FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10218
28 December 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 67/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, With the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(FOUO 67/81)

CONTENTS

may ECONOMICS

ITALY

Electric Energy: Rates and Demand Regulation
(Pippo Ranci. et a1.; ENERCIA ELETTBICA: TARIFFE B CONTROLLO
DmlLA wMANDAg 1981) teoooeaooooeoeeeaaoeeeeaeeeeeoooooeeeneocoo-o
POLITICAL
FRANCE

New Defense Policy Intended To Be 'Permanent'
(Francois d'Orcival; VALEURS ACTUELLBS, 16 Nov 81) ;..............

SPAIN

Various Consequences of NATO Entry Analyzed
(Antxon Sarasqueta; CAMBIO l6, 9 Nov 81) .........................

PSGE To Harden Criticism of Administration. Moderate Ideology
(Jose Manuel AriJa, Rafael Cid; CAMBIO l6, 2 Nov 81) .............

Basque Terrorists Allegedly Released by Lenient Courts
(CAMBIO 16, 9 Nov 81) ............................................

UCD Debacle in Galicin, Possible Consequences, Reviewed
(Antxon Sarasqucta; CAMBIO 16, 2 Nov 81) .........................

AP's Fraga Advocates Center-Right Understanding To Halt PSOE
(Manuel Frags Interview; CAMBIO 16, 2 Nov 81) ....................

MILITARY

FRANCE

Transportation Weakness of New Brigade Noted
(Frederic Poms; VALEURS AW, 16 Nov 81)

- a - [III - HE - 150 F00

F09 “FHI‘IAI DIG? ON! V
FlﬂltlﬂNCJAl.lEﬂE(MVLV

ENERGI ECONOMICS

ELECTRIC ENERGY: RATES AND DEMAND REGULATION
Milan ENERGIA ELETTRICA: TARIFFE E CDNTRDLUD DELLA DOMANDA in Italian 81 pp 92-133

[Article by Pippo Ranci and Gianni Cozzi, with the cooperation of H. Berra, P.
Berra. G. Oggionni, and G. Panati, preface by Sergio Vacca: "Electric Power Rates
and Demand Regulation"]

[Text] 4. Considerations on Electric Power Rate System in Italy
4.1. Brief Review of Italian Rate Schedule Development

From the first decades of the 20th century, power rates were under government con-
trol but were set by the various electric power companies on the'basis of each
company’s production and distribution costs; rates also differed considerably from
one region to the next.

The Decree-Law of 5 October 1936 froze utility rates; this helped consolidate the
rather heterogeneous rate schedule situation which had been developing on Italian
territory in relation to the diverse cost structures presented by the various
electric power generation and distribution companies operating at that time.

The rate freeze, which was extended afterward, was followed in 1941 by the stoppage
of supply contracts. The rate deadlock continued until 1944 when the CIP (Inter-
ministerial Price Committee), established during that year, in the light of the
continuing process of money devaluationfonentedby the war economy, authorized an
increase of 15 percent and 30 percent of prewar rates, respectively, for light and

power.

The rate revisions in 1945, 1946, 1947, and 1948 progressively raised electric
energy sales prices whose level, figures on the basis of 1942, through CIP direc-
tiVe No 101, dated 11 August 1948, reached the "figure of 24."

Table 1 summarizes the increases approved by the CIP during the period of 1944-1948,
in the base rates applied in 1942 for aupplying light and moving power.

CIP Directive No 348, dated 20 January 1953, launched a process of rate standardiza-
tion which ended in 1961 with Directive No 941. As of 1 January 1953, as a matter
of fact, utility rates for users with a power of up to 30 kw had to follow the

rate schedule spelled out in Directive No 348.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Increase in Electric Power Rates Authorized by C1? during the Period of
1966-1968

 

 

 

 

 

Anne 2 MAIN Ii 3 M
1 Anew-Illa (but IN!) (IN: - I)
7 [Mine —5 3.5m,
_________—__ __ -.__._. ._.__
I944 IS 30 1.15—1.30
I945 225 290 1.3—3.”
I'M. m «n 3
can 600 7
I947 I.” I.” It
194! 2.31.!) 2 300 2d

 

 

Key: 1--Year; 2-Increased percentages (1942 base year); 3-Level; 6--Light;
5--Power.

In particular, wnile public light rates were confirmed by the provisions of Direc-
tive No 101, dated 11 August 1948, rates for private lighting, for use with elec-
tric household appliances. and for power up to 30 kw, experienced changes which,
depending upon the case involved, brought reductions or increases in sales prices
which had been in effect until then.

A "maximum" of 62 L/kwh [lire per kilowatt-hour] was provided for private lighting
and prices higher than that level had to be lowered; prices on a lower level re-
mained unchanged.

For uses different from illumination (electric household appliances and power) a
"Id-anus" and a "maximum" rate was introduced. respectively, to the extent of 67
percent and 133 percent of the rate schedule prices provided for in Directive

No 368 whose inplesentation was allowed provided its adoption did not involve,
for the individual user. an increase of more 30 percent of the rate cost borne
until thenl.

Directive No 348 did not standardize the rates for units with a ccanitted power 0f
more than 300 kw; their regulation continued to be based on the provisions of
Directive 101, dated 11 August 1968, and No 5, dated 30 August 1946; however. a
surcharge on energy was provided for the latter users as well as for private
lighting with a corresponding unit cost of less than 26.50 L/kwh; this surcharge
was intended to finance the electric power rate balance fund instituted in this
directive itself for the purpose of providing an incentive through a lechanism
based on the redistribution, to the electric power companies, of the surcharges
collected so as to develop investments in new plants.

General contributions as a matter of fact were established on energy effectively
produced by plants which went into operation after 1 January 1969, so as to line
up with the electric power companies through the Balance Fund. after 1 February

1953. The idea was to close the gap existing between the cost of energy produced
in the new plants and the sales proceeds realized under the rate schedule freeze.

2
FOR 0511(1AI.IEHE(H‘LY
FOR 0511C1AI.US£GDNLN

The Balancing Fund, which took over the previously existing "thermoelectric sur-
charge Balancing Fund," thus taking over its institutional tasksz, furthermore,
according to the provisions of Directive No 348, was to permit appropriations to
compensate for the reduced earnings of electric power companies deriving from the
implementation of the standardized rate schedules and the reduction of private
lighting rates following the introduction of the "maximum rate."

The initial surcharge increments were progressively increased between 1953 and 1956,
through directives No 413 of March 1954 and No 507 of August 1966, while they were
partly included in the price of energy through Directive No 620, dated 28 December
1956.

After 1 January 1957, permission was given for adding, to the rates frozen in 1942
and raised by a maximum of 2.300 percsnt, a surcharge increment established in CI?
directives No 348, No 413, and No 507 .

The reduction in the amount of the general contribution on energy from new produc-
tion plants--which was obviously accompanied by the inclusion, in sales prices.

of the surcharge increments--however did not restore the endemic deficit of the
Balance Fund which at the end of 1959 came to 13 billion lire.

Directive No 620 furthermore established a series of rates constituting the upper
and lower limits of the spread allowed for rates applied to power units with

a committed power of between 30 and 500 kw; this was another step toward the com-
plete standardization of rates and conditions of light and power supply which, as
we know, was implemented through Directive No 941 and its successive provisions.

CIP Directive No 941, dated 29 August 1961, and the related directives No 949,
dated 11 November 1961, and No 1000, dated 25 Hay 1962, were the first steps taken
in the standardization field during postwar years in an effort to tackle the pro-
blem of electric energy rate determination in all of its aspects.

The above-mentioned directives were not only aimed at providing a final system
setup in the minds of the officials responsible for electric energy policy; they
were also supposed to constitute the initial phase of a progressive process of
restructuring the entire electric energy rate system, based on rational evaluations
of the ratio between cost and price.

As a technical foundation for the evaluations connected with the definition of
sales prices contemplated in Directive No 941, officials took the consolidated
balance sheet from a sampling of 45 private electric companies and 11 municipal
companies, whose contribution to national electric energy generation in 19S9--the
year of the balance sheet--was figured at 83.26 percent.

Sales prices, standardized by Directive No 941, were so established as to determine,
on the basis of equal energy sold, a yield volume equal to the earnings derived in
1959 for the group of companies considered from sales of energy and contributions
from the Balance Fund. The latter item was included among the commensurate yields
based on the rate schedule level while, as of 1 September 1961, the Balance Fund
was eliminated so that, consequently, along with the surcharges on energy sold,

an end was also put to the general contributions on energy from new production
plants, granted to the electric power companies.

HIR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FtﬂltﬂﬁﬂCIAl.USE(NQLY

To compensate the electric power companies that might have suffered losses as a
result of the forced introduction of the standard rate schedules. the "electric
rate schedule standardization compensation fund" was established on that date with
authority to draw appropriations from sales of energy reserved for them on the
basis of increments included in the prices.

The lineup of rate schedules in force as of 31 August 1961 with the standardized
levels-which in some cases was done with a certain degree of gradual implementa-
tion built into the directive itself--1ed to the standardization of supply con-
ditions as such and this was followed, through Directive No 949, by the standar-
dization of utility connection contributions.

Directive No 1000 regulated the supply conditions to be applied to some special
users; it marked the end of a series of directives intended to give the Italian rate
schedule system the direction which it still pursues today, in spite of the many
amendments introduced thereafter“.

A policy of holding electric energy rates down was launched with the nationalization
of the electric power enterprises in December 1962.

As a matter of fact, starting in 1961 and until the beginning of the decade of the
seventies, there were no rate increases, in spite of the growing deficit in the
economic account of the electric power agency.

It must also be noted that. as a result of Decree-Law No 918, dated 30 August 1968,
converted into Law No 1089, dated 25 October 1968. rates for industrial. commer-
cial and agricultural uses of up to 30 kw were reduced by 25 percent up to 31 Dec-
ember 1970.

This reduction was then continued through Law No 853, dated 6 October 1971, until
31 December 1980 for areas under the Fund for the South Only.

Both the freeze on electric power rates and the legislative provisions which re-
,duced electric energy sa1;a prices to the degree indicated above in our opinion
represent a manifestation of a rate policy which, in harmony with the new public
role assigned to the electric power sector after nationalization, has become an
instrument of economic policy.

In particular, the 25-percent reduction could initially have been interpreted as an
economic measure aimed at reviving the economy. afterward transformed into an ef-
fort of a structural nature in support of the development of the South.

To compensate for the significant losses deriving from the application of the above-
mentioned rate schedule reduction as far as the electric power companies were
concerneds. CIP Directive No 1226 was then issued: it instituted a surcharge of

6 L/kwh on private lighting users residing in the communities of Rome, Turin.

Milan, Naples. and Genoa; under the provisions of CI? Directive 941, these com-
munities had until then gotten the benefit of a discount of 6 lire--6 for every
kilowatt-hour consumed, as compared to the nation's electric energy users as a whole.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFﬂJAl.USEIDNLY

A further change in the electric energy sales price setup came from 01? Directive
No 17/1979 which raised the private lighting equivalents provided for in CI?
Directive No 961 by 7 lire per kuh, in line with the abolition-~followed hy the
adoption of the VAT--of the comnmnity tax on the consumption of electric energy
varying from 10 to 15 L/kuh, depending upon the community involved. The electric
energy price for such supplies consequently declined further.

The policy of substantial rate schedule stability was maintained until 1974. in
spite of growing inflation during the seventies, the international petroleum price
rise, and the subsequent speedup in the inflationary process--phenomena which caused
components of electric energy costs to grow so as so make the economic and financial
situation of ENEL [National Electric Power Agency] quite precarious (see Table 2)5.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6Pn~roml¢

       
 

iii—J : :0 Lin
90]
1 qt, 233
0 1.3 250
. o 3.7 .277
' ° 3.9 297
‘ 0 5.9 53?
D o 6.; 3451
F 011.1 .21
D 011.) I85
? 0 9,8 616
1 41.5 6k)
> 028.8 113
- 036.“ 961 '

A 5

018.3.

. 5"-

«10.8
o 7,;
011,5
0 8.7
916,5
015,2

7 Mutitili
h?- .11"

hi

531

ugh
FORIOFFNFAI.USEZONLN

After 1973. a rate rise became evidently indispensable.

From 1974 onward, the level of electric energy rates-after 13 years of substan-
tial stability-~was raised progressively with a series of CIP directives. starting
with No 34, dated 6 July 1974 and ending, as we go to press, with CIP Directive
No 36/1979.

The gradual rise in prices introduced some standard modifications and a special
price system into the rate schedule setup.

This pertains particularly to the following:

Standardization of rate schedule (and tax) treatment of "domestic" users of elec-
tric energy, which eliminated the distinction that was made between the quantity
of energy used in homes for lighting purposes and other uses (CIP Directive No
34/1974);

Institution of heat surcharge (CIP Directive No 34/1974);

Creation of the so—called "social slice" which, for domestic useres with an instal-
led capacity of up to 3 kw, involved payment of reduced rate equivalents within a
limit of 1,800 kwh, per year (CIP Directive No l/197S);

Production of rate discounts for electric energy supplies to agricultural users
and "moving power" users with an installed capacity of up to 30 kw (CIP Directive
No 1/1975).

Abolition of some power steps provided for in the rate "pattern" established at the
time in CIP Directive No 941 (CIP Directive No 34/1974);

Reduction of installed power level from 501 kw to 101 kw beyond which "night-time"
rates and high-use rates become optional (CIP Directive No 11/1978);

Increase in contract-based value of power factor from 0.80 to 0.90 (CIP Directive
No 11/1978);

Standardization of rates for electric energy used for illumination and other pur-
poses in places other than homes (CIP Directive No 36/1979);

"Separation" of general rate schedules into rates for "normal use" and rates for
"high use" (CIP Directive No 36/1979);

Increase in minimum and maximum values of "tolerance limit" and "maximum available
power" (CIP Directive No 36/1979):

Etc.7.
4.2. Some Aspects of Rate Schedule Structure and Standards Currently in Force
1n the history of the Italian rate schedule system, briefly described above, we

can thus identify three different periods of time, each of which reveals its own
specific aspects.

T
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first one, which extends from the postwar period until the beginning of the
sixties. is characterized by a process of system development and consolidation of
rate schedule structures which--following the issue of CI? directives No 941/1961,
No 949/1961, and No l.000/l962-led to standardization of electric power rates
throughout national territory.

A second one. beginning in 1962 and ending in 1974. during which, in harmony with
the public role assigned to the electric power sector following nationalization,

we observe a policy of holding electric energy prices down for the sake of the
general economic interest.

Between 1962 and 1976, as a matter of fact, we not only had no rate increases but,
in spite of the growing deficit in the economic account of ENBL, we had, as we saw,
even a reduction in electric energy sales prices, probably in an effort, in this
way likewise, to support the revival of some sectors of the economy whose growth
was slowed down by the development of the economic situation and the promotion of
the south.

The third period. which started with the energy crisis, is characterized by the
introduction, into the rate schedule system, of a series of modifications essential-
ly aimed at the following: '

a. Correction of gaps created between the dynamics of cost and the development of
yields, through a rise in the rate level;

b. Modification in rate structure permitting more flexible handling of increases
to be made in electric energy sales prices as a function of the rise in the cost of
fuels derived from petroleum through the creation of the heat surcharge;

c. Satisfaction of some segments in terms of social policy through the creation
of the "social slice" and the institution of discounted heat surcharge increments;

d. Containment of electric energy distribution costs; this objective was promoted
for example by the standardization of rates for domestic uses and the increase in
the contract value of the power factor.

The response to the progressive rise in international petroleum prices as a matter
of fact, in terms of rates, was expressed by a series of steps substantially aimed
at restoring the electric power agency's economic management balance. The problem
of a radical revision of the entire rate schedule system--"considered to be easy"
during earlier phases in the energy industry--was not yet posed, nor is it today
considered as an effective instrument in implementing a demand policy in line with
the demands of the country's current energy situation.

The following analysis therefore is designed to develop some critical considerations
on the rate system in force through an examination of specific examples of standar-
dization and rate provisions which can supply useful indications as to the advis-

ability of going into a complete and organic revision of rates and standards govern-

ing the sale of electric energy at this time.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analyzing the provisions on standardization, we will in particular make reference
to the following:

1. Rates confined to night-time hours;
2. Conditions governing the sale of electric energy to in-house producers;
3. Determination of estimated power connection fees.

The examples considered in the matter of rate schedule structures on the other hand
will pertain to the following:

4. The "social slice" of doacstic power supplies;

5. The heat surcharge "mechanisnfﬁ

6. The "incentive" for the disseminatioa of electric heating.
4.2.1. Rates Confined to Night-Time Hours

Rates confined to night-time hours, introduced in the regulations govern”ng the
sale of electric energy through CIP Directive 961/1961, so far has been the only
instrument for modulating the actual use of electric power covered by the rate
standards.

As a matter of fact, the other modulation instrument, that is to say, the "inter-
ruptability clause"--constituting a "special agreement" between ENEL and the elec-
tric steel mills-~does not show up in the CIP standards.

The significance of rates confined to night-time hours however turned out to be
entirely negligible; here it suffices to realize that the number of industrial
users actually employing this system is less than 30 units.

In our opinion, the low degree of dissemination deriving from rates in question
essentially depends not only on the price level, which characterizes them, but
also on the inadequacy of provisions in force which confine their application:

a. To users which take electricity only during the hours between 2000 and 0600 of
the next day between Monday and Friday, on Saturday between 1300 and 2400, and all
the time on Sunday, up to 0600 of the following morning;

b. And to the supply share consisting of the power increment taken during definite
night-time hours which exceeds the "continuous" power supBly in case this option
is chosen by users who already have a "continuous" supply .

We as a matter of fact note in this respect that, on the one hand, industrial users,
whose production processes are such as to facilitate an electric power demand ex-
clusively concentrated during night-time hours, are very rare; on the other hand,
the mechanism for the distribution of power use during night-time hours, provided
for users who get a continuous supply and a supply limited to night-time hours,
together, does not substantially reduce the already scant "economic significance"

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

of the night-time rate but in some cases makes it less convenient for the users of
rates provided for the continuous use of electric energy supply.

This can be demonstrated with some examples.

Let us first of all consider the case of a user with an installed capacity of
between 10 and 25 m. supplied with a voltage of. more than 100 kv, with a monthly
conuitted power use of between 150 and 350 hours. who can. as desired. take out
electric energy either during "night-time" hours or during "day-time" hours. The
discount on the average price of energy taken out of the grid, which the above-
mentinned user would get if he where to opt for a supply of power limited to night-
time hours (and who would thus concentrate his entire consumption during that period
of time) as compared to power supply during day-tine hours, on the basis of the
rates specified in CI? Directive No 36/ 1979, would be about between 19 percent and
26 percent.

This figure, which is definitely modest compared to the average gap existing
between day—time prices and night-tine prices charged by European utilities in
general evidences the fact that night-time rates charged in Italy are of rather
little help to the user.

Even lower are the discounts for users who, in addition to their standard supply,
use a supply volume regulated by rates confined to night-tine hours.

This can be seen in Figure l where we. have indicated the discounts on the average
price for the total amount of energy which the user could get. with a voltage of
more than 100 kv, an installed capacity of more than 10 m. and a power use between
400 and 600 hours per month; instead of using a single rate for high utilization.
these users would ask for the application of the rate schedule confined to night-
time hours for certain "slices" of the overall power use process.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

,_. Ricunone wumuata cu covmpcu-vo ci lo-r-iiuta (o drl c-ruo audio)

0 lo 20 II 00 50 m

2 Pucsmo dc! gain complain amibuito Illa
tomium Iuniuu all. on nouumc

Figure 1. Note: the "percentage reduction" was calculated with reference to the
rates given in CIP directives No 35 and No 36/1979. Key: l--Percentsge reduction

of power supply equivalent (or average price); 2--Percentage of total power taken
and charged on the basis of rates confined to night—tine hours; 3—Huimum reduction;
lo--Minimun reduction.

Finally, there are power supply use situations where the user's decision to re-
duce his power use during peak hours transferring a portion of the load to night-
time hours. could even bring about an increase-rsther than an obvious reduction--
in the average price of the total volume of energy taken out.

This happens when the transfer of a portion of the load to night-time hours brings
about a reduction in the figure of the ccnitted power during day-time hours with

the "passage" of that power into a rate schedule step which involves a unit equi-
valent of the higher kwh.

Let us. for example, examine an industrial user with 30 H: of cox-titted power and
an annual power utilization volume of 6,000 hours and let us assme that the or-

ganization of this process can be structured so as to bring about the following
two alternate situations:

a. Power use during peak hours amounting to 21 ﬂu and 9 Nu during night-time hours;

b. Power use of 30 Hw during peak hours.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0FFKJAI.USIZONLY

Applying the rates currently in force (CIP Directive No 36/1979). the average price
of electric energy used as a whole turns out to be higher for case (a) than for
case (b) (specifically, 35.82 lewh as against 35.46 llkwh).

In conclusion we can therefore say that the current rates, limited to night-time
hours. are not helpful in creating an economically significant incentive to promote
concentration of electric power use during night-time hours--a concentration which,
technically possible for many enterprises, should be the natural objective of night-
time rates.

0.2.2. Conditions Governing Sale of Electric Energy to In-House Producers

As we know, the CIP provisions governing the sale of electric energy to in-house
producers are confined to prescribing that the energy acquired from the latter must
be governed by the general rate on the basis of the methods and with the exceptions
provided for in the standards.

The inadequacy of such standards regarding the regulation of a relationship as
complex as the relationship between the distributor and the in-house producer can
be understood immediately if we consider the rather burdensome and expensive situa-
tions to which the rigid application of such standards can lead.

Let us consider the case in which the industrial user-~who normally uses purchased
electric energy and in-house-produced electric energy in his production process--
is forced to take from the distributor's network, for a period of time of no more
than 1/4 hour, the entire power which he needs, due to an accidental breakdown of
his own power generating units. By virtue of the standards in force, the "added"
power need would have to be regulated through a new supply contract lasting a year
and with a committed power figure equal to the power taken out during the period of
"failure" of the in-house power generating groups.

The cost of each kilowatt of added power taken out would consequently coincide with
the annual equivalent of the committed power.

Thus, if in the case under examination, the power of the group which had "broken
down" were to be equal to l Hw, and if the rate applied were the general rate for
high use and power supply at 130 kv, then the amount which the user would have to
pay to the distributor for the reserve service rendered during 1/4 hour of failure
of his own roup would come to about £4 million lire. equal to about 175,000 for
kwh used up 0.

Since we cannot fail to realize that an unexpected increase in the power demand
w0uld lead to higher costs to the supplier (and this would not be otherwise ex-
cept for a greater reserve that would have to be set aside), then the burden
deriving from the standard in question appears evident; this is especially so if

we realize that, for the in-house producer, the need for supplementing or replacing
his own electric power availability with purchased power emerges not only in con-
nection with accidental events as indicated above but may also be of a system na-
ture in connection with the need for maintaining his own power generating plants.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FFNJAI.LEEIONLN

It is clear as a matter of [act that--by virtue of the mechanism of the general rate
--while the maintenance of in-house production plants cannot be performed during
periods when the industrial production cycle is closed down, the user would have to
commit (and pay to the distributor) a power value comensurate not with the unit of
supply normally acquired but with the volume of power actually taken out during the
period of time when his own power generating group was unavailable.

The burden which, in the cases given above by way of example, would spring from a
line of action strictly in keeping with the provisions of the CIP standards, as well
as the need for regulating these aspects of power supp ice with in-house producers
who are not covered by these standards, have persuaded ENEL on its own to draft
regulations that make up for the shortcomings in the official regulations.

The electric power agency as a matter of fact for quite some time has been applying
to its own in-house production users a commercial policy wpich not only calls for
the substitution of the general rates with "ad-hoc" rates1 in cases beyond ac—
cidental service and special maintenance of user's power generating equipment, but
which also includes a series of equivalents to make up for these special services
to be rendered (special energy supply, parallel service, etc.).

In the above-mentioned case, direct action by the ENEL-although it took place
outside the context of its institutional authority-mustbeconsidered positive and
offers a point of departure for a consideration of the role which could be assigned
to the electric power agency in the future in the matter of rates.

In our opinion, greater decision-making autonomy on the part of ENBL in this field
would always be desirable not only to eliminate certain shoricomings and/or delays
encountered in the past regarding the updating of standards1 and price levels but
also to get the agency itself to assume a more active role in the implementation
of government policy and electric power demand regulations.

4.2.3. Power Connection Fee

The power connection fee represents the share of expenditures for power connection
which is charged to the user.

ClP Directive No 949/1961 as we know provides for the following:

Connections to be made without fee: reserved for users with a committed power of
up to 1 kw;

Connections to be made with flat-rate fee: here the user's contribution to the con-
nection expenditure is determined on the basis of the flat-rate figures given by
the CIP; '

Connections to be made with "estimated" fees: here the fee charged to the user for
power connection is calculated from case to case on the basis of the following:

a. The cost of connection work specifically tied to the type of supply requested;

b. Coefficients predetermined by the CIP. redistributing the above-mentioned cost
among the distributor and user of electric energy.

13
FORIJFHKJAI.USEZONL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the following we will consider some aspects of the standards in question which.
in our opinion, lend themselves to some critical remarks.

In particular, keeping in mind the fact that provisions pertainipg to flat-rate
fees have already been the subject of some critical observations , we will confine
ourselves to considering first of all the provisions in the current standards
relating to connections to be made with estimated fees.

It is noted in this connection that these provisions not only do not give us any'
indications as to how the base cost is made up, i.e., the base cost which must

be assumed to determine the fee,but which also. by giving a breakdown of the "ex-
penditure" figures, or the "long-term costs" to be borne by the distributor for
putting in the connection as such, give rise to unequal treatment of users. Let

us consider, for example, the case of three users who at the same time request
connection for two types of supply operations which are perfectly homogeneous in
terms of location, supply voltage, "quantitative" characteristics, etc.; one of them
is supplied by the distributor with facilities which have already been in existence
for some time but which until now have been underused while the other one is
supplied through new facilities put together on an "ad-hoe“ basis.

Since both of them should be paying a fee in line with the nominal value of the
expenditure undergone by the distributor, it appears evident that the first user
will pay less than the second one, and he will do so to an increasing degree, the
greater the difference of "age" between the two connection facilities.

It is therefore clear that the standard in question represents a violation of the
general rate principle according to which two users with equal characteristics
must be treated in an equal manner.

A further "distortion" resulting from the iaplementation of this standard can be
evidenced by the following example.

Let us assume that a user, connected in 1970 to the certain trunk line in the dis-
tribution network, is afterward supplied in keeping with the supplier's technical
requirements, either through the initial line or, alternately, with facilities
built in 1960.

Let us further assume that the user in 1980 asks for an increase in power. The
estimated connection fee charged to him for each kilowatt of additional power could
obviously--compared to the equivalent unit fee as of the moment the supply was
started (1970)--result in the following:

It could either be nominally equal, although less in real terms, since the power
supply in 1980 was handled through facilities built in 1970;

Or it could turn out to be less, both in "current" and in "constant" money value.
in case power supply is provided to the user through power lines built in 1960.

In this second case likewise. the standard therefore appears inadequate.

a

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0FFNJAI.USEGDNLY

Another significant shortcoming in the standards concerning connections consists of
the absence of norms governing connections made with a voltage of more than 50 kvl‘.

we can as a matter of fact observe that. although these connections may be ignored
by 01? Directive No 949/1961, since at the time they were issued they were requested
by a very small number of "special" users, presently representing a recurrent fact

in ENEE operations, they should hereafter be made the subject of specific stan-
dards .

A last point of criticism can be raised if we recall that, following the passage of
Law No 765. dated 6 August 1967 (the so-called "Ponte Law"), the construction of
electric infrastructure facilities in areas not provided with electricity and in-
terested in having such facilities, until then governed by the provision of CI?
Directive No 949, was made subject to a twin regulation:

a. The construction of electrification works, consisting of the trunk lines in
newly constructed distribution networks, constituting a part of the urban develop-

ment process of the land, was made subject to the standards provided for in the
law itself;

b. The actual execution of connections for the individual users to the distribu-
tion network on the other hand was returned to the area of CI? regulations.

With the separation between electrification projects and connection projects, the
construction of electric power delivery facilities became the subject of a large
number of economic-legal relationships between distributor, user, public and private
land developers, communities, etc., which interacted in terms of bringing about

connection "configurations" not covered by the provisions established at the time
by the cm.

The break existing between the "reality" to be regulated and the content of rate
standards, which have become obsolete to the provisions of laws passed after their

establishment, once again forced the electric power agency to do what the CIP
had not done.

The need for clearly and unambiguously dealing with users as a matter of fact
quite some time persuaded the ENEL "autonomously" to settle the setup for electrical
operations necessary for supplying new users with power through a regulation com-
bining the provisions issued on the topic of connections by the CI? and those

dictated by the urban development laws regarding primary urban development pro-
jects.

6.2.4. The "Social Slice" of Domestic Power Supply

A debate has developed on the "social slice," introduced in 1975 in the Italian
rate schedule system. under impetus from political and social groups; involved in
this debate we have, on the one hand, the supporters of the use of rate schedules
also for social purposes and, on the other hand, those who oppose this idea.

Looking at rhc ideological aspects of this debate, it seems to us that we should
note that an objective evaluation of the effects connected with the existence of
the current "social slice"16 is bound to cause confusion as to the attainment of

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

the objectives that were supposed to be attained with the help of this system. He
must as a matter of fact ask ourselves whether the social slice really is an in-
strument for defending electric energy consumers on the lowest income level.

He have seen that the rate reduction and the heat surcharge--something now enjoyed
by about 95 percent of the domestic users and leading to an average expenditure
reduction of no more than 2,000 lire per month--on the one hand does not have the
character of preferential treatment confined to low-income consumers alone who

use electric energy to meet their own "essential" consumption needs17 whereas on
the other hand it has an irrelevant effect on the family budget.

Paradoxically, the maximum benefit deriving from the social slice (about 4,000 lire

per month) is now being enjoyed by users with consumption levels that exceed the
"essential" levels.

If we finally realize that the current domestic rates which are "not discounted"
can make it advisable to use electric energy for environmental heating purposes.
then we cannot fail to show that the social slice is specifically assuaing in the

- rate schedule system also a role in terms of providing further incentives regarding
the improper use of electric energy which is already widespread in Italy.

He must therefore not forget. as was disclosed several times, that the use of
electric energy for domestic heating in certain parts of the country is a necessary
thing in view of the lack of alternate energy sources and this therefore should not
as such be considered an improper use of electric energy.

In reality, looking at the data given in Table 3, concerning the use of electric
and gas stoves in homes, by regions, we could on the other hand maintain that the
use of electric energy for heating purposes is anything but mandatory; the table
shows that, in spite of the fact that 96.4 percent of the houses do have gas,
electric heaters are used to the extent of 12.3 percent.

He also note that. although it is true that the problem of holding the use of elec-
tric energy down for heating purposes cannot be solved only through adequate rates,
it is quite true that the current rate schedule does not provide an incentive for
further dissemination, quite in contrast to the objectives of Italian energy policy.

In summary, in the light of the considerations presented above, we could thus say
that the social rate does, on the one hand. produce "incorrect" information which
provides an incentive for the consumer to make an inefficient choice of energy
sources to be used. but on the other hand has insignificant effects regarding the
goals of a policy of income redistribution.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Table 3. .wfﬁ'wuu pm; ..'..‘.:I. Jello um 0.2-.mcbmca 4i gm
1 2. {unriw per il Hnmlo'w‘k‘ntﬂ Jet 3m”: abitazioni
'lv- u'om- ﬁf—Jli ——'—‘——-—"—'—.
' ' Tum.- 5"...4 sum to» slug 1! dolls abitaﬁom)

l. 5 .‘":.- ..'i 6 n‘p: ..'i 8’" 401a di Cos in
rm...:.!.I.m-nI-n__ri_ru.:_l.§ni:r- mmh- nm- __l.(m;l_c_-10

 

 

 

litmune ll I:.L “a nun -M.> kn“ 533
Vail-.- D'Ao-Jlu '.‘,- |,'I 5,0 "7,1 't,- 83.1
:mh‘mlr. 12 -..o 0. ’- 9.) 97.- 63.“ 3".-
hamim.AJ. 156 u,' 'Z} #53 m1 153
'u'ru'w 11,6 l,--_ l0,- 5”,!» 36.0 “L?
ErhliVﬁ. nan Ln ‘ 1m6 -wp :mr 7L9
'J.?uih 9,r z,x 6.1 98,- 66,9 31,9
:jliu u. 1.1 o,h 6,7 95,n 61.6 3H,:
Yum-:44 13 l5,- 3.0 i',l 9‘.’ ”.7 63.6
"??id :!,u l,- 10." 95,8 12,3 su.6
3,...” 25.9 0;. 13.“ 97.7 22.5 75.‘
.. ..- 2‘,- ".- 3,: r5.6 "3.1 5‘32
Abrurli 7.1 1.: 6.~ 97.5 11.5 60.5
”alive 9,. 1.: H.) 95.1 21.7 73.!
we mu. 1:,7 11,: 3.5 9!,8 26.1 12.-
-u.gv..-. 5.9 11.5 2.3- 95.9 9.5 87.6
rat-111mm 9.6 :_1 1.5 9?." I.‘ 88.-
;‘ulubru 19.5 15.8 5.7 . 89.9 :0.6 19.7
3mm 14 cos: 17,9 2.5 99.2 5.0 3.5
Sanka-.1 15 1?..- 6.- 6,- 97,- 2,“ 9“.5 ‘
in Lou-In 8 l7.) 5.! 7.2 96.. 35.9 “.8
______._________________________________________

mum: Earl, Irulugtm sull'unmw «in-varied, 1915
16' 17

Key: l--Region; 2--Percentage distribution of electric heaters for space heating;
3--Availability of gas in homes; lo--‘l‘ota1; S--Uithout any other type of heating;
6-—Hith other types of heating; 7--(X of homes); 8--Total; 9--cas from network; _
10--Gas in pumps; ll--Piedmont; 12--Lombardy; 13--Tuscany; 16-Sicily; lS--Sardinia.
Source: ENEL, "Indagine sull'utenza domestics" [Survey on Domestic Uses], 1975.

4.2.5. The “Mechanism" of the Heat Surcharge

As we know, (I? Directive No 36/1974 established and charged domestic energy users
with a surcharge for every kilowatt-hour consumed in a differentiated manner depend-
ing on the type of power used and the voltage levels; the idea was to reimburse

the distributing enterprises, which produced electric energy using thermoelectric
plants, for the greater expenditures, compared to 1973, for getting supplies of the
following fuels: fuel oil, gas-oil, foreign coal. methan£.gas from coking plants.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtOFFKJAl.USE(MNLY

The heat surcharge yield~—which is collected by the utilities--is handled by the
Balance Fund which was assigned the institutional task of determining the volume
of the above-mentioned reimbursements.

The logic behind the introduction of the heat surcharge into the Italian rate
system can be traced to the need for keeping separate the effects on the rates
deriving from the rise in fossil fuel prices from those connected with the increase
in other production costs, so as to permit the automatic adaptation of electric

energy sales prices along with the change in the conditions for the supply of
such fuels .

The heat surcharge entails undoubted advantages in the sense that:
a. It permits a rapid increase in the rate level;

b. Since it gives the consumer a precise "message" as to the causes--beyond the
utilities and generally beyond the country-which influenced the rise in electric
energy prices. it makes these price increases more acceptable to the user.

0n the other hand, it does introduce various disadvantages which, on the one hand,
are connected with the specific application standards and, on the other hand,
which are implicit in the logic of the heat surcharge itself.

Looking at the first aspect here, as we observed earlier, we note for example that
exemption from or reduction of the heat surcharge increment applied to some user
categories (domestic users, agricultural users, moving power users with a committed
power of up to 30 kw. public lighting, aluminum industry, outfits operatigg under

ENEL, etc.) resulted in a higher heat surcharge for the other categories1 .

He also are quite familiar with the objections raised by the industrial enterprises
that produce their own electricity regarding the computation of the heig reim-
bursement for the purpose of figuring the energy delivered to the ENEL .

Loking at the second aspect, we must keep in mind that the heat surcharge compensa-
tion mechanism can significantly hinder the process of diversification of primary
sources used in the production of electric energy which, as we know, constitutes
one of the fundamental objectives of Italy's energy policy 0.

The reimbursement system introduced through the heat surcharge--by causing a "freeze'
on the 1973 levels of variable unit costs borne by the electric power companies for
conventional thermoelectric power production-—in this context perpetuated the
economic advisability for these companies to cope with the increase in the electric
power demand by using the same production means which at that time proved to be most
suitable, iglother words, thermoelectric power plants running on petroleum
derivatives .

The price rises on the various fuels as a matter of fact did not bring about any
change in the ratio existing in 1973 between the company costs deriving from the
various electric energy technologies, although they did bring about a differentiated
increase in the real cost of conventional thermoelectric energy which had not been
reflected in the correlated increase in the expenditures of the utilities since
they were compensated in overall terms with the heat surcharge reimbursements.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Today. as in 1973. thermoelectric power production based on fuel oil constitutes

the most economical way to meet the growing demand as far as the electric energy
producing and distributing companies are concerned.

In view of this situation. in which there is an obvious rupture between "company"
interests and "collective" interests regarding the choice of electric energy pro-
duction means. we ask ourselves whether the moment has not come to revive the
current heat surcharge mechanism.

Generally speaking, we note that this rate setup, created under emergency condi-
tions, should be a short-term instrument available to the rate schedule authority,
not a permanent element in the rate structure.

How to get around this is a problem.

Although it is true that lumping together a portion or the entire heat surcharge in
a rate could recreate the economic convenience conditions necessary to promote the
use--today clearly penalized--of primary, nonpetroleum sources (water power, coal,
nuclear-geothermal enersy) it is just as true that this measure would lead to a
series of inconveniences.

First among these is the loss of automatic adjustment of sales prices which we
stressed earlier.

In second place we must emphasize that the partial or total lumping together of the
heat surcharge in a rate could create particularly significant "hydroelectric
yields" for companies under municipal control which mostly are involved in hydro-
electric power generation.

Hithout wishing to go any deeper into this issue, it seems to us that we can say

that this latter problem, which is undoubtedly one (or the) fundamental obstacle

to the adoption of such a measure, could be suitably resolved in the more general
context of public finance management.

6.2.6. The "Incentive" for the Hide Use of Electric Heating

In the current situation of relative prices among the various forms of energy that
can be used for heating, the electric source seems to look more convenient for large
groups of domestic and industrial users.

Regarding domestic uses, we can say that the cost of heating with gas-oil, calculated
in line with a range of consumption forms reflecting widely different forms of
utilization, turns out to be higher than that of electrical heating.

This is shown in the diagram Figure 2, constructed on the assumption of the follow-
ing reference hypotheses.

a. Variable gas-oil consumption between 100 and 1,000 kg per yearzz;

h. Gas-oil price between 285 and 300 leg [lire per kilogram], including VAT;

1.)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. Total yield from gas-oil heating plant between 0.5 and 0.6;

d. Average electric energy price between 71 and 96 L/kwh resulting from the applica-
tion of the rate for donestic uses with a coulutted power of up to 6 kw, including
VAT and treasury tax;

e. Electric energy consumption between 600 and 7.200 huh, per year (these values
are equivalent. in terns of useful thermal energy, to those connected with the
quantities of gas-oil lentioned in point a, above);

f. Higher fixed annual cost of gas-oil plant conpared to electric plant betveen
150,000 and 250,000 lire per year23.

20
FOR<0FFKJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0'” 0 7‘0 “30 2|” an me 4270 «so 57” mo 71” Kitchen. 5

6 mmmwmmmam

7 a“. mod. IWN 0M0“.

3
E
3
s

(iv-mum .4“ka a- on cl

U

Figure 2. Comparison of presuled annual cost of gas-oil heating plant and heat- -
convector heating plant. Key: l--Lire per year; 2--cas-oil consumption; 3-Equi-
valent consumption of electric energy with gas-oil plant equal to; 4--Kilograns
per year; 5--Kilowatt-hours per year; 6--Cost of gas-oil heating plant; 7--Cost

of electric heating plant.

He can thus say that, in line with a range of consumption forms covering the most
varied heating requirements arising in the various parts of the country, the use
of electric heating equipment can turn out to be more convenient for the consumer

than the traditional gas-oil system.

Regarding industrial uses, we note that those characterized by an electric power
requirement essentially concentrated during day-time hours constitute a signifi-
cant example of market seguents in which--on the current level and with the

A.
’J

FOR OFFICIAL USF ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

current structure of ClP rates--the use of the electric "source" for environmental
heating can appear particularly advantageous.

For the uses in question. there is as a matter of fact the possibility of using
heat systems with night-time accumulation, up to a total capacity of no more than
the normal day-time use level. with an electric energy cost coinciding with the

kwh unit equivalent provided for in the rate governing the type of supply requested
for the "normal" production uses.

Under these conditions. if we keep in mind the volume of kwh unit equivalents
covered by the rates in CI? Directive No 36/1979, for power supply in various
places of housing units, we can say that very many users, supplied with high and
medium voltage, could use electrical energy for environmental heating, putting up
with "fuel" costs less than those deriving from the traditional gas-oil systems2 .

Considering next that the fixed expenditures certainly accentuate the suitability
of electrical heating, apart from considerations relating to the advantages con-
nected with the latter in terms of guaranteed supplies, simplicity of operation,
etc.. we cannot fail to note that, so long as the structure and/or levels of
current electric power rates are not properly modified at the right time, the
“industrial" user might come to constitute a market segment highly susceptible to
the wide use of electric heating.

4.3. Report by Electric Rate Reform Study Committee
4.3.1. Premise

The incongruencies detected in the standards analyzed in the preceding paragraph
seem to confirm that the amendments in the provisions governing the sale of electric
energy did not modify the central backbone of the rate schedule system although they
did make it possible to correct the worst shortcomings in the standards in question,
sometimes perhaps at the cost of further distortions (see, for instance, the case

of the heat surcharge for everybody).

However, there is no doubt that there is an urgent need for a general reform of
electric power rates; this is demonstrated by the fact that, in 1974, a committee,
charged with studying the electric power rate reform, was established under the
Ministry of Industry.

He will now take up some considerations which spring from a critical re-reading of
the final report put out by that committee.

He note right away that. in view of the heterogeneous makeup of the committeezs,

the proposals made in the report constitute a comrromise of the various positions
advanced by each member:

a. 0n the labor union side, rates are also viewed as an instrument for income re-
distribution;

b. From the ENEL viewpoint. the solution of the rate problem is substantially
conceived from the company angle which stresses the objective of an equalized
balance sheet and the need for having a "simple" and easily managed rate schedule
system;

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OIWNC1AI.USEZCNULY

c. Confindustria [General Confederation of Italian Industry] was most concerned
with showing that industrial users should not have to bear rate expenditures that
should not be charged to them.

d. The other production categories (for example, agriculture), were concerned
with showing the need for maintaining preferential rates.

h.3.2. The Report's Logical Assumptions

The assumptions behind the proposals listed in the report can roughly be summar-
ized in the following two points:

a. The yields must make it possible to cover the company cost;

b. The efficient use of electric energy is automatically guaranteed by a rate
structure which will speculatively reflect the production costs.

Assuming that the yields should cover the costs (and hence that the rate level
should be in line with the cost level) is an acceptable assumption only so long as
we have properly established the existence of a "minimum cost" situation. As the
report itself says, "the ways through which the organizations responsible for the
production of goods and services must on a priority basis face the increases in
their costs, for the sake of the community as a whole, can only be implemented
through the achievement of higher productivity levels."

However, although the ministry study notes that ENEL cannot and must not avoid the
obligation of keeping costs down through an increase in productivity, the report
does state that "the argument, to the effect that it would take quite some time

to examine the other elements, has not been properly developed in depth since it

is completely beyond the tasks assigned to the drafting committee"; it does this

by emphasizing that "the available data enable us to ascertain, especially regarding
the first years after nationalization, that significant improvements were achieved
after the rationalization of production and distribution processes."

The total volume of electric energy production, transportation, and distribution
as a matter of fact is simply determined by adding the items in the ENEL balance
sheet, some of which, among other things, include expenses which cannot really be
charged to the agency's electric power operations26.

Having said this. we cannot help but criticize the fact--from the methodological
angle--that, in the report, the rate level was determined on the basis of the

costs resulting from the above-mentioned additions, above all keeping in mind the
possibility that the assumption of equality between costs and yields can in fact

be expressed in Italian rate schedule procedures as a guarantee requirement which,
by allowing the electric energy supplier to "shift" any cost increases to the rates,
can act as an objective brake upon the assumption of initiatives of a rate, organ-
izational, and other nature designed to improve the economical operation of the
electric power service27.

The latter concern appears quite real to us since it seems to be confirmed both
in the ways in which electric energy price increases have been instituted until now

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

and in the fact that the cost determination criteria followed in the study we are
examining here seem to boil down not so much to a "simplification of method" but
rather to a concept which calls for considering costs as an independent variable to
be assumed as a parameter commensurate with the yield.

Beyond this logic, we could not explain the proposal for the automatic rise in rates
as a function of the changes in predetermined cost indexes repeatedly indicated in
the report itself, in clear contradiction to the references for the need to hold
cost increases down through an increase in productivity.

But beyond the considerations regarding the effects which an equilibrium in the
economic account automatically assured by a systematic adjustment between cost ac-
counting items and sales prices could have on the efficiency of the ENEL, it seem
to us that we must say, looking at it from a more substantial angle, that the rate
level should be established not so much as a function of an equalized balance
(which in fact does represent "political" objective) but rather in relation to the
attainment of a situation of financial equilibrium which can enable the electric
power agency economically to deal with the development of investments.

Considering the second of the two fundamental assumptions guiding the draft of the
Electric Rate Reform Comitteeuthat is to say, that the efficient use of electric
energy is automatically assured by a rate structure which will reflect the pro-
duction costs in a speculative manner-we can observe that the determination of
cost configurations, which can be used as objective base for the determination of
sales prices for each of the classes in which electric power users are usually
broken down, will necessarily be arbitrary in view of the character of the combined
product represented by electric energy.

It follows from this that the guarantee of efficiency, which should give the rate
syscem correspondence between coats and prices, in practice turns out to be entirely

fictitious.

There is another observation, of a more general nature. which we can make on the
ministry study; it deals with the criteria used in determining the costs relative
to the various classes of users.

The method of sharing in peak-time output, adopted in the document we are examining
here to distribute the costs among the various classes of users, as a matter of
fact ignores the relationships existing between the various methods of powar use
and the dynamics of costs; this consequently give us a price system which shows
how rates are still essentially conceived as a pattern foryields and not also as
an instrument for regulating the demand.

4.3.3. Some Observations as to the Method

He have summarized the objections to the assumptions used in the committee report
and we also want to introduce some ideas which will enable us to evaluate the
characteristics and the limitations of the rate methodology employed in the analysis

in question; we also want to be able to comment in greater detail on the points
discussed earlier. We will therefore try to do the following:

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAl.USEiﬂNLY

a. To emphasis the relationships which still exist, both on the level of the
electric power system and on the level of user classes, between the demand for
electric power and energy, and the cost of the latter's production, transportation,
and distribution;

b. To evidence the approximations which inevitably result from any effort to sub-
divide the costs of electric service into fixed costs and variable costs;

c. To show how the distribution of fixed costs among the classes of users, based
on the adoption of one or the other possible method, can lead to different re-
sults.

Electric energy supply is marked by a zero "standby time" in the sense that, at any
instant, the generation of electric energy can become quantitatively equal to the
demand expressed by all users taken together; consequently, the dimensioning of the
production, transportation, and distribution plants must be such as to permit not
only the satisfaction of the tetal energy demand arising in terms of time in the
electric power system but must also guarantee the coverage of maximum instantaneous
power demanded in the grid.

As a function of the above-mentioned circumstances, the total electric energy pro-
duction cost seems to be divisible into two fundamental components: the "fixed
component" which, being essentially dependent on the capacity of the plants, can be
considered proportional to the value of the maximum power taken out and the "variable
component" which instead can be directly tied to the quantity of energy produced.

‘

The breakdown of the total cost of electric energy supply into the "fixed" part and
the "variable" part however is an extremely simplified representation of the total
electric energy cost structure. There are as a matter of fact certain cost classes
which, although they are extremely rigid, while the energy produced varies (that is,
energy consumed or sold), do not seem to depend on the value of the maximum capacity.

Examples of this are the general expenditures, the billing costs, the administra-
tive and commercial management costs of the electric utility, etc.

A more rational subdivision of the electric energy cost can therefore be provided
by referring to the cost breakdown as followsza:

a. The energy costs, comprising the costs directly chargeable to the quantities
of energy produced (and hence made up mostly of fuel costs);

b. The power costs: more directly connected with the power produced and used in
the electric system (financing expenditures, amortization of plants, portion of
expenditure for personnel, etc.);

c. User costs: identifiable in the complex of billing expenditures, administrative
and commercial management expenses, consultation, etc.) which are part of the "user
service" factor.

Overall, the use and power costs constitute the class of fixed costs while the
energy costs are identified as a matter of fact with the variable costs.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The subdivision of electric service costs into two parts or three parts among the
classes indicated above raises some problems of charging which it seems a good idea
to point up here. In the study prepared by the Committee for Electric Rate Reform,
for example. the fuel cost was considered entirely as a variable cost.

In reality. keeping in mind the decreasing ratio between specific fuel consumption
and power taken out by a thermoelectric unit29, we can say that, more correctly,
the expenditures in question should have been partly charged to fixed costs. We
observe, for example, that the British production agency (the C363) charges the
latter with a share of the cost of fuels used in each power plant on the basis of
the formula 100/(100+12.8 L) where L is the load factor for the power actually
taken from the power plant. Considerations of similar logic could be entertained
regarding a more "precise" distribution among fixed costs and variable costs, on
the one hand. and expenditures for personnel, maintenance, hydro-geo-nuclear-
thermoelectric production, lubricants, etc., as well as a series of expenditures
not directly tied to the physical process of electric energy production, trans-
portation, and distribution but nevertheless connected with the operation of the
electric power service which, in the study, are simply lumped together in one or
the other of the three classes considered.

What we have said so far thus boils down to the fact that the fixed and variable
costs can assume different values, as a function of the charging criteria chosen30.

The process of distributing the total electric service cost among the various user
categories furthermore involves ”approximations" which are considerably more
significant than those we have mentioned so far.

The subdivisions of power costs among the various user classes. in particular,
implies assumptions which--because of the broad degree of subjectivity character-
izing them-lead to results that cannot be clearly spelled out.

This is confirmed by the variety and plurality of methods which, since the beginning
of the century, were proposed to solve the problem of assigning the costs of power
to the various classes of consumersal.

The basic assumption behind all of the methods for the distribution of power costs
is that the previously mentioned fixed costs essentially depend on the total maxi-
mum load of the system.

The agreement among "positions" which turned out to exist regarding the identifica-
tion of the main element that generates the fixed (power) costs however does not
spring from the fundamental objectives of these distribution procedures: that is,
the determination of the total fixed costs which must be charged to each con-
aumer category.

Although there is unanimity in the conviction that each class of user influences
the volume of power costs in a manner proportional to the "weight" with which it
participates in the formation of the system's "peak," opinions regarding the share

of fixed expenditures to be charged to each of them do diverge profoundly.

This basic divergence on the "charging philosophy" has led to the definition of a
series of power cost distribution criteria which can be arranged in the following

two categories:

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICHHNCJAL USEIDNIN

a. Criteria on whose basis the assignment of the above-mentioned costs to the
consumer classes is made exclusively with reference to the power parameter (for
example, the power taken out when the system is at its peak, the maximum power,
etc.);

b. Criteria on whose basis each user class is charged with the costs in question
keeping in mind not only the power taken out of the grid but also the time factor
involved in this power use.

we note that the differentiation between the two categories of methods is not tied
so much to the diversity of distribution "instruments" used (only the "power"
parameter or the "power" parameter combined with the "tﬂmé' parameter) but rather
the diverse "objects" for which the fixed costs are ”charged": using the cri-
teria under (a). it is the class of users which is taken as the reference point

for the charging process; using the method under (b), it is the commodity furnished
to the user (the kilowatt-hour).

In the ministry study we are looking at here. as we know. the fixed power costs

were "distributed" among the various classes of users in proportion to the power
taken out by each one of them in determining the system's peak output (method of
peak output participation).

Regardingthechoice of the above-mentioned criterion, we canlvtetwo points. First
of all it is assumed that the method--a1though it may look easy to apply-~can lead
to a distribution of fixed costs which is rather debatable when the values of the
coefficients of participation in the peak power used are not constant in terms of
time but reflect the structure of the load curve at the particular moment of
maximum power in the system. Keeping in mind that the maximum peak of the ENEL
system can materialize with similar probabilities both in the morning and in the
afternoons.so as to present a different structure, we cannot rule out the possi-
bility that the adoption of the criterion in question32 may have led to a sub-
division of the fixed costs among the various classes 3 users which is not "in
line" with the normal characteristics of power as such --in spite of the use of
an average value for the peak-time participation coefficients.

It seems to us that we must observe, second, that, due to the use of the method
of peak-time participation, in the analysis developed by the Electric Power Rate
Reform Committee, no consideration was given to the fact that any energy taken out
of the system, even if this is done during "off-peak" periods or even if it is
marked by a power value less than the power figure taken during peak hours, since
it nevertheless involves the use of power generating, transportation. and dis-
tribution facilities, should be "charged" for an albeit minimum share of the fixed
cost .

A rigorOus application of this method on the other hand would mean that we would
not be charging any fixed cost to user classes with zero power taken out when the
system is at its peak although the volume used would be significant during other
periods of time which are also close to the peak time. This is the case, for
example. with public lighting which is practically nothing during winter-time
peak-hours in the morning but which is at a maximum in the evening during the

winter-time peak.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In recalling that the use of distribution criterion based on the combined utiliza-
tion of the two parameters of "time" and "power" would have made it possible to
give the above-mentioned circumstance a precise economic significance, to consider
it useful to conclude these brief observations, evidencing, throngh the examples
given in Appendix 2, how and to what degree the total fixed costs,"chargeab1e" to

the individual user classes. can vary as a function of the distribution method
adopted.

The distribution of energy costs and the distribution of user costs looks less
problematical than the distribution of power costs.

Regarding energy costs, we note in particular that. although the assignment of
energy and power losses to each of the stages constituting the segments of the
plant structure of the electric energy production and distribution enterprises
and/or the individual classes of users also raises a problem of subdividing the
"common" process costs. the usual distribution methods (which are specifically

illustrated by way of example in the report) involve levels of approximation rather
than acceptable levels.

But that does not mean that the cost configurations, deriving from the application
of the above-mentioned methods, can be considered "exact" figures for the actual
variable costs. In addition to what we already observed on the method of charging
the three classes of costs considered in terms of fuel, maintenance, personnel,
etc., as well as regarding the losses, we can as a matter of fact reveal that the
distribution of variable costs as the function of an average value determined on

the overall level and properly corrected to take into account the different ef-

fect of the losses, in fact signifies ignoring the fluctuations to which the propor-
tional energy cost is subjected due to the changes which take place, in terms of
time, in the mix of the generating units in operation.

4.3.4. Some Concluding Considerations

The analysis made so far enables us to draw some conclusions regarding the opera-
tional signficiance which, in a rate reorganization project, may be assumed by the
"sector" costs that can be charged to the individual user categories as well as the
parameters in relation to which the rationality of a rate system shapes up.

It seems a good idea to point out that what we tried to show in the preceding pages
is not so much the character of "constitutional unsuitability" of "sector" costs
when it comes to representing the different economic content associated with the
elementary demand coming from the individual use categories, but rather the close
dependence existing between the value of such costs and the criterion for the dis—
tribution of common costs actually adopted.

It seems to us as a matter of fact that while. on the one hand, it is correct to
say that. in spite of the intrinsic artificial natureg the above-mentioned cost
configurations constitute a by no means inacurate measure of the differentiations
caused by the various ways in which the technical parameters that distinguish each
supply form "work," it must on the other hand be quite evident that the 1nd1cations
furnished by them have a meaning only if they are understood with reference to the
logic implied in the methods of distribution of electric utility costs among the
user categories.

28
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘his logic is devoid of any intrinsic objectivity but does find justification in the
)bjectives which we seek to attain through the distribution of cmmmon costs; this
logic as a matter of fact is subordinated to the ultimate goals which we intend

:o pursue with our price policy.

the rationality or irrationality of a rate system thus should not be evaluated so
nuch as a function of the existence of a ”formal" coincidence between the costs and
the prices of electric energy supplied to the individual user categories but rather
in relation to the suitability or nonsuitability which the rate system itself pre-
sents in terms of satisfying the needs in relation to which it was designed.

If, for example, we assume-~as seems to have been done in the electric rate reform
study--that the rate system should essentially be functional in terms of attaining
certain objectives within the economy of the electric energy producing and dis-
tributing enterprises, that is to say, that it should make it possible to cover the
enterprise balance. to guarantee smooth commercial management of the particular
utility. to guarantee flexible commercial management of the user's operation, etc.,
then it is clear that the price system currently in force, properly updated on the
basis of the conclusions arrived at by the Electric Power Rate Reform Study
Committee, can be considered rational.

if on the other hand we say that electric energy price policy should be aimed not
only at attaining the above-mentioned goals but also at making the demand turn out
to be more compatible with the urgent requirements dictated by the country's energy
situation. then there is no doubt that the proposal for electric power rate reform.
submitted at the end of 1974 by the above-mentioned committee, would have to be
subjected to revision.

The need for a change in the operational function "traditionally" performed by the
rate system emerges in relation to the prospects which shape up in the energy field
for ‘tnly in short-range and medium-range terms.

it is realistic to think--as was brought out in a recent analysis by the IEFEJA

and as demonstrated by the preparation, by the ENEL, of an electric service back-

up plan--that there would have to be, in short-range terms, a critical condition

in the electrical system marked by shortages during "peak hours." This critical
situation could be further accentuated through the manifestation of a form of energy
shortage during the middle years of the decade of the eighties.

ln longer-range terms. the situation cauld improve and the supply could turn out

to be suitably commensurate to the demand; this is so even though the estimates of
the changes that cauld develop in medium—range terms in the electric energy produc-
tion system might be more chancy than the earlier ones, essentially because of the
uncertainties that still hover over the strategic choices concerning the way to
produce electric energy.

It seems hOwever that we can say that, very probably, petroleum derivatives will
continue to represent the dominant energy source throughout the entire span of time
to which these conlsderations pertain; this is so because of the unknowns inherent
in the implementation of nuclear electric power development plans, the complexity
of problems connected with the use of coal to the degree recently hypothesized by

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the ENEL, and the marginal nature of additional contributions from water power and
geothermal sources which have not yet been exploited.

Looking at these prospects it appears evident that a government policy of electric
power demand regulation, centering around price controls, aimed at reducing the
demand during peak hours and the discouragement of "improper" uses of electric
energy, can constitute an important strategic instrument for the following purposes:

a. Prevention or "containment" of presumable peak-time power shortages;
b. Achievement of energy savings during the utilization phase;
c. Containment of average electric energy production costsas.

It must however be kept in mind that the modulation of loads and the discouragement
of improper uses of electric energy constitute two objectives of rate policy which
may turn out to be in conflict with each other.

He can observe as a matter of fact that, for example, a strong differentiation
between the prices of electric energy taken during peak hours and those during other
periods of time in the course of the day, could on the one hand promote a signifi-
cant reduction in the peak-time newer demand--thus helping in the attainment of

the objectives spelled out under (a) and (c), whereas on the other hand this might
also give rise to a further and undesirable increase in improper (heat) uses of
electric energy.

This contradiction however can be straightened out in our opinion by implementing
a rate maneuver designed to take into account both the prices of the other energy
sources and of the peculiar characteristics of the various segments of electric
power demand, and to resort to suitable measures of a normative character.

It was therefore considered advisable to develop some summary considerations on
the limitations, on the operational possibility. and on the tie-in of the rate
maneuver as an instrument for regulating the demand in the various segments of the
electric power market.

4.4. Some Aspects of Electric Power Load Control in the Various Segments of
Demand Through Rates

4.4.1. Electric Energy Supply for Public Illumination

As far as the use of electric energy for public illumination is concerned, it is
believed that--in view of the distinguishing characteristics here--it would be
quite difficult to produce significant effects in terms of consumption rationaliza-
tion through rates alone.

As we know, public illumination is a service which is not only linked to the use
of electric energy but which is also characterized by rigid service hours, strictly
depending on natural lighting conditions.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1AL.USEG)NLY

It follows from this that, while. on the one hand, we cannot really suggest replacing
electric energy with other sources. on the other hand, there is no real specific
possibility of making any shifts in the power load actually taken out of the system.
It is noted in this connection that taking electric energy for public lighting pur-
poses is something which as a whole figures in the makeup of the winter-time even-
ing peak load while, during the summer, its effect on the maximum load is zero.

In spite of the above-mentioned characteristics, public illumination still repre-
sents a sector where the rationalization of electric power demand can have a cer-
:ain significance.

Recent surveys36 as a matter of fact demonstrated that, by replacing incandescent
bulbs with [high-intensity] flood lights, it would be possible, without changing
the ”quality of service," to reduce the quantity of energy and power actually
taken out by the user facilities in question by about 18 percent. Although they
are not conspicuous in relation to the overall dimension of the electric power
demand, these savings. it seems to us, nevertheless make it advisable to launch
promotional initiatives in support of the introduction of the technique indicated
above.

The following could be instruments for such initiatives, rather than manipulating
the prices of electric energy sold:

a. A timely change in the standards currently asked by the ENBL--as a counterpart
to the maintenance operations performed by the agency itself--of the community
administrations regarding illumination equipment;

b. A selective grant of preferential loans which the laws currently in force
provide in support of local administrations to put up public illumination facili-
ties.

while it is undoubtedly a fact that a rise in electric energy sales prices can

get users to hold consumption down through the adoption of equipment with a higher
lighting efficiency, it is just as indubitable that, in this sense, a much more
effective stimulus might be provided by either increasing the cost of maintenance
of facilities equipped with incandescent bulbs as far as the community administra-
tions are concerned, or by handling the above-mentioned financing support in such
a way as to get them to contribute toward the improvement of the energy yield of
the public illumination grid.

6.4.2. Electric Energy Supply for Domestic Uses

The situation on the domesgic market for electric energy, essentially, as it emerges
from available information is characterized by a complex of circumstances among
which the following are of particular importance in our opinion:

a. The current dimension of the social slice is such as to permit--as was under-
scored earlier-~"improper" uses of electric energy at preferential prices;

b. Electric energy consumption for "heat use" turn out to be growing rapidly above
all in the country's south-central areas; in this connection it is important to
consider the rapid spread of electric hot-water heaters in the above-mentioned

ares (see Table 4);

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. The sensitivity demonstrated by domestic power demand regarding price fluctua-
tions is such as to make us assume that conditions of necessary "elasticity" exist
for the development of initiatives, including rate initiatives, aimed at rational-

izing consumption.

Table 6. Use of Electric Water Heater in the Various Italian Regions in Percent
of DOmestic Users —————=—-—————-—-__-

 

1966 I911 19"
1 Henna! 5.1 ‘ «L6 “a“
anh- II'McIa M3,! 31ml. at...
2 Innumli‘l .153 2“,! 2),:
'mmino Alto Mia: 25.8 251.1 2-3.9
Vela-In IS.“ 15,5 16.9
Priull V-«zia Giulia 1?," 9.8 11.5
urns-in 19.2 23,3 -' 18,0
Fhﬁlia lk-nunr- 18,0 ' 1a,; {‘9,2
3 Mum '16.} ",8 '0.0
elm-in . 23.} .3.5 59.3
Marthe 23.8 27.1 23$
1.32:0 $1.9 95.“ 77.7
Ahmzni 16.7 28.0 “3.?
Home 3‘3." 29.5 ”.3‘
Cup-sin 36.0 35.6 59.!-
I'nclia 27.? 7.. ‘4'."
lnsiliunt. l1,? :5.2 3t.5
Cnlnbrla 21.5 9.0 ~35)
a SiciUe 19.1 3L6 U1J
5 swtrrs I 32.7 ”.5 ‘33.?-
6 Tbtolc ltalis 28.2 33.~ >8.“

 

mate: Fail, Indogina sull'utrnza (maniacs

Key: 1--Piedmont; 2--l.ombardy; 3--'l‘uscany; lo--Sicily; 5--Sardinia; 6--Itaiy total.
Source: ENEL, "Indagines sull'utenza domestics."

The data referring to the structural makeup of domestic users as a matter of fact
seem to indicate that the introduction of the "social slice” not only caused a
conspicuous concentration of domestic users in the committed power category of up
to 3 kn but that the option for the above-mentioned figure in many cases was sub-
ordinated to the decision of the users to change their usual ways of using electric
energy so as to be able to hold down their own power needs38 through the staggered
use of available electrical appliances in terms of time.

The above circumstances cast light upon the fact that a demand regulation policy is
opportune and possible also in the domestic field but also point to some considera-
tions concerning some rate schedule steps which it might be advisable to develop.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USEI)NLY

keeping in mind however that any effort to revise electric energy prices outside
the frame of reference of the system of prices pertaining to the various sources
of available energy can lead to results that might also conflict with the objec-
tives of national energy policy.

A domestic electric power demand control policy, carried out through the rate
instrument, in our opinion could tend to reduce the "improper components" caused
by the use of electric energy for heating purposes and could also reduce the
power demand during peak times.

Hithout trying to propose final solutions, we can say, from a purely theoretical
viewpoint, that a multi-hour rate setup could also turn out to be best when it
comes to reducing the uses of power during peak hours.

it must however be noted that the advantages deriving from the reduction of the
domestic power load during peak times probably would not compensate for the ex-
penditure that would have to be made to apply the multi-hour rates.

It seems as a matter of fact that we can say that the amount of reduction in the
total peak volume within the electric power system that can be achieved through

a shift of a portion of the domestic power load would be reduced, for the following
two reasons:

a. First of all, since the coefficient of participation in the peak time for
domestic uses is rather low which is why a shift of conspicuous consumption "slices
during quiet hours would also lead to a modest reduction in the system's overall
peak volume;

b. Second, because, considering the current per-capita consumption levels,.a1ao in
the presence of a major reduction in prices on electric power other than during
peak times, would provide an insufficient economic incentive to promote a signi-
ficant response on the part of the users.

0n the other hand we must keep in mind that the introduction of a multi-hour rate
system--which involves an expensive and complex replacement of measurement instru—
ments currently installed with domestic users-~could bring about a development of
electric energy heating plants which, as we said before, would instead be slowed

down.

Considering all of these points, we could also admit (in agreement, among other
things, with what was observed in a recent document put out by the EEC directorate-
generai of energy39), that domestic rates, reasonably progressive in keeping with
the increase in consumption and structured with prices on such a level as to dis-
courage the use of electric energy for heating purposes, can represent a suitable
rate instrument--albeit an imperfect one‘°--for the "implementation of a demand
regulation policy in the sector in question."

In concluding these brief considerations, we must however emphasize that, in our
opinion, to achieve a significant containment of domestic power use, we should in
any case follow up any rate schedule steps with measures of a normative type aimed
a promoting changes in the current design typology of electric household appliances
in order to reduce specific consumption.

33
FOR OFTHCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.6.3. Electric Energy Supply in Places Other than Homes

In view of the extreme heterogenity of the quantitative and qualitative character-
istics distinguishing electric power supplies in places and premises other than
homes, it is certainly difficult to spell out a demand regulation policy.

It would therefore be absurd to try to provide precise indications as to the
specific structure of rates best suited for developing such a policy in the various
demand segments in question.

This is especially so because, regarding particularly supplies in smaller dimen-
sions, such as those for crafts, agricultural, and tertiary sector establishmsnts.
the information available to us as to the uses and methods characterizing the con—
sumption of electric energy are not such as to enable us to draft sufficiently well-
reasoned proposals.

we will therefore confine ourselves to developing some brief considerations re-
garding the rate schedule which could entail the launching of an electric power
demand rationalization policy in the large-scale industry sector and we will do
that essentially on the basis of the information obtained directly during the
survey described in Chapter 7.

We must observe right away that the definition of a multi-hour rate system is a
very complex thing. This problem cannot simply be reduced to an identification of
a rate structure capable of producing significant shifts in the electric power
increments from peak times to other periods but instead calls for a solution which
would be compatible also with other energy policy exigencies.

From this angle we must therefore carefully realize that, in short-range and medium-
range terms, Italy will be characterized by the following:

a. A shortage in electric energy supply in the sense we can anticipate peak-time
and base-energy shortages;

b. An electric energy production structure predominantly based on petroleum;
c. A primary urgent requirement for reducing our dependence on petroleum;

d. A reduced possibility of developing the power generation potential because of
ecological, financial, and social-political restrictions.

Having noted this, we observe that, for example, if it were considered necessary
to persuade the users to shift significant load "slices" for short periods of time
to prevent a presumed peak—time power shorage, it might turn out to be rather
awkward to introduce multi-hour rates with rather high price differentials, es-
tablished also with reference to the elasticity of the individual demand incre-
ments at various price levels.

That however could lead to the use of electric energy (during low hours) as a sub-
stitute for other sources with the result of wasteful energy use (for example,
greater use of electric heating).

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To prevent this effect, which is incompatible with the urgent requirement for hold-
ing petroleum consumption down and reducing the expansion of the power generation
potential, it would then be necessary to draw up the above-mentioned rates with

reference also to the prices of energy sources that take the place of electric
energy.

A major hourly price spread on the other hand could be an incentive for the develop-
ment of industrial production efforts with a high energy content which--as indicated
in point (b)—-would lead to an accentuation of the country's dependence on
petroleum and to a further deterioration of the basic electric energy shortage
situation in medium-range terms.

The considerations presented so far show that electric energy prices, established
with a view to a single objective only (power saving), can work in directions which
also diverge with respect to other directives (energy savings) of energy policy

and of the country's economic policy.

It follows from this that the rate schedules for electric energy assume a signi-
ficance that is quite different from what it was in the past; this calls for de-
cisions and measures which must take into account not only the real situation on
the electric power market but also the more complex national energy economy situa-
tion and which can necessitate the adoption of rate schedule criteria that are

not based only on the cost parameter, such as, for example, the normative criteria
which introduce further restrictions. other than those inherent in the rates as
such (for example, ban on further spread of electric heating).

We are not trying here to discount the validity of a rate schedule system centering
on correspondence between coats and prices; we are only trying to underscore:

a. In the particular sense that price systems might derive from this correspondence
which would not be compatible with the implementation of a demand regulation policy
designed to meet the sometimes contradictory exigencies arising from the Italian
energy situation;

b. In the more general sense, the well-known complexities which are inherent in
the formulation of electric energy sales prices established in harmony with the
country's economic and energy policy directions.

FOOTNOTES

1. The following Directive No 354, dated 23 February 1953, specified that the
rates in effect as of 31 December 1952 could be increased by 30 percent. pro-
vided the increase deriving for the user would not turn out to be more than
the increase springing from the standard rate.

2. The ThermoelectricSurchargeBalance Fund, instituted through Directive No 46,
dated 15 March 1946, was designed to reimburse the electric power companies
for the increased costs deriving from thermoelectric production.

3. It must be noted that the increments transferred into the price were of a
different size also in relation to the final utilization sector (electrochemi-
cal plants, steel mills).

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

So

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FORGDFFNJA1.USE(HHLY

A summary list of changes made in the Italian rate system after 01? Directive
No 961/1961 is given in Appendix 1.

The losses determined as far as the ENEL are concerned came to 90 billion lire.

For a more in-depth analysis on the economic and financial situation of the
ENBL and on the development of rate standards during the period of 1962-1978,
see 6. Zanetti and C. Fraquelli, "una nationalizzazione a1 buio," Il Hulino.
Bologna. 1979.

In Appendex 1 we have indicated in detail the variations in the structure of
the rate system set up established by CIP Directive No 941 as a result of the
CIP provisions which became effective after 1974.

As we know, the standards in effect provide that. in case of combined use of
continuous supply and supply limited to night-time hours:

a. The power to be billed for supply limited to night-time hours must be as-
sumed to be equal to the distance between the maximum power taken during the
month, in terms of hours listed as night-time hours, and the maximum power
taken out during other hours (or contractually committed for continuous supply,
if the maximum power taken during day-time hours was less than the committed
Power) ;

b. The consumption of energy to be billed on the basis of the rate schedule
for supplies limited to night-time hours would be established by monthly dia-
tributing the actual consumption during the hours in which this latter rate is
used between the continuous supply and supply at the specific rate itself, in
the proportion in which the power increments taken are allocated to the two
forms of supply.

c. The price of energy. charged for night-time supply, should however not turn
out to be higher than the price for continuous supply.

In this connection. see Paragraph 6 and Appendix 3.

The annual power equivalent provided for in the high-use integration rate, for
supplies delivered to users getting voltage higher than 100 kv. is equal to
43.800 L/kw. The kwh unit equivalent varies from about 28 to 31 lire. Taking
out ”w for 1/6 hour. evidently involving a consumption of 250 kwh, therefore
gives us a cost equal to 43,800 L/kw x 1,000 kw - 43,800 lire. Divided by
250 kwh, the amount for every kwh taken out is 175,000 lire/kwh.

This involves the so-called rates for emergency assistance supply, programmed
reserve, and for parallel service.

For example, until the entry into force of CIP Directive No 36/1979, the "toler-
ance limit" of users having a committed power of more than 500 kw was determined
by adding to the power commitment a "tolerance" equal to 10 percent of the
commitment itself. For this tolerance a "minimum" value equal to 75 kw and

a maximum value of 500 kw were fixed. The maximum available power however had
to be determined by adding, to the committed power, 25 percent of that com-
mitted power, with a minimum of 200 and a maximum of 1,250 kw. The grant of a
"tolerance" of 500 kw to users characterized by a committed power Of several

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tens of Hw evidently made no sense since the accidental errors implied in
measuring the power actually taken out can be very much greater than the
above-mentioned value. In spite of that, until the entry into force of CIP
DireCtive No 36/1979, this norm was regularly in effect. A similar remark
can be made in relation to the standards provided for by the cIP on the power
factor which only recently was modified in a manner conforming with the pro-

visions that had been operative for a long time in the European countries as
a whole.

See E. Bechis, R. Coriasso, "The Problem of Electric Power Rates," QUALE
SCIENZA, No 1, 1979, Stampator Publishers, Turin.

As we know, CIP Directive No 949 regulates only user connections involving
low voltage and medium-high voltage up to 50 kv.

Here it suffices to recall that, in 1978, the users of the ENEL, which were
supplied with voltage in excess of 50 kv, amounted to about 1,000 units and
that energy billed to them turned out-to be about 30 percent of the total sold.

Reference is made here to rates for domestic uses with a commutted power of up
to 3 kw, in force as a result of the provisions of CIP Directive 1/1975 which
as we know called for the following: a. A reduced price for the first annual
1,800 kwh consumed; b. A reduced heat surcharge for the first annual 1,800
kwh consumed.

Although the quantitative expression of "essential" consumption of electric
energy by a domestic user is somewhat more arbitrary, we must note that a
recent survey by the ENEL reveals the following:

a. The average annual consumption necessary for the use of illumination, for
ironing. for the refrigerator and for the TV turned out to be less than 600 kw
whereas with less than 800 kwh of annual average consumption one can use light-
ing. the iron, the refrigerator, and the washing machine (obviously in addi-
tion to smaller electric household appliances);

b. Users included in categories with a committed power of up to 3 kw con-
sumed an average of about 1,000 kwh in 1976 out of the 1,800 annual kwh covered
by the preferential rate.

. This led to a radical change in the structure of amounts billed to the various

user classes. The scope of these variations was illustrated in Paragraph 5.

. See 0. Zanetti, "Economic and Rate Aspects Tied to the Problem of Energy Use

Rationalization,' op. cit.

On that point. see the information provided by G. Lizzeri, "Price Control Policy
in Italy--Haterials for a Debate," "Atti del Convegno Arel," Rome, 27 October
1978, I] Mulino Publishers, Bologna, 1979.

. This economic operation of "oil-fired" plants is further accentuated if we

consider the smaller fixed components which these plants require as compared
to coal.

3?
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
22.

23.

219.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This consumption corresponds to the annual gas-oil requirements for tem-
porarily or permanently heating single-family homes in various parts of the
country.

The above values are differential costs in the sense that they include:

The installation costs (including wiring and wall work) for the traditional
heating system;

The maintenance and operating costs (excluding the fuel costs) for the heating
system (electric energy. burner maintenance, boiler cleaning, parts replace-
ment costs, etc.), after deducting the costs of installation of the electric
heating units and the user's higher expenditures that may spring from the
application of the domestic rate with a comitted power of 6 kw.

Current gas-oil prices (250-260 L/kg, excluding VAT), assuming that the total
hent yield of the gas—oil system is between 0.5 and 0.6 and equal to 0.95 of
the electric heating system with heat accumulation, it is evident that for all
types of use with a kwh unit price below the spread between 33 and 62 lire,
the above—mentioned electric heating system turns out to be less expensive
than the "traditional“ gas-oil system already in terms of. variable costs. It
must furthermore be noted that users belonging to the market segment in ques-
tion who may benefit from the above-mentioned reduction in the "fuel cost"
are not only those who purchase electric energy at a kwh price lower than the
previously indicated limits; to them we must as a matter of fact add all users
(also in the form of low-voltage) who, by using night-time storage equipment,
can. by switching from standard-use supply to high-use supply. achieve a re-
duction in spending on the consumption "slice" relative to the "normal" uses
of electric energy to such an extent that, if deducted from the total cost

of electric energy intended for heating uses, we could reduce the amount to
figures lower than the cost of gas-oil employed in traditional systems.

The committee, appointed by the minister of industry on the basis of the
Ministerial Decree of 13 November 1974, was made up of representatives from
the Ministry of Industry, the ENEL, the municipal companies, the labor unions.
the industrial associations, the small industries and the crafts, agriculture,
and the ANCI.

The report explicitly admits that the deterioration of the economic and finan-
cial situation of ENEL was caused by the following:

.1. Factors directly inherent in the "normal" management of the operation
(rate schedule ceilings. cost increases are factors necessary to produce and
distribute electric energy) and which therefore should be balanced with an
increase in rates;

b. Expenditures that cannot be charged to electric company operations which
should be compensated for through “external" action.

According to G. Zanetti and G. Fraquelli ("Una nazionalizzazione al buio,"

op. cit.) "the greater expenditures borne by ENEL in 1978 for nationalization
compensation amounted to 164.3 billion lire. In l980--the year when the
effects of the nationalization operation could have been considered to be
over, these expenditures amounted to 210.9 billion lire."

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

34.

INDR OFINCJAL USE‘DNLN

It is noted in this connection that, while it is true that, as far as the
electric power company is concerned, the balance sheet situation can turn out
to have no effect on the efficiency (more closely tied to other factors, such
as, for example, the degree of responsibility given to the middle-level
decision-making structures, the increase in productivity, etc.), it is just
as true that a guaranteed balance in the economic management of the company
makes the search for solutions suitable in minimizing the costs less pressing.

A rate schedule analysis developed in the report uses this three-way sub-
division.

The specific fuel consumption (Comb) is a function of the load factor (PC),
which can be expressed through a relation of the type Comb - a + b PC where

b < 0; since PC = Pm/Pmax, with Pmax given. the equation can be rewritten in
the following terms: Comb a a + (b/Pmax) PM; where b/Pmax < 0. By load factor
we mean the ratio between the average power supplied and the maximum power that
can be supplied during a certain interval of time by a power plant.

The CEBG, for example, lists under "fixed costs" the increments of "personnel
expenditures" and of "repair, maintenance, etc. costs of generating units" ‘
which spring from the development of the following formulas:

Percentage share of personnel expenditures which can be charged to fixed costs:
. 100/(100 + 0.3L);

Percentage share of maintenance and other expenditures which can be charged

to fixed costs: - 100/(100 + 0.87L);

(L - installed power utilization factor).

For an overall view of these methods, see "La tarification de l'energie
electrique; Onu Coutes et systemes tarifaires de l'electricitie: une etude
generale" [Electric Energy Rate Schedule Development--UN Costs and Electric
Power Rate Systems--A General Study], New York, United Nations Publishers,
1974.

In the ministry report, the figures for the coefficients of participation of
the various user classes are the average of the two values for the morning and
the afternoon; this, by the way, appears to be in contradiction with the

logic inherent in the method.

On this point. see "Struttura dei costi e tarifficazione dell'energia
electrics in Italia" [Electric Energy Cost Structure and Rates in Italy],
ENEL, Distribution Directorate, Rate Study Sector, put out by the IFAP
seminar, "Costs and Prices in Utility Companies," Rome, 18-20 October 1978,
stating that "in the rather frequent cases where the system during various
times presents two points of great analogy but diversely constituted by the
participation of the various user classes, relatively modest variations in
the load of some classes can cause continuous shifts of the maximum absolute
load which in turn should give rise to even major variationsinthe way the
costs are charged."

For an in-depth examination of this problem, reference is made to the essay
by P. Berra, G. Cozzi. G. Oggionni, "The Electric Power Shortage during the

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(MNLV

"Inter-Tine Pcak--Eva1uation of Its Volume and Proposals Designed to Prevent
it and Cope with It,“ ECONOMIA DELLE FONTI DB ENERGIA, No 9. 1979, Angeli,
Milan.

It is noted that the significance which a demand control and regulation polity
might assume from this angle, based on the use of the price parameter. might
turn out to be anything but marginal. It would be realistic to provide for

a progressive increase in current energy prices if in fact we consider, on the
one hand, the economic and financial situation of the nation's electric power
company and, on the other hand, the volume of resources that should be set
aside to support:

a. The development of electric energy production, transportation, and dis-
tribution plants;

b. The anticipated progressive increase in the prices of petroleum products
whose utilization, as we observed earlier, will be mandatory for several years
to come;

c. The expenditure connected with some of the decisions made with a view to
reducing the Italian electric power system's dependence on petroleum deriva-
tives.

See. for example, P. Salvini, "Energy Savings in Public Illumination Plants
in Italy," "Atti della Giornats de Studio sull'illuminazione pubblica,"
Sep Pollution 78, Padua, 18 April 1978.

The market surveys conducted by the ENEL ("Indagine sull'utenza domestics,"

in 1968, 1971, 1975) represent a point of reference which is extremely useful
in identifying the implications of a rate schedule character which are con-
nected with the implementation of an electric consumption rationalization
policy in the domestic sector. From these surveys we can as a matter of

fact derive a series of indications regarding the consumption and the widespread
use of electric household appliances.

In this connection it is interesting to note that appliances with a committed
power of more than 3 kw, which in 1973 represented about 8 percent of the
domestic users, were reduced to 7 percent in 1975 and 5 percent in 1978.

See EEC, directorate—general of energy, "Prices of Energy--Ana1ysis of the
Sectors of Gas and Electric Energy," Brussels, 1978.

It is recalled in this connection that this progressive procedure for example
could be a disadvantage to larger families for whom essential electric power
consumption could turn out to be way above the lowest price level.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 by Franco Angeli Bditore, Hilano, Italy

5058

650:8028/0357

ho
'13R10FF1CJAI.l£5EZ(N‘LY
FOR‘0FFK]AI.US£1ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

NEH DEFENSE POLICY INTENDED TO BE 'PBRHANENT'
Paris VALEURS ACTUBLLES in French 16 Nov 81 pp 35-37
[Article by Francois d'Orcival: ”Military Assurances"]

[Text] The government is placing its defense policy in
the context of continuity, the general strategy as much
as budgetary choices. At the moment when the menace is

increasing, a "Reagan-like effort" will be needed.

Louis XIV had had the phrase, "Ultima ratio regum," engraved on his cannons: the
final argument of kings. Cannons are money. The speeches of defense cease with
the budgets devoted to security.

Minister of defense for the past 6 months, but a specialist in military issues for
the past 20 years, Mr Charles Hernu presented his first budget at the end of last
week. From the time when he entered the ministry Hr Hernu has known how to win
the confidence of the armed forces ("the military people worship him," says LB
CANARD ENCHAINE, which attacks him every week) with one word: continuity.

Not one debate within the armed forces, not one statement by a military chief goes
by that is not prefaced with the statement made by the prime minister, Hr Pierre
Mauroy, 14 September before the audience at the Institute of Higher Studies in
National Defense: "1 am assuredly the prime minister of change, but there is at
least one point concerning which continuity is indispensable: the dictates of
defense."

Continuity of the general doctrine: independence, nuclear dissuasion and Atlantic
Solidarity.

But continuity also in budgetary policy: 123 billion francs for 1982. Admitted-
ly a rise of 17.6 percent in comparison with 1981. but an insufficient rise,
characterized by program authorizations (future funding) that are too low, com-
bined with already accumulated delays in the delivery.of materiel (assault rifles,
cannons, Mirage 2000, etc.). And just "barely enough to keep things going at home,
that is, train the forces.

From the rostrum Mr Hernu has probably heard remarks like those which he himself
made a year ago when he was deputy for the Socialist opposition: "Here again,"
he said concerning funding for training the armed forces, "the objectives of the

hl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

programming law will not be met, or will be at-the cost of ambiguity and exped-
ients: the number of pilots and missions is reduced to arrive at a figure of

15 hours a month in the air force; naval aviation will be below its objectives.
The navy will sail only 86 days. As for the land army, with a fuel allotment that
will be increased by no more than about 35 percent, it is obviously out of the
question to want to give it appropriate preparation.

Thereis not one line to be changed. (Except for a figure: funding for fuel for
the land army will not be increased by 35 percent but by 25 percent.)

0n the other hand, an additional risk must be taken into account: that of a crisis
in the armed forces' treasury at the beginning of next year (due to the insuf»
ficiency of the provisions for salary payments), a crisis like that of 1975. Where
is the necessary money going to be found? Hr Pabius, the minister of the budget,
will advise Hr Rernu to take it out of the funding for equipment. In other words,
to slow down even further the renewal of his materiel.

But to what extent did the new minister of defense participate in adjusting this
budget? Almost none whatever. The import of the services approved by vote, of
already allotted funds, of programs already started under the previous adminis-
tration is such that the freedom to move of any new chief amounts to practically

nothing.

To be exact, Hr Hernu had some leeway with about three thousandths of his budget:
to improve the situation of the contingent, and to write in study funds for the
seventh missile-launching nuclear submarine.

The symbolic 350 million nevertheless express a political willpower which Mr Berna
summarizes in a phrase: "Guarantee national independence through a crackpproof
solidarity between the country and its army." The seventh submarine for
independence, the maintenance of military service for solidarity.

But for basics Hr Hernu is giving himself 2 years. In 1983 he will present a new
5-year equipment law. The years 1982 and 1983, he says, will be for "getting
caught up" on earlier delays. They may also be 2 years of additional delays. An

identical delay had been taken on at the beginning of H: Giscard d'Bstaing's
7-year term. Already in the name of "thinking over" our defense policy. The risk
is that this thinking over may be shackled by a bad economic setting. '

We continue to raise the issue the other way around. General Jeannou Lacaze,
chief of staff of the armed forces. made the following statement on 29 September
before the Center of Higher Studies on Armament: "In view of the evervrising
cost of training personnel and getting equipment in place, the first thing that
comes to mind is the extent of the effort which the country can actually devote
to setting up a military structure adapted to our needs without jeopardizing the
balance of our economy."

The question is surprising for a military chief. General Rogers, chief commander
of NATO in Europe, repl‘es: "The most valuable social service that can be provided
to a nation is to insure its survival." The most famous of the supporters of tLe
"blow from the ax" in social and public spending to fight against inflation,

h2
FOR OF11C1A1.USE()NLN
Milton Friedman, told me one day in Chicago: "There is one budget item where no
savings must be made, and that is security. Defense comes outside of inflation.

Economic prosperity to the detriment of security is an illusion which invites
disaster."

France will pay 123 billion next year for its "military insurance;" the nation's
social budget will he in the neighborhood of 850 billion. Our defense spending
will represent 3.9 percent of our national wealth expressed in terms of the
market Gross Domestic Product (H/GDP, the scale used by the Ministry of Defense
for its comparisons, i.e., about 90 percent of the GDP).

Twenty years ago this share was 6 percent. It was over 4 percent during all of
our years of strong growth. It still stood at 4.6 percent in 1968. Detente and a
sense of well-being caused it to drop to less than 3.6 percent in 1974. Five
years had been enough for the loss of a point. It will take 10 to get it back.
Military funding will not reach the 6 percent range until some time after 1983.

Other public expenses are increasing even more rapidly than the defense budget:
the state devoted 17 percent of its resources to it in 1976, as compared to 15.6
percent this year.

Here is what General Lacaze has to say: "The objective of 6 percent of the M/GDP
is the minimum threshold below which the armed forces would no longer have the
wherewithal to assume their current missions. Below this level, it would, in

fact, be best to review these missions and reconsider the role which France expects
to take in the world at a time when the threat is becoming greater.

It is the threat that dictates the resources needed for defense and the mission
of the armed forces.

The takeover of Kabul and the Iranian disaster abruptly awakened the American
giant. President Reagan decided to undertake a huge military rebuilding effort:
180 billion additional dollars will be injected into military funding during the
next 5 years. Yet the United States has just reached an unemployment rate esti-
mated at 8.5 percent of the active population (the same figure as in France).

Hr Hernu confided to the delegates of the Defense Committee: "There is no securi-
ty unless there is an overall balance among the forces, most of all in the nuclear
era. Bearing in mind the Soviets' superiority in the area of antiforces capa-
bility, the maximum danger period will occur somewhere around the years 1984 and
1985.

The terms of the inequality were pointed out last week by General Haig, former
commander in chief of NATO and currently the American secretary of state: in the
number of missiles and aircraft the relationship is three to one in the Russians'
favor; in "theater" missiles (for Europe only) this same relationship is six to
one.

There is full agreement between President Reagan, Hr Hitterrand and Mrs Thatcher:
priority is given to the reestablishment of parity among the forces. Before
negotiating on disarmament.

1:3
FOR OFFICIAL usB our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A significant detail: it was during the Western su-it neeting in Ottawa last
July that lit Hitterrand let it be known ﬂat as soon as he got back he would go to
the nuclear submarine base in Brest. During this visit he announced the design-
ing of the seventh missile-launching nuclear submarine (SNLB), sea power being
the "diamond point" of our discussion. Hith this seventh vessel - three sub-
marines ($4 multiple-head missiles) will be in continuous service on the seas.

The current French strategic nuclear force (SNLB, Albion plateau missiles, Mirage
IV) protect France from blackmail like that which stopped our parachutists in Suez
in 1956. It protects our population from an antipopulation weapon. It is
necessary; as it is now, it is not sufficient.

First because it is necessary to protect, "to cover" the enay's real stake,which
is not France alone, but all of Western Europe. What would become of a France
deprived of Europe? It would be suffocated. Germany, denied possession of nuclear
weapons because of its defeat, will be literally sucked in by unconditional neu-
tralisn ("better red than dead"), if France and Great Britain, nuclear powers, are
not in a position to substitute in a timely manner for the sole Anerican guarantee.

Nuclear weapons, Stalin used to say, are made to "scare people with delicate
nerves." The SS 20s and the Soviet ”Backfire" bombers are already in the process
of disarming Northern Europe from a distance.

lbreover, other forces are required against other threats. Defense can do nothing
more than adapt itself to the attack, and strategy to the evolution of weapons.
Nuclear or classical. Timidity in this area would be a sign of weakness. It is
of the utmost importance that Mr Hitterrand has requested that work go forward
on the neutron weapon.

An interesting discussion pt under way within the armed forces before becoming,

in the Elysee, the subject of a forthcoming defense decree. A discussion between
supporters of the seventh missile-laucnhing nuclear submarine and the defendants

of the nuclear driven aircraft carrier.

These two weapons do not, militarily, have anything in comn. The former, hidden
for years mre by the darkness of the oceans, is the instrument of massive re-
prisals. the weapon of despair. The other is the very tool of heavy, long-
distance intervention (an aircraft carrier, not so slow as one might think, covers
800 kilometers a day): to insure the free movement of our supplies, of our
interests abroad, or simply to show our presence.

This discussion no longer makes sense, if it is a matter of choosing one program
rather than the other on the grounds that, their approximate case being from 4

to 5 billion each (with its missiles in the case of the former, withouts its air-
planes in the case of the latter), France is tlought to be unable to launch them

both.

The missile-launching nuclear submarine and the aircraft carrier are not sutually
exclusive, but rather are complementary. It will be the government's difficult
task to lay out the work on the weapons of the future: new land missiles (those
of Albion now becoming vulnerable), bonbers to succeed Mirage IV, a new generation

of tactical weapons .

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is an urgent matter: the choices unet be made before the period which
Mr Charles Hernu identifies as that of "maximum danger" (1984, 1985). MacArthur
used to say: "In war, the story of feilure can be summarized in two words: too

late."
COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Veleurs ectuelles"

91098
680: 3100/ 133

'65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

VARIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF NATO ENTRY ANALYZED
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 9 Nov 81 pp 28-31
[Article by Antxon Ssrasqueta: "To the Rock for NATO"!

[Text] Once the Congress of Deputies receives the green light for Spain's entry into
the Atlantic Pact Treaty, the Calvo Sotelo government will begin both official and
unofficial consultations and negotiations with the heads of NATO.

The objectives of the Spanish authorities include the attainment of the command of
the Strait. which is part of the Baleares-Gibraltar-Canaries defense axis. and the
establishment of the Iberian Peninsula Command in Madrid.

As a result of Spain's entry into NATO. this organization is obliged to restructure
its provisions for strategic commands, according to the highly reliable military
and government sources queried by CAHBIO 16.

The greatest difficulties for the Spanish authorities have arisen because of the
suspicious attitude that has been detected for some time in government circles of
Portugal, a country which up until now has maintained supremacy in the southern
defense of the European Atlantic within NATO.

On the other hand. although NATO has thus far refused to state overtly what it
thinks about the new distribution of military commands, Great Britain has already
expressed an excellent willingness to cooperate in the Spanish leadership of the

Strait command.

A high-ranking military commander told this magazine, ”Never before has Great Britain
had a better disposition toward Gibraltar than it has now."

The same Atlantic expert assured CAHBIO 16 that London has already given concrete
signs and all kinds of facilities to enable Spain to obtain the command of the

Strait. and to obtain a foothold in Gibraltar as a first step toward solving the
dispute between the two countries. "And that should be Spain's entry into NATO,"

he noted.

The president of the government himself, Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, is confident, as he
stated in a recent closed meeting, that the responsibility for the command will go
to a Spanish military men, and that this will be the first step toward placing the
Spanish flag on the Rock of Gibraltar.

h6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nevertheless. in some previous studies it has been virtually ruled out that the
command of the Strait might be established in Gibraltar itself, for technical and
logistical reasons which. however. indicate an ideal situation in Cartagena.

Once the Spanish Western defense commands become incorporated into the NATO system,
they will have a radius of action that will, almost certainly, include the French

and Italian Mediterranean, and in some cases have the participation of foreign
troops.

In this way, NATO would partially replace the vacuum left by France when De Gaulle
(on ID March 1966) left the NATO military system (without leaving the Pact) in the
HEDOC (western Mediterranean) area, with a base in Toulon.

Problems With Portugal

In the case of Portugal, the problems confronting Spain are of a larger scope,
although the potential confrontations have not yet assumed a public or official
nature, with the process of the Spanish affiliation still in its first phase.

According to a Spanish report prepared this summer with the title "Portuguese Posi-
tion Toward Spain's Entry Into NATO". which has been used in high-ranking government

echelons. those misgivings on the part of the neighboring country stem from three
fundamental aspects:

Discomfort over our entry into NATO because it might entail the loss of preeminence
on the Iberian Peninsula. Although they regard it as positive for the Alliance,
the economic aid that they are now receiving is also at stake. At the moment, all
this is rather nebulous.

They are the spokesmenfor the strategy on the Iberian Peninsula and its sphere of
influence (they are the ones consulted). They fear that with Spain's entry they
will lose their leadership.

The problem of commands that could be posed. especially the IBBRLANDT Command (now
in Lisbon, under Portuguese leadership). They want us to be responsible for the
Mediterranean and themselves for the Atlantic (no globalization of the Iberian
Peninsula).

This latter position, precisely. is upheld by the Portuguese defense minister him-
self, Diego Freitas do Amaral, based on the idea that Portugal has an "Atlantic
deatiny" which, accoriing to the latest information, is backed by President Eanes
and the Socialists in that country.

However, 2 years ago, the former defense minister, Gen Mario Pirmino Miguel, pointed

out (in a position that has been reaffirmed with the passage of time) the feasibility
of locating the command of the Peninsula in the center of the territory, for reasons

of strategic effectiveness. '

According to Gen Firmino Miguel, "It would be unfeasible for the Iberian Peninsula
not to be considered a Strategic entity in terms of the structure of the NATO
commands."

1.1
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in one of his studies, Cen Fermino Miguel added: "The formation of this new command,
whose action in the ACE (Allied European Command) area would necessarily be located
on the Iberian Peninsula, in the Mediterranean and, possibly, on the northern coast
of Spain. would have to call for the installation of its general headquarters in a

relatively central position, probably in the Csstilian region, Madrid or its
vicinity."

The Canaries Defense

But even in Spanish government circles most directly related to the entry into MAID,
there are serious doubts that the situation will proceed in this manner; among
other reasons, because that organization almost n'ver uses strategic criteria when
it is time to establish commands, if this entails a clash between two member states.

Under these circumstances, NATO imposes politicomilitary criteria. This means that,
in the case of Spain and Portugal, a decision would be made with intermediate solu-
tions. In other words, to establish the command of the Iberian Peninsula in Madrid,
with an alternate headquarters, or todinidethe territory into two commands, keeping
the present IBERLANDT one in Lisbon and locating the new one for Spain in Madrid,
subordinate to the Allied Command in Europe. Because with the current structure of
the NATO commands, the Portuguese zone is not subordinate to Europe, but rather to

the United States, known by the initials ACLANT (Allied Atlantic Command), with a
base in Virginia (United States).

Within this complex system of military commands comprising the NATO table of organi-
zation, Portugal also advocates an almost privileged sphere of economic influence

in the triangle formed by the Azores and Madeira islands with the continent; whereas
the economic zone of the Canaries, or the coast of Cadiz. is very limited, for geo-
graphical reasons. Now. the Spanish option in the NATO defense system is one of
superimposing the Mediterranean and Atlantic zones. wherein the Baleares-Strsit-
Canaries exis could play an essential role.

At present. there are plans to reinforce the defense capacities of the Canaries and
Balenres, according to reports obtained by this magazine.

In Spanish military circles there is a real embarrassment when mention is made of
the defense capacity established in an area of such great significance to Spanish
and Western interests as the Canaries. because it is virtually non-existent in
comparison with the needs.

It must be realized that over 95 percent of Spain's foreign trade is conducted by
sea. and the Canary Islands in particular rank amoung the most important oil routes
in the world, with all the traffic coming from the Persian Gulf via the Cape of
Good "ope.

From a defense perspective, the "Atlantic front" which covers the area from the
British coast to the Canaries is of special importance in the NATO plans in the

event of a war in Europe, because it is the route whereby the military and food
supplies coming from the United States and even Latin America would enter.

h8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the other side of the Baleares-Strait-Canaries axis lie Spain's two African
provinces, Ceuta and Melilla, the defense of which by the NATO forces is of doubtful

viability, according to the terms of the North Atlantic Treaty text, which places
the boundaries in the direction of the Tropic of Cancer toward the north.

This has been one of the most controversial points in the parliaunntary debates,
with the opposition arguing that the government should request as a guarantee for
the defense of Ceuta and Melilla the inclusion of a special clause when the treaty
is signed.

According to the military experts, there is scarcely any doubt that neither Ceuta
nor Nelilla comes within the defense boundaries of NATO. but they detract importance
from this fact, pointing out that the defense of the two provinces is totally
guaranteed by the Spanish Armed Forces, as is that of any other province in the
southern part of the peninsula.

By its very nature, Spain's entry into NATO will bring abOut a deepseated change in
our Armed Forces' contacts abroad. on a level of "permanent relations".

In Spanish military circles it is agreed that the process of incorporation will be
slow and the negotiations complex, and that the relations that are to be established
will cause some substantial changes in the Spanish Armed Forces, both from the stand-
point of their strategic centers of operations (especially in the case of the land
army), and that of an improvement in resources and systems.

A high-ranking government official associated with defense described this change
as follows: "Our branches of the Arned Forces will proceed from a system and a
philosophy based on internal defense to a different one open to the external area,
and in the Western context."

COPYRIGHT: 1981. INFORHACION Y REVISTAS, S.A.

2909
C80: 3110/42

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR Ol-‘FiCiAL use (mu

POLI‘I' ICAL SPAIN

9808 T0 "ARDEN CRITICIQ‘I 0F ADMINISTRATION, MODERATE IDBOLWY
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 2 Nov 81 pp 40-65
[Article by Jose Manuel Arija and Rafael Cid: "The P803. Out To Get Calvo"]

[Text] The Spanish Socialist Workers Party has sent the Moncloa Palace a clear
message: from now on they will be out to get the president. Along with this
message. the 29th Party Congress has made it plain that the consensus has ended,
and that Calvo Sotelo will not be able to escape the opposition that Felipe Gon-
zalez's party will bring to bear in Parliament and in the streets.

"He must be rougher on the president of the govern-ant." announced Nicolas Redondo.
the man from the socialist labor union, "because in Calvo Sotelo the C803 [Spanish
Confederation of Business Organizations] has found the pawn it needs, since he only
serves the interests of the employers."

"The Francoitss are coming back without having to be voted into power, because the
government is so weak," the secretary general of the P803, Felipe Gonzalez, warned
in his turn. Between Redondo's announcement and the warning fros Gonzalez a Con-
gress took place last week in an atnosphere of unanimity which rendnded one more
of the National Congress of the Franco movement than of the decisive Congress of
those who claim to represent an alternative of government and change. Arsenic
Mieri went to the Reinosa station, got his train ticket and left for Madrid.
During the course of his life he had missed very few PSOE congresses. Now, only
a few months away from his 80th birthday, Arsenio complained through the smoke of
a‘ "farias" that the young socialists of today have not been toughened like those
of the past. "But what are we old follows going to do, if we can't do much any
more? We haven't the strength, and we-can't smoke, we get tired right away."

"Why do you say that you can't smoke, if you are smoking a cigar now?" he was
asked by the journalist seated next to him in the Palace of Exhibitions and Con-
grcsses in Madrid, where the 29th Congress of the P803 took place from 21 to 2!.
October.

"Yes. I'm smoking it, but I ought not to. because the doctor has forbidden me to,"
he answers. while he calmly reapplies the match to the dead butt of the cigar.

Arsenic. a retired netsllurgiat from the Reinosa shipyards, wears pinned on his
lapel a card saying "guest." He sat through the long sessions of the Congress
until the early warning hours.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"But l'm getting upset," he adds, "because there hasn't been any discussion. And
when socialists don't argue, it's very bad"--a pause, and he gives his verdict--
"because out of argument comes light." This old militant. who joined the DOT
[General Union of workers] 60 years ago, and the 9802 a little later, has reason to
be upset. There was no discussion at the 29th Congress. Caught up in a complex of
not making a spectacle of themselves like the previous congress; careful not to
disturb with their internal dissensions the voters who could give them a victory

in the coming general elections; and in conformance with the iron control wielded
by the party apparatus, the delegates did not want to enter into any debates.

And something happened which had never been seen before in the P502: the actions
of the Executive Committee were approved with 99.6 percent of the votes. The 0.4
percent opposition came from Avila, which was authorized to vote against it, and
which at the last minute did not even dare to do that, choosing instead to abstain.

That concern about presenting an image of a united and cohesive party led them to
some high percentages of unanimity which many felt ashamed of the next day. "We
look like the congress of the Bulgarian communists," some said with an apologetic
smile. "why should we vote against it if we think the actions are positive?"
others defended themselves.

The loo-percent vote for Felipe Gonzalez for the post of secretary general was the
final item in the program of unanimity. In the closing speeches, harsh criticisms
of the Calvo Sotelo government, frequent quotations from Pablo Iglesias and warn-
ings of possible socializations tried to stir up the spirits of an excessively
peaceable congress and at the same time to give an impression of toughness in the
face of criticism for being moderate.

The phrases "Put steel into the party" and "Toughen the ranks of socialism,"
uttered by Felipe Gonzalez, were a sign of the new phase which the P808 may be
entering as it faces an election campaign which appears to be coming increasingly
closer.

But many of those attending the congress asked themselves how that toughening was
going to take place inside the party: greater control of the apparatus. or an
approach toward the sectors of the critics?

Judge and Plaintiff

The sparseness of the debates and certain self-criticisms of the oligarchization
of the party make some people foresee the need for greater internal discussions,
because the blandncss and lack of controversy go against the character of many
socialists. A delegate commented to his neighbor in the next seat: "Just look
how we are getting to be like the social democrats. They even passed me a written
note saying that my wife had phoned me." On their part, some members of the out-
going executive committee encouraged their colleagues to come out and criticize
them. The normalcy and smooth functioning raised suspicions of a turn toward the
right.

It appears that the delegates went away convinced that there must be a change in
the systems of functioning and of representation in the Congress. The PSOE cannot

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

continue on with a congress patterned the way it was at the beginning of the century.
when socialism now exists not only as a party but as an institutional implant in
the organs of the State.

"It is absurd," said a current executive, "that 70 percent of the criticism of the
Executivc Board was made by members of the Federal Comittee, because both measures
are voted jointly. Thus the person speaking becomes both judge and plaintiff. There
is no sense in voting at the same time in the controlling body--the Federal Com-
mittee--and in the controlled body--the Execunive Comittee."

But being convinced that it is necessary to alter its internal organization did not
make the 29th Congress confront its problems directly. "They were afraid to." it
was commented. But at the last minute a proposal from the Francia Sur delegation
opened the door to reform. At the suggestion of these representatives, it was .
approved that within a period of 12 months various "Organization Days" would be
held. for the purpose of studying all the necessary changes. If these conclusions
were later adopted by the Federal Committee, they would come into effect_at the
next Congress. Proportionality. and a new system of work at the congress, which
would involve not having to read the five thick volumes prepared for the present
gathering, would thus lead the way.

This seems like a good idea to the "socialist left" group, which was absent from
the current Congress, if people guarantee to attend those days. "Here, as on other
points, decisiveness has been lacking," says Jeronimo Saaverdra, one of the few
critics attending the Congress. "A situation came up where Felipe Gonzalez was
trapped by the Valencia and Andalusia federations. and Felipe did not dare to
exercise his power."

During the first 2 days of the debate, the possibility of the party’s turning to
the right alarmed some delegations, because of the line taken ”in some reports.

In the case of the economic report. Carlos Solchaga introduced a lengthy docunent
in a surprising and unusual way. According to some sources it was the first draft
of a possible coalition government economic program ordered by Felipe Gonzalez a
few months ago. Because of the manner in which it was introduced and its contents,
the document raised the suspicions of the economists of other federations. The re-
presentatives from Madrid eventually disassociated themselves from the report because
of disagreements. They did not accept Solchags'a definition that "in order to get
through the crisis" wages had to go down 2 points in relation to inflation. "We
do not agree with the philosophy expressed by Solchaga, nor can we say to the
workers: vote for us in the coming elections because we are going to lower wages.
It is intolerable," argued the people from Madrid and other delegations.

Socialist Happiness

In the end, Solchaga's document underwent substantial changes. Various amendments
reached the plenum of the Congress. The one from Valencian Sanchez Ayuso-"we

must distinguish between the policy toward the crisis which the right offers and

the one which we socialists put forward"--proposed an economic reform program similar
to that of the French socialists. and was defeated by the scant margin of 3 percent
of the votes. Joaquin Leguina, from Hadrid--"we socialists cannot adopt the liberal

52
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

message that unemployment is the fault of wages“--managed instead to introduce his
amendments, which were more to the left than Solchaga's text: let the unions play
the main role as far as wages are concerned, reduce costs in Social Security. and

have socialization of a0 percent of the financial area.

With more open and flexible tendency than what was expected at first, the Madrid
delegation also contributed to other reports. In the political one, the letter
"a," from the plural of "bloc of classes," also caused a long argument. For some.
like the Catalonian Fabregas, "keeping in the letter 's' could change us into a
bloc or an inter-class party." "What we should create," added Pabregas, "is a
socialist movement which groups together all the exploited classes, or those which
are beginning to feel exploited." This idea was the one that prevailed. There
was a 2-hour discussion on whether or not it could be said that socialism is a
design for the happiness of mankind. According to the Andalusian spokesman Rodri-
guez de la Borbolla. "Harx implicitly mentioned happiness when he alluded to the
unhappiness of the capitalist system." Delegates Iglesias and Triginer opposed the
definition, because they considered it utopian. In the end, they settled on an
intermediate definition: "Socialism is a plan for achieving the social conditions
which make possible happiness for mankind."

In the section dealing with the autonomies. the concepts of nationality and region
were debated. with a clash of dialectics, between the Catalonian Joan Prat, the
Basque Txiqui Benegas and the Andalusian Rafael Escuredo, among others. Another
Basque, Garcia Damborenea, hit upon the phrase which closed the discussion between
federal and autonomous states. "The federal plan of the PSOE," he said, "is a suit
hung in a closet, and we don’t know when we are going to use it." In the labor
union report, which strangely enough listed none of the delegates who are also
members of the executive committee of the 06?, the debate centered around the Basque
Country and Madrid. The former thought the relation between the party and the labor
unions should be closer. According to Carlos Perez, from Madrid, the party's labor
union policy should move farther away from the DOT and direct itself toward the
workers' movement as a whole. In the end, the ideas of the Basques prevailed.

The formation of the new Executive Board created its emotions and differences as
always, although there were no excessive tensions. Only the solitary introduction
as a candidate of Rafael Escuredo, current president of the Andalusian Board,
caused problems. "Rafael is tired of being blocked and pushed to the side in the
party. The Andalusian socialist leadership wants to dominate even his most immed-
iate collaborators. and because of this he has made a bid to join the Executive
Committee." his sympathizers say.

Compromise Executives

In what was judged to be the most serious event of the Congress. Rafael Escuredo

even threatened to resign from the presidency of the Board if he was not elected.

The spokesmen even prepared a statement of support, but Escuredo answered them:

"if you make that statement I am getting up and going away immediately. I don't

want moral support, but actions." In the end the statement was not made, and 23
percent of the Congress voted for him. It was too small a percentage for him to

be elected. and the majority of the Andalusian delegates did not associate themselves
with it.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other delegates gave their opinion on the Bacuredo case. "We recognize Rafael's
motives. but if every one of us who is irritated did this, we would be in trouble.
People in positions of responsibility should be patient and not harm the party,
even if they do have their reasons for being annoyed."

Felipe Gonzalez admitted publicly that the initiative for creating a permanent
committee inside the Executive Committee had come from him. Apparently. only
reasons of efficiency had led him to make this decision, because a 24-member
board turned out to be too large and impractical.

Despite this, there was criticism of the secretary general's lack of the forceful-
ness to propose a smaller leadership board instead of the compromise of creating two
categories. by those who saw no other purpose than that of keeping on executives,
more for the sake of compromise than for efficiency.

Luis Solana, a delegate who is deputy from Segovia, criticized the decision to
create the two categories. "The point that I raised," he says, "was that as soon
as you have some executives who are permanent and others who are not, power becomes
concentrated in the former; and therefore the pattern chosen was a dangerous one.
He should trend in the opposite direction, toward decentralization of power."

After meeting with the heads of delegations. Felipe Gonzalez began to speak about
the subject that was already buzzing through the corridors of the Congress, the
danger of oligarchization of the party. The presence of the "regional oligarchies,"
with an implicit agreement to respect their powers, through which the intermediate
cadres wouldnwt dispute problems in the federal sphere in exchange for the leader-
ship not interfering in regional topics.

In the opinion of some outstanding delegates this was a new argument which started
up in the 29th Congress, although in a hidden form: the question of distribution
of powers within the party. Some thought the leaders of the federations had
eliminated their respective internal oppositions, rather than Alfonso Guerra or
Carmen Garcia Bloise. "It is a new.phenomenon, which Felipe opposes, but which
he should resist energetically," they concluded.

Undiversified and officialist because of the procedure of delegate selection. the
Congress could only produce the result of moderation in its principal economic and
political reports, which did not satisfy the critics, although they have stated that
they are willing to respect the results.

"I fear," stated Jeronimo Saavedra, from the socialist left group. and Canary Island
spokesman, "that if we keep up our present political strategy of moderation, of
occupying and filling space which belongs to the 000 [Democratic Center Union] it
could lead us to defeat in the coming 1983 elections.

News from Congress

The critics support this thesis, inasmuch as it would cause abstention on the left
without captivating the electorate, making more votes be lost than would be gained
on the right. 0n the contrary, the officialist wing is convinced that it is only
possible to have success in any general election with programs which are realistic
and applicable to today's conditions.

5!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
To sum up: the most newsworthy issues dealt with by the 29th Congress were the
holding of future congresses every 3 years instead of every 2; the elimination of
the incompatibility rule saying that parliamentarians cannot be members of the
Federal Committee; an executive board with a reduced permanent committee within

it; responsibility and moderation as regards wage increases; nationalization of the
primary system uf electrical transmission; socialization of 50 percent of the fin-
ancial sector; the convocation within a year of a conference to deal with problems
of internal organization; transformation of society through the party's leadership
of a bloc of exploited and oppressed classes and sectors; broadening the position
of the autonomies toward an organization as close as possible to that of the federal
state.

On the return journey in the train which was carrying him back to Reinosa again, the
old veteran Arsenic Hieri, who as on ohter occasions had paid all his expenses out
of his own pocket, murmured his final complaints: "of course, the intellectuals

are indispensable in the party, but the workers are the ones who fight in the front
lines. Hell, we're not the U60; Felipe has to be tough, because we all want him

to be president of a socialist government."

And Arsenic, since his doctor wasn't travelling at his side, forgot that he was an
octogenarian. thought of his long-time socialist toughness, with prison, dismissals
and exile, and lit another "farias." "I'll keep going for the time I have left,“
he said.

THE NEW EXECUTIVE BOARD OF THE PSOE

Position on the

 

 

 

Executive Board Age
Ramon Rubial President 75
Felipe Gonzalez Secretary General 39
Alfonso Guerra Asst. Secretary General 61
Ciriaco de Vicente Secretary for Social Action 45
Guillermo Galeote Secretary for Publicity 40
Emilio Alonso Administration & Finance Secretary 39
Jose Maria Maravall Secretary for Culture 39
Joaquin Almunia Studies 6 Programs Secretary 33
Carmen Garcia Eloise Secretary for Organization 44
Maria Izquierdo Executive Secretary 35
Carmen Mcstre Executive Secretary 38
Javier Saenz Cosculluela Executive Secretary 37
Jose Maria Benegas Executive Secretary 33 I?)
Manuel Chaves Executive Secretary 36
Pedro Bofil Executive Secretary 35

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
vacuoaunoa

:mnvuanan
>nn0n=n<

wswwomovaw mam ronnonw

 

recon Hamvaonon
m:<m»n»~=

macaosuan
can<onunn< mnemnuuon

mnosoauun
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010016-8

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Profession Parliamentarian

' Miner
University Professor Deputy (Madrid)
University Professor Deputy (Tenerife)
Attorney Deputy (Guipuzcoa)
Bachelor of Sciences Deputy (Barcelona)

 

University Professor

— COPYRIGHT: 1981, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8131
C50: 3110/61

57
FOR OFFICIAL 188 MY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010016-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

BASQUE TERRORISTS ALLEGEDLY RELEASED BY LENIBNT COURTS
Madrid CAMBlO 16 in Spanish 9 Nov 81 pp 37-63
[Article: "118 ETA Members on the Street"!

[Text] During the past 10 months, the national high court of justice has given a
provisional release to 118 presumed terrorists from the Basque organization, ETA-
Military [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group-Military]. according to information
reported to the government by the Ministry of Interior a few days ago.

According to the police information, of the 118 terrorists at liberty under surveil-
lance, at least 23 have provided information and resources to the ETA Military
action commands, which have caused the death of innocent persons who were the victims
of terrorist bullets.

According to government sources, this position on the part of the national high
court of justice has given the society the impression that crimes, essentially those
of a terrorist nature, are going unpunished or are receiving slight penalties in
comparison with common ones.

This police charge clashes directly with the views of the judges, who on more than
one occasion have rejected the police's accusations of "leniency" in penalizing the
presumed criminals.

Apparently. the inefficiency of the police themselves is responsible for the release
of those citizens, precisely because of the lack of evidence that the police must

necessarily submit.

while high-ranking officials of the Judicial Branch avoided making statements about
that release of over 100 presumed ETA members, one judge. a magistrate of the
national high court of justice, who prefers not to give his name, but does express
his views, which are shared by many of his colleagues, gave categorical assurance
that "no terrorist crime for which sufficient evidence has been submitted has gone
unpuniahed, and a sentence less than that stipulated in the Penal Code has never

been given."

Thus, the confrontation between the police and the judicial claims has occurred again,
and this time in a serious case: According to the police, direct collaborators of
the ETA are on the street. CAMBIO 16 obtained this list of those released from

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
jail, from government sources. and is publishing it, pointing out the discrepancy
that usually exists in such cases between the police and the judiciary.

Trained to Kill

On 23 May 1980, the Dutch authorities turned over to the Spanish Government four
presumed ETA Military terrorists. They were: Jose Antonio Aguirrebsrrena Ruiz de
la Cuesta, Juan Carlos Yurrebasolo Atucha, Jose Manuel Arzallus Eguiguren and Juan
Ignacio Urrutibeascoa Hendiolagaray.

All four had been arrested a few hours earlier at the Amsterdam airport, upon their
return aboard an Air Kuwait plane from Aden (South Yemen), the latest terrorist
"university" known in the West, "where they had been trained to kill," according

to the Ministry of Interior.

Police sources claim that the four presumed terrorists had been in the Yemen
terrorist sanctuary for 5 months, becoming physically toughened and learning to
fire all types of weapons, from the Western "-16, Stein and Beretta rifles to the
famous Kalasniknv,of Soviet make, and including all kinds of pistols: Tokarev,
Hakarov, Browning, Halter P-38 and Luger.

According to the same sources, they also engaged in exercises launching American,
Chinese, Soviet and British hand grenades, and learned to make all kinds of explo-
sives and to shoot in the dark, using infrared light visors.

According to government sources. only three of these four Basque terrorists,’ 'mas-
ters in the use of the most modern techniques for subversive revolutionary war."
are in jail. The fourth. Jose Antonio Aguirrebarrena y Ruiz de la Cuesta, aged
22, a native of Tolosa (Guipuzcoa), has been provisionally released since last
March, under 200,000 pesetas bail.

The ETA Military member, Vicente Aldalur Larranaga, has had a similar history.
Turned over to the Spanish authorities in April 1980, Aldalur Lsrranaga has also
been provisionally released since 25 May of this year.

118 Cases

Born on 14 June 1955 in Cizurquil (Guipuzcoa), and with a domicile in Azpeitia, the
presume ETA member left his occupation as an upholsterer at the age of 20, accord-
ing to police files, in order to "adopt that of a terrorist."

In 1976, he was chief of an ETA Military command operating in the San Sebastian
area, and engaged in all types of holdups and assaults, from which he was amnestied
at the end of 1977.

However. according to the police, he did not give up the weapons. On 13 April
1978 he set an explosive device in the Adegui business firm in San Sebastian.

The bomb exploded before it was planned to, destroying a large part of the building,
and Aldalur Larranaga himself was hit by the shock wave and injured.

59
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
run Uttlbuu. van umu

Me escaped 1n n Sent-127 vehicle but, a quarter of an hour later, he crashed into
a fence on the Bilbao-Behovia freeway.

According to the police account, bleeding profusely from his face, the ETA Military
terrorist then stopped a taxi, robbed the driver at gunpoint and headed for the
French border.

At the international bridge at Santiago. the Border Police attempted to stop him
for identification, but Aldalur Larranaga gunned the car's accelerator, broke
the frontier barriers and entered France at high speed. The gendarmes captured
him a few hours later at St. Jean de Luz.

Five days later, France agreed to the extradition of the presumed terrorist, and
turned him over to the Spanish authorities in Hendaya. According to the police,
for setting a bomb in a factory, stealing a car at gunpoint and breaking through
the police checkpoint,risking the lives of the officials on duty, Aldalur Larranaga
spent only a year and 1 month in jail. He has been on a provisional release since
25 May.

According to government sources, these two cases are not two isolated accounts.
From 1 January to 30 October of this year, in other words, during the first 10
months of the year. the national high court of justice has released 116 other
presumed ETA Military terrorists, one every 3 days, with bails ranging from 50,000
to 500,000 pesetas.

During the same period of time, the Civil Guard and Higher Police Corps anti-
terrorist groups captured 394 members of ETA Military. Therefore. according to
government sources, one out of every four ETA members captured by the state
security forces does not enter jail, or spends only a few months there.

The situation is of concern to the state security forces. As one police officer
told CAMBIO 16, "To capture a command takes years of investigation, thousands of
hours putting two and two together and following minor clues which almost always
turn out to be false. And, furthermore, it means that a large number of officials
are constantly risking their lives."

But it is not only the state scourity forces that are concerned over the excessive
ease with which the presumed terrorists reach the street. In mid-September of
last year, the minister of interior, Juan Jose Boson, turned over a dossier of
over 100 pages to the Council of Ministers, which reached the conclusion that more
forceful measures had to be adopted to prevent these incidents from continuing to
proliferate.

One of the measures agreed upon was that of alerting the state'prosecutor, Jose
Maria 611 Albert, so that in the future, before a presumed terrorist was given
a conditional release, the judges would notify the Public Ministry of this, so
that it could make the appropriate consideration of the matter.

Police and high-ranking government officials are of the opinion that the reform
to the Penal Code of 6 May 1981, whereby the mere fast of belonging to a terrorist

group may be punished with penalties of up to 12 years in prison,is not being imple-
mented.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, 2 months after this law went into effect, the police in Zarauz arrested
Rosa Maria Gonzalez Hurua and Maria del Carmen Urcola Ortiguela, presumed members
of an ETA Military backup commando group.

The two presumed terrorists have been on the street since last October, despite
the fact that, according to the police, they knew and were lending support to
the San Sebastian Coast command headed by Miguel Antonio Coicoechea Elorriaga,
alias "Txapela".

One of the terrorists, Rosa Maria Gonzalez Hurua, had even built a "people's jail"
at No 22 Autonomias de San Sebastian Street, according to the police, and both
Gonzalez Murua and Urcola Ortiguela knew the exact location of the "Txapela"
commando group: an apartment on the outskirts of Zarauz.

An official told CAMBIO 16: "These two terrorists were the ones who pointed out the
connando group's apartment to us police."

The opinion of the judges regarding the release of over 100 presumed ETA members
by the national high court of justice is radically opposed to that of the police.

Whereas high-ranking officials of the Judicial Branch avoided making statements
on the matter. a magistrate from the national high court of justice, who asked
that his name not be disclosed, gave categorical assurance that "no terrorist
against whom convincing evidence has been brought has gone unpunished for his
crimes, and in no instance has a sentence less than that stipulated inizhe Penal
Code been given to such a person."

According to the same source, the judges have abided strictly by the laws. If
the crime is in the Penal Code, the latter is applied. Hence, it is not true
that the national high court of justice is not implementing the reforms made in
the Penal Code last May.

it is definitely false that the judges have given provisional release to a single
terrorist or citizen for whom there is rational evidence of criminal behavior.

The magistrate with whom CAMBIO l6 conversed remarked: "The fact is that the judge,
before making a decision to curtail the liberty of individuals, must be provided
by the police with the necessary evidence. If that evidence does not exist, the
'presumption of innocence' stipulated in the Constitution acts to the benefit of
the person being held. who cannot be put in jail. If a judge were to act other-
wise, he would even be committing a crime."

According to the same source, the very guarantee that this country is a state of
law is based on thv fact that the judges release, with complete autonomy and at
all times abiding by the laws, those individuals on whom there is no evidence of

a crime.

He added: "it wOuId be unjust for the national high court of justice to jail every-
one sent to it by the police. Then, obviously, Spain would not be a democratic
country; It would be a more police state."

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The magistrate who was CAMBIO 16's informant has another argument against the
claim that his collenges are indiscriminately releasing terrorists. He comments:
"Before making those claims, the police should have taken the statistics on
jailed terrorists. They show that, at present, there are far more presumed
terrorists in prison than during the last 5 years of the previous regime."

he observes: "Not only are there more terrorists in jail now than 5 years ago, but,
in addition, an overall assessment of the sentences handed down by the national
high court of justice demonstrates that the judges are acting with complete inde-

pendence not only from the Executive Branch, but also from potential threats by
terrorists."

He concluded by saying: "The judges could be afraid. like anyone else, but in

the exercise of their office they do not accept pressure. And all this is true
despite the faCt that two judges, Jose Mateu Canoves and Miguel Cruz Cuenca, have
been assassinated by terrorist gangs."

This Is the List

This is the list of the 118 presume ETA Military terrorists who, according to the
Ministry of Interior, have been released by the national high court of justice

during the past 10 months:

Released Bail
Jose Abalos Ochoa April 100,000
Pedro Acha Albistegui February 500,000
Jose Aguinaga Martinez July 200,000
JeSus Aguirre Aguirrezabalaga September 100,000
Jose Aguirrebarrena Ruiz March 200.000
Alfonso Aisa 01coz July 100,000
Vicente Aldalur Larranaga May 200.000
Joaquin Alfonso Martin January 200,000
Ignacio Altuna Almundarain March 200,000
Jesus Arandigoyen Ayerra June 200,000
Miguel Arbeloa Suberniola July 100,000
Felix Arcelay Iriarte July 200,000
Fernando Arrausi Oliva June 100,000
Koldo Arrese Garcia July 100,000
Maria Arrieta Guridi March 100.000
Jose Artabe Lizarreta October 100,000
Manuel Ascargota Aguirre August 100,000
Marla Azcarate Inchaurrondo January 100,000
Jeronimo Azcue Arrizabalaga September 100,000
Jesus Barbarin Ganuza July 100,000
Manuel llecerra Oteo June 100,000
Javier Bilbao Atucha May 100,000
Maria Blanco Doborgsnes April 50,000
Maria Bolumburu Zuazua April 200,000
Francisco Calvo Enriques June 200,000
62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
unmannmno man—.528 93:59
more: :5 mmnoucmn >un=n
>=no=wo won—.62.: 005%
.3»: «5502.0 man—anon
map—.0 09:30 gonna—.0
.5330 03.39 31.2.»
mnosnwmno 03.2» man—Samoa
smut. Oman: $3

39—33 05.3» 33.28:
gonna»: Dunno ongpu

.uoum 091.: 082.6»

uouo 93.5 33.350
Shauna noun: won:

won—.9 02.3me 2.250
391.: coanmaou no cans?»
v.32 ocasnpon noun:
x02. egg—.3 3:25
monsmaac 003. «261w»:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Released
Maria Lazcano Otegui October
Maria Lete Azaldegui Hay
Ramon Leunda Aizpurua April
Jose Lopez Apesteguia July
Victoriano Lopez Bengoechea Auguat
Jose Lopez Cano January
Jose Lopez Domaica July
Carmelo Lopez Sagastizabal Hay
Francisco Lopez Torres July
Jaime Lopez Valader October
Fernando Mendiguren Lubian July
Jose Mendizabal Iraatorza Hay
Antonio Manuel Hercader Cazteli May
Arsenic Montea Sanz March
Maria Honzon Martinez September
Juan Horaguca Oregui April
Jose Odriozola Aguirre September
Fernando Oata Delgado June
Manuel Pastor Aranguren February
Juan Perez Doval June
Jose Plaza Zaldegui January
Felix Prieto Echevarri July
Eloy Ramos Arenal Hay
Roberto Rebolleda Delgado March
Juan Rego Vidal March
Rafael Rodriguez Roldan March
Jose Ruiz Vicandi September
Juan Sagorriz Carro July
Juan Sanz Eguiluz March
Vicente Sarries Larrea September
Nekane Soraluce Celaya October
Maria Soroiz Ormazabal June
Pedro Ugarte Bolivar October
Ricardo Ugarto Coicocchea July
Bundin Unn Elisabeth Hay
Marin Urcola Ortiguela October
Luis Uriarte Legorburu June
Juan Urrusolo Santos September
Martin Vega Salinas February
Pedro Villanueva Herrera January
Luis Vivaracho Cervcro July
Inigo Zabaiu Eguiluz February
Roberto Zabala Zamalloa March
Armando Zabala Bilbao September
Ignacio Zumarran Mendoza March

COPYRIGHT: 1981, INFORHACION Y REVISTAS. S.A.

2909
650: 3110/42

6b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010016-8

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010016-8

m
75.

vil
100l
100.
100,
100I

H1!

100.
100,
100.
100,
75,
so,

50,
501
wil
100,
50,
1001

75:
1001
75‘
50.
100
75
100
Hit
100
100
100
250
100
100
100
100
50
100
50
100
wt
75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

UCD DEBACLE IN GALICIA, POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES, REVIEWED
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 2 Nov 81 pp 46-53
[Article by Antxon Sarasqueta: "Electoral Pistol Shot"]

[Text] President Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo is caught between the "natural majority" or
"great right" claimed by Alliance leader Manuel Frags more forcefully than ever
since his electoral victory in Galicia. and the moderate, reformist center which
PSOE [Spanish Socialist Horkers Party] has been attempting to lure away from UCD
[Democratic Center Union] since its 29th National Congress.

This situation has caused an exacerbation of the crisis in the government party
which. since the Galician defeat. has been embroiled in mutual accusations between
the government and the "apparatus" controlled by Suarez.

Meanwhile, in his statements to CAMBIO 16, Manuel Frags has expressed his conviction
that his offer will be accepted by Calvo Sotelo and that thecoalitionbetween UCD
and AP [Popular Alliance] is the only "salvation" for the Spanish right against

the aggressiveness of the Socialists.

And while the Galician elections have had an inevitable national effect, from the
standpoint of that region the government's delegate in Galicia. Dr Garcia Sabell,
analyzed the first autonomous elections for this magzine, indicating the need for
a stable government on both the regional and national levels.

The aftermath of the Calician elections has spread to the parliamentary debates on
NATO, and has had an effect on the leading political parties and the government.
which are already moving on the basis of electoral dynamics. According to the
Alliance lender. Manuel Frags, the general electionscannotbe over a year avay.
and the top-ranking PSOE leaders have, in private. placed them within that period.

Meanwhile. the president of the government. Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, assured a group
of newsmcn, including a correspondent from CAMBIO 16, that there will be no general
elections until 1983. However. the latest information obtained since the Centrist
defeat in the Gallcian elections indicates the fall of 1982 as the most likely date.

The Calician election results have entailed a debacle for the UCD party and for
the government which. at its Executive Committee meeting and in the next one called
[or 2 November, are seeking a solution of change that will enable the Centrists to

recover their positions.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Amid this "mire magnum" [great sea], there persists the battle between Calvo Sotelo,
who is attempting to reinforce his leadership in UCD. and former President Adolfo '
Suarez who, according to information obtained by this magazine during the last
meeting of the Centrist Executive Comittee, went so far as to threaten to leave

the party if UCD "became rightist." In concrete terms, this Suarist story assumes
a pact with Alliance leader Manuel Frags.

At the aforementioned meeting, at which a harsh self-criticism was made concerning
the Cent rists' resounding defeat in Calicia, Landelino Lavilla, head of the Congress
of Deputies and visible head of the Centrist Christian Democrats. in opposition to
the Suarez proposition, upheld the need to undertake a change, an opening of the
party. as a last alternative which he seconded. Neither Miguel Herrero de Minon nor

Jaime Mayor Ore ja, individuals who have taken a stand along the same line, intervened
in response to this comment.

This being the case, Calvo Sotelo, who had just made a decision with a high political
price over the short term among the more pxogressive Centrist sectors, but with a
major strategic significance regarding the general elections, namely, the dismissal
of the general manager of RTVE [General Directorate of Radio Broadcasting and Tele-
vision], Fernando Castedo, at their request, did not disclose any of his key deci-
sions concerning the future of the party and the government.

However, bnsed on the direct reports obtained by this magazine, the president of the
government plans to make a cabinet shift shortly after the parliamentary debate on
NATO. which ends this week, and a deepseated change in government before the next
general elections.

According to the most direct accounts received from Honcloa Palace, one of the indi-
viduals who would be affected by the cabinet shift is said to be the sinister of
labor, health and social security, Jesus Sancho Rof.

CAMBIO 16 has learned that President Calvo Sotelo recently told former President
Adolfo Suarez that the time planned for a cabinet shift was after the parliamentary
debate on NATO.

Taking the Calvo Sotelo-Suarez pulse, the backing from the Centrist party head,
Agustin Rodriguez Sahagun, for the head of the government, requesting Castedo's
dismissal from the R‘rVE mnagement. has been interpreted in political circles as

a ploy won by the supreme government leader aimed at obtaining the Centrist leader-
ship.

But one or the obsessions of the main political parties, and most particularly of
the government, is that concerning the Calician election results. "How could we
have lost so dreadfully?" asked some of the attendees at the Centrists' meeting in
a hotel on the outskirts of Madrid.

The offers that were available in the Calician voting were three: a change to the
right, or the left, and continuity of UCD. Selected by a majority in Calicia was

the change in favor of a euphoric Frags, who received CAMBIO l6 shortly after the
results were learned, and who analyzed them in this way:

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"It was a vote out of the American book: Hhat happened to the extremes on both
sides? Ignored! Excluded! From Communism to those in the New Force, they were

crushed! Hhat happended to the nationalists? They were reduced to minimal propor—
tions."

Amid laughter and obvious signs of satisfaction. Manuel Frags went on to say: "What
happened to the Socialist Party? As you can see, it has proven possible to be
contained; because Socialism has grown vegetatively, but we won over it in all the
big industrial cities."

But what is most important to Frsga is that, "For the first time in Galicia a
government has clearly lost elections;" something which, in his opinion, means that
"The famous mechanisms of the government which carry so much weight, do they not?,
have now begun to fail."

The UCD leaders themselves are in partial agreement with this analysis by the
Alliance leader, because it was the head of the UCD, Agustin Rodriguez Sshsgun,
who claimed this very week that, "Frnga's success may be due to the fact that he
managed to give an image of change."

It was. to be exact, Rodriguez Sahagun and the UCD secretary of organization. Jose
Ramon Caso, who reflected the conclusions of the Centrist self-criticism. In this
connection. the mistakes of the government party itself "on quite different levels"
were taken up. In Honcloa, there were some to blame: the Centrist division in
Gnlicia and, more concretely, the faction headed by the Coruna leader. Jose Luis
Meilan.

The UCD's Shortcomings

These are some of the UCD's shortcomings which had a negative effect on the Centrist
results. according to its secretary of organization, Jose Ramon Caso, spokesman for
the Centrist executive body:

Delay in the opening of the election campaign.

Absence of a leader. a regional figure with charisma, which was one of the keys to
Fragn's success.

The results were also a tug at the government's ears.
A change must be offered: "We cannot become producers of the crisis."

"ltwas impossible to land in Galicia with all the ministers during the past 2
weeks. Thntwas detrimental."

"It was impossible to end a party crisis 10 days before the elections, because
otherwise this party would have no credibility."

"We could not praise our competitor (Frags) and then attempt to show that they were
different political offers."

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As some of the government's top-ranking leaders admitted to this magazine, even
during the Calician electoral period, after Galicia the troubled waters will return

to a party which has not finished becoming centered, despite the fact that this is
one of its philosophical principles.

The Socialist Party has taken advantage of the occasion (the center's electoral
disaster in Galicia) to set UCD in the direction of the Fraga right.
Without"6uccumbing to the dynamics of tension," as he remarked a few hours after the
P505 Congress, its secretary general, Felipe Gonzalez, admitted that the govern-
ment's shift to the right wOuld benefit "a moderate, firm entrenchment of the P803."

That is something which the Socialist leadership considers essential for winning the

next general elections. Felipe Gonzalez stressed: "That great right direction is
henefiting the PSOE."

The PSOE's own strategy prompted its secretary general to respond to CAHBIO 16,
in one of its questions, that he advocated including independents on the Socialist
Party's electoral lists.

As part of the new Socialist strategy ofoccupyinglwre extensive electoral space,
aimed at the more moderate sectors which turned out for the center in the last
elections (with its progressive offer), the PSOE, in addition to the independent
candidates on its lists, is attempting to promote the image of a "sympathizer" as
a way of cooperating with the party without a direct involvement with the Socialist
militnncy.

Thus, the president of the government, Calvo Sotelo, is being pressured by the
left, by the Frags right and by the most progressive sector of UCD. with a very
difficult personal situation for surmounting this crisis, increased by the serious
commitments of the government during the coming months. There is, for example,
the case of the trials of 23 February, concerning which the chief executive has
expressed optimism in a harsh sentence from the military courts for those respon-
sible for the coup d'etat.

In his private meetings, President Calvo Sotelo has also claimed that he will be
able to dominate the party and take over its leadership in a strong manner within
a few weeks, in view of the opportunity that he has to use the economic resources
and those of power.

And while the Calvo Sotelo operation would appear to facilitate a meeting with the
Alliance loader, Manuel Frags (who since the Galician elections has striven to

give an image of greater moderation), his clesest collaborators, of a more progress-
ive line, insist that the offer which he will head in the next elections is one of

a broad center, including the most progressive sectors of UCD.

Thus, a period of negotiations is opening for two factions, involving Calvo Sotelo
with Manuel Frags and with the most progressive sectors of UCD, which might be
headed by Adolfo Suarez who, in order to combat the Socialists in the center, will
have to curb a tempting offer to the moderate and reformist sectors.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jn 2 Novvmhvr, at the Centrist Executive Committee meeting, the pistol shot starting
the final phase of this Centrist battle will sound, and its finish may even be a
special party congress and, as a lesser evil, a "special" meeting of the political
council of a UCD that is seeking change in order to survive.

Drdonez, Uncomfortable

A change which, in the opinion of some, will inevitably have the price of the depar-
ture of certain Social Democratic deputies, including former Minister Fernandez
Ordonez, someone who, moreover (as has been revealed again in the latest situations
involving TVE [Spanish Television] and NATO) is seen as being increasingly more
uncomfortable in UCD.

But even some of Praga's followers and the most conservative sectors suspect that a
broad center electoral front may perhaps not be benefited, when it is time to vote,
by the departure of Fernandez Ordonez, and, of course, much less so after a break
with Suarez. it was Fraga himself who told this magazine, upon referring to these
UCD members without mentioning their departure, that "the time has come for them
to be in the third rank.,not the first."

A less cautious language has been perceived among the Centrist movements. Comments
such as, “the swords are unsheathed and cannot be retrieved again," which the
CAMBIO l6 correspondent heard personally from an active Centrist deputy of the
conservative Christian Democratic sector, are an authentic expression of the manner
that is being observed at present, behind the scenes of UCD.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, INFORHACION Y REVISTAS, S.A.

2909
C30: 3110/42

69
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul‘rlLlHL UDI'. UM.)

POLI‘!‘ l CAI. SPAIN

AP'S FRACA ADVOCATES CENTER-RIGHT UNDERSTANDING T0 HALT PSOE
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 2 Nov 81 pp 66, 67
[Interview with Manuel Frags; date and place not specified]

[Text] Hith Manuel Frags at the present time, there are hardlyany alternatives
other than to discuss his "loves and enmities" regarding UCD [Democratic Center
Union] and the president of the government.

CAHBIO 16: After the Galician victory, how do the negotiations and a possible
coalition with UCD appear?

Manuel Frags: There has been a very subtle proposal from the UCD Social Democratic
sector, saying "no" to the pact, and that we should govern in Galicia alone. We
have clearly stated that we wish the other (the natural majority);not without
conditions, of course.

C 16: What conditions?

H.F.: The reasonable ones. They would be related 90 percent to Galicia and the
other 10 percent to a general national proposition, the latter associated more with
the next general elections than with anything else. But not as they are saying
thereabouts: Look at Frags asking for a vice presidency! That is the only thing
for which I shall not ask. The serious things have been planned, those involving

a good government for Galicia and the general involvement from now until the next
general elections.

C 16: A coalition for after the general elections?

M.F.: Coalitions which are not made before elections are not worth anything. One
cannot say: You go along on the street, and we shall have all the advantages of
power. And if you survive, then we shall make a pact. That is out of the question:
it is immoral and unjust.

c 16: would the pact include the reform of the electoral law?

H.F.: Well, not necessarily. I attach so much importance to Galicis that the pact
would be solely and exclusively for Galicia and by Galicia. As for the rest, take
anything you want from it.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C 16: But you have decided to extrapolate the Galician results for the rest of the
country, haven't you?

M.F.: I am absolutely determined not to use this in the negotiations. What I do
say is: It's all right if they are extrapolated! Right now, I would be foolish

if I claimed that the same thing would happen in elections in Guipuzcoa, but those
who do not realize that this (winning) could take place tomorrow in 30 provinces

or less may be far more foolish. And that is quite serious, because I know what

is starting here now (and with gratified laughter he shows the reporter letters and
telegrams on the desk which have arrived from all over Spain).

c 16: Do you think that Calvo Sotelo will call early general elections?

M.F.: The UCD's lack of social entrenchment is widespread all over Spain. UCD has
operated owing to the fact that, at a given time, it has managed the loyalties to
the established power. using personal arguments and manipulating the state's power.
In Calicia, it has been disgracefu1,starting projects without a budget, with its
ministers laying cornerstones....but, of course, all that is finished. It has become
increasingly evident that they are left in the lurch, as the saying used to go.

C 16: We are talking about early elections.

M.F.: Yes. in that regard, I do not think that the remedy is early elections. 0n
the contrary. the logical reaction would be to ask why we are in this situation,
and how we shall emerge from it, something that would require time. I say, let's
plan the next elections with a certain amount of intelligence, in all senses of
the word intelligence, for which there is 1 year and no more.

C 16: Are you among those who think that without the great right or a center-right
option....?

M.F.: I refuse those definitions. I call that a "natural majority“ because what
the people want is a better living, and someone unemployed or his family will vote
in the next elections on the basis of this question: Who offers me hope of getting
out of this situation? And I don't like those expressions for objective reasons,
not because I am afraid of calling myself a rightist.

C 16: I was asking you precisely about a defeat of the right against the Socialists,
and whether that possibility would increase if they went to the polls divided.

M.F.: If the Socialists came to power they would do so, more than in France, as a
result of a defeat of the right rather than as a result of their own drawing capacity.
The Socialist Party itself has been one of integration. In 1977, the P808 [Spanish
Socialist workers Party] had 11 Socialist Parties, including something as serious

as that of Tierno-Galvan, for example, Now, the P502 has nothing left but Rojas
Marcos' Andalusian Socialist Party, and I have a feeling that it will not take the
PSA long to enter the great integrated mosaic of socialism as well.

C l6: Should the right follow in those steps?

H.F.: Among the right, there will have to be some type of integration, and if not,
they (a reference to UCD) will be responsible for what could be an unnecessary defeat.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This does not preclude (and I say this because some UCD members think and say the
same thing) the fact that some sectors of UCD perhaps need not be situated there.

C 16: Are you referring to individuals such as Oscar Alzaga, Miguel Herrera...?
M.F.: I do not care to give any names.

C 16: Is it not true that among these sectors an understanding between you and
Calvo Sotelo is considered logical?

H.F.: I have the impression that my availability has been evident to President

Calvo Sotelo at all times. Of course, from the standpoint of logic, there is obvious-
ly no reason for this understanding to pose problems. Now then, logic does not
always govern politics , at least it does not always govern those of UCD and the
members of its apparatus. Because. of course, the things that have been done and

said by gentlemen such as Agustin Rodriguez Sahagun (head of UCD), Rafael Calvo
(Centrist secretary general) and a strange Hr Caso ( secretary of organization).

who has shown up there, have had nothing to do with logic either.

c 16: Do you still suspect, as you did this summer. that there might be some move-
ment in UCD willing to make a pact with the P802?

M.F.: That continues to be mentioned by some people. I, as a person very grateful
to providence. do not believe in such desires. I an addressing you now as a person
and as a party, not as a Spaniard nor as a Galiciaa. I could say, in the next
elections: Gentlemen. those who vote for UCD already realize that they are voting
for Socialism! I can say right now that they number 200 deputies. And I don't
think that the will of providence would reach that point. From the standpoint of
general interests, it would be a real disaster. I do not desire it. But, after
all, there may be a few foolish ones who put their personal interests above those

of their party. even in this type of matter
COPYRICRT: 1981, INFORHACION Y REVISTAS. s.A.

2909
680: 3110/42

72
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

TRANSPORTATION MESS 0? NEW BRIGADE NOTED
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 16 Nov 81 pp 37-38
[Article by Frederic Pans: ”Limited Assistance"]

[Text] Completing the two intarventionary divisions, a
brigade was created in the southeast. It lacks transpor-
tation.

Hr Charles Hernu talks about ”foreign assistance" forces, and no longer about
act-ion or intervention. But he wants to "harden" the tool. In other words
strengthen it. Because the potential adversary of such units has also "hardened"
itself. It is using up-to-date light armament, mdern armred vehicles and anti-
aircraft missiles.

The strengthening of our "assistance forces" had been approved by Mr Hernu's
predecessors. It found expression last 31 July in the setting up of a 31st
brigade which Just engaged, at the end of the month of October, in its first joint
maneuvers south of Ajaccio. This exercise, called "Parfadet," brought out the
abilities as well as the weaknesses of forces of this type.

The 31st brigade (based in Aubagne) under the command of General Paul Lsrdry (who
is also commander of the Foreign Legion) comprises two regiments of professionals:
the legionaries of the 2nd foreign infantry regiment (RBI) and the infantry
soldiers of the 21st infantry regiment of the navy (RI-Ha). To support it, some-
thing really big: a squadron of AH! 30 tanks of the 501st combat tank regiment of
Rambouillet. In all, less than 3,000 men.

This brigade, an outgrowth of the projects of General Lagarde (former general
chief of staff of the land army) is an addition to the other tun major interven-
tion forces: the 11th paratroopers division based in ‘Ibulouse (12,500 nen, a
dozen regiments, 55 percent professionals), which is under the amend of General
Jean Schmitt; the 9th infantry division of the navy (8,500 men, 50 percent pro-
fessionals, half a dozen regiments), under the orders of General Raoul Brediche
in Saint-Mala.

Capacity. Backed by squadrons of the tactical air force and naval aviation. sup-
ported by three squadrons of helicopters of the 2nd regiment of combat helicopters,
the 31st brigade succeeded perfectly well in its air-land-sea exercise: the dis-
embarking on Corsican beaches of 2,000 men, 15 AM! 30 tanks and 250 vehicles,

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thanks to the transport ships supplied by the navy, itself represented by the air-
craft carrier, "Clemenceau," and two dispatch vessels. The brigade's working
principal had been identified in its instructions: "mscle up" the intervention
forces thanks to an armored and amphibious comprehensive unit "capable of being
involved in foreign action, especially in the Mediterranean."

Two recent experiences have emphasized the efforts to be made. In Lebanon, the
units of the French blue helmets were overtaken by the arming of the Palestinian
militias. In chad our paratroopers had nothing to put up against the multiple
rocket launchers of the rebels, army by the Libyans; their light automatic machine
guns (AHL) with a 90 barrel could not penetrate the armr of the T 54 tanks: they
were almost unprotected against the mo 23 of Soviet manufacture.

Weaknesses. Operational on land. the 31st brigade lacks the indispensable means of
transportation. The navy, for landing in Corsica, could supply it only with three
available ships for landing. Hith two times that many ships, it still would have
taken 10 days to land the entire lot of the brigade's armored vehicles. Thus there
is no connection between the navy's transportation capacity and this single unit.

For airborne troops the weakness is identical. .Only the Leopard element (400 men,
til) combat companies) can be carried off by air within 6 hours by the three DCBs
or the military air transport Transalls. The latter has a carrying capacity of
300 tons in 210 hours to a distance of 5,000 kilometers. (Soviet capacity 20,000
tons, i.e.. a division.)

This transportation undercapacity leads the military men to call for the requisi-
tioning of civilian means in times of peace: airline companies, merchant marine,
8N6? (French National Railroad). Not forgetting the risks which that can involve:
potential blockades. union resistance, control by the Co-Iunist minister of trans-

portation, Hr Charles Fiterman.

Equipment weaknesses also. The 21st this is awaiting delivery of the AH! 10

armored vehicles to replace its m90s. now outmded. The MIX 10s with wheels

are armed with a 105 gun, clearly more powerful and having a greater range than that
of the AHL. The 21st RIMa will also wait for the 120 milimeter mrtars, the

battery of 155 guns, etc. Similarly, the 2nd foreign infantry regiment has mt
received for stock the entire number of its front-armored vehicles (Vsb), troop
carriers mounted on wheels: it is still equipped with "tactical delivery vans."

The foreign assistance forces' problems is equipment and in heavy transportation
by sea or air (despite the production of 26 new Transalls which henceforth can be

provisioned in flight) will come up again in the next military planning exercise.
Two years hence.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs actuelles"

9698
CSO: 3100/ 133 m

71.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY