FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10449

13 April 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 23/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS ”OVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(2000 23/52)

CONTENTS

TERRORISM

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMAN!
'Leftist' Program of 'New Right' Viewed
(Ulrich Voelklein; Sm, hw82) OOCCUOOOOCOOODIOOOOO

“ERG! MMCS
FRANCE

Energy Budget Increaeee 3h Percent, Doneetic Coal Stressed
(RBVUE DE L'WIE, me 81) 0.......C..................

3001M G
ITALY

De Michelin or. Proposed Refom of State Partici petione
(Gianni De Hichelis Interview; 1!. NIB-2h ORB, 1!; Feb 82)

SPAIN

Measures Reco-nended for Ailing Agricultural Sector
(leo 16, lmaz) QOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIIOIIOOOOOOOOQ

- e - [III - w: - 150
roa<nwK1ALtmitnnx
a up. v. e uslllu V0.- ve‘ul

POLITICAL

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Genecher on EC, NATO, Detente, Peace Policy
(Hans-Dietrich Genscher; EUROPA-ARCHIV, 25 Jan 82) ......

New Charges Against Kie , Lsmbsdorfi‘ in Donation Scandal
(STERN, km 82 OI...IIDI.D0..6...IOOIOOCQOUOIOOUICCIOI

I TALY

Berlinguer on PCI Links With Socialist Parties
(Enrico Berlinguer Interview; LA STAHPA, 30 Mar 82) .....

Party Leaders Predict Outcome of Early Elections
(Roberto Ippolito; IL MONUO, 12 Feb 82) .................

MILITARY
FRANCE
Briefs
Ramjet Engine for Missile
GENERAL
FRANCE

Two Types of Ariane 5 Considered To Provide Lower Cost
(Pierre Lengereux; AIR ET 009408, 30 Jan, 6 Feb 82) be...

Payload of 1; to 15.5 Tons
Reusable First Stage

.1)-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'LEE'PIST' PROGRAM or tun: new M
Hamburg STERN in Germsn 4 Hsr 82 pp 98. 100. 103. 104. 106
[Edible by Ulrich Voelklein: “nae Red seeing

gag On 26 September 1930, while the Mich Oktoberfest wss in progress. s
bomb exploded which killed 13 and indexed 213 people. It was built end detona-
ted by a rightving extremist. His name use Gundolt Koehler: he use 21 years oi‘

3890-

On Christ-ass Bee 1980. s nee-Nazi shot end killed two customs officials at the
Swiss border end then killed hiueli‘. His name was Freak Schnbet; he was 23.

On 20 October 1981. two riatving rsdicsls were killed in s shootout vith
police in Vunioh. Their nemes were Klaus Uhl end Kurt Volta“. they were 24
and 21 years old respectively.

The trail left by riditwing violence hse been getting vider for some time now.
Since 1978. 631 rightving extremists have been sentenced to legally binding
prison term. 40 rightving extremists are presently in detention pending trial
and another 133 are under investiation. hat neither the courts, the' ofﬁce
for the protection or the constitution nor the politicians have new idea so
yet of m the sentimentsl, beer-gussling mt decided to tun militsnt.

Nor have the scientific studies couissiened by the govement been able to
shed any light on the grevth medium and the political theory peculiar to right-
wing terrorism. ‘15:.) years ego, for sample. some Prenki‘urt scientists loohed
into the life histories of 212 militsnt sotivists—Wo-tbirds of whom were
under 50. mt pointing to difficult oirounmtenoes does not sound convincing.
Countless young people come from broken {smilies end have trouble at hon. at
work. at school and with their girl friends—but they still do not tum to
“Claus

which is the resson W Andress von Schooler (m). the parliamentary state
seoretsry in the interior ministry. calls these findings soowhat vogue. "The
desire for simple solutions for ditrioult politiosl problems.“ he ssys. "/my/
facilitate a decision in favor of mm extremism, its simplistic progre-
oi‘ action end its unequivocal stand on who the eneq is."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The state secretary's interpretation is supported by various public opinion
polls.

The Sinus Institute of Heidelberg found that 57 percent of the adult populap
tion harbored "undemocratic thinking" and "authoritarian attitudes and 13 per-
cent of those of voting age possess an "ideologically complete" rightwing ex-
trenist view of the world. Almost 50 percent of these even said they "would
operate underground" if need be.

Prankmrt sociologist Klaus Sachatzy polled 857 young poopl. in the Greater

Prankmrt area. One out of four favored lifting the ban on national socialist
propaganda. 22.8 percent of those questioned felt that "cost of our social
problems could be solved by extsminsting those unwilling to work. the crimi-
nals and the insane." Just about half of the young people between the ages of
12 and 20 raised the dsaumd: "Destroy commisnl" and "Put an end to the nur-
derim; :tedsl"

{Eon-:theloss, the interior ministry in its "Report on Internal Security" last
fall could discern "no uniform iddcy" of the extreme right; nor do those
responsible for protecting the constitution. aeribert Helhbroich, the agency's
vice president, told STERN: "I cannot detect anything like a political theory '
of the. Right."

This interpretation comes from an expert; but it is incorrect. Over the past
15 years, a political theory of the New Right has indeed evolved upon which
the militant camp followers of the movement-the bomb builders and military
sportsmen, the gun fetishists and Hitler lovers—have cons to rely. And this
rightwing theory originated on the left.

The ideology goes by the name of "people's socialist" and "anti-imperialist"
as well as "national-revolutionary" and "ecological." Their primary article of
faith is "Mano-pluralism" (the social Duvinist doctrine of the diversity and
the intellectual and cultural order of priority among the races). Their slogan
is "liberation nationalism" signifying withdrawal from the alliances and oppo-
sition to the superpowers.

One of the leaders of the rightwing terrorist scene, 52 year-old Priedheln
Buses, head of the ”People's Socialist Movement of Germany" which was banned
at long last by the interior ministry in January. is fond of using such slo-
gans. mess, to whose group Prank Schubert. Klaus Uhl and Kurt Wolfgren, the
"dead heroes of the movement." belonged, is hard at work protecting the "first
radical-democratic, anti-imperialist state on German soil." For this goal,

“we must be prepared to die. more is a storm breaking until at last the Reich
will be bom again."

A light wind was already springing up in the sixties. At that time. a Hamburg
enaneering student named Lethar Pens put out "MES FORUM," a hectographed
pamphlet. The publication. which later urged its readers to support the NPD,
was concerned with establishing the "intellectual fomdaticns of a new no-
tionalism and socialism.“ This "third way" toward a “new middle ground" be-
tween coulunisu and fascism was directed toward the ”national rebirth of Ger-
many. toward "organic" non-popular, non-Marxist socialism and an "organic
world order."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pens' little pamphlet was of programmatic importance for the developnent of
the New Right primarily because be surrounded himelf with national-socialist
ideologues who are still influential today. Aside from Pens. who now is 50,
there is the journalist Wolfgang Strauss. also 50 and 39 year-old Kenning
Eichberg, a historian and lecturer at Stuttgart university.

Lothar Pens still believes in the "third way.” As chairsnn of the nee-fascist
"solidarists." he made the case for the New Right to get on the green bandwagon
of the ecologists in 1978. ”Our point of departure as a third force independent
of the right and left," he said, "is to postulate an ecological-biological
threat to Inn."

But Just so that the politically inexperienced Greens" diinot get swallowed up
by leftwing or riatwing "reactionaries," the "solidarists" were to provide
them with a "nalistic conception of ms“ and an "overall national-political

ll

program.

Wolfgang Strauss has since Joined the Independent Workers Party. a leftwing
nationalist organization with a membership of about 1.000. As editor-in-chief
of the ERICHSARBEITERZEITUNG, he campaign for the introduction for the Yugo-
slav model of workers self-administration and has contact with nationalist
\mdera'ound groups in Rat and Southeast Europe. In the November 1981 issue of
the rightwing extremist monthly NATION MOM. he came ridit out with it: "A
Luciferian challenge (the partition of Gem) affords us an opportunity to
prove our mettle...0nly in the direct emerpncy, only in the direct confronts.-
tion with the forces of annihilation do digxity and the will to live of those
condemned to extermination arise."

without a doubt. Homing Eiohberg is the most intelligent of the three New
Right ideologues and thus the most dangerous politically. The Stuttgart lec-
turer was first in line for the chair of military history at Phenster univer-
sity and has been teaching at various universities for years.

while still in school. Kenning Eichberg was connected with the ridatwing radi-
cal German Social Union. As a university student, he had connections to French
nationalist circles and it was he who finally acquainted the New Rigxt in nume-
rous articles with the leftwing fascism of the brothers Strasur, with the non-
Marxist brand of socialism o.' Ferdinand iaea'ile and the struggle of the syndi-
calist Irish labor movement to attain the national liberation of their comtry.

The NPD's National Democratic University League adopted Kenning Eichberg's
proposals for a university refers did it was Richberg once again who drafted
the prom of Action New Right. headed by Siegfried Poehlmann. the Bavarian
NPD chairman. in 1972. Starting in that same year, he became a major influence
in NEUE 2311‘, s publication initially put out by Action New Right and subse-
quently by its splinter group, the National Revolutionary Reconstruction Organ
nization.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e we; v. e ewe-’5‘. an... v. ~ne.

l-‘eantise, it is the magazine \JIR SELBST, published in Koblenz, which acts as a
sounding board for Eichberg's ideas. "The fear of contacting each other as
between national revolutionaries and non-dogmtic commists seems to have been
partially overcome by now, " an article in a recent issue of this "magazine for
national identity“ said. Nationalists have come to understand that nationalism
in and of itself is meaningless as long as socialist ideas are not included.
And communists can see that socialism without national self-awareness tends to
degenerate into an international lat m-th without substance."

Kenning Sichberg has substantially contributed to this rapprochement between
nationalist socialists and non-dogmatic lettwingers. Thus, the readers of left-
wing magazines such as BEEREIUNG, man. EXTRA, PPLASTERSTRAND, mm 0ND
Kora-IUMA'I‘ION or ms DA—AVAN'PI are no longer stunned to see one of Eichberg's
pieces in print. In last year's double issue 19/20 of nap-122mm, Eichberg's
ridttwing theories on "Nation, Identity and Alienation" covered no less than

24 page!-

ile did so very deftly, employing New Left terminology. '“l'hc convincing thing
about new nationalism," as for as he is concerned is that it "does away with
the legitimacy of superstructures and brings self-determination down to the
peoples." "In order to unite the Cannon nation anew," said Eichberg, we must
"get away from the VodkAPCola headquarters, from the cities, the colonies"
and the superpowers.

By stating demands such as these, the Stuttgart lecturer has every right to
expect applause from among large sements of the non-dogmatic left.

Martin Valser, the writer, also wants to “keep the wound that goes by the name
of Germny open." Heinrich Boell welcomes the "new patriotism that may take hold
among the left and the conservatives both in the mo and the GDR." Rudolf Behro
feels it is time the "Germans emancipated themselves from the tutelage of the
victors." The social democrat Horst Eppler calls the peace movement "a part of
the national will for self-determination in the face of the world powers."
ﬁeinrich Alberta comes out and says: "I am a German patriot." And Egon Bohr
calls anyone "deceitful or stupid" who says that "the Germn question is dead."

Leftwing Berlin historian Peter Brandt, the son of spa party chairman Hilly
Brandt. published a book ("'“he Left and the National Question") a few months
ago which contains language national revolutionary Banning Eichberg may enjoy
reading: "The issue of identity points us Germans to the issue of the nation,
to national identity...“ reject the image of a pemi‘ul order for airope
which lets the division of Germany mnction as the prime support for a balance
between East and Vest."

When the writer Ingeborg Drewitz issued an appeal to replace the 17th of June
holiday which "has become propagandized by dw-to-day politics” with an all-
German holiday on 18 March—the day when the Berliners chased the royal troops
through the streets in law—that appeal was signed not only by Heinrich Al-
bertz and ecologist Holger Strohm but also by tome: comune member Dieter Kun-
zelmann and rightwing national revolutionary Wolfgang Venohr.

1;
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Traditional concepts of right and left tend to disappear altogether when the
subject is Poland. The rightwing Springer papers and the business-owned FRANK-
FURTER mam feigned Imderstsnding for the strike «islands of "Solidarity"
while leftwingers like "011‘ Riemann, sated and safe, sang songs calling for
suicidal popular resistance.

The applause coming from the rightwing corner about this new neigborly spirit
cannot be overheard. "In the spirit of rediscovering our national identity,"
the DEM'SCEE NATIONAL ZEITWG wrote, "new traditional contrasts and reserve-
tiots are disappearingh—not only between the ridit and the left but also within
the conservative camp."

Gard-Klaus Kaltenbrunner, the conservative publisher of the Herder series ”Ini-
tiative," is pleased. "The return of young conservatives and young socialists
to the idea of being Gemans," he says, "is one of the most fascinating sips
of the past few years."

Martin Hussgmg, the NPD chaiisnan. extends the rightoleft are all the way to
the Greens: "A person who thinks in ecological tens automatically takes a
position on the riaxt...1f some perspicaceous lsftwingers view the ween wave
as posing the threat of a rightwing trend in the final analysis. there is no
reason for us to dispute them. Onward, national democrats."

me NPD has been pursuing the green line since its 12th party congress in 1978.
man now its prom still calls for “giving priority to ecology in favor of
the economn" for being "against nuclear powers" "for national unity." and for
“an enviroment-couscious econony as part of a true-to-life system of order of
the collaborative popular comunity." With this woolly program which is neither
able nor willing to hide its Nazi origins, the NPD does not stand alone.

At the "environmental coordination conference" in Lahnstein in 1978, where of
the Green Action for the Future, headed by former cw member Herbert Gruhl, net
with Georg Otto. the former secretary-general of the Greens. But ﬂan list of
participants also included young national democrats from the NPD; the "Associa-
tion of Pro-Constitution ibrces," founded by Erwin Schoenbom. an old Nazi, and
Dr M 0 Bruker, a nenber of the "scientific advisory council” of the racist
"Society for Anthropology, mgenics and Btholoy."

Given all these incestuous green-brown relationships. it is not at all emptie-
ing to find Baldur Springnann. a Schleswig-Bolstein fewer-ecologist and one

of the cult figures of the Ur-Greens, referring to the old ﬂazi ‘niise Christo-
phersen (the author of the "Lie of Auschwitz," a book banned to protect young

people) a. "fine, upstanding sen."

Now this closes the circle that reaches froe new. old and green rightwingers
all the way to the rightwing extremist terrorist scene aromd Busse's "People's
Socialist Movement of Germany" and the bonb throwers of the Manfred Roeder
clique now standing u'ial at Sta-sheila. me circle has closed nore quickly than
the protectors of the constitution suspected. By now, miss Qiristophereen and
the New Right ideologues Pens, Strauss and Eichberg have become trieddnd-true
fellow combatants of the likes of Erwin Schoenborn and Friedheln Busse, having

5
l-OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l V“ VI . l‘lﬂh \a-Ic. ‘ll‘l.l

gone throng) many ungagementa together. For his part, Busse has 31m his acti-
vist associate waiter chel leave to work on Schoenborn's monthly 61mm KOR-

RIEI‘ONDENZ. And that pal-61mm publication included this statement: "Either
the world will 30 national socialist, which is to any green. or it will descend
into chaos."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jain- AG 8: Co.

9478
(50: 5105/374

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ENERGY BUDGET INCREASES 36 PERCENT, DOMESTIC COAL STRESSED
Paris REVUE DE L'ENERGIE in French No 340, Dec 81 pp 657-660

[Text] The Industry Ministry's Energy Budget

We are coming back, here. to the Energy section of the budget of the Ministry
of Industry as it was presented in the ministry's information letter.

The ministry's budget aims at meeting several objectives:
[a.] Support of domestic coal production.

[b.] Emphasis on the energy saving policy.

[c.l Assurance of development of new energies.

The total funds amount to 6.563 million francs, or a 34-percent increase,
to which are added 455 million francs in special tax levies and 565 million
francs in contribution to the hydrocarbon support fund.

Support of Domestic Coal Production

The government's primary objectives find expression in a sizable increase
in the subsidy grantedto theNationalCoal Board, which increases from 3.99
to 5.96 billion 1982 francs, or +29 percent.

This grant will make it possible to have production increase from 18.7 billion
metric tons to 19.2 billion.

The future of our domestic coal production for decades involves an increase
in the nation's coal inventory. Ten million francs uill be allocated to this

program in 1982.

Finally, 1; will be necessary to develop technologies for using coal, including
gasification methods.

The return of coal in industry entails a considerable, long-term outlay: 66

million francs will be released for this purpose. or +47 percent, in compari-
son with 1981.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFr‘ICIAL USE ONLY

Emphasis on the Policy of Rational Use of Energy

The priority attached to this action was reaffirmed by Parliament at the time
of the debate on energy.

These actions find expression in the considerable increase in the funds of
the Agency for Energy Saving.

These allocationswillamount to 1 billion francs in 1982, compared with 628
million francs in 1981, or +59 percent.

This budgetary outlay is supplemented by important tax measures also included
in the budget bill. Tax deductions for energy saving work by individuals
will amount to 8.000 francs per household, plus 1.000 francs for a dependent
child.

Finally. the government will set up several new measures in 1982:
[3.] Establishment of an energy savings account for individuals.

[b.l Extension of the interventions by the National Housing Improvement Agency
to energy saving.

[c.] Development of incentive mechanisms involving lease credit agencies
and projects heavy in investments like conversion to coal or heating networks.

Development of Production of New Energies

The aids allocated to geothermal energy will increase by 41 percent in 1982,
reaching 85 million francs. Moreover, the funds of the Solar Energy Commis-
sion will increase by 49 percent in program authorizations.

Energy Saving: Agency's Report

The 3lst meeting ofithe Board of Directors of the Agency for Energy Saving,
which met under the chairmanship of-Poulit, head of ohe Agency for Energy
Saving, made a certain number of important decisions in the field of promotion
of energies to replace oil.

An important part of those decisions were made within the framework of the
recent procedures established by the agency and whose first report can thus
be drawn up at this time.

I. In the Residential and Services Sector

a. Promotion of new technologies: demonstration operations.

Coal:

The Agency for Energy Saving [ABE] is giving increased importance to the pro-

blems raised by reconversion to coal by taking an interest in medium-sized
heating plants, especially in low-cost housing heating plants.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thus, the 318: meeting of the Board of Directors of the AER decided to grant
a subsidy of 2,775,165 francs for the second part of an operation demonstrating
conversion of 5 existing heating plants in HIM [low-cost housing] buildings.

These heating plants are located at Soisy, Pierrelaye, Coudekerqus, Longwy-
Haut and Tourcoing.

This use of coal will make it possible to eliminate 2,714 metric tons of oil
for a total investment of 16,268,078 francs.

Electric Heat Pumps:

In addition, the agency is financing a campaign of measures involving over
600nm buildings equipped with electric heat pumps for a total of 800,000
francs.

This operation is preparing for action promoting heat pumps to replace boilers
in apartment buildings, intended for supplementing. in the near Suture, the
Perche 1 operation initiated jointly with EDP [French Electric Comany]. It
must be pointed out that the Perche 1 operation involves 20,000 housing units
and is to be carried out in 1981 and 1982.

b. Investments among large energy consumers (over 5,000 TBP [metric tons
of petroleum equivalentl) .

The Agency for Energy Saving is granting large consumers a direct subsidy
for making investments making it possible to replace 011.

Thus, subsidies have been granted to three operations pertaining to incinera-
tion of household garbage with recovery of heat in the urban community of
Bordeaux, use of geothermal energy at Acheres and drawing off of steam at

the EDF powerplant in Vitry.

The following table gives the status of this procedure to date:

Free Energies at the Source

 

Source Number of Number of Heat TB? Investments Subsidies
operations housing units replaced (francs) (francs)
“22:32:: 7 14,015 1.2.07.7 166,967,000 18,756,000
Industrial 2 5.126 15,380 90,918,000 7,840,000
thermal refuse
“:§:;;31 11 10.018 30 .056 290 .000,000 11 .993,000
Firewood 2 542 1,627 7 ,000.000 651.000
Comercial Energy
Coal 4 20,566 61,700 143,110,000 12,677,500
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

?rce Energies at the Source
c. Scattered consumers (less than 5,000 TBP).

The agency's operations are applicable both to large energy consumers and
to small and medium-sized consumers.

With regard to operations pertaining to small and medium—sized consumers,
the agency has set up networks of qualified professional men (research com—
panies or offices) grouped by federated agencies. They receive financial
aid from the agency to encourage and manage netwroks and for training pro-
fessionnl men.

These networks consist of around [8 federated agencies in addition to 2,000

installers which give the final consumer a ADO-franc subsidy per ton of oil
replaced and 200 francs in the case of coal (commercial energy) at the time

the job is performed.

The objective established in agreement with these federated agencies is ambi-
tious: 80,000 metric tons of oil replaced by the end of 1981 and 170,000
tons in 982.

Ii. In the Industry Sector

The policy of incentive for reconversion to coal in industry assumed by the
public authorities has made it possible to replace almost 1.5 million metric
tons of hydrocarbons and it has found expression in the implementation of
investments amounting to arOund 800 million francs.

By itself, the cement sector has made it possible to replace 900,000 metric
tons of oil, at the cost of an investment outlay of 540 million francs.

In the other industrial sectors. the recent performance of operations for
returning to coal has led to a total investment amount of 240 million francs,
corresponding to a replacement of 230.000 metric tons of oil equivalent in
the form of hydrocarbons.

Finally, it should be stated that the steelmaking sector has also partici-
pated in the national effort to reconvert to coal by using coke as a replace-
ment for fuel oil. without the need for any special investments. The replace-
ment of hydrocarbons thus achieved is on the order to 300,000 TBP.

Research on Energy Saving in Transportation: the VIRAGES Project

The VIRAGES (Industrial Research Vehicle Improving Energy Management and
Safety) project was developed by Renault Industrial Vehicles in conjunction
with the Ministry of Transportation through a technical committee sponsored
by the IRI [expansion unknown; possibly Industrial Relations Institute].

This work was also followed up on by the Ministry of Industry and the DGEMP
[General Directorate of Energy and Raw Material].

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This prchCL proVides for an overall summary leading to a complete rethinking
ol the design of the top of the line vehicle (38-ton tractor), aiming most
parlivuﬁnrly at the following:

[n.! Improvement of fuel consumption.

[b.z iumrovcmont of safety.

lc.; Reduction of sound emission.

[d.] Ronuction of polluting emissions.

ic.] merovement of the driver's working conditions.

Fuel Consumption Improvement Objectives

Technical solutions aiming at this improvement will pertain to the following:

improvement of performance of the power unit.

—.
‘J
.

5b.] Reduction of power absorbed by the auxiliaries.
lr.} Reduction of dead weight.

!d.§ Reduction of aerodynamic drag.

Why Has the Largest Tractor Chosen for This Project?
The following are the reasons for this choice:

1. Because this kind of vehicle, owing to its use intensity, consumes around
hrlf the total amount of fuel used by industrial vehicles (from 2.5 tons to
33 tons), although they represent, in number, only about 11 percent in this
bracket.

2. Because the techniques applied to this equipment, in very heavy demand)
can be transposed essentially to other heavy vehicles (16-ton to 26-ton range).

Thornforu. utter a period of over 15 years during which the vehicle has been
developed in separate steps and successively with regard to the various com-
poncnt parts, it is a question of studying and producing, in the next 5 years.
a perfectly homogenoua composite vehicle bringing together techniques with
the highest performance known at present and capable of being mastered.

bola: Energy: Two New COMES Programs
The Solar Energy Commission [COMES] recently put in effect two important,

original programs: one. for the regions; the other. for the DOM-TOM [Overseas
Departments-Overseas Territories].

11
INJR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(MVLY
F1)R10511(]Al.lEﬂE(NNLY

a. Regicnal Operations of COMES: ASCOL Agreements

As early as 1980, the Solar Energy Commission wanted to develop programs for
the application of solar technologies best suited for regional conditions
and specifitities.

Therefore, for almost 2 years now, COMES has been undertaking action in the
Regional Public Establishments to disseminate, especially in the local collec-
tivitics sector, solar equipment that has reached technological maturity.

This is true. especially, of applications of solar'water heating, heating with

wood and straw, and so on.

For this purpose, it is proposing to the Regional Public Establishments the
signing of an agreement called Solar Operations Coordinated with Local Col-
lectivities (ASCOL) whose objective is to prepare and implement a program
of incentive and dissemination of solar techniques in a given region.

The agreement provides for establishment of a regional solar fund by equal
contribution, in principle, by the Regional Public Establishment and COMES
to which is added, in some cases, a land contribution by DATAR [Delegation
for Territorial Development and Regional Action].

b. The Renewable Energies Development Program in the DOM-TOM

The overseas departments and territories are a preferential application field
for renewable sources of energy.

The nature and distribution of energy requirements, the availability of solar
energy resources, a'", of course, very favorable factors that make it possible
to envisage applications overseas that still seem to be less advantageous

in metropolitan France, for technical or economic reasons or both. Some ele-
mentary energy requirements can be filled especially, in a number of cases.

by solar installations: photovoltaic modules and windmills especially.

Therefore, a program for developing renewable sources of energy in the DOM—
TOM was prepared by COMES early in 1981. Its objectives pertain to the fol-
lowing:

[a.] Improvements of material living conditions, primarily in rural areas.

[b.l Search for greater energy independence of the overseas territories and
departments.

[c.l Development, especially overseas, and promotion of French technologies
capable of being exported to countries with a comparable climatology.

This program was established in close collaboration with the secretary of
state for the DOM-TOM, from a point of view covering a number of years. This
ambition is very important, because achievement of an investment volume on
the order of 875 million francs is envisaged during the next 5 years. The
energy stake is considerable: 50.000 to 80,000 tons of oil equivalent by
1985. But this is only one aspect of this operation that might lead. toward

12
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the end of the decade, to the energy equipment of 20 to 25 percent of the
dwellings not connected at present to the electricity distribution network.

This kind of effort can be undertaken by private contractors (industrial in-
vestments, household solar installations) or public contractors (local collec-
tivities, public agencies) only with the benefit of a large subsidy from the
public authorities. This is the subject of the financial provisions in the
program. providing for subsidies granted by the regions or territories in-
volved. COMES and the'secretsriat of state for the sou-mu. A total amount

of financial assistance of 150 million francs is contemplated, provisionally.
for the next 5 years. shared in at the rate of 50 percent, 25 percent-and

25 percent, respectively, by the territorial regions. COMES and the secretar-
iat of state for the DOM-TOM.

These objectives, proposed to the local authorise in the spring of 1981, were
approved by the pertinent territorial and regional assemblies. They are being
implemented within the framework of annual programs, established and managed
in accordance with methods similar to the A8001. agreements.

For 1981, a total financing of close to 16.5 million francs has been set up.
It makes it possible to carry out operations like the following:

[a.] Production of electricity for the netvork, on the basis of renewable
resources (eamll pouerplants, gas generators, and so on).

[b.] Rural electrification (scattered villages).

[c.l Energy supply for isolated equipment (telecommunications. signaling.
limping).

Id.) Various thermal applications (solar water heaters. air-conditioning,
solar distillation. and so on).

[e.) Accoupanying operations (information and avarenese. training. knowledge
of resources, studies and follow-through on operations).

Geothermal Energy: Successful Drilling in the Paris Region

The Evry Region Intetcouunal Study and Development Chamber (SIEARB) and the
public development establishnnt of the New Town of Bvry (EPEVRY). this latter
acting as delegated contractor. have had a geothermal drilling accomplished
located within the perimeter of the Rev Town of Bvry (Canal district). Assis-
to the contractor is provided by the Geoheat Colpsny and the contracting by
the Bureau of Geological and Mining Exploration (336“).

The results obtained are very satisfactory, because the drilling provides.
in artesian flow, 95 cubic meters of geothermal an hour at a tewerature of
70.5‘C at the well bottom, instead of the expected 67°C.

The project has received financial aid from the Geothermal Couittee in the
Ministry of Energy. from the Agency for Energy Saving and from the regional
public establielment of Ile de France. The main financing is provided by
the SIEARB. with the aid of a loan from the Deposit and Consignment Fund.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ Uri“. '51. U3; Ul‘l.‘

Eventually, it is planned to connect up 2,300 dwellings and public equipment,
or a total of over 3,100 dwelling equivalents. This will make possible an
annual saving of 3.690 metric tons of petroleum equivalent.

The results of this drilling are very encouraging and make it possible to
envisage the initiation of other geothermal operations in the geographic sector
of Essonne.

International Cooperation
France-India After Mrs Gandhi's Trip to raris

On occasion of Indira Gandhi's trip to Paris, the part played by Total in
exploitation of the Indian oil depositat Bombay High was stressed. Development
of this cooperation has been planned. Moreover, a cooperation agreement has
been concluded with the French Petroleum Institute pertaing primarily to the
flexible coupling technology that will be studied at Bombay High and to a
survey of the sea floor for which the IPPIFrenchPetroleum Institute] has

its own method.

France¢China

Jobert, minister of Foreign Trade, took a trip to China darkened by the arrest.
at the time of his arrival. of a young Chinese girl engaged to a French diplo-
mat. Aside from these special circumstances, it seems that the Chinese leaders
have soft-pedaled their large energy equipment projects or at least that they
were keeping up with the schedule by postponing some achievements to unspeci-
fied dates. The Chinese Government is not reversing its decision in principle
to address itself to France for a supply of nuclear reactors. if it adopts
this source of energy, but it is still hesitating on this definite adoption.

0n the other hand, things seem to be developing more favorably in the oil
sector in which ELF-Aquitaine and the OPP [expansion unknown]. already opera-
ting in China, seem to have good chances of obtaining another permit.

France-Arab Countries

Habid-Deloncie. president. and Baccar Touzain, secretary general of the France-
Arab Chamber of Commerce. have submittedims activity program for 1982 to the
press. It consists of the establishment of a technical energy committee.

France-PRC

At the time of their meeting in Paris on 29 October 1981, the German minister
of Research and Technology. Andreas von Buelou. and the French minister of
Research and Technology. Jean-Pierre Chevenement. confirmed their intention
to extend and intensify Franco-German collaboration still more both in the
bilateral framework and in the multilateral framework.

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
These intentions involve the following in the field of energy:

Modern Technologies on Coal Utilization

Gasification ,of coal opens up a possible very vast field for cooperation be-
tween both countries and a priavry advantage t-.. the future.

Nuclear Energy

Franco-German cooperation is essential for both countires. The two linistera
proceeded to exchange views on the respective progra-s of France and the PEG
and on cooperation especially with regard to reprocessing and breeder reactor.

COPYRIGHT: REVUE DE L'ENERGIE No 340 Decelber 1981

10 .042
cso: 3100/398

15
won omcul. use ONLY
DE ”ICHELIS CN REESE!) BEER“ 05‘ STATE PARTICIPATIONS
Hilan IL SOLE-21b ORE in Italian in Feb 82 p 3

[Inter-view with Minister of State Participations Gianni De Hichelis by Massieo
Gaggi

[Text7 Ronen'dithin a few days Minister of State Participations Gianni De
Michelis will lay before the cabinet his progra- for reforaing the Ministry of
P953 [State Participation] and the three Ianageaent agencies. and will request
that the new presidents of the two agencies (131 [Industrial Reconstruction
Institute‘] and mm [Manufacturing Industry Holding and Financial Gospany'l)
whose presidential terms have expimd be chosen sieultaneously with the passage
of the bills that embody his program.

"It's a 'big game' that we're gettim ready to play." the socialist minister
said. "but the fact is that 1982 is a decisive year for the state participa-
tions. If we are not successful in reversing the negative trend of recent
years. the entire 'castle' of reform progress that we have built will crumble.
with entirely foreseeable consequences. It is therefore essential that these
decisive responsibilities be set with a clear-cut. top-level plan and with a
precise conception of the kind of public sector of industry toward which 'we are
striving. even if my draft bills are subsequently subjected to lengthy debate
and even undergo mjor changes. I as prepared to discuss all points, but I
will not agree to postpone-ems or inaction.”

In short, De Michelie believes the assent has arrived to focm the spotliyit
of reform on the institutional system of a sector which for some tile has
suffered from a IaJor crisis of Iamgeunt.

In the past 2 years of Ismael-eat De Hichelis has initiated many processes (too
many. according to his detractors. who rebuke him for having maintained necha-
nisas over which he is destined to lose control). For emple. there is the
case of the transfer of Hontedison to private omrship. and the incorporation
of the public sector of the chenical industry into the American-om Ccci-
dental ”corporation" (which led to the creation of the Iultinational MY):
phenomena which inevitably put the two poles of the cheaical industry--the
public and the private--on a collision course.

16
'03 m1. USE ONLY
In this as in other cases. however. De Michelis has taken advantage of exist-
ing differences of opinion to induce the government and the private companies
to develop a proposal for the restructuration and rationalization of produc-
tion. To Judge from the results obtained to date from the an: National Hydro-
carbons Agencﬂ-Hontedison deal. one would say that this wager destined to
pay off.

In addition to pressing for increased internationalization of the public sector
of industry and for closer collaboration with the private sector (the Alia-Fiat
agreements. the TEKSID -Finsider [Iron and Steel Finance

Corporation-l negotiations. among others). the minister has formulated proposals
for reforming certain key segments of the public sector of industry (steel.
chemicals, alumina-a). Above all. he succeeded in extracting an agreement con-
cerning these plans from the national government, labor uniom, local govern-
ments. and private companies by stressing-win his talks with those who from time
to time were complaining that implementation of the plans would involve exces-
sive cost. loss of jobs. or introduction of a system of "special surveillance"
over management--the danger that entire sectors of industry would collapse.

Ind ige st ible ?roposals

Aware of‘ the "high degree of indigestibility" of some of his proposals (despite
the fact that they have received formal acceptance) but also aware of the popu-
larity that certain steps toward consolidation have earned for his among the
workers of factories whose survival had until recently been in doubt. De
Hichelis has accordingly begun to crisscross Italy, flying from one plant to
another and from one regional PPSS conference to another (the one concluded
just recently at Bari is already the seventh).

TheSe meetings-which according to De Michelis are opportunities for dialog and
explanation with the workers but which according to his enemies are "talkfests"
with political overtones--have in any case thrust him before the public as one
of the leading protagonists of the policy of industrial restructuration in the

post-1973 era.

aoreover, it is precisely this policy which he cites in proposing a reorganiza-
tion of the ministry that would give him an entreprenem'ial role. "when other
political parties attack the proposals to reorganise the ministry-~proposals
which are largely the fruit of the work of the 'Amato Commission,” De Michelle
said emphatically. "I have the impression that a little too such attention is
focused on the person of the minister 'pro tempore' and too little on the struc-
ture of the ministry which would in the future have the task of directing ixrlus-
trial policy in the public sector. Similarly, there is great confusion when the
question of eliminating the Hinistry of State Participation: is discussed.
because--for example--although a position does exist (let us for convenience
call it the "‘v'isentini position") that is favorable to the elimination, pure and
simple. of the governmental sector which coordinates the public enterprises,
this position can in no way be compared with the PCI Italian Communist Party“;
line, which calls not for elimination of the ninistry s functiom but for their
incorporation into the functions of a kind of 'superministry of the economy.’
Moreover, although I too believe that steps should eventually be taken to reduce

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the number of ministries. this does not prevent a reform of the PPSS system
from being enacted in the meantime, irrespective of the affiliation of the
agencies that would be called on to manage it."

'Jhoever imagines. therefore, that De Michelis wants to be a sort of "boss" of
the public sector of industry is probably instrulentalising the minister's
position. On the other hand. is this not a nieuuierstandizg caused precisely
by the fact that the new law-win addition to strengthening the indirect powers
of ninistsrswho in the past have certainly not given a good account of them-
selvesnentrusrts these ministers with functions that are characteristic of an
entrepreneur?

To counterarguments of this type. De Michelle replies that the problem is not
one of personnel but one of situatiom--situations that we lust have the
courage to confront. "As for personnel.” he says, "there is no question but
that we must choose experts to manage industrial policy, as has long been the
practice in foreign countries. The real problel, however. is the fact that in
all modern industrialized societies a process of change is under way--a proc-
ess that began in conjunction with the petroleum crisis and that I believe will
continue until the end of the century, by which time the new configuration of
the world industrial organization should be stabilized.

The Example of Japan

"Under this process," he continued, "a government increasingly assumes the role
of an active and direct entrepreneur. In short. the stateuthrough its politi-
cal and administrative powers-wakes decisions that directly involve the
structure of industry. The most obvious example is that of minthe Japanese
Ministry of Industry-which for 20 years has been the heart of the Japanese
entrepreneurial community, coordinating that oomunity and promotim its initi-
atives. and no one in Japan dreams of calling this role into question. ”or is
anyone disturbed by the scope of the minister's powers. inasmuch as the real
strength of such a mechanism is to be found in the structure of the ministry,
which--eection by section--controls the various sectors of production."

[Question-l Japan, however, represents a unique model of economic and social
organization. If the Alfa worker is never going to reseable the Toyota worker.
how is it possible to hope that the "miracle" will occur through the medium of
bureaucracy? '

Again De Michelle responded, gasim into the distance.

[Amweﬂ Let's get it straight. ‘le have to cope with a challenge of worldwide
dimemiom: in other words, we must either defend the status of "Class A indus-
trial nation" that Italy won in the postwar period. or we must retreat. If we
fail it will be very difficult for us to recover, imsmuch as we lust contend

no longer against single industries but agaimt "nation-systems" based on the
Japanese model , which will also be adopted by other industrial powers. To be
victorious. however-to become mtion-systeas in our turnnwe most assuredly
cannot rely on what I call a “photocopy bureaucracy." There is. consequently.

a gap in industrial policy to be filledufilled as quickly as possible--and it

18
F0! 0M]. USE ONLY
is in this direction that I am moving-4:0 the ertent that it is my responsibil-
ity-with these proposals for reforming the PPSS. Moreover, many are now
following Japan's example: there is the "constituent plan" of the electronics
industry whereby the French Government (umier Giscani. in fact) prescribed the
number-and productive capacity—-of the new plants: is that not the decision
of the entreprenmzr? And isn't the American govern'ae'nt acting as an entrepre-
neur when it turns aside from nuclear power and decides where and how to pro-
vide incentives for the use of coal. or when it uses the "antitrust" laws to
orient the development of compute; communications?

[Question-I Elut if the state is to function as a "superholding company," then
of what use are the 131. EM! and FIR?

[Answeﬂ Take the case of telecommunications. whereas formerly the question
under discussion was whether Italy should, or should not. have an industrial
presence in that sector, the government is today telling us which way we should
go, with what systems and with what alliances of companies in Italy and abroad.
In this new situation it is clear that there are a few too many "channels."
whereas the financial corporations maintain a significant role as group leaders
of homogeneous sectors-«even if these corporations must be reorganized because
they have evolved a little too much into industrial plannirg headquarters while
paying little attention to their financial functionuthe management agencies do
appear on the other hand to be obsolete. I am a realist and gradualist. however.
To attempt to abolish these agencies would be a mistake: it would probably have
the effect of undermining the entire reform program It would therefore be
better to restructure their-to streamline them and make them more effective.

Let us therefore not forget, in planning for the future. that precisely in the
recent months--in developing their postmtionalization strategy for the public
sector of industry--the French have studied the Italian experience ard have
derived therefrom the conclusion that it would be a mistake to establish manage-
ment agencies in France.

[Question‘l Then what is the rationale for this reform of the agencies--this
reform that is causing so much controversy and apprehension?

[Answerj The DDL :draft bill-f for the reform of the statutes of the agencies
which the government is expected to approve before the end of February is inten-
ded to update norms that were studied in the 1930's for the IR]: and in the
1950's for the ENI: that is to say. when the problems of industry were com
pletely different from those of today. There are five basic features of the new
norms:

1. Decisive “deregulation" of relations between the agencies and the ministry.
A thousand little regulations and directives must be abolished--regulations that
serve only to create veto powers-while it will be necessary to specify the
entrepreneurial decisions that the government can and must make, in keeping with
the new institutional functions that it has assumed. In short. it is absurd for
me to be able to block every siniscule increase in upital or the establishment
of new companies, while the government-whee its plan for reform of the public

19
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
to give these funds in actual fact to Finsider rather than to some other sector
of the group. If the IR]: subsequently "aligns itself" in accordance with polit
ical considerations, that is yet another aspect. Moreover. the respomibility
for managing a plan of this type must inevitably reside with the government.

which assumes the social and econosic burdens and is the counterpart of the BBC

3. Explicit regulation of agency-financial corporation relations: the agency
should have recourse to all instmnentalities that are necessary to control the
activity of companies and financial corporations. This greater measure of
clarit , however. should also be incorporated into the procedure for the ap-
pointment of managers: in the IRI, for example, with the passage of time the
executive committees ultimtely case to exercise control over all appointments
of personnel at the managerial level, includirg even those of companies in
which it holds 1 percent of the capital stock.

without participatirg in the basic decisions taken by their respective agencies.
It is not quite enough for an organ which in practice perform the functions of
a. stockholders' msetizg. On this pointugoing beyond the conclusions of the

the workers: and re
the group.

mamgesent. Someone once said that "if the plan is bed. the manager cannot
perform miracles." Very well: on this point one lust be fin and precise.
The government makes decisions after extensive consultatiom and is subject
to various controls. but if it lakes 9. sistake it will accept respomibility.
If the manager opposes these decisiom. however, he should get out--precise1y
as the private Isnager will who does not agree with his holding cospany.

20
FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
[Question] Does this also hold true for the presidents of the agencies who
will be entrusted with management of the plans just enacted for the reform
of the sectors in crisis?

[Answer] Yes, it also holds true for them-and especially for them. This is
why I have asked that the new presidents be appointed simultaneously with
enactment of the reform, and also that the new president of the m be ap-
pointed in advance, because the government and the parliament-mace the reform
action has been prepared-must decide who is to be entrusted with the names-
ment function. I don't want someone, some day, at the political level to be
able to say that the plans were good but the managers not. This does not mean
that we must change the personnel now, but whoever is called on to make--or to
ratify-«decisions must unierstand the mtm‘e of the responsibilities that are
assumed at such a critical and dramatic moment in the existence of the state
participatioxs.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editrice Il Sole-21+ Ore s.r.1.

10992
:50: 310M129

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MEASURES RECOMMENDED FOR AILING AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
Madrid CAMBlO 16 in Spanish 1 Mar 82 pp 34-37

[Text] If 1980 was the year of the record harvest, than 1981 was a bad one for
Spanish farms, which have suffered over 20 months of drought. For the first time
in the past 16 years, agricultural production fell, reaching the 1978 level. As
a result, while half of all Spain's growth in 1980 was from agriculture, poor
production last year was the main reason why this country's growth is between

.5 and 1 percent.

Agriculture continues to lose ground to industry and services. At the same time
farm income is dropping. While income for persons employed was 1,082,000 pesetas
in 1980, Spain's farmers earned 434,000 pesetas. In 1981, the situation deter-
iorated even further, with a drop in farm income of 16 percent in real terms.

Between the years 1979, 1980 and 1981, Spanish agriculture accumulated losses of
some 800 billion pesetas, according to agricultural organizations. Consequently,

farms experienced a tremendous loss in profits. While in 1972 the Spanish farmer
obtained 18.87 pesetss from every 100 pesetas spent, in 1982, he obtained only

1.4 pesetas.

And yet, prices for the products used by farmers (fertilizer, seed, gasoline and
fuel. electricity, machinery and feed) have steadily risen, far above the prices
actually received for the products.

As a result, farmers have had to go far into debt in order to keep operating.

"The farms have literally stopped paying. At the present time, of every 100 pese-
tas the farmer produces, he owes 70 to banks and suppliers. By the end of 1981,

the debt was over 1 billion pesetas," Miguel Ramirez, secretary general of the
CNAC [National Confederation of Farmers and Livestock Breeders], explained.

The sector does not have the strength to recover. Private investments have fallen
off sharply (from 103 billion in 1975 to 145 billion in 1979, a heavy drop because
of inflation), which has prevented any modernization of farms and led to a lower

use of fertilizer, select seed, machinery, and so on. As a result, we have an ob-
solete, aging agricultural sector.

The picture could not be gloomier. The problems had been building up in recent

years, when agriculture was the "Cinderella of the crisis.“ However, the persistent
drought has hit that other Spain, where 5 million persons live, very hard.

22
FOI(NHHCLALIIHEONLY
Once again this year, negotiations on farm prices, begun on 16 February, were an
Opportunity for agricultural organizations to lay the grave situation of Spanish
farmers on the table. Every year, there is a fight between farmers and the ad-
ministration over a few pesetas more or less in the regulated prices on certain
products, but these negotiations have never substantially improved farm income.

Consequently, agricultural organizations have changed their strategy. They no
longer content themselves with an increase of one point or so on the 17 products
regulated, but rather, attempt to negotiate a series of complementary measures

aimed at improving the structure of farms and the standard of living of farmers.
From the price policy, they want to move on to what they call the "income policy."

Basically, it is a matter of controlling farmers' expenditures (especially for
fertilizer and energy), obtaining money at favorable interest rates and with good
terms for the time of repayment, converting sectors experiencing problems (olives,
milk, wine, and so on), reorganizing crops in order to prevent periodic shortages
or surpluses in production, improving marketing channels and obtaining investments
in order to adapt structures and systems of operation.

Last year, with the consent of only two farm organizations (the FTT [Farm Workers
Federation] and COAG [Coordinating Committee of Farmers and Livestock Breedersl),
the government set an overall price increase of 11.31 percent, plus another 2.78

percent in complementary measures. For this year, the administration's proposal

is about 12 percent, plus 3 points in complementary measures. 0n the other side,
the agricultural organizations propose increases of between 17 and 21.6 percent,

plus a few more points in complementary measures.

This year, the price negotiations are stymied by two related issues: One, the
so-called "Lamo testament," is a report prepared by the previous minister of agri—
culture defending an increase of 15.6 percent this year. The other is that 1982
is an election year in Spanish rural areas. Elections for the Agricultural
Chambers were scheduled for the month of May. In addition, there is the issue

of elections to the Andalusian Parliament and countless seetorial elections
(regulatory councils, olive and rice growers, and so on). With rural areas in
ruins and elections on the horizon, it will be difficult for price negotiations

to come to any agreement.

"With an increase of under 15 percent, we cannot begin to talk; it would be de-
grading," Miguel Ramirez, secretary general of the National Confederation of
Farmers and Livestock Breeders (CNAC), the agricultural right, told CAHBIO 16,
because the organization had asked for 21.6 percent and additional complementary
measures. "We have to recover farm income in a relatively short period of time,
by 1984—1985, when we enter the EEC. We need a suitable price policy, a financial

and budget policy and a policy of controlling the farmer's input," he added.

in this connection, the CNAC is asking that the Agrarian Financing Law be drafted
(It was to have been presented before 30 May 1980), plus money from the budget for
subsidies and investments, restructuring of fertilizers (more expensive than in

Europe) and price reductions for machinery (which is expensive and of poor quality)
and energy (providing subsidies per kilogram of what is produced).

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"With the 13.6 percent that Lamo prescribed, we would be at the 1979 income level.
We have written off these 3 years. but we must carry the complementary mea-
sures further and negotiate programs to restructure sectors in order to prepare
from our entry into the EEC starting now," Felipe Gonzalez de Canales, secretary

genera] of the National Young Farmers Center (CNJA), the agricultural center.
explained to CAMBIO 16.

The CNJA believes that more resources are needed and that the reorganization of
the olive and dairy sectors, already begun, must be pursued. It is urgently
necessary to initiate programs to convert to vineyards, fruits and vegetables.
"The disorder on the domestic market is very harmful and we should promote the
establishment of cooperative companies in order to regulate the market," he adds,
without forgetting the need to control spending outside the sector ("up to

7 percent") and the fact that there must be cheap money.

"What we want to do is to negotiate agrieultural policy, not only prices. It is
a matter of improving farm production and the living conditions of farmers. In
order to do so, we should provide direct economic aid, in the case of losses due
to the drought, without generalizing. And on the whole, along with a selective

improvement in prices, we must open up special lines of :redit (cooperatives),
set a ceiling for cost increases and restructure our crops," we were told by

Josep Riera, from the state executive board of the Coordinating Committee of Far-
mers and Livestock Breeders (COAG), on the agrarian left.

For this leader of the Unio de Pagesoa, the main organization in COAG, it is
necessary to support the key sectors that have a greater future. "We must prepare
for our entry into the BBC, organizing sectors and allowing farmers to participate
in negotiations," he added.

Pere Aiguade, also connected with the Unio de Pagesoa and a PSC [Socialist Party
of Catalonial-PSOE [Spanish Socialist Workers Party] deputy in the Catalonian
Parliament, explains wh., he means by an income policy for farmers: "We must
negotiate the combined t al of what the farmer will receive at the end of the
year: a rational price increase, controlled spending, farm reform measures,

improved markets and marketing and a series of social measures (agricultural
social security, potential farm mutual insurance companies, and so on)."

In his opinion, such proposals are not costly in terms of subsidies and invest-
ments: "Ensuring the food supply and agriculture of a country is relatively
cheap compared with the funds required by other economic sectors," he adds.

"We must bring farm income in line with what the rest of the Spanish people make.
In order to do so in 10 years, we would need 82.5 billion pesetas a year, meaning

5.5 percent in prices. We are asking for an increase of 17 percent, plus 5.5 per-
cent In complementary measures for subsidies to small and medium-size farms

(50 out of 100), ranches (b0) and forestry operations (10). With these funds, we
could buy land, achieve structural reforms and improve marketing, in order to
equalize farm income, as the constitution mandates," CAHBIO 16 was told by Andres
Picazo, secretary general of the Farm Workers Federation (FIT), a kind of agrarian
UCT [General Uhion of Workers).

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The administration and the Ministry of Agriculture also feel that agriculture is
not merely a matter of prices. "I believe that the drop in farm income and pro-

duction is not as great as they say and that 1981 was especially bad because of
climatological reasons. The year 1982 will not follow the trend; far from it,"
Jose Luis Garcia Ferrero, undersecretary of agriculture, fishing and food, told
canan 16. '

Garcia Ferrero explains that between 1981 and 1982, some 110 billion pesetas were
injected into agriculture: 60 billion (at 7 percent and for 10 years) to invest
in farms and improve structures and bring about reforms, and another 50 billion
for amortization in 4 years, at low interest. Another 15 billion will be used

to reorganize the dairy sector and 10 billion for the olive sector.

Along with the price policy, the Ministry of Agriculture defends an improved
structuring of farming ("we must combine farming better with livestock raising,
which has become somewhat elite") and organize crops (seasons, upgrading producers
associations that market their products, increasing the participation of farmers

in the market).

"For me, the most urgent thing is to rationalize the way in which farms are set
up. The farmer makes a sacrifice and he always will with the price increases,
since the government always tries to reduce inflation. It is a sector in which
cost accounting never counts. In order for farm income not to fall, the produc-

tivity of farms must improve. This requires greater professionalism on the part
of the farmer, in addition to a financial and legislative framework and the organ-

ization of crops and production for which the administration will be partly re-
sponsible," Garcia Ferrero says.

Here one sees the philosophy of the new minister, Jose Luis Alvarez, who is
determined to reduce the paternalism and intervention of the administration so
that farmers will increasingly assume their own risks and so that those who fol-
low truly professional methods will survive. This ls a proposal that has been
criticized by farm organizations consulted by CAHBIO 16, who believe that "one
cannot just take a leap into space and this would mean the disappearance of many

small family farms."

For the socialists, the government has not finished presenting an agrarian policy,
especially since the departure of Jaime Lamo, with whom they had reached a tacit
agreement when, in June 1979, the government presented a program of reform for
agriculture.

"We must apply the legislation we already have and with which we are substantially
in agreement: the Law of Manifestly lmprovable Farms (we do not know the extent
to which it has been applied), the Farm Income Law (it has not been developed or
or even disseminated among farmers), the Family Farm and Young Farmers Law, and
the regulation for modernization of family farms. With these, we would have
noteworthy improvements in agriculture in 3 or 4 years," says Juan Colino, spokes-
man for the P803 on agricultural issues and a deputy from Vslladolid.

4.4
l-D

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Stabilizing Income

In addition. the socialists defend greater speed in sectorial reorganisation
(olives, dairy, vineyards, meat), for which the necessary budgeted funds must be
made available, and improved organization of production, for which purpose an
Agricultural Products Contracting Law has just been passed. "It is a matter of
having producers and merchants or manufacturers reach medium-term agreements on
production, which would help stabilize farm income," Colino emphasizes.

In addition, the farm spokesman for the P80! emphasizes professional training
(upgrading agricultural extension services), agrarian industrialization ("we
must take existing regulations and apply them") and above all, the choice of
types of production that complement what Europe produces, in the face of our
entry into the BBC.

"We must embark upon a 4-year plan with these issues, increasing the role of
professional agricultural organizations, improving statistics and defining the
responsibilities of autonomous operators. In this way, we can help agriculture

out of the crisis. But political determination is needed and we must be ready to
clash with a number of powerful agricultural interests," says Juan Colino.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Reviatas, S. A.

11,464
CSO: 3110/98

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GENSCHER 0N EC, NATO, DBTENTB, PEACE POLICY
Bonn EUROPA-ARCHIV in German 25 Feb 82 pp 85-94
[Article by Hans-Dietrich Genscher: "Europe's Role in world Politics"]

[Text] Crises, times of decision, are also times of opportunity. Linked
to our consciousness of living in a criticial time is the awareness that
this time is not simply s test of our capacities but also an opportunity
for Europe.

Then we speak of Europe's role in international politics, what we mean by
"Europe" is primarily the democracies of Europe and in particular the
European Community of the Ten, soon to be the Twelve. At the same time,
we are always aware that this is not the whole of Europe, that Warsaw,
Prague and Budspeat-—to name just three-sre European cities, just as
Leipzig and Dresden are German cities. Recent events have made it clear

to the world to what degree the peoples on both sides of a divided EurOpe
think of themselves as Europeans. Europe can be divided, but it cannot be

separated.
The European Community's Identity

To explore the role of democratic Europe and in particular the European
Community in international politics means asking: what is the identity
of this Europe? Hhat does it seek to give the world and what is it

able to give?

First of all: Europe's present identity in the world is characterized by
the establishment of the European Community: as late as the first half
of the 20th century Europe was the starting point for two world wars.
Today the European Community is a force for peace-not only for Europe
as a whole, but for the world.

Second: the European democracies are the region most strongly integrated
into the world's economy. Europe, by its nature, is and must remain this:
a force for an open world economic system and a force for cooperation in
partnership with the developing cauntries.

Third: the idea that has made Europe what it is, is the idea of freedom.
It is this which has unchained the creative forces of mankind and made
EurOpe the birthplace of the modern world.

2
FOR‘OFIHCJII.USB10NLY
Within the idea of freedom, respect for the dignity and the rights of

each individual are linked to the affirmation of tolerance and the right

of peoples to self-determination. These are the values through which

Europe has become a force for the evolution of a world order of partnership-
an order which affirms human rights and the plurality of cultures and leads
the world's peoples together for cooperation with equal rights for all.

The European-American Alliance as a Guarantor of Peace

The historic LuSk of Europe in the present epoch is an active policy for
peace--for its own continent and for the world. In this connection peace
and freedom are for us inseparably linked to each other.

The European democracies can only fulfill this task in alliance with the
democracies of North America. For only this alliance can sustain the
equilibrium necessary for peace in Europe and in the world. A Europe
which would look for a morally neutral position, equidistant between the
United States and the Soviet Union, would, as a result, lose its weight

in international politics and thereby the basis for an effective peace
policy. It would become the object and the football of international
political developments. It would be madness in terms of security policy
to believe that the United States w0uld be wholly or partially replaceable
as a factor for security in Europe.

By the same token, it is also true that the international political role
and significance of the United States, or even the security of the United
States, cannot be looked at without taking account the relationship of
Europe to the United States. The Atlantic Alliance is no onedway street.
He are all sitting in the same boat, the democracies of North America and
of Europe. We in Europe might be more at the edge, but when the boat sinks,
we will all go down together. The term-a community of destiny in

FrceJOm, in which the dczccrccies of Europe and North America are bound

to each other-18 no empty cliche; I emphasize this for the decouplers

on both sides of the Atlantic.

The European-American alliance is-even more important than the similarity
of vital interests-optimarily a community of shared values, a community of
the will to freedom, to human dignity and self-determination. This
community of values explains the vitality of the alliance and distinguishes
it from military alliances of the old style.

The alliance is also by its nature an association of states with equal
rights. But equality of rights does not automatically signify equality

of weight. Europe's equal wieght in the alliance, and that means a stronger
role in shaping that alliance, can only be attained through a united

Europe. President Kennedy's plan for an alliance which rested upon two
pillars-North America and Europe-must continue to be our goal today.

It is not the United States which is denying Europe its equal weight in

the alliance but the Europeans themselves: through their lack of capacity
for unity, through their national egoisms, through inadequate contributions

F0ﬂ.0F11Cf%{.USBIDNLY
to their common security. Anyone who complains of Europe' a dependency
upon America is, in reality, complaining of insufficient progress in
European unification. He would have to demand that the Europeans develop
more strongly than ever before their capacity to define their interests
jointly, to represent them in the alliance and to orient their defense
efforts toward those interests. we cannot look upon the United States as
a kind of hired night watchman for Europe and do as little for our own
security as we can get away with. Equality of weight is not something
that can be obtained from the assurances of others, it has to be achieved
through our own efforts.

European Peace Policy Toward the East

For some 10 years now the world's economy has been in a deep-rooted
structural crisis: inflation, slow growth and unemployment in the
industrialized countries; and in the countries of the Third world stagnation,
even regression, of per capita income, crisis of development. At the sane
time the population in the Third World is growing rapidly. At the same

time ecological balance on our planet is becoming ever more endangered.

These global problems, upon whose mastery the survival of mankind depends,
would be insoluble if East and Rest were to turn their forces against
each other, if it were to come to increasing confrontations and armaments
races and if East-west tensions were to be carried over more and more into
the conflicts and problems of the Third World.

The paramount task for peace for Europe and for the world consists today
as it did yesterday in working toward a realistic detente policy through
the medium of dialog, of arms control and cooperation for the most
constructive possible relationships between East and West. The question
here is the preservation of peace in the world. And it is also a question
of whether the great global questions with which mankind is facec can be
resolved.

The policy of detente, begun in the 1960's with such high hopes, has
suffered serious setbacks in recent years: Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan and Soviet pressure upon the Polish leadership to impose
martial law and to stifle the movement of the Polish people for renewal,
speak a clear language. The Soviet arms buildup in the 1970's, far
beyond what was necessary to maintain its own defensive capacity, is
cause for great concern.

Yet the response to these setbacks cannot be to resign ourselves and to
allow the world to slip back into a new Cold "hr. This would be the
abandonment of policy, would be nonpolicy. The answer lies instead in
a common policy of the Rest toward the Soviet Union in which our
determination to maintain the balance and the demand upon the Soviet
Union for moderation is linked with the readiness for dialog and
cooperation, for arms control and disarmament.

FOR OFFHj§1.USEIONLN
I'Ulb VI'I'ULIAI. UQI'. UI‘LI

Toward the end of the 1960's the alliance proposed, in the Hormel Report,
just such an overall political strategy in regard to the East. This
strategy is now, as it was before, correct and valid. It rests upon
three elements:

The basis is defense policy, the task of which is to assure a military
balance.

Linked with this as a second element is a policy of arms control which
would make it possible to bring the indispensable balance of power down
to the lowest possible level through disarmament agreements.

0n the occasion of his official visit to Washington, Chancellor Schmidt
and President Reagan once again underscored in a joint declaration the
significance of arms control as an indispensable component of security
policy and confirmed their resolve to continue efforts for effective
arms control. The connection between defense and arms control policy
was also emphasized in President Reagan's speech of 18 November 1981,
which contained initiatives for a comprehensive arms control policy.

The expression of this policy is the NATO two-track resolution of December
1979. On the one hand, it makes clear the determination of the alliance

to restore by the buildup of its own arms the balance which had been
endangered by the stationing of the Soviet's SS-ZO medium-range missiles.
The offer made to the Soviet Union of arms-control negotiations underscores,
on the other hand, the Heat's resolve to hold this military balance of
armaments to the lowest possible level so as not to initiate a new arms
race.

Negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on the issue
of medium—range missiles have begun in Geneva. The alliance's objective
is a zero-solution, in terms of which the alliance will renounce
completely a rearming with medium-range missiles if the Soviet for its
part will completely eliminate their medium-range missiles. The
negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union can only
succeed, however, if the Soviet Union has no doubt that if a disarmament
agreement is not reached by the end of 1983 that Western medium-range
missiles will be put in position. Anyone in the Nest who proposes the
rejection of Western Arms increases or who demands a moratorium will only
awaken Soviet illusions and therby undermine the disarmament negotiations
in Geneva.

The third element of the Overall strategy in regard to the Best is
detente policy.

Its first objective is to keep East-West tension under control, to subdue
and reduce it by a cantinuing political dialog. Detente policy in this
way is intended to be a balsnce-of-power policy which, while it remains
central, adds an additional element for guaranteeing peace.

FOR 0FF1C%21.USEZCNQLY
Detente policy does not mean that a state of detente between East and
West has already been attained. The concept instead indicates that
tensions based upon differing values and goals are a fact and that
efforts must be made to control these tensions, to reduce them and, as
far as possible, to overcome them.

To this objective of reducing conflicts, detente policy links as a second
one, that of developing cooperation between East and Heat wherever possible
for the advantage of both sides and to support and attend the encounters
between peoples and the exchange of information.

Economic cooperation also takes on a political function within this concept:
It is intended to create a network of mutual interests and thereby
stimulate a policy of mutual moderation. Its aim is to support the
stability of these relationships.

This network of interests would fail in its purpose, however, if what
reSulted was unbalanced dependencies by the Heat which would create
problems or even make impossible the assertion of its vital interests
and goals. The German Government has always given this aspect its full
attention.

The goal of linking a divided Europe through a network of various contacts
between people and multipel cooperative undertakings has a fundamental
significance for the divided German nation and the divided community of
European nations. What has been achieved in this area over the past 12
years must not be placed in jeopardy by any of us.

To speak of detente policy in Europe today means to speak of Poland.

In doing so, we must keep in mind the historical dimensions of the reform
and renewal movement in Poland. Within this movement a force has found
expression which is not limited to Poland: the will to national identity
and to European identity. Whatever the course of future events in Poland,
it has already changed the level of consciousness in Europe, both in the
East and in the West.

The stresses which have been imposed upon Bast-Heat relations as a result
of the events in Poland have their origin not in the reactions of the
west, as Soviet propaganda would have us believe, but rather in the
actions of the Polish military government and the Soviet Union itself.

The Nest correctly calls attention to the heavy responsibility which

the Soviet Union bears. Nonetheless this responsibility of the Soviet
Union is frequently seen on both sides of the Atlantic in too superficial
a way. we think of the immediate and publically exercised pressures
upon the Polish leadership. There is no doubt that this is correct.

31
FOR 0FF“JAI.USEZCHULY
I U“ VI'I'IVIHL Us’l‘. UDVI.I

But this is only the top of the iceberg. The basic problem is the Soviet
Union's lack of capacity and willingness to respond to the will of the
peoples for self-determination and national identity. The West must
clearly recognize this basic problem if short lived actionism is not to
take the place of political strategy.

From the example of the Polish crisis can be seen the fundamental crisis
of the system of communist domination in the East. Communism of a Soviet
character has become a system "which allows no genuine democratic
participation either in the field of production or in the field of
politics and which thus stifles not only freedom and creative energies
but also constrains economic dynamism, technology and culture." These
are not my words but those of the Italian Communist Party. The open
cOnflict with the Communist Party of Italy reveals the deep crisis of
communist ideology which extends even outside the area of communist
hegemony.

The basic question is the question of the communist system's capacity

for reform. It needs no gift of prophecy to predict that the Soviet Union
will only be able to achieve stable relationships with its East European
alliance partners if it makes a constructive response to the demands of
the peoples of Eastern Europe for reform and the realization of their
European identity. Stability in a dynamic world cannot be achieved by
trying to solidify by compulsion obsolete structures and an obsolete
orthodox communiSm. The continuing incapacity to respond to the desire
for renewal would of necessity lead to instability in Eastern Europe,
which in turn would hnpact negatively upon East-West relationships.

The path to a solution is to be found in the Final Act of Helsinki. What
was proposed in this document will not impinge upon anyone's security
interests. 0n the contrary! Adherence to the Final Act by all its
signatories could give teh whole of Europe more stability, more security.

For the West to turn its back on the Final Act of Helsinki, to abandon

the policies of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe would
be a grave mistake on its part. A firm stand as a vigorous advocate of
the Helsinki Final Act must, therefore, be a central concern of Western
policy. we cannot allow ourselves to release the Soviet Union from its
responsibility for carrying out the Final Act of Helsinki.

The contravention of the Final Act of Helsinki is the challenge which faces
us. We will meet it through our will to peace, freedom and cooperation if
we, the West, act in common. The NATO foreign ministers conference of 11
June 1982 at Brussels testified to this will to common action; we cannot
allow it to be debated to death.

The Final Act of Helsinki does not demand more of anyone than that he
recognize his signature as a binding pledge, yet it does open up to everyone
the larger perspective of a Europe which is on its way to a lasting

peaceful order. This peaceful order ought, in our view, to be characterized
by political, economic and security policy agreements which are solid and
lasting as a consequence of their careful conception. We appeal to the Soviet
Union to open the way for such a policy which is desired by the peoples of
Europe in both the East and the West.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Worldwide Policy of Peace
In our age of global interdependence peace policy is a worldwide task.

European peace policy, therefore, demands that Europe make an active
contribution" to the peaceful settlement of conflicts in the Third World
and demands that it not carry East-West tension over into those conflicts
and by so doing make them into pemnent conflicts. It is in the light of
this background that European support of the nonalignmsnt of the countries
of the Third World is to be seen. We perceive genuine nonaligmaent as a
factor for stability and peace in the Third World as well as for East-West
relations.

Over and above this, the safeguarding of peace is more than ever also an
economic task. The decisive economic questions facing the world today are:

-—Will it succeed in maintaining and further developing the open economic
system that has been created since the war? Or, as a result of rising
unemployment in the industrial democracies, will the forces of a new
protectionism gain the upper hand? Recollections of the 1930's, when the
industrial democracies, by a policy of autsrky and beggar-your-neighbor, '
drove each other into a long-term depression and permanent unemployment,
calls to our minds what is at stake here.

—Further: Will it succeed in overcoming the crisis of development which
has so many countries of the Third World in its grip today and will it

be able to head the Third World back on to the track of stable growth? In
the long run probably no question is more decisive for the maintenance of
peace than this one. For it is clear that a world in which the gap between
poor countries and rich ones continues to widen and in which the number
of people suffering from hunger continues to rise in the developing
cauntries—such a world could have no peaceful future.

The European Community is the largest ec onomic area within the industrial
triangle of the United States-Europe—Japan. It is the most important
trading partner of the Third World and the Third World's most important
source for development assistance. This demonstrates the role and the
importance which Europe holds for the further course of international
economics. In its own interest Europe must master this role, for no region
is more dependent upon a stable, prospering world economy. Therefore I
look with great concern upon the pressure for protectionist measures
within the European Col-unity. The Federal Government will resist this
pressure with all its strength.

Finally, as a third point, the task is imposed for a worldwide policy of
peace, for a global, mutually dependent con-unity of states to create a
global order of stable cooperation.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run VFI'ILIRL vol; Ul‘hl

In the past, international order meant the dominance of some and the
subservience of others. The order of the future, on the other hand, moat
and can only be based upon the equality of rights and the self-determination
of nations and peoples.

All nations today are dependent upon assured access to the markets of others,
to the technology of others, to the raw materials of others. They require
growth impulses through the growth of others, they need cooperation for

the protection of the endangered ecological balance. None of this can be
attained through power politics. Force can only achieve one thing any
morc--chaos. Stable cooperation, on the other hand, can only come to pass
through an order to which all nations voluntarily adapt themselves, because
all nations will recognize it as just and as contributing to the maintenance
of their own interests.

It is also clear at this point what political and intellectual contribution
Europe can make to the creation of such a world order of partnership:
European culture carries within it the possibility of advancing beyond

its own exclusiveness, of transporting itself into the nodes of thought

of other cultures; in short, to relativize itself. This early acquired
capacity--here I would point to the early Greek enlightenment of the 5th
century B.C.~-has today reached full maturity. To think and to act as

a European means rejecting all fanaticism of exclusiveness, every form of
ideological striving for dominance, every form of totalitarian standard-
ization of the world.

we Europeans do not believe that mankind is on the way to a European world
civilization or that modern science and technology can only be acquired
through the demise of the great non-European cultures or that mankind in
its totality is to become European. In fact, the nee-Confucian cultures
of the Far East are proof of how successful even non-European cultures
can be in building a modern industrial society.

He Europeans want one world but we do not want a uniform world. We believe
that the world will need a plurality of cultures even in the future, if

its creative forces are not to be exhausted. We are, however, convinced
that three basic values of Europe must be achieved universally: human
rights, self-determination and tolerance. Only upon these can that
peaceful world of multiple cultures, each endowed with equal rights be
built upon whose evolution the future of mankind depends.

We are all aware how far removed our contemporary world is fro: such a
world of partnership. But we should not ignore the signs that point to
such a future.

We can observe everywhere in Asia, Africa and Latin America the trend to
create associations of equally entitled states on the pattern of the
European Cennmnity. The most advanced of these is ASBAN, the association
of Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines: existing
or planned regional associations can also be found in Africa, the Arab
countries and in Latin America.

31:
ron omcm use ONLY
By means of such associations the countries of the Third lbrld are
strengthening their political independence. By the creation of sufficiently
large economic areas, they are at the one tine asking possible their own
independent development.

The European comunity sees in these associations an important factor for
stability in world politics and it endeavors to support them as far as
possible. It has concluded an agreesent of cooperation with ASEAN, it

is linked with more than 60 countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the
Pacific through the Convention of Lone and it has initiated cooperation
with the countries of the Arab League and the countries of the Andes Pact.
These forms of interregional cooperation between industrial and developing
coantreis are paths that point to the future for the further development
of equal, partner-like relationships between countries.

The European Community as Goal of the Unification Process

Europe can only fulfill its task for freedos and peace if it continues
resolutely on the way to unification.

The establishment of the Comunity of Six in 1958 was, in the full sense
of the word, an event of world-historical isportance. It gave the European
democracies a completely new role in the world. We have progressed since
then from the Gomnity of the Six to the Commity of the Nine and the
Ten and, I hope soon, of the “Nelve.

From this basis of the economic camnity, we have gone forward to the
development of a political coasunity: a European Union. With the
introduction of direct elections to the European Parlaimenr we have taken
a decisive step toward a democratically constituted cos-unity, a coununity
of citizens. During the 1970's we achieved progress indeveloping a conson
European foreign policy which no one would have thought possible at the
end of the 1960's.

At the same time, we are aware that all of these achievements are threatened
today by the deep economic structural crisis within the commity. Ten
million unemployed, weak growth and inflation, too many obsolete industrial
plants, danger of losing economic competitiveness to the top-ranking
industries of the United States and Japan, large deficits in the balances
of trade and payments: this is today the economic reality within the
community. The community is threatened with the loss of its economic

basis for an effective policy both at home and abroad.

A large percentage of the unaployed is under 25 years of age. Ought we
really be surprised that among young people today anxiety and pessimiss.
alienation and withdrawal from responsibility are spreading?

The countries of the commity can only master this severe economic challenge
in common. They can only naster it if they continue to preserve and foster
what has already been accon‘plished within the (Io-on Market because only

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
l'UK UI'I‘ILIAL Ubl‘. UNI-Y

the European market has the necessary dimension to provide a basis for
a top-ranked European industry from which it can become competitive in
world markets. And they can only meet this challenge if they overcome
the structural change through a cannon European strategy for growth and
for combating unemployment and inflation.

In the light of this challenge it is a tragedy that, at the meeting of
the EC foreign ministers on 25 January 1982, an attempt should fail for
the third time to fulfill the mandate of the Council of Europe of
November 1980 for fiscal and agricultural reform. Is Europe to becoae
bogged down in the very middle of its unification process?

However decisive it is for the future of Europe to solve its economic
problems, we must be aware of one thing: We will only find the strength
to solve these problems if all of us keep in mind the vision of European
unification. As in our national policy, so too in European policy can
the power to reach a consensus and the balancing of interests only arise
from the conscionsness that we are a community with a common destiny.

At the beginning of the European Economic Community there was a genuine
enthisiasm for a politically united Europe. It was a grave mistake that
all of us in Europe have allowed this political elan from the time of our
beginnings to trickle away and that now, having grown smug, we rely instead
on the theory that the hard facts of economic necessity will automatically
bring with them political unification as well.

We recognize today, in a time of economic difficulties, this misperception
all too clearly. Economic necessities are even more serious today than
ever before. But they do not unify, instead they tempt us to push even
further apart and to lead us up the blind alley of short sighted national
egoisms. As a result of the unceasing debates over agricultural prices
and subsidies, net balances, unfair competition and national subsidies,
etc., the European Community is in danger of losing the support of its
citizens.

All of this means that we must give new life to the idea of Europe, to
the idea of European unification.

Europe's identity, Europe's role in the world as a force for peace

and for the progress of mankind-this is a Europe which has something
to say to our young people, to which they could commit themselves. It
is our fault if instead of this, we have shown them a Europe that seems
to be comprised of unending, fruitless quarrels over petty national
interests-—petty interests in any event when we look at the magnitude
of the real challenge before us.

It is the goal of the German-Italian initiative for a European Act to
give new life to the idea of the political unification of Europe. The
act is intended to summarize what has been accomplished to date in all
areas of the process of European unification in a political document of

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
major importance. It is intended also to propose new areas for Mopaan
cooperation. Most importantly, however, it is intended to orient all
EurOpean efforts and negotiation once again toward the great goal of
political unification, the goal of European Union.

The world needs the political, economic and intellectual inpulaes that
a strong European Comunity can generate. In turn the annuity needs
the capacity for action and decision in order to preserve and develop
those conditions of life in Europe and in the world, within which it
can survive and flourish in freedom.

Europe is faced with the alternative of either helping shape change in
our world of transition, or of simply being a passive spectator to it.

To participate-in shaping this change neans first of all to unite Europe
so that it is capable of taking action for human dipity and self-
detemination, for peace and for freedom.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Verlan fuer Internationale Politik (hbll, Bonn

9878
CSO: 3103/ 344

37
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
avn vasavanu 0-H. vuul

POLITICAL WI. REPUBLIC 0? CW

my (moan AGAINST lax-r, museum-r n' summon scum
Hamburg STERN in Conan 4 Mar 82 pp 242-245
[ﬁnsttributed article: “The Bonn Scandalﬂ

ﬁery In connection with the investigation of the Flick
conglomerate. a shadow fell on some prominent government
officials in Bonn. But now, new accusations are also being
leveled against CDO politician Kiep.

Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, a former first lieutenant, recalls an old military
axiom: "Never surrender a position under fire." Uninpressed by press stories
calling for the resignation of government ministers Otto Graf Lambsdorff (PD?)
and Hans Matthoefer SPD) who had been accused of corruption, Schmidt nose to
the defense of his sorely pressed associates. "Fly trust in these non has not
decreased one bit," he said. When one is under attack, one needs to rely on
the solidarity of one‘s neidibcr."

Elsploying this type of hard-hitting forward strategy, Schmidt wards off an
attack that might well finish off the SPD/FDP coalition which has undergone a
good deal of strain over the past few months. Ever since it became known that
the Bonn public prosecutor's inquiry into possibly illegal party contlhutions
by the Flick conglomerate had turned into an investigation of leading political
figures on the national and Land level suspected of ”having accepted favors,"
the Bonn governing coalition was faced with a further severe loss of confidence.
After all. "it is devastating, of course," as FDP general secretary Guenter
Verheugen put it, "to get involved in a bribery situation."

Schmidt's decision to stick it out was approved by his coalition partners.
Last Thursday evening, PDP chief Hans-Dietrich Genscher learned of a new de-
velopment in the donation affair at a campaign rally in Pinnsbsrg in Holstein
where, over a bowl of sorrel soup and a glass of dry white wine from the Pale;-
tinate. he tried to get people to vote for the FDP at the communal elections
on 1 March. There, he got a telephone call from his party spoleesmn, Herbert
Schmelling, who sounded excited. "In a situation like this, one has to stay
real cool," he told Schmuelling. "I thought all along that the prosecutor's
office would get moving again after Ash Wednesday."

He was equally composed at the chancellor's crisis council meeting on the
following day. He said he was against dismissing Hatthoefer and Lsnhsdorff

right away. "That would look like an admission of guilt," he told Schnidt.
Interior minister Gerhart Baum (EDP) rose to the defense of the leadership,

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
telling STEIN; "Eben cabinet members have a ridit not to be publicly erecuted
before the courts have ruled—not only people like Horst Nshler and Astrid
P5011."

In fact, those under suspicion have denied aw wrongdoing. Anyone trying to pin
something on him in connection with the donation affair, said Hatthoefer, "is
lying." Manfred Lehnstein, the heed of the chancellor's office who is also
under investigation, said coolly: "I did not even get a Christmas card from
Flick; much less anything else." Otto Graf Lembsdorff, too, put on a show of
strength. "I resolutely deny these accusations," he said. But among his inner
circle including FDP spokesman Schmuelling he already spoke of his apprehen-
sions some weeks ago. "If the Flick business gets out," he said, "I am done
for."

This now appears to be the case. Among those involved in the investigative
tangle either as donors, recipients or accessories. there are other influen-
tial personalities in addition to the three prominent ones: Lanbedorff's
decessor Hans Friderichs, who now heads the Dresdner Bank; Wolf Eberle {3),
the economics minister of Baden-Wuerttemberg; Borst-Indwig Riemer, presently
an FDP member of the Bundestsg and a one-time economics minister of north
Rhineddestphalia; Friedrich Karl Flick, the head of the fins as well as her-
hard von Bmuchitsch and Manfred Nemetz, his top wingers.

All of these were involved in the m 840 million tar gift. The treasury waived
the tax payment when the Flick conglomerate sold its 29 percent share in Daim-
ler-Benz AG in 1975 for about In 2 billion and invested the profits in various
domestic and foreign business "nuns. The necessary special permit for tax
exemption was prepared by then scononics minister Hans hiderichs and signed by
Graf Lembsdorff, his successor, with the approval of finance minister Hans htt-
hoefer. As the ministers concemed at the Land level, Eisner end Eberle had
given their approval earlier on.

The prosecutors believe they can prove that the nick conglomerate showed its
gratitude in the tons of party oontritutions. The investigators pioleed up the
corruption trail more or less by ohmce in the course of looking for proof of
tax fraud which had led them to the messeldorf front offices of the Flick
conglomerate between 11 and 25 Novenber 1981. The investigators found and took
along 100 file folders and some 150 contribution registers.

The danumite was contained in "daily receipts" and "confidential memos," namely
letters to parliamentarians, lists of names of top officials and ninisters.
Pranzbruno Menkamp, the prosecutor in charge of the investigation, was stun-
ned. "A very first look at the files," he informed North Rhine Vestphalian
minister of justice Inge Donnepp Just 5 days after conclusion of the search,

"has brought out the perpetraticn of crimes as per paragraph 331 ff of the
criminal code (accepting favors)."

39
FOR OFFICIAL use 0in
.... --.-~-.-— '~— use...

There were no mrther written reports submitted by Monica». After 81'!!! die-
closed the financial tricks employed by the political parties (in its No 2/82:
'"l'he Black Treasuries of Bonn") the state prosecutor's office in Been was in-
structed to seek out STERE's informants. Fearing harther indiscretions, m
Minister of Justice Juergen Schmude and his North him-Westphalia: counter-
part, Inge Donnspp, were given oral reports only on the investigation into the
party donations affair from then on.

What the two ministers got to hear in the weeks that followed beca- more and
more explosive. It started out with "certain indications" that soon tuned into
solid suspicion. Thus, on 24 February, the state prosecutor's office initiated
an official inquiry on suspicion of bribery and so infoned the presidium of
the mindsets; as well as those involved.

The oral reports, usually delivered by Monksmp and his insdiate superior,
Cologne general prosecutor Halter Steffens, provided Schnide and Demepp with
far more detailed information. The investigators based their findings on docu-
ments confiscated and testimcmt given at the Flick conglomerate. In the course
of the investigation, new suspicions arose to the effect that there migxt have
been obscure cash transactions. Prominent emissaries, dispatched by the cm and
the FDR, were stated to have gone to Flick's with suitcases end to have recei-
ved more than m 100,000 in cash in each instmce. The tax investigators say
that the fins disposed of black treasuries. At present, the question of where
the money came from that was fed into them is still a matter of conjecture.

'mere my have been a black source in St Augustin near Bonn, which is where

the Catholic "Steyler missionaries" are located whose holdings are administered
by "Soverdia Society for Public Welfare Ltd”. The investigators discovered that
Flick had given about In 10 million over the past 10 years to this group and
had gotten receipts which made the payments tax deductible. Of this money, In 8
million returned to Flick through a back door.

Once the "confidential memoranda" prepared by nick's management were sifted
systematically, they turned out to be a veritable goldmine. 'lhey showed that
the firm made intensive efforts to work on, as vcn Brauchitsch put it, ”poli-
tical decision makers." For this purpose, an office was opened in Bonn which
was shut down at the end of last year, however. In the meantime, the tar exemp-
tion caper on the profits from the Minion-Benz stock sale had already succee-
ded for the most part. It was Mmifred Nemitz who acted as chief lobbyist.
Officially, he draws his salary as a member of the board of nick subsidiary
"Chemical Process Engineering Project."

'nae Flick affair has made Otto Graf Lambsdorff the target of an investigation
for the second time within a year. In May of last year, an investigation was
launched against him "for suspicion of continued tax evasion" dnring his tenure
as treasurer of the North Rhine-Westphalia: FDP. For years, contributions from
industry totalling millions were said to have been funneled to PD? accounts
via supposedly tax-exempt associations and professional organizations (which
the state prosecutor referred to as "laundering operations") as well as liberal
groups abroad without being reported for tax purposes.

ho
son omcm. use any
gators found a phototh of a document issued by the Swiss bank of but a 00
in Bern for a numbered account. The handwritten notation on it eilply said:
"124,100 Nerf." The account stood at 114 325.000. ‘l'he bank statelent is dated
1980 at which time Inmbsdori‘i‘ had already held his Bonn cabinet post for a
good 2 years. In a 2m summary dated April 1981 (and marked Js 114/81),
state prosecutor Gerd Pohl concluded: "Both the nuns Nerf (where he used to
live) and the handwriting itself point to Dr Otto Graf lambsdori'f.”

There was one more time that the state prosecutors ran into Lambsdorft's name.
When they searched the premises of the "Citizens Association" in Cologne, an-
other of the collection points for contributions, the investigators confiscated
a memorandum prepared by the president of the association which contained in-
criminating evidence on Lsmbsdori‘t. The minister had called him on 1 December
1979 to ask whether the donation "intended for hin by our friend Koehlsr" had
already come in.

In the meantime, the investigators think they know that this refers to Herbert
Koehler, a CD!) Bundestag deputy and ranking member of the Iron and Steel Asso-
ciation from Duisbur . And it is this very branch of industry which receives
subsidies from Bonn which run into the millions.

Walther Ieisler Kiep, the cm treasurer who heads his party's slate for the
Hamburg city council elections, also faces new and additional woes. When
letters soliciting money that bore Kiep's signature were found, Owe LuethJe,
Kiep's plsnipotentiary at cm party headquarters, said the blame was both his
and a signature machine's. The letters contained an incitement to tax evasion.
Luethje's statement could have absole Kiep or aw responsibility in the
matters

But the investigators now think they have a better idea. They have separated
the wheat from the chati‘, so to speak—the automatic signaturesironthe real
ones. It now appears clear that a letter addressed to an industry official in
i'leerbusch near Duesseldort named Langen, for example, is "the real article."
In the letter, Kiep asks Langen, who lives Just a stone's throw away from
Kiep's mother-in-law and from big spender Friedrich Karl Flick, not to trans-
fer his intended m 70,000 contribution directly to the cm account but to a
citizens association both for "technical" reasons and in order to have it
qualify as a tax deductible expense.

The investigators have managed to unearth a mat mew genuine Kiep signtures
from among the hundreds of fund-raising letters. And this has made Kiep a tar-
get of the investigators once more-uwho are not concerned with political re-
sponsibility but with criminal code violations.

While over darker clouds are gathering over the heads of economics minister
Iapbsdori‘i‘ and cm treasurer Kiep, at least two of Bonn's leading political
figures who are under suspicion of corruption in connection with the Flick
affair may breathe easier, at least for the tine being: finance minister Hans

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.~-. -..-_-._ -u- .uu...

Yatthoefer and hie former state secretary hatred Lahnstein, who now runs the
chancellor's office. has far. the state prosecutors have been unable to find
proof that the two social democrats accepted new that vent into the party
treasury or their own pockets.

lambsdorft, too. is as convinced as ever that he will not be liable to mee-
cution. (lamenting on the tumoil created by the state prosecutor's investiga-
tions. FDP chief Genecher was quoted as saying: "Heaven help then, it these

investigations lead to a dismissal of charges. hen. this entire unparalleled
pmceee would have to be discussed all over again."

The question then is whether this donation scandal will wind up in a aisle of
the state or merely in a crisis or ﬁle state mum's office.

OOPY'RIGHT: 1982 Game: + Jehr A6 a. Go.

9478
0508 3103/378

1.2
eon OFFICIAL use ONLY
BERLINGUER 0N PCI LINKS WITH SOCIALIST PARTIES
PH311069 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 30 Mar 82 p 1

[Interview with PCI Secretary General Enrico Berlinguer by Paolo Garimberti:
"Understanding With Socialist Parties Now Fundamental to Our Strategy")

[Text] Paris--Is Eurocoununism, born in Leghorn in November 1975 with the
Italian and French communists' joint document, now dying in Paris with the
PCI and French PS joint document? Enrico Berlinguer. who meets today

with P5 Secretary Lionel Jospin and tomorrow with President Francois
Hitterrand, but who will not be meeting with any cornmnist leaders, denies
that he has come to Paris to ratify the end of Eurocommunism and to replace
it with the Euro-left.

"I would not raise such formal and subtle terminological issues." he told

me in a conversation during the journey to the French capital. "Euro-
communism is not a word coined by us, but we have always used it--specifying,
however, that it should also be regarded as a quest for cooperation with
other political forces. So if the Euro-left means cooperation with other
parties, not just communists, then it suits us. The fundamental principles
of the declarations on £urocommunism-—such as the ones made in Leghorn or

Hadrid-—are still valid, but cooperation with the socialist forces is now
becoming an integral part of them."

[Question] Does this mean that the contraposition between Eurocoumunism
and Eurosocialism is disappearing?

[Answer] As far as we are concerned, at least, there is no longer any

contraposition-~on1y differences within a framework of a joint quest in
the advance toward new prospects of socialism.

[Question] On what points do the major convergences with the socialist
parties exist?

[Answer] There are two fundamental points of contact with the French
Socialists. The first is that the PS, like us, is talking about a third

way, partly in different terms but partly in similar terms--the unviability
of the path pursued in Eastern Europe, the need to make a break with

1:3
roe OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capitalism and to transcend traditional social democratic paths. The second
point is the new internationalism. which must not be restricted just to
comunist parties, but which must embrace other forces, especially in the
developing countries.

[Question] What about other European socialist or social democratic
parties?

[Answer] With the Germans the major points of contract concern the detente
policy. With the British Laborites there are convergences both on inter-
national issues and on how to advance toward a new kind of socialism.

[Question] On which issues, however, are there major divergencm with the
European Socialists?

[Answer] I would draw a distinction between socialist and Social Democratic
parties. Indeed, in the Social Democratic parties' policy we have not yet
seen a determined abandoment of the old traditional policies, which we
consider definito obsolete in View of the crisis in the Western world.

[Question] Would the PCI agree to join the Socialist International, perhaps
as an observer?

[Answer] We do not want to join any international organization. One can
develop good relations with other parties without belonging to organiza-
tions. We are opposed to all organized forms of links within the workers'
movement. And we also believe that organized forms of links are no longer
suited to the times.

[Qumtion] Hitterrand once said that he considered himself as the French
Berlinguer. Do you consjder yourself the Italian Mitterrand?

[Answer] Did he really say that? Even if he did, it was undoubtedly a quip.
Let us leave personal comparisons aside. The fundamental political issue

is that we Italian communists consider ourselves the fundamental force that
should perform leading role in building in Italy a leftwing alternative
similar to the one mtablished in France with the leftwing forces' victory.

mPYRIGi'l‘: 1982 Editrice LA STAMPA S.p.A.

CSO: 3104/162

his
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PARTY LEADERS PREDICT OUTCOME OF EARLY ELECTIONS
Milan IL HONDO in Italian 12 Feb 82 pp 14-15
[Article by Roberto Ippolito: "Forward the Laymen"]

[Text] In the event of anticipated elections, who
would gain votes? IL MONDO asked party experts.
PSI, PRI. PLI, and P801 seem to be ahead, but....

The PSI has already won the election. To be exact, it has won if you add up
the results of 117 local elections held during the 12 months of 1981 to re-
place conuunal councils and commissary officers whose terms had expired.
These results have infused the socialists with a soaring optimism for what
would be the outcome in the event of an anticipated national vote, and hang
heavily over the two majority parties.

Not only PSI politicians are convinced of mounting public opinion in their
favor: a poll conducted by IL MONDO among leaders of all the parties concedes
them a victory if national elections were to be held today. In the average
assessment, the PSI would gain 3.1 percent; not one interviewee believes its
percentage would drop. Its success would be shared by the PRI (+1.1 percent)
and the PLI (+0.8), both seemumanimously to be on the rise. Even the PSDI is
thought to be moving ahead (+0.6), although this prediction isnot shared by
everyone. The expense would be paid by the two major parties--DC (-2.3) and
the PCI (-0.5)--as well as the PR (-1.3), M81 (—1.3), PDUP (—0.1), and NSU
(—0.1).

The 1981 Tally

The politicians queried based their estimates of a hypothetical vote held

2 years ahewd of schedule on the outcome of the partial elections last year.
Sunday after Sunday every month except during the summer, the voting popula-
tion demonstrated a shift toward new political orientations. By the year's
end. the Christian Democrats and Socialists read the statistics differently,
particularly after the minister of theinterior added up the figures, which

IL HONDO is now able to publish. The socialists are exultant: "All the par-
tial elections during 1981 indicate that the P81 is surging forward by 4, 5
or 6 points, and the first 1982 local elections confirm the trend," declares
Giuseppe La Gangs, socialist director of local organizations.

h
INJR OﬂﬂﬁCJgi.lﬂﬂE()hﬂUY
I'UK UI'HLIAL U30. ONLY

The DC is not ready to second his optimism. "The data must be interpreted
with care." says Angelo Sanza, undersecretary of the interior. 'The DC’s
losses are contained. We must bear in mind that the figures cover the whole
year. In the first few months we encountered difficulties, but after our
national assembly, we recuperated, as the most recent local election returns

prove."

A summation of the 1981 returns will help us to understand better the atti-
tudes of the parties, all of them officially opposed to anticipated elections.
While the DC, PCI, and PRI prefer not even to think about such a possibility,
the PSI, PSDI, and PLI openly boast that they have nothing to fear. Indeed,
the 117 local elections, in which 5.52 million people cast their votes,

offer a significant indication of how the nation would respond today at the
urns. The returns in Rome last year. however, do not affect the overall es—
timates since the capital is one of the PSI's minor growth districts.

Political Humors

In its poll on the response to a hypothetical anticipated election, IL MONDO
did not enquire into the parties' views on the advisability of such an emer-
gency but asked their interviewees instead how they see the public's politi-
cal attitudes evolving. Exponents of the two major parties are opposed to
dissolving the chambers, and agree on the need to establish a new premise.
Both Paolo Cabras and Emanuele Macaluso, DC and PCI leaders respectively. are
convinced that more voters than ever would stay away from the urns. Says
Cobras: "People are worried about the international situation and the econ-
omy. They do not realize that the disputes between the parties and party
aspirations to take over the reins of government would end up by dissolving
Parliament for the fourdntime. We would see fewer Italians casting their
ballots, and this would probably penalize the mass parties more than the
others." Macaluso thinks that "Abstention would be greater because more than
ever the public distrusts the institutions and considers them incapable of
carrying out their legislative duties. What is more, people are convinced
that nothing would change very much."

Roberto Cicciomessere, radical, takes a different tack: "The results of an
anticipated election would vary according to how we approach it. If enough
candidates were to come up with a viable alternative to the DC program. I
think they would capture the majority." Here are the predictions, party by
party:

DC

in their forecasts for IL MONDO, the heads of all the parties see the DC
definitely in decline except Christian Democrat Paolo Cabras, who declares
that the party's renewal has attracted new adherents. In the opinion of Oa-
car Manna, of the PRI secretariat, the DC does not stand to lose much: "The
party is recovering, and this will condition a good showing for the PCI."
PSDI vice secretary Ruggero Puletti thinks otherwise. "The DC's decline has
begun," he says.

116
roa omcut use ONLY
PC!

The poll shows that the PCI is probably the party whose share of the vote is
the most difficult to predict because of the many new factors which have
cropped up in recent weeks, from its condemnation of the Polish government's
militancy to its quarrel with the USSR. Manmi foresees a P01 in expansion;
the communists, too, talk of growth. "I think," says Hacaluso, "that these
recent developments will have a positive effect. The people behold a cohe-
sive party that knows how to make choices, say no, and settle matters even
with itself." But isn't the PCI in danger of alienating part of its tradi-
tional suffrage by invading areas outside its sphere? "I think not," Maca-
luso replies, "because the PCI is holding fast to its distinctive principles:
its fight for socialism and certain reforms, a foreign policy less servile
to NATO, and its unwavering insistence on the question of an alternative to
the DC power system.“ The biggest loss for the Connunists is predicted by
Puletti (-2.7 percent), who detects a "Stalinist element in its electorate
who would like to nortify the party." According to PLI vice secretary
Antonio Patuelli, however, “The Polish crisis will have little effect, but

I don't find anything left of the rank-and—file's expectation that the PCI
is going to produce miracles."

PSI

Puletti predicts a triumphant percentage spurt of about 5 percent for the
PSI: "Italy lives by images, and Bettino Craxi is the image of a strong man
at a time when people have come to understand that democracy is not anarchy."
Only slightly less optimistic is La Ganga's prognostication for his party:
"Our goal is to arrive at 14.2 percent or more, which is what the party won
in 1958, the PSI's highest score in 35years." PDUP deputy Pamiano
Crucianelli prophesizes a good showing for the socialists. "I think," he
says, "that the trend will be confirmed in the next national election. If
that should come to pass, then the vote could make way for a majority govern-
went without the Dc."

I’SDI

The Social Democrats have no doubt that they would rack up a big vote. La
Gangs agrees, as does Pstuelli, although he foresees a less consistent growth.
Macaluso, Cicciomessere and Cabraa, on the other hand, think that the P801 is
standing still. "I doubt," says Cabras, "that their demogoguery about pen-
sions will pay off very muchin 1982." Mammi, who envisions a recurrence of
the DC—PCI polarization, believes that the PSDI will sustain a loss.

PR1

Second victor in the poll after the PSI, the PR1 owes much, all agree, to its
top man, Giovanni Spadolini, party secretary and president of the republic.
Cicciomessere finds him heading "an electoral government." Cabras refers to
theadvantages that go with occupying the presidential suite in Palazzo Chigi,
and Hammi is sure that the favorable "Spadolini effect" derives from the
"good impression the present government has made."

h
FOR OFFICIA7L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PL]

That the liberals will reinforce their position is a prediction everyone is
ready to bet on. "They will benefit from the same phenomenon that is bene-
fiting us." says La Gangs. "They are favored by the open debate with the two
major parties and the sentiment against a return to the times when Italian
political life was polarized by the DC and PCI." La Gangs foresees a greater
success for the liberals than Patuelli does.

PR, PDUP, usu
These three political factions are thought to be losing strength, particu-
larly the PR, according to the poll. For Cabras, "the 1979 exploit cannot be

repeated." Less marked, however, would be the ebbing fortunes of the extreme
left.

The Latest Results

Local Elections in 117 Communities in 1981

Party local, 1981 nationals, 1979 preceding local
DC 30.8 34.9 33.8
PG! 32.5 30.8 34.2
PSI 13.8 9.5 10.2
MSI 6.5 7.6 8.3
PSDI 5.9 3.5 4.5
PRI 3.8 3.1 3.8
PLI 2.7 2.3 1.6

Note: This table excludes the PDUP, NSU, and radicals because homogeneous
comparisons are unavailable. The figures cited refer only to the national
and local election results in the 117 communities which voted in 1981.

The preceding local elections were held in different years. The percentage
won by the H81 in the national election in 1979 includes the votes given to
the National Democratic party.

Milan-Pavia

1981 Local Elections in 4 Communities Included in This District

Party local 1981 national 1979
06 26.2 28.2
PCI 34.9 40.8
PSI 24.4 12.4
NS! 1.7 3.2
PSDI 5.3 4.1
PRI 1.7 1.9
PLI 1.7 1.6
118

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE|DNLN
Rome-Viterbo-Latins-Frosinone

Results of the 1981 National Election in 17 Districts Included in This
Constituency

Party local 1981 national 1979
DC 30.2 34.6
PCI 35.3 29.8
PSI 10.4 8.4
HSI 8.4 8.6
PSDI 4.7 3.1
PR1 4.1 3.4
PLI 2.8 2.4

The Predictions

What returns do you foresee in the event of anticipated elections?

Forecasts of DC PCI PSI HSI PSDI PRI PLI PR PDUP NSU
Paolo Cabras

DC Direction 39.0 29.5 11.5 5.0 3.8 4.0 2.4 1.5 1.3 0.7
Emanuele Halacuso

PCI Direction 35.5 31.5 13.0 4.5 3.8 4.2 2.5 1.5 1.4 0.8
Giusi La Ganga

PSI local units 35.0 29.0 14.2 4.3 5.0 4.0 3.4 1.9 1.4 0.5
Ruggero PuletLi

PSDI vice secretary 35.4 27.7 14.7 4.8 6.5 3.0 2.9 1.8 1.2 0.6
Oscar Mammi

PRI secretariat 37.0 33.4 10.5 4.5 3.5 3.8 2.5 1.5 1.4 0.8
Antonio Patuellt

PLI vice secretary 35.9 29.0 13.0 5.0 4.8 4.0 3.1 2.0 1.2 0.7
Roberto Ciccionessere

Radical deputy 36.8 28.1 12.5 3.9 3.8 5.0 2.5 4.5 0.8 0.8
Faniano Crucianelli

PDUP deputy 33.5 31.0 13.9 5.0 4.0 4.8 2.0 2.1 1.6 0.8
Average 36.0 29.9 12.9 4.6 4.4 4.1 2.7 2.1 1.3 0.7
1979 returns 38.3 30.4 9.8 5.9 3.8 3.0 1.9 3.4 1.4 0.8

Note--To arrive at 100 percent for both the predictions and 1979 returns, the
votes given the minor lists must be added. In the preceding national elections
these lists accounted for 1.3 percent; an almost analogous percentage was given
them by the forecasters. The 1979 M51 figure includes the National Democratic
party. Actually HSI took 5.3 percent, DN 0.6 percent.

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1982

9653
CSO: 3104/133

1;
FOR 0W2]. USE ONLY
BRIEFS

RAHJET ENGINE FOR MISSILE--0NBRA [National Bureau for Aerospace Studies and
Research] and the MATRA [Aeronautical Equipment and Production] Company are
developing, at present, under the sponsorship of the DTEn [Missile Technology
Directorate], a test model of a tactical missile with ranjet propulsion, in-
tended for flight qualification of this "simple" engine (without moving me-
chanical parts). Use of ramjet propulsion on a tactical missile makes it
possible. with a given dimension. to increase its performance or, at a given
range. to reduce its length. But its application to short- and medium-range
missilesamst.meet the basic requirement of low manufacturing cost and it is
necessary to resort to simple technological solutions, even at the cost of

a slight decrease in performance. These are the characteristics of the
"simple" aerobic engine, studied for several years at ONERA. Its performance
will be very superior to the performance of traditional rocket engines. This
engine consises..of the following: An accelerator without nozzle and with
traditional propellant, incorporated in the combustion chamber of the ramjet;
the ramjet's air-tightness is provided, on the air intake side, by hatches
that are ejected at the end of acceleration by simple pressure difference.
One or several fuels, located right within the combustion chamber thus uncovered
and fired naturally during the process. The sole pyrotechnic initial firing
control is sufficient for setting off the chain of various operations. [Text]
[Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 20 Feb 82 p 39] [COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1982]
10042

650: 3100/398

50
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
'IWO TYPES OF ARIANB S CONSIDERED TO PROVIDE WEIR COST

Payload of 4 to 4.5 ﬁons

Paris LIR ET COSMOS in French 30 Jan 82 pp 29-30

:Article by Pierre Langereué: "Future European Launcher: Towards an Ariane 5 Con-
ventional Launcher by 1994“J

iText] _The European talks organized by the CNES [National Center for Space
StudiesJ within the framework of the conference on "Evolution of Launchers in
Europe“ brought together 230 participants representing industries and space agen-
cies (BSA [European Space Agency], CNES. DFVLR LGerman Research and Test Center
nor Air and Space Flight]) of some 12 European cauntries, mostly French and Ger-
man, from 19 through 21 January in Paris (see AIR ET COSMOS, No. 891).

Tne discussions, chaired by Mr Frederic d'Allest, director of the Launchers Divi-
sion of the CNBS and president of Arianespace, made it possible to arrive at a
better definition of the future European launcher, a definition that was strongly
influenced by the CNES, its project for the Ariane 5 launcher having, according

to all indications, been the most thoroughly worked out of the seven projects sub-
mitted, thanks to the studies carried over the last 3 years in France and Germany.

The object of these studies was to arrive at a definition of the future European
launcher that is to replace Ariane 4 by 1994, considering that some 10 years will
be needed to build this new rocket, whose development must therefore get under way
by the beginning of 1984, although there were some differences of opinion as to
this date, the CNES pressing for a decision by 1983 while the BSA expects it
rather by 1985.

The proposed launcher would be a multiple-use type, capable of placing payloads
of 4 to 4.5 tons in geostationary orbit--double the capacity of Ariane 4--and of
some 15 tons in low orbit (400 km, tilted at 30 degrees), or, half the capacity
of the Shuttle, at a per-kilo launch cost 20 to 30 percent less than that of
Ariane 4 for a geostationary orbit launch and 1.5 times that of the shuttle for

a low-orbit launch.

The difficulty lies in optimizing the launcher for two types of missions so dif-
ferent, one from the other, and identifying this far in advance the missions

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mmmmdm)mmb_mmo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

provide a capacity for manned space flights with Ariane 5. This is a fundamental
option for the future, but one that changes completely the nature and the dimen-
sions (technical and financial) of the problem. These points must be settled
during the next several months.

Current logic calls for building the Ariane 5 launcher, the latest version of the
Ariane line, using integrally the first stage of Ariane 4—-with four 66-ton-thrust
Viking motors and 210 tons of storable propellants (UDHB [unsymmetrical dimethyl-
hydrazine] and N204)--topped by a new second stage, 860, carrying 60 tons of
liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen and a new cryogenic motor, HHSO, having greater
thrust (90-100 tons). This new launcher could be used in a two-stage version (57
meters high) for low-orbit missions, with possibly also a 'transfer and attitude-
control module.“ using storable propellants, to handle diversified missions
(transiers, rendevous, etc.), up to an altitude of 1,500 km. A three-stage
version (65 meters high), with a resignitable cryogenic third stage, is envisaged
for geostationary missions. This supplementary "orbital transfer stage." carry~
ing 9 tons of propellants and equipped with the HM7B (6-ton thrust) motor of the
current Ariane launcher, will enable the injection of single (4.5-ton), double
(2x 2~ton), or triple (3x l.2~ton) payloads into geostationary orbit. The laun-
cher should also be able to inject manned vehicles (Hermes mini-shuttle) into low

The cost of developing the Ariane 5 launcher should not exceed 1 to 1.5 times that
of the current launcher, that is, 5.5 to 8 billion francs. But views differ as to
the level of resources Europe could allocate to it over the next decade. Accord-
ing to Michel Bignier, BSA director of space transport systems, no increase can be
foreseen in European space budgets, hence the project to build the new launcher
must be limited to an overall cost of around 10 billion francs over the 10-year
period. Yves sillard, director general of the CNBS, who is more optimistic,
estimates, on the other hand, that France could allocate 1.5-2 billion francs
annually to this program, which she would be financing to the extent of 10-50
percent. This would represent an overall European allocation of 3-5 billion
francs annually, totaling 30-50 billion francs over the 10 years, which would sut-

CDPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

Reusable First Stage
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 6 Feb 82 pp 29-31

[Article by Pierre Langereux: I'F'Vuture European Launcher: Study of a 'Prime Ariane
Ywuhkuwhrkusanﬂ

[Text] With a view to reducing launch costs with the future Ariane 5 European

FOR(Mﬂﬁcaﬁ.USE(NVLY
«30.53: 3.

 

5h

OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

launcher, the cues [National Center for Space Studies] has studied the design of
a "prime Ariane 5' launcher, distinguished from the previous one by the adaptation
of its upper part and by the development of a new first stage that would be re-
usable. This could reduce the launch costs (15,000 Pr/kg in low orbit and 50,000
Fr/kg in geostationary transfer orbit) and increase the launch rate (around

15 launches/year). The basic mission of the prime Ariane 5 launcher would remain
the same as that of Ariane 5, namely, the launching of a ls-ton payload into a
reference low orbit (equatorial circular at an altitude of 200 km) and of a 4.5-
ton payload into geostationary orbit) with a payload volume of 170 m3 (half the
capacity of the Shuttle) and a compatibility with manned vehicles (Hermes mini-
shuttle).

The cost analysis of a twonstage launcher of the Ariane 5 type reveals that the
first stage (with boosters. propellants and operations) represents around so per-
cent of the total launch cost. It is therefore on the recovery and reuse of the
first stage of the future launcher that priority efforts must center.

To reduce these costs. Several approaches are possible. The single-stage launch-
er holds little promise as an approach to the intermediate and long term outlook
for an economical system (to say nothing of its feasibility). The two-stage
launcher offers two possibilities: One is to develop new production methods for
building present stages more economically (recharacterize the new systems, sim-
plifying and redefining them after analysis of the merit of new production
methods); this approach could very well be fitted to the Ariane 5. The Other
possibility is to take an entirely new approach, essentially that of reutiliza-
tion techniques.

A study of the economic factors involved in the operation of a reusable stage,
as compared to that of a non-reusable stage of equivalent performance, shows

the essential condition to be that the number of potential re-uses must be
such as to guarantee that the price per kilo of payload for the total number of
launchings of the reusable stage will be less than the price per kilo of payload
launched by the non-reusable vehicle.

This requires taking into account the addition of the special elements necessary
for the recovery but that reduce the performance of the reusable stage.

The problem of the reusable stage therefore presents entirely different aspects
depending up0n whether it is to be a first or a second stage.

It is very difficult to compensate through re-use for the loss in payload in the
case of a reusable orbital stage, since any additional weight put into this upper
stage entails a direct reduction of payload potential.

0n the other hand, re-use appears to be economically viable for a first stage,
which is less sensitive to variances in performance introduced by the addition of
recovery systems.

Thus, the recovery of the first stage, which holds a priori promise of the most
gain in launch cost, is also less risky than that of the second stage.

55
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to AEROSPATIALB [National Industrial Aerospace company], the number of
potential re-uses could be reasonably expected to be of the order of lo, offering

a good tradeoff between economy and vulnerability of the system!

Two kinds of recovery are possible:

--Partia1 and very primitive recovery, introducing a slight additional cost into
the production of the stage but involving high costs of recovery operations and
restoral to operating condition:

--Complete recovery, offering a priori promise of a substantial gain in operating
costs but involving a sizable developmental cost and difficult techniques for
keeping down the cost of restoral to operating condition.

Two designs of prime Ariane 5 launchers are currently undergoing study by the

CNES. From the standpoint of limiting the developmental cost of the new program,
the most interesting designs are based on recovery (limited or extensive) at sea;
recovery based on return to the launching basis is more costly and considered too

advanced (aerospace vehicle).

Limited Recovery

If only a limited portion of the launch cost is to be recovered. then as cheap a
launcher as possible must be developed, which means reducing the number of motors.

This is the "l—and-l/2 stage' (HLLV [Heavy-Lift Launch vehicle] type) design,
comprising a first stage with two recoverable-at-sea, solid-propellant boosters,
and an outboard non-recoverable fuel tank operating with the fully non-recoverable
second—stage motor. To inject 15 tons into low orbit, such a launcher must have
two lso-ton, solid-propellant boosters, each (separately) developing a thrust of
3,000 KN [kilonewtons] (300 tons) at liftoff; these rockets, which are steerable
by means of vector-steering nozzles (like ballistic missiles), would have a burn
of-125 seconds and a specific impulse of 275 seconds.

To recover these boosters, a simple system could be designed, with an overall
rocket structural weight of 25 tons (structural coefficient 17 percent).

The outboard tank, with a capacity of 7 tons of liquid hydrogen and 90 tons of
liquid oxygen, would weigh 11 tons empty and would have a diameter of 4.2 meters
(like the Ariane second stage). It would be equipped with an HMSO 750-KN (TS-ton)
cryogenic motor having a specific impulse of 425 seconds in a vacuum.

The performance of this launcher could be improved by adding a deployable diffuser
to the nozzle of the HHSO.

The mode of operation would be as follows: After 125 seconds, the two boosters
would be jettisoned (to be recovered by parachute at sea), the burning (and trans-
fer of the propellants of the motor (diffuser deployed) would continue; after 350
seconds, the second stage would enter into operation.

57
ron omcm. use ONLY
The problems to be resolved are: The development of the steerable solid-propellant
rockets (missile techniques) and the fine-tuning of the HHGO.

Extensive Recovery

This is the "cryogenic cluster" design, or bundled-stage rocket (in the Russian
manner), based on maximized re-use of an Ariane 5 launcher's 860 cryogenic stage.
Given its weight and the cost of the first stage, such a design calls for exten-
sive recovery of the first-stage elements, at sea. which poses new problems.

A performance analysis shows that the important parameter is the overall structu-
ral coefficient of the first stage, considering the weight of the recovery system,
since this affects the takeoff weight and hence the size of the auxiliary rockets
used for the first phase of the flight. These solid-propellant boosters cannot
have too substantial a weight if recovery is to remain economical.

Constraints and Advantages

A certain number of functions must be performed, moreover, by any recovery system
at sea (or on land). The attitude of the stage during the reentry phase must be
controlled to minimize thermal stresses and to control stresses owing to decelera-
tion: this attitude control can in some cases be passive depending upon the
aerodynamic and structural characteristics of the stage. An auxiliary braking
system must be provided to slow down the descent beginning at a certain altitude.
in preparation for the splashdown of a weight of that magnitude (around 30 tons).
Lastly. a system must be provided for controlling the setdown trim in the final
phase and at impact, to minimize stresses at that moment and control their points
of application.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

9238
C80: 3100/328 END

58
FOR art-1cm. use ONLY