FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLV

JPRS L/10068
23 October 1981

USSR Report

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 6/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGFTIAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODCCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10068
23 October 1981

USSR REPORT

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT
(P000 6/ 8 1)

CONTENTS

NUCLEAR ENERGY
Modeling Transient and Emergency Modes on Simulation Trainer ........ 1

Performance of Leningrad Nuclear Electric Power Station Reviewed .... 6

Analysis of Equipment Failure at Active Soviet Nuclear Power
Stations mt‘ m-hho Reactors .00...00000000000000...cocooeeooooo 12

Design Measures To Ensure Operability of Nuclear Electric Plants
With M Reactors Under Energemcy Conditions .... 1?

Investigation of Efficiency of Decontaninating ERIK-1000 Coolant
0f ﬁansuranium Elements 0......0I.0...OOIOOOOOOOIOI...00.000000... 21‘

Thermophysical Properties of working Fluids of Gas-Phase
Nuclear. ReSCmr .0...000.000.0000...0..DID-OIOOOOOOOOOO00.0.0000... 27

INwS'I'RIAI. TECHNOImY
Modeling on Computer System for Automated Design of Industrial

RDbOts Ooeoeeeeeeee00.00.ee.I...neocouyeeeeoeeeoooeoeeoe_eeoeeoeeeeo 29

Classification and Technological Criteria for Controlling
IndDStrial Robots 0.0000.oeoI...oeoooooeooooolooeeeoooe0.000.000...

E: E;

Technological MHD Installations and Processes .......................
TESTING AND MATERIALS
Antifriction Coatings on Titanium Alloys Products ..a................ he

Carrying Capacity of Working Blades of Gas-Turbine Digines
Under vibration loads COOOOOOOCCIO..II.O.COOOOOOOOOOOICOOIOOOOOO... 51

- a - [III - USSR - 2].? SET P000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nucnran ENERGY

UDC [621.311.25:621.039].007:658.386
MODELING TRANSIENT AND EMERGENCY MODES 0N SIMULATION TRAINER
Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 9-11

(Article by candidate of the engineering sciences 8.6. Huradyan and engineers
A.A. Ayrapetyan and 0.3. Babadzhanyan. Yerevan Affiliate of the All-Union Scientific
Research Institute for Nuclear Power Stations]

[Text] Unforeseen deviations from the specified operating mode are possible at the
AES's in service because of disruptions in the operation of the production process
systems, equipment or power unit monitoring and control systems [1].

In such situations, which are called nonstandard in the following, the operational
personnel of the power unit should quickly determine the source of the deviation
and take the requisite steps to restore normal operating conditions for the power
unit. Incorrect actions by the operating personnel in nonstandard situations fre—
quently lead to serious emergencies, and for this reason, reaction speed and error
free action on the part of the operators when controlling the operational modes of
AES power units take on special significance, and special teaching and training
centers (UTTs) are being created for then, where these centers are equipped with
trainers and other technical instruction tools.

Faults occur randomly in the systems of ABS power units and constant readiness.on
the part of the operators during their shift work is required for the timely detec-
tion and elimination of the faults, something which also explains the stressful
nature of their activity.

Operators go through training in the simulators in both teaching and testing modes.
In the teaching mode. operator training in the simulator is carried out in accord-
ance with previously composed scenarios, in which specific nonstandard situations
are studied. The entire instructional course program is broken down into topics,
upon the completion of which there is a test of the mastery of the material which
has been covered. Upon completing the training course, operators in the teaching
and training centers go through final certification and receive appropriate skill
certifications [2].

In order to reproduce as completely as possible the work conditions of the opera-
tors on shift duty in the training simulator (the stressful psychological and
physiological state and the constant readiness for intervention in the power unit
control system). it is expedient during testing to simulate the random nature of
the occurrence of defects in the power unit systems.

IIMRCHﬂﬂCIAl.lEﬂ£(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A method of simulating nonstandard situations in trainers for situations which occur
in a power unit, taking into account the random nature of their occurrence, is
treated in the following.

Nonstandard situations in a power unit can be caused both by defects within a power
unit (defects in equipment, in control and monitor systems) and by external effects
(for example, a sudden drop in the electrical load, operator errors in controlling
the power unit, etc.) [3]. As a rule, operators using the power unit monitoring
system do not detect the basic cause of the occurrence of nonstandard situations.
but rather a certain condition of the production process system which is a conse-
quence of the disruptions or deviations which have occurred.

Logic and dynamic mathematical models of a power unit are reproduced in the simula-
tion trainer, where these models are developed on the basis of the calculated de-
sign configurations of the production process systems, including a specified com-
plement of modeled equipment. The locations and nature of the defects being simu-
lated in the trainer are ascertained by means of preliminary analysis in the calcu-
lated design configurations. As a result of doing this work, the set of those para-
meters is determined (the coefficients and variables) for the mathematical models,

a change in which within a specified range (either continuously or in discrete
steps) leads to the reproduction of the nonstandard situations in the trainer. It
is not precluded that it will be necessary to incorporate supplemental logic or
differential equations to introduce a certain class of defects into the mathematical
models of the power unit.

Defects in equipment, operational failures and deviations from specified operating
conditions of the production process systems of a power unit, which are termed
perturbations in the following, can be broken down qualitatively into three classes.

The first class includes perturbations which as a rule do not lead to emergency
situations. For example, the failure of individual controls, transducers, etc.
Such perturbations are most frequently encountered during the process of operating
ABS power units.

The second class includes perturbations which, if there is no operator intervention,
can lead to emergency situations. Examples of such perturbations are the loss of
reactor controls, failures in opening or closing gate valves, in turning pumps on
or off, etc.).

The third class includes perturbations which necessarily produce emergency situa-
tions. For example, a break in the pipes of the primary loop of power units with
VVER's [water-moderated, water-cooled power reactors], the sudden disconnection of
the main circulation pumps. the loss of power by the station, etc. Perturbations
of this kind are encountered comparatively rarely. Since the simulation trainers
are designed for the purpose of instruction, it is apparent that the probability
of occurrence of perturbations must be changed in them as compared to actual power
units.

The occurrence probability for the first class of perturbations can be reduced in
the simulation trainer, since operators can acquire the requisite operational ex-

perience for such situations on an actual power unit. And vice-verse, the proba-
bility of the occurrence of the third class of perturbations must be increased

2
FOR_OWTNCJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USEIONL¥

in the trainers, since their occurrence entails serious consequences, and in this
case, the probability of teaching operators the actions to take in such situations
is small with an actual unit.

The random nature of the occurrence of nonstandard situations can be simulated by
means of a random number generator [4].

A random number generator periodically (for example, with a period equal to the
integration step) generates numbers in an interval (a, b), which is broken down
into two parts (a, c) and (c, b), in which case, the size of the interval (c, b)

is much greater than the size of the interval (a, c). If the random number falls
in the interval (c, b), it is assumed that there is no perturbation. In turn, the
interval (a, c) is broken down into small intervals, the number of which corresponds
to the number of possible perturbations, while the width of the intervals corres-
ponds to the probability of their occurrence. If the random number generator has
produced a number in the interval (a1, c1) 62 (a, c), this means that the perturba-
tion with the corresponding number i has been selected.

As was noted earlier, both discrete and continuous input parameters are included
in the set of perturbations. If a discrete input parameter corresponds to the
interval (at. c1). then when the random number x falls at any point in the range
(a1. c1). the given discrete perturbation is selected. However, if a continuous
variable corresponds to the interval (a1, c1), the probability of the appearance
of values of which likewise changes continuously over this range, than the choice
of the values of the variable can be made in two ways. The input of the values of
the input parameter can be digitized, breaking the interval (a1, c1) down into sub-
intervals, the width of which is proportional to the probability of the appearance
of discrete values of the input parameter. The choice of the values of the input
parameter can likewise be made by means of a certain function of the randomrnumber
x, similar to the distribution function for the probabilities of the appearance of
the values of this parameter.

As an example of the second method, we shall consider the case where with an in-
crease in the value T [T£E(To, T1)]. the probability of its appearance falls off
continuously:

T=.- To cxp |u(.\'—-a.)’].

"he" u=ln(T./7'o)/(c.---a.)’.

The probability of the occurrence of an arbitrary perturbation is:

 

ﬂ—C
.4==;::;.
while the probability of the occurrence of the perturbation corresponding to the
interval (a1, c1) is: a:_"
q": one"
I
[t is apparent that qstls m. where Z is the number of perturbations.
i‘..l

The monitoring process in the simulation trainer using the method considered here
for perturbation input is accomplished as follows.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The specified input mode is set in the trainer and the random ntnber generator is
triggered. The input of an arbitrary perturbation (from the selected set) into the
production process being simulated should be accomplished during a time to, deter-
mined from procedural and psychological considerations. If we assume that there are
n drawings over the time t, then the probability that one arbitrary perturbation
will be selected during this time is

o - 1- (1-0)“

It is apparent that with a sufficiently large n, the probability of selecting any
perturbation tends to unity. ‘

The coordinate of the point c on the segment (a, b) for specified values of to
and the drawing rate R is determined from the following expression:

c - a - (a - hm - (1-0)1’“°l.
where no is the integer part of the expression kto.

The production process parameters begin to change the moment the perturbations are
fed in; the operator should be capable of eliminating the defects and restoring
the normal operating conditions of the power unit through his own actions.

The entire course of the check exercise is recorded and the corresponding printout
is fed out at the end of the exercise.

In AES operational practice, it is possible for not just one emergency (nonstandard)
situation to arise. but a chain of emergency situations, one after the other. Two
methods can be used to simulate such superimposed complex nonstandard situations.

In the first method, the complex nonstandard situation is included as one pertur-
bation in the interval (a, c). In this case, the choice of the complex nonstandard
situation has a probability

in

1-1
of being made, where m is the number of complex perturbations. With the choice

of the i-th complex perturbation, the program is started which specifies the seque-
nce for the input of the simple perturbations.

In the second case, a complex nonstandard situation can be created by repeatedly
feeding in perturbations, turning on the random number generator at a different
frequency for each subsequent step of the drawing (the time segment from one selec-
ted nonstandard situation to the next). In this case, it becomes possible to
create complex perturbations as the need arises. It is apparent that the choice

of the same perturbation in different steps of the drawing cannot be tolerated,

and for this reason, following the choice of a perturbation. the interval (a1, c1)
corresponding to it is added to (c, b).

An advantage of this method is the fact that one can create a rather large number
of complex nonstandard situations with the superimposition of two. three or more

h
IN)! 0FTWC]AI.USEI(NNLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perturbations from the specified set of perturbations. For example, with the
superimposition of three perturbations, the overall number of complex nonstandard
situations will be equal to Z(Z - l)(l - 2).

The time allocated in the trainer for each student in the teaching mode is limited,
and for this reason, the trainees during the training process can in practice study
only a portion of the nonstandard and emergency situations modeled in the simula-
tion trainer. All of the situations provided for simulation can Le reproduced in
the testing modes using the proposed method, i.e., the traineee will sometimes be
confronted by situations with which they are familiar only from theoretical exer-
cises. In conclusion, it must be noted that the method considered here provides for
simulation of operator's work conditions in simulator for on-line power units,
something which allows us to hope for a more objective estimate of their level of
training. Moreover, during the process of training in the simulator, the operators
will also acquire definite psychological and physiological skills when working in
nonstandard situations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. "0b avarii na ABS 'Tri—Hayl-Aylend-Z'" ["On the Accident at 'Three Mile Island'
Nuclear Power Station"], ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA, 1979, Vol 47, No 1.

2. Nuradyan 8.6., Kashirin V.H., "Sisteny podgotovki operatorov AES" ["A Training
Systan for Nuclear Power Station Operators"], ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII
[ELECTRICAL POWER STATIONS], 1981, No l.

3. "Analiz avariy" ["Accident Analysis"], in the book,"Bezopasnost' yadernoy
energetiki" ["Nuclear Power Engineering Safety"], edited by J. Past and L.
Weaver, Moscow, Atomizdat, 1980.

a. "Shornik nauchnykh programm na FORTRAN!" ["A Collection of Scientific Programs
in FORTRAN"], Moscow, Statistika Publishers, 1974, No 1.
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1981.

8225
C50: 8164/1824-8

5
FOR OFFICIAL use onur
FOI.OFINC1Al.lﬂﬂE(MVLY

UDC 621.311.25:621.039.004
PERFORMANCE OF LENINGRAD NUCLEAR ELECTRIC POUER STATION REVIEWED
Moscow BLEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 6-9
[Article by engineer A.P. Yeperin, Leningradskaya ABS]

[Text] The 1970's were marked by the rapid exoansion of a new area
in the field of power engineering. This new area was born in the Soviet Union in

1954 with the start of the first nuclear electric power station in the world in
Ohninsk.

A widescale program of nuclear power station construction in the European region

of the USSR was planned through the directives of the 24th and 25th CPSU Congresses.
An even more ambitious program of ABS construction was approved at the 26th CPSU
Congress.

The progress in the development of our nation's nuclear power engineering is linked
to no small extent with the creation of the Leningradskaya Nuclear Electric Power
Station imeni v.1. Lenin.

The construction of the station was started in 1967, while the main unit with an
electrical capacity of 1,000 MU having an RBHK-IOOO reactor and two 500 NH turbine
generators was brought on line in December of 1973. In July of 1975, the second
unit of the station with the same reactor went on line at the industrial load.

In 1975, the construction of the second stage of the station was started: the third
and fourth power sets with capacities of 1,000 MB each. The third power unit was
placed in service in December of 1979, while on February 9th, 1981; the creators

of the Leningradskaya ABS (LABS) marked a new victory: the fourth power unit was
brought on line at the industrial load. The socialist obligations assumed by

the collectives of builders. installers, alignment workers as well as operational
workers in honor of the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
were successfully completed with this event. The Leningradskaya ABS became one of
the largest nuclear power stations in the world when the fourth unit was brought

on line.

The operation of the first and subsequent units of the station has made it possible
to accumulate invaluable experience which was used in the design of other units
and nuclear electric power stations with RBHK [channel type, graphite moderated
high power] reactors. In this case, deficiencies were found in the project plan
and design solutions. and ways of eliminating them were determined. Custom-made

6
FOR OFINCJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
it possible to begin the design of the next series of AES's with RBHK reactors.
but now with a capacity 50 percent higher (the RBHK-lSOO). In this case, the core
dimensions of the reactor will remain practically the same as for the 1,000 MW
reactor (the RBHK-lOOO). This has become possible because of the development of

a new type of fuel cassette with heat exchange intensifiers. which have been
tested successfully at the Leningradskaya ABS.

system (SUZ). which incorporates three systems of automatic controllers for the
overall reactor power and a system of local automated controllers and protection
to maintain the'power within the specified range in individual regions of the reac-
tor core. A SFKRE system (physical monitoring of the liberated energy distribution)

This system, as a part of the complex with the "Skala" centralized monitoring sys-
tem, which is designed around specialized computers, continuously performs calcula-
tions to determine the thermal engineering reliability of each production process
channel of the reactor. The operator who controls and monitors reactor operation
receives continuous data from this system in the form of light signaling and print-
out charts. This makes it possible to perform a timely analysis of changes in the

drical case. Thus, the cladding seal BlaLls monitoring system, as part of a com-
plex with the loading and unloading machine, makes it possible to maintain the
purity in the circulation loop through the reactor and provide for a normal radia-

FOR 0F?1(JAI.[EHE(MVLV
FOR ()I-‘l-‘ﬂ 1M. USE ONLY

In case of an emergency shutdown of a unit, the designers and project planners have
provided systems for screaming the reactor and subsequently cooling the core. In
this case, special attention has been devoted to the reliability of the electrical
power supply for the station shutdown mechanisms which participate in these opera-
tions. Besides the traditional ways of boosting the electrical power supply relia-
bility for the station, a diesel electric power generator is additionally installed
which is started automatically by the actuation signals for the emergency protection
aMpmuusdunkﬂpwufmthrﬂnuemwrmwhquM.

Despite the fact that the water flowing through the reactor core has a relatively
high radioactivity, this nonetheless is no threat to the safety of the servicing
personnel. Such a situation is assured by the fact that all of the production pro-
cess systems with the radioactive coolant are made as tight systems and housed in
special protective boxes. Possible leakage of the radioactive water is localized
by means of a system for trap water collection and processing, as well as intent-
ional leaks. The water which is processed and purified by this system is returned
to the production process loop.

The liquid radioactive wastes which appear during the process of cleaning and re-
processing the production process loop water are directed via a special route into
special tanks for further reprocessing and subsequent burial of the highly radio-
active residue. The atmospheric purity of the ambient air basin and the air in
the rooms is maintained by means of production process and overall ventilation ex-
change systems, the operational mode of which provides for clean air delivery to
attended rooms and exhaust with subsequent purification in special filters from
unattended rooms. Following the filters, the air is ejected through a ventilation
pipe 150 meters high.

Despite the reliability of the steps taken to protect the servicing personnel and
the environment against radiation, there is an automated dosimetric monitoring sys-
tem at the station for the gamma radiation level, as well as the concentration of
radioactive gases and aerosols in the most important production rooms and in the
air ejected through the ventilation stack. The cleanliness of the wall surfaces
of the rooms and the production process equipment is checked periodically as well
as the presence of radioactivity in the atmospheric air, the water basin, soil.
vegetation and foodstuffs. The monitoring system confirms the reliability of the
adopted protective measures.

Operational experience with the first two units of the station, and the increase
in the stringency of the requirements placed on assuring the safety of AES's and
protecting the environment, as well as the achievements of science and engineering,
have necessitated new design solutions for individual equipment and production
process questions in the design of the third and fourth units of the station.

All of this was responsible for a number of special features of the third and fourth
units as compared to the RBHK-lOOO reactors which had gone on line previously:

—-The modular layout of the main and auxiliary installations and production process
systems, which makes it possible to resolve questions of repairing the equipment
and fittings in a nonoperating unit relatively simply and preclude errors by
personnel during changeovers;

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The improvement of the system for containing the products from a loss of seal
accident by containers and tanks in emergencies, related to pipe breakages in the
multiple forced circulation (HPTa) loop:

brought about a marked change in the layout of the main building, the systems housed
in it and have predetermined specific features of the start~up and alignment work
as well as the physical and power starts of a unit.

A major features of starting a reactor of the third and fourth units is the fact
that two percent enriched fuel is used in the initial charge of all fuel rods in
them for the first thme in reactors of this type.

rods and the supplemental moderators (DP's), as well as setting up a full scale
load while meeting the requirements of nuclear safety.

central cavity of a fuel cassette as an additional means of compensating for
excess reactivity in the physical start program. In contrast to all of the
previous RBHK-lOOO reactors. the charging of the third unit reactor took place
with water present in the production process channel (TK's) of the multiple
forced circulation loop.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculations based on two-dimensional programs; experiments were run to determine

reactivity effects in order to obtian data for running three-dimensional computa-
tional programs.

A set of start-up and alignment operations and experiments was performed during
the power start period, which made it possible to check and more precisely specify
the characteristics and operational modes of the equipment, the production process
systems at various power levels, including the neutron physics characteristics of

brickwork, as well as effects caused by activation and reactor radiation, i.e.,
check the quality of the biological shieldings; the radio-chemical composition of
the coolant for all loOpa; the radiation status in the rooms and on site. as well
as the dynamic characteristics of the unit. The control point settings for the
protection, interlocking and signaling were also made more precise during this
same period; the safety valves and the automatic control systems were adjusted;

as well as the pre-assembly examination of the pumping equipment. fittings. elec-
trical equipment, etc.) and their self-sacrificing labor made it possible to
bring the fourth unit of the station on line within a curtailed timefrane. The

months after the physical start and only 1.5 months after the physical start of
the fourth unit.

The station staff finished 1980, the concluding year of the 10th Pive~Year Plan,
with good results:

-—The five-year plan for electrical power output was fulfilled on November 6,
1980, and the plan for power generation was fulfilled on November 17, 1980;

r—The annual plan for electrical power output was fulfilled on December 18 and
that for power generation on December 20;

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--'l'he installed capacity utilization factor was 73 percent, despite the fact that
the installed capacity of the third power unit was mastered in the first half-year
following start-up;

--The production cost per KHH of electrical power was reduced by 14.1 percent and
amounted to 0.797 kopeck/KHH.

Based on the results of the All-Union Socialists Competition of 1980, the station
staff was awarded the challenge Red Banner of the CPSU Central Comittee. the USSR
Council of Ministers, the All-Union Central Trade Union Council and the Komsonol
Central Comittee, as well as the memorial medal "For High Work Quality and Effic-
iency in the 10th Five-Year Plan", which was entered on the All-Union Board of
Honor of the USSR Exhibition of National Economic Achievaents.

The Leningradskaya ABS ineni V.I. Lenin has become the major supplier of electric
power to the Leningrad Power Administration system. The plan for electric power
generation in 1981 is 22.6 billion KHH. By the end of the year, the total anount
of electrical power generated bv the station from the time it was started will
reach 100 billion KW“.

Thu successes of the staff of the Leningradsksya ABS imeni V.I. Lenin once again
underscore the correctness of the party and goverment policy related to the further
development of power engineering in our nation and inspire confidence that the tasks
ahead in this field will be carried out successfully.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1981.

8225
C50: 8144/1826—3

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lNJR‘OI1ﬂC1AL.U§I§CNVLY

UDC 621.039.58'68

ANALYSIS OF EQUIPMENT FAILURE AT ACTIVE SOVIET NUCLEAR POHER STATIONS HITH VVER-440
REACTORS

Moscow ATOMNAYA ENERGIYA in Russian Vol 50. No 6. Apr 81 (manuscript received
14 Nov 80) pp 248-250

[Article by F. Ya. Ovchinnikov, L. H. Voronin. B. B. Baturov. A. A. Abagyan and
S. A. Lesnoy]

[Text] One of the major trends in development of nuclear power in the Soviet Union
is construction of nuclear electric facilities with water-cooled water~moderated
power reactors [VVER). The first power facility with a VVBR-ZIO was put into in-
dustrial operation in 1964 at the Novocherkassk Nuclear Electric Plant. A large
series of power facilities with vvrn-aao reactors has been put into operation since
1971 in the USSR and several other nations (East Germany. Bulgaria. Finland. Czecho-
slovakia) with technical assistance from the Soviet Union.

Operation has confirmed the correctness of engineering decisions in design develop-
ments, as well as conformance of the actual working characteristics of power facili-
ties to the projected levels. Operational experience has also enabled determina-
tion of ways to further improve equipment and technological systems in accordance
with increasing requirements for safety and reliability of nuclear electric plant
operation.

Safety problems for normal working conditions can be considered completely solved.
However. for emergency conditions these problems need further research. Interna-
tional experience in the development of nuclear power shows that the very concept
of "safety" and the methods of achieving it are undergoing continuous changes in
connection with massive construction of nuclear power facilities and the search

for rational. technically feasible means of ensuring safety. VVER reactors of

the first generation had shielding and localizing systems corresponding to the
limited scale of a maximum credible accident that was accepted at the time. Con-
siderable emphasis was placed on the factor of keeping the nuclear electric plant
far from populated areas. The safety systems in power facilities with unified
VVER-hho reactors that are now being introduced are designed for counteracting

more extensive damage up to and including a break in the pipelines of the main
circulation loop with maximum diameter for which the consequences of an accident
are potentially more serious. Obviously it is very difficult to solve this problem
by technical means alone, i. e. by using hardware to meet all safety requirements
in building a nuclear electric plant that does not subject the surrounding environ-
ment to at least a slight risk of contamination. All efforts in the area of safety

12
FOR(NﬂﬂK]Al.US€(NWLY

should be directed toward reducing the degree of risk. Such efforts will be fruit-
ful only upon condition of inseparable combination of technical safety facilities
with a high level of organization in utilizing these facilities.

Experience in the operation of nuclear electric plants throughout the world shows
that while we are developing and constantly improving hardware for preventing and
localizing large accidents (up to and including instantaneous transverse rupture
of maximum-diameter pipelines), we need to be just as serious in working out and
perfecting methods and means of preventing and clearing up so-called "minor acci-
dents." In large part. these methods and means are the same as those aimed at
ensuring the reliability of nuclear power plants as sources of energy. since any
disruptions in the operation of mafor equipment that are due to failures and de—
fects lead to power limitations for purposes of preventing deviations of the param-
eters of the facility beyond safe limits. In other words. to ensure safety. a
reduction in reliability predetermines the necessity of placing constraints on
the working conditions of a facility.

Comprehensive in-depth analysis of equipment operation to find the weakest links

in technological systems of nuclear electric plants and improve their reliability
has been a matter of course since the startup of the first VVER power facilities.
Since 1977. a unified system has been in operation in the USSR for collecting data
on failures and defects of nuclear electric plant equipment. The acquisition of
reliable information enables isolation of the most typical failures that lead to
emergency outages. unplanned down time and reduced economic efficiency of nuclear
electric plants. Timely determination of the causes of equipment failures and
defects (especially for the equipment of systems having to do with the safety of

a nuclear electric plant) means that effective work can be done on improving this
equipment from the design stage to final operational use. For the sake of'conveni—
ence of such analysis and evaluation of the influence of failures and defects on
the operational reliability and safety of nuclear electric plants. equipment has
been divided into groups in accordance with functional designation. The table
shows the spectrum of distribution of failures of equipment by percentages as typi-
cal of power facilities with VVER-AAO reactors.

In analyzing the information, consideration was taken of all kinds of failures.

both complete and partial, that lead or may lead to limitations in the operation

of major equipment. as well as those failures that do not affect normal operation

of power facilities due to the secondary nature of equipment. or built-in redundancy.
The table shows that 11.3: of the failures pertain to equipment of the primary
circuit having the greatest significance from the standpoint of ensuring reliability
and safety of the nuclear electric plant. Failures of reactor equipment. including
the control system. amount to ~61..failures of steam generators 3.51. and of pipe-
lines—-less than 11. This shows the fairly high level of reliability of the main
circulation loop. The remaining 88.7% of failures and defects pertains mainly

to equipment that is not specific to nuclear electric plants and is typical of
conventional power facilities.

A large number of failures (-381) pertain to monitoring and control instrumenta-

tion. However, this has almost no effect on the reliability of the power facility
since it most frequently involves instruments and communication lines with adequate
backup. Analysis of the statistics of equipment failures for 1977-1979 showed that

13
FO!!0FFNJA1.USE(NVLY
Primary Circuit Equipment:

INJI.0511CJAL USIICNQLY

Equipment Group

reactor equipment
steam generator equipment
main circulation pumps
main shutoff gates
pipelines
For the Group
Turbine-Unit Group:
turbines
condensers
steam-superheater separators
regenerative heaters
For the Group
Pump Equipment of All Kinds
Fittings (Except for Main
Shutoff Gates
Blower Equipment
Compressor Equipment
Electrical Equipment:
turbogenerators
electric pump drives
electric drives of control
assemblies
breakers, disconnects
For the Group
Monitoring and Control
Instrumentation:
primary instruments
secondary instruments
communication lines
For the Group

TOTAL

 
    
 
  
 

Distribution of Failures and Defects of Equipment in Nuclear Electric Plants
Hith VVER Power Facilities According to Functional Groups
and Individual Kinds of Equipment

Number of Failures
per Unit per Year

 
 

 
 
 
 
   
   
     

     
   
 
 

a o a

ﬂOO~ws~
o
“O‘DV5‘U

a-o

  
 
   
   
     

     

.—
Nt-UINNO

mu~o~o-c

 
   
 
 

 

  
 
    

     
  
 
 
 
 
  
   

as.
U‘HN

NO U0“

 
     

UN.-
u—QQ O‘VD

p.-

the most characteristic defects are welding flaws (up to 321) and hidden flaws

in materials (up to 282).

Failures and damage through fault of servicing personnel

amount to less than 71. which is evidence of a rather high skill level.

To work out requirements for equipment reliability (which are especially necessary
on the stages of design and manufacture), reliability indices are calculated on

the basis of statistical data on equipment failure.
for rcstorable items is the parameter of failure rate m(t).

One such very important index
Because of the com-

paratively small volume of the statistical sample, only point values of w(t) have

been obtained. withOut estimation of the confidence level.

Nevertheless. these

1h

FOR 0F11C1A1.US£¢DNLY
FOR OFFNJAL.USE1)NLY

values of m(t) establish a lower limit of reliability and can be used as primary
normalized data in the design. manufacture and utilization of equipment. For
example m(t) in hr'1 for the reactor is (1.6-2.1)olO‘5, for the steam generators
-—8.2'10‘5. for the reactor control system--6.2-10'”. for the main circulation
pump-—2.6°10's. for the turbine-8-10’5. Comparison of these data with those avail—
able for equipment of non-Soviet nuclear electric plants shows that they are com-
pletely comparable if consideration is taken of the fact that ordinarily only total
failures are considered in calculations of w(t) in non-Soviet practice.

The given information shows that failures and flaws apply mainly to subsidiary
equipment. or to auxiliary systems of major equipment. Therefore these is no re-
duction in the reliability and safety of the nuclear electric plant as a whole.
This is evidenced by the stable and high level of the coefficient of utilization
of installed power of vvra-aao power facilities: in 1970 this index was 72.62,
in I978——80.7Z. in l9?9--73.8z.

We point cut that the optimum coefficient of utilization of installed power for
power facilities with VVER—Aéo reactors in the USSR is 801, which corresponds to
7000 hours of operation of the equipment at rated power per year. This is deter-
mined by estahlished periodicity and standards of duration of repairs of major
equipment (reactor equipment, turbines and so on).

Analysis of the structure of the coefficient of utilization of installed power
shows that underuse of installed capacities associated with unplanned repairs and
equipment defects. i. e. due to down time having a direct relation to reliability
and safety of the nuclear electric plant. amounts to no more than 3.71. whereas
this index was 82 in the early years of operation of VVBR-aéo reactors. This is
evidence of an appreciable improvement in the reliability of major equipment over
the elapsed period.

Continued work in the following major areas will ensure retention of the attained
reliability level and further improvement:

perfection of equipment design;

improving the quality of the equipment during manufacture and the quality of in-
stallation as a basis for operational safety and reduction of the probability of
failures and damage. Programs of quality control have been developed and imple-
mented at the manufacturing plants for major equipment. All equipment arriving

at the nuclear electric plant goes through a pre-inatllation entry inspection.
improvements are being made in the technology of installation and welding processes.
and in methods and equipment for quality control on welding jobs;

checking the condition of equipment during utilization with application of up-
to—date methods for early detection of defects;

improving and increasing the technical level of utilization;
improving the efficacy of supervision for observance of directive and normative-

tcchnical documents in the process of manufacture. installation and utilization
of nuclear electric plant equipment;

15
ron omcut use onu
IN)! OWTWCJAI.USHE(MNLY

improving the skill of personnel working in the nuclear electric plant, and syste-

matic personnel safety training in accordance with specially developed compre-
hensive programs.

0n the whole. experience in utilization of WBR-440 power facilities brings us
to the conclusion that they are sufficiently highly reliable and safe.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Atounaya energiya". 1981

6610
(:80: 8144/1354

16
FOR 0mCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR1MHHCJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 621.039.58

DESIGN MEASURES TO ENSURE OPERABILITY OF NUCLEAR ELECTRIC PLANTS "III! M “ACTORS
UNDER EMERGENCY CONDITIONS

Moscow ATOMNAYA ENERCIYA in Russian Vol 50, No b. Apr 81 (manuscript received
14 Nov 80) PP 251-254

[Article by 1. Ya. Yemel'yanov. S. P. Kuanetsov and Yu. H. Charkashov] '

[Text] A number of advantages of REM! uranium-graphite boilingdwater channel reac-
tors have brought about their extensive use in nuclear power in the USSR [Ref. 1].
RBHK reactors are characterized in particular by high reliability thanks to moni-
toring and control of parameters of individual process channels. and also replace-
ment of the fuel assembly without shutting down the reactor.

In successful operation at the present time are seven power facilities with RBHK
reactors having [000 H" of electric power; a program has been worked out and is
being implemented on constructing and utilizing several more reactors. Design,
construction and utilization experience has enabled us to go on to construction

of the RBHK-1500--a channel reactor of the sane design and dimensions with power
of 1500 HHe.

 

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the circulation loop of the RINK-1000: l--reactor;

2--separator; 3-main circulating pump; b—-1evel regulator; 5--preseure regulator;

6-—turbogenerator; 7-wster tank; 8--punpe of self-contained emergency reactor

cooling system (BRCS); 9--pUIped storage unit of sacs; lO--fast-action valve of

BRCS; ll--pressurized collector; lZ--diatributing group collector; 13-rncs col-
lector; [6-flow limiters

17
FINICHNNC]A1.USE!MVLY
FIMICHHWCIAL USE:CHﬂlY

The fundamental heating arrangement of the RINK-1000 (Fig. l) is typical of one-
loop boiling-water reactors. The coolant is circulated through the reactor by
eight main circulating pumps. two of which are backup units. Steam separation

is done in four separators of gravity type. and the saturated steam then goes to
the turbines and to the intermediate steam superheaters. Two turbogenerators are
installed on each power unit with RBMK-IOOO reactor.

The RINK parameters are monitored by a centralized control system based on computer
equipment. The system provides operating personnel with visual and recorded in-
formation on the operation and condition of components of the structure.

Energy distribution through the volume of the core is monitored by a physical con-
trol system that includes radial and heightwise intrareactor sensors. An algorithm
for calculating the power of all process channels with respect to discrete reference
points. i. e. bv channels with sensors, is realized in the PRIZHA program for the
plant computer that is part of the centralized control system. The program uti-
lizes characteristics of radial energy distribution obtained by a program of physi-
cal calculation on an external computer. and also the position of the control rods
at the same instant of time when the physical calculation is done. These data

are fed to the plant computer via punched tape.

The power of the process channels is periodically calculated upon order by the
operator. The results are used to correct the energy distribution. On-the-spot
control of energy distribution is done by operational personnel directly in accor-
dance with the readings of the intrareactor sensors.

The distribution of coolant flowrate through the process channels is monitored

by flowmeters installed at the inlet to each channel. The reactor design provides
for on-the-spot control of the distribution of water flowrate through the process
channels by changing the position of the channel regulating and cutoff valves.

The capability of measuring and controlling the water flowrate in each process
channel is a distinguishing feature of the RBHK; this capability ensures the re-
quired maneuverability of the distribution of reserves before a heat exchange crisis
upon a change in the power of the reactor or radial energy distribution.

Leaky fuel elements and loss of integrity of channel pipes are detected in ample
time by systems for monitoring gas tightness of fuel element cladding and the integ-
rity of each process channel pipe.

The reactor control system is designed with consideration of requirements of nuclear
and radiation safety. For example, local automatic controller and local scram
systems are provided to prevent unsteady deformations of energy distribution. For
purposes of maintaining power conditions of operation of the facility when complete
shutdown of the reactor is not required, provisions are made in the reactor control
system for rapid controllable power reduction in some cases. in addition to the
conventional facilities for complete damping of the chain reaction. These provi-
sions include disconnection of some main circulating pumps, reduction of the water
level in the separators. reduction of feed water flowrate. partly disconnecting

or dumping the load by turbogenerators in the unit, increasing the energy intensity
of the fuel elements and the like. The various types of emergency protection are
actuated by signals of equipment malfunction.

18

INJR!OFIWCJAI.IJSEI(HQLY
FKMI(MHH(JAI.IRSEI(MVLY

To study emergency conditions. a mathematical model was developed including equa—
tions of kinetics. hydrodynamics and heat exchange. and algorithms for operation

of equipment and systems for automatic control of nuclear electric plant parameters.
Comparison of the results of calculations done with the aid of the model. with

data on individual dynamic processes that have occurred in operating nuclear elec-
tric plants showed that the model satisfactorily describes the dynamics of a power
facility. Some emergency conditions. mainly involving a transition to natural
circulation. were studied on special model stands.

This paper discusses the results of investigation of emergency conditions caused
only by total de-energizing of the power facility. disruptions in the feed water
supply system. and breaks in large pipelines of the circuit.

When the facility is de-energized. emergency equipment operates that scrams the
reactor; early in the accident. the core is cooled by main circulating pumps that

do not immediately stop. and then by natural circulation of the coolant. For re-
liable cooling of the reactor during this period, the main circulating pumps must
have fairly large flywheel masses. and for this purpose special flywheels are in-
corporated into their design. A diesel generator facility is automatically switched
in to supply emergency feed pumps, the pumps of the emergency reactor cooling system
and the like, that are necessary for carrying off the residual energy release in

the reactor.

The major parameters of the power fa-
cility in the state of de-energizing
are shown in Pig. 2. At the beginning
of the transient process, Q is somewhat
higher than G, i. e. in this period

the average subcritical power reserve
through the reactor is less than the
rated value. However. calculations
show that the reserve to the heat ex-
change crisis in the most stressed
channels does not fall below unity.
Thus it can be stated that in the early
period of accidental de-energizing

the reactor parameters do not go beyond
safe limits.

 

Fig. 2. Emergency state of de-energizing Within 30-35 a after de-energizing

of the_facility: l--relative neutrgn of the main circulating pumps of the
power N; 2-—relative thermal power Q; power facility. the core is being cooled
3--re1at1ve coolant flowrate G; 4--level by natural circulation of the coolant.
H in the separators; 5—-pressure P in and the stability and intensity of

the separators this circulation depend in large mea—

sure on several factors such as the
design of the loop. the pressure therein. change in temperature and flowrate of
the feed water and so on. To determine the reliability of core cooling in the
mode of natural circulation. a set of experiments was done both on the techno-
logical model stand. and on the reactors of the first and third power units at

19
FOR OFTﬁCJAL USIiCHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Leningrad Nuclear Electric Plant. Steady-state and transient conditions were
studied with various parameters influencing the development and intensity of natural

circulation. As a result, the parameters were determined that ensure reliable
cooling of the reactor with natural circulation.

system of feed water supply have enabled determination of the conditions of safe
operation of the facility, and elaboration of requirements for the equipment and
for action by operational personnel in such emergency situations.

state there are slight and even changes in technological parameters. and therefore
it is not required to introduce any auxiliary protection of the equipment. To
bring the reactor power into line with the altered feed water flowrate it is suf-
ficient to reduce the power manually by adjusting the controller setting. When
two or more feed pumps are disconnected at the same time. the emergency protection

ensures safety of the facility by automatically reducing the reactor power to a
safe level.

The transient process with disconnec-
tion of two feed pumps and operation
of emergency protection in accordance
with a signal of reduction in the flow-
rate of feed water by 251 of the current
value (Pig. 3) is characterized by
2'0 :0 w 5' u n u the following: anautomatic regulator
time 3 reduces reactor power to 601 of the
' rated level with slight overcontrol;
Pig. 3. Emergency state of disconnection maximum deviation of the level in the
of two feed pumps (l-S, see Pig._2; 6-- separators is observed within 50 8.
relative flowrate of feed water Gnoe) and amOunts to 150 an, after which
the level is recovered; the steam pres-
sure in the separators is maintained at a level close to the nominal value by means

          

'll.‘ ' '0 70

rate reduction below 502 of the current value. In this state. the water supply

to the circulation loop by emergency feed pumps is ~10! of the nominal level; these
pumps are energized within 10-20 3 after cessation of the supply of feed water.
Studies have shown that cessation of the feed water flow leads to a reduction of
the level in the separators. This can cause undesirable trapping of steam on the
downcomers of the loop. cavitation cutoff of main circulating pumps. and impediments
to the development of natural circulation. To prevent the level from falling in
the separators, the main circulating pumps are disconnected. which slows down the
rate of reduction of steam content in the core and outlet lines of the reactor.

As a result. less water is required from the separators to replace the steam in

the circulation loop.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The state of cessation of the supply of
feed water with disconnection of the
main circulating pumps is analogous

to the state of de—energizing of the
facility. which has been found to be
safe. The main parameters of the power
unit in this state are shown.in Fig. 4.
Analysis shows the following:

the rate of reduction in thermal power
is greater than the rate of falloff

in water flowrate throughout the entire
transient process, which is evidence

of reliable cooling of the core;

 

time, s

Fig. 4. Emergency state of disconnection maximum drop in the level in the sepa—
of all four feed pumps (1-5, see Fig. 2) rators is observed within 75 s. and

then the level begins to rise; the
steam pressure in the separators decreases at the beginning of the process, then
becomes somewhat higher than nominal. and after 72 s the pressure stabilizes at
the nominal level.

instantaneous cessation of the supply of feed water accompanied by disconnection

of the main circulating pumps. Therefore the main circulating pumps are disconnected
with a delay of ~9 s after emergency protection operates in power facilities with
RBMK reactors upon a signal of reduction in the feed water flowrate below 502 of

the current value. The core is cooled down by natural circulation of the coolant.

It is assumed that the most serious emergency situations can arise when large pipe-
lines of the power facility are ruptured. The design provides for technical facili-
ties that prevent discharge of the steam-gas mixture into the service areas. and
especially beyond the limits of the nuclear electric plant. Host typical damage

to the circulating loop is breaks in small tubing (drains. impulse lines and the
like). Rupture of a large pipeline is extremely improbable. Experiments on full-
scale specimens have shown that a leak is possible in pipelines with diameter

of ~800 mm at a pressure of 8.5-9.5 HPa if fatigue cracks are ~75: of the wall
thickness in depth. and ~b70 mm long [Ref. 2]. Inspection of the metal guarantees
that there will be no sudden rupture of the pipeline. since the critical dimensions
of defects are large. and they should be detected in planned shutdowns of the fa-
cilities. During inspection. the metal is examined and checked by special tech-
niques (ultrasonic flaw detection. acoustic emission). In spite of this, the de-
sign of the nuclear electric plant provides for measures to ensure safety in case
of instantaneous transverse rupture of the largest pipeline.

At the initial instant the leakage is about 6 metric tons per second in the case
of complete instantaneous rupture of a pipe 300 mm in diameter, and ~60 metric
tons per second for such rupture of a pipe 900 mm in diameter. As a result of
analysis of emergency situations. two independent signals have been selected for
operation of emergency reactor protection: a rise in pressure in the rooms where
the pipelines of the loop are accommodated. and a reduction of the level in any

21
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

separator to a value that exceeds
its deviation from the nominal
under transient conditions.

The most dangerous pipeline rup-

ture is one on the pressure side

of a main circulating pump, since

this instantaneously cuts off

the supply of coolant to the

channels of the emergency half

of the reactor. It is just such

a hypothetical accident that

has dictated the fast-action

emergency reactor cooling system

(ERCS). its maximum capacity
(about 1.1 metric tons per second)

Fig. 5. Change of pressure in RBHK-IOOO circu-

lation loop upon rupture of a pressurized col- and minimum time Of discharge

lector 900 mm in diameter: l-—pressure in Of all the coolant from the ener-

, __ gency loop (10-12 s). Fig. 5
separators. 2 pre:::f:c::rthe pressurized shows the pressure change in

 

rupture of 900 mm pressurized collector of a main circulating pm!» Coolant from
the ERCS is fed to the channels of this half to prevent damage to the fuel elenents.

Water from the EROS is sent to each distributing group collector, and to avoid
nonproductive discharge of the water through the cross section of the break in

the pressurized collector, check valves are provided at the inlet to the distrib-
uting group collector. The ERCS consists of two subsystems (see Fig. l): the
main subsystem with pumped-storage unit. and a prolonged cooling subsystem with
special pumps and tanked water reserves. The cooling water is supplied from bot-
tles. and after they are emptied the water is supplied by pumps to the BROS of

loss of integrity of the circuit.
FOR Ol-TICMI. USE ONLY

which is not surpassed even in the case of complete instantaneous rupture of the
largest pipeline. thanks to special condensation devices of the bubble: type, a
system of bypass valves, sprinklers and heat exchangers.

REFERENCES

l. Dollezhai'. N. A., Yemel'yanov, 1. Ya.. 'Xsnal'nyy yademyy energeticheskiy
reaktor" [Channel-Type Nuclear Power Reactor]. Moscow. Atonizdat. 1980.

2. Rivkin. Ye. Yu. et al.. TEPLOENERGBTIKA, No II, 1978, p 71.
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Atomaya energiya", [981

6610
(ISO: 811010/13510

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.029.536.141.

INVESTIGATION OF EFFICIENCY OF DECONTAHINA'I‘ING ”MK-[000 COOLANT 0P TRANSURANI'UH
ELEMENTS

Moscow ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA in Russian Vol 50, No 6. Apr 81 (manuscript received
11 Feb 80) pp 274-275

[Article by A. H. Vorob'yev and N. P. Starcdonovs]

[Text] For purposes of radiation safety at nuclear electric plants of all types.
both Soviet and non-Soviet. provisions are made for purifying the water coolant

of radionuclides. The bypass purification facilities at nuclear electric plants
are intended for extracting products of corrosion. soluble salts and radionuclides
from the purging water. In nuclear electric plants with RBMK reactors, 200 cu. m
of water per hour is purified with total volume of the multiple forced circulation
loop of ~1200 m3. The water is taken off from the pressure side of the main circu-
lating pumps. and after appropriate treatment and cooling to loo-50°C it is sent

to a purification facility, where it goes in sequence through mechanical (hydraulic
perlite), mixed cationic-anionic exchange (RU-2. AV-l7) and trapping filters. The
process includes monitoring for pH, hardness. CI' content. products of corrosion
(iron. copper). specific electrical conductivity and content of some radionuclides
before and after purification. The purified coolant is heated to 270'!) and returned
to the circuit.

In addition to radionuclides of corrosion origin and fission products. the water
of the multiple forced circulation loop may be contaminated with a—emitters that
are formed as a consequence of slight surface contamination of the fuel elements
with uranium or migration of radionuclides from defective fuel elements. Accumu-
lation of transuranium elements in nuclear fuel was studied in Ref. 1, 2. It was
shown that sequential capture of neutrons in the fuel forms a large quantity of
isotopes of plutonium. americium and curium that are quite dangerous from the radia-
tion standpoint. For example. 19 kg of 2”mp. ~700 kg of isotopes of plutonium.
>100 kg of isotopes of americium and >2 kg of curium are formed after a three-
ycnr run in 80 metric tons of fuel with 3.31 “50 enrichment at a reactor power
of 1000 MW [Ref. 2].

Unfortunately, we have been unable to locate any published data on the coefficients
of diffusion of transuranium elements from intact and leaky fuel elements. However.
this quantity can be roughly estimated by considering the similarity of properties

of lanthanides and actinides. For example, if the relative diffusion of iodine and

21:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cesium from leaky fuel elements is taken as 1. then diffusion is equal to 10'” for
cerium [Ref. 3]. In case of severe loss of integrity of fuel elements and contact
between fuel and coolant, there may be a considerable increase in this parameter.

in emergency situations with fuel meltdown. o-emitters may play a decisive part

in raising the radioactivity of the coolant and formation of the radiation environ-
ment at the nuclear electric plant and its surroundings. In this connection. coolant
purification takes on special significance.

To study the effectiveness of bypass decontamination with respect to transuranium
elements. the content of 23’“p, plutonium isotopes. 2“All and “’01: was determined
in the coolant before and after purification. The studies were done in different
periods of operation of the nuclear electric plant. The “’Np content was deter-
mined by a y—spectrometric method using a semiconductor Ge(Li) detector. Identifi—
cation was done simultaneously with respect to five peaks (210, 228, 278. 316 and
334 keV) . Americ ium and curium were determined by radiochemical methods based

on precipitation on bismuth phosphate after the plutonium had been oxidized to

the hexavalent state. Reduced plutonium (III) or (IV) was then also coprecipitaterl
with bismuth phosphate. The o-activity count (100% efficiency) was then done in

a layer of solid scintillator (Zns) by the technique of Ref. 1. With background

of 0.2 pulse/minute. the sensitivity of the method was 10'13 Gill (1 Gil-3.700 101°
disintegrat ions per second). The error of determination was :20! [Ref. 2].

Content of u—elitters in the water of the
multiple forced circulation loop. Ci/l Table l

 
  

   
 
  

Initial (up to one year) u own-u u '1 hr" l:-2)-Ilr'= I In-
(I 'n ur" I'm-10'" (' 1‘ l" ..
.055; of integrity of fuel l-IU" 56-Ilr‘" ‘3 1- .

'ormal I u mun-N
elements ‘I

Table 1 summarizes averaged data of investigation of the content of o-emitters

in water for different periods of operation of a nuclear electric plant. Calcu-
lations show that the content of transuranium elements in the initial period of
utilization [(1-5) 40'” 61/11 is due mainly to surface contamination of fuel
elements with uranium during fabrication. As the length of the run increases.
microcracks appear in the cladding. and the content of transuranium elements in

the coolant increases by two orders of magnitude. A further increase in the content
of these elements (to [0'9 Ci/Z) is observed with occurrence of defective fuel
elements subject to replacement. Some time after their replacement, the concen-
tration of a-emitters in the coolant again stabilizes at a level of (l-lO)-10‘“

Ci/l.

Table 2 gives some results of evaluation of the efficiency of bypass purification
of transuranlum elements on nuclear electric plants with RBHK-lOOO reactors.

This table shows that the water purification factors with respect to the indicated
transuranium elements are fairly close. and are equal to 3000 in the case of fresh

25
so: omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2 charging of the filters with ion-exchange

resins. about 1000 after 5-8 months,

Efficiency °f bypass removal of and 25-100 after 9 months on this charge.
transuranium elements from coolant Individual values of RP"! for a filter
service period of 5-8 months amount to
1025 for neptunium, 985 for plutonium
and 750 for curium.

The degree of removal of transuranium

. 4,... “4"... elements from the coolant on ion-exchange
. 4"" (Mn-u filters is higher than for radionuclides
:31: 9113: of corrosion and fission origin. These
.104. H..." results are to be expected since it is
'33: ”3:: known that the strength of sorption of
1:”... 2130'" cations on KU-Z resin increases with

increasing cation charge. The radionu-
clides of interest to us are arranged

in the following sequence with respect
to the strength of bonding to the cation
exchange resin: Cs<3a. Sr<Y. La. Ce,
An, Cm<Ru<Zr. Nb<Np. Pu. The bypass
purification factors for removal of trans-
uranium elements from the coolant are
an order of magnitude higher than for
other radionuclides. Removal of trans-
uranium elements is good when steam is
separated from water in drum separators:

“"m s-"’Cm .. - 3.3.10“!
‘40-»
3.m~n the corresponding purification factors

Mu“: ' are 10"-10 , . e. the steam going to
("w- the turbines is nearly free of a-emitters.

Thus the standard purification system

in nuclear electric plants with RENE-1000
reactors ensures effective removal of
neptunium. plutoniul, emericium and curium
from the coolant.

REFERENCES

l. Gabeskiriya, V. Ya. et a1.. ATOI‘NAYA
BNEECIYA, Vol 44, No S, 1978, p 446.

2. Roman. S.. in “Proc. Advisory Group ﬂeeting on Transactinium Isotopes Nuclear
Date". Karlsruhe, 3-7 Nov 1975. Vol I, p 39.

3. Cohen. D.. "Voprosy yadernoy energetiki" [Problems of Nuclear Power], Moscow,
Atomizdat. 1958.

4. Tsenter. E. H. et al.. in: Dozimetricheskiye i radiometricheskiye metodiki"
[Dosimetric and Radiometric Methods], Moscow. Atomizdat. 1966, p 404.

S. Starodonova. N. P.. GICIYENA I SANITARIYA, No [0. 1978, p 68.
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Atomnaya energiya". 1981

6610
C80: 8144/1354

 

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFINCJAI.1EIE(NNLY

"DC 533.9

THERHOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF HORKING FLUIDS OP GAS-PHASE NUCLEAR REACTOR

Moscow TEPLOFIZICHESKIYE SVOYSTVA RABOCHIKH SRED GAZOFAZNOGO YADKRNOGO RBAKIORA
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) PP 2. 295

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Thermophysical Properties of working
Fluids of a Gas-Phase Nuclear Reactor". by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov, Igor'
L'vovich Iosilevskiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna Kuznetsova.
Vladimir lvanovich Kucherenko. Galina Borisovna Lappo, Boris Nikolayevich Lomakin,
Georgiy Alekseyevich Pavlov, Eduard Yevgen'yevich Son and Vladimir Yevgen'yevich
Fortov. Atomizdat. 1800 copies, 30‘ pages]

[Text] An analysis is made of the current state of the theory of calculation of

the thermodynamic, transport and optical properties of gases at high pressures

and temperatures, and the state of experimental research in the physics of a non-
ideal completely or partly ionized plasma. Numerical calculations are done on

the thermophysicai properties of plasma of working fluids used in a gas-phase nuclear
reactor--a1kali metals, uranium. hydrogen and their mixtures--over a wide range

of temperatures and pressures.

The book is a review and a reference. and may be of use to specialists working
directly with gas—phase reactors. and also to engineers and scientists specializing
in different areas of low-temperature plasma physics.

Tables 19. figures 106. references 465.

Contents page
Editor's Preface 3
Chapter I: Thermodynamic Properties 6
1.1. General characteristics of the behavior of thermodynamic functions of
working fluids 6
[.2. Asymptotic methods of describing the thermodynamics of a weakly nonideal
plasma 16
[.3. Thermodynamics of a strongly nonideal plasma 20
[.4. Component makeup of a partly ionized nonideal plasma 32
1.5. Accounting for the influence of the fluid on the state of an atom. Model
calculations by the Hartree-Fok ano Thomas-Fermi method 61
1.6. Methods of calculating the composition and thermodynamic functions of a
multicomponent nonideal plasma 47
27

IKHlCNHHCIAI.USE(lNLY
Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(]Al.lﬂNE(ﬂVLV

1.7. Discussion of results of calculation. Comparison with data of other calcu-

lations 57
Chapter 2: Transfer Coefficients of a Nonideal Plasma 66
2.1. Qualitative description of processes of transfer of heat, mass. momentum

and charge in a gas-phase nuclear reactor 66
2.2. Kinetic theory of a weakly nonideal plasma 70
2.3. Theory of nonequilibrium processes in nonideal media 79
2.6. Model approaches to determination of electronic coefficients of transfer

of a nonideal plasma 92
2.5. Effective transfer coefficients of a multielsment nonideal plasma 101
2.6. Methods of calculating the transfer coefficients of a nonideal plasma.

Discussion of the results of calculation 109
Chapter 3: Optical Properties of Gases and Plasma 119
3.1. Radiation transfer in a gas-phase nuclear reactor. Elementary processes

of absorption in a plasma of working fluids 119
3. 2. Bremsstrahlung absorption on ions and atoms 121
3. 3. Photoionization of atoms. ions and molecules 122
3. 6. Absorption in atomic lines 129
3.5. Molecular absorption 132
3. 6. influence of nonideality on optical properties of plasma 138
3. 7. Discussion of method and results of calculations of the optical charac-

teristics of working fluids 166
Chapter 6: Generation and Diagnosis of a Nonideal Plasma 167
.6. l. Particulars of experimental investigation of nonideal plasma 167
6. 2. Electric methods of producing nonideal plasma 151
6.3. Dynamic methods in nonideal plasma physics 160
6.6. Nonidesl plasma condensation 169
6.5. Comparison of experimental and theoretical data on thermodynamics 175
6.6. Comparison of experimental and theoretical data on transfer coefficients 181
6.7. Comparison of experimental and theoretical data on optical properties 186
Chapter 5: Thermophysical Properties of Working Fluids of a Gas-Phase

Reactor 190
References 291

COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat. 1930

6610
C80: 1861/159

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOImI

UN 621.007.523 681.3

MODELING ON COMPUTER SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATED DESIGN OF INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS

Moscow VB’I‘NIK WMROYBIIYA in Bmlen lo 5. Ihy 81 pp 7-9

[Artlcle by V. V. Verenteov. cendidete of teclmi ecimcee. K. F. Krevchenko.
engineer and M. I. Poceyev. candidate of technlce sciences]

[Text] Industrial robote (PR). ee ehoun by en enelyeie of their techicel cherec-
terietice. were designed beeicelly ecconding to four hineeetic erase-onto (n5. 1).
About 75 percent of the Pa heve the him-tic errenseeent ehown in Fig. In: the
remining three mengenente (Figs. lb. 1o, id) ere and in PR 10. 5 end 3 percent
respectively of the total nunber of developed PR [1. 2]. In deeiyune PR mine

the indicated kinentic errengenente. it ie neceeeery to execute teirly einiler
operatione. In perticuler. they include: the eelection of the kinettic mense-
nent of the PR on the beeie of the given technological groceee end the indiceted
working zone to be serviced; the preperetion of the dynellc equetion for the PR

end its drivee; the formletion of linitetione ilpoeed on the eyeten: the calcu-

lation of the heelc perenetere of the Pl! nechenien end its drives: the deeig: of
the control systen of the PR; the optinleetion of the dynellc. tine-tic end pre-
cielon cherecterietice of the PB adhering to the inpoeed linltetione; the torntion
of the layout drawing of the PR. ite driven. control eyetel. etc.

f1)? r” f‘

(c) (d)

Fig. 1. Kinenetic errengenent of men-um robote (Pa).

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The eiaiiarity of these operations in designing the multiplicity of PR for various
purposes attests to the urgency of the problea of creating coaponents and systens
for an autontsd design of industrial robots (803 P2). that aseunea the achieve-
aent of all the enuaeratsd operations on a conputer with the possibility of a
dialogue betueen the designer and the coaputer to achieve an optin result.

Investigations have shown the possibility of creating the SLPR PB. It Inst repre-
sent the totality of subsystem. oriented toward iaplenenting certain design
solutions. Bach subsystea mat contain algorithas for finding the desiai paras-
sters of the nnipulator. the control syste- and or their own individual unite.
These include algorithm for deter-ining the para-stars of the nnipulator's ars.
taking into account its elasticity. kinentic characteristics. load etc.; the

algorithm for the detersination of the parameters of the gripping device. taking
into account the properties of the loads being transferred. the tine lag. loads
etc.: the algorithss for calculating the paraaeters of the drives. taking into
account the coabination of their love-ant etc. i sufficiently developed SAFE PR
must also have a bank of stored deaiai solutions to use in sililar situations.

01 this basis an SAPR PR ny be represented in the fora of a block diagra- (Fig. 2)

Subagstsn for selecting a kineaatic arrangeaent (of asnipulator, gripping device
etc. ‘

V
Subsysten for establishing linitationa

Subayatea for using the bank of stored data ._____.___.__————I if“

no

Subsystem for calculating basic para-store of nnipulator. era
gipping device. drive etc. 1

Subsystsa for optinising paraseters

i
Subsystea for iapoeing liaitations on the desist paraaeters. taking
into account GCBT. nterials used. standard parts etc.

i
Subsystes for toning the drawing of the arrange-ant ¢—-—-———

Fig. 2. block diagran of the M PB

Individual subayatens were simulated on the Yes-1030 coaputsr to check the panel-
bility of creating the SAPR PR. The simlation included a calculation of the
basic parameters of the sechaniea and drives of the unipulator (Pig. 3). Such
an algorithn nkee it possible to calculate and optiaise the basic para-store of
the aanipulator with a pneunatic drive that provides a sinima cycle tile. No
provision is lads in this algoritha tor a dialogue with the coaputer and for
preparing the arrange-ant drawing. A Isthod of statistical trials (the Hunts

Carlo aethod) is used here to find the optiaal solution. as well as a syste-tic

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approach that inpliee the consideration of the nnipulator aechaniam eymten, taking
its drive alone, an well as the determination of the optin parmnetere of the
manipulator nachaniaa and ita drive under the condition of the coabined love-ante
of the links for forward and reverse atrokee of the gripping device in accelerating
and decelerating nodes. taking into account the eluticity of the outgoing link.

 

Fig. 3. Kinematic amngenent of a nnipulator with a pneumatic drive:

1. rack It. outgoing link
2. pneumatic cylinder for lifting the 5. load
ehat‘t

3. pneuutic cylinder for radial
advancement of the outgoing link

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the notion of the outgoing link of the nnipulator along the vertical is

not related to other actions in the given amngeaent. the drives. therefore. for
only turning and advancing are considered in the described part of the simlation
algorithm It is assuaed that reciprocal action mountic cylinders are need in
each of these drives. The rotating part or the unipulator is aounted on a cog
wheel; the action to it tron the rod of the turning menutic drive is transaitted
by a rack or chain.

leing into account the elasticity of the outgoing link of the nnimlator. the
dynaaic equations of ite nation and the characteristics changes in preseuree in

the cheaters or the pneulatic cylinders of the drives my be represented in the
nondieeneional fora ae follows:

2:33.01l_o")-5’e_2p'm+wn§.

.W. m
'1--ﬂ.(°...-o..,)+a.(n Humani: (2,

3 _ _ m + L') 5+ iv} + 6.43.» ; (3)
I. I O

 

h .
°" =. (Th. [“‘B"(°u)"°:|(| ; u)
1, .. k .
t: m- [Mwww-dncl. (5)
where
P I .L 1'
ou-Ti—‘I o‘.—l P‘ o a": Pt: I
P
on! ‘1‘;
[here ”{1- 0p. 0m- on: n are pressures in the
charge and discharge chambers of the monastic cylinders of the drives according
to coordinates ‘37 and Y; z Pin-VquPn: -- measures in the

charge and discharge chaabere of the pneu-tic cylindere of the drives according
to coondinatee g! and v] (of the shaft turning and are advancing drives)]

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“3 -‘ (here x -- coordinate of the piston position of the turning shsft drive;
8" -- Spieton stroke); 5: =55}: [hereF -- piston sree of shsﬂ. turning drive;
Pu -- sir pressure in the monastic ninM -—'ra.(u'2 -- coeffioimt of speed

trsnssiseiom r -- radius of the dividing circulfermce of the cog wheel of the
mm -5 -- mm of 10nd; C_ 2’3"“; (52:3 -- solent of insrtis of the

 

second and third link with respect to axis s: .1; -- unseat of inertie of the

fourth link with respect to the verticsl exis. psesing through the center of use

or the link)]; on: if" . oh-%L (here hr '0 -- pressures in chsrge

 

and discharge chssbers of the pneuntic cylinders of the PR drives sccording to
the x and y coordinates; 5.1—3— (here “l uni-at. .

-- use of are;
"I. e ‘ 5‘

Sy -- piston stroke of drive for loving ere); 3,-7‘? (here at. -- proportion-
ality coefficient); "=’ % (here 1 -- coordinste of piston position of drive

9 I
for sovin srs : L' = here I. = 1 If 1 -- distsnce tron the sxis of
8 ) éL ( m + e
y 5,4- I5

the shaft to the center of the use of the en: L -- length of the ere)

FM"
34! (M. 'l m’)

0, (here Fy -- piston ares of drive for saving on);

 

AxS a
—_L. n a
B'"M.+Mc‘ 5' m.+m.

. ‘ __
(here «'3 -- proportionslity coefficient): t = T [here- 1= V link 12 (1.13- M ~-

deflection of the center of sees of the ere during its deflection oecillstions and
its components according to coordinstes 3: sad 1)] A g V 61‘ 1- or

(A. M. “y -- given accuracy of positioning end 1'58 30.900th alone the " sod
y coordinates“:

3:. 351

”It - 5x ' ﬂu “ —3MRS' [a “"Ls

. 33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(here 8 -- Young's eodulue; J -- noeent of inertie of the croee eection of the ere
with respect to ite longitudinal exie); R -- univereel gee conetent];

III I In

muss-57:. fit-75573;

01ere IL. 1;, efficienciee of the inlet hole ereee of charge chubere

of the pneuntic cylinders of driven for turning the ehert end loving the ere);

k 3 8.28 coefficient; g..-—fs’:-.

(en-l-f-iéL
at

here
( ”°" 9" -- heretul volueee of cherge end dieoherge clue-here);

‘9 (on). V (”u)

functions of air coneueptiom
g3“! -- nondieeneionel coordinatee x and n (”“4” -- index

In solving the eyetee of equetione (1) - (5) the following veluee ere given:
force of gravity of the coated loed c. axilel eotione 8x end 8, in accordence

with coondinetee x and y end precieion of poeitioning Ax along exie x.

to be detox-lined ere: meee e3 end I“ of the [lieu-tic cylinder end outgoing
link, eoeent of inertia J93) of linke 2 end 3 or the PR with reepect to exie

a. Ionent or inertia .12) of the outgoing link ’0 with reepect to the exie thet
peeeee through the center of the nee. end the design pore-atom of the driven
piston arena of pneuntic cylindere I“ end I?" Volunee of the cherge end diecherge
chanbere "o,i”‘o,2’ ’0.1’ ’0,2‘ the effective ereee of the inlet end outlet holee
of the charge end diecherge cheebere 1'. 11,. I;,.- I:., s the
perenetere of the hydraulic type breking device: the dieeetere of the deeper
pieton end of the by-peee tubing 1) end d; the dynneic viecoeity coefficient )( of

the braking fluid; the length of the braking eection 11..

31:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘IOAL USE ONLY

Functional lisitations ore isposed on the solution of the oyster of equations
(1) - (5) as follows:

 

oU < I; °t.: >o,: (6)
.. I dxr3L-‘J .. _
£1 <ﬁ7(—;7+hv). (7)
° ._°"_ ' —3El .
‘M‘uw I) 1/ m...» ' ‘8’
where o" .. .22; In... Win-Hm; n. - stnoophoric pressure.

Condition (6) requires that the pressure in the working chasber of tho pneuntic

cylinder should not exceed the pressuro in tho nin. while the pressure in the
discharge chesher should not exceed the etnosphorio pressure. condition (7)
requires that the asplituds of tho deflection oscillations of link i in the braking
node and the syston oainet tho stop should not exceed the value of positioning
accuracy 4 x of tho nnipulatod' (n3. 3). condition (8) requires thst the as-
plitude of dofloctim oscillatims of link 1. vhu it is epinet the stop. should
not exceed the value of the precision occureoy of the unipulstod‘.

In selecting optinl systes parsnoters. giva: the initial values of p; . the syste-
of equations (1) - (5) is solved in the accelerating node for toward snd reverse

notions of the gripping device. A ooshinstion of systo- porsnotors is found by

the nothod of statistical trials thst would povido a niniul tile ‘1'!) of the ‘

nnipulator notion; the realisation of this tile is achieved by selecting the

instants of connecting the drives. Omsidod'ing tho notim of tho syston in the
braking node and solving the systes of oqustial (i) - (5). taking into account
linitations (6) - (8). paranotors of the braking devices ore found that provide

ninisal tine T1. of braking. Tho pan-store obtained of the nnipulstor nocheniss .
its drives and braking devices provide for tho nini-Is tins of psessgs between

end positions of the systos Tnin = 5*?!"

do n result of calculations for the initisl dots G: 6.3K: 8 = 0.079 s: 8 30.3 I:
Ax -3o.025 -. we obtained porn-store sun-nun in the this. The: pr‘vido
passage tine Tp 3 1.6 seconds at the following instsnto of drive connections:

for the fomrd novonont of tho systen. the drive for advancing the an is 0.3
seconds later than the connection or the drive for turning the mm for the

35
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reveree novenent of the eyeten. the connection of the drive for turning the ehaft
ie 0.2 eeconde later than the connection of the drive for advancing the an.

Table

Paranetere for the turning drive (in the nunerator) and the drive for radial
notion (in the denouinator)

 

Note. Index 1 correeponda to the charge chanber. index 2 -- to the diecharse
cmbue

in order to check that the mutate found are optimal, a nnipulator that hae
the characteristics ehovn in the Table wee deeigned and mufactured. Ite teete
indicated that the paeeage tine between extrene poeitione nae 1.65 eeconde. The
instante of connecting the drivee for turning the daft and advancing the an were

changed any tines in the teete. other para-etere of the nnipulator. in particu-
lar

.' D
:.l"1.2";.l";.2' 7-

were also changed and led to a reduction in lineage tine Tp by nore than 5 peromt.

Thle confine the optinlity of the paranetere found and the authenticity of the
algorithn for their determination.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

313mm

1. Belmin. PJI. “Industrial Robots.“ Hoocow. WMBOYUIYB.19?5.
W0 pages

2. “Develop-om of Robot muipunt Abroad.” (lieu-uh of the Thin! International

Sylpoaiul on Industrial Robots). NIIMSII Sciatific Research Institute of
Inching Building and Metal Vol-king]. i9? . 88 pages.

CMRIGRI‘: Isdatel’stvo ”hlhinoctroyniyo“. 'Vootnik mhinontroyuiyu'. i981

2291
C80: 1861/1910-A

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moscow VBTNIK MASHINGTROIBIIYA in Russian No 5. May 81 pp 3-6
[Article by A. A. Panov, candidate of technical sciences]

[Text] Industrial robots [PR] have rapid readjustability. This PR property is
characterized by the following: method and degree of accessibility of programing
the task on moving the parts, and the number and type of instructions; the cost of
programing the task on moving the parts. changing the program and resdjustsent.
as well as require-eats for the autontic control hardware of the progrssing and
the skill of the service personnel; reprocessable progras structures, including

At present. PR of the first generation are the most widely used; in the future. the
utilization of program control systems will mks it possible to find the solution

for the prevailing number of problems on loving processed parts, as well as to
change the functions of the control. storing and processing of data.

The increasing costs of using robots in production are concerned primily with the
automatic control hardware of the PR.

The following requirements are demnded of the PR control system: control of the
movements of the gripping device (tool) in the working zone in accordance with a

given program for loving the parts: prograsing for various working modes; providing
for interaction with the technological equip-ant when it is used in a complex
automted system; executing functions of interoperational monitoring.

The origination, in practice. of various control system is due to the following:
the multiplicity of PR design versions that have original features: technical

progress in the deVelopment of automatic control hardware using microelectronics:

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical characteristic on the type and degree of free movelents of the PR, the
type of system control and prograling nethod; trends in the develop-ent of auto-e.-

Prog-a- nanipulators ny be classified in the following manner according to types
of control systems and conditions of application.

1. PR progran’ PR are considered progranble, whose readjustmt is implemented
by means of congosing a corresponding movement control and introducing this pro-
gram into the control system. A rigidly prograsable nanipulator has a constant
program in the control system; changing it is done by an adjuster.

Such control is used basically in sinple PR of the cycle loaders type. Positional
control systems make it ossible to produce point-by-point positioning in the work-
ing space where the gripftool) loves; a mnctional love-ant relationship. predeter-
mined by the control system. exists between these points.

The loop control systems achieve a functional relationship in the move-ant of axes;
the grips (tools) trace out strictly defined loop lines in the working zone pre-
sented by the program. The use of this or another loop control systel is determined
by the nobility of the structurally preset domes of freedom of novement of the
axis.

Two versions of loop control are used in practice, differing in the prograaing' of
the data processing within the systel with the direction of the motion loop line
called nultipoint control; the programing is inplenented by “motion along the loop."
in cases where the notion loops are produced with conplex notion shapes. for example.
when applying varnish-paint coatings with a continuous direction of the loop line,
the programing is implemented, as a rule. by "starting-up and storing" and. in re-
producing the program. the notion loop between the points is obtained by interpola-
tion. .

3. Nondigital and digital programed control system. Nondigital programed control
systems are lost frequently used in conbination with PR in which the preset positions
are fixed by loans of regulated stops. can etc. The ﬂexibility of such a system
depends to a great dense on the type and capacity of the memory. Nunsrioal pro-
gramed control system (GhPU) are reading devices using numerical values as signs

of the path data and synbols for instructions. as well as coded data. The posi-
tions of a preset path in the form of nulerical data are a component of the notion
program; positioning of the path may be progrased with respect to the given values
of the positions. the number of various positions along each axis, the frequency of
origination of certain given positions in the notion cycle and. if necessary. my

be easily corrected. Due to data coding and the use of a corresponding nesory. a
great number of progra- steps. instructions and data may be achieved and reproc-
essed.

1:. Special and universal control system. If a control systel is designed for a

certain type of PR or probless of the notion of a type of part. it represents a
special solution.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060045-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

50.300 00 0HOH0

-0000 o>aanuu< .mnasoaopuuHou
no auaHuna on» 000 pguanaua>
I00 000 00009.00 0......' .8 00000
0000000 0000 0>00 00.3.. 0003
:0H00 00 0.300 00.... :0 00:30.5

0003030 0000.50.00 0300.30.00
0 00 00.250000 0H0>.0 .3390
0.3 H0300 3.000000 :93 0H00

:03 50390 00308055 3093

0:0 00 0003000.“ 03 H0833

00.33003

300 0H 000.3005 H9350 0:3 00
000005.300 0:9 00.593 3:00
:26: 0.3 :H :05» 00300033
0» 003.3000 030.930 00500
:00 0.00 000303300." H9350

u5|00.000|.dlu 00l00

0 capaa

.H000: 00H: 00.300000 .3

000.30051 H9308 :00.» 3000091300 000 Mo H000: 000
00 HHO: 00 503003300 no 0.30330 5.0300 0:0 0.000
000 no H000: :03» 0 .«0 0309 0:0 00 000000 H9330
0:3 .3 00330 00.50.00 000026: 2.00000 00.0500»...

0 an .000 3000.6: 003.3: “Ev 00030 0030303

0.3.0030 .«0 000300000 003:

300026: H9308 003.3000 003000080 3030300:
1.300 7000 0000000300 000 .3308 0000: 03 003.“:
umooou 300:0 000 003.0000 .«0 00300300300 50.300300
00.3.0000 .0000» 00300000 00.“ 0:030:50 00 00.30099

003003000 00 303

0:0 0503.000 .00 00:00:0>:00 Hahn—:00 .00 000» 0:0 :00:
0030000.... 00030000 33000 .0003 H0300 000 0050 003
00300000 .3 500300.305 0.9.5030 00 0000: an 0000005:
00 3.3000 500303005 00 003038.30 .0H000 00.5000

 

H9380
0:030:20

smﬂduﬂ—Hﬁv:
II 2.23..

mm
.058...

: .guﬁ”:
In 00000m

H93000
00.50.00

«3.; mm
In 30.3.0

00.. 00
00:0» 00

140
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007IOW09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060045-2
Table 1 (continued)
:riteria for ggtgiging dat

nth from sensor of positi
Lalysis of position of cls
is deternined indirectly.

,ional tactile. optical an
,especially for the analys
1d recognition of the obje
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Control systems intended to solve Inltipurpose control problem should be called
uniVersal systems; they are implemented primarily by developing and storing special
control functions. i.e., by developing means of programing. Under concrete condi-
tions. the developnent of special software my also be required.

In creating special control systems. the designer determines. based on the required
control functions, the control volume. convenience in servicing. as well as produc-
tion possibilities etc.. the necessary groups of structural components and units.
Thus, for simple cases, pneumatic control systems are specified. New developments
of special ChPU system should include miniconputers.

Universal control system should have built-in mini- or microcomputers or be con-
nected to a central computer.

Progralned control systems in principle are not meant for processing paths and mo-
tions on a digital oasis as compared to freely programed Chm computer systems.

Prograsing problems on moving parts span all actions for preparing motion programs
and introducing them into the control system. The motion prograa contains all the

control functions intended to implement the concrete problem of PR control.

The control system must provide econonical programing according to the requirements
for their application and readjustability when complying with special features of
motion. The basic requirements not include conunience for the consumer and. if
possible, the least laborious preparation of the program and the easiest correct-
ability and optimization. Methods for data introduction and prom-ins should be
classified according to the place of programing and the type of control system.

Programing methods are selected according to conditions for the use of PR and. at
the same time, must satisfy the requirements mentioned above. Programing at the
site of use is very convenient because the programer usually does not need special
knowledge, and special auxiliary means for programing are not required. However,

in a number of cases of PR use, especially for comprehensive automtion of assembly.
programing outside the boundaries of the work position (external programing) is re-
quired. In this case. the program is nude up when preparing for work and is recorded
on the progran carrier assigned to the control systen. Such programing Inst be
used only in those cases where programing at the site is inpossible or inexpedieunt
(for example. the motion task due to its complexity. or switching with the process
at the working position does not lend itself to description: implementing control
functions which nay be programed only when preparing for work; or the PR receives
control data from central control).

When the PR is programed at the worker position. after the motion cycle is deter-
mined. all the necessary data for designing the program is fed directly into the
control system.

Prograning by motion cycles of parts is limited by the program cycle. i.e.. the
motion cycle is designed as a sequence of instructions for direct control of motors
of axes and grips. inputs and outputs etc.. and is implemented manually. The
notion paths are adjusted by means of stops or position sensors directly on the PR;

therefore, they are not a component part of the motion program.

1.2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Bod

gn- cycle; :3 --- path 01
. diagnostics. Sons 001
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The input of data into the program memory may be done unually by adjusting, con-
necting, pushing an operator's pushbutton etc. with the motion reading exhibited
on the control panel. and automatically by functional switches due to which data
is transferred to the addressed places in the memory, i.e.. by the self-teaching
method. A PR programed at the site whose program also includes path conditions

in the component parts of the program, along with the motion cycle, is called
freely programble.

Specified motions are adjusted nnually in the required sequence. In this case,
the motion cycle and. the path conditions are stored step-by-step. The PR position
is determined by the path sensors which feed data on the path.

To produce motion along the loop, the grip(tool) is directed nnually along the
desired motion loop during the adjustment mode and the trajectory is autontically
stored as a sequence of points. The number of points stored per unit of time must

be such that a sufficiently precise reproduction of the programed motion line is
made automatically.

As a rule. programing requires special documentation. equipment and devices for

preparing, converting. checking. correcting program and transferring data to the
memory. All tasks on motion data met be compiled fully at the stage of work

preparat ion .

The improvement of external PR programing methods is achieved by a similar method
of programing nechine tools with 01m.

The use of mechanical program carriers cam discs, rigidly secured by cams, is a

special case of external programing only for simple PR. When readjusting. the
program carrier is replaced or readjusted anew.

An approxinte control system using coded data my be implemented by special cod-
ing on program carriers, punched tape. diode ntrices or semiconductor memories.

Specialised program languages which are subdivided into simple languages oriented
toward a specific problem and languages of a higher order are used; they differ
in complexity of control functions and in the volume of reprocessed data.

The motion program recorded in the corresponding language, up to the time that it
my be placed in the program memory, lust be translated into the elementary control
language. There is also the possibility of converting instructions in specialized
languages directly into control instructions (by means of interpreters). Prob-
lem oriented languages are used primarily in connection with universal control

system for the solution of complex problem for mltimachine tool servicing and
assembly operations.

In external programing. problems on the motion of an industrial robot on the site
of its use, mixed prograning is also utilised.

bl;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Conclusions

An analysis of control system and prograling nethods for PR ukss it possible to
establish a relationship between the control system type, methods of programing,
the control application field and the content of notion program. Based on these
general criteria. it is possible to classify control system. In practice. some
control system criteria may be found in combination when only s part of the de-

grees of notion belong to positioning. The type of control system is deternined
according to the optinl variation of a positioning robot with a given scourscy

and quick action which my be achieved by nthenticsl simulation of its motions.

CCPYRIGHTI Izdatel'stvo “Hashinostrovsniyc”, "Vestnik unshinoscroyeniya", 1981

2291
C50: 1861/ 1910-A

1:5
son omcul. use ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 532.538.4
TECHNOLOGICAL HHD INSTALLATIONS AND PROCESSES

Kiev TEKHNOLOCICHBSKIYB HOD USTANOVKI I PROTSBSSY in Russian 1980 (signed to press
21 Oct 80) pp 22, 189-190

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Technological Hun Installations and
Processes”. by Anatoliy Pedorovich Kolesnichenko. Institute of Electrodynamics.
UkSSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka". 1000 copies. 192 pages]

[Text] This monograph examines qualitative and spatial transformations in bounded
regions filled with an electrically conductive liquid or gas and placed in physical
fields: electric, magnetic and gravitational. Included among such transformations
are changes in the form of energy and energy transfer--conversion of electromagnetic
energy to heat and mechanical work, transfer of heat and mass of the conductive
fluid under the influence of various combinations of electromagnetic. capillary

and thermoconductive factors. Resulta of theoretical and experimental research

are given on a new class of HHD phenomena--capillary effects that arise during

arc and induction treatment of metals. New techniques for processing alloys are
described that are based on the use of MED effects.

The book is intended for scientists. engineers and technicians interested in the
development and use of HHD installations.

Figures 82. table 1, references 119.

Contents page
Preface 3
Principal symbols 6
Chapter I: Principal Equations of Magnetohydrodynamics 9
Chapter 2: Hub Phenomena in Electric-Arc welding 18
I. Body and surface forces in electrically conductive droplets. jets and

plasma [8
2. Shape of the boundaries of phase transformations as a cylindrical electrode

is melted by a welding arc 30
3. Quasi-steady states of the free surface of droplets and jets of electrode

metal 40

a. Drop formation and transport during arc melting of a cylindrical electrode #6
5. Drop formation and transport of electrode metal in welding by direct
current with superposition of current pulses 54

L6
IND! 0F1ﬂ€lAl.lEﬂi(ﬂ'LY

6. Drop formation and transport of melt in electric arc welding with unsteady

electrode feed 57
7. Drop formation in modulation of magnetic pressure of noncontracting arcs 59
Chapter 3: MED Granulation of Hetals 61
1. HHD methods of controlling dissociation of free electrically conductive

jets 61
2. Free electrically conductive jets under the effect of sign-alternating

electromagnetic forces in the sources 69
3. Conditions of dissociation of free jets placed in a longitudinal alternating

magnetic field 81
4. Conditions of production of spherical particles 83
5. HBO dispersers of liquid metals and alloys 90
Chapter 6: MED Heat and Mass Transfer in Induction Hclting Furnaces 102
1. Eddy pattern of electromagnetic forces and nechanises that produce uni-

directional motion 104
2. Pressure developed by active sections of the channel 108
3. Hydraulic drag of induction channels 113
A. Simulation of heat and mass transfer processes in the channels of induction

furnaces 115
5. Modeling of industrial induction furnaces 136
Chapter 5: HHD Devices Based on Piston Gas-Liquid Flows 139
1. Physical essence of processes in accelerated gas-liquid flows 161
2. Formation of piston flows 106
3. Stable forns of gas-liquid interfaces. Change in mass of a liquid

batch during acceleration 150
a. Dispersal of a liquid batch and mass transfer 158
5. lnterphase heat exchange in the channels of acceleration devices 162
6. Model of motion of liquid batches of variable lass 167
7. Losses during acceleration of piston flow. Efficiency and other param-

eters of acceleration devices based on piston flows 171
8. Example of calculation of a device for accelerating piston flows 176
References 182

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka". 1980

6610
C50: 1861/154

b7

FOI1OFFKJA1.USI(IILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 621.?93.669.2'&8
ANTIFRICTIQI COtTINGS OI TITANIUM ALLOYS rumors
Moscow V511”! WINDSTROYBGIYA in Russian lo 5. lb: 81 p 47

[Article by V. I. Latatuysv, cand. of tech. sciences and G. N. Canny. engineer]

[Text] It is well known Ei-S] that it is extrelel! difficult to deposit good

bonding coatings on titan ua and its alloys due to the forntion of oxide file on
their surfaces.

when the oxide file is rsnoved by etching by using a sixture of nitric and hydro-
Iluoric acids there is observed a strong hydrogen absorption on the titaniua surface
due to the for-stion of a hydride (0.06“ and acre of hydrogen in the outer layers).

The presence of the hydride filn reduces sharply the adhesion of the coating to
the titanius and deteriorates the strength characteristics. i.e.. increases the
brittleness of the hotel. It is proposed [2] that annealing (“OD-500°C) reaoves
the hydrogen. and the adhesive properties of the electroplating are iaproved.

A new and very prosising asthod .is one for depositing nickel-phosphorus coatings

by cheaical nickel plating (m) with acid and alkali (ansoniun) solutions [6-9]
on the titanius and its alloys.

The phosphorus content (2-15) in the coating isparts specific properties: great
hardness and higher antifriction properties which ukes it possible to utilise
W to solve the probles of screwing parts ads of titaniun alloys together when
they are subjected to high loads. Tests were ads on sanples of the ”2-1 and the
vr-zo alloys. Preliainary tests on the W in solutions of well-known conpounds
(cosr 9.0a7-75) indicated that titaniua slloys either cannot be nickel plated or
fora a coating with poor adhesion.

m the basis of recommendations 7-8]. investigations were ads on the preparation
of the surface of the titaniua a loys before cheaical nickel plating (before each
chenical operation the parts were washed thoroughly in running water for 2 to g
sinutss) by first degreasing in ornnic solvents (sasoiine,dichioroethsne etc.

for 5 to 10 ainutes. then in an alkaline solution for 5 to 10 Iinutes at a tea~
perature of 60 to 70°C.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The oxide filn was reeoved in solutions of sulfuric or hydrochloric acids at vari-

ous tenperaturee and tiles. The best results were obtained by pickling in concentra-
ted hydrochloric acid at 501500 for 8 to 10 Iinutee (2 to 3 nicronetere are etched

off). Too lengthy etching destroys the surface due to autocatalyeis. For exalple.
15 to 20 aicroeeters are etched off.

The lost critical operation is the activetion of the titaniun alloy surface '-
the deposition of a thin file (approxintely 0.1 nice-outer) of nickel that cata-
lyzes the KhN process.

A solution' consisting of 150 to 250 gran/liter or nickel sulfate and 100 to 120
nilliliters/liter of hydrochloric scid at 20 to 25°C was taken as a basis. The
activation tine was 5 to 10 seconds.

After thorough mhing in running water. the salplee were illediately i-ereed in
the KhN solution. In this case. solution “D“ was used which consisted of 20 to 30
gran/liter of nickel sulfate, 20 to 25 gran/liter of sodiun hypophoephite. 10

to 15 gran/liter of sodiun acetate. 0.003 gran/liter of thiouree and 2 nilliliters/

liter of acetic acid. at a teaperature of 90 '3: 2°C and a speed of 20 to 25 aicro-
asters/hour.

For removing hydrogen and increasing adhesion. the sanplee were heat-treated
in air at 000°C for 2 hours. The adhesion of the plating let the (HST requiresente.

The developed technology solves the proble- of depositing an antieoui‘i' nickel-
phosphorus plating on threaded parts ude of titaniun alloys.

nmlmn
i. Colner. A et al. J. Electrochen. 800. ll 11. 100. 1953.

2. Layner. V. I. ”hodern Electroplating.“ Moscow. lletallurgiya. i967, 3814 pages.

3. Ginberg. A. ll. “Electrolytic Deposition of Natale on Alueinue." Leningrad.
Sudproxis. 1957. 167 pages.

16. Vernik. 8.; Pinner. R. ”meaical and mectrochenical Treat-ant of Aluainun and
its Alloys.” Translated fro- the hglieh. Lningud. Swim-gin. 1960. 322
pages.

5. Veyner. Ya. V.. moyan, h. A. “Technology of Electrochesicel Coatings.”
Leningrad. hashinoetroyeniye. 197?. 1068 pegee.

6. Gorbunova, K. $1.; Nikiforova. A. A. ”Physio-cheeical Principles of the (heli-
cei Nickel-Plating Process.“ USSR Acedeny of Sciences. 1970. 20? pages.

‘Val'eyunene. Ya. N. Solution for activating titaniue before cheaical nickel
plating. Author's certificate 185182.

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Latatuyov. V. 1.: Gunny. G. IL: Doniaov. A. D. “m1 coating by the Choucol
Process. Alt. kn. lad-v0. 1968. 208 pages.

8. Nimdrova. L. I. “an-1m Hothodn for mu Costing." ﬂuted by P. H.
Vyacheshvov. “meow. lbshlnootroyontyo. 197'}. 1016 pages.

9. Vlohenkov. S. A. “Queucal and moctrochodcd Hothods for Dopamine Eta].
Coatings.“ Moscow. bohinoctroyenlyo. 1975. 312 pages.

CMRIGHM Imtol'atvo "lhshinostroymiyo','Vutu1k mhlnootroyoniyo". 1981

2291
C50: 1861/1944;

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.638.62-226-2

CARRYING CAPACITY OF HORKING BLADES 0F GAS-TURBINE ENGINES UNDER VIBRATION LOADS

Kiev NESUSHCHAYA SPOSOBNOST' RABOCHIKH LOPATGK GAMURBINNYKH DVIGATELKY PR1 VIBRATSI-
ONNYKH NAGRUZHENIYAKH in Russian 1981 (signed to press 29 Dec 80) pp b. 313-316

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Carrying Capacity of Working Blades
of GasdTurbine Engines Under Vibration Loads". by Valeriy Trofimovich Troshchenko.
academician, UkSSR Academy of Sciences, Valentin Vladimirovich Hatveycv, Boris
Alekseyevich Gryaznov. Sergey Semenovich Gorodetskiy and Anatoliy Beynaminovich
Roytman. Institute of Strength Problems. UkSSR Academy of Sciences, lzdatel'atvo
"Naukova dumka", 1000 copies, 316 pages]

[Text] This monograph gives the procedure and results of investigation of fatigue
of high-temperature alloys subjected to complex thermomechanical loading. and also
the fatigue of working blades of turbines and compressors in gas—turbine engines
with consideration of their changes during utilization. A method is described

for modeling experimental loads for turbine blades (experimental facilities). Data
are given on the damping properties of turbine blade materials. lock joints of
compressor and turbine blades, and also on the damping capability of working blades
that is due to aerodynamic drag of the ambient flow and structural hysteresis with
consideration of operating conditions. An examination is made of methods of re-

= ducing the dynamic stress on blades by using structural damping and dissipation

of the energy of vibrations in the material. Recommendations are made for increas-
ing the carrying capacity of the turbine blades in gas-turbine engines.

- For scientists, engineers and technicians dealing with problems of developing and
using gas-turbine engines.

Figures 245. tables 38, references 209.

Contents 9889
Preface 5
Chapter 1: General Information on Operational Damage to Compressor and Turbine
Working Blades 7
l. Hajor factors that influence the carrying capacitv and service life of
working blades 7
2. Typical types of damage to the blades of the axial compressor and turbine 22
3. Indices of operational reliability of gas-turbine aircraft engines 37
51

IIHRCHHNCJAI.IENICHVLY
thaptcr 2:

hapter 3:

Imp

hap

o

nap

:' fe
JPY

)IO
50:

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Durability of Turbine Blade Materials
Hethods of studying the durability of high-temperature alloys

Influence of high temperature on the durability of turbine blade alloys
Durability of high-temperature alloys under conditions of combined action

of mechanical and thermal cyclic stresses

Methods of Studying the Carrying Capactiy of Working Blades

Methods of testing Blades for durability

The UL-l facility for studying durability under room-temperature and high-

temperature conditions

44
44
57

64
78
78

90

The VL-2 automated vibration stand for studying fatigue under conditions of
programmed load and temperature variation

Statistical processing of the results of mechanical tests
hnpter 4: Investigation of Fatigue of Working Blades
Influence of operational and technological factors on fatigue of working

blades

Damage to turbine blades after operational failure
Influence of testing conditions on the microstructure and type of fracture

of working blades

ter 5: Methods of Studying the Damping Capacity of Working Blades
Damping characteristics and methods of determining them
Systems for automating the process of determining characteristics of

vibration damping

Investigation of the damping properties of turbine blade materials
Investigation of the damping capacity of lock joints

Investigation of aerodynamic damping of vibrations

Investigation of damping of vibrations in a centrifugal force field
ter 6: Investigation of the Damping Capacity of Working Blades

Damping properties of turbine blade materials
Damping capacity of lock joints

Aerodynamic vibration damping

Vibration damping in a centrifugal force field

ter 7: improving the Vibrational Reliability of Working Blades
Optimizing the damping properties of turbine blade materials
Improving the characteristics of aerodynamic vibrational damping

Increasing the damping capability of lock joints

Improving the vibrational reliability of pairwise shrouded blades

1!ch98

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", i981

1861/153

EHD

5?

FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE(NWLY

95
103
228

118
129

144
155
156

166
175
187
204
213
220
220
237
258
270
281
281
286
291
298
302