FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10523

18 May 1982

USSR Report

SPACE
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

JPRS L/10523
18 Hay 1982
USSR REPORT
SPACE
(F000 2/82)
CONTENTS
HANNED HISSIOR HIGHLIGHTS
'AIR 6 COSMOS' on 'Oosnos 1267‘ as Precursor of Hodular
vessel.00000.0.0.000...lOOOOOOCCQCOOOOCQOOOCO'DOCOOOOOOOOOOOOC 1

Blagov Consents on Plight of "Selyut—G'n'Cosnos-Hﬁ' . . . . . . . . . . 6

'AIR a COSMOS' on Training, Mission of Soviet-French Joint

Plightosassessaoasescooolooseooooosesasoooaoooooooossaosssaso. 6

'AIR 8 COSMOS. 0n Puture of French-Smut: n‘sht.oessosoooooaoso 9

Space Research on Atnospheric-Optical Phenomena Fro-

'saly‘lt-6'oos0.9000000000000000OsooooosoootOoooo'ooooo'ooaoaoa 10

LIFE SCIENCES

Conparative Analysis of Biological Effects of Electromagnetic
Radiation: 1. new“. sntQOOlOOOIOOOOOOCGIOIOOOCOOOOQQOOOO 16

SPACE ENGINEERING
Technique and Bquipnent for Radionetric Calibration of

'Fragnent' Multispectral Scanning Systea in Absolute
mercy unit.000.0000....CO0.0.00000..COOOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOQO0.0. 26

SPACE APPLICATIONS

Observation of Visible Manifestations of Ocean-Dynalics Pro-
'&1yut-6' orb1ta1sutimv...OOOOOOOOOOOOOO000.500.000.000... 36

Method of Integrated Investigations of Ocean and Atmosphere

PIC. spaceaooeooeoeeooooooeooosoaaassess0.009000050000000...as ‘2

- a - [III - USSR - 211. 881‘ 3000

MD neat-In Her “I" V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysio of Date Pro. Synchronous mature-outs Made by
'neteor' Artificial Barth Satellite and Ships leer
“Uta“ Slur: of 00th “Coons...oosooosssooosesssssesesosos

Experinent in Using Videointomtiou tron 'Heteor' Satellites
To Im03tipte Oceanic Phage“...osseeosooosooosoesoosssssoe

Geonetric Correction of Scanner Photographs of the Earth's

surt.c¢eeoe000090000000eeoooeoootboootooeoooevooooooooeooeesoo

til-ins Hoonsets From Space 93 Method of Studying Barth's

Am’phereooseoeoooeeooooeoOI000.000nooooeoo.00.090.000.000...

Using Space Photographs To Study and Map Agricultural
Utili‘ation of “Mp...sssseossossooscooesssssoossooossoeossoo

Experimental Evaluation of Methods for Autonoted Interpretation
of Agricultural Crops on Basis of Photographs Obtained With
'Frepent' Hultispectrel Scanning Systa......................

Napping Forest. Fr“ Space PbtograpMsessooooooooossQOIQOOOosIo

Space-Based Research for Urban Planning.........................

satClli-te Imaging for Urban Planninssossooooovssoosoo'ooooooosso

Using Materials Fro- Hultiepoctrsl Scanner Survey To Study
Anthropogenic Bffxt on the smirmtesossoeoeeeooeoooesosos

'Intercosuoe' Program Meetings on Environmental Pollution. . . . . . .

SPACE POLICY AND ADMINISTRATIW

International Monitoring he. Space.u....nn.nu.n.u..n...

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

52

69

77

81

89

914

99
106

109
115

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm MISSIM HIGHLIGTS

'AIR 8 COSMOS' ON 'COSHOS 1267' AS PRBCURSOR 01' W VBSSBLS

Paris AIR 81‘ COSMOS in French 31 Oct 81 p 39

[Article by Pierre Lansersux, special correspondent sent by AIR ET COSMOS
to Star City as guest of Soviets]

[Text] The Coma—1267 autonatic satellite. which has been noored to the
Salyut-6 orbital station since June 1981. is the precursor of new nodular
transport spacecraft that will enable the USSR to build a large new third-
generation orbital station.

This major new objective of Soviet astronautics was officially disclosed on
17 June 1981, just 2 days before the docking of Connor-1267 with Salyut-6,
by the Soviet nueber one in person.1 Leonid Brezhnev revealed on that date
that "The USSR will be putting into service per-amt orbital scientific
complexes whose crews will be renewed!"

A little sore is known today about what Come-1267 actually is and what
the future Soviet orbital stations will be like. thanks especially to the
facts given us at Star City by Gen Vladinir Shatalov. co-ander of the
Soviet cosnonauts.

Cosmos-1267 is an experinentel satellite of the Cosnos series designed to
test new space systems in orbit and to fine-tune assembly nethods for large-
scale space coaplexes. Cosmos-1267 is not a new piloted craft but a
"prototype of a nodular transport vessel" that will lake it possible to

build pernanently orbited space stations of a larger size and better
equipped than the present Salyut.

'rheae future stations will be able to-accmodate three-person crews. thanks
to the new three-place Soyuz '1' transport vessel. This will sake it possible
to lodge up to six cononauts aboard future Salyuts in cases where a
"visiting" crew is sent up in addition to the "sain" crew.

Cosmos-1267 is a lS-ton vessel, twice as heavy as the Soyuz ‘l' (7 tons) and
almost as heavy as a Salyut station (19 ions). It will be able to carry

15 See AIR ET 008308 No 852. 866. 867 end 875.

MWWONIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

around 8-10 tons of cargoz. although this characteristic does not appear to
have been defined as yet. Devoid of a solar generator, Cosmos-1267 consists
mainly of three elements: A propulsion module. a habitation module with uir
lock, and a cargo nodule, possibly with a recoverable compartment to bring
back to earth the products manufactured under microgravity in future
"space-industry workshops." as explained by Shatalov. The Cosmos-1267
habitation module resembles that of the Soyuz T. but the cargo compartment
is cylindrical and the propulsion system is different. as is the docking
system. This new transport vessel can be built in several variants, with
different special-purpose modules, according to needs: habitational,
microgravity laboratory, astronomy. geophysics. etc. The habitational
module will enable crews to live and work aboard, but cosmonauts will not
be launched aboard this future transport vessel, which will actually be a
kind of "Super Progress."

The present Salyut will be the generative basis of these future large
orbital complexes, which will consist of many habitstional modules of the
size of a Sslyut station. The future thirdogenerstion orbital etation3. will
be equipped with several docking ports that will accommodate different
special-purpose modules. The facilities required for different missions
will be installed in the station and in the special-purpose modules that can
be added one by one as needed. This new concept of a nodular orbital station
is judged by the Soviet experts to be "more flexible and more economically
viable" from the standpoint of a permanent establishment in space.

"The time is not far away when the USSR will put such a complex in orbit,"
said Soviet cosmonaut Konstantin Peoktistov on 24 June, adding that "The
recent docking of Cosmos-1267 with Salyut-6 was the prototype of such an
ac tual izat ion . "

The Soviets are now building the facility at Star City to house the flight
simulator designed for the new nodular stations. Vladimir Shatalov pointed
out that: "This new facility will be in service within 3 to 6 years, by
1984-1985. that is. This means the USSR will be ready by that time to orbit
a permanent modular station, based on the experimence it will have acuqired
with Cosmos-1267 and its probable successors. This will provide confirma-
tion of the capacity of these orbital complexes for flights of long
duration."

The mission of Cosmos-1267. launched on 25 April 1981 and moored to
Salyut since 19 June. will terminate in a few weeks or a few months

2) See AIR ET COSMOS No 866.

3) The Soviets regard the first five Salyuts as first-generation orbital
stations, and Salyut 6 as the first second-generation station, capable,
that is. of docking two vessels (Soyuz and Progress) simultaneously. by
neans of its two docking ports.
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the latest. The satellite, which carried no cargo for this test flight,
is in fact scheduled to be detached yrior to the possible sending of another
"principal crew" to occupy the Sslyut—6 station. assuming the Soviets will
decide to send new crews, including the first Francovsoviet crev. aboard
Salyut 6. Hore probably, homer, these crews will use the new Salyut-7

station, and in this case Sslyut.6 will be abandoned.
1mm: A. a C. 1981

9399
680: 8119/0700vA

MOWUSEONLY
l-‘OIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLY

BLAGOV COWS 0N FLIGHT OF 'SALWT-6'-'COS}D8¢1267'
Paris AIR 5 008108 in French 28 Now 81 p 62

[Article by Pierre Lsngeremt: "Soviet Station 'Selyut-G' in Orbit
Fifty Honths"]

[Text] The Soviet orbital station "Salyut-6" has been in orbit more than four
years. The station. which was launch on 29 Septeeber 1977. has coepleted
over 26.000 revolutions of the earth and covered sole 10 billion kilometers.
"Cosmos-1267”. which the Soviets tern a "heavy satellite". has been docked to
the station since June 1981. "Cosmos-1267" is a precursor of new nodular
transport vessels which in the future will pernit the Soviets to construct
large third-generation orbital stations announced for 1986-85 (See AIR &
cosms No 879).

"In the future. such conpleres conpoeed of satellites of comparable nass will
be widely used," Viktor Blagov, assistant director of the "Salyut" progran,
declared recently to the Soviet Press Agency APR. "It is envisaged that
specialised nodules (astronony laboratories, renote sensing, technological,
etc.) will be joined to then. They will have a weight comparable to that

of the station which will thus becone a comfortable space apartment.”

These future third—generation orbital stations will be sore optinised.

"The cosnonauts will be able to live in the crew caspartnent with In!”
confort and work in better conditions aboard the specialised nodules."
explained Blagov.

For the present. "Salyut-b" renains in orbit with the "Cos-osc1267"
satellite docked to one of its ends. thus forning the largest orbital con-
pler realised to date by the USSR. The orbit of this couple: has already
been raised on two occasions by the.engines of "Cosmos-1267". Blagov re-
called this fact in announcing that'the orbit of "Salyut-6"-"Cosnos-1267"
will be corrected once again in the near future. According to the assistant
director of the progras, "the tests will require a certain additional amount
of time.”

"The operation of "$alyut-6" has already enabled the 0881! to acquire useful
experience in coordinating work in space and on the ground," declared
Blagov. He added that "the new operations have led the Soviets to add a
NB OFFICIAL USE ONLY

third hall to the Flight Control Center for better sinultaneoua col-and
of several spacecraft." This had been announced to us at the tine of our
recent visit to Moscow (See AIR G cosmos Nos 877-882).

"Experience has shown that operation of. a nanned orbital station can be
extended for three to five years." said Blagov. ”The 'Salynt-6' station.
conceived for a service period of 18 months, has actually operated for

50 nonths in orbit without najor failure. No serious trouble has been
noted apart fron the natural deterioration of the solar panels and bat-
teries." declared Blagov. But Blagov acknowledged that "the station owes
a large measure of its longevity to the repairs performed on board by the
cosnonauts. During these four years, 27 coanonauta. of which 19 were
Soviet and 8 citizens of eastern nenber countries of Intercoms. have
worked aboard 'Salyut-b' and have parforned note than 1.600 scientific

and technical experinents." "The cosnonauts live according to Hoscov
tine." explained Blagov, "with days of work and days of rest. renaining in
permanent contact with the Control Center and with their relatives and
friends. But this does not prevent then tron being overburdened with work
at certain tines."

In the future, the Soviets are going to raedy this problem "by further
developing automation of certain con-and and function processes." The
"Delta" autonomous navigation system tested on "Salyutoo" already handles

a large part of the operations of orientation and stabilization of the
station during perfornance of experiments. In addition. Blagov revealed that
it is possible to equip the telescopes or caneraa with a nini-conputar con-
nected with the "Delta" system to progran the daily observations. The

crew would lave only to monitor the functioning of the systems and inter-
vene only if necessary.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1981

C50: 1853/4-P

MWMMY
“MUSEONLY

'AIR 6 COSMS' on TRAINING, “138101! 01’ SOVIET-PRINCE JOINT FLIGHT

Paris AIR 3T 0081103 in French 31 Oct 81 pp 37-38

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "First French Astronaut to Fly at End of
June 1982"]

[Text] The first French astronaut will fly aboard a Soviet spacecraft about
the aiddle of next year, between June and August . lost probably toward the
end of June 1982. lie will be launched together with two Soviets, aboard a
Soyuz T spacecraft which will rendezvous with the orbital station in which
they will stay for 1 week in orbit at about 250 In above the earth. The
station will be either the Salyut-6 now in orbit. or lore probably a new
Salyut-7 which is scheduled to be launched at the start of 1982.

The station will be manned initially by a "priaary crew” who are tentatively
scheduled to be launched around February 1982. This crew will consist of
two Soviet cosaonauta who will effect a flight of long duration. but of

less than 6 aonths. according to Vladimir Shatalov, head of the cosmonauts.
The duration of the flight will be set before their departure by officials
of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences, as is customary. V. Shatalov disclosed.

But in the case of flights of long duration. it is only after 1 month in
orbit that the actual duration of the nission is finally decided. with a
lead tine of S to 10 days approxiaately.

This primary crew will be joined near the end of June 1982 by a "visiting
crew" consisting of two Soviet cosnonauts and the first French astronaut.
At this point and for the first tine, there will be five persons aboard a
Salyut spacecraft. Until now. the Soviet Salyutvé station has been occupied
by no more than four persons at any one tine.

The two Franco-Soviet crews, who have been in training since 6 Septasber 1981.
are now training at City of the Stars. where we set then at the official in-
troduction on 19 October organised by the was [National Center for Space
Studies] and Inter-cosmos (see AIR 31' 008108 lo 878).

The "titular crew." who have been designated as the first to lift off, consists
of Aviation Cot-sander Yuriy Hslyshev. 6 [as published]. flight col-sander;
Engineer Alexandre Ivanchenkov. lol, flight engineer: and Jean-Ioup Chretien,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

63. astronautverperinenter. We recall that Tu. lialyshev piloted Soyu: T2.
the first of the new spacecraft to be launched with crew. and that

A. Ivanchenkov. passenger aboard Soyuz 29. flew aboard Salyut 6 for a
period of 1&0 days.

The "standby crew." who will replace the titular crew in case of failure
of the latter. consists of Col Leonid Klein, 60, flight consander;
Vladinir Solov'e. 3S, flight engineer; and Patrick Baudry. 35. astronaut-
experimenter. L. Kizia took part aboard Soyuz T3 in the new spacecraft's
first three-nan flight. V. Solov'e is a new astronaut selected in 1977.
Upon graduation in 1970 free the Batman Advanced Technical School in lbscow.
he worked first in the Space Studies Bureau Advanced Technical School in
Moscow. he worked first in the Space Studies Bureau headed by Acadenician
Sergey Korolev, then returned to the Space Operations Center as a rocket
propulsion specialist. lie is narried and the father of two children. His
father was an aeronautical test engineer.

The detailed nission plan will be set up tentatively at the end of

Noveaber 1981. The two Franco—Soviet crews will undergo an initial flight-
readiness exanination at the end of January 1982 adninistered by the
Control Cousittee of the USSR Acadeay of Sciences. A second mainstion
will take place 1 south before the flight to designate the crew to be sent
into space.

The present designation of one as the titular crew and the other as the
standby crew notwithstanding. the chances of flying of each of the l'ranco—
Soviet crews are about equal. In case of failure or accident on the part
of one of the nenhcrs of the titular crew, the entire crew would. in
principle. be changed. But, according to Gen Georgiy Beregovoy. cot-sander
of City of the Stars. it is entirely possible that only one of the nabers
may be replaced. It has already happened once that an entire crew has had
to be replaced. and several tines that one of the neabers of a priaary
crew has had to be. because of illness or accident. Thus, Soviet Cosmonaut
Valeriy Ryunin. holder of the world's space flight record (362 days) had
to be sent into space a second tine in the place of Valentin bebedev, who
had suffered a knee injury.

For the moment. the two Franco-Soviet crews are pursuing their practical
training which began l and 1/2 aonths ago with a l-week survival exercise

in the North Sea off the coast of Peodossis. to familiarise thenselves with
the procedure for a forced landing at sea. Unlike previous Soyuz's, the new
Soyuz spacecraft is designed to be able to put down on land as well as at
sea. The landing point can thus be displaced by sons 1,000 ha free the
planned one in case of necessity.

The two French astronauts have also taken part in weightless-simulation
exercises aboard the new 11.76 laboratory plane. which enables the effecting
of acne 15 siaulations (by way of power dives followed by clinbs), whereas
the previous luv-106 provided only up to five simulations and for shorter
durations. During these flights, the astronauts train to nove about inside
a fullvscale aodel of the Soyuz T cabin installed in the fuselage of the
plane. Further such flights are scheduled for the spring of 1982.

7

POIOFI'ICMLUSEONLY
FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

This training was supplemented by other exercises in survival on land,
siaulating landings in sun-pa and on lakes, with recovery by helicopter.

The crews will also undergo winter training near Moscow, and not in Siberia
as is customary. Actually. the flight or the FrancovSoviat crew is scheduled
to take place in summer and. theoretically, survival training under nountain
or extrene cold conditions is not necessary. Throughout their training.

the French astronauts are monitored by an appointed military physician,

Dr Sergey Ponolarev. a specialist in the training of astronauts, who has
worked at the City of the Stars over the past ll years.

But to date. the training of the French astronauts has been highly satis-
factory. Chretien and Baudry are very good candidates: self-disciplined,
meticulous. punctual and hardeorking, according to the officials of City

of the Stars. Moreover. their qualification as nilitary pilots and their
training as test pilots enable then to rapidly assimilate knowledge of the
Soyuz T spacecraft and its handling. In principle. however, the French
astronaut will not be called upon to pilot the Soyuz I; that is the function
of the flight con-ander. Nevertheless. in case of difficulties. each of the
passengers aboard the Soyuz T nust be capable of manually piloting the space-
craft. designed. though it is, to be flown nor-ally in the autonrti: node
with the help of the onoboard conputer.

COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1981

9238
650: 3100/297
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'AIR & COSMOS' 0N FUTURE OF FRENCH-SOVIET HIGHS
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 31 Oct 81 p 39

[Article by Pierre Langereux, special correspondent sent by AIR B‘l‘ cosuos
to Star City as guest of Soviets]

[Text] French officials are desirous of looking forward to further flights
by French cosnonauts. following the first one scheduled for aid-4982 by,

in principle. Jean-loop Chretien. This would provide an opportunity for
"backup" cosnonaut Patric Baudry to fly, and above all a neans of continuing
Franco-Soviet space cooperation at a very interesting level. The head of
the ONES [National Center for Space Studies] expressed officially his
interest in continuing joint space flights, on the occasion of the recent
Franco-Soviet talks held in Rode: (France).

The Soviet officials have not yet replied officially to this French proposal.
It is moreover probable they will not do so prior to conplation of the

first joint flight. However. those with when we talked during our visit

to Moscow are rather favorable to the idea. Gen Georgiy Beregovoy. couander
of Star City, thinks that "The cooperation beeun in this doaain cannot be
stopped." Professor Eugene Choulgenlw, director of hionedicine in the
Ministry of Public Health. also considers that "future Joint flights would
represent a consolidation of FrancoPSoviet cooperation." Prance can actual-
ly contribute much to the USSR effort, with respect to bionedical instru-
aentation for manned space flights. This is already the case with the blood-
echography equipment that is to be used for the first tine in space on the
occasion of the first Franco-Soviet flight. This equipnent has greatly
impressed Soviet officials. who would like to use it for further experimental
work during flights of long duration.

COYYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1981

9399
080: 8119/0700-A

POROFHCIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

030 551.593:629.l98.3

SPACE RESEARCH ON ATMOSPHERIC-OPTICAL PHENOHENA FROM 'SALYUT-ﬁ'

Leningrad ATHOSFBRA ZBHLI s "SALYUTA-6" in Russian 1981 (signed to press 25 Her 81)
pp 2-8, 206-207

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Barth’s Atmosphere--The
View From Salyut-6" by Aleksandr Ivanovich Lazarev, Vladimir Vasil'yevich Kovalenok,
Aleksandr Sergeyevich Ivanchenkov and Sergey Vasgenovich Avakyan, edited by L. I.
Shtannikova, Gidrometeoisdat. 2300 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] This book presents the results of research on atmospheric-optical phenomena
accomplished by the main crew of the second expedition on board the Salyut-6 orbital
scientific station from June through October 1978. Peculiaritias of optics research
in space are noted. The results of observations of the space and time distribution
of night atnosphere emanation and aurora are described. Analysis of the foregoing
is presented taking into consideration activity in the sphere of geophysics and so-
lar physics. Also presented are the results of observations of such atmospheric-
optical phenonena as the "mustache effect." mirror reflection of the sun from the
earth's atmosphere, luminescence of sodiacsl light. luminescence from the stars,
planets and luminous particles.

This book is intended for a wide circle of specialists in physics of the upper at-
mosphere and near-earth space, astrophysics and meteorology.

Introduction

April 12th 1981 marks the 20th anniversary of the first space f1ight--the flight of
Yuriy Alekseyevich Gagarin in the spacecraft Vostok. since that time, many Soviet
cosmonauts and cosmonauts of the socialist countries have flown missions on the Vos-
tok, Voskhod and Soyuz Soviet manned space vehicles and on the Salyut orbital space
stations. Scientific research and experimentation has been conducted on all of the
manned space vehicles.

Beginning with Yu. A. Gagarin’s first flight in space, extremely important studies
have been conducted related to the atmosphere and atmospheric-optical phenomena.
These include studies of the colored daylight and twilight halos, night emissive
layers, aurora, silver clouds, glimmering stars and planets in the earth's night ho-
rizon, etc. The results of these studies have enabled us to define significantly
more precisely our concept of many physical processes and phenomena observed in the
earth's atmosphere. Success is achieved in this regard on almost every flight in

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

space--we obtain new data on optical phenomena in the earth’s atmosphere. This is
related to the fact that a certain set of research conditions arises for each indi-
vidual space flight allowing us to study certain or other optical phenomena, and to
the fact that the earth's atmosphere itself is changing, and, correspondingly. atmos-
pheric-optical phenomena.

The main crew for the second expedition of the Salyut-6 orbital scientific station--
USSR pilot-cosmonauts V. V. Kovalenok and A. S. Ivanchenkov-completed an extensive
series of experiments related to the study of the atmosphere and atmosphericroptical
phenomena. This crew was transported to Salyut-6 by the Soyuz-29 space vehicle,
launched 15 Jun 1978. It returned to earth 2 Nov 1978 on the Soyuz-31 spacecraft.
Two visiting crews of international composition were transported to Salyut-6 during
the flight of this second-expedition main crew.

The first visiting international crew~-USSR pilot-cosmonaut P. I. Klimuk and pilot-
cosmonaut H. Hermashevskiy of the Polish People's Republic-was transported to Sal-
yut-6 on the Soyuz-30 spacecraft launched 27 Jun 1978. The crew returned to earth on
this same spacecraft on 5 Jul 1978. The second visiting crew-USSR pilot-cosmonaut
V. F. Bykovskiy and GDR pilot-cosmonaut S. Jsehn--was transported to Salyut-6 on the
Soyuz-31 spacecraft launched 27 Aug 1978. It returned to earth 6 Sep 1978 on board
the Soyuz-29 spacecraft.

The long Ibo-day flight of V. V. Kovalenok and A. s. Ivanchenkov enabled systematic
observations of the atmosphere and atmospheric-optical phenomena to be conducted. As
a result, success was achieved in ascertaining new natural laws governing certain
physical processes and phenomena observed in the earth's atmosphere. The cosmonauts‘
advance training for prolonged space flight enables them to conduct certain visual
observations of atmospheric-optical phenomena from the very first days they are on
board-~chiefly response to inquiries from earth. At the beginning of a flight, how-
ever, emotional factors exert significant influence on one's perception of the sur-
rounding environment. Cosmonauts become enraptured at the bright, colorful scenes of
daylight and twilight halos, sunrises and sunsets, the beauty of the earth‘s cloud
cover, its surface and oceans, the bright scenes of aurora, silver clouds and night
emissive layers.

Later on, the cosmonauts gradually become accustomed to the scenes they are observ-
ing and focus their attention on certain processes of great significance that play a
substantive role in studying the natural environment from space.

Undergoing a prolonged space flight, the cosmonauts begin to classify and analyse the
phenomena they obrarve. Consultation with experts that takes place during periods of
communication aids the cosmonauts in executing independently certain experiments of
considerable importance in the study of the natural environment. The "Program For
Visual Observations From Manned Space vehicles" developed by A. I. Lazarev for the
first expedition provided great assistance in conducting space experiments on board
the Salyut~6 orbital station. USSR pilot~cosmonauts V. A. Drhanibekov and 0. C. Ha-
karov delivered this program to Salyut-6 on ll Jan 1978.

Crews of the Salyut-6 orbital station's second expedition continued the research on
atmospheric-optical phenomena according to this program. They conducted visual ob-
servationa and photographed emissions of the night atmosphere. aurora, silver clouds,

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

zodiacal light, rising and setting of the sun, planets and stars, etc. Naturally,
most of the experiments were accomplished by the main crew that spent 160 days in or-
bit. The contents of this book are devoted chiefly to classification, analysis and
interpretation of the results of these experiments.

we will make note of a number of interesting experiments conducted by the crews of
Salyut-6's second expedition and note the most important results of this research.
One of the most interesting observations is related to the second emissive layer on
the earth's night side. The second emissive layer was observed for the first time
from outer space by cosmonauts V. G. Lazarev and O. G. Haksrov aboard the Soyuz-12
spacecraft in September 1973. Cosmonauts P. I. Klimuk and V. I. Sevast'yanov contin-
ued these observations on board Salyut-b from May through July 1975. Cosmonauts Yu.
V. Romanenko and G. H. Grechko frequently observed the second emissive layer from the
Sslyut-6 orbital station. They even obtained photographs of the first and second
emissive layers of the night atmosphere. Results of the research of Yu. V. Romanenko
and c. H. Grechko confirmed the notion that it was possible to observe the second
emissive layer continuously in the equatorial zone.

The second emissive layer in the equatorial zone was also observed by V. V. Kovalenok
and A. S. Ivanchenkov. In addition, they were the first to observe from space lumi-
nescence on a planetary scale from the second emissive layer. Later, based on the
results of systematic observations, the cosmonauts turned their attention to the
phenomenon where a planetary-scale outburst of the second emissive layer turns out to
be a precursor of an intense aurora manifestation. A planetary luminescence of the
second emissive layer was often observed as well upon completion of such an aurora.
Observations of the second emissive layer have allowed us to corroborate certain
well-known geophysical phenomena, and have brought to light new concepts regarding
the link between upper atmosphere emissions and activity in the sphere of geophysics
and solar physics.

A number of interesting results are related to aurora observations. Several of the
observations of V. V. Kovalenok and A. s. Ivanchenkov are special in that these cos-
monauts were the first to see areas of aurora luminescence from space not only in the
region of the aurora oval, but in the middle latitudes and subtropics as well. Some-
times Salyut-6 flew over areas of aurora at latitudes of about 25 degrees. Particu.
larly interesting were observation results with respect to the color vision in areas
of aurora luminescence, which enable us to qualitatively evaluate the energy of elec-
tron flows whose excitation causes the luminescence. During the course of 59 days of
flight, the cosmonauts made systematic, daily observations of the aurora. This cor-
roborated the conjecture mentioned earlier as to the possibility of observing aurora
from space continuously in the region of the aurora oval.

During the mission of Salyut-G's second expedition, information was relayed to the
orbital station for the first time with regard to a magnetic storm expected on 25 Sep
1978, along with a request to conduct aurora observations south of Australia and
southeast of Canada. The prediction was entirely justified, and the cosmonauts ob-
served an aurora measuring three [degree of intensity]. V. V. Kovalenok and A. S.
lvanchenkov observed the most powerful aurora (a four) on 29 Sap 1978 in parts of the
northern and southern hemispheres up to latitudes of about 25 degrees.

Observations of the "mustache effect" appeared as somewhat of a surprise-upper-atmos-
phere twilight luminescence overhanging the emanation from dense layers of the earth's

12
POI 0F?ICIAL US! ONLY

night atmosphere. V. V. Kovalenok and A. S. Ivanchenkov noticed that this phenome-
non can look different. According to the cosmonauts, on certain occasions a single
layer was seen; on others-two stretched-out areas of luminescence. Sometimes the
phenomenon was not observed at all. These results can be explained both by differ-
encea in the structure of the emissivs layers and by differences in the conditions
of observation.

Unusual results were obtained upon observing silver clouds on the earth's twilight
horizon during the initial period of flight from 23 Jun through 5 Jul 1978, when
Salyut-6 was in solar orbit. P. I. Klimuk and u. hermashevskiy, members of a vis-
iting international crew, participated in these observations. clearly and constant-
ly visible at all latitudes above the atmospheric halo was a thin strip, silver in
color, approximately one-fourth the thickness of the first emissive layer. This
strip was quite clearly defined (more so than the ordinary silver clouds one ob-
serves). In a discussion of these results with V. I. Sevast'yanov, it became appar-
ent that he and P. I. Klimuk had observed this strip at various latitudes during
their flight on board the Salyut-6 orbital station in sun-er of 1975.

At the request of A. s. Ivanchenkov, observations of silver clouds were conducted in
the summer of 1979 by the main crew of Selyut-b's third expedition. Cosmonauts V. A.
Lyakhov and V. V. Ryumin obtained new data on the latitudinal distribution of silver
clouds and other dissipating layers in the mesopause. These data define considera-
bly more precisely our concept of the nesopause structure in the lower and equator-
ial latitudes.

v. V. Kovalenoh and A. S. Ivanchenkov devoted a great deal of attention to observa-
tions of cloud cover structure over seas and oceans. They repeatedly observed the
generation of cyclones and typhoons, and the forlation of families of cyclone dis-
turbances. The data from systematic observations of the cloud cover enabled them to
express certain views on the interrelationship between large-scale cloud cover
structure and the structure of sea and ocean currents.

The crew of Salyut-6's second expedition is apparently the first to observe from
space such atmospheric-optical phenomena as rainbow clouds and gloria. V. P. Bykov-
skiy and S. Jaehn. members of a visiting international crew, participated in observing
the rainbow clouds. Both of these phenomena arise as a result of solar radiation
interference in clouds made up of ice crystals.

As long ago as the occasion of his first flight on the Soyuz-25 spacecraft. V. V.
Kovalenok observed the phenomenon of apparent magnification of objects and forma-
tions on the ocean surface when haze appeared. During his Salyut-6 mission, Rove-
lenok got the impression several times within a short period that he was observing
objects and formations on the earth's surface through a magnifying glass. A. A.
Leonov, V. I. Sevast'yenov and other Soviet cosmonauts also mentioned observing
earth objects from space as a magnified representation. This phenomenon is linked
to peculiarities in the frequency-contrast response of the cosmonauts' system of op-
tics, and to sharp change in the atmosphere's transfer function in certain regions
of the globe.

Zodiacal light was often observed by P. I. Klinuk and V. I. Sevast'yanov from on
board the Salyut~s station in June and July of 1975--also by c. h. Grechko and

13

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
POR 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY

Yu. V. Romanenko from 8alyut-6, January through larch 1978. There are significant
differences, however, between the observational data from Salyut-4 and Salyut-o.
Klimuk and Sevast'yanov could isolate the beam structure in zodiacal light with con-
fidence. They estimated that the beam contrast reached about 10 percent. however,
Grechko and Romanenko were unable to find beam structure in zodiacal light.

v. V. Kovslenok and A. s. Ivanchenkov also conducted observations of zodiacal light.
In half of the instances, Rovalenok could distinguish in it a weakly defined bean
structure; Ivanchenko could not distinguish one at all.

Differences in these observations of zodiacal light are evidently related to space
and time differences in the distribution of meteor showers and associations observed
at various times of the year, and to variance in the contrast sensitivity of the
cosmonauts' system of optics for low brightness levels.

The optics research conducted by the cosmonauts comprises a highly significant por-
tion of a broad program for studying our natural environment from space. Extensive
information has already been obtained from space with regard to the atmosphere's
diverse properties and the earth's surface and ocean areas. Hitherto unknown atmos-
pheric-optical phenomena have been discovered, and new data on radiation of the sun,
planets, stars and interstellar medium have been recorded. This material is being
widely utilized both for accomplishing numerous national economy-oriented tasks and
for studying the natural environment. The results of optics research completed by
crews of the Salyut-6 orbital station's second expedition are contributing signifi-
cantly to the accomplishment of these tasks.

Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chapter 1. Peculiarities of Optics Research Conducted in Space. . . . . . . . . 9

1.1. Parameters and criteria for optical instruments and systems ..... . . 9
1.2. Transfer functions of the atmosphere and viewport ...... . . . . . . 16
1.3. Vision in space. . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 22

Chapter 2. Emissive Radiation of the Night and Twilight Atmosphere. . . . . . . 31

2.1. Optical excitation of the upper atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.2. Time and space distribution of emissive radiation in the night atmosphere 48

2.3. 5a1yut-6 observations of night atmosphere emissions. . . . . . . . . . . 70

Chapter 3. Aurora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . 82
3.1. Time and space distribution and features of the energy spectrum in areas
of aurora luminescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82

3.2. Observations of aurora from the Voskhod, Soyuz-9 and Soyuz-15 space
vehicles and from the Salyut and Salyut-a orbital stations . . . . . . 101

3.3. Observations of aurora from the Salyut-6 orbital station . . . . . . . . 105

3.4. The outlook for aurora-related optics research on manned space vehicles. 133

ter 6. Observations of Clouds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
.1. Peculiarities in observing and recording the cloud cover from space. . . 138
2. Structural framework of cloud cover over the seas and oceans . . . . . . 1&0

16
FOR OPfICIAL USE ONLY

4 3. Gloria ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1&8
6. . Rainbow clouds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
6 5. Silver clouds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

.

162
162
172
175
177

Chapter 5. Other Optical Phenonena. . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . .

l Luminous particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 Apparent magnification and gaps in the at-oaphere. . . . . . . . . . .
.3. Upper-atmosphere twilight emanation that overhang. the earth's horizon
.6. Zodiacal light . . ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

on...

Concluaion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
Bibliography . . . . L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
COPYRIGHT: Gidroneteoizdat, 1981

9768
CSO: 1866/22

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WWWONLY

LIFE SCIENCES

11130 539.106

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF ELECTROMAGBTIC RADIATIW:
1. NERVOUS SYSTEM

Moscow KOSHICHESKIYE ISSLBWANIYA in Russian V01 19, No 10, Jul-Aug 81
(manuscript received 16 Aug 80) PP “9-653

[Article by V. V. Antipov, B. I. Davydov and V. S. Tilthonchult]

[Text] Electromagnetic radiation (M) of non-ionizing nature has in recent years
become an ecologically meaningful factor in hm'activity, and the field of astro-
nautics is, of course, no exception. Hence, one must regard as normal the newsurge
of interest among the medical people, biologists and engineer-physicists, during the
lest few years, in studying the mechanisms of the biological effects of not, deter-
mining permissible levels of activity, matters of dosimetry end so on.

The last 15 years have witnessed the publication of many exhaustive surveys [1] and
monographs [2-5] devoted to the generalization and analysis of experimental data on
the mechanisms of M's biological effects, to matters of standards, to means and
measures for protection from radiation etc., and attention has been given primarily
to radio-frequency EHR. There has also been a sharp increase in the nunber of peri-
odical items concerned with the problem. There are, however, at least two circus-
stsnces which make it advisable to do a comparative analysis of the biological ef-
fects of Bill. First of all, even in such monographs as the work of Baranski and
Czerski [4] the basic literature is comprised of publications up to 1970 only.
Secondly, in the analysis of the literature there has been insufficient emphasis on

reaction of the critical systems of the organism to M.

This series of articles villettempt to analyze the data published up to 1979 on the
effects of am on the central nervous systas, gonads and crystalline lens, and on

lethal effects .

First,s few general remarks. In this series of reports we have analyzed only those
works in which the parameters of a physical factor have been specified: power den-
sity, frequency or wavelength of electromagnetic field, the irradiation conditions,
biological object parameters, kind of animal, size of groups, number of tests etc.

Works in which no characteristic was specified have not been analyzed.

16

MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 . Cl inical-Phys iological Studies

During the last 20 years cl inical-physiological investigations have been conducted
to detect disturbances in functional activity of the nervous, cardiovascular and
digestive systems, and studies have been made of changes in the blood and metabolic
indexes and in certain endocrine gland functions in a production environaent, which
have been called "production experiments". We attempted to evaluate the advantages
and the shortcomings of the "production experiment" using the study of the function-
al activity of the nervous system as the most informative index of an an "injury"
(in accordance with the opinion of many of the authors cited).

The effect of m on the function of the human central nervous system in a produc-
tion environment has been studied by many authors [3-6]. The majority of them note
that as production experience increases the frequency of the complaints about state
of health increases.

According to the data from most of the clinical-physiological surveys, one-gains the
impression of an earlier and more pronounced reaction of the nervous system in the
case of chronic irradiation [5, 7-9].

This is manifested subjectively in the form of constant headache, increased fatig-
ability, disturbance and shortening of sleep, heightened irritability, impairment
of memory and other symptoms. It is easy to discern the polymorphism of the com-
plaints and the low recurrence of them in the investigations of the various authors.

In an objective study, vegetative disturbances were observed: tremor of hands and
eyelids, heightened tendon reflexes, sweating of palms, inhibited dermographia and
hyperhydrosis. According to the data [6], distortions of Shcherbak's reflex and
skin tuspersture asymetry were found and paroxysmal headache was sometimes ob-
served, blanching of the skin and adynamia, often terminating in syncopic states
with prolonged poor health thereafter. Such disorders were qualified as diencephal-
ic. Some of these symptoms were f0und by other authors also [5, 8].

The changes in the vegetative nervous system were often accompanied by shifts in the
electrical activity of the cerebral cortex [5, 6]. The clinical and experimental
findings are typically polymorphic. The appearance of bilatu-ally synchronous slow
theta and delta discharges are characteristic for persons with 6 to 10 years' work
experience. The changes in the biopotentials are associated with a change in the
reactivity and excitability of the nerve cells. Analogous results were obtained by
other authors.

In the opinion of most of the researchers, the polymorphic change in nervous system
functions with a predominance of visceral-vegetative modifications and a vaguely
manifested diencephalic syndrome suggests both a direct and a mediated effect of
microwaves on the central nervous systmn. Some [8, 10] have found a correlation
between the studied indexes and the intensity of microwave irradiation and duration
of production experience.

One has to view as an important aspect of the study of m the phenomena of hunan
adaptation to it. The presence of this phenomenon and the effectiveness of the

adaptation mechanisms in man are noted in most of the works [10]. Actually, not-
withstanding man's protracted contact (over 20 years) with electromagnetic fields,

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI‘OIFICIAI.lEﬂ£(N§LY

cases of serious illness from chronic exposure to low-intensity SH? fields are un-
known in the scientific literature. A majority of the scientists, moreover, have
formed no definite impression as to the need or justification for allotting the
illness a separate nosological identity [2-5].

Analysis of production-environment clinical-physiological studies (manned space-
craft are no exception) is a very difficult task. For quantitative analysis of the
bioldogical effects one must consider a number of conditions: availability of exact
characteristics of the physical parameters of the factor in question and concomitant
factors; establishment of the active factor dosage; selection of a method of analy-
sis adequate for the data obtained and determination of the data's reliability; and,
finally, making the optimum decision: "hazardous--non-hazardous".

Host of the clinical-physiological studies, however, do not contain the exact char-
acteristic of the physical parameter in question: power density, wavelength, ex-
posure time. .

a frequency range (cm, dm, mm), power range (non-thermal, low intensity, weak, ther-
mal) and exposure range (short-term, prolonged, chronic) are usually given. It must
be emphasized that final dosimetric evaluation is influenced by a subject's loca-
tion, its size, the presence or absence of shielding, the ability of the electro-
magnetic waves to reflect off of nearby objects etc. It can be agreed that any body
situated in an SH? field is going to distort the field pattern in an almost unpre-
dictable way [11]. By virtue of this fact, one faces the'impossibility of getting
an exact appraisal of the power density under real conditions, or the possibility of
using extremely rough data based on theoretical calculations. All of this poses
distinct obstacles to the analysis and comparability of the published results and,
in some cases, makes it fundamentally impossible. The complexity of the real situ-
ation requires a complex method of treating the results for purposes of analysis.

2. Experimental Investigations

The effect of EHR on the functional state of the central nervous system was studied
on people and monkeys, and on dogs, rabbits, female cats, rats and mice [1-5, 12].

For the purpose of studying human higher nervous activity, visual and motor analy-
zers, use was made of thermometry, and blind spot and peripheral vision perimetry;
variation in the parameters of the preciseneas of movement, simple and complex reac-
tion rates, and the critical frequency at which light flashes tend to run together
were evaluated. The results of these investigations can be summarized as follows.

In the case of EHR exposure at densities of 0.3-3 mulcmz in the meter, dm and cm
bands, the findings were intensified hand tremor [13] and heightened excitability

of the dark-adapted eye [14]; the threshold of change in the lability of the retina
was found to be 0.3-0.4 mil/cm2 for the cm band and 0.8-1 mil/cm2 for the dm band [15],
with a narrowing of the field of vision at 1 mH/cmz.

The method of conditioned reflexes was shown to have a high sensitivity in experi-
ments with dogs and rabbits: positive conditioned reflexes to food increase and
the latent period is shortened. Under repeated exposures to S mil/cm2 there was an
initial intensification of the reflexes with subsequent normalization. This was re-
garded as adaptation to the EMR [16]. Rats were found to exhibit at first height-

18
FOIOFII'IGALUSEONLY

ened then, later, lowered central nervous systun excitability, an increase in the
latent period of reaction (109 ﬂirt/can2 for 15-30 minutes twice a day , a decline in
conditioned reflexes and disturbances in differentiation (600 nil/cm ) [17]. Stimu-
lation-oby means of electric current-oof the pregenglionic nerve of the upper cer-
vical ganglion in rabbits under 50 nil/m2 irradiation caused an elevation of the
nerve temperature and a lessening of the latent reaction period.

A study of 886's revealed the following general characteristics: intensified syn-
chronization (latent period from tenths to hundredths of seconds), long desynchroni-
zation (latent period of same duration), manentary desynchr'onization (at aunt of
source activation and deactivation), aftereffects in the form of intensified desyn-
chronization; appearance of epileptoid discharges [(0, 18].

The character of the changes in the electrical activity of the cortex observed in
association with Bill is maintained in the case of a disorder of the analyzer centers,
hypothalamus, thalamus or a reticular formation; the directivity of the reactions is
maintained when the cortex is isolated from the mesencephalon. The introduction of
caffeine or adrenalin intensifies convulsive discharges in the EEG. In analyzing
the experiments it is first of all necessary to answer the following question: Is
it basically possible to employ the method of electroencephalography in studying the
biological effects of an Sll!‘ field. Unfortunately, this question can be answered
neither positively nor negatively at the present time. In the first place, the use
of implanted metal electrodes in the EEG method leads to a redistribution of the SH?
field and a considerable increase in its intensity [191. The actual distortion of
the exposure density is so great that it is practically impossible to predict any
kind of solid figure for the density. In the second place, the implanted electrodes
lead to the occurrence of standing waves [20, 21, 2]. To determine the threshold of
central nervous system changes by the EEG method we used the data of Gordon [10].
1'he following relationships were obtained for an and dm waves, respectively:

y - 1.33-103ut'2‘l‘3 and y -= 1.36'102-x'3’39, where y is ,IH/cm2 and x is the exposure
time in minutes. . .

In the investigation of biological sensitivity most of the experiments were run with
rabbits and guinea pigs. Studies were made of the activity of chol inesterase, ace-
tylcholinesteraoe, dehydrogenass, succinic acid and cytochrome oxidase of brain
tissues, the blood and other organs. '

It was revealed that the degree of cholinesterase reduction is not uniform in dif-
ferent parts of the brain: cerebral cortex, subcortex, cerebellar trunk. Changes in
tissue chol inesterase are preceded by a reduction in blood cholinesterase.

The relationship between the observed effects and the M intensity and duration was
clarified. The absence of any effects at all at 1 nil/cmz and a lowering of activity
at 10, 20 and 60 aﬂ/cmz were revealed. 1'he observed decline in cholinesterase ac-
tivity (tissue and blood) is associated by most of the authors with accimlation of
acetylcholine in the organs studied.

There is a general conclusion as to the unquestionable involvement of certain en-
zymatic systems of the divisions of the brain under the effect of mm and the need
for research to obtain more reliable results [lo].

19

POROFFIC‘IALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of an analysis of the data in the literature on biochmical indicators

the following relationship was obtained: y - 6.33-106-x'1'69, where y is rﬂlcmz

and x is exposure time in minutes. An analysis of experimental data on the study of
human and animal higher nervbus activity suggests first of all high sensitivity of
and variability of functional changes in the central nervous system under the effect
of m. For example, according to the data of G. F. Plekhanov et a1. [22], fluctua-
tions in the sensitiVity of the central nervous system are found in the range of

101° to 101 pH/cmz.

A second, no less important characteristic is the polymorphicity of observed changes.
Practically none of the researchers found that there was no effect in response to
am. The central nervous system evidently reacted to m as to any other stimulus.

A third characteristic is the presence of gradually diminishing changes proportion-
ate to the reduction in intensity, duration and recurrence of the irradiation ses-
sions, evaluated by most of the authors as a manifestation of the organism's adap-
tation. The appearance of phase variations and the increase in changes and symptoms
proportionate to the increase of exposure time and experiment duration, leading to
the appearance of experimental neuroses, is considered to be a phenomenon of func-
tional cumulation.

A fourth characteristic is the caution that is well known to be exercised in evalu-
at ing the pathological significance of changes which are observed. In the over-
whelming majority of the published experimental works there is no evaluation of the
degree of risk associated with the effects in question.

All of this makes it difficult to analyze the data in the literature, of course.
However, if we adhere to the point of view of 8. ll. Savin, A. G. Subbota and Ye. A.
Yermolayev [23, 16], Z. V. Gordon [10] and others in evaluating the pathological
significance of the observed effects as applied to the cited works, then the follow-

relationship can be regarded as the threshold fora hazardous effect as far as changes

in the central nervous system are concerned: y - 9.3.107.x‘2'2“

, where y is 'M/cm2
and x is the exposure time in minutes

In conclusion, it must be pointed out that, notwithstanding the relatively large
number of publications in which the reaction of man's or animal's central nervous
system to EHR was studied, there is a need forworks which would bring into play the
relationship of Bill's effects to power density and exposure time, and to its fre-
quency characteristic, and which would employ more adequate procedures C from bio-
physical reactions at the cell level- to behavioral reactions of the entire organism),
making it possible to evaluate in evolutionary aspect the pathological significance
of the changes being observed.

As applied to aerospace medicine, the problem of the biological action of non-ioniz-
ing EHR has to be looked at mostly from the standpoint of the combined action of a
variety of factors. There are in the literature works in which the combined effect
of microwave M and game radiation has been studied [24-26]. However, evaluation
of the biological effects in these investigations was made with reference to such
indexes as survival rate, body weight dynamics and the.peripheral blood leukocyte

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

count, and from certain biochemical tests characterizing the condition of the endo-
crine system and others. But the state of the central nervous systus under condi-
tions of the combined action of m and other factors-4n particular, this refers
to flight factors of the non-radiation kind—was not studied.

Of theoretical and practical interest are investigations of the biological effect of

am and dynamic factors of flight, the gaseous enviroment, an end magnetic fields
and so on.

More and more data are being published now suggesting that constant magnetic fields
are a biologically active enviroueental factor.

During space flight, man and biological objects may be in a hypogeomagnatic environ-
ment for a long time or may be subjected to the effect of strang magnetic fields
which are produced on spacecraft by special apparatus for protection from cosmic
radiation [27]. This factor may alter the organism's reactivity, in particular, the
reactivity of the central nervous system to non-ionizing m. One of the imediate
tasks of space radiobiology may also be the study of biophysical mechanisms of the
interaction of Hill with constant magnetic fields.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Petrov, I. P. and Subbota, A. C., "On .the Effect of 88? Electromagnetic Radia-
tion on the Organism," VOYBNNO-HBD. 28., No 2, 1966, p 2.

2. Presman, A. S., "Elektromagnitnoye pole i zhiveya priroda" [The Electromagnetic
Field and Living Nature], Moscow, Neuka, 1968.

3. Petrov, I. P., "Vliyaniye SVCh-ielucheniy na organism cheloveka i zhivotnykh"
[The Effect of 8311’ Radiation on the lumn and Animal Organism], Moscow, Heditsi-
“I, 1970s .

lo. Bsranski, S. and Czerski P., "Biological Effects of Hicrowaves," Dovden, Hutchin-
son, Ross, Stroudsburg, Pa., USA, 1976.

S. Tyegin, N. V., "Klinicheskiye espekty oblucheniy SVCh-diapesona" [Clinical As-
pects of SR? Exposure], .Hoscov, Meditsina, 1971.

6. Uspenskeya, N. V., "Dynamic Observations of "orkers Under Conditions of Exposure
to CH-Band Electromagnetic Haves," VRACHEM 081.0, No 3, 1961, p 124.

7. Drogichina, 8. A. and Sedchik0va, M. N., "Clinical Syndrome in the Case of 8x-
posure to Various RP Bands," GIGIYENA TRUM I PROPZANLEVANIY, No 1, 1965, p 17.

8. Sadchikova, M. N. and Orlova, A. A., "On the Clinical Picture in Chronic Expo-
sure to Centimeter Haves," Ibid., No 1, 1960, p 32.

9. Klimkive-Deutschova, 3., "The Effect of Radiation on the Nervous System," ARCH.
GMBEPATHOL. 0ND GMBBHYG., Vol 16, 1957, p 72.

FOIOWIGALWEONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gordon, 2. V., "Voprosy gigiyena truda i biologicheskogo deystviya elektroaag-
nitnykh poley sverkhvysokikh chastot" Drobluas of Work Hygiene and the Bio-
logical Effect of SH? Electrmagnetic Fields), Moscow, Meditsina, 1966.

Michaelson, 8. M., "Human Exposure to on-ionizing Radiant Energy Potential
Hazards and Safety Standards," PROC. IEEE‘, Vol 60, Mo ’6, 1972, p 389.

Michaelson, 8. M., "Radio-Frequency and Microwave Energies, Magnetic and Elec-
tric Fields," Pound. of Space Biol. and Med., NASA-,Maahington, D6,..1975, p409.

Pivovarov, M. A., The Effect on Humane of Microwave Irradiation Under Laboratory
Conditions," in book "Mediko-biologicheskiye problemy SVCh-izlucheniy" [Medical
-Biological Problems of 8H? Radiation], Leningrad, Hanks, 1966, pp 130—140.

Matuzov, N. 1., "Variation of Visual Analyzer Excitability in Persons Exposed
to Microwaves," BYUL. ESPER. 3101.. I m., Vol 68, No 7, 1959, p 27.

Libikh, S. F., "Functional Lability of the Retina," in book "Voprosy biologir
cheskogo deystviya sverkhvysokochastotnogo (SVCh) elsktranagnitnogo polys"
[Problems of the Biological Effect of an SH? Electromagnetic Field], Leningrad,
Institute of Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases, 1962, pp 30-31.

Subbota, A. 6., "Criteria for Evaluating Functional Changes in an Organism Ex-
posed to Microwaves," in book "Printsipy i kriterii otsenki biologicheskogo
deystviya radiovoln" [Principles-and Criteria for Evaluating the Biological
Effect of Radio Waves], Leningrad, Military Medical Academy imeni S. M. Kirov,
1973, p 19.

Gorodetskaya, S. 17., "The Effect of an SH? Field and Convection Heat on the
Estrual Cycle in Mice," FIZIOL. 2H. AN 888R, No 10, 1964, p 491..

Khnlodov, Yu. A., "V1 iyaniye elektromagnitnykh i magnitnykh poley na tsantrel'
nuyu nervnuyu sistemu" [Effect of Electromagnetic and Magnetic Fields on the
Cemral Nervous System], MOscow, Meditsina, 1966, p 59.

Sevast'yanov, V. V.. "Principles for Systematizing Investigations of the Biolo-

gical Effect of RF Fields ," in book "Printsipy i kriterii otsenki biologichesko-
go deystviya radiovoln," Leningrad, Military Medical Academy imeni S. M. Kirov,

1973. pp 53-56. ’

Hines, H. and Randall, J ., "Possible Industrial Hazards in the Use of Microwave
Radiation," ELECT. ENG., Vol 71, No 10, 1952, p 879. ~

Schliephake, 3., "Functional Testing of the Endocrine Glands, the Pituitary in
Particular, Using Shortwave Stimulation," WOMEDIZIME, No 2, 1960, p 80.

Plekhanov, G. F., "Discrepancy and Error Criteria in Studying the Radiosensiti-
vity and Radiovulnerability of Living Systems," in book "Printsipy i kriterii

otssnki biologicheskogo deystviya radiovoln," Leninpad, Military Medical Acaé
deny imeni S. M. Kirov, 1973, pp 14-16.

22

I. USE ONLY
23.

2“.

25.

26.

27.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Savin, B. H., Yemolayev, Ye. A. and Subbota, A. G..‘"Printeipy ineledovaniya
i kriterii oteenki biologicheekogo deyetviya radiovoln" [P-riciplee for Study-
ing and Criteria for Evaluating the Biological Effect of Radio Haves], Lenin.
grad, Military Medical Acadeny imeni 8. H. Kirov, 1973, p 83.

Davydov, 8. 1., Antipov, V. V. and Tikhonchuk, V. 8. "Biological Interaction
of RP Electromagnetic Waves and Ionizing Radiation," KOSMIGESKIYB ISSLBDOVANI-
YA, Vol 12, No 1, 1971., p 129.

Antipov, V. V. and Davydov, B. 1., "The Canbined Effect of Flight Factors,"
Ibid., Vol 15, No 2, 1977, p 286.

Davydov, B. I., Antipov, V. V. and Tikhonchuk, V. 8., "Tim Paranetere in Micro-
wave Exposure," Ibid., Vol 17, No 1, 1979, p 151.

Grigor'yev, Yu. G., "Radiatsionnaya bezopaenoet' koonicheekikh poletov" [Radia-
tion Safety of Space Flights), Moscow, Atouizdat, 1976.

COPYRIGHT; Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Koamicneekiye ieeledovaniya", 1981

5456
CSO:

1866/8

M OFFICIALUSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE ENGINEERING

UDC 621:396.965

TECHNIQUE AND swim roe ashram-mic CALIBRATION or 'mm' HULTISPBCTRAL
SCANNING SYSTEM IN assoum: mm UNI'rs

Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYB ZEHLI Iz Nosuosa in Russian No 6. Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 12 Jun 81) pp 79-88

[Article by G.A. Avanesov, A.A. Bogdanov. A.P. Naumov, A.G. Sychev, v.1.
Tarnopol'skiy and G.N. bolstykh, Institute of Space Research. USSR Academy of
Sciences. Moscow. and All-Union Scientific Research Institute 01 Opticophysical
Measurements, Moscow]

[Text] In [1-4] the authors show that for the representation of the results of re-
mote measurements of the Earth's brightness fields made by different surveying sys-
tems (SS) operating in the optical band, particularly the “Fragment" multispectral
scanning system, the latter should be given spectral energy brightness density
(SPEYa) values from the 'State Special Standard“ [5]. However, the special features
of the optical systems in 55's makes their direct comparison with the standard meas-
uring equipment (051) certified by the "State Standard" impossible: special cali-
brating stands are needed for the geometric matching of an SS and an 081.

The complex of demands made on calibrating stands and the specific calibration tech-
nique used are stipulated by the following considerations.

In order to determine the SPEYa of radiation entering an 33's input. it is necessary
to know its sensitivity in each channel:

Z:
30..) '

where sj = absolute sensitivity of the j-th channel, for which wavelength Xe [6,7]
is effective: 3(Ae) - SPEYa of the radiation taken as the model for observations in
nature; the radiation has surface and angular uniformity: gj I the 58's output sig-
nal in the j-th channel for the model radiation.

 

S" (1)

Let 8(A) be the 55's relative spectral sensitivity in the channel under discussion:
it is then the case that

3,-CIB(A)S.(A)JA. (2)

where c - a factor depending on the normalization of the relative spectral sensitiv-
ity and the geometric parameters of the 55's optical system.

24

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When calibrating an $5 from a source, the spare of the radiation of which has the
remnant), while the geometric parameters are the same as for the model radiation,
we obtain signal gj st! which can be represented as

Int-CI Manama ' (3)

Substituting (2) and (3) into (1). we finally obtain

I Bumua

cm s

w.)

 

 

3,-

. (4)
I swam;

'l'hus, SS calibration must be done with a source having a known spectral SPEYa dis-
tribution and, moreover, the source's radiation must fill (as is the case under op-
erational conditions) the space angle of the 58's viewing field.

It is obvious that ribbon-filament lamps without additional optics do not satisfy
the second requirement. In order to calibrate the “Fragment" system, therefore, we
used a working source consisting of a large-diameter integrating sphere illuminated
by halogen lamps. The source is tested periodically with an 050: that is, by (in
the final account) by the State standard for SPBYa.

As follows from [4], one of the parameters needed in order to determine 5 is the
55's relative spectral sensitivity. In order to determine it experiments ly, it is
necessary to have a monochromatic source, the radiation of which fills the 55's in-
put pupil within the limits of its viewing field's space angle.

Thus, the calibrating stand must contain three sources and a system for testing two
of them on the basis of the third (an 061). this determined the optical layout and
structure of the 'Poisk" stand, which was developed especially in order to calibrate
the ”Fragment“ multispectral scanning system and is used at the present time for
calibrating ss's (spectroradiometer-brightness meters) with input pupils up to 240
nun in diameter in the 0.25-2.5 um spectral band.

A functional diagram of the "Poisk' calibration stand is shown in the figure on the
next page. It consists of the following assemblies: elongated, diffuse,
mntinuous-spectrum emitter 1, monochromatic emitter 2, OS! 3, comparator 4, cali-
brated diaphragm S and flat rotating mirror 6.

The diffuse emitter is an integrating sphere 600 m in diameter. The sphere's inner
surface is covered with barium sulfate and is illuminated by four ram-100 halogen
lamps that are distributed uniformly over its external surface. In order to insure
uniformity of the distribution of the brightness in the plane of the sphere's output
opening, the radiation from the lamps enters it through 14513 mil): glass. Investiga—
tions showed that the nonuniformity of the brightness in the output opening's plane
does not exceed 0.5 percent.

For the monochromatic emitter we use a system consisting of an SIB-ZOOu ribbon-
filnment light-measuring lamp (chosen for its stability) with a stabilized H'l'KSe35H

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

.__2J

l_-

Functional diagram of the 'Poisk" measuring installation.

 

 

 

 

power unit. The lamp's emissions are broken down into the spectrum by monochromator
2.2. Its exit slit is in the focal plane of spherical collimator mirror 2.3 (the
mirror's light diameter is 255 n- and its focal length is 800 In). Depending on the

position of rotating mirror 6, the parallel beam formed by the collimator mirror en-
ters either collimator 4 or the instrument being calibrated (in connection with
this, the diffuse emitter is in position 1').

Standard emitter 3 is an 5110-300u light-measuring lamp that is contained in a
water-cooled. lightproof housing. The lamp was first annealed, then selected for
stability and uniformity of the channel body's brightness and calibrated in SPEYa
units according to the “state Special Standard,“ so that it is a standard means for
making measurements according to the All-Union testing system [S].

The operating modes of the standard lamp and those of the monochromatic and diffuse
emitters are controlled by precise measurements of the voltage (with the help of
V7-23 voltmeters in the lamp bases) and amount of current in their circuits. The
current is determined from the results of measurements of the voltage drop in an
“-310 standard resistor with the help of an 3361-1 precision potentiometer. In ad-
dition to this. the stability of the sources' emissions is monitored with the help
of two silic0n photoreceivers that are periodically introduced into the appropriate

optical channels. The signals from these receivers are measured by a Sh1513 digital
voltmeter.

Comparator 4 is used to determine the SPBYa of the diffuse emitter and the relative
Spectral distribution of the monochromatic emitter's energy by comparing these
sources with the 061's radiation. The couparator consists of spherical mirror 4.l
(light diameter - 255 m, focal length - 1,600 III). calibrated screen 4.7, flat mir-
rors 4.2 and 4.3, modulator 4.4, monochromator 4.5 and photoreceiver block 4.6.
Photomultipliers of the 28 sums-co type, which have multislit or oxygen-silver-
cvsium photocathodes, are used as photoreceivers in the near-ultraviolet, visible
and near-infrared bands of the spectrum to 1.1 pm. In the 1.2-2.5 um band. a

26

POIOFHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

photoresistor of the PS-llAN type is used. A special unit consisting of a highly
stable incandescent Tush-2840 lamp operating on reduced voltage and an PD-24K photo~
diode is used to monitor the stability of the comparator's sensitivity. The lamp is
gouered by a 85-21 power unit. The signals corresponding to the emissions of this
source are registered simultaneously by the compartor's receiver and the photodiode.
since identical deviations of the parameters of such an interconnected system is not

very probable, the possible instability of the comparator's receivers can be evalu-
ated with a high degree of accuracy.

The emissions of diffuse illuminator 1 enter the comparator when the flat rotating
mirror is in position 6, while those of the monochromatic source do so when the mir-
rot is in the same position but the diffuse illuminator is in position 1'. When the
flat mirror is drawn back into position 6', the 051's emissions enter the compara-
tor.

The shape and size of screen 4.7, which is in the path of the light, are chosen so
that, on the one hand. mirror 4.2 is in the screen's shadow and, on the other, the
bundle of rays passing through diaphragm 5 is not screened.

Thus, the space angle of the shaded part of the beam from the 061 is determined com-
pletely by the dimensions of screen 4.7, while the geometric parameters of the dif-
fuse emitter's radiation, which passes through the comparator's optical system, do
not depend on the screen since they are formed by diaphragm S. It is also obvious
that the screen has no effect on the monochromatic emitter's spectral characterist-
lCS.

As has already been mentioned, the calibration technique is based on the separate
determination of the relative spectral sensitivity of each measuring channel in the
instrument being calibrated and the channel's absolute sensitivity to SPEYa on the
effective wavelength.

During measurements, the comparator is considered to be a complex radiation receiv-
er, while the measurement of the 061's emissions is its calibration. The feasibili-
ty of such an approach is determined by the following facts. Because of the bulk of
the flat mirror, moving it from position 6 to position 6' on each wavelength is in-
convenient. Therefore, instrument readings are first made in one position (that is,
for one of the sources) and then in the other (for the other source). These series
of measurements can be separated by a considerable time interval. From this it fol-
lows that the parameters of the lamps' emissions and the sensitivity of the compara-
tor's receivers must be stable, which is achieved by using highly stable power
units, monitoring receivers for the illuminators, and reference sources for the re-
ccivers.

Thus. instrument calibration is preceded by calibration of the comparator with re-
spect to the 051, determination of the monochromatic illuminator's relative spectral
characteristic, and measurement of the diffuse emitter's SPBYa.

huring the measurement of the relative spectral distribution of the monochromatic
illuminator's energy for each wavelength of the monochromatic radiation, the wave-
length in monochromator 4.5 is set so that the receiver's signals are maximal.

since dispersion does not depend on wavelength for a monochromator with a diffrac—
tion grating, while the SPEYa of lamp 2.1 changes only slightly within the limits of

27

FOI:0l11CJAl.USIE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the spectral interval delineated by the slits, it can be assumed that the form of
the SPEYa's spectral dependence in the plane of the exit slit of monochromator 2.2

differs little from the slit spread function. From this it follows that this de-
pendence is identical for different wavelengths set in the mohromator. During
duplicate calibration, therefore, the wavelengths set in the scales of mono-
chromators 2.2 and 4.5 must coincide. For this same reason, during calibration with
respect to source 3 and measurement of source 2, the relationship of the values of
the output signal from each of receivers 4.6 will be proportional to the relation-

ship of the absolute values of the SPEYa of the sources being compared. which means
it is equal to the ratio of the relative values: that is,

B,(l)-Ba(l)2-. (5)
‘-

whcrc 82”). 33(X) = relative spectral distributions of the energy of the mono-
chromatic illuminator and the 061, respectively; 9n: 91:3 . output signals of the
comparator during irradiation of it by the monochromatic illuminator and the OSI,
resmctively.

In practice. however, some difference in the calibration of the monochromatore (on
the order of 2-3 3) is possible. Therefore, in order to achieve precise coincidence
of the maximums of the spectral intervals delineated by the monochromators. scanning
is carried out in the comparator's monochromator close to the wavelength set in
monochromator 2.2 until the maximum value of the signal from the receiver is ob-
tuined.

The spectral characteristic of the ”Poisk" device's monochromatic illuminator, cal-
culated in accordance with expression (5) , is given in Table 1.

Table 1. Relative Spectral Characteristic of Monochromatic Emitter

 

   
         

 

  

 

arm-"awn“ Omar-menus Disarmament
511mm Ina-m sumo-mm Mmu loam! assures “IV“!!!
A. mm ‘rgztvrgg'rrﬂu I A. mus cneuvpaauvol ignpx‘ttzalgza
.. . .
___U.)___.._-
0.5005 Dun 0.8870 0.“
ussw ".0! l 0.94% 0.687
0.51% that": 0.9959 0.158
".5le 0.128 1.0503 0.908
".0148 um mm 1.000
0,669.1 HMS 1.2306 1.000
".7237 0.393 1.3398 0.915
".7721 0.36“ H“? 0.761
0.3320 0.322 1.5376 0.506
Kvy:
l. Wavelength A, um 2. Relative values of spectral character-
istic

The rel—ltive spectral characteristic aid) of the instrument channel being cali-
hrated is determined from the ratio

(a
B: (1) '

where 932 = relative value of the output signal of the instrument being calibrated
during irradiation by the monochromatic illuminator on wavelength A.

 

34(1) "

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0‘11C1Al.lEﬂE(NHLY

From this, by using relationship (5) we obtain the final formula for determining the
relative spectral characteristic:

 

_ ‘5 I.
(1) rt“) :. (6)
Further, from ratio
Imam
L- .. (7)
Iowa

we find the effective wavelength Ae (6.7] for the given channel on which absolute
sensitivity 5- is determined. Absolute sensitivity is determined according to the

reaction of t channel being calibrated to the emissions of the diffuse source. ac-
cording to the expression

1:.
B. (1.) '

where gjl = output signal of the instrument being calibrated during irradiation by
the diffuse emitter: 31(Ae) n SPEYa of the diffuse emitter on wavelength 1°.

 

55- (8)

During calibration, the emissions of the diffuse illuminator can be regarded as a
set of beams. When in position 4.1. the comparator's spherical mirror selects from
this set the beams propagating within the limits of the space angle determined by
the norochromator's entrance slit and the focal length of spherical mirror 4.1. The
emissions pass through monochromator 4.5 into set of receivers 4.6.

When measuring the 051's emissions, the comparator's spherical mirror is shifted in-
to position 4.1'. In connection with this, an image of the lamp is created in the
plane of the entrance slit of the comparator's monochromator. The emissions then
pass through the monochromator into one of the interchangeable receivers.

The ratio of the values of the diffuse emitter's and 081's SPBYa is proportional to
the ratio of the receiver's corresponding signals. It is important to note here
that geometric factors enter the proportionality factor (since they are different
for the sources being compared), although neither the mirrors' reflection coeffi-
cients nor the characteristics of monochromator 4.5 does, since the light from the
diffuse emitter and the 05! pass through the same optical channel 4.1-4.5 (from the
viewpoint of its reflection coefficient, mirror 6 should be regarded as part of il-
luminator 1 or 2).

when calibrating the diffuse illuminator on wavelengths where the spectral sensitiv-
ivity of receivers 4.6 is low, the signal-to-noise ratio turns out to be unfavorable

for precise measurements. Therefore, the absolute value of the diffuse illumina-
tor's SPEYa is determined only for several wavelengths where the signal-to-noise ra-

tio is quite high and the relative energy distribution is measured for the rest of
the wavelengths. When measuring the absolute value of the diffuse radiation's

SPEYa. the monochromator's entrance slit has the same dimensions as when calibrating
the comparator with respect to the 061. However, when measuring the relative

29

INNRCHWWCJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distribution of the diffuse emitter's brightness with respect to the spectrum, the
entrance slit's dimensions are increased for the purpose of improving the signal-to-
noise ratios on the edges of the spectral band.

The diffuse illuminator's SPZYa is determined with due consideration for the gemst-
ric factors. In the calculation. the illuminator can be replaced by an equally
bright luminous plane that coincides with diaphragm S. The radiation that passes
through diaphragm 5 and enters the nonochronator is limited by space angle 01, which
is determined from the ratio

0.

Q -_l
' r... ‘9’

where 9k - area of the couparator's entrance slit; f4.l - focal length of mirror
4.1.

Space angle 93. within the limits of which the emissions of the SIlo-300u lamp enter
the interior of nonochrouator 4.5, is determined by the relationship
Q,- 05.1 01.1

F‘F. (10)

where 94.1 - area of the entrance pupil of mirror 4.11 94.7 - area of screen 4.7:
1.2. [.3 = distance from the ribbon of lamp 3.1 to the entrance pupil of the mirror in
position 4.1' and to screen 4.7, respectively.

The conparator's output signal is proportional to the spectral density of the flow
of radiation that enters the receiver. From this,

(n _ 17.00 _ SKI-Km.
5- F30) 8:0)00493 '

where 91:1 - input signal of the canparator during irradiation by the diffuse illumi-
nator; P10), P30) - spectral density of the flow of radiation fron the diffuse il-
luminator and the 061, respectively: 95 =- area of diaphragm S: 93.1 - area ‘of the
part of the SIlo-300u lamp. the emissions of which enter the entrance slit of mem-
chromator 4.5. '

 

 

(11)

The lamp's ribbon is projected onto the comparator's entrance slit with a magnifica-
tion equal to the ratio of the distance from mirror 4.1 to the entrance slit to the
distance from the ribbon to this mirror:

3 _ i. (12)
l.
where ll 3 distance from the mirror to the slit.

It is then the case that

0... "—0: (13)

5"

where 93.1 = area of the cowparator's entrance slit.

From expressions (5)-(10) we derive the final formula for determining the diffuse
illuminator's SPEYa:

_ (a. . 117:: 04.: _ 04.1 (1‘)
8.0) 8.0.): —l|,o‘ F F).
30

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Spectral Characteristic of Diffuse hitter

Mediums
cuenmuu

spacers
Brito-n’xi '

 

Key:
1. wavelength A, um 2. Absolute spectral brightness.
H/sr'm3 x 107

The values of the SPEYa of the diffuse emitter in the 'Poisk" installation, as cal-
culated with ferrule (14) , are presented in Table 2.

Substituting (14) into (8), we obtain the final formula for determining absolute
sens i tivi ty:

5; (AU-‘30!
s 04.: 04.1 . (15)
’ _ _ .—
3. (1.) («is [u (a. I" )

hﬁd'r‘acy characteristics of the 'Poisk' Installation. Since several different phys-

ical value and parameters are measured when calibrating radiometric equipment. a de-
tailed analysis of the resultant accuracy of the measurements can be made only with

due consideration for all the components of any errors: electrical, energy. geomet—
ric. telperature and so on.

we have made a detailed analysis of the errors that arise during the use of calibra-
tion techniques based on the use of light-measuring lamps with energy characterist-
ics calculated by some method or another. It turned out that the root-aean-sguare
deviation of the results of measurements made by these techniques is 15 percent,
while the magnitude of the uneliminated systematic error (NSP) is 30 percent.

The radiometric equipment calibration technique realized with the "Poisk" installa-
tion is free from a number of errors inherent in the previously used measurement
methods. This is explained by the fact that this technique is based on direct com-

parison of the emissions of the sources used during the calibration with the enis-
sions of a standard source. In addition to this, it makes it possible to inter-
connect the separate calibration stages with each other methodologically.

Let us discuss the basic sources of calibration errors in the "Poisk' installation,
as well as several measures that are used to reduce them. The following errors play
a definite role.

1. Errors arising during the transmission of the SPBYa unit from the standards to
the standard measuring facilities. These errors are defined by GOST [All-Union
State Standard] 8.196-76 [5].

31

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR¢OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

2. Instability of the brightness of the radiation sources that are used.

3. Inaccuracy in the setting of the value of the radiation sources' operating cur-
rent. The lamp current is set with an accuracy of 0.005 K and is kept at a constant
level during measurements. Highly stable HTKS—3SH and SIP-353 power sources are
uSed to power the lamps.

4. Nonlinearity of the comparator, which leads to a situation where the ratio of the
comparator's signals is not equal to the ratio of the flows from the sources being
measured. In order to reduce this error, the 051 is calibrated in several modes, so
that it is possible to choose the one of them for which the signals from the OSI and
the emitter being measured are as close together as possible. Besides this, meas-

urements of the comparator's amplitude response are made in order to evaluate the
possible nonlinearity.

5. Errors caused by a change in the comparator's sensitivity (by photomultiplier fa-
tigue. for example). In order to reduce this error. before the beginning of the
measurements the photomultiplier is held under a constant illumination until its

sensitivity stabilizes. In addition, a comparator sensitivity monitoring system,
which makes it possible to introduce the appropriate correction factors if its sen-
sitivity changes, is provided.

6. The error caused by nonconformity of the section of the 061's luminous body out
off by the conparator's entrance slit to the section of the luminous body, the SPEYa

of which was determined according to the standard.

In order to reduce this error, the lamp is selected beforehand for uniformity of the
brightness of its luminous body. In addition, the 081 is aligned relative to the
monochromator with a laser beam, utilising a mark on the bulb that was made during
calibration.

7. Errors determined by the difference between the brightness of the section of the
diffuse emitter cut off by the comparator and the diffuse emitter's brightness as
averaged within the limits of the viewing field of the instrument being calibrated.
The brightness distribution over the emitter's area is investigated in order to al-
low for this phenomenon.

8. Errors caused by nonconformity of the wavelength set in the monochromator to the
true one. In order to establish the dependence of the wavelength of the radiation
leaving the monochromator on the readings on the monochromstor's scale. multiple
calibration of the monochromator with respect to wavelengths is carried out. Using
the obtained results and the method of least squares, the relationship connecting
the drum reading with the wavelength of the radiation leaving the monochromator is
calculated.

9. Errors caused by the finite nature of the spectral interval delineated by the

monochromator. The mechanism of the appearance of these errors is as follows.
since the dependence of the brightness of the radiation sources used in the instal-

lation on the wavelength is a smooth function, it is the case that. by selecting
sufficiently narrow monochromator slits, the width of which determines the deline-

ated spectral interval, it can be assumed that within the limits of this interval,
the brightness's dependence on the wavelength is linear in nature. In this case,

32

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NdLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Basic components of 'Poish" Measuring Installation Error

Source of Error gaggitude of Error

Installation reproducibility of the nonochronators' 10.3 pl: [translation unknown]
wavelengths

Areal uniformity of diffuse emitter's brightness

Angular uniforlity of diffuse enitter's brightness

Comparator linearity

Comparator stability

Reproducibility of the monochromatic elitter's rel-
ative spectral characteristic

Reproducibility of the diffuse enitter's relative 1.5 t
spectral characteristic

Reproducibility of the diffuse euitter's absolute 1.8 \
spectral characteristic

Effect of scattered light 0.5 t on wavelength of 0.35 us

within limits of 5’ angle

“999°
mhuww
OO'O'

the measured spectral density of the brightness will correspond to the brightness on
the wavelength lying in the middle of the delineated interval. If the radiation
source's spectral characteristic deviates from linearity within the delineated spe<.~
tral interval. errors appear in the determination of the brightness.

lo. Errors arising because of long-term instability in the lamps' brightness caused
by irreversible processes taking place in a lamp as it is being used.

11. Errors caused by the presence of scatter light in the sonochromators.
12. Errors determined by aberrations in the optical systems.

During the metrological certification of the “Poisk' measuring systen, the errors
making the basic contribution to the resulting measurement error were investigated.
The results that were obtained are presented in Table 3.

In View of the special features of spectroradionetric measurements, it is inpossible
to guarantee identical accuracy on all wavelengths in the spectral band that is be-
ing used. This is explained by a number of reasons. such as subsidence of the radi-
ation sources' brightness into the ultraviolet and near-infrared bands of the spec-
trum, selectivity in the sensitivity of the photoreceivers that are used. differing
degrees of accuracy in setting the wavelengths in different areas of the spectrum.
and selectivity of the spectral characteristics of the optical elements that are
part of the measuring device.

In view of the total effect of these causes, the resultant error in the reproduction
of energy values in the 'Poisk" device is lowest in the 0.8-1 um band and increases
in the area of the ultraviolet and near-infrared bands of the spectrum.

The results obtained during the astrological certification of the "Poisk' device,
which characterize its resultant accuracy parameters on different wavelengths, are
presented in Table 4.

In conclusion let us mention that the "Poisk" installation was put into service in
1978. since then it has been used to calibrate and certify, in the appropriate

33

FOIOFHGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4. Resultant Accuracy of Reproduction of Energy Values
on the “Poisk' Installation

Manor’s-anneal

 

2.5 3.2
2.0 3'0 3‘5 2::
Key:
1. Wavelength. ma 4. Diffuse emitter
2. Monochromatic emitter 5. Unelininated systeaatic error, t

3. Root-mean-square deviation, t

manner. a photometric model and a flight version of the "Pragnent" Iultispectral
scanning system [6) , one of the HIP-6 mltispectral camera couplexes, and the 5-500
airborne scanning system. At the present time. the "Poisk‘ installation is located

at

the USSR Academy of Sciences' Institute of Space Research and is being used to

certify new generations of scanning systems.

I.

5.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sychev. A.G., and Tarnopol'skiy. v.I., “0n Spectroradiometric characteristics of
hultispectral Surveying Systems,‘ in 'Hnogozonal'nyye aerokosnicheskiye s'yenki
Zenli' [Hultispectral Aerospace Surveys of the Earth]. Moscow, Irdatel'stvo
”Nauka". 1981, pp 87-93.

Bogdanov, v.I.. Sapritskiy, V.I.. Sychev, A.G., and 'rarnopol'skiy, v.1.. "Energy
Calibration of Surveying Systems Used in Remote Investigations of the Earth,"
1bid.n pp 93-99. .

Balaban, v.s.. Bogdanov, A.A., Koval'skiy. V.Ya.. et al.. 'i‘echnique for Cali-
brating Teleradioneters in Absolute Energy Units." in ll'Metzrologicheskoye
obespecheniye energeticheskoy fotouetrii nekogerentnogo izlucheniya" [Metrologi-
cal Support for Energy Photometry of Noncoherent Radiation] , Moscov, WIIP'I'RI
[Al l-Union Scientific Research Institute of Physicotechnical and Radiotechnical

Heasurenents], 1973, pp 79-87.

. Bogdanov. A.A., Koval'skiy, V.Ya., Rolesnikov. A.A., et al., "Basic Varieties of

Radiometers Used for Remote Investigations of the Earth. and Their Calibration in
Energy Units,“ in "Problemy energeticheskoy fotouetrii" [Problems in Energy
Photometry]. Hoscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Atonirdat", 1979, pp 86-94.

“Gosudarstvennyy spetsial'nyy etalon i obshchesoyuznaya poverochnaya skhena dlya
sredstv izuereniy spektral'noy plotnosti energeticheskoy yarkosti nepreryvnogo
opticheskogo izlucheniya sploshnogo spektra v diapazone dlin voln 0.25-2.53 mks.
COST 8.196.76" [State Special Standard and All-Union Testing Method for Facili-
ties for Measuring the Spectral Density of the Energy Brightness of Uninterrupted'
Continuous-Spectrum Optical Radiation in the 0.25-2.5 um Band. 0061' 8.196.761.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

6. Avanesov. G.A.. ziman, “.1... Sychev, A.G., and Tarnopol'skiy, V.I.. 'Hetrologi-
cal Support for Measurements of the Brightness of the Earth's Surface by the

'l-‘ragnent' Hultispectral Scanning System," ISSLBD. m: 12 Kosuosa. No 5. 1981,
pp 65-77.

7. Bogdanov, A.A., Nalinov, V.N., Sychev. A.G., Tarnopol'akiy, V.I., and Tolstykh,
G.N., "On a Possible Improvement in Radiometric Accuracy During Remote Investiga-
tions of the Earth With Multispectral Surveying Systems," ISSLED. ZBHLI I2
KOSMOSA, No 3, 1981. pp 77-84.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo "Nauka", "Ineledovaniye Zeali iz kosnosa", 1981

11746
C502 1866/36

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE APPLICATIGIS

UDC 551.46 :629.7

OBSERVATIGI OP VISIBLE WIPBS'MTIOIIS 0? ocean DYNAMICS PM! 'SALYUT-‘G' ORBIT
STATIOH '

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYB 23141.1 12 KOSHOSA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 7 Jul 80) pp 5-9

[Article by G.u. Grechko, USSR pilot-cosmonaut, GA. Grishin and G.A. 'nolkachenko,
Marine Hydrophysical Institute, Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, Sevastopol']

[Text] The possibility of directly observing and photographing the processes that
characterize the dynamic state of the ocean first appeared vith the development or
satellite systems. With due consideration for the importance of this type of re-
search, sections of oceanographic observations were included in the program for the
study of the Earth's natural resources from artificial Barth satellites. As a re-
sult, such important features of oceanic circulation as the merging of currents, up-
wellings, large-scale vortices, water exchange between boundary seas and the ocean
and many other phenomena that reflect the complex dynamics of the processes taking
place in the ocean were first noted and photographed by the crews of spacecraft and
long-term orbital stations (DOS) [,1].

Automatic measurement complexes installed in unmanned artificial Barth satellites
and making measurements over a broad band in the spectrun of electromagnetic waves,
including the visible, infrared and superhigh-frequency bands, have unarguably been
called upon to play an important role in space oceanography. The prototype of such
complexes is the equipment installed in the specialized "Cosmos-1076" and "Cosmos-
llSl" satellites. At the same time, at the present stage or ocean and atmosphere
investigation, an exceptionally important role is continuing to be played by visual
observations and photographic surveying conducted directly by man from on board a
manned spacecraft or a ms. The most inportant advantages of. such research are the
possibility of the operational selection of the most interesting objects, the effi-
cient utilization of favorable meteorological conditions, and the possibility of
monitoring the dynamics of the process or phenomenon being investigated, which is
very important tron the viewpoint of the integral perception of an object.

In the process or carrying out the program of investigation of the Earth's resources
from the “Salyut-G" DOS, a series of photographs of the South Atlantic Ocean in the
area of the Falkland Islands was obtained. This region is interesting because a
branch of the circumpolar current, which diverges to the north after passing Cape
Horn, flows past the extensive Burdwo'od Bank and the Falkland Islands and then goes
far to the north, under the name of the Falkland Current, where it encounters the

water masses of the Brazil Current. According to the observations from space,

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Schematic representation of photographic image, allowing for
distortions in perspective and coordinate correlation to the area, with
depth and bottom relief marks.
Key: 1. West Falkland 3. Beauchene Island

2. East Falkland

greenish hues caused by the presence of phytoplankton are typical of the Falkland
Current's waters. The boundaries of these currents, which are easily distinguisha-
ble from a great altitude, are frequently traced for distances on the order of thou-
sands of kilometers. For example, observational data gathered by the 'Skylab" nos
in December 1974 [2] were used to trace the frontal zone between the Brazil and
Falkland Currents visually, in the form of. a thin serpentine strip, for more than
3.500 km without a break. However, the series of photographs nade from the “Salyut—
6" 008 on approximately a daily basis from 27 Deoenber 1977 to 5 January 1978 showed
the overall instability of the system of currents and revealed the formation of a
whole series of variable-sign large-scale vortices.

The color insert (Figure l (omitted!) is a fragment of the survey of the oceanic
area to the southeast of the Falkland Islands. This same photograph is reproduced
in Figure 2. taking coordinate correlation to the area into consideration, by graph-
ic plotting; on the left are distances illustrating the change in scale in separate
sections of the photograph because of distortions in perspective.

The flow of the East Falkland oirrsnt is quite visible in Figure 1. Basically, it
follows the isolines of the bottom topography. and after it rejoins the western
branch the current also moves to the north along the 400-600 In isobath. As is

37

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

known, to the east of the Falkland Current there is a countercurrent flowing to the
south that can be traced quite easily to a depth of “500 a [3]. a characteristic
feature of the photograph is the presence of two clearly expressed vortex-shaped
structures. A cyclonic vortex that has formed alnost completely is quite distin-
guishable in the center of the photograph because of its greenish shading. so the
northeast of it can be seen a vortex rotating in the opposite direction, with a wa-
ter mass that is deep blue in color as the result of molecular scattering in the bi-
ologically pure, low-productivity waters of the open ocean. The vortices are about
50 km long and the distance between then is about 200 km. '

It is possible only to fornulate hypotheses about the mechanism involved in the
generation of these features. The cyclonic vortex is apparently generated by an un-
stable barotropic flow over an abrupt sval [possibly dropoff] at depths of 500 to
1,000 n. his is also indicated by the fact that in the sue: (for the southern
Hemisphere) period, intensification of the entire system of currents is seen in this
region [3] . with respect to the anticyclonic vortex. however, such a conclusion is
evidently not entirely correct. Actually. as is obvious from Pigure 2, this vortex
is located in an area of deeper water and is considerably to the right of the main
flow of the East Falkland Current. 'lherefore, it can be assumed that the vortex is
generated by an unstable system of two currents: the Bast Falkland Current and the
countercurrent. For this hypothesis, let us atteapt to evaluate a nulber of charac-
teristics of the anticyclonic formation. For a displacement zone width of 200—300
km and a flow rate of 60-70 ell/s [3], the characteristic period of the lost unstable
waves is 4-6 days. The rate of movement of such a vortex proves to be quite signif-
icant: 17-25 kn/day. Unfortunately, the absence of direct measurement data does
not enable us to compare these theoretical characteristics with the actual values
for the speed and period of movement of anticyclones observed from space in this re-
gion.

Another important feature of Figures 1 and 2 is the presence of l'short--per:l.od" regu-
lar waves to the northeast of Best Falkland Island. 'l‘he curvilinearity of the
fronts of the wave trains is clearly noticeable in the photograph. The wave field's
phase orientation is apparently distorted because of refraction, so a definite angle
is formed between the edge of the shelf and the direction of wave propagation. It
is interesting to note that closer to the shore. we see greater distances between
the wave trains and greater lengths of the trains themselves than on the side toward
the sea. These features of wave action on the continental shelf, as observed from
space. are also typical of other regions of the ocean, particularly new York Bay
[4). On the average, the width of a wave train is about 1-2 kn, while the distance
between the trains is 6-10 km. As is known, these features are typical for a field
of internal gravitational waves. If the periodic features under discussion are rep-
resented in the form of surface waves, for wavelength A - l-2 In their periods will
be =2S-3S s. which exceeds significantly the known appraisals of the analogous char-
acteristic of a field of wind-caused waves and ocean swell.

Let us examine the observed features from the viewpoint of the classical concepts of
the theory of internal waves. within the framework of a two-layer approxination of
the ocean, the phase velocity of wave propagation is described by the well-known
formula

Ap/P. '5 (1)

c-[ wk) clh kh.+clh Mo,

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where g = gravitational acceleration: k - 21/1 - wave number: AD/D1 - density gra-
dient: h1. h2 - thickness of the layers. In January in the investigated region,
Ao/ol = (2-4) ~10" and the upper layer’s characteristic thickness is hl I 50 m. For
a general ocean depth in the shelf zone of 200-300 In and A I 1-2 km, formula (1)
yields the value c :- 0.25-0.40 m‘l. For such a velocity and an average distance be-
tween the trains of 10 km, the wave trains' period is 7-11 h. The second evaluation
corresponds most closely to the half-day period of the internal tide in this region.
Thus, it can be assumed that the "short-period“ waves observed in the photograph are
a manifestation on the ocean's surface of internal wave action formed by the scat-
tering of the barotropic tide's under the effect of bottom topography or the edge of
the continental shelf. The orthogonal nature of the wave and current propagation
directions can also serve as confirmation for what has been said. Otherwise-«luring
the generation of internal waves by a shear current, for example-«me wave and cur-
rent movemnt directions do, as a rule, coincide.

The theoretical models of gravitational wave propagation in the ocean that are known
at the present time make it possible to describe the dependence of the basic charac-
teristics of wave action on the stratification of the medium, Coriolis force, bottom
topography, special features of the generation mechanisms and so on. On the other
hand, laboratory and (in particular) full-scale measurements basically confirm only
individual fragments of the evolution of a field of internal waves that fit in the
framework of the normal classical concepts. In particular, manifestations of in-
ternal waves on the sea's surface can be caused only by those mechanisms that allow
for the features of the transformation of a wave field's energy near the surface.
Several such mechanisms are known at the present time [5]. One of them, for exam-
ple, indicates that the divergence and convergence of current speeds in a field of
internal waves causes transformation of the capillary surface waves under the influ-
ence of Reynolds stresses. This leads to an increase in the roughness of the
ocean's surface above internal wave crests. Such a picture was seen, in particular,
on the 29th voyage of the scientific research ship "Mikhail Inmanosov,“ at 10’48'
S.l.at. , 20’48' "dong” when bands of ripples 30-50 m wide and moving with a period
of about 8 min were observed on a mirrorlike sea surface. The results of measure-
monts showed that the range of the fluctuations of the layer of maxim hydrological
parameter gradients was 20-25 m, while the rate of change of the water temperature
from the minimum to the minus value at the fixed level of 27 m was 2.5' C/min.
According to another mechanism, a high tangential velocity of a water current near
the surface, caused by large internal wave amplitudes, results in an increase in the
thickness of the film of surface-active sitstances in the convergence zone, which
causes smoothing of the high-frequency components of surface wave action and the apo
pearancc of sliki [possibly slicks). The presence on the surface of bands of rip-
ples or sliki results in local changes in the sea's reflection factor. When ob-
served at large angles to the nadir from a satellite, such sections should show up
as dark or light-colored bands that are tens to hundreds of meters wide and hundreds
of meters to tens of kilometers long. then observed at the nadir these bands are
practically invisible, except for instances when the Sun is at the zenith and sliki
located in the area of flashes of sun light are manifested as dark bands on the
glittering surface of the sea.

In order to identify bands in photographic images taken frat space with internal
waves, experimental investigations were made of sliki in the northwestern part of

the Black Sea, using an airplane. As in the case of observations from an artificial
liarth satellite, the sliki were observed visually as individual bands grouped into

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

-5 .ﬂﬂ... __ --
0 20 to u u m m z,'c

Figure 3. M91. of recording, made from an airplane. of a group
of internal wave sliki in the Black Sea (Sun at the zenith. sight--
ing at the nadir). -

 

    

packets. An example of the instrument measurements of the sea surface's brightness
in the area of sliki is shown in Figure 3. me nulber of bands in the packets
ranged from 4 to 12, the bands were 50-300 m wide. the distance Letween the bands in
a packet was 0.4-1.5 km, and the average distance between the packets was 5-10 km.

Thus, in principle. the variegated manifestations of internal waves on the ocean's

surface give us the opportunity to make mass remote measurements of internal wave
action in different regions of the world ocean. Actually. aerospace equipment has
repeatedly registered traces of internal waves on the western and eastern shelves of
North America, the Florida, California and Somali currents. on the shelf of South-
west Africa, in the central part of the Pacific Ocean, in the South china, Black and
okhotsk Seas and so forth. The particular value of these observations is that they
yield rich material for the study of the phenomenon itself and, in addition, make it
possible to determine such an important energy characteristic of the ocean-
atmoephere system as the thermal reserve of the upper quasihomogeneous layer [6].

Actually. assuming that the lower layer's thickness is much greater than h and that
wavelength A >>h1, equation (1) takes on the form c2 - gh(Ap/91). In connection
with this, if the water density p is basically the result of a change in temperature
1‘. then 60/01 - «or, where o - coefficient of thermal expansion of sea water. 00n-
sequently, the expression for determining the thermal reserve. Q . ocphlA'r, allowing
for the formula for c2, can be rewritten as

Q-pcﬁ’ll“. (2)

where c =- thermal capacity of water under a constant pressure. By substituting in-
to (2) ghe characteristic values p - 1 cal/deg, a - 2.10'4-c‘1 and the phase velo-
city value c - (0.25-0.40) m/s (as termined from the observations). we find that
the value of Q in the area of the Falkland Islands in 3-8 kcal/cllz. m the other
hand, for the values hl - 50 m and A? - 1-2’ C, which are typical of the observed
region in January, Q - 5-10 kcal/cmz. By comparing these evaluations and taking in-
to consideration the fact that the value of Q is proportional to the square of the
phase velocity of internal waves, it follows that the heat reserve appraisal made
with formula (2) is sufficiently realistic in the presence of statistically guaran-

teed data.

‘I‘hus, the results of observations of internal waves from space indicate that the
present level of development of satellite oceanography makes it possible to obtain
important information about the variability of the ocean's upper layer. Despite the
fact that a nmber of problems have not yet been solved (determining the anplitudes
of internal waves, for exasple, which is a matter of interest for underwater

b0

MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

navigation) . in principle the data tron remte measurements can be used to evaluate
phase velocities, direction of propagation and length 0! internal waves. and the

thermal reserve of the upper quasihonogeneous layer.

The value of such intonation

is that it makes it possible to evaluate, on an operational basis. the mechanism of

mixing of the upper layer in models of the dynanic interaction of the ocean-
atmosphere system.

3.

6.

31311061111911!

Lazarev, A.I., Nikolayev. 11.6., and Khrunov, Ye.v., 'Opticheskiye issledovaniya

kosnose" [Optical Investigations in Space] . Leningrad. Isdatel'stvo
'Gidrolneteoizdat", 1979, 253 pp.

maul. G.a.. and HcCaslin. $1.. “An Assessment of the Potential Contributions to
Oceanography Prom Skylab Visual muservations and Handheld Caera Photographs," _
NCAA NFL. OCEANOGR. m. LAB. mm mm. 1977. p 432.

Zyryanov, v.I., and Severov, D.K., "water Circulation in the Palkland-Patagmia
Region and Its Seasonal Variability,“ OWIYA, Vol 19, No 5. 1979. pp 782-
791.

Apel, J.R.. et al., “(beervations of Oceanic Internal and Surface Raves Pros! ~
ERTS.” J. 6801’". 1125.. V01 80. No 6, 1975, pp 865-881.

Novoqrudskiy, 3.11.. at al., "Issledovaniye okeana it kosnosa' [Investigation of
the Ocean Fran Space], Leningrad, Izdatel'etvo 'Gidroneteoizdat", 1978. 53 pp.

Hollo-duistensen, 5., ”Heat Storage in the Oceanic Upper nixed Layer Infrared
Prom Landsat Data," SCIENCE, Vol 203, No 4381, 1979. pp 653-654.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", I'Isaledmaniye Zenli is komsa“. 1981

11746
cs0: 1866/10

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

00C 551.46.0:629.78:528.7
MEN“) 0? INTEGRATED INVESTIGATIWS CF 003A" AND am an: SPACE

Moscow 188W?! 2m: I2 mm in Man “O ‘1 Jul-hug 81 (unusuipt re-
ceived 9 Oct 80) pp 45-53

[Article by H.S. nelkevich and v.v. Bedeyev. Institute of Oceanology iueni 9.9.
shirshov, USSR Academy of Sciences. macaw]

From this there inevitably arises the problem of detenining the entire cowlex of
unknown and interference-causing paraneten. it being the case that their relation-
ship can change. depending on the specific goals that have been fomlated for the

The obtaining 0! such information is an important part of the above-undead inte-
grated appxoach, which includes a conbination of space and traditional lethode of
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

follows the necessity of determining the sam paraneter by at least two independent
methods, utilizing radiation characteristics in different bands of the spectrm.

The rules governing the generation and transfer of radiation in natural medium (the
ocean-atmosphere system. in particular), in ooubination with physically and mathe-
matically rigorous methods for the manta deternination of these Iedim' parameters
from space, are the physical basis for geospace investigations. The study of these
rules and the development of remote nethods create possibilities for detenining

ways of creating the physical bases for reacts investigations of the ocean-
atmosphere systes are discussed below. in examples of the solution of tvo coaplexes
of problems that were formulated with due consideration for the results of numerals
theoretical and experimental projects:

1. A complex of problems in determining the temperature of the ocean's surface and

the atmosphere's vertical temperature, moisture and aerosol attenuation profiles, as
well as characteristics of cloudiness and the radiative capacity of the ocean's sur-
face on the basis of measurements of the ocean-atmosphere systen's intrinsic radia-

For cloudless conditions, the variable Iv(x.y,r), which--generally speaking-do a
function of frequency v. spatial coordinates my, and direction of radiation propa-
gation r, is related to To by the relationship

 

 

 

' 0P.( .r) ' aII.
I.-¢.3.(2‘.)P.(1.r)—jB.[T(§)I—a:—dt- 2(1-6.)P.(1.r) Ilium] a?) dc. m
where BJTI- 2’: ' (M) = a Planck function (h, k - Planck and Boltzmann con-
ch“ _ "1
' \ kT

stants. respectively, and c - the speed of light): 5v - radiative capacity of the
ocean; 1‘(c) = vertical telperature profile (1: - altitude in relative uni of pros-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

under real conditions. all of the enumerated functions of c can also depend on co-
ordinates any. In addition to this, 9‘, (hr) depends on the concentration of sub-
stances that absorb radiation. In the infrared-band windows. for example. P‘, de-
pends on the water vapor's mass MC) and the aerosol's optical thickness 131;):

MC. 0) WIPE-kmcmc 8) owl-r: (Due 0). (2)

where e . angle between direction r and the vertical axis (1 k9 - absorption coeffi-
cient of water vapor.

Thus. I» in (l) is a functional not only of the unknown value 1'0, but also of param-
eters 6v. 1‘“), w(;) and 13“). which it is necessary to determine simltaneously by
independent measure-ents of 1v for the purpose of allowing for atmospheric radiation
in (1). As is known (see. for example. (1.2!). the vertical profiles NC) and UK)

can be determined from measurements of I“ in the absorption bands of 002 (4.3 and is

um) or 02 (0.5 at) and, correspondingly, of water vapor (6.3 and 20-25 pm or 1.35
cm).

Relationships of the type of (1) that are used for this purpose and written for the
indicated absorption bands are integral equations of the Priadhola Me I variety
relative to I“) or w(C). Methods for regularising corresponding inverse problems
that were formulated incorrectly (in the mathematical sense) have now been worked
out. In particular. an effective method for statistical regularization that uses
the eupirical characteristics of the vertical structure of the NC) and a“) fields
as prior information about the solution has been proposed (see [1]). As far as
13(() is concerned. there still exist contradictory opinions about the aerosol‘s
contribution to the attenuation of infrared radiation. his question is closely re-
lated to the classical problem of the physical nature of the continuum in the atmos-
phere's ”transparency windows" in the infrared band.

I

v
0,3

   

1 2 J U Julc

. ”s
Figure 1. Dependence of effective attenuation factors K. on effective va~

ter vapor mass we, according to measurements of atmospheric transmission
(a) and radiation (b): l. A I 10.2 um: 2. A I 11.2 um 3. l - 12 um.

Aerosol Attenuation of Infrared Radiation. Numerous laboratory and full-scale meas-
urements make it possible to evaluate reliably and distinguish the contribution to

(do

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the centinuuu of the wings of the absorption bands of water vapor and the aerosol
conponent [3]. This division is illustrated quite well by the results or neasure-
nents of the effective absorption factor in the “windows":

t-l. (a)
”s
which was derived in (3] for a broad range of changes in the total optical thickness
1" and moisture content we or the entire ooh-1 of the atnosphere (see Figure 1).
Thus. iv, nin can be regarded as the coefficients of continual absorption of water
vapor. while any excess above it», .1” is the contribution of aerosol attenuation.

  

-5 -4 -J -z -! a I 2 17.1:
Figure 2. Errors in determining NC) in the presence or a layer
with optical thickness t“ - 0.1 at different levels in the at-
nosphere: 1. C < 0.8; 2. C I 0.5-0.65: 3. C I 0.3-0.4; 4. C I
I 0.l-0.2.

Evaluations of the street of aerosol layers located at different levels in the at-
mosphere on errors in determining T0 were made in [4]. As is obvious from Figure 2,
the existence of such layers with optical thiclmess 13 I 0.l can lead to errors on
the order of S-8' C. In order to determine the vertical profiles t3“) it is possi-
ble to use measurements of the angular distributions of radiation Iv(e) in the at-
Inosphere's ”transparency windows.” which are related to 1'3“) by relationships of
the type of (l) and (2), with n I sec 6.

The possibilities of solving the corresponding inverse problem were illustrated in
(5]. using neasurenents of the angular distributions of incident radiation Ivan)
(Figure 3) in the tropical region of the Atlantic Ocean. As is obvious tron Figure
4. the Ivh) curves in Figure 3 correspond to two types of layered distribution of
the aerosol attenuation factor. These layers. which were observed during direct
airborne sounding of the atmsphere in that area or the Atlantic [6), are created by
dust coming frou the African continent.

65

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

g , Hovever.itshouldbelenticnedthatwhen
“WWI" "" " the angular distributions of 1‘. (a) are used
to deter-ins t3“). there arises the con-
plicated proble- of allowing for the hori-
zontal nonmiforeity of the aerosol sub-
stance.

Thus. the deternination of NC). w(l:) and
f3“) will lake it possible to allow for
. atmospheric distortions during the re-ote
' 2 J . I" deternination of T0 with the help of rela-
tionship (1) under cloudless conditions. as
Figure 3. Angular distributions of well as in the case of sendtransparent and
radiation of the tropical atmosphere broken cloudiness.
me) over tb Atlantic Ocean for
different degrees of turbidity s - Under solid cloud cover conditions. it is
- sec 8: l. turbid ethosphere: 2. necessary to lake joint use of radiation
transparent atnosphere. measurements in the infrared and ultrahigh-
frequency bands of the spectra. In the
first place, this makes it possible to
identify unasbiguouslylthe cloud and sur-
‘ ... 1 face effects in the ultrahigh-frequncy ra-
5 """’ 1 diation's characteristics. In the second
place. assure-ants in the infrared band
' lake it possible to deter-inc the cloud
3
2
t

 

Z, In

cover's characteristics (altitude. tapere-
ture and phase state of the water). Third-
ly. joint neasurenents in the ”windows“ of
the infrared and ultrahigh-frequency bands
of the spectra: will nice it possible to
a detoraine variations in the ocean surfaoe's
0 0.05 0” W radiative capacity.

Figure 4. Determination of vertical

distributions of aerosol attenuation Finally, the Inost inportant advantage of

factor according to measurements of the use of a coupler of measurements is an

19h) (profiles 1 and 2 correspond to i-provenent in the reliability of the de-

curves 1 and 2 in l’igure 3). terlination of To and the atmospheric pa-
raeeters, since each parameter will be de-

tcrnined on the basis of independent information at least twice.

ture in the atmsphere) that is being obtained at the present time. Recent analyses
of the fields (see, for exuple. [7]) indicate that errors and uncertainties in the
deter-ination of To make this information practically useless. The authors of [1]
are conpletely correct in pointing out the necessity of developing more refined re-

lished in [8).

Let us mention here that the problem under discussion was fomlated clearly after
:he processing and analysis of materials gathered during measurements of the ocean-
lt-osphere system's radiation in the visible, infrared and ultrahigh-frequency bands

46
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the spectra: by the "Cosmos-149. -243, ~320. 484" satellites [1.2.9]. (I: the
basis of the integrated approach explained above, we have now developed a technique
for obtaining and processing the appropriate coqalex of initial information about
the characteristics of the field of intrinsic radiation, using the characteristics
of the ocean-atmosphere systea's brightness field.

Determining the Ocean's Brightness and the Atmosphere's (ptical Parameters. In con-
nection with the remote determination of the ocean's brightness on the basis of
measurements of solar radiation reflected by the ocean-atmosphere system, it is ne-
ceseary to allow for the contribution of the auosphere's brightness. which can ex-
ceed the unknown quantity by an order of nagnitude [6]. In order to do this, it is
necessary to determine the following atmospheric paraneters: optical thickness.
scattering indicatrix 7v and the vertical distribution of the aerosol scattering
factor.

The method for solving this problem that is presented in [10) is based on the utili-
zation of measurements of the intensity of the reflected solar radiation Iv. from a
satellite, in several sections of the molecular oxygen absorption band (0.76 Ill).
The physical basis of the method is the fact that solar radiation reflected by the
ocean-atmosphere system is generated by different layers in the atlosphere. the con-
tribution of which to the brightness, as measured free the satellite. is determined
by the oxygen transmission function P.,(C,n) (n - l 4» sec 00. 00 - zenith angle of
the Sun). This function is known with a sufficient degree of accuracy, since the
relative concentration of oxygen is constant to very high altitudes in the atlos-
phere and varies little around the Earth, while the 0.76-vm abosrption band has been
studied quite thoroughly [1].

The relationship between the intensity of the outgoing radiation 1", (in percentages
of the solar constant RSV) for measurements at the nadir and the atmosphere's opti-
cal parameters in the 0.76 um area of the spectrun (it is assumed that the indica-
trix and the optical thickness do not depend on v within the limits of the absorp-
tion band) is established by the formula

894:)
a:

which was obtained on the basis of the solution of the radiation transfer equation
for a plane-parallel medium with a non-light-reflecting underlying surface (the
surface's albedo is A - 0), where em“) 3 u exp («7(0), 1: - brightness indicatrix
for the realized scattering angle it. as related to the entire stratum of the atmos-
phere. Here. in the equation for single scattering we have formally introduced
brightness indicatrix u, which is a scattering function aggravated by multiple ef-
fects. in place of scattering indicatrix y. This is done for the purpose of naking
an approximate allowance in this formulation of the problem of the effects of Iulti-
ple scattering and is in accordance with the reoouaendations made in [ll].

 

‘ O
I.- 2; 1‘ P.(t. 1») dc. (4)

than allowing for the reflection of light frail the underlying surface in the right
side of formula (4), in general there must be present the term th(l,n)¢m(l)-

° (cos Go/u), which describes the contribution to 1‘, of the light coming from the
surface. In this case, the solution of the inverse problem (”-4.“) «will differ

from the true solution 9.10;) by an arbitrary constant in layers of the atmosphere
where t < l and will have a discontinuity at the surface at the point z - l.

67
FOIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
POI OFRCIAL USE ONLY

Actually. in the case under discussion functions of the type

' Vu“)
“(g)-9.(t)+8Ancos9m-U)—u—-v

VI“)- { c. {<1

6., {-1

function 6(1 - U). Thu. the effects of reflection can be manifested in the solu-
tion of equation (4) only in the fort: of a discontinuity in the solution at the sur-
face and are eliminated easily when determining the atnosphere's optical parameters
1(C) ' (l/m)ln(e.(0)/O.(C)&-and c - 5(0) with (for crawls) the help of nunsrical
interpolation of function (C) frost the area of altitudes C < l to the level of the
surface z - 1.

However. the indeterainacy of component c of function v1“) sakes problem (4) in-
deterninate and compels us to resort to the use of additional information about the
unknown parameters, without taking into consideration that which is required in or-
der to use the method for the regularisation of the solution of the incorrect in-
verse problem (4) (we use the method of the provisional gradient of aininiration of
the nonbinding fmctional in the set of mtonic, bounded functions O.(€)). As
such information it is possible to use (for ex-ple) espirical oorrelational rela-
tionships between the optical parameters u and 1', as obtained by ground measure-
nents in the one-.- area of the spectrum. Such data (ll) indicate the presence of
a rather high correlational relationship between the brightness indicatrir u and at-
tenuation factor 1' that can be expressed by the appropriate regression equation.
Another coupling equation for u and t‘ can be obtained directly from the solution of
inverse problen (4) (after the appropriate interpolation of 8.“) to level t; - 1 if
a discontinuity in the solution at the surface is seen):

9-(0)-¢.(l)-u(1-¢"’). (S)

The equation for finding parameter 1" is determined fro- this last expression and
the regression equation. Further, using the value found for t' and the coupling
equations for the paraneters. all the other optical characteristics of the problem
are determined sequentally, including the vertical distribution of attenuation fac-
tor t“). which makes it possible to discover the layers in the atmosphere with an
increased aerosol concentration. After the appropriate elimination of the effects
of atmospheric haze. the characteristics of the water surface‘s brightness are de-
teruined fro. the measurenents of Iv in the 0.74 m 'transparency window.‘

For an error level of the masurenents of Iv in the 0.76-un absorption hand area of
3 percent, the error in determining r. with the help of the approach under discus-
sion is estimated to be 20-25 percent.

m value of 1:0 in the A0 - 0.74 an area of the spectra. that has been obtained in
this manner can be used as an input parameter for deternining the degree of turbidi-
ty of the atnosphere in other sections of the visible band of the spectrum As is
known [1], for this purpose it is advisable to use the method of optimal extrapola-
tion of result 130 to ta, because in nature we see a quite close spectral

48

roe omcm. usrpnu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

correlation (the coefficient of correlation is more than 0.9) for aerosol attenua—
tion. The error in such an extrapolation does not exceed 7-10 percent. The use of
analogous relationships between the scattering indicatrix and the optical thickness
makes it possible, in the same manner. to determine the form of the scattering func-
tion. which, along with optical thickness. are the basic parameters used to allow
for atmospheric effects when studying the ocean's resources from space.

2,“:

 

0 a 0,! 0,1 M '1' "

Figure 5. Comparison of airborne measurements of vertical pro-
files of aerosol optical thickness 12(2) (curves 1-3) with re-
sults of a remote determination of wk) on the basis of meas-
urements of the brightness of the surface-atmosphere system in
the 0.76 um band (curves 4): l. A - 0.45 um: 2. l - 0.55 um: 3.
A a 0.74 In.

A more detailed explanation of the method and the results of its experimental test-
ing are presented in [10,12] , from which we took Figure 5, in which the results of
airborne measurements of 1v“) are compared with the results of the determination of
mo“) with the help of this method. l-‘rom Figure 5 it is obvious that the method
insures the determination of the vertical “’0“, profiles with adequate accuracy.
The accuracy of the optimal extrapolation of Iva) into the short-wave area of the
spectrum is completely satisfactory. Besides this. in the case under discussion of
measurements made over a relatively intensively light-reflecting water surface, the
delta-shaped component of the tvou) profile near the surface is distinguished quite
clearly. This component describes the radiation that is reflected directly from the
aqueous medium. and makes it possible to differentiate the brightness of the atmos-
pheric haze and the brightness of the surface in the total measured brightness of
the surface-atmosphere system.

On the basis of this method of allowing for atmospheric effects in the visible band
of the spectrum, technical requirements were formulated for the lots complex of mass-
uring equipment, which was developed by specialists in the Gun and installed in the
"Intercosmos.20' and ”Intercoms-21" satellites. Processed materials from the

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

satellite neasurenents confirmed the validity of this approach to the solution of

the

1.

2.

3.

4.

Se

6.

10.

11.

problem under discussion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Halkevich, [1.8” “Opticheskiye issledovaniya amosfery so sputnikov' [wtical
Investigations of the Atmosphere Iron Satellites], noscov, Izdatel'stvo “ﬂanks“,
1973, 205 pp.

Basharinov, A.Ye., Gurvich. 3.3., and Yegorov, S.G., 'Radioizlucheniye Zenli kak
planety" [Radio-frequency missions of the Earth as a Planet]. Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo "Naulm'. 1974, 188 pp.

Ha1kevich. 14.8., Gomdetskiy. A.K., Orlov, A.P., Chavro, 3.1., and shukurov,
3.131., 'Integrated Method for Investigating water Vapor's untribution to nanos-
pheric Transmission in the 8-13 m Transparency Rims,” TR. 600, No 369, 1976,
pp 143-156.

Halkevich, 14.3., and Petrenko, 3.2., "On the Effect of Aerosol Attenuation on
the Accuracy of the Determination of the Ocean's and Ataosphere's IVs-parature by
Rents Methods," Izv. AN SSSR. rIzm am. I cream, Vol 14, No 7, 1978, pp
723—732. ,

Orlov, A.P., Badayev, V.V., Gorodetskiy, A.K., and Halkevich, 14.8., "Airborne
Investigations of Vertical Infrared Radiation Profiles in the 10-12 um 'Hin-
dov',‘ IZV. AN SSSR. P121!“ am. I m, V01 12, No 7, 1976, pp 711-719.

Nantevich, 11.5., Istonina, L.G., and Khovis, V.. 'm the Transformation in the
Atmosphere of Solar Radiation Reflected From the Ocean," 12V. AN SSSR, rum
am. I OKBANA, Vol 13, No 1, 1977, pp 21-34.

Barnett. 7.9.. Patzert. W.C., Webb, s.c., and Bean. B.R., 'Climatological Use-
fulness of Satellite-Determined Sea Surface Mperatures in the Tropical
Pacific,‘ BULL. AMER. METEOROL. 5°C., Vol 60. No 3, 1979, pp 197-205.

Malkevich, H.s., "Some Estimates of the Accuracy and Reliability of the Remote
Deteruination of the Ocean Surface's Mperature From Space," INPORH. BYULLETEN'
8311M "ATMOSFBRA-OKEAN-Km" PR1 GIN? $888, No 1, 1980, pp 47-69.

Gorodetskiy, A.K., "Method, Results and Error in Deternining the Underlying Sur-
face's Temperature Prom Measurements of Outgoing Radiation in the 10.5-11.5 um
Area of the Spectrum by the 'Kosmos-320’ Satellite," in ”Kosnicheskaya strela"
[Space Arrow], Hoscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 1974. pp 198-208.

Badayev. V.V., and Malkevich, 11.8., ”On the Possibility of Determining Vertical
Aerosol Attenuation Profiles Prom Satellite Measurements of Reflected Radiation

in the 0.76 um Oxygen Band," IZV. AN SSSR. Przm m. I 013m, V01 14. No 10,
1978: PP 1022-1029.

Glushko, V.N.. Ivanov, R.I., Livshits. 6.512., and Pedulin. I.A., "Rasseyaniye
infrakraanogo izlucheniya v bezoblachnoy atmosfere" [Scattering of Infrared

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Radiation in a Cloudless Atmosphere]. Alma-Ate, Iadatel'stvo ”Neuka'. 1974, 210
pp.

12. Badayev, V.V., and Kozlov, Yam” “On Determining the Amsphere's Optical
Parameters Prom Measurements of Reﬂected Radiation in the 0.76 pm Oxygen
Absorption Band.“ 12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA ASH. I OIBANA, Vbl 16, No S, 1980, pp
542-545.

COPYRIGIPI': Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Issledovaniye M1 :12 kosnoee“, 1981

1 1746
C50 : 1866/10

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l. Bathynotric nap of range, in haters (broken lines -
hydrological profiles).

Research Center for the Study of Natural Resources]. the results or this processing
were used to coupile brightness distribution naps, using relative values (levels 0
to 255). in three spectral bands A (0.5-0.6 m). A: (0.6-0.7 um) and A3 (0.7-0.8
um) (Figure 2). The accuracy of the determination of the hydrological stations' lo-
cations on then was it 13.5-5 kn. allowing for errors in the nap cospilation technol-
ogy and the ships' observations. Laboratory processing of ealplos for inorganic
suspended matter and chlorophyll A was conducted with standard todmiques. with the
results for the two levels being averaged.

 

Figure 2. Map 0: distribution or aqueous nadiu hrightnoss. in
relative values, in the 0.5-0.6 W metal band.

he region where the experiment was cmducted is a highly productive aroa of the
Caspian Sea. which fact is related to the upwelling of rich biogonic ole-ants from

53

FOIOFI'ICMLUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the subsurface waters near the eastern shore [4). Seagoing Insure-ants of the wa-
ter's surface temsrature confirmed this. for instance, a dmp in temperature from
20.4 to 19.4' c over a distance of about 8 h was registered in the coastal area of
the range. The average concentrations of chlorophyll in the surface layer were
2.0-2.5 Will. he water depth in the area where the work was done ranged fro. lo to
26 n, while the bottom consisted of yellow-gray sand. withan mm. of shell.
covered by a thin layer of dark gray silt. the distribution of relative transparen-
cywithinthebordersoftherangeturnedoutnottoberelatedtodepth. Porsxan-
ple, values of 4-5 n were registered repeatedly at depths of 10, 14. 20. 24 and 26
n. while at the sane tine. relative transparency values of 7—11 I were noted at
depths ranging fro. 10 to 20 s. The distribution: of the aqueous Iodiun's spectral
brightness 3» as measured from the satellite, was also not directly related to

only two stations was the calculated effect of the botto- souewhat greater (0.7 per-
cent). Therefore, any change in the aqueous nediu's e; value can be regarded as
being related to the distribution of the concentration of phytoplankton. inorganic
suspended matter and other ale-ants, thencre so since the height of the waves during
the experiment did not exceed 0.2-0.4 n for the shallow areas and 0.6-0.8 n for the

deeper regions, while their length did not exceed 5 and 10 n. respectively. which
(according to the data in [6]) does not cause vertical airing down to the bottom.

During the comarison of the relative values of the aqueous mdiun‘s spectral
brightness BA with the corresponding values of its relative transparency Yrel tr for
the purpose of reducing the effect of random errors in the measurements of this
characteristic, which can reach values of 10-15 percent of the registered value.
grouping of the relative transparency's neasm'ed values was carried out and the av-
erage values of the aqueous nsdius's spectral brightness 3A were omtsd for the
separate groups: the results of these calculations are presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Average Values of of the Aqueous Media in the Region of the
uperinent for Difée

rent Relative Transparency Values

    

Kay:
1. Limits of relative transparency 2. Average value in group. n
values in a group. n 3. 81 in spectral bands

In connection with this. the correlation coefficient r of the average values of the
aqueous nediun's spectral brightness and the relative transparency's average values
for spectral band A1 is r; I 0.83 and for band A; it is r12 - 0.57, While the cor-
responding regression equaéions have the form

Yam-mazessg—uém), Yum-Nuns 3.41.3).
The results of the cosparison are presented graphically in Figure 3.

56
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nu suo~ a 70001,,

figure 3. Relationship between values of aqueous nediu's bright-
ness in 0.5-0.6 m (a) and 0.6-0.7 m (b) spectral bands and rel-
ative transparency values.

As is obvious from the results of the marina. for the region of the experiment
the detenination of the relative transparency values is acre reliable when it is
done with the data on the distribution of the aqueous aediu's brightness in the A;
(0.5-0.6 ul) spectral band.

The next stage of the analysis of the results was a oosparison of the values of 3‘1
and 3A2 with the corresponding values for the concentration of inorganic supended
setter c“... In order to reduce the effect of randu snore in C1” on the results
of the analysis, which can reach a level of 20 percent of the obtained value. analo-
gous grouping of the data gathered on board the ships was carried out. .the results
of the cosparison are presented in Table 2 and figure 4.

Table 2. Average Values of .83 of the Aqueous Mill in the Region of the
Experimt for Different Owcentrat’nns of inorganic Suspended hatter

 

Key:
1. Limits of inorganic suspended nst- 2. average value in group. ag/i
ter concentration in grow, ng/l 3. B; in spectral bands

In connection with this, the following regression equations and correlation coeffi-
cients were obtained for spectral bands ‘1 and 13:

ch.-—4o.so+o.‘98.., “-037, c;“-_s.ss+o,153¥ 1.3036.-

The results of the analysis show that the determination of the concentrations of in-
organic suspended nutter in the surface layer of the aqueous India for the area of
the eaperinent is lots representative when it is done according to the data on the
distribution of brightness in the 0.6-0.7 m spectral band.

55

MOWISEONLY
Mane. “on y“ ted W
‘1’ 1t ban a .1

W t in “ﬂu-u in this band c1123":y “up.

“We a late” M -

""9““ Wm “fl‘m'itr at par:
“.0108 of C

W m- u

a m", t° “For

(Poinu) An 1mg“ dung 3W

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

The regression equation calculated Ira these data has the for.
Cu 4"} . '4"th

in connection with which r 8 0.96. a - -33.3. b I 7.98 for c“. < 1.5 Ig/lv: r -
- 0.91, a - «1.2, b - 9.67 to: c“. a 1.5 ng/l.

For identical aqueous media 81 values. the points in the graph (rigors 6) with
suspended setter concentration 34,. < 1.5 tag/i have higher cch A values. which indi-
cates the correctness o! the chosen nethodologioal approach for processing data

gathered by space surveying and synchronous seagoing observations.

ll'he calculations that have been nade are correct only for the area where the experi-
nsnt was conducted. However, the proposed nethodological approach to the analysis
of materials (to. ship and satellite uasursnents can be used to process the results
oi analogous experinente. He should also nention here the possibility of using the
0.5-0.6 m spectral band to detect highly productive regions in the ocean. utilising
available satellite information and allowing for the fact that changes in an masons
nediun's Bx values in this band are nore closely related (for open ocean waters) to
changes in the concentration of biological elements, since the presence of particles
of inorganic suspended utter in these waters is linited in coqarison with coastal
waters.

finally, in connection with this it is also necessary to allow for the effect or the
atmosphere on the radiation leaving the ocean [15.16], although {or bodies or water
that are enall in area it can. in nest cases. be provisionally seemed to be waiters
and. consequently. all the changes in 81 recorded for a given area can be attributed
to the distributions of the oceanologi‘cal and mid biological characteristics
or the aqueous nedius.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. noiseyev. P.A., ”Biologicheskiye reeursy nirovogo okeana' [Biological Resources
of the World Ocean], hoscow. 1969, 338 pp.

2. “Biologiya okeana“ [Biology of the Ocean]. Moscow, lzdatel'stvo 'Nauka", Vol 1.
1977, 398 pp.

3. Yerlov. $6.. ‘Optika norya' [Optics of the Sea]. leningrad. Isdatel'stvo
'Gidronsteoisdat'. 1980, 247 pp.

d. Kosarev, a.n., 'Gidrologiya Raepiyskogo i Aral'skogo norey" [Hydrology of the
Caspian and Aral Seas]. hosoow. Isdatel'stvo mu [Moscow State Universitylo 1975,
273 pp.

5. Han'kovskiy. v.1., "the Relationship Between the Depth of visibility of a White
Disk and the ﬂadietion Attenuation factor to: Ocean waters,” in “Optioheskiye
netody irucheniya okeanov i vnutrennikh vodoyenov' [Optical liethods {or Studying
Oceans and Inland Water Areas]. Novosibirsk, lsdatel‘stvo "hauka'. 1979, pp loo-
106.

6. Zhukov. than “Obshchaya okeanologiya" [General Oceanography}. uningrad. Isda-
tel‘stvo ”Gidroaeteoisdat". 1976, 376 pp.

58
5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

9.

1°.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gurinovich. 6.9.. Sevchenko. 5.8., and Solov'yev. K.N., “Spektt'oekopiya

khlozofilla i rodetvennykh eoyedlneniy [Spectroscopy of Wyn and Related
Compounds], ninek, Izdatel'etvo 'uauka i “rekhnika'. 1968, 520 pp.

'Ilanual of Renate Sawing." Haahington. Antican Society of Photogra-etry. Vol
2. 1975, 1,756 pp.

Pelevin, v.ll., "Evaluating the Concentxation ot Suspended Matter and Chlorophyll
in theSeaonthe Beale of theSpectnnotmtqoing Radiationumdhooa
Helicopter.“ WYA, Vol 18, No 3. 1978. pp 428-434.

Skopinteev, B.A., "at the Coagulation of a Fluvial Discharqe'c migenoue Sua-
pended Patticlee in Sea Water,“ Izv. AI! 8883. m. 1 ”12.. Vol 10. no 4,
1946. pp 351-371.

Clarke. 6.1... wing, G.C., and Women. Cd... 'Spoctza of Back-Scatteted Light
Pro-n the Sea, Obtained with an Aircraft. as a Heaeure of Wu Concentxa-
tion,‘ SCIENCE, Vol 167, No 3921, 1970. pp 1119-1121.

Seekielda. KJL, 'Cbecrvaticne of Suspended Material no. Spacecraft Altitudem"
Hamburg, Dcutechee Hydrographiechee Institut, Reft 4. 1974. pp 159-170.

Violliet, IL. Deechaapo, 9.2.. and uconte. P.. “Airborne Relote Sensing of
Chlorophyll Content Undo: Cloudy Sky an Applied to the Tropical Uaten in the
Gulf of China," mm 88135116 (I m, V01 7, lo 3. 1978. pp 235-248.

Kohlente-Hiehke. 0.1.. and Vedetnikov. V.I., 'Ptilery Production.“ in "Biologiya
okeana" [Biology of the Ocean], Moeoov, Izdatel'stvo 'IIauka", Vol 2, 1977, pp
183-208.

Malkevich. 11.5., “Allowing for the Maoophex'e men Studying the Earth's Natural
Resources no. Space,“ in 'xoenicheekiye ieeledovaniya eel-mm remeov" [Space
Investigations of the mth's nooouzcee], Moscow. Izdatel‘etvo 'Nauka". 1976,
pp 110-130.

Menkov. v.1., Gurevich, I.Ya., Kopelevich, o.v.. and Shiftin. x.s., 'Bxight-
nese Spectra of (mtgoing Radiation and Changes in men as the damnation Alti-
tude memes," in ”Opticheekiye netody izucheniya okeanov i vnutxennikh
vodoyenov", Novosibirsk, lodetel'etvo 'Nauka", 1979, pp 41-53.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'etvo "Nauka". "luledovaniye zcnli is Roma“, 1981

11746

C50:

1 866/ 10

59

l-‘OROFFICIALUSEDNLY
FOR Ohm USE ONLY

00C 551.‘6.0:629.78

mam IN USING VIDNINPOMTIQ! PM 'meon' SAW!“ ‘10 mean
OCEANIC mm

Moscow xssmoovmvs m: lz We in Ruuian No 6. Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 21 Apr 81) pp 48-57

[Article by 3.8. Kas'min and V.Ye. Sklyarov, Institute of Oceanology imeni P.P.
Shirshov, 0881! Academy of Sciences. Moscow)

[Text] in recent years. the quality of the space information recein from satel-
lites in the 'Heteor' series has improved considerably. The scanning eguipsnt in-
stalled in then (MSG-s [multispectral scanning unit with medium resolutionl) makes
it possible to obtain images in the visible (0.5-017 ill) and near-infrared (0.7-1.1

250 II). An analysis of images obtained with the “30-8 scanner in 1980 confirmed the
possibility of using such intonation in the practice of ooeanological research.
However, limitations related to the observation conditions do not always make it
possible to obtain informative images in the visible band. Our analysis of a large
number of images obtained with the lieu-S and 3130-3 [multispectral scanning unit with
low resolution] (with lower spatial resolution) scanners. photographs of the ocean's
surface taken by cosmonauts on the 'Salyut-G" station. and images and photographs
taken from American space vehicles ('Skylab.” the “Landsat” Isz [artificial Barth
satellitel) enabled us to reach the following conclusions: 1. As a rule. the depic-
tion in space images of dynamic processes in the ocean (fronts, eddies, current
boundaries and meanders, traces of internal waves and so on) takes place under rig-
orously defined conditions that are related to sighting angles. Sun height and the
hydrometeorological situation. 2. Features of the ocean surface's dynamics are seen
most clearly in areas where sunlight is reflected; that is, under conditions of a
mirror (or close to it) reflection of solar rays. 3. The effect of “visibility" of
dynamic processes is caused by modulation of the high-frequency component of wind-
caused wave action in a field of currents. which creates contrasts in the roughness
of the water surface and corresponding contrasts in the field of reflected solar ra-
diation registered in photographs and images.

Below we discuss specific examples of the investigation of oceanological phenomena
in the western part of the Pacific Ocean and in the ”editerranean Sea. using images
frm “Meteor“ 182's and other types of space information.

Eddies in Currents. At the present tints, remote methods are being used extensively
to investigate eddy formations in the ocean. with the primary emphasis being on

60
POIOFHCIAIJJSBONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

synoptic eddies and current rings. Images obtained with the help of Isz's also make
it possible to investigate smaller eddies (20-50 km) that exist in current flows
near their frontal limits [1). This type of eddy (only cyclonic ones have been de-
tected so far) apparently plays an imortant role in the formation of the
thermohsline structure of frontal zones. althoth their structure and

generation mechanism have not yet been studied thoroughly soon 11. In

our opinion, each new case of the discovery of such phenomena eserves attention.
The study of the processes of eddy formation in the regions of the most intensive
energy exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere--particu1ar1y in the sons of
convergence of the (Oyyasio) and (Kurosio) Currents--is especially important. Re-
mote monitoring of the location of meanders and eddies in this region can create a
real basis for predicting heat advection in the northwest part of the Pacific Ocean
and, as a consequence, for predicting ice formation in the Sea of anchors): and weath-
er in the eastern regions of the USSR.

In June 1980, an HBO-s sensor ('Heteor'
152, 0.7-1.1 um band) was used to obtain an
image of a section of the Pacific Ocean's
surface to the east of the island of Honshu
in the zone of convergence of the Kurosio
and Oyyasio Currents (figure 1 [not includ-
edl). In it are clearly visible two eddy
formations of a cyclonic nature, designated
in Figure 1 as eddies “a" and "s.“ The
central part of eddy 'A' has approximate
coordinates of 31.5-36' N.Lat. and 144.5‘
Lung. The center of eddy "B,“ which is
Figure 2. Thermal structure of the partially obscured by clouds. is 150-200 km
ocean's surface in the zone of con- to the south (36-36.5° N.Lat.) and is 10-
vergence of the Kurosio and Oyyasio cated at 144' BJong. Our experience in
Currents, based on data gathered by analysing space images in the visible band
the Non-6 152 on 5-6 June 1980: of the spectrum enables us to categorize
T3 a warm waters of the Kurosio Cur- these eddy formations as oceanic rather
rent; XB =- cold waters of the 0yyasio than atmospheric phenomena. The central
Current: solid lines - location of part of eddy “A" is 40-50 km in diameter
sharp temperature gradients: dotted and the nucleus of eddy "3" is also about
lines - location of weak temperature 50 km in diameter. The diameter of the en-
gradients; A, B - location of cyclon- tire area of water involved in the eddy mo-
ic eddies. tion is about 80-100 km for both eddies.
Key: 1. Honshu Island Here it is appropriate to point out that
images in the visible band of the spectrum
reflect the surface manifestations of dynamic processes, whereas infrared data re-
cord tcmperature irregularities on the surface (which are. as a rule, a result of
the dynamic processes) , so that evaluations of the eddies' parameters on the basis
of these two sources do not have to coincide. Moreover, in the case of weak taper-
ature gradients or the absence of them. eddy formations (particularly small-scale
ones) may possibly not appear in infrared images.

 

In order to obtain additional information on the location of the frontal limits in
the convergence zone of the Kurosio and Oyyasio Currents, we utilized infrared im-
ages (in the 10.5-11.5 um band) that were obtained with the non-6 and ”Tires" sat-
ellites in the time period under discussion. An analysis of the thermal structure

61

FOIOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a section of the surface to the east of Honshu Island. based on data gathered by
the Nona-6 Isz on 5-6 June 1980 (figure 2). shows that cyclonic eddy 'A" is also
manifested quite clearly on the infrared image. ll'his is a boundary eddy ('bridge.’
according to the terminology used in (1)) that is located at the frontal limit
formed by a quasistationary. anticycl'onic meander of the Kurosio that exists in this
area and the Oyyasio's cold waters. Eddy '3' cannot be identified unautiguously on
the basis of infrared data. Its central part. as follows from a comparison of Pig-
ures 1 and 2. is displaced somewhat to the southeast of the frontal limit. Thus.
eddy “a“ is located directly in the flow of the Kurosio Current. in thermally more
homogeneous waters. which may be the cause of its absence in the infrared image.
However. the question of whether eddy ”a“ formed on the frontal limit and was then
displaced into the Kurosio's flow where it lost its thermal nonuniformity or formed
directly in the current flow remains open. The high quality of the image produced
by the HSU-s scanner (Figure 1) makes it possible to establish that there are sub-
stantial differences in the structures of eddies 'a' and "B" that are presumably re-
lated to their different locations relative to the frontal limit. Eddy "A' consists
of two separate and clearly distinguishable (by tone) spiral-shaped elements. with
one being curled cylonically relative to the other. he light-colored spiral. which
is 2-10 km wide in the eddy's nucleus and then expands fanwise in the area of'the
Oyyasio's waters, apparently consists of the Oyyasio's cold waters that have been
drawn into eddy-type motion. The dark section of the eddy can be interpreted as
warm waters of the Kurosio that have been cut off from the main flow. Eddy “9" is
considerably more isotropic in structure. and appears as a set of spiral, threadlike
white bands. ”out 1 km wide. that are curled toward the center.

In the image under discussion (Figure l). the characteristic shape of the cloud cov-
er, in the form of thin (1-3 km wide) bands of cumlus clouds. draws attention to
itself. a comparison of these strips of cloud 3 th the location of the Kurosio's
anticyclonic meander (Figure 2) makes it possible to conclude that they formed and
are located along the front separating the Kurosio's warm waters (the meander) from
the Oyyasio's cold ones. Thus. bands of clouds of this type (which are also seen in
other regions) can serve as an additional identifying feature for fronts in the
ocean when data in the visible band of the spectrum are being used.

At the present time there is evidence that eddy formations such as the ones dis-
cussed above are a typical and permanent feature of the cone of convergence of the
Kurosio and Oyyasio Currents [2]. In particular. in [2]--based on infrared data
from NOAA satellites-oit is mentioned that such eddies (friction eddies. as they are
called in (2)) are seen very frequently to the east of Capes Inubo. Kurosaki and
Erimo. and it is also pointed out that they are frequently situated one behind
another as a pair of eddies on one "slope" of a meander. We, however, do not know
of any examples of the analysis of this phenomenon utilising information in the vis-
ible band of the spectrum.

local Fronts. Above we discussed an exasple of the interpretation of space images
of the front zone of large oceanic currents. Using remote methods it is also possi-
ble to investigate fronts in coastal areas and inland seas. Jrhe infrared images
used for this purpose make it possible to obtain detailed pictures of the location
of thermal fronts. A successful example of an investigation of this type is the map
of thermal fronts and related phenomena in the Mediterranean Sea that was construct-
ed in [3] from VHRR radiometer data (152 non-5) for a period of 2 years (1977-1979).
Fronts of this type can also appear in images in the visible band. since along the

62

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

FtNIOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

In the images they observed light-colored bands corresponding to calm areas with a
high reflection factor that reach from the leeward side of the islands, in the di-
rection of the wind flow, to distances of up to 200 km. An analogous phenomenon is
seen in images of the Aegean Sea (Figures 3 and 5 (not included!) obtained with the
MSU-s equipment on a "Meteor" satellite. Particularly clear 'wind shadows' from the
numerous islands in the Aegean Sea, in the form of bright wide bands elongated in
the direction of the wind, appear on the image obtained on 26 June 1980 (Pigure 3).
It should be mentioned here that these zones of relatively quiet surface appear to
be brighter than the surrounding background in the central part of the flashing
area. On the edges of the patch of sunlight, however, they are darker than the
background. This effect is quite visible in ?igurs 5. The phenomenon of a change
in the contrast sign of calm sections of the sea's surface relative to the back-
ground as the distance from the central part of the flashing some increases was also
noted in [6]. It is necessary to keep in mind the fact that in Figures 3 and 5 only
the general direction of the wind is indicated (from meteorological data), whereas
the “wind shadows” reflect the local wind field structure, which has considerable
spatial variability in a region with such a nonuniform underlying surface. In con-
nection with this, noncorrespondence of the directions of “wind shadows" to the pre-
vailing wind direction is seen in some cases. Thus, space images such as this make
it possible to study the detailed structure of the wind field in contrast to meteor-
ological maps, which give only the general direction_of wind flows. The wind velo-
city during the periods of the surveys was 5-7 m/s. The extent of the zones of the
islands' screening effect varies from 20 to 80 km and is apparently related to the
height the islands reach above sea level and their width, which is confirmed by the
irregular structure of Crete’s “wind shadow” (Figure 3): the longest and most con-
trasting sections correspond to the highest points on the island, while the breaks
between them are explained by the penetration of wind flows through depressions in
the relief.

Internal Waves. Visible manifestations of internal waves on the ocean's surface
(alternating bands with different degrees of roughness that are seen when winds are
weak or moderate) can be caused by two different mechanisms [7,8], the essence of
which is periodic modulation of the short-wave component of wind-caused wave action
in a field of currents excited by progressive internal waves. Different reflection
conditions in the bands create contrasts in the field of reflected solar radiation,
which is also the physical basis for the remote registration of internal waves that
was carried out successfully by the ”Skylab” space laboratory [9], the “Landsat-1'
and ”Landsat-2" Isz's (10-12). the DMSP [15] [sic] and airplanes [ll]. The results
of multispectral surveying from the "Soyuz-22" spacecraft and the 'Salyut-S” orbital
station, as well as images obtained with the ”Meteor" 182's, also confirm that, un-
der certain conditions, internal waves are observed on the ocean's surface. Data in
the literature and materials available to us show that traces of internal waves are
manifested most clearly in areas where there are patches of sunlight, it being the
case that the sign of the contrast in the bands relative to the background changes
from the center of the patch to its edges. In a number of works, space images have
been used to investigate internal waves. He will only point out the most detailed
of these investigations [10-12], in which a number of conclusions are reached about
the basic parameters and reasons for the generation of internal waves, observable
from space, near the Atlantic coast of the United States, the eastern and western
shores of Africa, and the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea.

Information about internal waves that is obtained in space can be used to investi-
gate the spatial variability of their parameters. As an example, we analyzed images

64

EIECN'LY
FOR OMCMI. USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Traces of internal waves on a section of the open
shelf (a) and in the Gulf of Maine (b) , based on data gathered
by the ERTS-l 152 in July 1973 and July 1974. respectively. The
location of frontal waves. in packets, is noted.

of the traces of internal waves (54 packets) along the eastern coast of the United
States during the period 1972-1974. as published in atlas [12]. M regions are

singled out. according to the nature of the relationship of the traces of internal
waves with the morphometric conditions: 1) a section of open shelf from Cape Hat-

teras to Cape Cod. with an average bottom slope of 0.001 (in this section almost all
the internal waves propagate in the direction toward the wind and their tracks are

parallel to the depth contours (Figure 6a)): 2) the mlf of Maine, which is a water
area with depths of about 200 an, enclosed by slopes with a bottom slope of 0.01-0.02
and separated from the open ocean by the shallow-water Georges and Browns Banks (the
basic tidal influx enters the gulf through the narrow Eastern channel, where a con-

siderably more coaplicated pattern of internal wave orientation is seen (figure 6b)) .
The results of calculations (generalized in the table on the next page) indicate

that the internal waves in these two areas have substantially different parameters.
This exasple shows that in the future. remote data can be used to find relationships
between the parameters of internal waves and the background conditions and to carry
out the corresponding zoning of the ocean.

The investigations mentioned above are concerned primarily with internal waves in

the ocean and boundary sees. the generation of which is related to the interaction
between the tidal wave and irregularities in the bottom. Considerably more rarely
do we see reports on the registration of traces of internal waves in closed seas,
where their origin is not related to tides. but to other (and nonperiodic) causes.
In this respect, the image obtaim" on 1 July 1980 with an MSU-s scanner (Figure 5)
is of considerable interest. In it we can see a complex pattern of internal wave

tracks in the central part of the Mediterranean Sea. in the region of the islands in
the Cretan arc. Internal waves were recorded on images in both bands, but the pat-

tern can be seen more clearly in the near-infrared band (0.7-1.1 um). The interpre-
tation of the observed phenomena and the hydrometeorological situation are presented
in Figure 7. Judging by the curvature of the bands in the area most remote from the
islands, we are observing propagation of progressive internal waves from the

6.5

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Average Parameters 0: Internal Waves in an Area of men Shelf
(Iron Cape Hatteras to Cape Cod) and the Gulf of Heine

n Shelf Prom Ca

Parmters m Gulf of Maine

Length of Frontal wave 780 m 1.070 a
3504.590 n GOO-2.500 It

Average length of Have in a Packet 685 n 865 a
350-l,500 n 250-2,000 a

Distance Between Packets 16 km 43 km
10-40 kn 40-60 Jan

width of Packet 6.3 km
2-12 km
of change of the paran-

southeast--the central part of. the Mediter-
ranean Sea--in the direction of the islands
The absence in this

this case their generation is not related
to interaction between the tidal {low and
irregularities in the bottoa. In contrast
to an ocean shelf. where internal waves are
propagated as packets that are 3-5 km wide
and 15-30 km apart (the result of periodi-
city of the tidal flow) [10-11] (see Figure
6a). in this region we do not see separate
packets, but a field of internal wave
tracks up to 250 km wide (from the "nodes
Strait to Kasos Strait) that stretch for
100-150 kn in the southeasterly direction.
into the open part of the sea. The waves
are 5-6 kn long in the area most remote
image obtained on 1 from the islands,- but diminish to 2-2.5 km
July 1980 (Figure 5): solid lines - in length as they near the islands, which
= location of internal wave tracks: may be related to the lessening of the
broken lines a- depth contours: depths near the islands. The internal
points - boundaries of "wind shad- waves are about 3 km long in the Rhodes
ows": l. [sic] area of. disruption of strait. In the inage under discussion we
internal waves: arrows - direction of observe an interesting example of a change

   
    

currents in straits. in the form of the tracks or internal waves
Key: 1. Aegean Sea acted upon by a surface current moving fro-
2. Rhodes Kasos Strait into the bevantine Sea. the
3. Karpathos Strait existence of which current is confirmed by
4. Wind (7 a/a) both average mltiyear hydrological data
5. Kasos Strait [4] and meteorological data on the wind's
6. Crete direction during the period of the survey

(see Figure 7). In the image (Pigure 5) it
is clearly obvious that in the zone of action of the current moving in the direction
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

opposite to that of internal wave propagation the bands are convex and turned toward
the direction of the current, in contrast to the rear part of the wave field where
the internal waves‘ tracks are curved in the direction of their propagation; that
is, in the direction opposite to that of the current. Along the current's boundary.
which can be determined from the boundary of the area of Kasos Island's screening
effect (the light-colored band leading away from the island on its leeward side).
there is compression of the internal waves' traces; that is, their length is re-
duced. In the central part of the Kasos Strait, where the counterflow is maximal,
the bands lose their orderly structure and it can be assumed that this is an area of
dissipation of the internal waves.

Conclusions. 1. In a number of examples that are also of independent interest, we

have demonstrated the possibility of the successful utilisation of images in the
visible and near-infrared bands of the spectrum, as obtained with the help of 182's

of the "Meteor" series, in oceanological research. 2. the high spatial resolution
of the "50-5 equipment makes it possible, in a nuiaer of cases, to obtain more de-
tailed information about the structure of dynamic formations in the ocean than can
be derived from infrared data. 3. In order to increase the effectiveness of the

utilization of videoinformation from the ”Meteor“ Isz's in oceanological practice,
the choice of orbits and the planning of the surveys should be done in such a manner
as to cover sections of the sea's surface with patches of sunlight as frequently as
possible (and this is fully realizable). In order to record surface mifestations
of dynamic processes in the ocean that appear in these patches. channels in the
spectral band from 0.6 to l um are the most effective. When surveying outside a

patch of sunlight, the choice of the optimum bands depends to a considerable degree
on the specific problem and requires special consideration.

BIBLIWRAPHY

l. Sklyarov, V.Ye., and Pedorov, K.N., “Three-Dimensional Structure of the Gulf
Stream's Frontal Zone, as Determined From Synchronous Ship and Satellite Data,‘
ISSISDOVANIYE MI 12 KOSHCBA, No 3, 1980. PP 5-13.

2. Bulatov, N.V., "Eddy Structure of a Sub-Arctic Front in the Northwestern Part of
the Pacific Ocean.“ UCH. ZAP. 1.60. SBR. GEOGR. ﬂux, “0 27, 1930, pp 61-72.

3. Philippe. Michele. "Fronts thermiques en Hedeterranee d'apres les donnees du
radiomeytre du satellite ROMS (Septembre l977-Pevrier 1979)," C. R. ACAD. SCI.
PARIS, Series B, No 291, 1980, pp 43-46.

4. Ovchinnikov. I.H., et al., "Gidrologiya Sredizemnogo nor-ya" [Hydrology of the
Mediterranean Sea], edited by v.h. Burkov, Leningrad. Izdatel'stvo
"Gidrometeoizdat", 1976, 376 pp.

. Levine, B.R., and White, W.B., “Thermal Frontal Zones in the Eastern Mediterrane-
an Sca," J. GEOPHYS. RBS., Vol 77, No 6, 1972, pp 1081-1086.

CI

6. Strong, A.B., DeRycke, R.J., and Stumpf, 3.6., nExtensive Areas of Reduced Waves
Leeward of the Lesser Antilles,” GEOPHYS. RES. 1.311., Vol 1, No l, 1974, pp 47-49.

7. Ewing, G., "slicks, Surface Films and Internal Waves.“ J. MAR. 1335., Vol 9, 1950,
p 161.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gargett. 3.8., and Hughes, 3.11.. "On the Interaction of Surface and Internal
waves,“ J. 17er “Ben” Vol 52. No 1, 1972. pp 179-191.

Diets, 11.5., ”The Ocean: Prom the Skylab-4.“ SH mourns. Vol 20. No 6, 1974.
pp 359-363.

Apel, J.R., at a1., “Observations of Oceanic Internal Havoc From the Earth Ra-
sourcea Technology Satellite.‘I J. GROWS. 1188., Vol 80. No 6. 1975, pp 865-881.

hpel. $1.11., at al., ”A Study of Oceanic Internal Haves Using Satellite Imagery
and Ship Data,“ m SENS. mm., Vol 5, 1976, pp 125-135.

Sawyer, Co: and Apel, J.R., "Satellite Images of Internal Nan Signatures."
Miami. Florida, Atlantic Demographic and Meteorological Lab” 1976.

Fact, 11., and Babe, IL, "Satellite (laceration of Internal Wave Refraction in
the South China Sea," GBOPHYS. RES. 1.311., Vol 4. No 5, 1977, pp 189-191.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'utvo 'Nauka". "Isslodovaniye 2311111 1: komsa', 1981

11746

CSO :

1866/36

68

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 528. 727
GEOHBTRIC CONCERN OP SCANNBR PHOTOGRAPHS 0? m um's SURFACE

Moscow mm mm 12 nosnosa in msian No 4, Jul-Aug Bl (manuscript re-
ceived 31 Jul 80) pp 96-103

[Article by v.1. mmmnko)

[Text] Space television systems installed in artificial Barth satellites produce
multispectral photographs of the Barth's surface that mks it possible to solve a
number of isportant national econalic problems related to the study of natural re-
sources, it being the case that syst-s of the scanning type are some of the most
promising ones [1]. The solution of these ptobless at the level required by nodsru
consuaers is possible only if there is a substantial Wt in the accuracy
characteristics of space photographs. particularly their geometric accuracy. how-
ever, a nuaber of factors that affect different parts of a system [2) prevent this,

which results in the necessity of special ground processing of these photographs
with the help of analog or digital computer facilities.

The digital processing of space photographs [3] is being done on an ever broader
scale because of its inherent flexibility and high accuracy. In order to solve the
probleas that have been formlated. a high degree of practicality in obtaining. pro-
cessing and recording the video intonation photographically is another ertrasly
important condition. Therefore. the problem of developing special geometric correc-
tion algorithms that would be optinal fra the viewpoint of minimal tine conswtion
has acquired a particular degree of urgency. Such algoritr-s realise the recalcula-
tion of the coordinates of an i-age's eleasnts on the basis of special mathematical
expressions, with subsequent forwarding (or nore coupler processing) of the bright-
ness codes. Teuporal optimization is possible primarily through simlificatiou of
the mathematical expressions for recalculatiug the coordinates.

M approaches are possible in this matter. no first of them is widely used in the
United states [3], the m [4] and other countries to process ”Landsat“ system
photographs. and consists of a polynomial appreciation (usually of no higher than
the fifth order) of the expressions mentioned above. The polynomials' coefficients
are found on the basis of processing the results of the neasurensnt of the locations
of-identified objects (reference points). . In order to look for and identify refer-
ences points it is necessary to have special te-plates and precision optico-
mechanical devices. The tine expended on searching for and identifying reference
points in a photograph depends to a considerable degree on the qualifications of the
people doing it. For these reasons. processing of the photographs on an operational.
basis nay not be achievable.

69
PO! omau. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second approach consists of constructing a mathematical model of the scanner
survey that takes into consideration only the effect of the weightiest distorting
factors. Even in the case of simlified models (Id-6], for exulple), however, the
set of equations of notion of the scanning and recording beams gives inexplicit re-
lationships for recalculating coordinates, which'leads to the necessity of looking
for a solution iteratively, with the help of a computer [6]. Substantial time con-
suption. which can have a negative effect on the operational nature of the process-
ing, is possible in connection with this approach.

However, within the framework of the second approach it is possible to construct a
special type of survey model in which the distorting factors that have been distin-
guished are small, which is typical of the existing and more promising systems for
studying natural resources. 'lhe author of [2] proposes such a nodel that makes it
possible to find the desired relationships, in explicit form, as an exponential ser-
ies expansion with respect to small distorting factors and subsequent truncation of
the series. He also demonstrates that a linear approximation is frequently suffi-
cient for existing and prospective cysts-n. The explicit nature of the relation-
ships that are obtained eliminates the need for the utilisation of iterative meth-
ods. which saves substantial amounts of time. Further saving of time is possible if
the proposed technique is used only to calculate the nodal points of some rectangu-
lar network, while the intermediate coordinates are obtained with the help of algo-
rithms of the bilinear interpolation type as the photographs are being processed.

In this article. on the basis of an appronmate solution of the system of equations
for the special scanner survey model mentioned above, we have derived expressions
for recalculating the coordinates of an image's elements for a scanner with plane
scanning. ‘1'hese expressions were used to calculate the coordinate networks for no-.
dal points that are needed in the processing of photographs with the help of the
correction algorithm explained in [6]. and are oriented toward the storage of the
information about an interpreted photograph on a magnetic disk, which makes it pos-
sible to realise two-dinensional correction of distortions. Further, there is a de-
scription of the processing of two photographs of the Earth obtained by one of the
”Heteor"-series satellites in 1977 and 1978, as well as an analysis of the improve-
ment in the accuracy characteristics of the photographs that has been achieved.

Expressions for Converting Image Blement Line and Colusn matters. As was pointed
out above, in (2) the author presents a geometric nodal of a scanner survey. The
equations of notion presented for the scanning and photographic recording beans were
solved in a linear approximation of relatively small distorting factors of a deter-
ministic and random nature. for the pm'pose of finding the dependences of the dis-
torted geocentric coordinates o' and 8', as measumd in a photograph, on the true
coordinates, as read from the 03:0 axis of the orbital system of coordinates oxoyoso
(Figure l) . which is fixed at the moment tc of seaming of the middle of sue line
that is assured to be central, as it applies to :the problem of evaluating geometric
distortions. The pole formed at the intersection of the 0x0 axis and the Barth's
surface is assmed to be the center of the frame. Coordinates a. and 8 are conven-
ient for the purposes of this discussion, since (for example) for photographs cov-
ering an area of 600 x 600 has they do not exceed a value of 0.047 in radian measure,
regardless of their dependence on the geographic latitude. however, these equations
can also be solved in a linear approximation and relative to the scanner coordi-
nates: the scanning angle 5, also read from the oxo axis, and the time interval At
between the middle of the current line and the moment tc (At I t - tc) , depending

70

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the corresponding parameters of the photographic recorder: €' - angle of rota-
tion of the recorder's drun. At' .. interval of tine beWeen the recording of the
current line and the moment té of the recording of the central line (At' - t' - té).
This results in the obtaining of relationships that can be used to recalculate the
coordinates of an image's elements for the purpose of coupensating for geouetric
distortions.

 

Figure 1. General. geo-etry of scanner surveying.

We will assume that for surveying we are using a scanner with plane scanning. the
incident beam vector a of which (Figure 1) has the components (cos 5. 0 - sin 5) in
the orbital systea of coordinates oxoyoso (we will assume the scanner‘s intrinsic
distorting factors to be equal to zero). Further assisting that the recording is
done with a drum-type photographic recorder, we obtain the interrelationship of the
photograph's coordinates my and the photorecorder's coordinates 5' and At' in the
for:

0 .
.r'a-v'At'. y-p-‘t. (1)
“I

where p - radius of the drum and. "b - angular velocities of rotation of the drum
and the scanning bean. respectively: v' - rate of drum feed along the axis.

As a standard, we will use an obliQue, cylindrical. equidistant projection oriented
along the satellite's orbit. The formulas for this projection can be represented in
the form

z-nnm'. b-Ma’. (2)

where 30 = average radius of curvature of the reference ellipsoid in the center of
the frame: H... - a coefficient reflecting the main scale of the photograph. Pro- (1)
and (2) we obtain the interrelationship between coordinates u'.8' and E'm' (n' is
an additional dimensionless variable) in the forts

all , I-‘L"_"-_‘"_,
°‘ mam.‘ ’ u. u. ‘3’
7 71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By aaking use of the surveying nodal equations fro. [2] and the method for their ap-
proximate solution relative to small distorting factors that is explained there, it
is possible to find functions €(a.8) and No.8) - Me (n - mm position of the
satellite relative to the center of the frame) . (hitting the quite metro-e
intermediate mutations, we obtain

a_) ksin-a'vidp e.
P—chose-H p 2

kcees-i
Ir‘- Zkoosa‘H

 

e-mts (“In

k-cee a

X

 

—c(cos(n-e)-§sin(u-e))]+

x [(Ao- -:l’p)nn:m(u+p)—Amn(u+p)] —1—_—p,

I: (d)
n—p—Zep «(u-o) + cos a

 

mod—u)-

-t¢a (0+: — p)- -(AQ-:: —- p) [cos i-
-sin l i: a 51mm ]+A£i¢acos(u¥p_):A;.

where e, - eccentricity of the reference ellipsoid; n. - angular rate of rotation
of the Earth: 9 - geographic latitude for the center of the frame; I: - p/Ro: p, u,
w. e. i. 0 - standard orbital para-stars for the center of the franc; 6p, Au, (ii,
an - their corresponding measurement errors: 7, 0. t. y, 8, u - bank, pitch and yaw

angles of the orientation system v - 49(1 - e5)5/p5 - average notion of the satel-
lite: u - gravitational constant.

When there are no distortions. the equalities s - e' and B - 8‘ must be fulfilled.
Then. having replaced s' and 8' in (3).‘vith s and 8 and substituting the obtained
expressions into (4). we obtain the required functions {(E'm') and n(£'.n'). ‘i‘hese
coordinates are easily converted into line and colum nuabers of elements of the
original (n and n) and processed (n' and a') inages_ as

l
m-llo+—§(R'A..n n'Aa). n- MFA-"W“ An" A.). (5)

where Al - v'r/(k - l) - value of the desired angular resolution that provides equal-
ity of the resulting photograph's scales along the r and y axes; A; - vr - angle of
displacenent of the satellite during line frequency period 1': no, no - coordinates
of the center of the franc in ele-ent nubers: A - angular resolution of the scan-
ner.

Thus, when (4) is taken into consideration. expressions (5! give explicit relation-
ships for converting the coordinates of an image's elements during the geouetric
correction process.

Geoeetric Correction of Photographs of the Earth. As our initial material we used
the central fraguants of photographs taken. at different tines from a Meteor“ satel-
lite: with a low-resolution scanner on orbit 984 and a media-resolution scanner on

orbit 5.094. The photographs depict the Caucasus and the island of Kyushyu (Japan):
respectively. The latter is shown in figure 2 [omitted].

72

POI! OFFK‘ML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the days of the surveys. there were available orbital data in a relative equator-
ial system of coordinates at moment to of the beginning of the first orbit on the
ascending node on the given days. Ming data on the scanners. which proved to be
analogous to some bank (10) and pitch (06) angles, were also available.

Reference objects were identified in the original photographs and the corresponding
geographic coordinates were determined. The nulber of points turned out to be 14
and 12. respectively. for each photograph.

The photographs were then encoded in an image input-output unit and entered.

element by element (with loo-um resolution) in special files in a computer disk mem-
ory in the form of masses of image elements measuring 2,048 lines by 1.020 colums.
The fragments that were entered depicted segments of the Earth's surface measuring
1,781 x 830 and 514 x 237 km for each photograph. By taking into consideration the
terms of the second-order expansion with respect to parameter «no/v it 0.073, which is
the weightiest of all the distorting factors. it can be shown that the accuracy of
the linear approximation in expressions (4) for both photographs is less than a sin-
gle element. After this. both photographs were depicted on a graphic display in
half-tone form so that the size of each element was 1 x 1 III. This made it possible
to review and make measurements on the photograph with single-element accuracy.

First. temporal correlation of the centers of the frames with coordinates no -

- 1.024. “’0 - 510 was carried out. In order to accomplish this, on the graphic im-
ages we determined the line numbers corresponding to the beginning of the minute
marks formed by the on-board timer during the scanner's return motion, as well as
the dimensions of these marks and the width (in elements) of the frames. These
measurements made it possible to determine the equivalent angular resolution A and
line frequency period '1' of the scanner for each photograph (these parameters are not
equal to the scanner's true resolution and period, since the image was obtained from
a photograph). Knowing them and the on-board timer's correction factors for Moscow
time. which turned out to be 0.3 and 10 s. respectively, the times of passage of the
centers of the frames were established and the sidereal time was determined from an
astronomical yearbook. further. standard techniques were used to calculate the or-
bital parameters and azimuth t. which. together with the date and Hoscow time of
passage of the center of the frame. sidereal time, tuning data and the equivalent
values of A and 'r are presented in Table l. Coordinates x and y of the reference
points in the graphic images were then measured.

In View of the cmparatively low operating speed of the computer that was used. pre-
cise formulas (5) (with due mneideration for (4)) were first used to calculate only
the nodal points of the curvilinear coordinate networks corresponding to the origi-
nal photograph: the coordinates of the intermediate points were computed with the
help of bilinear interpolation during the anal processing of the photographs (see
below). The result of these calculations was two special files on a disk that con-
tained the x and y coordinates of the nodal points. The dimensions of the cells An'
and Am' (for lines and columns) of the rectangular network corresponding to the im-
age that had been processed were selected on the basis of the condition of smallness
of distortions caused by the replath of segments of the curves foraing the sides
of the network's cells with segments of straight lines because of the effect of the
bilinear interpolation algorithm during the processing of the photographs. A second
condition was that the curvilinear network not go beyond the boundaries of the ori-
ginal frame. The values of An' and Am', as well as the corresponding quantities of
nodal points with respect to frame (R) and line (I!) are also given in Table l.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Initial Data for Processing of Photographs

    

 

- evum r.

 
      
  

  
  

    

' 8
3.33} an 52!; on. 11s. one one: ﬁg"
1 I (0 00a. 05-. 11,53: no: 46: cm: «Egg:
,f :- mo - m ' m
e » 14
u .80 an
s. i.
o.% .me
v. 1/
Lee. .-
Key: '
1. Paraseters 3. Date of survey
2. Photograph No . 4. Sidereal tine

ﬁnally. the actual processing of the photographs for the purpose of geometric cor-
rection according to the algorithm described in [7] was carried out: the result of
the processing of the photograph in Pigure 2 is shown in tigure 3 [o-itted). After
the processing was comleted. graphic isages were again produced and the coordinates
of the reference points were measured. On the basis of knowledge of the equivalent
line frequency period for each photograph and the satellite's average notion v. co-
efficients ". were found for the obtained photographs with the formula

Anti-16'." (e)
The corresponding results are also presented in Table l.

The effectiveness of the proposed photograph correction algorithn was evaluated in
the for: of the ratio of the line, angle and area measure-ant errors before process-
ing to the corresponding indicators after processing. As these errors we took, re-
spectively. the values

o.- [57.31]. o,-I:4.é.§|, 5.-le - m

where "c' Ac: Sc - lengths of sides. angles and areas of triangles on the photograph
with vertices at reference points: to, he, s. - the sane characteristics for spheri-
cal triangles on the Barth's surface. Averaged indicators (6) were computed for all
possible pairs (during the measurement of lengths) and triplets (during angle and
area measurements) of reference points, except for angles greater than 160'. The
results of the calculations made before and after the processing of the photographs
are given in Table 2 (in the table. a tilde indicates the values of the distortions
occurring in the processed photographs, while Kt...) designates an averaging opera-
tion) .

It is now appropriate to look into the methodological errors and then nova on to an
analysis of the effectiveness of the proposed Isthod for calculating coordinate net-
works and then correcting photographs. The errors in bilinear interpolation, as
calculated on the basis of the data for the values of An'. An', N and it presented in
‘l'able 1, proved to be less than one-third of an element for all the photographs:
that is, they can be ignored. a detailed analysis of the mean-square errors caused

7‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Key:
1. Distortion before processing 3. autograph No .
2. Distortion after processing 4. Method error. t

lation ot the geographic coordinates andthe discretisation of the photograph.
yielded figures of 0.49 and 0.4? mt for the two photographs. Multiplication by

the figure 2/5178 0.8 enables us to lake the transition to the nathnatical expec-
tations of criteria (6) if we ”tune that the total errors are distributed according

gihly 8.311.
Considering the data in Table 2 and the methodological errors presented above. it is

possible to draw the following conclusions in, for ample, the case of Moments
at lengths. tor the first photograph. this error was able to be reduced to about

solve problems concerning the mapping of the Earth's surfaoe, as well as a number of
problems that arise during the study of natural mess.

I. Salivanov, 5.8., Che-iodanov, v.P., Suvozov. B.a., Narayova, u.x., sinel'nikova.
Lin. Bondsrenko, 3.8., and Seregin. V.I.. “Optical-shamed Scanners for Classr-
vation of the Berth,” mm KING 1 MIMI“, No 6. 1978, pp 17-41.

75

POIOWICIALUSEONLY
2.

3.

4.

s.

6.

7.

FOR Oﬂ'ICIAl. USE ONLY

Khizhnichenko, v.I., "Technique for Evaluating the Accuracy Characteristics of
Scanner-W Television Systols,’ GWIYA I mm. No 11, 1979, pp 28-32.

Bernstein. “Digital naqe Processing of Earth Mutation Sensor Data.“ nu

Schur, H” 'Digitale Entrsrrung mltispectzaler Bilder," 31mm mm
mm, Vol 44, no 5. 1976, pp 202-208.

Bocharov, V.P., and Sazhin. 8.14., 'Correction of Geoutric Distortions of Space
Video Intonation by Digital Hethods,‘ TR. customs In, no 8. 1980, pp. 8-16.

Kadnichanskiy. s.a., “PhotograI-etric Processing of Orbital Television Panoramas,
Using Reference Points,” TR. taxman [Central Scientific ”search Institute of
Geodesy, Aerial Surveying and Cartography], No 222, 1979, Pp 59-80.

mum. Yu.s., Kadnichanskiy, 3.A., and Khishnichenko, V.I., ”Analytical Trans-
formations of Orbital 'nelevieion Panoranas Into a Cartographic Projection,"
GBODEZIYA I WIYA, No 4, 1979, pp 51-57.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka'. "Issledovaniye Zenli is kosnosa". 1981

11746
C80: 1866/ 10

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one 535.36:528.7
PILMING HOONSB’I‘S PM SPACE AS METHOD OF STUDYING ma's ATMOSPHERE

Moscow 1551.500me m: 12 KOSHOSA in Russian No 6. Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 5 Feb 81) pp 58-62

[Article by 8.8. Gurvich, V. Kan. LJ. Popovl, v.v. Ryuminl and 8.A. Savchenko, In-

stitute of Physics of the Atmosphere and Institute of Space Research. 0588 Academy
of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] When the Sun and the noon are observed through the Earth's atmosphere. re-
fraction leads to both smooth compression of the images of these heavenly bodies and
small-scale deformation of the images' shapes. Light refraction measurements can be
used to determine the atmosphere's parameters.

Small-scale deformations of the shape of the Sun's image. in the form of steps, were
first observed from space by the crew of the first expedition in the "Salyut-e' or-
bital scientific station (Yu.v. Romanenko and Gm. Grechko). They took separate
photoguphs of the Sun near the horizon that were used to make approximate calcula-
tions of the vertical structure of the temperature field in the Earth's atmosphere
[1] . It should be mentioned here that such steps have not yet been mentioned in the
observations of American astronauts. as follows from the most recent publications on
this question [2]. In [3] the authors present only theoretical calculations for the
standard model of the atmosphere and proposes a method for determining the altitude
of the tropopause according to the characteristic break as a function of the angle
of refraction.

For the purpose of further investigating the Earth's atmosphere from the viewpoint
of light refraction. the crew of the lengthy fourth expedition in the "8alyut-6'

station filmed risings and settings of the Sun and Moon, thus making it possible to
derive the altitudinal pattern of the angle of refraction and investigate in detail

the dynamics of the typical small-scale deformations of the shapes of these heavenly
bodies. The filming was done with long-focus lenses at a rate of 2‘ frames per sec-

ond. In this article we present a brief preliminary analysis of three series of
films of the Moon. two of which were made on 29 June and one on 25 August 1980.

The dependence of the magnitude of oblateness at on frame number N for the survey
series made on 29 June 1980 is shown in Figure 1. here at. - d1/d2, where d1 is the
vertical and d2 the horizontal diameter of the Moon's visible disk. The altitude of

 

l'USSR Pilot-Cosmonaut.

77

FOB OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the perigee of the light ray froua the
Moon's center corresponding to the most
oblate image 02 - 0.30) is approxinately 6
kn (here and henceforth, altitudes are
correlated with values of a calculated for
the standard nodal of the atnosphere) .
For the two series under discussion, the
angle between the sighting line and the
plane of the orbit was 22-25“. The origin
of reading of the franss was chosen arbi-
trarily, with curves 1 and 2 being super-
m In m m :u my inposedaccordingtothenaximvaluesof
Figure 1. Dependence of oblateness on 1 by displacesent along the x axis. Dur-
frane nuaber for observations lads on ing Series 2, the hoon's disk passed
29 June 1980: 1. Series 1) 2. Series through a cloud layer about 1 La thick, at
2. an altitude of 13 In. as it was setting.
The discontinuities in curve 2 correspond
to the passage of the Moon's upper and lower edges through the cloud, when its
oblateness could not be measured.

 

Fros Figure 1 it is obvious that smooth coupression of the uoon's visible disk as it
sinks is manied by wavelike perturbations of small amplitude that are apparent-
ly related to the effects of horizontally layered irregularities in the density of
the air. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that these undulatory perturba-'
tions correspond approxinately to the sane franes in which irregularities in density
are aanifested clearly as deformations (steps) in the shape of the Moon‘s inage.
Fran Figure 1 it is also obvious that although in their upper sections the depend-
ences have approximately the sue type of diminution, curves 1 and 2 differ substan-
tially in their lower parts, which corresponds to the passage of the Moon's disk
through the cloud for Series 2. This is related to the fact that both above and be-
low the cloud there are tenperature gradients differing fron those that ‘ars observed
at the sans altitude under cloudless conditions.

In Figure 2 [not included] we see as an example eight frames that were filmed as
part of Series 1. Since only the shape and deformation of the Noon's outline are
important for quantitative processing, the originals of the snowing picture file were
copied on contrast film of the Murat-300" type and the photographs were also
printed on contrast paper. The photographs in Figure 2 were obtained from sequen-
tial frames of the film, separated by a tins interval of one-third second: that is,
fro: every eighth frame. The oblateness value for the first frane is it . 0.67,
while for the last it is u - 0.57; the altitude of the ray's perigee changed from 20
to 18 Jun, respectively. In the lower part of each photograph, deformations in the
fora of steps are clearly visible on the right and left sides of the outline, it be-
ing the case that the horizontal dinensions of the irregularities that caused these
deformations are many times greater than the vertical ones and exceed the visible
sire of the Moon's disk. The outline deformations in the upper left part of each
photograph are not related to the perturbations caused by diffraction, but are con-
nected with the darkening of the lunar seas located there, which was intensified
during the process of increasing the contrast. The series of photographs in Figure
2 gives us a graphic picture of the dynamics of the development of the defornations
in the Moon's visible dish; that is. of the magnitude and nature of the change in
oblateness and the size, shape, location and aswnetry of the step-shaped

78

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
of the love
I edge of the Maon's visible image The out
3 lines are redraw: from the series of photo
J graphs presented in Figure 2. The outline
w; of the Moon's lower edge decimated by the
0
I

~€
8’
5‘
3'
:1
g.
ff
.
£5
."

the effect of
s our the next (and lower) irregularity: the
responds to the numbering of the in- disk's lower edge is severely defw and
ages in Figure 2). flattened. In outline 3 this new irregu-
larity appears in the for. of thick, step-
type defomtione end in addition. the lower edge of the Mom's disk bulges outward
slightly. 0n outline 3 and further in the series, the disturben
image caused by the effect of er

ing one: and that its

uoes horizontal “profiles" of the atmos-
plane of the orbit is

Figure 4 (not included] is
moving picture film on whi
1980 was recorded. this s

the dynamics of the develo

1 details of the process, for Figure 4

between photogr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one twenty-fourth of a second each (that is, these frames are successive ones); be-
tween 7 and anon-sixth of a second. Photographs 1 and 2 show the beginning of the
process: it is obvious that in addition to deformation of the Moon's disk in the

form of steps having a coaplicated shape, the lower edge of the Moon in photograph 2
in comparison with 1 is flattened noticeably, which is caused by the effect of non-
uniforaity of the air's density. In photographs 3-7 this nomunifornity is manifest-
ed in the form of severe deformations. which are a refraction image of the lower

part of the Moon's visible disk. Although the refractive disruption is barely
noticeable in photograph 3, as the visible rays sink into the disturbed layer of
air. an ever more signifith part of the Moon is seen below the line of the refrac-
tive disruption. In photograph 7 the line of the disruption is very weak, whereas
in photograph 8 the refractive disruption has disappeared and be converted into a
step with sharp edges, with the step being deeper and sharper on the right side.
This asyunetry, which is related ‘to the horizontal nonunifornity of the disturbed
layer of air, is also manifested in preceding photographs 5. 6 and 7 in the non-
identity of the right and left edges of the refraction-affected part of the Moon's
image. When the time during which the refractive disruption was observed and the
rate of subsidence of the visible ray are known, it is possible to evaluate the
thickness A of the layer with the anomalous density pattern; for the case depicted

in Figure 4. A Z 250 n. The hypothesis of the existence of such thin layers was ad-
vanced in [4] on the basis of observations of flickerings of stars and planets.

In conclusion let us mention that, as the derived data indicate. filming of sun- and
moonsets with long-focus lenses is a new and promising nethod for taking a quantita-
tive study of the structure of refraction distortions. Filming makes it possible to
observe the uninterrupted pattern of the change in oblateness, which can further be
used to study variations in the vertical profiles of air density and temperature.

In connection with this, the rather high temporal and (consequently) spatial resolu-
tion of the irregularities makes it possible to distinguish and identify deforma-

tions of the outlines of heavenly bodies caused by disturbances in density after
eliminating the random errors in individual frames.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Grechko. 6.!” Gurvich, 11.5., Romanenko. Yu.v., Savchenko, s.A., and Sokolovskiy,
S.V.. ”Vertical Structure of the Temperature Field in the Atmosphere. Based on
observations of Refraction From the 'Salyut-6' Orbital Station," Don. AN SSSR,
Vol 248. No 4. 1979, pp 828-831.

2. Garriot. O.X.. ”Visual Observation Frost Space,“ J. 0PT. SOC. AMER” Vol 69, No 8,
1979. pp 1064-1067.

3. Shuernan, DAL. Giovane, 2., and Greenberg, J.M.. "Stellar Refraction: A Tool
to Monitor the Height of the Tropopause From Space," J. APPL. METEOROLOGY, Vol
14. No 6, 1975. pp 1182-1186.

4. Grechko. G.M.. Gurvich, A.S.. and Ronanenlro, Yu.v., “structure of Density Irreg-
ularities in the Stratosphere. Based on Observations From the 'Sslyut-é' Orbital
Station," IZV. AN SSSR. PIZIKA MM. I own, Vol 16, No 4, 1980, pp 339-344.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka", I'Issledovaniye Zemli is kosnose". 1981
11746
cso: 1866/36

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 528.946
USING SPACE mums TO STUDY AND HAP AGRICULNML UTILIZATIW 0? LAND

Hoscow ISSLBDOVANIYB mu Iz Kosnosa in Russian No 5. Sap-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 28 Apr 81) pp 103-110

[Article by I..P. Yanvareva, Department of Geography. Moscow State University ineni
FIJI. wonosov]

[Text] The study of the agricultural utilization of land occupies a central posi-
tion in economic and geographic investigations of agriculture. It is essentially a
multiaspect problem, but in the end its goal is to reveal the interrelationships be-
tween natural conditions and systems for carrying out agricultural work and to de-
termine the confinement of different types of agricultural utilization of land to
different natural types of soil and local economic conditions [1]. Such a study of
land utilization gives a scientific basis for the suitable territorial organization
of agriculture.

Until now. the original materials for studying land use were large- and medium-scale
land magenent cartographic materials, data free field investigations of separate

key farms, statistical materials on individual agricultural enterprises. and com-
plexes of natural maps. The collection and processing of such detailed materials

for large territorial units is extremely difficult.

In this respect. the use of materials gathered by space surveys offers new opportu-
nities. Space surveys not only give a quite detailed image of the land surface over
an extensive area. but also make it easier to study the confinement of separate
types of agricultural utilization to natural types of soils, since they can be in-
terpreted in the topographical. geomorphological, soil and geobotanical aspects at
the same time.

In this article we discuss the possibility of using mltizonal scanner photographs
taken in space by the “Fragment" system, on a scale of l:500.000. for these purposes.

The photographs encompass a region located inside two geographical zone--forest-
steppe and steppe--that change from the former to the latter from north to south.

A large portion of the photograph is occupied by the Kalachskaya upland, which is
fragmented severely by a system of gullies and ravines. In the northwest. at the
edge of the photograph. lies part of the xhopersko-Burulukskaya accumulation plain.
0n the southern edge. along the right bank of the Don River. stretches the
Donetskaya ridge, which is also severely dissected by an erosion network.

81

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Practically all of the watershed area and slopes have been tilled (Figure 1 (not in-
cludedl) . The gully and ravine network more or less cuts into a unified arable
mass. creating an erosion figure in the land's territorial structure. From a com-
parison of the space photograph with a topographical map it is obvious that as re-
cently as the 1960's. the very highest sections of the Kalachskaya upland were not
being tilled. The grassy virgin steppes were used as pastures and for haymaking.
Now. only the natural meadowlands along the gullies and ravines remain untilled.
Their agricultural value is not great. A considerable part of the gullies and ra-
vines in the upper reaches have been reforested or planted with bushes in order to
prevent the development of water erosion. This shows up quite well on photographs
in the orange band (A - 0.6-0.7 m). as an abrupt darkening of the tone of the upper
reaches of a ravine or gully.

The valleys of the large Don and Ithoper Rivers (and their flood plains and ter-
races) . which are clearly visible on photographs taken in any band. make up a com-
plex mosaic of different types of land: open and bush-covered meadows. underbrush,
blocks of forest. 0n the high right original bank of the Don, which is dissected
severely by ravines and gullies, the agricultural lands are fragment and represented
by small. isolated sections that are impossible to distinguish on a space photograph.

The extensive left bank terraces of the Don and its tributary the Peskovatki are al-

so occupied by a complicated complex of lands. In this area. grassy steppes used to
alternate with sections of sand. a large part of the terrace is now occupied by

pine forests that were primarily planted by man. The remaining steppe pastures are
severely broken up.

Through office interpretation of small-scale photographs taken by the “Fragment"
system. this territorial structure of the lands in the region makes it possible to
compile small-scale land maps (Figure) with the help of topographic and forestation
maps.

The delimitation of tilled fields and the discrimination of the natural meadowlands
along the gullies and ravines is the first and most complicated stage in the process

of interpreting the land types.

A comparison of the space photograph with a topographic map of about the same scale
showed that almost all of the ravine and gully network shown on the map can also be
seen in the space photograph. However, from the photographs it is impossible to
distinguish ravines from gullies and defiles and thus distinguish the lands and nat-
ural meadowlands that are confined to the ravines and gullies and are not used in

agriculture .

Plowed lands can be distinguished most reliably from a complex of multisonal photo-
graphs that were taken at the same time. Both summer (July) and autumn (October)
photographs were used in the interpreting process.

The boundary of the tilled land along the brows of large gullies and ravines is seen
most clearly in susner photographs in the near-infrared band (A - 0.8-1.1 ml) . where
the network of gullies and ravines has a lightened. whitish tint (Figure 3a (not in-
cluded]). However, small gullies blend in with the plowed land background. They
are more clearly distinguishable in an autumn photograph taken in the same band.
where the autumn-plowed fields are distinguished from the gray gully network by
their dark, almost black tone (Figure 3b).

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

  

EB: 1:1: 513:! , I.

Figure 2. Fragment of land map conpiled on the basis of space photographs
taken by the I’Fragnent" system. Lands: la. tilled land; lb. eroded
tilled land: 2. pastures and hay-producing areas: 3. pastures and hay-

producing areas along ravines and gullies (a. open. b. covered with under-
brush): 4. flooded hay-producing areas; 5. forest. Composite lands: 6.

forests along river flood plains combined with open and brush-covered ra-
vines; 7. plowed land combined with natural meadowlands and land not used

in agriculture. Unused lands: 8. sands.

The reliability with which the outlines of plowed lands are distinguished depends
largely on the size of the fields. the clearness of the boundaries between then. and
the rectilinearity of their shape. The larger and more rectilinear a field is, the
easier it is to distinguish from other types of land. This is why plowed lands can
be distinguished nost clearly in plains-type steppe regions.

The sizes of the fields in the photograph range fron 50-100 to 300-400 ha. Snell
fields covered with grain plant stubble that are adjacent to or dissected by gullies
are difficult to identify. and following the boundary of the plowed land is quite
difficult. The observed lack of clarity and the washed-out nature of the boundaries
of the tilled lands along the sands of the Don's terraces indicates that the fields

have been eroded.
FOR omcuu. USE ONLY

The formation of the pattern of the cutting of the fields depends on a number of
factors. The density of the dissection of the relief affects it decisively. On the
Kalachskaya upland, the cutting of the fields is irregular: being oriented in dif-
ferent directions, they form a complicated mosaic. Placement of fields at right an-
gles to slopes, with the formation of more or less domelike structures. is typical
of the highest part of the Kalachskaya upland. The pattern of fields on the

Khopersko-Busulukskaya plain is distinguished by a high degree of orderliness. The
rectangular fields stretch from the northeast to the southwest and form a rectiline-

ar structure that resembles a chessboard. here the boundaries of the tilled land
are distinguished most clearly and reliably.

The network of administrative and farm boundaries has a definite effect on the for-
mation of the field pattern. In the photograph there are boundaries of three
oblasts (Voroneshskaya, Rostovskaya and Volgogradskaya) and a number of administra-
tive regions. They can all be traced quite well, either on the basis of the differ-
ently oriented cutting of the fields or by the change in the shape of the fields and
their elongation along the boundaries. The boundaries of the agricultural enter-
prises--kolkhoses and sovkhozes--can be interpreted just as easily. Rayon or oblast
land utilization plans are used in the identification of the administrative and farm
boundaries.

The definition of the boundaries between fields used in the crop rotation system af-
fects the separation of the plowed land from other types. It depends on the diver-
sity of the crops in the planted areas, the proportions of different groups of crops
in the crop rotation system. and the special features of their phenological develop-
ment. In some cases. the sharpness of the fields' boundaries can also depend on the
lithological composition of the surface deposits.

As has already been mentioned. in comparison with the watershed areas the river val-
leys are notable for the high degree of complexity of the structure of their lands.
The resolution of the photographs taken with the "f‘ragment'I system does not make it
possible to differentiate the lands in the valley complexes. Further enlargement of
the photographs' scale or the use of synthesised color images does not produce a
positive effect in the identification of the valley land structures. In the summer
orange-band photograph. from the structure of the image it was possible to distin-
guish open meadows from brush-covered ones and underbrush only on the Don's broad

flood plain. Forests are identified in the photographs with confidence because of
their darker tone. In the valley of the Khoper and along the right bank of the Don

it is possible to distinguish only combinations of lands, although the boundaries of
these combinations can be traced very reliably in any area in the summer photo-

graphs.

The formulation of a plan for identifying lands and determining the boundaries of
their outlines is possible only by analysing all the zonal images for both periods.

Despite the impossibility of obtaining detailed information about the location of

the different types of lands (particularly for the valley complexes). space photo-
graphs have substantial advantages for studying the confinement of certain types of

agricultural usage to natural types of soils. The features of the territory's or-
ganization as a function of the relief and the degree of its ruggedness are mani-

festod quite clearly in them.

8‘

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(N‘LY
FORIOFFKJAL.USE(HVLY

The interpretation of space photographs offers us great opportunities when studying
forms of agriculture as complex methods for the agricultural utilization of land.
The territory in the photograph is a typical grain-growing region with a large per-
centage of grain plantings for the production of marketable grain. Grain growing is
combined with the raising of livestock for meat and milk. The insignificant per-
centage of natural fodder resources in the overall land pattern indicates that the
livestock fodder base rests on field fodder production. Only on the flood plains in
the Don and Khoper valleys do the flooded meadows have any agricultural value.

The basic indicator of the arable land utilization system on individual farms is the
proportion of the groups of crops (cultivated. uncultivated, perennial and annual
grasses) that play different roles in crop rotation, as well as fallow and planted
pairs of fields. The relationship among these groups of crops makes it possible to
obtain an idea of types of crop rotation being used.

' \\\..\ .~ . ‘

    

I...I -.\.
\ \._: .

    

\-\.

H' I! , -* .5 ---. —'—7

Figure 4. Fragment of land utilization map. Agricultural crops: 1. cul-
tivated (sunflowers and corn); 2. uncultivated (winter and spring grains
and others); 3. fallow fields. Natural meadowlands: 4a. steppe-type, on
river terraces; 4b. along gullies and ravines; 5. State forest reserve
lands; 6. kolkhoz and sovkhoz land utilization boundaries; 7. boundaries
of administrative regions.

   

The analysis and interpretation of the photographs make it possible to obtain such
information. In the photographs we first determine the boundaries of the agricul-
tural enterprises (the kolkhozes and sovkhozes) in order to determine the relation-
ships of the groups of crops on specific farms. of course, the proportions of the
different groups of crops in the planted area of a farm do not give a precise pic-
ture of the role of the crops in specific crop rotation plans, but are still a quite
reliable indicator that make it possible to form an opinion about the forms of agri-
culture in use. when studying forms of agriculture covering large areas, general-
ized statistical statistical data on administrative rayon: and even oblasts are nor-
mally used. A space photograph makes it possible to obtain the required information
not only for farms covering considerable areas. but also to see the location of dif-
ferent groups of crops on farms: that is, to come closer to a study of the crop

85

FORiﬂﬂﬂKIAl.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rotation sethods actually in use (Figure 4). Press an enlarged, synthesised space
photograph it is easy to extract information about agricultural crops: in it it is
comparatively easy to distinguish, quite simply, groups of crops, the identification
of which on the basis of zonal black-and-white photographs is a oouplicated proce—
dure.

  

EYE;

MW

 

      

l 0 Mi Iona lbs. [k e (hunﬁlluuﬁn “nib
l) (2) (3) (4)

(5 (6) 7)
[:11-2 m: ma 5 ﬂ .

\
mm: mm: -. -m m" §rz

Figure 5. Diagrams of phenological development of agricultural crops: a.
winter wheat; b. spring wheat; c. winter rye: d. spring barley: e. corn:
f. sunflowers. Stages in organogenesis: 1. seed; 2. sprouting: 3. till-
ering: 4. leaf-tube for-ation; 5. heading and flowering; 6. tasseling of
panicle; 7. milky ripeness: 8. waxy ripeness: 9. formation of sunflower
racemes: lo. browning of sunflower calathide: ll. [omitted]: 12. recom-
mended surveying dates.

 

 

Key:

1. April 5. August

2. May 6. Septenber
3. June 7. October
4. July 8. noveuber

In the synthesized photograph taken on 30 July. three types of fields can be distin-
guished: fields covered with uncultivated grain crops, both winter and spring vari-
eties (gray-blue color): cultivated crops (sunflowers and corn--orange in color):
plowed fields (dark blue color). The division of crops into cultivated and un-
cultivated proved to be possible because of the different dates of onset of the ba-
sic stages of these two groups of crops' phenological developmentl. The diagrams
that were constructed to show the passage of the agricultural crops through differ-
ent phenophases and stages of organogenesis (on the basis of average nultiyear data
and data for the year of the survey) indicated that the spring and winter grains
(winter wheat and rye, spring barley) in the southern part of the area surveyed had

reached full ripeness and were already harvested (Figure 5). The cultivated crops
were in different stages of vegetation: the sunflowers were in the flowering stage

and the corn in the panicle-tasseling stage. The plowed fields were open and fallow
and were ready for the planting of winter crops. In the autusm photograph, taken on
10 October. they are differentiated from the autumn-plowed fields, since the winter

grains planted in then had already reached the tillering stage.

However, fro. neither the summer nor autumn photographs is it possible to obtain an
idea about the location and percentage of winter crops .in the crop rotation system.

 

1Data on the location of crops on key farms, gathered by MA. Shepel'. were used in
the identification of the crops.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this purpose it is better to use photographs taken in the spring. in the period
when the sprouts of the spring crops have not yet appeared and the winter ones have
reached the tillering stage.

The necessary surveying dates for different regions can be determined on the basis
of diagrams of the vegetative development of agricultural crops that are constructed
from average annual data, with corrections for the meteorological conditions of the
specific year.

In the end. the analysis of photographs taken at different times makes it possible

to c' ‘ternine the proportions of crops in planted areas and the percentage of fallow
ti :d-n. thus producing information about the utilization of tilled lands and types

of -'.op rotation systems. In the area under discussion, for example. "grain-fallow-
cultivated" crop rotation is the one primarily used, with a large percentage of win-_
ter and spring uncultivated grains.

The study of forms of agriculture provides for the investigation of the agricultural
technology and land reclamation methods used. as well as the systems of measures for

preventing wind and water erosion, the use of fertilisers and so on. Normally, when
using space photographs to determine the complex of antierosion measures being used

in dry steppe regions, we have at our disposal an entire system of external indica-

tors: the presence of forest belts to protect fields, strip siting of agricultural

crops and fellow fields. a significant percentage of perennial and annual grasses in
the crop rotation. specific strip-type cutting of fields across the direction of the
prevailing winds [2].

The study of a system of antierosion measures with space photographs is more diffi-
cult. The following agrotechnical measures do not appear in space photographs:
contour plowing. working of the soil without plowing. the banking or furrowing of
autumn-plowed fields and other forms of antierosion working of fields aimed at re-
ducing the washing away of soil from level fields. The same thing can also be said
of hydraulic engineering measures: the building of terrace walls on slopes and the

erection of channeling structures. As has already been said, space photographs tak-
en with the “Fragment' system have been used to identify water-control forest plant-

ings on the edges of ravines and gullies, but we have not succeeded in identifying
field-shielding windbreaks in them.

It is necessary to mention here that in the laying out of fields, too little atten-
tion is given to the susceptibility of soils to water erosion. despite its signifi-
cant development in the region under discussion.

The thorough study of the agricultural utilization of land with the help of space
photographs must be based on field investigations of key types of farms, the choice
of which can be made on the basis of preliminary interpretation of the photographs.

In the end. the use of space photographs to study the agricultural utilisation of

land should facilitate the "geographication" of territorial economic and geographic
research and the compilation of maps reflecting the interrelationship of natural

conditions and the contemporary agricultural utilization of land.

The esperience gained in analyzing space photographs taken with the "Fragment" sys-
tem has demonstrated their suitability for compiling and revising small-scale land

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

utilization naps. types of territorial organization, and tom of agriculture in the
steppe and forest-steppe zones. _

The study of the agricultural utilization of land in all its aspects requires the
use of photographs taken at different tines. Despite their insufficiently high res-
olution, therefore, space photographs taken with the "P’ragnent' system have acquired
particular value for agricultural interpretation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Rakitnikov, LN” "Geografiya sel'skogo khozyaystva' [Agricultural Geography].
Hoscov, Izdatel'stvo 'uysl'”, 1970, 341 pp.

2. "Issledovaniye prirodnoy aredy koaicheskimi sredstvani. Geogratiya. netody
kosmicheakoy fotos'yenki. 'r. 4, razdel 'Sel'akoye khozyayatvo'“ [Investigating
the Environment with Space Facilities. Geography. Space Photosurveying nethods.
Volume 4. ”Agriculture” Section], Moscow, VINITI [All-Union Institute of Scien-
tific and Technical Intonation] . 1975. pP 57-67.

COPYRIGHI‘: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka', "Iaaledovaniye Zeali iz koemsa', 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3:518

Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYB mm 12 1:06:05; in Ruuian No 6. Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 28 Apr Bl) pp 89-92

[Article by LA. Labutina and 1.x. Lur'ye. Department of Geography. macaw State
University iueni MAI. Lononosov]

For our experiments in automated interpretation. we selected a photograph of the
territory of the Don and Khoper Rivera' interfluve that was obtained with the
"Fragment" nultispectral scanning system on 30 July 1980. We used a four-band image

The area depicted in the photographed ie almost coupletely farmed. Despite cone
slight differences in agricultural practices in Voronezhakaya, Volgogradekaya and
Rostovskaya Oblasts. parts of which are seen in the photograph, in general the min

occupied by cultivated cro . the main ones of which are sunflower: and corn. Ha-
terialsl on the distribution of agricultural crops by crop rotation fields (and
their status) were gathered in the fall of 1980 in an area encompassing the

N
l~'1‘he materials were gathered by NJ. Shepel' and LA. Kovrizhnykh.

89

FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

territory of two sovkhozes in Veshenskiy Rayon, Rostovskaya oblast. 1hese materi-
als, as well as Hydrometeorological Service data on the phenological phases of crops
were used as standards in the evaluation of the results of automated processing that
had as its purpose the identification of the cosposition, by type, of agricultural
crops. He also used spectral and color synthesized photographs on a 12500.000 scale
and the results of visual interpretation.

A fragment of the photograph measuring 512 x 300 elements, which contained about 100
agricultural fields (including 38 fields in the standard section) was subjected to
automated processing. The fragment was first processed on a Yes [Unified System of
Electronic Computers] “Ii-1022 at MGU's [macaw State University imeni MAI.
mmonosov] NIV'rs [probably Scientific Research Computer Center] by a program devel-
oped in the Laboratory of Aerospace Methods, Cartography Section, Department of
Geography, “60. It was assumed that there was no prior information about the nature
of the distribution of probabilities inside the classes of objects and that the only
digital recordings on magnetic tape were used as the initial data. The program
realizes a cluster analysis algorithm and is based on a single

element-by-element survey of all the assigned lines in the photograph. By analyzing
the distances between the elements in the photograph in a multidimensional space (in
this case its dimensionality is four) and comparing them with a previously given
threshold value, the program forms clusters that are identified as homogeneous for-
nations. In connection with this, the centers of the clusters are defined as the
average values of the spectral characteristics of the elements in them and the
intrscluster dispersions and the distances between the centers of the different
€10”!!! are determined. the values of the boundaries of the objects for each line
in the photograph are plotted in a special table (if the object is not an isolated
element). Using an alphanumeric printer, the computer produces a classification map
in which each cluster is designated by its own alphanumeric symbol. This classifi-
cation map is compared with data gathered on the ground or a visualized image, and
the standard fields are identified. In the experiment being described, the identi-
fication of the fields was made quite easy because of the presence in the photograph
fragment being investigated of images of fallow fields: that is. fields with exposed
soil. They can be grouped into one cluster very easily because of, in the first
place, the substantial difference between their brightness in all surveying bands
and the brightness of cultivated fields and, in the second, the relatively high uni-
formity of their spectral characteristics. Confident identification of fields on
the classification map was also facilitated by the fact that their boundaries could
be seen clearly in almost all cases.

An analysis of the results revealed the following. Pields planted with grain crops,
the harvesting of which had already been coupleted by the time of the survey, were
easily combined into a single cluster. Fields planted with corn and sunflowers and
that had a greenish appearance at the moment of surveying could not be distinguished
with sufficient confidence. The planting: of these crops in each field was. as a
rule, not uniform, as a result of which it was not possible to obtain more or less
homogeneous salient features on the classification map even when different threshold
values were used. The plantings of these crops were characterized only by their own
set of clusters, in which they were combined, since on the classification map the
fields corresponding to these crops were designated by two or three symbols of over-
lapping clusters, although almost everywhere a single predominant symbol could be
distinguished. During the f.‘ -t stage of classification, therefore, it turned out
to be possible to obtain information about the centers (the average values of the

90

FOR OFHCIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spectral characteristics) of all the clusters of interest to us: that is, the stan-
dard fields planted with different crops.

In the second stage, we set a desired number of clusters and gave several threshold
characteristics for combining or separating clusters. As our initial data we used
the values of the centers of the clusters (the average values of the spectral char-
acteristics of homogeneous formations) that had been obtained during the first stage
of the 6100“? analysis program's utilization. In an iterative fashion, this pro-
gram compares the centers in question with standard values. The clusters are com-
bined if the distances between their centers are less than the given threshold value
and separated if the intracluster dispersion for any spectral component is greater
than the given threshold value. In connection with this, new cluster coordinates
are formed.

Such a sequence of procedures has quite substantial advantages: the first stage is
quite simple to realize and rapid in execution (in the sense of computer time re-
guired) and makes it possible to reduce the quantity of initial information signifi-
cantly: instead of the characteristics of the 512 x 300 elements of the original
photograph, after the first stage we have only characteristics on the order of 60
cluster centers. The second stage is more complicated to realize, but this complex-
ity is offset by the small amount of information to be processed. As a result of
this automated interpretation method, the reliability of the classification of the
agricultural crops was evaluated at 80 percent.

The same photograph fragment underwent processing in an automated complex in the ONP
[expansion unknown] of the USSR Academy of Sciences' Institute of Space Researchl.
We programs were used: classification by minimum distance and a program that real-
izes the method of maximum likelihood. In order for these programs to function, it
was necessary to obtain the values of the vectors of the average values of the stan-
dard fields' spectral characteristics and the values of the covariance matrices.

The following procedures were realized for this purpose. The standard fields were
identified visually on a display screen and representative sections inside them,
measuring 5 r 5 elements. were distinguished. The vectors of the average brightness
values for each spectral channel and the covariance matrices were computed for each
such section. The minimum-distance classification program was set up to sort the
original photograph into five classes: fallow fields (bare soil), winter wheat and
barley (stubble), corn and sunflowers. The results of the classification were: 1)
the fallow fields were distinguished very clearly (as with the preceding method,
they served as the basis for identifying fields on the classification map): 2)
plantings of corn and sunflowers were combined into a single class, in connection
with which on the fields planted with corn, the symbols representing the class were
arranged compactly, almost without spots, while in the sunflower fields there were
individual spots combined with designations of unclassified objects: 3) a class con-
taining natural meadowlands along gullies and ravines we: distinguished. Thus, we
distinguished three of the five classes of fields that can be identified quite con-
f idently during visual interpretation of spectral photographs and that correspond to
the three basic colors in a synthesized color photograph because of the fact that
they characteristic entirely different states of agricultural fields: plowed soil,
vegetative growth and grain stubble after harvesting.

 

1The photograph processing programs were developed by V.A. Krasikov and V.A. Shamis.
91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The maxim-likelitwod method is considered to be a much more accurate but also more
laborious autcnated interpretation method. It presupposes that the distribution of
probabilities for each class of objects is normal. In order to relate each element
in the photograph to some class with the maximal likelihood, a Gaussian decision
rule is used. In connection with this. it is necessary to know the mater of dis-
tinguishable classes of objects. the vector of the average values for each class,
and the elements of the covariance matrix.

The first classification variant with this program, when the spectral characterist-
ics of arbitrarily selected fields planted with the crops named above were given as
the centers. yielded the same results as the classification with the minima-
distance determination program. In order to distinguish between fields planted with
sunflowers and corn. an attempt was made to distinguish 13 classes corresponding to
standard fields with crops in different states. Thus, the characteristics of fields
with dense and sparse plantings were used. The experiment proved to be unsuccess-
ful: there was a confusion of classes and only one--the fallow fields--could be
distinguished clearly.

The next attempt to separate corn and sunflower plantings proceeded as follows. The
average values of of the characteristics of two fields planted with each of these
crops were introduced into the sexism-likelihood program as the centers instead of
the characteristics of a single. arbitrarily chosen field. In connection with this
it was assuaed that the covariance matrices for these fields are quite similar, so
they were not recomputed. The result proved to be positive: corn and sunflower
plantings were separated into two classes. True, sue fields were relegated inedi-
ately to two clusters (that is. they were represented by a combination of designa-
tions of both crops) , but in almost all cases it was possible to determine the pre-
dominant class. all six fields planted in corn that appeared in the fragment that
was processed were combined confidently into a single class, while of the five
planted with sunflowers, only one could not be placed confidently in one class or
another.

This experiment confirmed our supposition that when using classification programs

with instruction. it is not possible to assign the spectral characteristic of a sin-
gle field as the center of a class. since fields with a single crop that belong to a
single class can have significant differences in spectral characteristics. The use
of the average value of the characteristics of several fields defines the boundaries

of a class more accurately.

This experiment in interpretation shows that in addition to objects that differ tan-
gibly in all bands (or most of them) . objects differing from each other by an insig-
nificant value in only one band are encountered very frequently (particularly among
agricultural crops). During visual interpretation such cases are usually detected.
The introduction of a weighting factor in the spectral characteristics of such ob-
jects in a single band would make it possible to separate them during automated in-

te rpretation .

These experiments showed that the methods used yield quite similar results, at least
for small fragments of photographs. The choice of method is affected by the subjec-
tive attitude of the user. For large volumes of information it is advisable to use
the least laborious and fastest automated interpretation methods. with mandatory
participation of an interpretative specialist in the initial stages of the work.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is reasonable to conduct the business of. thematic processing in severa1 stages.
The first step. even at the stage of adjusting and instructing the automated satel-
lite information processing systens. should consist of a preliminary visual or

photometric (depending on the required degree of accuracy) interpretation of the
photographs in separate representative sections, which makes it possible to obtain

prior information about the advisable nunber of classes and special teatures of the
image of an object being identified in spectral photographs.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka'. 'Issledovaniye Zenli iz kosnosa", 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/36

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 528.946

MAPPING PORSSTS PM” SPACE WRAPHS

page... Issnsoovmvs 2m: Iz Koswosn in Russian No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript re—
ceived 28 Apr 31) pp 111-116

[Article by 'r.v. Kotova, v.1. Kravtsova and Mt. uakarevich, Departnent of
Geography, Moscow State University iueni H. V. Iouonosov]

('next] One of the northern regions of the European part of the USSR was used as the
example during an investigation of the possibility of studying and mapping forests
on the basis of photographs obtained with the experimental "Fragment" system. no
analysis of the pictures of forest growth was conducted in the Aerospace Methods
Laboratory, Cartography Faculty, and the Problem Laboratory of Integrated Cartogra-
phy and Atlases, Department or Geograth. mu [Hoscow State University] iseni ILV.
mnosov.

Previous experience in working with mltisonal space photographs had shown that
scanner photographs from the 'Landsat" satellite, taken in 4 spectral bands with
80-11 resolution. were suitable for napping types of forest growth and distinguishing
coniferous, brosd-lesved and mixed forests, but could not be used to distinguish
forests differing in valuation characteristics. that conclusion was reached by
Canadian specialists [1]. Very promising, from the viewpoint of mapping forests,
proved to be the multisonal photographs obtained with the MIG-6 camera, in which it
was possible to distinguish forests not only on the basis of tree type: but also ac-
cording to several valuation characteristics [2-4] . It is a matter of interest to
determine the place in the system of space surveying materials of the photographs
obtained with the "Fragment" equip-ant.

For our analysis of the forest growth pictures, we used photographs taken in the or-
ange (0.6-0.7 um), red (0.7-0.8 um) and near-infrared (0.8-1.1 we) bands on 30 July
1980: the work was done with prints on a l:500,000 scale.

The photograph that was analysed (Figure 1 [not included]! encompasses the upper
reaches of the Severnaya Dvina River in the area of confluence of its righthand
tributary, the Vychegdy River, with the Malaya Severnaya Dvina River. This region
is located at the junction of the boundaries of 'three oblastsz Arkhangel'skaya,
Vologodskaya am. Kirovskaya.

This area is a slightly hilly plain dissected by river valleys. he black bands of
the channels of the Malays Severnaya Dvina, vychega, Yug and Luza Rivers, fringed
with light-colored sandbars and shallows, are clearly visible in the photographs in

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the red (0.7-0.8 um) and near-infrared (0.8-1.1 un) bands. On the flood plains of
the larger rivers (Malaya Severnaya Dvina, Vychegda) we can see ancient lakes and
river-terrace meadows. Another characteristic is the presence of bogs and boggy
sections on the high terraces.- the crest-and-hollow relief of which is emphasised
by vegetation of different types.

a large part of this territory is forested. This is quite obvious in the orange-
band (0.6-0.7 um) photograph. where the unforested sections are represented by a
light-gray tone, while the forested areas are indicated by gray and dark-gray tones.
The area of the survey belongs to the subzone of midtaiga forests and podsolic and
boggy soils. The virgin forests are primarily coniferous (pine and spruce) and have
a dark tone in the photographs taken in the red and near-infrared bands. In this
region. the birch and birch-aspen forests--represented in these bands by a light-
gray tone--are secondary.

The degree of agricultural development of this area is comparatively low. The ara-
ble land is concentrated near the rivers: together with the flood-plain meadows,
which are the primary fodder base for milk-cattle raising, they fern a light-colored
"frame" for the valleys in the orange band. In the orange-band photographs. a
bright, light-colored tone represents the large cities: Kotlaa at the confluence of
the Malaya Severnaya Dvina and the Vychegda, Velikiy Ustyug on the left bank of the
Malaya Severnaya Dvina, Koryazhma on the left bank of the Vychegda, We on the
same river's right bank. 'me light-colored line of a broad clearing extends along
the Vychegda. Light-colored rectangular cuttings--indicative of the industrial use
of woos-—against the dark background of the forests are visible in the orange-band
photograph. Sawmills and woodworking and cellulose-paper industry enterprises using
this raw material base are operating in Kotlas and Velikiy Ustyug. Further inten-
sive utilization of the forests is indicated by the replacement of coniferous trees
with broad-leaf varieties over a considerable part of the territory. With the help
of other sources of information about this region, we succeeded in detecting boggi-
ness in sane of the cuttings.

6 we Photographs taken in different spectral
”gm/nos”) bands give information on different fea-
ﬂucmamm: tures of the structure of the vegetative

 
 
  
 
 
 
 

(1‘ c "“(2) cover and should be used to solve various
”N

(25 ”5:21,“ problems.

0‘ Module“) The boundaries of unforested areas, both

w ”‘0 along the river valleys (flood plain mead-

0.6 (.17 01! in!“ ows, bogs, agricultural lands, settled
Pigure 2. Curves of spectral image of areas) and in the interfluvial spaces (out-
different types of forest growth in tings, bogs that have formed in cuttings)
photographs obtained with the 'Prag- are quite visible in the orange-band photo-

ment“ multizonal scanning system. graph. From these photographs it is possi-
Key: 1. Unforested territories ble to distinguish unforested sections
2. Broad-leaf forests among forest masses (primarily the outlines
3. Mixed forests of cuttings); the minim size for these
4. Coniferous forests sections is on the order of 2 auz for a

photograph with a scale of l:$00,000 (or
0.5 km2 in actuality). In orange-band photographs. differentiation of tones inside
forest masses is very weak. Forest boundaries are more clearly distinguished in

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFINCIAI.USE(MVLY

photographs taken in the red and near-infrared bands: unforested territories do not
have such a light image tone as in the orange band, but the forest areas are differ-
entiated very clearly by their image tone. A comparison of the photographs with
topographic and forest maps shows that the differences in phototone are caused by
changes in the types of trees in the forests. On the basis of a comparison of a
photograph with forest maps of Arkhangel'skaya (a scale of l:2,000,000), Kirovskaya
(l:l,250,000) and vologodskaya (1:1,250,000) oblasts and a geobotanical map of the

another; that is. the spectral image of the objects to be identified that are of in-
terest to us. The curves of the basic objects' spectral images are presented in
Figure 2. They were obtained by visual measurements of the image's density on posi-
tive prints of the photographs, using a standard scale of densities. and character-
ize the image of these objects not in general, but only for the prints we used.

The spectral image curves give a visual picture of the change in the image density
of the basic objects to be identified in the zonal photographs. They confirm that
in the orange-band photographs, unforested territories have a brighter image (in
comparison with other objects). Therefore. it is easiest to use these photographs
to delineate the boundaries of forests. but distinguishing types of trees in them is
impossible. since forests of different types are characterised by image density val-
ues that are very close to each other in this band. In the photographs taken in the
red band. there is an increase in the brightness of the image of broad-leaf forests.
which makes it possible to distinguish the outlines of coniferous. mixed and broad-
leaf fcrests. the differences in the image density of which are AD - 0.2. In photo-
graphs taken in the near-infrared band. these differences are even greater: conif-
erous forests show up as a dark-gray. almost black. tone (0 - 1.0). mixed forests as
a gray tone (D I 0.6). and broad-leaf ones as light gray (D - 0.2)) the differences
in image density of AD - 0.4 insure reliable discrimination of these types of for-
ests. In connection with this, however, unforested territories show up as a light-
gray tone that is the same as the tone for broad-leaf forests. The combined use of
multiband photographs makes it possible to identify all of the required set of ob-
jects. In connection with this, it is possible to recommend a definite. most advis-
able sequence for the utilisation of multiband photographs during the identification
process. In the first stage, orange-band photographs are used to identify forest
boundaries and differentiate between forested and unforested areas. Then, the
photographs taken in the near-infrared band are used to differentiate them into
coniferous, mixed and broad-leaf forests. After this sensible breakdown of the ob~
jects. red-band photographs-~which have the best resolution--are used to correct the
pattern of their outlines.

The results of the identification of forest growth with space photographs are de-
picted in Pigure 3. The system of forests shown in it was compared with previously
published forest and geobotanical maps of about the same scale, such as the ”Geo-
botanical Map of the Non-Black-Barth zone of the RSPSR,' which has a scale of
l:l,500,000. In comparison with this map, the interpretation with the photographs
does not yield any additional information. On the contrary: the published map. for
example. identifies spruce and pine plantings that cannot be distinguished in the
space photographs. However, the detail of the delineation of outlines on the map

compiled from the space photographs is considerably better; they are accurately lo~
calized and are tied in quite well with the pattern of other natural elements (river
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘2'.’
0-1.
.-
\.
O
. .

 

Figure 2. Identification of forests in the area of the upper reaches of
the Severanaya Dvina, as compiled from space photographs. Forests: l.
coniferous (spruce. pine): 2. mixed (spruce. pine, birch, aspen): 3.

broad leaf (birch. aspen). Untorested areas: 4. bogs along river val-
leys; 5. boggy areas on cutting sites: 6. cuttings; 7. flood-plain mead-
ows: 8. settled and agricultural lands: 9. urban areas.

97

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

valleys and so forth). This indicates that there is a possibility of improving the
degree of detail in medium-scale forest naps by using nterials from mltispectral
scanner space surveying.

Thus, photographs obtained with the 'Fragnent" nultispectral scanning system can be
used for small- and medium-scale mapping of forests. However, although they can be
of assistance in obtaining a detailed and geographically cor-rect- pattorn of out- — .-
lines, they do not provide the total content of such maps and mch additional mater-
ial must be used to complement them. Using then to comare forest naps with a de-
tailed description of-thi types of trees present and valuation indicators is. un-
fortunately, impassible.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. 'Hanual of Remote Sensing,“ Washington, Vols 1 and 2, 1976, 21“ pp.

2. Kamyshan, O.L., and Kravtsova, V.I., "Mapping Northern- and Hid-Taiga Forests,
Using Central Yakutiya as an Duanple," in 'nosnicheskiye s“yenka i tenaticheskoye
kartogratirovaniye. Geograficheskiye rezul'taty mogozonal'nykh kosnicheskikh
eksperimentov" [Space Surveying and Thematic Cartography: Geographic Results of
Multispectral Space Experiments], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo non, 1980, pp 85-96.

3. Kotova. T.V., and Garanina, 1.8., "A Study of Mountain-Taiga Forests and Their
Anthropogenic Dynamics for the Purpose of Small-Scale Cartography. Using the Pre-
Baykal Area as an Example," ibid., pp 96-105.

4. Sukhikh, v.1 ., and Sinitsyna. S.G., editors, 'Aerokosmicheskiye netody v okhrane

prirody i v lesnoln khozyaystve" [Aerospace Methods in Environmental Conservation
and Forest Management], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Iaesnaya pronyshlennost', 1970, 288

PP -

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Issledovaniye Zemli is kosmosa", 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/35

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 7| l.528.7:629.78
SPACB- BASED RBSEARCI! FOR URBAN WING

Leningrad KOSHICHESKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA DLYA GMDOBTROIM' SNA in Malian 1981
(signed to press 30 liar 8!) pp 6, 9-I3. I76

(Annotation. introduction and table of contents fro. book "Space-Based Research
for Urban Planning", by A. Alekseyev, A. Bogdanov. G. Vanyushin, c. Grechko, D.
Grnchiar, Yu. ZOnov. I. lvanov, V. Kasnacheyev, I. Kvitkovich, A. Lishevskiy, ll.
Lobachev. A. Uelua. S. Kityagin, V. Modev. V. Mordyuk, A. Peshkov, A. Porubski,

n. Reykhshteyn, N. Selivanov, Ya. Feranets. and V. Shidlovakiy, Stroyizdat (Lenin-
grad Division), 3000 copies, 176 pages]

[Text] This book surveys the results of investigation of the Barth's nitural
resources from space over the twenty-year period of manned space flight. Progress
in and prospects for use of satellite ingery in regional and urban planning and
investigation of environmental quality in the socialist nations are considered.
Scientists and specialists from Bulgaria, the (:08, Poland, the USSR, and Czechoslo-
vakia, the participant nations in the Intercosmos progran, were 13'0““ in it! P"-
paration. The book is intended for scientific workers and personnel involved in
land use planning and environmental protection.

Introduction

The Soviet space program is directed primarily at solution of pressing "terrestrial"
problems, i.e., at seeking ways for effective utilization of the results of space
experimentation for peaceful purposes, including solution of the most iaportsnt
scientific-technical and economic problems confronting the 1188!! and the socialist
nations. -

A certain amount of experience has already been amassed in the use of space tech-
nology to study the Earth's natural resources and monitor ecological processes. for
radio and television, and for neteorology and navigation. A new scientific disci-
pline, space ecology, is rapidly evolving.

The past few decades have been characterised by significant scientific and design
achievenents in the field 'of urban and regional planning. In the Soviet Union.

the territorial scale of the urbanization of new lands is rapidly expanding, par-
ticularly in the North, Siberia, and the Far East. Interlinked systems of popu-
lation centers are being created and cities are growing to cover extensive areas.

99

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vigorously developing urbanization in the USSR and its sister socialist nations
required that rapid decisions be made in the field of the regulation of urban
growth and environmental protection and that changes he made in methods for gather-
ing and processing information on the rapidly shifting status of various urban
subsystems. local and regional settlement systems, and the areas occupied by major
industrial facilities.

The I970's in the Soviet Union were marked by a switch to planning forecasts made

at the regional level. Thus, the General Plan for Settlement of the USSR and the
General Plan for Development of Health Resorts, Recreation Areas, Tourism. and Natu-
ral Parks in the USSR were the first dooments in the world to reflect the broad
opportunities afforded by the socialist system for solution of pressing problems

of urban planning and environmental protection on the scale of a nation as vast

as the USSR. These general plans are serving as the foundation for compilation of
regional planning documents for the major economic regions and UniOn republics,
various district planning programs, and general city plans.

Multipurpose territorial analysis during different stages of the planning process
requires the creation and introduction of new technical methods and tools. This
has generated an urgent need for the development of automated systems for manage-
ment of large urban-planning operations and organization of a continuous dynamic
planning process that will quickly react to the changing external situation.

SPICO-bued studies have opened up totally new opportunities for gathering infor-
mation and making design decisions in urban and regional planning and landscape
architecture (Table I). Unique archives of space imagery of the Earth's surface,
including images sent to Earth by the participants in experiments carried out under
the Intercom-0s progras, are being created. Utilisation of this imagery is having
an enormous economic effect. For crawls, imaging of 5.5 million km of the Soviet
Union by cosmonauts 9.1. Klimuk and v.1. Sevast'yenov from the long-lived orbital
station Salyut-lo produced a savings of 50 million rubles.

"hat advantages are provided by the introduction of space imagery into the plan-
ning of cities and major territorial systems?

First of all, the planner is able to examine all of a very large area simultane-
ously, something that was previously impossible. 'lhe space photographs used for
this purpose graphically sbov the environment of the region to be studied and
provide a clear picture of the distribution of features with respect to height
as well as area.

Secondly. in contrast to traditional topographic maps, space images give an "instan-
taneous" representation of features that more accurately and comprehensively re-
flects the properties of territorial systems during a given period. In planning
any major territorial system, especially in regions that are sparsely settled and
on which little research has been done (e.g., Tyumen' District), it is often neces-
sary to employ topographic maps from which a significant proportion of current in-
formation has been omitted as a censequence of the slow rate at which such maps

are updated on the basis of the results of ground surveys.

100

FOROFI'IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l

Sons Bcononic Sectors in Hhich Space hegery is Utilized in the
USSR (froa Published Data) .

Organization

State Connittee for Urban Planning

Ministry of Geology

State Cousittee on Forestry

State Couittee on Mydrouteoro-
logy and Monitoring of the
Environnent

Ministry of Transport Construction

Ministry of Agriculture

Main Administration for Geodesy
and Cartography

Ministry of Public Health

Problem Being Solved or to Be
Solved by Use of Space lessen

Provision of a technical-economic fonndation—~——-
for the disposition and territorial expan-
sion of population centers

Zoning of territories vith respect to favor-
ability ofconditions for different types
of functional utilisation

Monitoring of the dynanics of population cen-
ters and settle-ent systens

Analysis of landscape and recreational condi-
tions

Study-of environnsntal conditions in the vici-
nity of large population centers

Large- and small-scale geological napping
Identification of areas pronising in terns of
nineral prospecting

Mapping of forests
Prediction of fire danger in forests and of
the consequences of forest fires

Meteorological research and weather forecasting

Study of environmental conditions (space noni-
toring)

Hydrological studies

Siting of roads

Technical-econonic substantiation of the dis-
position of transport facilities

Monitoring of the status of transportation net-
works and transport equip-cut

Forecasting of harvests
Study of land resources
Planning of conservation neasures

Compilation of different types of naps and
charts

Study of public health in relation to expo-
sure to environmental pollution

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FHKJA1.USE(MVLY

table I continued

Academy of Sciences of the USSR Study of the Barth's natural resources from

space
Development of technical tools and methods
for study of natural resources

Ministry of Culture Archeological research
Ministry of Education Study of geography and earth science
Ministry of higher and Hidlevel Study of certain scientific disciplines

Specialized Education

The advantages of space imagery are also indisputable from the standpoint of re-

flection of the current status of the Barth's surface, particularly if one takes

into consideration the rapidity with which information can be gathered, its novel
character, and the savings over, e.g., aerial photography (Table 2).

Thirdly, the organization within the overall framework of space-based research of
regular imaging cycles for definite regions makes it possible to discern trends in
the evolution of anthropogenic and natural landscapes and to determine the extent
to which changes in the environment have a dynamic character.

The most interesting proapecta are for use of space photographs in the planning
of cities and large territorial complexes that include settlement systems, areas
of intensive industrialisation, recreational facilities, tourist attractions, and
natural parks and reserves. It is actually possible to establish the precise

boundaries of cities and metropolitan areas, the structure of open spaces and
built-up areas, degree of forestation, the extent to which man has altered the
environment, air and water quality (including the extent of polluted areas), etc.

By using space imagery, architectural planners can see the three-dimensional struc-
ture of the landscape viewed from above rather than two-dimensional images of the
contour lines for cities and forests. For example, even when photogrhphs are taken
on a scale of l:300,000-l:500.000, the problem of providing a variety of landscape
features in laying out tourist routes over large areas can be more easily and quick-
ly solved.

It would he naive to assume that the problem of introducing space imagery into urban
planning is limited to the use of images of a specific region. The analysis of
infornation gathered from space and its employment for purposes of planning are
directed at solution of a wide variety of complicated research and organisatioual
problens. There are many vague and disputed aspects of the organization of this
activity at both the urban-planning and multipurpose levels. It is therefore neces-
sary to conduct a great deal at development work on scientific methodology and to
draw up experimental plans based on the use of new informeticn sources. which will
make it possible to devise a methodology for use of space imagery in various sec-
tors of the economy.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
enta of Different Usera for Information Content of Space In
Published Data)

|ce

Reoolving
power of

image: a

150,000

5000
200
200

150.000
100

1000
200
200
200
100

10,000

100-500
15
30-100

Image co-
verage.
kn

 

10‘
10‘

mums

no‘-no’

10~

Local infor-
mation need,

A

0.51-0.57
0a8‘1c3

Periodicity a
of iaaging. re

daze £2
60

As required
1-30

Aa required
0025'!

A. required

1-7
7
7
Ac required
I

30
FOR¢0FHKJAI.USE(MVLY

Table 2

Effect Anticipated or Ohteinad from One of Space Imagery (from
Puhliehed Date).

Area of epplicetion or problem Annual effect, millione
eolved hz uee of epece gaggerz of pggnda eterligg
Harte agriculture and foreetry 2-2.4

Horld geography Up to 2

Horld geology and mineral reeourcee Up to 2k

Horld hydrology and water reaourcee Up to 4

world oceanography Up to 36

At the reeeerch level. urban—planning criteria intended for evaluatiOn of territory
at different planning ecelee muet he clearly defined end it in neceeeery to eeteh-
liah the feaeihility of extracting new information at different acelea froa epace
photographe, tagether with their degree of detail end their reliability. Scienti-
fic research nuet he greatly expended in the area of epece-heeed methode for urban-
plenning etudiea, coneidering them both eeparetely from end in combination with
traditional ground-aurvey end aerial-photographic techniques (Table 3).

At the organizational level, the proper place for apece-haeed urhen-planning etudiea
in the overall atructure of apace experimente muat be determined. It in eapecielly
important to concentrate all work on acientific methodology in thin area under the
State Committee for Conatruction Affaira, in order to deviae a etenderd nathodology,
eneure a high ecientific-technicel level for reaearch, and provide an opportunity
for creation of a date hank in which all anelyeia and application proceeaee are
automated. It would ohviouely he expedient to provide for the training of quali-
fied apecieliete to work et urban-planning inetitutea.

The material ehove doee not cover all eepecta of epece-haaed research on urban
planning, but it doea reflect the divereity of the prohlema involved and the need
for aolution of a number of interdieciplinery prohlema end for technical and method-
ological (particularly programing) innovationa. All theee factore are evident in
the atructure of the preaent book, which conaidera both the goele of urban planning
and the moat important technical and organization eapecte of the euhject.

Ihie hook ie the firat international publicatiOn on apece research for urban and
regional planning; it wee prepared in cooperation with epecialieta from the aociel-
iet ne¢i0ne. Ite contente are divided into aectione intended to provide the reader
with general acientific information on the technology and methods of apece imaging
of Berth end on interpretation nethode and eectiona containing data characterizing
the potential applicaticna of epece inagery at the theoretical level.

In our opinion. thie aort of organization moat cloeely correeponde to the teak at
hand, i.e., that of familiarizing the reader with a new ecientific-technical field
and of deeonetrating the feaaihility of incorporating the achievemente of conno-
nautica into planning practice.

10‘

 

FOR 01-1-10“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents Page

Fo‘ewtdoceeeeeegeese.eeeeeeeeseeeeeesesseveoeseevsseeeseesssseeeesseeeeseoseeee-7
IntroductionCOOOOCOOOII...0.0'CICCOOCOOCIICC'OOOCICCOOOICOCUII'.ICUVCCCOCICCO'CIOg
Chapter I. technology and Methods for Study of Earth from Space...u.......unllo
Chapter 2. Analysis of Space Images to: Urban Planning.........................58
Chapter 3. Ways to Use Space leases in Developing Settlement Systems and
Region/I1 leescseee-eeeveeseeooesesessseeeseveevesessvseeeeeeoeeeeso
Chapter 6. Opportunities for Investigation of Cities from Space Inases.......126
Chapter 5. Use of Space Images in Investigating Environmental Quality.........156

Bibliosr‘phyooeoooeoaaaaeosssosssoloaloesoecosccso!sosvvssovevosoosvvoeooosov00‘7‘

COPYRICBT: Stroyirdat. Leningradstoye otdelenlye. 198!

2678
080: 1866/31

105

N]! OFFIOAL USE ONLY
Iii! OITNCJAL.USI2(HVLY

UDC 711:528.7 629.78

SATELLITE IMAGING FOR URBAR PLANNING

Hoscow KOSHICHESKAYA S"YEMKA DLYA GRADOSTROITEL'STVA in Russian 1981
(signed to press 7 May 81) pp 2-5. 159

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Satellite Imaging for
Urban Planning", by Sergey Ivanovich Krest'yeshin, Arkadiy Ivanovich Helue and
Teaara Nikoleyevna Chistyakova, Stroyiadat, 2000 copies. 160 pages]

[Text] This book examines various aspects of the gathering of reliable and com-
prehensive information for urban planning by means of satellite technology. Plan-
ning requirements with respect to the informational content of satellite images and
the principles of their interpretation are discussed. There are examples of the re-
sults of satellite-image analyses that reveal features of the terrestrial landscape,
urban and regional development. and air and water quality. The use of satellite
photographs in urban planning is shown to be cost-effective. This book is intended
for architects and specialists working in the field of urban planning. It includes
16 tables. 57 illustrations. and a bibliography of 13¢ items.

Introduction

The resolution entitled "Basic Directions to be Taken by the Economic and Social
Development of the USSR During 1981-1985 and over the Period Through 1990" provides
for further study and utilization of space in order to promote further progress in
science, technology. and the national economy. This extremely important state docu-
ment reflects a concern with a nee field of technology and science whose effective-
ness has been proven within a very short period of time.

It was only about 25 years ago that the first artificial earth satellite was launched
from the USSR. Two years later. the firstvehiclescarrying photographic equipment
were sent into space. At the time. many scientists denied the expedience of using
satellite imagery of Earth for national-economic purposes.

Satellite photography of Earth is today an effective method for territorial studies
and the most important area of the space prograa. Hundreds of organizations use
satellite images for solution of various scientific, planning. and industrial prob-
lems. Satellite imaging has revealed new mineral deposits. promising fisheries, etc.
Nevertheless, aany'specialists still cannot see see the prospects afforded by satel-
lite photographs for their particular field. have a skeptical attitude toward the
use of satellite images in planning. and deny that populated areas and transporta-

tion networks can be studied from space.

106

IN3I1OFIHCIA1.IISII0hﬂ}Y
FOR OFFHJAL USElDNlN

gathering capabilities of satellite imagery. Numerous examples are presented to
show that the size of an feature visible in an image depends on the photographic
technical conditions specified by the user. A planning problem of definite scale

of the features that are significant at the scale in use. which makes it possible

to improve territorial studies. The appearance of the first satellite photographs
resulted in modification of the boundaries of the natural regions of the natural

regions of the North American continent, which had for decades been considered
immutable; supplemental investigations carried out on the ground confirmed the
validity of the conclusions drawn from the satellite images. There are many
examples of the redrawing of maps after analysis of satellite photographs. Photo-

no change in information flow, it is 2-3 orders of magnitude greater for a satellite
photograph than for a map of similar scale.

rapid telemetric data transmission. etc. The use of satellite images requires
development of methods that take into account the scale and nature of the problem
to be solved.

The authors wish to thank Prof. V.N. Belousov. who reviewed the book and whose ad-
vice contributed to its improvement during all stages of its preparation.

107

FOR OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FIH!(HHW(JAI.USIECNNLY

Chapter I was written by 8.1. Krest'yashin (Sections 1 and 3 jointly with 1.“. Chis-
tyakuva). the introduction. Chapters 11 and III, and the conclusions were written
by A.I. Melua. and Chapter IV was written by T.N. Chistyakova.

Contents Page

Introducttoueeeeeeeeeeseeasseasseseeeaseeeeeaseseaassaeaeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeee-seelsoese3

Chapter I. Role of satellite iaaging in urban-planning studies....................6
1. Initial territorhl dataOOIOOI;D...IO.COOI.D...OIOIOOIOOIO00.0-00.0...00000006
2. Informational capabilities of satellite insges..............................12
3. Rough napping from satellite inages.........................................27
Chapter II. Technical and environmental conditions for satellite inaging.........32

1. Technical conditions for satellite inaging..................................32
2. Environnental conditions for satellite inaging..............................60
Chapter III. Territorial-planning analysis of satellite inagss...................50
I. General problens of aatellite-iaage interpretation..........................50
2. Plant coverOOOOOIOO0....IIOOCOCOCOIOOUO.ICOIOIOOODIIIIODOOOOOCOOOU0.00.0003067
3. “ydrolowlﬂl.0.I...OIOUOOIOCIOOIOOOOIOICO..OOOODOOICCVOIOOOOOOOIIOCOCOOCOUIC7S
A. “ologyOIOODOOUOOVDOIOO.IDD.l'OI....00...0.00.01...0......IDOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOOS7
5. Population centers..........................................................96
6. Road...il.0O.IO...DO..OUIUIOO0.0.0000I...I0.0.0...0......OOIOOOOOODIOOOOOICIOI
7. Individul 'tmtur°.0000000000000000IOOOCCUCCOOOIOOOOCOOCOOOOOIODICOOIOOIOIOS
8. mad u.e.'0'I.0...0.001....COO...O0.00....OOIOOOOOOIOCOI.IOOIOOOIICIOOI.OOOIM
9. hvtronmnc‘l qmlitYCIOCOI.9IOI...O.D...OOCOIIOOOCCIUCICCOOOOOOOOCOOI00000113
10. Composite territorial evaluation...........................................127
Chapter IV. Technical-economic effectiveness of use of satellite inages.........l39
1. General economic problems of applied space research........................l39

2. Principles for calculation of cost-effectiveness of satellite photography
in utb‘n planninSOIOCOCOIOOCCUCOIOCOIOOOOO‘IIOOOOOOODIO.....0000100000000001‘2
conclu'tona.COOCOOOICIOOOOOICOOCO00.0.00...I00...OIOIOOCOI'U.OOOOIOCOOOOOCCIOCOOCIW

31b1103raphy....-......nouncnn.uu..-.....o...o..u.o.u....-..o...o.n..n153

COPYRIGHT: Stroyizdat, 1981

2678
0802 1866/30

108

INJR‘OFFICIAI.IHHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 528.946

USING MATERIALS PM HULTISPECTRAL SCANNER SURVEY TO STUDY ANTHROPMDIIC
EFFECT ON THE ENVIRW

Moscow ISSIEDOVANIYE 2mm 12 ROSHOSA in Russian No 5. Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 28 Apr 81) PP 117-123

[Article by v.1. Kravtsova and 1.8. Niskaya, Department of Geography. Moscow State
University imeni MN. Lomonosov)

[Text] The goals of rational utilization of nature and protection of the environ-
ment require the development of mobile methods for monitoring the anthropogenic ef-
fect on the environment, among which space monitoring is becoming the method of pri-
mary importance [1-3]. The main space monitoring tool may be good-resolution multi-
spcctral scanner surveying. which provides for both operational and long-term track-
ing of the effect on the environment of human actions. In this connection, it is
important to analyze the possibilities of using photographs obtained with the help
of the "Fragment" system in order to study the anthropogenic effect on the environ-
ment.

In order to analyze the possibility of studying the anthropogenic effect on the en-
vironment, we selected regions lying outside the main agricultural zone that differ
sharply in both their natural conditions and the nature of their economic develop-
ment. The two areas selected were the taiga regions in the northern section of the
European part of the USSR and desert areas in Central Asia (the central part of the
Ustyurt Plateau). for which we analyzed the anthropogenic effect on forest growth
and desert landscapes. respectively.

In order to study the anthropogenic effect on forest growth. we used a photograph
that depicts part of the territory of three oblaets: Arkhangel'skaya, Vologodskaya
and Kirovskaya (Figure 1 [not included]). Rich forest resources are concentrated in
this area and are being exploited industrially by enterprises in the cities of
Kotlas, Sol'vychegodsk, Koryazhma. Veliki Ustyug and Lure.

Photographs of this area are interesting in that they depict quite well the results
of economic development. Cities. agricultural lands and broad clearing are visible
as light-colored spots. These are elements of the anthropogenic effect that are re-
lated to the development of the territory. An anthropogenic effect of a negative
nature is manifested here primarily in the destruction of forest growth and the dis-
ruption or alteration of the type of trees to be found. Indirect indicators can be
used to determine changes in the soil cover (bog formation on cutting sites). These
features of the anthropogenic effect. as identified in the photograph, are depicted
in Figure 2.

109

FOITOFIﬂCIAl.UEIICﬂ‘LY
FOR OITIC]AI.US£‘0NLN

 

Figure 2. Diagram of the anthropo-
genic effect on the forest growth
near the city of Kotlas. I. Destruc-
tion of forest growth as the result
anthropogenic action (unforested sec-
tions): 1. near urban construction:
2. near settled and agricultural
lands; 3-5. along broad clearings; 6.
cuttings; 7. boggy cuttings. 11.
change in composition of forest
growth as the result of anthropogenic
acrivity: 8. total replacement of
native coniferous forests by broad-
leaf forests: 9. partial replacement
of native coniferous forests by
mixed forests. 111. Other designa-
tions: 10. forests: ll. flood-plain
meadows: 12. bogs.

The interpretation was based on photographs
taken in three bands: orange (0.6-0.7 um),
red (0.7-0.8 us) and near infrared (0.8-1.1
um). Different spectral photographs were
also used to identify various objects. The
reason for this was the different informa-
tion content of the ilages of the territory
in the three bands named above. For in-
stance. for the detection of sections where
the anthropogenic effect shows up the
brightest. the orange-band photograph
proved to be optimal. Unforested territor-
ies (of various origins and being used for
various purposes) show up in it quite
clearly because of their light tone. For
example. in this photograph it is easy to
identify the unforested sections that are
urban areas located along the rivers, since
they show up as bright-colored spots with
irregular shapes. Settled and agricultural
lands (without any further breakdown) are
also quite visible in the photograph.

Their light-colored outlines, in the for-
of bands with broken boundaries, stretch
along the valleys of the large rivers, as
well as along small valley in the forest
masses that show up as a dark-gray tone.
Broad clearings are distinguished quite
clearly. although frag-entarily in places.

Another type of human effect on the forest
growth and the soil cover appears as the
result of the systematic reduction of co-
niferous forests for industrial purposes.
Cuttings are identified in orange-band
photographs. As a rule, they are light-
colored spots of small size (no more than
4-5 mm2 in photograph with a scale of
l:500.000), with rectilinear boundaries.
that are located primarily along rivers and
near populated points.

we can also point out another, no less im-
portant, feature: the cuttings are located
primarily in places where coniferous trees
grow, because spruce is the most highly
valued tree in the cellulose and paper in-
dustry. Therefore. as additional material
for identifying cuttings it is advisable to

use the red-band photograph, in which it is possible to differentiate forests ac-

cording to the types of trees in them.

In the photograph taken in this band, conif-

erous forests are represented by a dark tone. The orange-band photograph can be

110

FOR1OFFKHALlﬂiEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uncd to distinguish such anthropogenic formations as boggy cuttings, but only if ad-
ditional cartographic sources are available. This is on aspect of man's effect on
nature in this region.

Another type of effect is manifested as a change in the composition of the northern
European coniferous forests as a result of their many years of use as a valuable
source of wood. These changes are expressed either as a partial replacement of the
native coniferous forests by mixed ones or as a total replacement by broadoleaf for-
ests. These changes show up best in photographs taken in the red and near-infrared
bands. Mixed forests appear as gray areals with a characteristic grainy image
structure and separate dark impregnations. This is caused by the combination of co-
niferous and broad-leaf trees. which gives the picture a unique character because of
the alternation of dark and lighter spots that frequently have the rectilinear shape
of overgrown cuttings. These formations are located in the center of the photo-
graph, near the populated points. as well as along the right bank of the Severnaya
Dvina River. The broad-leaf forest masses are represented by a light-gray tone and
are located, as a rule. near the settled and agricultural lands.

The results of the interpretation give us grounds for reaching the conclusion that
it is necessary to institute a complex of measures for the purpose of restoring the
coniferous forests in this region. They also make it possible to judge the huge
scales of the anthropogenic effect on the forest growth and its utilization. In
this region. for example. only about 30-40 percent of the forest areas are still
virgin forest composed of the valuable conifers: 40-50 percent of the forests have
been affected by partial replacement of the coniferous forests with mixed ones; in
15-20 percent of the area, they have been completely replaced. It is important to
call attention to the fact that improper economic activity creates conditions that
lower the ability of the forests to resist the unfavorable factors of the anthropo-
genic effect. For instance, excessive and unfounded reduction of a forest leads to
the formation of bogs on cutting sites. About 50 percent of the cuttings existing

here are boggy.

In order to avoid such negative consequences of economic activity. it is necessary
to develop measures for the rational utilization of forest resources. as well as to
carry out a complex of reclamation projects to renew and restore our timber re-

sources (particularly the coniferous types).

The anthropogenic effect on the soil and plant cover in the deserts on the Ustyurt
Plateau was studied with the help of a photograph showing the central part of the
plateau within the boundaries of the western part of the Uzbek SSR (the
Karakalpakskaya ASSR) and the eastern part of Hangyshlakskaya Oblast in the Kazakh
SSR (Fiqure_3 [not included]). Topographically, the flat or gently sloping plateau
is a loamy desert with a complex of boyslycheno-biyurgunovaya [translation unknown]
vegetation on the grayish-brown desert soils. Karst formation processes are highly
develOped in this area. it being the case that the entire plateau is mottled with
leaching funnels and sinkholes. They show up as dark points about 1 mm in diameter.
wormwood and grasses (primarily feather grass) grow densely in the sinkholes. On
the plateau there are also shallow (up to 5 m deep) but very wide (up to several
kilometers) and flat 'urpa” (translation unknown] depressions. For them the charac-
teristic vegetation is the bright green ittsegeka [translation unknown] bush. which
imparts a dark tone to the image of these depressions in the photograph. This sys-
tem of depressions stretches from the northwest to the southeast. Between the

111

ltllfﬂﬂﬂllhl.USElN¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 4. Diagram of anthropogenic effect
on desert landscapes, as compiled from a
space photograph. I. Disturbance of soil
and vegetative cover as the result of in-
dustrial activity and pasturing around pop-
ulated points: 1. total destruction of
vegetative cover and serious soil defla-
tion; 2. partial destruction of vegetative
cover and significant soil deflation: 3.
disturbance of vegetative cover and insig-
nificant soil deflation. II. Disturbance
of soil and vegetative cover around wells
as the result of pasturing and trampling by
cattle: 4. complete destruction: 5. par-
tial destruction. III. Disturbance of soil
and vegetative cover as the result of con-
struction and operation of a large trans—
portation line: 6. total destruction of
vegetative cover and serious soil defla-
tion: 7. partial destruction of vegetative
cover and significant soil deflation: 8.
disturbance of vegetative cover and insig-
nificant soil deflation. IV. Disturbance
of soil and vegetative cover as the result
of the movement of transport vehicles and
cattle along roads and cattle trails: 9.
. total destruction of soil and vegetative
m ‘ V‘ “ ‘ cover as the result of cattle movement
along cattle trails; 10. partial destruc-

l
_h_‘__5_._l———l
’-' -2 m" 1-“ \~’ tion of soil and vegetative cover as the

37 7 g 3,"! " result of movement of transport vehicles

1' ////A 1! /’ / along dirt roads. V. 11. 12. Disturbance
of soil and vegetative cover as the result
of geological surveying work and other
types of activities.

   
  

hollows there are weakly delineated elevations (up to 2 m). which are the so-called
”bozyngeny” [translation unknown}, where the gypsum horizon lies directly on the
surface: it is precisely this that causes the light tone of their image in the
photograph. Salt bottoms and takyr soil located in depressions in the relief ap-
pear in the form of white and light-gray spots with clearcut boundaries.

until recently, the desert regions of Central Asia and xazakhstan were little devel-
oped and almost untouched by economic activities. The section depicted in the
photograph is interesting because in recent years the desert landscapes have been
altered considerably as the result of anthropogenic effects on nature [4). These

changes are related to the searches for and development at useful mineral deposits
(gas and oil deposits have been discovered); the construction of the Bukhara-Center
gas pipeline, the Kungradehardshou railway line, highways and new settlements serv-
ing these transport lines; the increased anthropogenic load on the region that is
connected to this. Intensive development of this part of the plateau is also lead-
ing to negative consequences that are manifested mainly as disturbances (of various

112

FOR‘OFFKJALIE510NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

origins) of the soil and vegetative cover. The degree of their manifestation and
the nature of their distribution are depicted in space photographs that have been

interpreted, and are shown in a map that has been compiled and is presented in Fig-
ure 4.

In the upper part of the photograph, the large light-gray spot that in places has a
white tone with unclear boundaries calls attention to itself. This section, which
stretches from northwest to southeast, reaches 40 km in length and 15 km in width.
In its center, near a railway station, is the settlement of Karakalpakiya. As a re-
sult of the construction and utilization of all these objects, as well as the move-
ment of transport and the pasturing of cattle around the settlement, there have been
substantial disruptions of the soil and vegetative cover: destruction of the sparse
vegetation, such as it is, and related deflation of the soil, the thickness of which
does not exceed 15-20 cm. Deflation takes place in the direction of the prevailing
winds, from the northeast to the southwest. In the photograph it is easy to see the
nature and degree of disturbance of the soil and vegetative cover, which is maximal
near the populated paint and the transportation line, then decreases gradually as
the distance from them increases. The light image tone in the center of the section
indicates the exposure of light-colored carbonaceous rocks. Determination of the
overall limits and the degree of the effect on the soil and vegetative cover is eas-
ier when photographs taken in two surveying bands—-red and near infrared--are used.

A number of roads converge on the settlement from the south. the dirt roads' image
is characterized by curvilinearity. As a result of the use of the strip along the
sides of the roads for the movement of transport, the soil and vegetative cover has
been disturbed near them. The roads appear in the photographs, which have BO-m res-
olution, in the form of noticeable light-colored strips. On both sides of the image

of the main transport road. temporary roads--traces of the movement of specialized
transport along the geological profiles during the conduct of geological surveying

work--appear as rectilinear, parallel light-colored strips. Even a single passage
results in disturbance of the vegetative cover and, as is obvious from the image of

these profiles, is accompanied by soil deflation and is preserved in the landscape
for a long time.

The deserts on the Ustyurt Plateau are used as a fodder base for livestock (Rarakul
sheep and milk and wool production by free-running sheep). During the spring, sum-
mer and autumn period, there is active pasturing of cattle. Numerous wells have
been dug in places where the ground-water lenses occur at a shallow depth. As a re-
sult of their systematic use, extensive areas with disturbed soil and vegetative
covor have formed around them. The intensity of the disturbance around the wells
varies. In place, the soil and vegetative cover has been completely destroyed near

a well. 1hese sections appear in the photographs as white, sun-shaped spots with
rays of roads and tracks leading away from them. As the distance from the wells in-

creases, the extent of the unfavorable effect on the landscape decreases, and there
is a corresponding weakening of the light-colored tone's intensity. The pattern of
the image of the pasturing areas has a number of characteristic features: it is as

if the light-colored spots around the wells and the cattle stands have been strung
onto the light~colored lines of the roads.

Thus, the interpretation of scanner-type space photographs makes it possible to de-
tect some anthropogenic effects on the desert's natural landscape-~primarily on the
soil and vegetative cover--and establish their origin, nature and extent, as well as

113

FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compile appropriate naps of the anthropogenic effect on the landscape that can be

used to develop recounendations for the rational utilization and protection of na-
ture.

The work that has been done demonstrates that nultispectral scanner photographs ob-
tained with the 'Pragnent" system can be used to detect a quite extensive range of
anthropogenic effects on the landscapes of different natural zones. Using addition-
al materials. with the photographs it is possible to establish the origin, nature
and degree of these changes. compile special thematic maps. and develop the neces-
sary recomndations for the rational utilization of natural resources and the pre-
vcntion of unfavorable consequences of intense anthropogenic activities.

BIBLIWRAPBY

1. Ryabchikov, A.H.. and Sayko. 'r.a., "Study of the Anthropogenic Effect on the an-
vironment." in "Issledovaniye prirodnoy sredy kosuicheskini sredstvani. T. 4.
Geografiya. Hetody kosmicheskoy fotos'yenki" [Investigating the Environment With
Space Facilities. Volume 4. Geography. Space Photosurveying Methods], Moscow.
VINITI [All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Infomation], 1975, pp
80-83.

2. Burov, V.P., Glushko. Ye.v., and Yernakov, Yu.G., "Standardization of the Images
of Anthropogenic Formations and' Complexes in Space Photographs." in
”Kosnicheskaya s"yemka i tenaticheskoye kartografirovaniye. Gsograficheskoye
rezul'taty nnogoronal'nykh kosnicheskikh eksperinentov' [Space Surveying and The-
matic Cartography: Geographic Results of Hultispectral Space Experiments] ,
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo HG!) [Moscow State University imeni H.V. Iononosov], 1980. pp
247-257.

3. Glushko, Ye.v., "Bxperiment in Calibrating an Anthropogenic Change in the Envi-
ronment with the help of Space Photographs.“ ISSLBDWANIYE 2341.1 12 XOSMOSA. No
4. 1980, pp 35-39.

4. Viktorov, 3.5., ”On Some Possible Causes of the Complexity of the Uetyurt Pla-
teau,” ZEMLEVBDENIYB, Vol 12, 1977, pp 179-183.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 'Issledovaniye Zenli is kosmosa". 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/35

116

MOMMUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 061.3:502.3:629.78
' INTERCOSWS' PROGRAM MEETINGS ON ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIW

Moscow ISSLBDOVANI‘IB m: 12 nosuosn in masian No 4. Jul-Aug 81 pp 122-124
[Article by 1.x. Gal'perin]

[Text] The first coordinating meeting on the subject "Utilization of Aerospace In-
formation to Determine and Monitor Enviromnental Pollution" was held in Bratislava
in October 1980. The national coordinators of Hungary, the Ger-an Democratic
Republic, Poland. the USSR and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic participated

In the meeting. The international coordinator in this matter is Yozef Kvitkovich,
the deputy director of the Slovakian Academy of Sciences' Institute of

Geography.

The particular importance and urgency of the latter of pollution was emphasised dur-
ing the discussion and it was discovered that the participants had different con-
cepts of the most dangerous pollutants, as a result of which it was not possible to
develop a cannon international progru for scientific research in this natter.

Those present at the meeting turned to the Soviet delegation with a request for the
preparation of a plan for an international progra of scientific research in this
field.

A second meeting of these natimal coordinators was held in noscow in "arch 1981.
Those present discussed and adopted an international progrua of scientific research
for 1981-1985. the plan of which was prepared by workers at the Laboratory for
Anthropogenic Monitoring and the Institute of water Problems of the USSR Acadeey of
Sciences.

This program provides for the development of methods of obtaining and processing in-
formation about anthropogenic pollutants and the determination of their effects on
the environment, including ecological changes of an anthropogenic origin.

The inVestigation and determination of types of pollutants must be conducted in the
atmosphere, on land and in water areas. seas and oceans. By 1985 we should have
techniques for the remote determination of anthropogenic pollutants and the detec-
tion of their effects.

A meeting of coordinators concerned with the subject "Development of Methods for In-
vestigating and Monitoring Water Resources and Their Pollution With the Help of
Aerospace Information” was held in Budapest in March of this year. The internation-
al coordination of work in this subject is the responsibility of (Gods Laslo) . di-

rector of the Hungarian Hydrological Institute.
115

MOI-‘FIOALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Representatives of five countries-~Hun3ary. Poland, Romania, the USSR and the
CSSR. who reported on the work that had been done in 1980--attended the
vunfvrcnrc.

A survey of methods for predicting melt water runoff has been compiled in Hungary,
as well as a description of the operational observation network for collecting data
on the snow cover. During the joint Soviet-Hungarian spaceflight, Hungarian spe-
cialists actively participated in the collection of ground data at the Kishknre and
Balaton monitoring ranges. First attempts were made at the machine processing of

space photographs in order to determine the characteristics of closed-drainage wa-
ters and soil conditions in the Kishkdre range.

Aerospace information is being used in the CSSR for the following purposes: study-
ing the hydrophysical characteristics of soils subject to erosion: investigating the
characteristics of the snow cover; studying the geomorphological development of
drainage basins in connection with the formation of alluvial deposits and the silt-
ing of reservoirs.

In ROmania the primary attention is devoted to investigating the characteristics of

soil moisture. which are determined by comparing synchronously gathered ground. air-
craft and space data.

Last year in Poland, the basic assignment was to study thermal pollutants in reser-
voirs and moving water. The characteristics of the thermal regime of water objects
was investigated on the basis of synchronous ground observations and aerial photo-

graphs .

Soviet specialists used aerospace intonation to compile hydrographic maps of the
deltas of the rivers flowing into the northern Caspian Sea and hydrogeological maps
of the Fergana region and the territory of the HP}! [Mongolian People's Republic] and
are working on a large project for the integrated study of reservoirs.

During the analysis of the results of all this work, those present at the meeting
noted a hunter of difficulties that have arisen because of the insufficient amount
of equipment for gathering and processing aerospace information. primarily because
of the extremely limited number of aircraft being used to carry out aerial surveying.

At the meeting there was a discussion of a plan for scientific research covering the
following areas:

1. me development of methodological principles for evaluating the status and dynam-
ics of water objects and their drainage areas on the basis of data from aerospace
surveys.

2. The development of methods for evaluating the spatial distribution of snow cover
and its aqueous-physical properties for the purpose of using aerospace information
in hydrological prediction of fluvial drainage.

3. The study of the Earth's surface for the purpose of determining subterranean wa-
ter distribution areas.

4. no development of methods for determining the composition and distribution of
pollutants of surface and subterranean waters.

116

“MUSEONLY
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USEIM‘LY

By the end of 1985. the conduct of research in these areas will create a
basis for conpiling a canon methodological nanual on the use of aerospace
infatuation for the investigation. evaluation and prediction of water
resources. which will be the Iain final result of the work in this field.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Ioaledovaniya Ze-li is kosnoaa". 1981

11766
C80: 1866/10

117

MWWONLY
Flll(”ﬂﬂ£]Al.US£i0Nlﬂ

SPACE POLICY AND ADHINISTRATIOI

INTERNATIONAL MONITORING PROM SPACE

Moscow HBZHDUNAKDDNYY KONTROL' 8 ISPOL'ZOVANIYEH KOSHICHESKIKB SEEDSTV in Russian
1981 (signed to press 8 Apr Bl) pp 2-6, 119

[Annotation and table of contents from book "International Monitoring From Space",
by Ivan Ivanovich Kotlyarov, Isdatel'stvo "Heshdunarodnyye otnosheniya",
1,900 copies, 120 pages]

[Text] This book examines the role of monitoring of the discharge of governmental
obligations assumed under international treaties in the areas of disarmament. en-
vironmental protection. the use of space, etc. The author considers forms and

methods of monitoring and the validity of using space technology for this purpose.

INTRODUCTION

The CPSU and Soviet government are tirelessly and consistently striving to strengthen
peace and bring about a relaxation of international tensions. "since there is at pre-
sent no more significant or important problem for any nation than the preservation of
peace and the assurance of the most fundamental right of every human being —- the
right to life." as was pointed out in the report of the CPSU Central Committee to

the 26th Party Congress.

This policy is reflected in bilateral and multilateral treaties concluded by the
Soviet Union with other governments.

Under the influence of the foreign policy of the 055R and other socialist nations. a
number of agreements directed at disarmament and environmental protection have been
reached during the past decade alone: the treaty of 1971 forbidding the disposition
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction on the ocean bottom or in
the oceans themselves. the Soviet-American agreements of 1972 to limit strategic
arms. the convention forbidding the development, production. and stockpiling of bac-
teriological (biological) and poisonous weapons and providing for their destruction,
the agreements between the USSR and USA to limit the underground testing of nuclear
weapons (1976), to regulate underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes
(1976). to limit strategic offensive.armaments (1979). and so forth, and the con-
vention forbidding the military or other hostile use of agents affecting the en-
vironment.

The future course of international relations depends on the extent to which govern-
ments conscientiously fulfill the obligations they have accepted. It is not

118

FIHICNﬂﬂCLA1.USE(HVLY
I‘lR‘OFIWCJAI.IJSFZ(MULV

fortuitous that the principle of conscientious fulfillment of obligations under inter-
national law found legal reinforcement in the final communique of a general European
conference. in this connection. the institution of internation monitoring is becoming
increasingly common in international law; it is employed in the relations between gov-
ernments as one guarantee of the fulfillment of the obligations they have assumed.
Soviet scholars specializing in international relations have made a significant con-
tribution to work on the legal aspects of international monitoring that have arisen in
different areas of intergovernmental relations.

Foreign experts in international law have devoted a great deal of attention to this
topic.

As for legal problems pertaining ot the use of space technology for international
monitoring. virtually no light has been shed on this subject.

The Soviet and foreign literature do not contain specialized monographs devoted to
multifaceted research on formalized international monitoring. At the same time. in-
ternational experience has shown that a multiplicity of legal problems of scientific
and practical interest that require further theoretical investigation arise in the
activity of monitoring organizations.

The establishment of international monitoring systems is a complex and difficult
problem. in view of the existence of two opposing social-economic orders differing
in the attitudes of their governments toward the use of international monitoring.

The Soviet Union and other socialist nations have taken a constructive position with
regard to the use of international monitoring. a stand manifested in an unbroken identi-
ty between the obligations undertaken by their governments with respect to agree-

ments in different areas of international cooperation and the need to ensure veri-
fication of their satisfaction.

It is typical of capitalistic governments to make a fetish of monitoring activity,
detaching it from the subject matter and scope of treaty agreements. which essenti-
ally can lead to an undermining of the authority of international monitoring. The
initiatives of bourgeois governments in regard to the use of international monitor-
ing. e.g., in the field of disarmament reduce not to implementation of actual dis-
armament measures but to monitoring of weapons. which would promote an arms race and
tho gathering of intelligence under the pretext of international monitoring.

Soviet diplomats and experts in international law are taking vigorous measures in-
tended to enSure that international monitoring will promote implementation of the

measures reached and strengthening of the trust between governments. so as to be
a true instrument of peace.

Contents Page
IntroductionOOOOOOO0.0....OOOOOOOCD.00....0......OOOOOOOOOIOOIOOIIOIIIOma

lNTERNATIONAL MONITORING -- A CONSTITUENT OF THE SYSTEM OF GUARANTEES IN
INTERNATIWAL ”WOOIOOOOOO....00....OI...I......II...IIOO..IOO0".OOOOOOOU'IIOOI’IS

The concept of international monitoring.................................5

119

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Forms and methods of international nonitoring..........................10
Accepted principles and standards of international law - the legal

basis for international monitoring..................................28
Special principles of monitoring activities............................39

LEGAL ASPECTS OF mmrmm mom-roams BY MEANS OF SPACE TECHNOIDGY. . . . . . . . . . .47
Influence of scientific-technical progress on legal problems of

international monitoring. Use of space technology for monitoring...“

Validity of using space technology for international monitoring........65

International monitoring fro: space as an aid to peace. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82

Special features of international monitoring from space. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .99

Notes....o.......no-oco.o...o.....--.........u............o...o.c-.oco-......onlll

COPYRIGHT: "uezhdunarodnyye otnosheniya". 1981

2678
(:50: 1866/29 .. m ..

120

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY