FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10054
15 October 1981

USSR Report

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

[FOUO 4/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FORIOFFNJAI.USE10NLY

JPRS L/10054
15 October 1

USSR REPORT
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

(P000 4/81)
CONTENTS

USSR-CEHA TRADE

Managing Foreign Economic Ties in European CEHA Countries
(0. Bakovetskiy; VOPROSY BKONME, m 81) coco-00.0.0000...

CEMA Member-Nation 1980 Economic Results, 1981 Plans
(In TaraSOV; VOW BKONGCIKI, W 61) oesooooooccooooooooeo

USSR-EAST EUROPE BILATERAL TRADE

Bilateral Programs for Specialization, Cooperation in Production
(I. mayev; VOPROSY Exam“, w 81) Coloalooonoooloooooao

- a - [III - USSR - 383
MANAGING FOREIGN ECOROMIC TIES IN EUROPEAN CEHA COUNTRIES
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No 5. May 81 pp 106-116

[Article by 0. Bakovetskiy: "Managing Foreign Economic Ties in the European CEHA
Nations"]

[Text] The study and use of mutual positive experience in organizing production.
management and solving national economic problems is of important significance in re-
solving the myriad tasks facing CEHA nations. L. I. Brezhnev noted in the CPSU Cen-
tral Committee Accountability Report to the 26th Party Congress that we should "study
more attentively and make better use of the experience of fraternal countries." This
applies directly to managing foreign economic ties. The experience of a number of
CEMA nations in which the methods of managing foreign economic activity have been
substantially changed in the course of economic reforms over the last 10-15 years is
of great interest.

The primary goal of improving the management of foreign economic ties is to improve
the efficiency of the national economy, which in the European CEHA nations is deter—
mined largely by their increased participation in the international division of la-
bor, by the effectiveness of foreign trade turnover. CEHA nations involved in de-
liveries of energy carriers, -aw material and machinery pay particular attention to
developing exports as a means of payment and. in this connection.-as a condition ne-
cessary for expanding imports and making them more effective. A significant and.
most importantly. constantly growing portion of the national income of the socialist
states is realized through foreign trade. Thus. exports reached 29 percent of the
national income in Czechoslovakia in 1978. 30 percent in the GDR. 40 percent in Bul-
garia and 54 percent in Hungary. For example. as was noted at the October (1977)
HS"? [Hungarian Socialist Workers Party] Central Committee Plenum. "to develop its
production. Hungary must increase its imports. and it can cover them only by inten-
sified expansion of its exports.... It is necessary." the plenum pointed out. "to
increase HPR [Hungarian Peoples Republic] participation in the international divi-
sion of labor. The HPR is attaining its goals in developing its economy in close
cooperation with CEHA member-nations. At the same time, it is trying to broaden its
own economic relations with nonsocialist countries as well."1 This leads to a situ-
ation in which foreign economic factors exert an ever-greater influence on consumption

l"Soobshcheniye o plenume Tex VSRP. 20 oktyabrya 1977 g. Informatsionnyy byulleten'
TsK VSRP" [Report on the 20 October 1977 Central Committee Plenum of the HSHP. In-
formation Bulletin of the HS"? Central Committee]. Budapest, 1977, pp 10-12.

l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the national income produced. in the physical-substantive structure of recompen-
sation, accumulation and consumption reproduction funds formed as a result of econo-
mic exchange between countries. At the same time. foreign economic ties also in-
fluence national income cost volume used for accumulation and consumption.

ible and stable contacts between the production and foreign economic spheres. Direct
links to the markets were effected only through foreign trade organizations. Calcu-
lations between them and industrial enterprises for output supplied for export or im-
ported from abroad were based on domestic prices. All income from export-import op-
erations was concentrated in foreign trade organisations and was then transferred to
the state budget. Conditions for selling output on the world market did not in-
fluence the activity of industrial enterprises.

But under present conditions in the socialist countries. this system of relations be-
tween foreign trade and industry has not facilitated increasing the effectiveness of
foreign economic ties. The primary goals in changing the system of foreign economic
aztivity management in a majority of the European CEHA countries have therefore been
foremost to overcome the separation of national production and foreign market de-
mands, the establishment of a planned, cost-accounting interaction between production

to achieve an effective combination of centralized. planned leadership with the de-
velopment of foreign-trade and production enterprise initiative. To this end. the
number of decreed indicators was decreased and they shifted from planning in physical
indicators to planning in cost terms for a number of foreign trade plan positions.
Price-formation reforms to bring domestic prices closer to world prices were carried
out. In many countries, calculated foreign exchange coefficients are now a basis for
including the resu1ts of joint industry and foreign trade activity in each other's
cost-accounting relations. Cost-accounting agreements are now used widely as the
bases of production and foreign trade. Obligations were redistributed among foreign
economic departments and subordinate organizations so that the former could concen-
trate on long-range problems in developing foreign economic ties and the latter

could assume responsibility for current activity; in some instances. the right to
manage foreign trade activity was transferred to industrial organizations.

------—--—---.--.--

l"Osnovni polozheniya na novata sistems na r"kovodstvo na narodnogo stopanstvo,"
Sofia. 1966, p 7.

2See. for example: "Novoye v planirovanii i upravlenii narodnym khozyaystvom v VNR"

[Innovations in HPR Economic Planning and Management), Izd-vo "Progress". 1969; "No-
voye v planirovanii i upravlenii SRR" [Innovations in Planning and Management in the
Romanian Socialist Republic]. Izd-vo "Progress". 1973.

2
-/' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The organizational rapprochement of the foreign economic sphere and industry and an
increased role for the direct implementers participating in foreign economic acti-
vity. and foremost the branch industrial ministries and departments. associations.
combines and enterprises. have been characteristic features of the steps taken. At
the same time. the countries have differed in degree of implementer responsibility

in foreign economic activity. by differences in areas of responsibility of economic
units entitled to establish foreign economic ties.

Hith improvement in the management of foreign economic ties. the dominant trend has
been organizational linking of specialized foreign trade enterprises and correspond-
ing production associations and enterprises. Thus. foreign trade enterprises in the
PR3 [People's Republic of Bulgaria] and the GDR have been transferred from the min:
ist.ies of foreign trade and are directly subordinate to the corresponding produc-
tion units or agencies supervising their activity. At the same time. the ministries
of foreign trade continue to exercise control over conducting state trade policies
and observance of foreign trade norms. A second trend is that specialized links
(departments. bureaus) concerned with exports have been created within production
units (as in Hungary and the GDR. for example). These links generally market out-
put of their own associations or combines and are directly subordinate to the pro-
duction association or its superior agency. However. their work is supervised by
the Ministry cf Foreign Trade. The next trend has been towards creating foreign
trade organizations which would carry out export-import operations on a large scale.
at the level of one or several branches of the economy; different organizational pro-
cedures were adopted in different countries. In particular. such tasks are being
carried out by special state agencies acting as general contractors but which are
not legal entities, by general contractors and enterprises designated by state agen-
cies (or those interested in making a particular deal) which are granted the right
to carry on foreign trade activity. and so forth.

Thus. participation by production organizations in foreign trade activity in Bul-
garia can take any of three forms: first. direct inclusion in foreign trade organ-
izations or through an appropriate management link; second. through a specialized
foreign trade organization subordinate to a branch ministry; third. through a for-
eign trade organization in another economic organization or other ministry. In
this regard. specialized links serving the corresponding economic organization pro-

ducing goods for export are created in the latter two instances in the foreign trade
organization.1

In Hungary. foreign trade turnover is effected for the most part by specialized for-
eign trade organizations managing export-import activity on a commission basis. in
which the commission agent (the foreign trade enterprise) purchases goods and sells
them in foreign markets for a set fee. The enterprises are granted the right to
choose independently a commission agent for foreign trade operations. At the same
time. more than 100 industrial enterprises have been given the right to independent
foreign trade activity. and the number of such enterprises is increasing.2

l"Byuletin normativni aktove za upravleniye ns v"nshnot"rgovskata deynost." Sofia.
1980. pp 1-2.

2"A nepgazdasag irenyitasi rendszer." Budapest. 1970, 163 old; MAGYAR KBZLBNY. No 56.
1979.

3
FOR orncm. USE ONLY
[UK uruuuu. U5]: URL!

Until recently. a significant portion of GDR foreign trade turnover was carried on
by organizations run by the Ministry of Foreign Trade. Moreover. a number of for-
eign trade organizations were subordinate to branch ministries and combines.1 In
accordance with a resolution adopted in 1980, foreign trade enterprises are being
transferred either to branch ministries or to combines, but will simultaneously be
under the supervision of the Ministry of Foreign Trade. The Ministry of Foreign
Trade retains management of just one foreign trade enterprise. for purchasing com-
plete sets of equipment.

In the Czechoslovak SSR. there are in addition to foreign trade enterprises subor-
dinate to the Federal Ministry of Foreign Trade, joint-stock societies managed by
the Ministry of Foreign Trade. but including as shareholders industrial associations.
foreign trade enterprises and a foreign trade bank. At the same time. about 20 in-
dustrial associations carry on foreign trade activity themselves.2

The differences noted result not only from dissimilar conditions under which the eco-
nomies of the individual countries operate, but also from different approaches to
solving this problem. The industrial associations were advanced to the fore in the
course of improving the organizational-economic participation of industrial produc-
tion in foreign economic activity. Raving assumed responsibility for the branch of
production subordinate to them in the course of the economic reforms. they received
broad powers to develop relations with foreign partners. In a majority of the so-
cialist countries, the industrial associations themselves determine the product as-
sortment produced by the enterprises comprising them. based on the principle of
maximum effectiveness. The associations have become conductors of structural
changes in the economy. initiators of accelerated development of the most effec-
tive types of production from the viewpoint of international specialization.

Heightening the role of the production link in the foreign economic sphere has had a
substantial impact on the work of the ministries of foreign trade. New functions ap-
peared for them: coordinating and supervising the activity of state agencies parti-
cipating in foreign economic ties, questions of international production and scien-
tific—technical cooperation. developing forecasts for the entire foreign economic
sphere.

Experience in improving economic ties shows that direct activity by production units
in foreign markets can be ensured given their active participation in international
specialization and production cooperation. strong dependence between exports and im-
ports. high profitability of the foreign trade operations they conduct. and the pro-
vision of skilled personnel. This is borne out by the work experience of such asso-
ciations as the "Karl Zeiss Jena"(CDR)."Balkankar" (PR3). "Medikor" (HPR). as their
proportion of export production has reached 60 percent or more.

Organizational measures have been accompanied by changes in the field of planning
foreign economic activity. As the experience of CEMA nations shows, one common di-
rection in improving the system of planning foreign ties has been implementation of

1"Verordnung uber Aufgaben. Rechte und Pflichten der Volkseigenen Aussen hadelsber-
iebe," in GEL. No 1, 1976. p 77.

2See: CHEKHOSLOVATSKAYA VNESHNYAYA TORCOVLYA. No 3, 1979.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

a comprehensive approach to planning them which is viewed as an integral part of na~
tional economic planning as a whole; ensuring the most efficient combination of cen-
tralized planned leadership with the initiative of the production and foreign trade
enterprises; creating joint interest within industry and the foreign economic appa-
ratus in carrying out export and import operations in the most effective way. In
this regard. the primary thing has been to involve industry more actively in plan-
ning, preparing and carrying out export operations. to increase its material inter-
est in increasing the production of export output and in improving the economic re-
sults of all foreign economic activity. Thus. in order to improve the combining of
centralized foreign economic activity management with development of the initiative
of associations. combine. enterprises and foreign trade organizations, the number of
centralized plan indicators has been restricted. assignments on export products lists
have been reduced and consolidated and the range of cost indicators has been expanded
and its importance increased. This has been one of the prerequisites for expanding
the operational independence of the enterprises. Another important trend has been

to broaden the circle of indicators reflecting the effectiveness of foreign economic

ties. Here. there has clearly been an effort to adapt planning to changing condi-
tions in foreign ties.

The general tasks facing the fraternal countries in developing the socialist inte-
gration process have resulted in the creation of a special element in the CEHA plan~
ning system to regulate expanding and deepening mutual economic. scientific and tech-
nical cooperation.1 The development of a new section reflecting integration assign-
ments for the five-year and annual plans of a majority of the CEHA nations plays a
leading role in this. The inclusion of integration measures as an integral part of
the national economic plans of the socialist states testifies t the intensified.
planned interaction of the economies of the integrating states.

The system of CEHA foreign economic ties as a whole includes medium-range (five-year)
and current (annual) plans. Increasing attention is being paid to forecasting for-
eign economic ties and working out the long-range strategy for developing them, to
using a program approach to planning foreign economic activity. The medium-range
plans are currently primary. One can trace in their development the same prepara-
tory phases as in the five-year national economic plan: analysis of development
trends in the up-coming period. defining specific tasks in view of the long-range
goals of economic policy and international agreements. The annual plans are based
on assignments set for the planning year in the five-year plans and are approved as
state plans. They are the operational plans of foreign economic ties and define the
specific tasks of their development.

It should be noted that medium-range and annual plans play a dissimilar role in the
development of foreign economic ties in different countries. Thus. their implemen-
tation is mandatory for enterprises as well in countries having approved long-range
plans at all levels. But in other states, the annual plan is considered mandatory

for the enterprises. There are differences in the amount and degree of centralized
foreign economic planning and planning such ties at enterprises in the CEHA nations.

1For greater detail. see: Bogomolov, 0. T.. "Strany sotsializma v mezhdunarodnom

razdelenii truda" [The Socialist Countries in the International Division of La-
bor], Izd-vo "Nauka". 1980. pp 199-207.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)R 0FF1CJA1.lEﬂE(HVLV

A significant role in planning foreign trade ties in CEHA countries belongs to pro-
duction combines. associations and enterprises. Their rights in making independent
decisions in the development and implementation of export production have been
broadened. Thus. economic units possess broad rights in approving the exports pro~
ducts list within the framework of the overall cost volumes for commodity groups as
established by the gosplsns and branch ministries.

In accordance with the directive and indirect indicators in the foreign trade plans
of the individual countries. substantial differences exist. but they share a cmmson
feature. that of carrying out the tasks stemming from long-term agreements among CEMA
countries on economic cooperation. In the HPR. for example, where indirect indica-
tors predominate. international agreement commodity lists are drawn up with the par-
ticipation of industrial enterprises and foreign trade organizations. which agree on
the terms under which they can assume implementation of these agreements. After
that. they are obligated to include these lists in their plans.

variants. The search for an optimum resolution to this particular problem obviously
cannot be considered over. For example. the GDR and Bulgaria concluded that export
cost planning is not adequate for selling output on foreign markets. But in the HPR.
there are practically no assignments set enterprises for exports at all.

Given continued improvement in the forms of ties between industry and foreign trade
in the socialist countries. organizational-planning measures are being combined with
economic ones. with improvement in the mechanism of cost accounting between the pro—
duction sphere and foreign trade activity. The basic line is to ensure the direct
participation of cost-accounting production associations and enterprises in profits
and losses from foreign trade operations, in changing over to the economic stimula-
tion of all participants in foreign economic ties as a function of the actual impact
of foreign trade activity. The dominant trend is towards converting the financial
results of foreign trade into one of the factors shaping the profit of production
enterprises. Thus. the Foreign Trade Law adopted in Rungary in l§74 anticipates the
introduction of integral cost-accounting elements into foreign economic activity.
setting prices based on calculations between industry and foreign trade for exports
and imports on the basis of actual foreign-trade prices recalculated in domestic cur-
rency. and strengthening material incentives for foreign trade and industry workers
for achieving the best import and export results.1

The same kinds of changes were also made in a number of other CEHA countries. At

the sane time. of course. the specific methods of including foreign trade results in
the overall results of economic activity are dissimilar. In a number of countries.
for example. national expenditures on exported output are evaluated in domestic whole-
sale priccs. and in others. foreign—trade prices are compared directly with output

net cost. However. the actual foreign-exchange receipts from exports are always re-
calculated. using special foreign-exchange calculation coefficients, into the national
currency and become part of coat-accounting organization revenues.

‘mmn KUZLONY. No 76. 1971..

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The foreign-exchange calculation coefficients on whose basis foreign trade prices
expressed in foreign currency are recalculated into the national currency have taken
on important significance in the cost-accounting ties of industry and foreign trade.
In content. these coefficients determine the "prices" of a specific unit of foreign
currency. They are used as instruments for internal calculation between industry
and foreign trade, as tools to set prices in an economically substantiated way and
to determine the effectiveness of the activity of organizations participating in
foreign economic ties. Their value depends wholly on the foreign-exchange effec-
tiveness of exports. Foreign-exchange coefficients are calculated based on the av-
erage national expenditures necessary to obtain a unit of foreign currency. The
overall purchasing power of a given currency or its gold content are not used in the
calculation. In this regard. two foreign-exchange coefficients generally operate.
those relating to the transfer ruble and those relating to the dollar.1

The actual effectiveness of foreign trade ties is determined with the help of these
foreign-exchange coefficients. which in turn enables us to work out on their basis
criteria for evaluating domestic and foreign economic activity and to introduce them
into the cost-accounting system for industrial and foreign trade enterprises. These

coefficients perform the role of export operations effectiveness normatives for cost-
accounting enterprises.2

The formation of profit on the base of a single financial result of production and
foreign trade activity stimulates an enterprise to lower production outlays. on the
one hand. and interests it in higher foreign trade prices. on the other. Enter-
prises with lower production expenditures. given identical foreign trade prices. re-
ceive more profit from product sales on the external market than do enterprises ex-
porting output with high production outlays. The importer also gains an opportunity
to compare expenditures associated with obtaining goods he needs from abroad with
prices for analogous goods made domestically.

In all the European CEHA countries. recalculating foreign-exchange revenues or ex-
penditures is supplemented by a system of financial levers which change the amount
of revenues from foreign trade left to the enterprise. These financial measures

--.----.-------...-

1In a number of CEHA countries. foreign-exchange coefficients have been transformed
into the sole official trade rate of exchange on whose basis foreign currency is
recalculated into domestic currencies. In particular. foreign rates of exchange
were transformed into trade-payment rates of exchange in Hungary in 1976. when it
also stopped quoting the forint on the basis of its previously established gold con-
tent (BANK SZEHmE, No 11. 1976). In Romania. a single foreign trade rate of ex-
change expressing the aversge ratio of domestic and foreign trade prices was intro-
duced. In this regard. the values of foreign exchange coefficients to the dollar
and to the transfer ruble have drawn closer to one another in a number of CEHA coun-
tries. Thus. $l was equivalent to 60 forints and the transfer ruble was equivalent
to 40 forints in the HPR in 1968; those ratios are now 1:32 and 1:28 forints, re-
spectively. In the PR3, the dollar and transfer ruble ratios were 1:1.6 and 1:1.3
lev in 1971. and they are now 1:0.9752 and 1:0. respectively.

’ror more detail. see: H. s. Lyubskiy. L. Kh. Sulyayeva and v. n. Shastitko. "Val-
yutnyye i kreditnyye otnosheniya strsn SZV" [CEHA foreign Exchange and Credit Re-
lations]. Izd-wo Nauka. 1978.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE¢DNLY

bear different names. but the essence is the same - they amortize the undesireable
effects of foreign-trade price changes on the cost-accounting results of the acti-
vity of enterprises and associations. making up, when necessary. for differences be~
tween actual production expenditures and foreign trade receipts.

The size of the subsidy is determined on the basis of export and import delivery
plans, generally in the form of price surcharges. The amounts are differentiated
by individual enterprise or commodity group as a function of the profitability of
the export or import. This system is especially well-developed in the urn. Exp :t
subsidies here are included in the overall financial results of enterprises and in-
crease their profit. Hhen profit from foreign trade operations substantially ex-
ceeds that needed to run enterprise cost accounting. deductions from export profit
to the budget are applied. Such a system combines material stimulation of produc-
tion efficiency growth in associations and enterprises effected through internal
factors with encouragement for the effective development of foreign economic ties.
A direct comparison of production expenditures with foreign trade prices stimulates

making the export structure more efficient and lowering enterprise production out-
lays.

The growth spurt in world prices in recent years has caused a significant gap be-
tween foreign-trade and domestic prices. which gap is increasing for reasons not
dependent on the enterprises. leading to growth in subsidies allocated basically to
importers within the system of regulating domestic prices for imported goods. At
the same time. the excess exporter profit generated in connection with the rise in
foreign-trade prices is deducted to the budget. for subsequent redistribution. and
in particular. to subsidize imports. For example, the HPR has since 1976 used a
production tax1 to neutralize losses arising as a result of change in the condi-
tions of foreign economic activity. With a view towards adapting to altered trade
market conditions. calculation coefficients (3P3) or adjusted surcharges (GDR. Czech
SSR) have been anticipated.

Recent improvement in foreign economic ties management in the European CEHA coun-

tries by disseminating cost-accounting principles to the economic ties of industry
and foreign trade has facilitated strengthening planning. organizational and cost-
accounting relations between them and the creation of a united interest in improv-
ing the effectiveness of foreign economic activity.

Of course, that does not signify that no problems have arisen in the course of op-
erating the systems for managing foreign economic ties in CEHA countries. Thus, we
thought, in restructuring the system for stimulating foreign economic ties. to create
an economic mechanism which would arouse enterprises to expand export production in
every way possible. In practice. however. it turned out that the use of cost cate-
gories did not solve the problem of expanding export deliveries or improving their
effectiveness in many instances. we did not succeed in fully solving the problems
arising in improving the effectiveness of imports either. This resulted. in par-
ticular, from the fact that granting foreign-trade rights to industrial links.
along with its positive results. intensified the departmental approach to solving
export and import problems and led in part to ignoring national economic interests.
The multistage organizational structure of foreign economic activity management and
the dual subordination of foreign trade organizations definitely complicated rela-
tions between industry and foreign trade in the economic-agreement system.

__.__—-------———---

Imam: xéztb'mr, No 1. 1977.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In particular, 6. Husak noted. in speaking about the management of foreign economic
activity in Czechoslovakia. that "the current level of cooperation between production
and trade is not satisfactory."1 "Industrial enterprises and foreign trade organiza-
tions must learn to be oriented more flexibly and efficiently towards the actual de-
mand in foreign markets for sales of our goods." said 3. aonecker. "This requires
first of all even greater joint efforts by industry and foreign trade in the area of
utilizingzmarkets for our exports and assumes the organization of efficient, reliable
aervice.‘

The Romanian press has pointed out the lack of coordination in work between the Min-
istry of Foreign Trade and International Economic Cooperation and the branch minis-
tries. It has noted the necessity of greater coordination among all economic organ-
izations in the area of foreign economic ties. of creating a single export-import
agency with a view towards monitoring progress in making export deliveries.

In this connection, a majority of the CEHA countries have constantly improved the
planning, organizational and cost-accounting tools for managing foreign economic ties.
Thus, in Hungary, world market prices have become a deciding factor in price forma-
tion for output of a majority of branches which are primarily export in orientation.
beginning in 1980. This relates to exports to both capitalist and socialist coun-
tries, inasmuch as CEHA market contract prices are generally set based on world
prices. The import price at which raw materials.energy carriers and a portion of

the basic materials and semifinished products are acquired in capitalist and social-
ist markets has been adopted as the normative basis for wholesale prices. The export
price at which the output of processing branches of industry can be sold in the non-
socialist market (the price of exports. in dollars, recalculated to forints based on
a foreign-exchange coefficient) has become the basis of prices for that output.

The improved system of state subsidies is aimed at creating normal conditions for en-
terprise operation. Some subsidies are constant and others temporary, intended for
replacement every 4-5 years. during which time enterprises must have reached a high
level of profitability. In the opinion of Hungarian economists. these measures must
facilitate improvement in the structure of industry. improving its efficiency, fore-
most from the viewpoint of developing branches specialized for exports, branches
whose output is sufficiently competitive to be in demand in a foreign market.3

Similar steps are being taken in Bulgaria‘; Czechoslovakia plans such steps for the
current five-year plan. Improvement in domestic price formation along this line is
one of the leading trends in developing systems to stimulate foreign economic acti-
vity in CEMA countries. Changing over to such a system of forming domestic whole-
sale prices results from the objective character of European CEHA-country participa-
tion in the international division of labor.

--“——-—-.-----—

I"XV s"yezd Kommunisticheskoy partii Chekhoelovakii" [15th Congress of the Czechoslo-
vak Cammunist Party]. Izd-vo Politizdat. 1977. p 55.

2"Ix s"yezd Sotsialisticheskoy yedinoy partii Germanii“ [9th Congress of the Social-
ist Unity Party of Germany]. Izd-vo Politizdat. 1977. p 82.

’MAGYAR szLBNY. No 12. 1979.
"n‘mzmvsn vasmm. No 90. 1979.

9
F0R10FFNJALVUSE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Countries of the socialist community (Bulgaria. Romania and Czechoslovakia. for ex-
ample) have recently begun creating mixed companies. with the participation of Heat-
ern-country capital, in various spheres of economic activity (industry. trade. bank-
ing). Thus. the formation of mixed companies with Western companies is regulated in
Bulgaria by State Soviet Ukaze No 535. under which contractual cooperation within
the PRB and other countries is permitted in the form of industrial cooperation and
mixed companies for the purposes of increasing production and exports. including
foreign-exchange receipts and increased efficiency of economic activity. All ques-
tions of joint economic activity are defined in the agreement. which is concluded
with the permission of the PRB Council of Ministers. A mixed company agreement can
be concluded for a period not to exceed 15 years. and the proportion of foreign ca-
pital is not to exceed 50 percent. In this regard. it is anticipated that the deci-
sions of the nixed coapany supervisory agency will be made only on the basis of the
principle of unanimity and that its chairman must be a Bulgarian citizen.1 Mixed com-
panies currently play a definite role in the system of foreign economic activity
management. They include. for example. these joint enterprises created in Hungary:
"Vol'kom" -- to produce Land Rover-type all-terrain vehicles with the participation
of Volvo Company of Sweden; "Radelkor" -- to produce blood analyzers with the parti-
cipation of Corning Medical Company of Britain; "Sikontakt-KPT". with the participa-
tion of Interkooperatsion foreign trade organization of Hungary and Siemens Conpany
of the PRC -— to produce electric motors. household appliances. medical apparatus
and computer equipment. In Play 1980. the Hungarian "Biogam" pharmaceuticals enter-
prise and the Swedish "Tsima" joint-stock company signed an agreement on founding a
joint pharmaceuticals enterprise to produce the new treatment preparation "Gatergen."

In joint enterprises, the Hungarian organizations possess a controlling block of
shares. This ensures that they will control the activity of the enterprises. For-
eign contributors provide technical documentation. deliver complete sets of parts
and assist in exporting the output. A Bank of Central Europe was created in Buda-
pest in 1979; its founders were the National Bank of Hungary and banks in Italy,
the PRC, Britain, Austria. France and Japan. Bank charter capital was $25 million.
with credit assets of $15 million. National Bank of Hungary's proportion of the
bank's capital has reached 310 percent. The bank is called upon to jointly finance
trade with countries of the West and make joint capital investments in developing
the services sphere. to serve as a source of funds in reversible foreign exchange.
It can also service joint operations between bank participants and third-party coun-
tries. Al.l bank operations must be carried out only in reversible foreign exchange.2
The "Rifil" Romanian-Italian enterprise. "Roakontrol Deyta" Romanian-American en-
terprise. "Roniprot" Romanian-Japanese enterprise and others operate in the Social—
ist Republic of Romania.

The formation of mixed companies is called upon to facilitate saving capital invest-
ments in creating new production capacities. setting up large-scale production and
raising the technical level of the products released based on use of the latest
equipment and technology.

Individual CDiA member-nations grant Western partners broad opportunities for econo-
mic act ivity. as is borne out by an analysis of normative doclnnents on the creation

-------------—--.-

‘n"a2HAVEN VESTNIK, No 25. 1980.

’MAGYAR HIRLAP. No 263, 10 November 1975.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1ICJAI.USEGDNLY

of mixed companies. In particular. the sphere of their activity can be any branch
of the economy. Hestern partners are granted a number of major privileges. as for
example. the free use of their portion of the profit in the country or taking it out
of the country. free either «artially or completely from profit taxes. and so forth.
As of now. only a comparatively small number of nixed companies has been created.
They are actually just beginning their activity. It is therefore not possible at
this point to evaluate their influence on the development of the economies of the
countries in which they have been created.

The experience of CEHA countries in the area of managing foreign economic ties is
doubtless of interest and needs to he comprehensively studied and thought out. In
our opinion, it is of definite importance to further improvement in planning, man-
aging and stimulating foreign economic activity in the USSR. naturally with consi-
deration of the specifics of our national economy and mmasures being implemented in
the area of managing foreign economic tiee.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voproay ekonomiki". 1981

11052
C80: 1825/34

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR Ul'l'lblhlu 03!. URL!

USSR-CEHA TRADE

cm man-NATION 1980 scouomc RESULTS, 1981 PLANS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 5, Hey 81 pp 115-125
[Article by L. Tarasov: "CEHA Nation Economies: 1980 Results and 1981 Plans"]

[Text] Implementation of the CEHA nations' socioeconomic development programs out-
lined by the communist and worker party congresses for 1976-1980 was completed in
1980. Their results reflected the development trends which evolved in the 1970's
and simultaneously determined the directions of socioeconomic progress we are faced
with broadening and deepening in the 1980's.

The scale of social production has increased appreciably in CEHA nations in this
past five-year period. its technical base has been strengthened and the well-being
of the people has been improved. Production and scientific ties have been broadened
and deepened on principles of mutual cooperation. Measures anticipated in the Com-
prehensive Program of Further Deepening and Perfecting Socialist Economic Integra-
tion have been implemented. assisting the economic interaction and mutual supple-
mentation of the national economic complexes and the more effective use of economic
resources.

The material-technical foundation of improving social relations and expanding the
opportunities of socialist society in the field of spiritual and cultural develop-
ment of the fraternal peoples has been a substantial increase in and modernization
of the production apparatus and improvement in the qualitative parameters of nach-
inery and equipment.

As compared with 1975. fixed production assets for CEHA nations as a whole grew by
more than 00 percent. The significant scope of expansion of the material base of
production has permitted appreciable up-deting of the technical base for developing
the most important branches of the material sphere. At the same time. opportunities
for saving working time and reducing the number of workers employed at physical and
unattractive labor have increased.

Quantitative and structural changes in the material-technical base have been a most
important element in economic strategy to ensure production growth while reducing
working time expenditures per unit of output. As a result of improved labor produc-
tivity. four-fifths of the increment in aggregate national income was ensured.

Substantial quantitative and qualitative changes occurred in the production of meter-
ial resources. For CEHA nations as a whole. national income increased 22 percent in

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTNC1AI.USE4MNLY

1976-1980. The proportion of industry, construction and branches of the circulation
sphere increased steadily in its structure. The proportion of agriculture and lumber-
ing in the production of material resources decreased appreciably. However. the re-
lative reduction in agriculture's proportion of the social product was noted given

an absolute increase in agricultural production volume. As compared with 1971-1975.
branch gross output over the last five-year period grew by nine percent for CEMA nae
tions as a whole.

In the sphere of interstate economic relations. countries of the socialist community
continued to carry out joint measures in production and science on a long-term basis.
This introduced new qualitative features into cooperation processes and raised the
level of planning. organizing and managing the international socialist division of
labor.

Given undisputed achievements in the area of socioeconomic and scientific-technical
progress. the fraternal countries had to overcome difficulties and solve difficult
problems in their own socialist and communist development.

"The change-over to intensive development of the economy." the CPSU Central Commit-
tee Accountability Report to the 26th Party Congress noted. "implementation of major
social programs and shaping communist awareness - all this does not come right away.
He need both time and tireless creative searching."

After an appreciable increase in the average yields of the main grain. fodder and
commercial crops in 1971-1975. the dynamics of agricultural growth indicators have
gradually decreased in a majority of the European CIHA countries. The balance ties
between plant growing and stockraising are more complicated now. which has led to re-
tardation of the dynamicity of stockraising development and to a diminished stabiliz-
ing role for this branch in the development of agricultural production as a whole.

A trend towards higher availability of capital to live labor was noted this past
five-year period. However. that process was accompanied by a persistent trend to-
wards reduction in national economic return on capital in all countries.

The reliability of the supply of raw material. fuel and materials to the national
economy and making their consumption more efficient in every way possible has been
an important condition for ensuring dynamic economic development in 1976-1980. The
extensive use of recovered raw material and production scrap has become an import-
ant direction in solving this problem in recent years.

A more complex situation has evolved in the foreign economic sphere. The deteriora-
tion of world economic market conditions and the sharp price jumps in the capitalist
market have negatively affected foreign-trade exchange conditions in a majority of
CEHA countries and have, as a consequence. led to increased sales of exports over
imports per unit of foreign-exchange expenditures.

The technical level of the production apparatus has risen slower than planned.

Overcoming such restrictions on economic growth as the manpower deficit. shortages
of individual types of raw material and fuel. imbalance in the economy and higher
national economic capital intensiveness has required the development and implemen-
tation of a system of economic. organizational and social measures ensuring growth

13
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FIHICMHWCIAL.USE(NVLY

in the technical level of production. improvement in the financial planning mechan-
ism of management and the development of intra-production democracy and the active-
ness of labor collectives.

In the aggregate. this system. whose development and adjustment continues. will fa-
cilitate increasing the effectiveness of socialist management methods inherent to
an intensive direction of economic growth at all levels of the national economy.

Material production growth dynamics and production intensification have in the final
analysis determined the volume and structure of material resources for (production
and nonproduction) consumption and accumulation.

As compared with 1975. real per capita incomes for GINA countries as a whole have
risen 18 percent. Labor revenues and the level of social security. medical, cul-
tural and personal services have risen appreciably. Nearly 16.9 million apartments
have been built. permitting improvement in the housing conditions of 60 million peo-
ple.

Along a number of lines. the economic development trends of this past five-year per-
iod were most distinct in 1980. This influenced the overall economic growth para-
meters for 1976-1980 and were taken into account to one degree or another in CEHA
countries when working out 1981 economic policies.

Aggregate production volumes for material resources and the basic proportions and

quantitative indicators of their distribution are characterized by the following
1980 data:

Dynamics of National Income Production in CEHA Countries in 1980 (1979 - 1C0)

Bulgaria 105.7 Poland 96
Hungary 99.2 Romania 102.5
can 104.2 Czechoslovakia 103
Republic of Cuba 106 USSR 103.5
Mongolia 103.6

For CEHA countries as a whole. national income increased 2.6 percent in 1980. More
than 70 percent of that increment was ensured by the development of industry and con-
struction and approximately three-fourths by increased labor productivity.

The practical implementation of steps to change the economy over to primarily an in-
tensive path of development was substantially based on the factor of saving material
resources. In the GDR for instance. national income growth was ensured given a re-
duction in the consumption of primary energy resources and given retention or an in-
significant increase in consumption of raw and other materials. In ﬂungary. energy
consumption in the national economy did not increase in 1979-1980. In the Soviet
Union. expenditures of raw and other materials, fuel and other objects of labor de-
creased per ruble of gross social product.

The policy of making the investment cycle more efficient - limiting and concentrat-
ing construction work. raising the proportion of capital investment in renovating
and modernizing existing production and reducing the amount of unfinished construc-
tion - exerted an appreciable influence on the distribution of material resources.

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 051WCLAL USEZCNVLY

Aggregate capital investments for the community as a whole increased approximately
1.2 to 1.5 percent. but their dynamics in cans countries other than the PRB [Peo-
ples Republic of Bulgaria] and NPR [Hongolian Peoples Republic] vere lower than na-
tional income dynamics. However. as a result of improvement in the investment cycle.
the increment in fixed production assets remained high (from 4.6 percent in the GDR
to 9.6 percent in the SRR [Socialist Republic of Romania]). This facilitated con-
tinued improvement in labor productivity and in the conditions under which labor
functions.

Industry made the largest contribution to developing the national economic complexes
of CBHA countries. Aggregate gross output of the branch increased 3.3 percent in
1980.

Dynamics of Gina-Country Industrial Output in 1980 (1979 I 100)

Bulgaria 103.9 Poland 98.7
Hungary 98.4 Romania 106.5
608 104.7 Czechoslovakia 103.2
Republic of Cuba 103 USSR 103.6
Mongolia 110

As a result of the outstripping growth of branches which determine scientific and
technical progress and an increased proportion of machine building and chemistry in
overall industrial production. modernization of its structure intensified and indus-
try's opportunities in terms of meeting the needs of the national economy increased
on the basis of the release of technically improved items and a greater degree of
processing of initial rev and other materials.

Improving labor productivity plays a decisive role in increasing industrial produc-
tion.

Dynamics of Labor Productivity in Industry in CEHA Countries in 1980 (1979 - 100)

Bulgaria 102.6 Poland 99
Hungary 101.1 Romania 104.2
GDR 106.6 Czechoslovakia 102.5
Republic of Cuba 106.5 USSR 102.6
Mongolia 108.6

For CEHA countries as a whole. labor productivity accounted for approximately three-
fourths of the increment in industrial output.

Branch changes in industry in individual countries uere connected with meeting social
needs more fully and with strengthening the balance in the economy.

In Bulgaria. electric power engineering (8.6 percent increment). chemistry (11.3 per-
cent), machine-building and metalworking (6.3 percent) vere developed faster than
other branches. The production of wool and silk fabric increased appreciably. In
Hungary. production oriented towards exports. as well as garment production and the
printing industry. received priority development. It continued reducing or stopped
the production of unprofitable items. In the GDR. growth rates continued high in

the development of microelectronics (a 16.5 to 28 percent increment for individual
groups of items). plastics (10 percent) and consumer goods in great demand. In the

15
roa OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

Republic of Cuba. electric and thermal electric power engineering. timber. wood pro-
cessing. pulp and paper industry output grew at an accelerated rate. In Romania.
high rates of growth were noted in machine building and metalworking (10 percent).
chemistry (seven percent) and branches of light industry (9-10 percent). In the So-
viet Unior. growth in electric power engineering (five percent). chemical and petro-
chemical .Jdustry (six percent). machine tools with numerical preset control (11 per-
cent). computer equipment (1b percent). garments and furniture (five percent) was
higher than the industrial average. In Czechoslovakia. the production of nuclear
power plant equipment (8.4 percent). computers and equipment for construction and
roadbuilding work (11.5 percent) and microelectronic circuits (51.9 percent) has
grown more dynamically.

The implementation of major investment measures (accounting for 30-50 percent of the
total industrial capital investment in individual CEHA countries) ensured growth in

production potential and facilitated growth in output and a higher branch technical
level.

In Bulgaria. they began operating the third turbine unit of Maritsa-Vostok-3 TETs.
the third reactor at Kozloduy AES. capacities at the petrochemical combine in Burgas.
a plant to produce chlorine. vinylchloride and polyvinylchloride in Devno, and other
facilities.

In Hungary. production capacities increased in electric power engineering. coal in-
dustry. metallurgy. chemistry. construction industry. machine tool manufacturing and
footwear industry. In the GDR. three l75-HH units in Harkersbach. rolling mills. a
plant to produce electric steel. capacities to produce potassium fertilizers. elec-
trical and electronics capacities. facilities to produce devices and control mechan-
isms and equipment to produce consumer goods became operational.

In the Republic of Cuba. about 70 industrial facilities began operating, including
two sugar refineries. two dairies. a glucose plant. eight house-building combines.
a power unit for the Rents thermal electric power plant. a textile mill and others.

In Mongolia. the second line of Erdenet ore-enrichment combine and the high-voltage
Ulan-Bator - Nalaykha - Bags-Nut electric power transmission line were put up and
work was done on expanding. renovating and creating many industrial enterprises with
the technical and economic assistance of the USSR.

In Romania. the production potential of the coal. chemical. footwear. furniture and
knitwear industries. machine tool manufacturing. agricultural machine building and
motor vehicle building increased.

In the USSR. 240 large state industrial enterprises became operational. Capacities
were put into operation to produce 13.1 million kilowatts of electric power. 9.9
million tons (conventional units) of mineral fertilizers. 517.000 tons of synthetic
resins and plastics and 15 million tons of coal.

In Czechoslovakia. the Yaslovsk-Bogunitsa A28, a SOD-HR unit at Hel'nik III power
plant. Matador plant in Bratislava and a wire mill in Glogoveta were put into opera-
tion.

Labor productivity growth and the start-up of new enterprises and capacities enabled
CEHA countries to produce 1.726 billion kH-hr of electric power in 1980 (an increase

16 ~
FOR OF11C1A1.USE(MNL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 6.4 percent), to mine 1 359 million tons of anthracite and lignite. to extract
617.5 million tons of petroleum and 665 billion cubic meters of natural and easing-
head gas.

As compared with 1979. the development of chemical industry accelerated. Aggregate
mineral fertilizer production. recalculated to nutrients. was 38.5 million tons (an
increment of 7.2 percent). of plastics and synthetic resins - 6.5 million tons (an
increment of 8.2 percent), and of chemical fibers - about 2.2 million tons (an in-
crement of 5.6 percent).

In machine building. machine tool manufacture was developed at higher rates.

Growth in industrial production has broadened opportunities for supplying agricul-
ture with modern equipment. a growing volume of mineral fertilizers and chemical
means of plant protection. This has enabled us to raise the level of mechanization
of agricultural jobs and to increase the amount of reclaimed land which, along with
the introduction of industrial methods of production and a higher level of farming
standards and management. has diminished the impact of unfavorable weather condi-
tions and has facilitated ensuring that the population will be supplied with basic
foodstuffs.

As compared with 1979. gross agricultural output in 1980 was 95 percent in the PR3.

103.4 percent in the HPR. 100.2 percent in the GDR. 87 percent in the NPR, 90.6 per-
cent in the PRP [Peoples Republic of Poland]. 95 percent in the SR3. 106 percent in

the Czechoslovak SSR and 97 percent in the USSR.

In spite of extremely unfavorable weather conditions. production volume increased
steadily this past five-year period. thanks to the intensification of management.

Growth in CEHA-Country Gross Agricultural Output During 1976-1980. in 2 of 1971-1975

Bulgaria 111 Poland 102
ﬂungary 115 Romania 126.4
003 106 Czechoslovakia 109
Mongolia 106 USSR 109

In 1980, CEHA countries (excluding the Socialist Republic of Vietnam) harvested 271
million tons of grains and legumes. six percent more than in 1979. The features of
the results of this economic year are described by the following tendencies. In
Bulgaria. harvests were good for wheat (1b.6 percent increment) and apples (27.4
percent) in 1980. but gross harvests of sunflower seeds. tobacco and sugar beets
were down. The number of poultry increased (by 1.6 percent). and the number of head
of sheep and hogs decreased slightly (by one percent). In nungary. the gross wheat
harvest was six million tons, 63 percent higher than the 1979 level. and the produc-
tion of olives and fruit increased. Vegetable and potato harvests decreased some-
what. Ue can note that wheat yields averaged 40.6 q/ha in 1976-1980 and corn yields
68.6 q/ha. seven quintals higher than in 1971—1975. Steady growth in the production
of meat.nn1k and several other stockraiaingproductswas also achieved in the last
five-year period. Calculated per resident. meat production reached 190 kg (live
weight). Skillful work by agricultural cooperatives and enterprises. along with
ensuring that the food needs of the population were met. permitted an appreciable
increase in exports of agricultural and food-industry output (by 26 percent in 1976-

17
FOR¢DFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
90'10FFKJA1.USEZONLY

1980). The 60R obtained a good grain harvest (nine percent more than in 1979) and
yields increased over 1976-1979 averages for a majority of crops. In stockrsising.
the number of head of all types of livestock. as well as the production of milk.
meat and eggs. increased. In the Republic of Cuba. gross harvests of grain. vege-
tables and fruit increased. In Mongolia. 1980 weather was extremely unfavorable and
gross grain harvests dropped (by 22 percent). as did the number of head of cattle.
sheep and horses (by 2-3 percent).

In Poland. gross plant-cultivation output decreased by 15.2 percent. due basically to
a decrease of 23.2 million tons in the potato harvest and a drop of 3.8 million tons
in the sugar beet harvest. Gross grain harvests increased 7.2 percent. Heat pro-
duction (slaughter weight) was 3.2 million tons (a reduction of 2.6 percent). milk

- 16.2 billion liters (a reduction of 1.6 percent) and eggs - 8.9 billion (an in-
crement of 2.1 percent).

Romania obtained a good grain harvest (especially of wheat). but gross harvests of
sugar beets. sunflower seeds. vegetables and fruit were down. The number of head of
livestock remained at the 1979 level.

In the USSR. the gross harvest of grain and legumes was 189.2 million tons (106 per-
cent of the 1979 level). sugar beets - 79.6 million tons (106 percent). sunflower
seeds -- 6.65 million tons (87 percent). vegetables - 25.9 million tons (95 per-
cent). meat production -- 15.1 million tons. milk - 90.7 nillion tons. wool -
661.700 tons (somewhat below the 1979 level) and eggs - 67.7 billion (more than in
1979).

In Czechoslovakia. the gross grain harvest was 10.762 million tons (an increment of
18 percent). with yields of 61.3 q/ha. Production of olives and perennial fodder
crops (hay) also increased. Due to unfavorable conditions. potato and sugar beet
harvests decreased. Production of the basic stockraising products increased --
meat (by 1.6 percent). milk (by 5.5 percent) and eggs (by 5.6 percent).

CEHA foreign economic ties were further developed in 1980. Foreign trade turnover as
a whole was 226 billion rubles. a 16.2 percent increase as compared with 1979. Reci-
procal trade accounted for 120 billion rubles.

Rates of Foreign Trade Turnover Growth in CEHA Countries in 1980 (1979 . 100)

Bulgaria 116.1 Poland 106.8
Hungary 113.6 Romania 123.2
GDR 110 Czechoslovakia 111
Republic of Cuba 117.9 USSR 117.2
Mongolia 116.3

The broadening and deepening of integration ties was an important qualitative element
in the development of reciprocal trade. In 1980. over 120 multilateral and more than
1,000 bilateral production specialization and cooperation agreements were in effect.
They included an agreement signed in 1980 on multilateral international specializa-
tion in the area of producing nuclear power plant equipment in 1981-1990. with deli-
veries totalling several billion rubles. In machine building along. specialization
covered more than 10.000 products. The coordination of OSHA-country national econo-
mic plans for 1981-1985 was practically completed in 1980.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scope of material resources production and the nature and direction of their dis-
tribution determined opportunities for raising the standards of living and culture

of the population in CEHA countries in 1980. The intensiveness of the rise in none-
tary and in-kind revenues from labor. payments from social funds. as well as society's
expenditures on broadening the material base of social. cultural. housing and personal
services and on improving working conditions. restoring and protecting the environ-
eent. influence the dynamics of growth in the well-being of the people.

Real per capita incomes rose by 2.8 percent as compared with 1979 for CEHA countries
as a whole. In Bulgaria. the increment was 2.7 percent. in the GDR - three percent.
in Mongolia - 3.5 percent. in Romania - 1.7 percent. and in the USSR - 3.5 percent.
This indicator exceeded the 1979 level slightly in Poland and Czechoslovakia and de-
creased by 0.5 percent in Hungary.

Monetary payments for the labor of workers and employees rose in all CBHA countries.
For the individual countries. its increment ranged from two to 13 percent. At the
same time. more attention was paid to differentiating the distribution of monetary
revenues from labor as one of the directions for making the use of labor resources
more efficient. Pension and grant payments rose and the material base of education.

culture and personal services was broadened. This helped further solidify the so-
cial guarantees of citizens.

The task of increasing retail commodity turnover was resolved in conformity with the
growth in incomes. The dynamics of its volume were. by individual country. compared
with 1979: Bulgaria - 103 percent, Bungary - 100 percent. the GDR -- 104.3 per-
cent. Hongolia'e- 104.1 percent. Poland - 100.6 percent. Romania - 106.6 percent.
Czechoslovakia -- 102 percent. the USSR - 105.3 percent. In terns of groups of
nonfood goods. the availability of refrigerators. washing machines. television sets.
passenger cars and other durables to the population rose. This permitted practical
satisfaction of demand as a whole for a majority of then with the level of produc-
tion capacities already achieved in CEHA countries. however. in this regard. the
problem of meeting the demand for high-quality. stylish goods remains.

The volume of services offered the population increased appreciably in all CEMA
countries. Housing construction on a broad scale has been an important part of the
social programs. In Bulgaria. 74.200 apartments were built. in Hungary - 89.300.
in the GDR - 169.200. in the Republic of Cuba - 16.500. in Mongolia -- 5.600. in
Poland -- 163.000 (public sector). in Romania - 197.200. in Czechoslovakia -
127.800. and in the USSR -- 2.055 million. The availability of children's insti-
tutions. general education and vocational training rose in all CIHA countries. me-
dical services improved. the number of instructional and entertainment institutions
and the number of copies of publications printed increased.

In 1981. CEHA countries begin carrying out the new five-year socioeconomic develop-
ment plans. As an integral part of long-range communist and worker party policy.
this year's plans contain a number of common provisions. They are oriented towards
ensuring continued growth in the well-being of the people on the basis of steady
economic growth. the effective use of material resources and production potential.
and improvement in work quality.

The planned rates of national economic development are to be achieved by broadly
intensifying the economy. through labor productivity growth. by reducing expenditures

19
FOR OPIlC1A1.USII(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of energy and materials and by the better use of fixed assets. The policy of improv~
ing the effectiveness of social production by using the achievements of scientific
and technical progress will be continued. To do this. measures have been outlined

to strengthen the ties between science and production. to improve the quality of

velopment. A substantial place has been given to capital construction. Capital in-
vestment policy is aimed at improving the effectiveness of updating. modernising and
broadening the material-technical base. at eliminating obsolete fixed assets and in-

it. He have anticipated better use of the foreign economic factor of growth, ensur-

nomy is being strengthened. for which purpose we are planning to utilize new types
of highly productive. economical equipment. to expand the release of high unit-capa-
city equipment. automatic and semiautomatic lines.

We intend to develop agriculture foremost by raising crop yields and livestock pro-
ductiveness. reclamation and chemization. the better use of the technical means of

the branch. strengthening the fodder base. and forming stable. effective intercon-

nections within the agroindustrial complex framework.

National economic plans are oriented towards further improving the material well-
being of the people. towards the all-around development of people. Their systematic.
steady implementation includes steps to ensure that the standard of living of each
worker corresponds to his labor contribution to the development of society. Along
with the change-over to actualizing the directions of socioeconomic plans up to 1985

and for longer periods. the 1981 national economic plans also reflect tasks of a more
concrete nature. -

The PRB national economic plan anticipates growth of 4.8 percent in social labor pro-
ductivity, which will enable it to ensure practically the entire increase in national
income. The revenues and profits of economic organizations will be increased (profit
increment of 16 percent). To do this. they plan to raise the production equipment

struction. to modernizing and renovating existing capacities. The construction front
isbeingreduced by nearly 600 projects in 1981.

The plan anticipates continued improvement in the production structure along the line
of ensuring proportionality between auxiliary. service and concluding stages of the

production process. between vertical and horizontal specialization and cooperation in
the release of output.

Electric and thermal electric power engineering output will increase 7.2 percent, fer-
rous metallurgy -- 10.1 percent. machine building - 8.1 percent. chemical and rubber
industry -- 11 percent.

20
FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dynamics of 1981 CEHA-Country Basic National Economic Indicators (in percent of 1980)

national industrial gross agricul- retail trade per capita

income output total output turnover real income
Bulgaria 5.! 5.6 6.7 6.8 3.1
Hungary 2-2.5 3-3.s 3.0 1-1.5 1.0
can 5.0 5.8’ 0.85 4.0 4.0‘
Republic of Cuba 3.91 4.0 4.0 4.0
Mongolia 9.0 9.5 17.09 5.5 4.07
Romania 7.0 8.1‘ 9.0' 6.0 3.4'
Czechoslovakia 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.3 3.37
03511 3.43 4.1 4.9 2.9
Key:

1. Social product

2. National income used

3. In the industrial ministries sphere

6. Net output

5. Output of agriculture and food industry
6. Net monetary incomes of the population
7. Monetary incomes of the population

8. Real wage

9. On average. as compared with 1976-1979

The decisive direction in which agriculture is to be developed is seen as grain and
meat production which. in combination with growth in light industry (2.4 percent) and
food industry (3.5 percent). will permit improvement in supplying the population with
foodstuffs and nonfood goods. In the foreign economic sphere (com-odity circulation
increment of 8.3 percent). the participation of countries in socialist economic inte-
gration on a multilateral and bilateral basis will be broadened and deepened. and
trade turnover with nonsocialist countries will also grow.

Some 160,000 new apartments will be built and the population will be provided with
more industrial services. kindergartena and medical services.

HPR 1981 primary economic activity tasks are to improve balance in the economy. fore-
most in foreign trade (increment of 7.5 to eight percent in exports and imports some-
what higher thsn the 1980 level). retention of the level of material consumption al-
ready achieved by the population and improvement in living conditions.

National income used for consumption and accumulation will not grow. given a one-
percent increase in consumption by the population. Production development is asso-
ciated in considerable measure with increasing exports. The entire increment is be-
ing ensured through higher social labor productivity (the number of employees in in-
duatry. construction and agriculture is decreasing). As a result of saving material
resources and making their consumption structure more efficient, the dynamics of ma-
terial expenditures in the economy will not exceed the dynamics of output production.

In industry, modernization of the production structure is being accelerated. and we
plan the more dynamic release of means of communication. vacuum equipment. apparatus.
nedications and chemicals. To attain these goals. there are programs for developing

21
I113 OFTNCJAI.IJSEZ(N‘lY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aluminum. petrochemical and pharmaceutical industries, the production of means of
plant protection. spare parts and subassemblies. as well as programs for improving
the power system and expanding the use of scrap and recovered raw material. In the
investment sphere. capital investments are being concentrated on completing construc-
tion in progress. New expenditures are anticipated for developing the energy and raw
material complex. profitable exports and effective import substitution. Steps have
been planned to strengthen the balance between construction capacities and client
orders.

In agriCulture. the production of vegetables. fruit. commercial crops and stockrais-
ing output is being expanded. A large part of the increment in agricultural and
food industry output is planned for export.

In the area of consumption. given a retail trade turnover increase of one to 1.5 per-
cent, the supply of goods to the population will be improved by expanding the assort-
ment of products in demand. The plan is to raise the average nominal wage and the
retail price level by 4.5 to five percent. Individual earnings will grow as a func-
tion of the qualitative and quantitative results of labor activity. In social se-
curity. the actual level of pension security will be retained and supplements to fan-
ilies with three or more children will be increased. The plan is to build 76.000 to
78.000 apartments and also to improve medical and social services to the population.

SRV 1981 basic directions of socioeconomic development are connected with improving
the use of the country's labor and land resources. making the investment process
more efficient. improving the sphere of distribution and circulation by strengthen-
ing the monetary and financial system. improving price formation and wages and rais-
ing the level of socioeconomic management.

In agriculture. reliance is being placed on solving the food problem. In 1981. the
plan is to harvest 15 million tons of food crops. The area sown to basic agricul-

tural crops will be expanded. In stockraising. the plan is to increase the number

of head by two percent. Twenty-five percent of all capital investment will be di-

rected into developing the branch and into irrigation. As compared with 1980. pro-
curements of foodstuffs will be increased by 50 percent. including a 48-percent in-
crease for swine. 50 percent for fresh-water fish. 3.2-fold for soybeans. two-fold

for tobacco and more than twoofold for sugar cane.

In industry. efforts will be concentrated on increasing the production of basic types
of output -- electric power (six percent). coal (10 percent), chemical fertilizers.
cement (67 percent) sugar (18 percent) and silk fabric (16 percent).

In the social sphere, the number of students will be increased (by two percent). as
will the number of hospital beds (by three percent) and children's institutions (by
four percent). The plan outlines steps to improve supplies of consumer goods to the
population.

The 1981 GDR development plan anticipates concentrating investments on projects of
national-economic importance. on modernizing and renovating the production appara-
tus and reducing (by 30-50 percent) the duration of the construction cycle. A spe-
cial place is being given to saving material resources. The increment in output
production and national income must be ensured with the same consumption of energy.
raw and other materials. or with an insignificant increase. Expenditures per unit
of commodity output are to drop 1.9 percent for industry and 1.6 percent in the case

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of construction; specific energy consumption is to drop by four percent. consumption
of rolled metal in metalworking industry - by 6.2 percent. consumption of rolled
metal and lumber in construction - by 3.9 percent. consumption of cement - by 2.5
percent.

The use of recovered raw material (scrap metal. reprocessed oil. wood shavings,
household waste paper) and industrial waste is to be increased by 7.1 percent.

In the area of using labor resources. plan measures are based on saving 450 million
hours of working time. For the industrial ministries alone. the plan is to free
67.000 workers for other tasks. Profit increment in the national economy will be 11
percent.

Machine tool manufacture (increment of 9.1 percent). electrical engineering and elec-

tronics (8.9 percent). agricultural and transport machine building (7.8 percent) will
be developed more dynamically in industry.

The plan is to increase plant-cultivation output by the more efficient use of arable
agricultural land and stockraising - on the basis of effective herd reproduction and
improvement in the number of pedigreed animals. Some 176.500 apartments will be
built or modernized and the material base of education. public health and social
services to the population will be broadened.

The Republic of Cuba national economic plan anticipates steady development of the
basic branches of the economy. Labor productivity is to rise by three percent and
profit by 20 percent, and commodity output net cost will drop by two percent. In
industry, the production of electric power (8.5 percent), chemical output (seven per-
cent). leather footwear (eight percent) and glass and ceramics (13 percent) will grow
more dynamically. Capital investments (increment of 5.7 percent) are being concen-
trated on completing construction in progress and on restoring. renovating and up-
dating existing fixed assets.

In agriculture. an appreciable increase is planned in the production of citrus (se-
ven percent). root crops (eight percent). fruit (five percent) and rice (six percent).
The increment in goods and services for the population will be four percent. They
anticipate building 20.000 apartments and a number of social and personal-services
projects.

The basic task of the NPR 1981 socioeconomic development plan is to continue strength-
ening the material-technical base. uae labor. material and financial resources effi-
ciently and, on that basis. increase social production and improve its efficiency.
raising the standard of living and culture. The country's fixed assets are to be
increased 10 percent. including an ll-percent increase in fixed production assets.
Three-fourths of the increment in national income will be obtained as a result of in-
creased labor productivity.

In industry, labor productivity will increase 4.8 percent; Category I output produc—
tion will increase 16 percent. Mining industry will be developed at rapid rates (in-
crement of 42.8 percent). Metalworking output will be increased 16.6 percent. wool
and textile output - 11.8 percent. food-industry output -- 16.6 percent; meat out-
put per resident will increase six percent. butter - eight percent. cooking oil -
seven percent. milk and dairy products - eight percent.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agriculture has been set the task of making up the loss caused by weather in 1980 and
of increasing plant-cultivation and stockraising output. The total number of head of
livestock must increase by two percent and neat and wool production must increase by
four percent. Sown area with irrigation systems is to be increased by 3.400 ha. The
plan is to harvest 565,000 tons of grain and 108,000 tons of potatoes and vegetables.
Fodder production calculated per reference head of livestock is to increase by 30 per-
cent.

‘l‘otal capital investments in the national economy will be 3.6 million tughriks, of
which more than 70 percent is being directed into developing the material sphere.
The country's housing supply is being increased by 5.5 percent.

The 1981 SR national economic plan pays particular attention to strengthening inten-
sive factors of economic development.

Social product volume must grow by 6.1 percent and national income - by seven per-
cent.

Power engineering development anticipates steps to save energy throughout the na-
tional economy. In metallurgical industry, improvement in the rolled metal assort-
ment is being based on preferential growth in the production of items with a high
degree of processing. In machine building. outstripping production dynamics are
planned for electronic equipment. computer equipment. means of automation. control
and measuring devices. and specialized. multifunction machine-tool units.

Industrial output net cost is to decrease by 1.6 percent and materials expenditures
-- by 1.3 percent.

The plan pays particular attention to intensive development and continued moderniza-
tion of agriculture. Branch net output must increase nine percent. In plant culti-
vation. a substantial increase is planned in the harvests of sunflower seeds, soy-
beans. sugar beets. flax. hemp. vegetables and fruit, and stockraising has been set
the task of increasing the number of head of livestock and increasing production of
the basic types of branch output. To these ends, work will be done to drain 100,000
hectares of land and to irrigate 195.000 ha. Agriculture will receive 110.300 trac-
tors and other agricultural equipment. Capital investments in the national economy
will be 220 billion lei. Material and financial resources are being directed into
completing construction projects as quickly as possible.

The plan is to build 185.000 apartments.

The basic directions of the 1981 CzSSR plan are to ensure conditions for regrouping
social production resources to raise the level of balance in economic development.
Primary attention is being paid to the conformity of the production structure to the
demands of domestic and foreign markets.

Industrial growth dynamics are determined primarily by the availability of raw and
other basic materials. The increment in chemical industry production will be 0.7
percent. The domestic raw material base for producing plastics is being broadened.
and output will increase by 3.5 percent. This year, they plan to produce more than
10 million tons of pig_iron, 15.7 million tons of steel. 11.1 million tons of rolled
metal products and 1.5 million tons of steel pipe. 2.3 percent more than in 1980.

21;
mn omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Machine-building output will increase by 5.5 percent, with outstripping growth in
the production of items for electrical engineering. The basic task of agriculture

is to ensure outstripping development of plant cultivation as compared with stock-
raising.

Capital investments will remain at the 1980 level, with construction being oriented
towards faster completion of projects begun. Social consumption funds will increase
by 2.6 percent. Some 110.000 apartments will be built.

The importance of planned use of the advantages of the international. and foremost
the socialist. division of labor is being increased in CEHA-country national econo-
mic plans. The CPSU Central Committee Accountability Report to the 26th Congress

of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union notes: "It is no longer possible to im- -
agine the confident development of any given socialist country and the successful
resolution of such problems as. say. providing energy and raw materials or introduc-

ing the latest achievements of science and engineering by it without ties with other
fraternal countries."

These and other directions of deepening socialist economic integration and coopera-
tion in individual branches of production and science have received further develop-
aent in the plans of the fraternal countries. The development of foreign economic
ties with developing countries and with the industrially developed capitalist states
is planned on a mutually advantageous basis.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda”. "Voprosy akonomiki", 1981

11052
C80: 1825/36

25
roe omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR-EAST EUROPE BILATERAL TRADE

BILATERAL PROGRAMS FOR SPECIALIZATION, COOPERATION IN PRODUCTION
Moscow VOPROSY EKONONIKI in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 115-1240

[Article by I. Kareyev: "Bilateral Programs for Production Specialization and
Cooperation"]

[Text] The main direction of the economic development of the countries of the so-
cialist community in the modern stage is intensification of public production, uti-
lizing the advantages of socialist economic integration. Tasks for increasing the
economic effectiveness of production and accelerating scientific and technical pro-
gress are coming to the fore in integrated cooperation. In the accountability re-
port of the CPS!) Central Comittee to the 26th Party Congress, Comrade L. I. Brezh-
nev emphasized that "the CPSU and other sister parties are following a course toward
transforming the next two five-year plans into a period of intensive production and
scientific-technical cooperation among the countries of socialism." The forced de-
velopment of integration in the 1980's precisely along this line is explained by the
fact that the scurces of extensive production growth are already exhausted to a sig-
nificant degree in the majority of the cm countries. Thus the limits of growth
of reciprocal deliveries of many kinds of fuel and raw material commodities are
close or have already been reached, and therefore there is an increased need for
efficient utilization of existing resources through concentration and specialization
of production as well as the application of progressive technical equipment and
technology.

International specialization and cooperation in production (HSKP), itwas pointed out at
the Bhth CEHA session, are organically coordinated with joint programs for scienti-
fic research and planning and design work, and in the 1980's they will become essen-
tial factors in the rearrangement of the branch structures and technologies. They
will be directed towards saving on natural and labor resources and accelerating the
introduction of modern technical equipment. The results of the large amount of work
that has been done by the (IBM countries in recent years for deepening production
specialization and cooperation are a guarantee for successful fulfillment of these
tasks. There are now more than 120 multilateral and more than a thousand bilateral
agreements concerning specialization and cooperation, within whose framework reci-
procal deliveries of products last year, according to a preliminary estimate, reach-
ed almost 25 billion rubles as against 330 million rubles in 1970. ‘lhe volumes of
exports of specialized products from machine building in the reciprocal deliveries
of the cm countries are increasing approximately twice as rapidly as the raw ex-

ports of machines and equipment, the proportion of specialized deliveries amounting
to 35 percent in 1979 (26 percent in 1975).

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time the further development of international specialization and co-
operation in production among the CEHA countries makes it necessary to solve a wide
range of problems that are of great national economic significance. They include
increasing the comprehensiveness and the intercoordination of research and technical
developments, creating and introducing into production mainly new kinds of technical
equipment, organizing technical servicing for them, and expanding specialization in
standardized components and parts in order to optimize the production of the final
product. The scope and comprehensive nature of these tasks are such that their
practical implementation is related to an ever increasing changeover to the develop-
ment and implementation of large joint economic and scientific-technical programs
that envision coordinating and joining together the considerable material, financial
and labor resources of the countries of the community for the long-range future.

It was noted at the 36th CEHA session that the pivotal point of all our work for the
socialist integration is still the deepening of long-term and stable production and
scientific-technical ties on the basis of ever closer cooperation in the area of
planning. New steps have been taken along this path. Bilateral long-term programs
for specialization and cooperation in production between the Soviet Union and Bul-

garia. Hungary, the GDR, Poland, Romania and Czechoslovakia have been prepared and
signed.

This was the first time in the practice of cooperation among the sister countries
that long-term programs of this kind have been drawn up. They make it possible to
coordinate previously developed multilateral long-term target programs for coopera-
tion (DTsPS) and concrete measures for their implementation with bilateral agree-
ments, to concretize the DTsPS in the various countries to augment the objects of
cooperation earmarked in them with new ones, and to select the most effective vari-
ants for combining efforts and utilizing resources in order to implement them. Bi-
lateral programs give a target orientation to planning and economic agencies in the
development of state plans for socio-economic growth and efficient combination of
internal and external factors in the development of the branches of the national
economy. This is achieved through joint determination in the principle program a-
reas of coordinated economic and scientific-technical policy for the countries in
specific areas and a comprehensive approach to solving the problems. An important
feature of the program is the fact that they go beyond the framework of the five-
year period and thus expand the temporal horizon of cooperation, which will serve
as a certain basis for coordinating five-year plans in 1986-1990.

Generalizing the essence of the long-term program that was signed for specialization
and cooperation in production between the USSR and the GDR, L. I. Brezhnev noted:
"Briefly. its essence consists in the following: everywhere where it is possible
and useful, we are stockpiling each other's resources and production capacities in
order to successfully solve the most difficult problems in economic development."
The program also works out problems of further deepening of collaboration. speciali-
zation and cooperation in the area of science and technology for the development of
new items that correspond to the world level, progressive technologies and means of
production in order to efficiently utilize existing capacities and to develop new,
highly effective specialized capacities. as well as to strengthen the material and
technical base of production, particularly in the cooperation of the supply of raw
material and fuel.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main directions for cooperation earmarked in the program are based on a firm
foundation that was laid in the 1970's. The results achieved during this period in
the area of specialization and cooperation in production have contributed to a sig-
nificant increase in commodity turnover between the USSR and the GDR. During the
period from 1970 through 1979 it increased 2.4-fold and exceeded 8 billion rubles
in 1979. The Soviet Union provides 36 percent of all the commodity turnover of the
GDR, and in terms of the volume of reciprocal exchange of specialized and coopera-
tive products with the USSR, the GDR is first among the CEHA countries. Economic
and scientific-technical cooperation between the USSR and the GDR become large in
scope. Both countries are implementing more than 100 agreements in economic and
scientific-technical areas. Scientists and specialists of the USSR and the GDR are
jointly developing more than 1.000 large scientific and technical subjects.

The joint work conducted in recent years by organizations of the USSR and the GDR
on the basis of research and production cooperation have contributed increasingly
to strengthening the material and technical base for cooperation. Thus they recon-
structed the equipment plants in Penza (USSB) and Magdeburg (GDR), while at the same
time redistributing production programs among them for concentration of the produc-
tion of certain type sizes of equipment and reducing parallel output of them at
these enterprises. As a result labor productivity at the Hagdeburg equipment plant,
according to calculations of GDR specialists, increased 1.8-2.1-fold. At the Fenza
equipment plant. as a result of the startup of a line for processing valve housings,
labor productivity increased 2—fold, and in the newly created section for plasma
cutting--lO-fold. Because of the cooperation, plants for producing new, progressive
construction material were created with minimal expenditures of labor and material
resources--dense silicate concrete in Grodno and Hﬂtchendorf, and Polimir installa-
tions were put into operation for producing high pressure polyethylene in Novopo-
lotsk.

Thus combining the economic and scientific-technical capabilities of the 603 and

the USSR in order to jointly solve large national economic problems have already
produced a certain economic effect. “The program for specialization and cooperation
in production between the GDR and the USSR up to 1990," noted E. Honecker, "and also
the long-term target programs for cooperation between the CEHA countries arm us with
an overall strategy which takes into account the capabilities and requirements of
the 1980's. Relying on these documents, we shall jointly solve more and more large
problems in the area of science, technology and production."

Taking into account the GDR's limited fuel and raw material base, in the long-term
program primary attention is devoted to the development of power engineering and
the implementation of effective measures that make it possible to reduce the expen-
diture of fuel and re; material. In the area of metallurgy, the program envisions
joint development and improvement of technological processes and equipment for pro-
ducing steels and alloys. Principally new processes will be investigated--automat-
ed cold rolling of steel pipes and rolled strip steel with protective coverings.

It is intended to jointly develop and produce instruments made of synthetic dia-
monds and other ultra-hard materials which will contribute to the introduction of
effective technologies in machine building, the glass industry, metallurgy and
other branches. The program earmarks the implementation of measures directed to-
ward solving important social problems. Among them one should take note of mecha-
nization based on cooperation of machines and equipment for those subsidiary and

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nature of production and economic ties and their comprehensiveness. This coopera-
tion will eabrace scientific research and planning and design work, production of
new machines and equipment on the basis of Joint developments, and also coordination

nomic and scientific-technical cooperation during the ten-year period and the main
directions for specialization and cooperation and other forms of production and eco-
nomic cooperation in material production, particularly in power engineering, ferrous
and nonferrous metallurgy, machine building, the chemical and petroleum processing
industry, agriculture and transportation. Questions of cooperation in machine buil-
ding occupy a special place in the general scheme. Machine building is involved in
25 of the 29 bilateral agreements in the area of production specialization. In
keeping with them, in 1976-1980 the volume of deliveries of specialized machine
building products from the USSR to Bulgaria increased more than 2-fold as compared
to the preceeding five-year plan. The USSR receives 70 percent of the Bulgarian
exports of machines and equipment. The main specialized products of Bulgarian
machine building among them are electric telthers, automatic loaders, electric
stackera, electric carts and electronic conputer equipment. About 70 percent of the
exports of specialized products fron Bulgaria to the USSR are from 6 branches:
lifting and transportation equipment, computer and organizational equipment, trac-
tors and agricultural machines. power and electrotechnical equipment, communications
equipment. radios and televisions, and means of transportation. Production and ex~
ports of equipment for the chemical, pulp and paper, construction. light and the
food industry are occupvina an increasingly important position. Expansion of spa-
cialization and cooperation between the USSR and Bulgaria in these branches is also

envisioned as a main line for the formation of the production and export profile in
the future.

The long-tern program for the period up to 1990 between the USSR and Poland envi-
sions further deepening of the cooperation between the two countries. In the area
of machine building the Soviet Union specializes in the production and delivery to
Poland of power, mining and metallurgical equipment, road construction machines.
trucks, tractors, steam engines and electric engines. metal processing and electro-
technical equipment, radio and electronic items and instruments. Poland's special-
ization, in turn, includes ship building, rolling stock for railroads, equipment
for light and the food industry, chemical, petrochemical, natal processing and min-
ing equipment, electronic computer equipment, and communications industry itens.
One of the important areas of the Soviet-Polish bilateral program is the creation
and accelerated assimilation of new machines, equipment and naterisls with improved
quality features. These tasks will be carried out both through efficient utiliza-
tion of existing specialized production capacities and on the basis of the creation
of new. highly efficient specialized industries, primarily through the reconstruc-
tion and modernization of existing enterprises.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘UFFKJAL.USEIN‘LY

1n the long-term program with Poland special attention is devoted to industrial co-
operation for the purpose of fuller satisfaction of the needs of both countries for
standard parts, batching items and spare parts. Moreover the development of ties
for cooperative production of aggregates, components and parts for items produced
in the USSR and Poland is oriented in the long-term program toward increasing pro-
duction concentration in the manufacture of individual items in optimal series for
maximal utilization of the advantages of mass and large-series production.

In the 1970's production cooperation between the USSR and Poland was considerably
developed in the automotive industry, the production of construction and road ma-
chines and machine tool building. Almost 75 percent_of the commodity turnover in
machine tools and instruments came under cooperative deliveries, and they are large
in scale. Thus during the past five-year plan Poland delivered more than 2 million
electromagenetic clutches for metal cutting machines, 600,000 lathe chucks and
other items. In turn, Soviet machine tools delivered to Poland comprised about 20
percent of the machine tool equipment that Poland imports. Reciprocal cooperative
deliveries between the USSR and Poland in the automotive industry are reaching one-
third of the overall volume of both countries in this branch. For Soviet Zhigulis
Poland annually delivers 1.5 million shock absorbers, 2.5 million lights, and
500,000 switches; and for the KsmAZ trucks--2$,000 sets of parts for brake systems.
For motor vehicles produced in Poland the USSR delivers wheels, bearings, windows,
washers and other items.

In the reciprocal exchange of construction and road equipment between the USSR and
Poland, recently there has been a prevalence of such forms of cooperation as joint
development of new types of hydraulic self-propelled cranes and also the sharing of
production programs for batching items and parts. These areas of production coop-
eration are earmarked by the long-term program in other branches of machine building
as well--for the production of underground and open pit mining equipment, equipment
for electric and thermal stations, metallurgical equipment, electric city transpor-
tation, and equipment for extracting, transporting and processing petroleum and gas.

The long-term program signed by the USSR and Romania envisions the development of
specialization and cooperation in a number of most important branches of the nation-
al economy. At the present time. in order to implement this program, the coopera-
ting ministries and departments of both countries have prepared proposals for speci-
fic volumes and lists of reciprocal deliveries of products resulting from speciali-
zation and cooperation. Thus in the area of the electrotechnical industry, Soviet
agencies are to specialize in the production of complex, high-voltage equipment,
cable items and electric welding equipment, and the Rumanians are to specialize in
the output of complex transformer substations, electric engines and automatic cir-
cuit breakers. In tractor and agricultural machine building Soviet enterprises will
specialize in the production of various types of plows, machines for harvesting the
roots and tops of plants, combines for harvesting flax, hemp and tomatoes, hemp
threshers and reapers, and hemp binders; and Rumanian plants will produce universal
seeders, threshing machines and machines for cleaning corncobs.

The specialization of Soviet organizations in the area of machine building for ani-
mal husbandry and feed production is to include the production of loaders for stalk
feeds, sets of electric shearing equipment and feed distributors; and the Rumanian
organizations--in the production of trailer pickups. In chemical and petroleum

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

machine building Rumsnian enterprises will have to deliver petroleum equipment for
various technological purposes so that the USSR can produce combined installations
of the LK-6U type, installations for catalytic cracking and hydraulic cracking of
Vacuum gas oil; and the USSR will produce installations for high-pressure polyethy~
lens and bulk polymerized polystyrene.

In the electronic industry Soviet organizations are to specialize in the production
of vidicons for electronic-ray oscillograph pipes, color picture tubes, and genera-
tor lamps. and Rumanian organizations-in the production of radio components, elec-
tronic optical systems and elements for color picture tubes.

The ministries have an agreement concerning specialization in the area of instrument
building. Soviet enterprises will produce instruments for control and regulation

of technological processes, analytical instruments and instruments for scientific
research. electrical measurement instnnsents, instruments for measuring mechanical
amounts. and also instruments for physics research. Romanian enterprises will manu-
facture electromagnetic flow gauges, electrical and electropneumatic positioners,
analytical weights and balances, and systems and devices for fire alarms. Addition-

ally. Soviet and Rumanian organizations will specialize in the production of auto-
mated systems for control of technological processes.

In the area of heavy and transportation machine building the coordinated list of
products includes the specialization of Soviet organizations in the production of
equipment for pressing machines, type rolling aggregates, equipment for broad strip
machine tools for hot and cold rolling and drilling machines; Rumanian organizations
are to specialize in the production of coke and cinder equipment, equipment for sets
of machines for continuous casting of blanks, brake equipment, hydraulic cylinders
and hydraulic equipment.

The USSR will deliver to Rumania petroleum refuse collectors, boats, floating docks
and self-propelled barges; Rumania will deliver the USSR tankers, dry cargo ships,
sea barges and fire boats. Moreover. there is a coordinated list of reciprocal de-
liveries of batching equipment for ships. The list of products included in special-
ization and production in the machine tool instrument industry includes heavy and
unique and also special metal cutting machines and components for them, timber pro-
cessing equipment. highly productive forging and pressing equipment and instruments
for processing metallic and nonmetallic materials.

The development of specialization and cooperation in the area of the chemical indus-
try will be directed towards the production of various types of chemical means of
plant protection, mineral fertilizers and other chemical products based on ties

that already exist in this branch of industry.

The long-term programs envision not only exchange and reciprocal deliveries of pro-
ducts included in specialization and cooperation but, especially imortant. coopera-
tion amona organizations during the course of their production. Thus the programs
and the documents developed on the basis of them coordinate all elements of special-
ization and cooperation as a comprehensive process whose implementation must be in-
tercoordinated. The necessary structural changes related to this process will he
carried out in the corresponding sections of production.

31
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l.0i1ﬂ(]Al.USE(MVLY

Until recently, when preparing joint proposals for the development of specialization
and cooperation, pri

concentration. And the creation and introduction of new materials, technological

tific and technical cooperation between the USSR and Bulgaria, and more than 600
subjects were developed jointly. But only one-sixth of them were related to the
creation of new items and kinds of equipment. The situation was similar in the co-

parts, raising the technical level. improving the quality of products and also up-

type, automated telephone stations, lsthes and seniautomated ma-
chines, bearings and so forth. Such items as automated equipment, equipment for
smelting under pressure, medical x-ray equipment, auxiliary equipment for the tex-
tile and rubber industry. chemical preparations for plant prorection. electro-
insulsting glass fabrics and so forth have also appeared. This list is to be con-
siderably expanded on the basis of joint developments. The branch subprograms with
Czechoslovakia envision conducting joint work on 330 problems and subjects, as a

32
FOR OFFICIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

types of machines and equipment, 95 progressive technological processes and 14
kinds of construction materials, as well as to develop 32 sets of technical and
planning documentation and to carry out s number of other projects.

The long-term program signed by the USSR and Hungary includes cooperation in the
development of specialization and cooperation of production of both countries in

19 branches of industry. let us consider several of the Soviet-Hungarian branch
subprograms. One of the more rapidly developing areas of economic cooperation be-
tween the USSR and Hungary is the automotive industry. In 1976-1980 reciprocal
deliveries of products from this branch increased 1.5-fold as compared to 1971-1975,
amounting to 2.7 billion rubles' worth. The branch subprograa in the area of the
automotive industry envisions considerably expanding the list of specialized pro-
ducts and increasing the volume of reciprocal deliveries 2-fold in 1981-1985. It

is intended for Hungary to continue to deliver new models of Ikarus busses to the
USSR, and the Soviet Union is to deliver cargo and passenger vehicles, motorcycles,
mopeds and bicycles. “(reover it is intended to double the reciprocal deliveries of

components and parts produced in cooperation, rear axles from Hungary and various
kinds of propeller shafts from the Soviet Union.

In the branch subprogram in the area of machine tool building, an important place is
occupied by comprehensive completion of the development of all phases of bilateral
cooperation-~p1anning, production and sales of the prepared products. The subpro-
gram also includes the organization of direct cooperation between machine building
enterprises of both countries. Hungarian enterprises will specialize in the pro-
duction of 8 kinds of metal cutting equipment and 6 kinds of forge and press equip-
ment, and Soviet enterprises will specialize in producing 66 kinds of metal cutting
machines, 28 kinds of forge and press equipment. 28 kinds of smelting equipment and
also measurement instruments and devices. Joint developments will make it possible
to introduce into production 19 new kinds of equipment and materials. It is in-
tended for the proportion of specialized items in reciprocal deliveries of products
to increase to 80-90 percent.

During the current ten-year period there will be a significant expansion of Soviet-
Hungarian cooperation in ship building and power machine building. There will be

a considerable increase in the deliveries of components and parts from the USSR to
Hungary, and joint planning will be arranged for new types of components. The sub-
program in the area of power machine building concretizes the mutual commitments of
the Soviet and Hungarian sides that arise from previously concluded multilateral
commitments concerning specialization of production and reciprocal deliveries of in-
dividual kinds of components, turbines, auxiliary equipment, boilers snd water pre-
paration installations.

The coordinated perspectives for the development of production specialization be-
tween the USSR and Hungary go beyond the framework of the ten-year period in certain
branches. These include, for example, their cooperation in the area of the chemical
industry. In the first half of the 1970's in Leninvarosh (Hungary), a large olefine
combine was constructed with technical assistance from the Soviet Union, which as-
tisfies the needs of a number of Soviet and Hungarian chemical enterprises. At the
same time in Kalusha (USSR) a combine was put into operation for producing 250,000
tons of polyvinylchloride. These enterprises were joined together by a pipeline
that is 330 kilometers longs. Such a distribution of the production programs

33
INJR‘OFIHCJAI.lﬂﬂE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ion of parallel capacities in both countries and to develop production economically
and at accelerated rates. In the middle of the 1980's it is intended to construct
another combine in Kalusha for processing olefinea, and from 1986-2000, in exchange

The bilateral long-term programs envision intensification of work for standardiza-
tion and unification.1 Branch subprograms for specialization and cooperation con-
tain lists of prepared items and parts that are to be standardized and unified as

cooperation, which approaches the level that is typical of western European coun-
tries. Both countries attach a great deal of significance to further increasing
reciprocal exchange of components and parts, above all those items whose deliveries
are stable.2 There are extensive prospects for this kind of exchange in other
branches as well. Thus the branch subprogram with Bulgaria in the area of the
machine tool building and instrument building industry envisions the organization
of cooperation production of 7 types of metal cutting instruments. The USSR will
deliver individual prepared components and parts for assembly at two Bulgarian en-

The branch subprogram in the area of tractor and agricultural machine building, on
the basis of already existing division of labor, envisions further development of
production in the USSR and cooperative delivery to Bulgaria of components, parts
and batching items for tractors of the HTZ-BO type and its modifications. self-pro—
pelled reapera for harvesting pulse crops, Ski-4 grain cleaning machines, IChPS—b
adapters for combines for harvesting soybeans and hydraulic aggregates. Coopera-

equipment are also to be considerably expanded in the future, both in terms of
volume and in terms of variety. In particular, Bulgaria will deliver batching
items for the KS-b sugar beet harvesting combines, the 38-6 top harvesting combines,

3h
FOIWOFINCJAI.USEGDNLV
INJR!0FIICLAL lﬂﬂECMVLV

reducing gears for tractors of the MTZ-BO type, hydraulic aggregates and certain
systems of electronic equipment for agricultural machines.

spare parts for them. The increasing scope of reciprocal exchange of machine build-
ing products between the USSR and Bulgaria have been brought about by new forms of
cooperation in this area. During the past five-year period three Soviet technical
centers were created in Bulgaria for servicing the equipment delivered from the

USSR (road and construction machines, automotive equipment, tractors and agricultur-
cl machinery). There are four Soviet technical centers in operation in Czechoslova-
kia and three more are under construction. There are three technical centers in

tions, electric typewriters and other kinds of equipment that are delivered from the

forced by a system of effective responsibility of the partners for their fulfill-
ment in the agreements. In order to eliminate existing shortcomings in the agree-

necessary to provide for the solutions to a complex of economic, production, trade,
scientific-technical. currency-financial, legal and other questions. In our opin-
ion, all measures earmarked in the branch subprogram for cooperation should also be
reflected in the agreements concerning specialization and cooperation. Of course
the subprograms that have been prepared will be distinguished both by the specific

their practical realization on the basis of a unified approach. This means that
agree-ants (contracts) should be unified in structure. Thus there appears, in our
View, the need to prepare standard bilateral agreements (contracts) concerning spe-

the time periods for the assimilation and curtailment of production, modernization
of items, joint development and approval of standards, and the implementation of
measures for the development (reconstruction. modernization and creation) of capaci-
ties for producing products delivered under the “SR? and kinds of technical servi-
cing for the products that are delivered.

35
FOI.0F11CLA1.lEHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The agreements should include questions of a commercial and legal nature, that is,
the volumes and product lists for reciprocal deliveries of products, spare parts,
prices, sanctions, work for joint utlization of licenses, and "know how." More-
over, it is expedient for them to reflect questions of scientific and technical co-
operation: time periods for conducting scientific research and experimental design
work concerning the most important problems, and for the creation and improvement
of specialized products.

The development and deepening of cooperation between the USSR and other CEHA coun-
tries and the quantitative and qualitative changes in the nature of economic rela-
tions now raises the question of further improvement of the mechanism of planning
measures for developing bilateral production and economic ties. As we know, the
USSR commitments arising from agreements concerning specialization and cooperation
of production are reflected in the corresponding subsection of the integration of
the state plan, which is limited so far to indicators of the volumes and the basic
products list for exports and imports of products.

The intensification of bilateral ties between the USSR and other CEHA countries
dictates the need to reflect more fully in the integration section of the state plan
the material-financial and labor resources that provide for the fulfillment of cosh
mitments involved in specialization and cooperation of introduction, the use of
credits from the NIB for these purposes and scientific and technical cooperation.

It seems to us that the time has come for this section of the plan to establish

the cauntries' commitments related to measures envisioned by the bilateral branch
subprograms for the development of specialization and cooperation through the

period up to 1990. Additionally, the indicators of the integration section of the
plan should be more closely coordinated with other sections of the state plan.

The integration section of the plan that is now drawn up should be expanded because
of the adoption of bilateral programs. In our opinion, it should be divided into
consolidated and analytical parts.

The consolidated part could give the volumes of reciprocal deliveries of products
produced through specialization and cooperation (for the country as a whole and for
the ministries) and the main measures (subject matter and time periods for imple-
menting the most important scientific research and experimental design work, the
introduction of new kinds of machines, equipment and items, standardization and
unification, the development of production capacities for producing products through
specialization and cooperation and so forth), and also expenditures of resources on
the implementation of these measures. The analytical parts of the section of the
plan could concretize the indicators of the consolidated part (for the various minis-
tries and departments) in terms of the products list, which should be, in our opin-
ion, more detailed than the products list that is given in the integration sections
of the state plan.3 This products list now contains only several dozen positions,
the delivery of components and parts is not established in it, and they overlap with
the plans of the ministries.

The inclusion in the analytical sections of the plan of a complete list of products
that are delivered would contribute to purposeful allotment of export funds for the
entire volume and assortment of products envisioned by the agreements and to noti-
fying the enterprises that manufacture the specialized products of their assign-
ments. The analytical parts of the plan could also reflect the assignments of the

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE.I ONLY
FIN!‘NNW(JA1.USE¢DNLY

ministries for developing scientific and technical problems relating to the develop-
ment of specialization and cooperation and indicate the subject matter and time
periods for carrying out developments, the organizations doing the work and the
funds necessary for this more concretely than in the consolidated part of the plan,
and should develop planning assignments for the introduction of new kinds of ma—
chines, equipment, items, technological processes and materials as well as for the

development and unification of standards, investments and other support for the
earmarked measures.

The interests of the matter require the active participation of the ministries and
departments in this work. As early as the 25th CPSU Congress L. l. Brezhnev noted:
"We think that strict and precise fulfillment of measures collectively earmarked

by the sister countries and out commitments to them are the sacred duty of the Gos-
plan, ministries, departments, associations and enterprises and all who are involved
in this section of our work." The "Main Directions for the Economic and Social De-
velopment of the USSR During 1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990" adopted at the
25th Party Congress sets the task of "increasing the responsibility of ministries,
production associations, enterprises and organizations for the fulfillment of com-
mitments in the area of foreign economic relations."

The implementation of bilateral programs and the branch subprograms that have been
developed for this purpose along with the fulfillment of long-term target programs
in the most important branches of the national economy will contribute to further
improvement of international specialization and cooperation introduction.

FOOTNOTES

1. At the present time little more than 600 standards have been unified on a bi-
lateral bssis between the USSR and Bulgaria, including about 100 in the area of
machine building. Under the current five-year plan it will be necessary to
unify no less than 3,500 standards for machine building products that are de-
livered under the policy of specialization and cooperation.

2. These deliveries include elements for electronic computer equipment and also
components and parts for the automotive industry, machine building, light and
the food industry and construction and road machine building.

3. We agree that "the need for strict and precise observance of integration
commitments makes it possible to think about singling out deliveries as con-
cretely as possible in the national plans. This task consists in not "losing"
the position agreed upon during the development of variants of specialization
of production, providing for the fulfillment of international commitments that
have been made, and carrying this position through to the plan of the enter-
prises and giving them time for preparation of production and deliveries of
products to the CEHA countries." (Yu. Kormnov, ”Spetsializatsiya i kooperi-
rovaniye proizvodstva stran SEV (v usloviyakh sotsialisticheskoy ekomoniches-
koy integratsii") [Specialization and Cooperation in Production Among the
CEHA Countries (Under the Conditions of Socialist Economic Integration)],
Izdatel'stvo “Ekanomika”, 1972).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda“, "Vorposy ekonomiki", 1981

11772 END
CSO: 1825/35 37

FOR'OFT1CJAI.IEHE(HVLY