l'UK Ufl’ll IAL “at. UI'VIJ

JPRS L/lO348
23 FEBRUARY 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 13/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1034

23 February

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 13/82)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Suzuki Government at Political, Diplomatic Turning Point
(YOMIURI SHIMBUN, b Jan 82) ..............................

ProSpects, Power of Tanaka Faction Analyzed
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN, 1h, 15 Jan 82) ....................

Remarks by Rokosuke Tanaka
Sources of Faction's Power

Factional Disputes Within LDP Ranks Described
(SANKEI, 8, 9 Dec 81) ....................................

Unrest Within Suzuki Faction
Focus on LDP Vice-Presidency

Early Start of General Election Campaign Noted
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUH, 19 Jan 82, YOHIURI SHIMBUN, h Jan 82)

Opposition Parties' Preparations
LDP Preparing for Elections

MILITARY

Production of U.S. 203-MH Hou1tzer Parts
(J1J1, 9 Feb 82) .........................................

Esrael Uses Japanese-Made Patrol Craft
(THE DAILY YOMIURI, 7 Feb 82)

Briefs
Arms Sales to U.S.
Nuclear Technology Exports

- a - [III - ASIA - 111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI)’

ECONCHIC

Nation's Per Capita GNP to Top U.S. in 2000
(JAPAN Ecmmc JOURNAL, 26 Jan 82) DOIOOOOOUOOOODIIOOOO

Toyota Motor, Sales Arms Hill Merged in July
(JAPAN BCONQHC JOURNAL, 2 Feb 82) oeoeeoeeoo-Ioovooacoo

Briefs
U.S. Tariffs

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Government To Run Short of Energy Development Funds
(Shigeru Komago; JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 26 Jan 8?).....

Laser Beam Cutter Using Optical Fiber Created
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 2 Feb 82) .....................

JITA To Push Patent Sales Overseas
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 2 Feb 82) .....................

'ASAHI' Urges Nation's Efforts for Antarctic Order
(Editorial; ASAHI EVENING NEHS, 3 Feb 82) ..............

Facilities Completed for Interferon Production
(JAPLV Ecmmlc JOURNAL, 2Feb 82) OIOUOOOIOCICOIDOOOOOO

Facsimile Equipment Expected To Climb 25 Percent
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 2 Feb 82) .....................

Research, Development Expenditures Grow 1h.5 Percent
(JAPAN ECONGAIC JOURNAL, 26 Jan 82) ....................

Hitsui, Centronics Tic Up for Biocomputer Technology
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 26 Jan 8?) ....................

HITI Project To Deve10p Supercomputer Starts in January
(NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN, 3 Jan 82) ........................

Briefs
USSR Orders Lathes
World's Largest Robot M111
hK Static RAN's
Computer Exports Increase
Interferon Production Boost

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUZUKI GOVERNMENT AT POLITICAL, DIPLOMATIC TURNING POINT
Tokyo YOMIURI SHIMBUN in Japanese 4 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] The year 1982, which we enter with a large reduction in welfare expenses
and a big increase in defense expenses, seems to be a major turning point in both
the domestic political and diplomatic aspects of the structure of postwar Japan.

In view of the intention of all opposition parties, including middle-of-road
forces, to request amendment of the budget draft, the current focus of attention

is on how Prime Minister Suzuki, who wants to pass the budget draft without amend-
ment, can ride out the Diet session. However, the large increase in defense spend-
ing and setback for welfare do not mean merely a quantitative change in the amount
of money in the budget or the rate of increase. It has become more likely that the
brakes on defense spending will be eliminated. The new budget draft also indicates
a qualitative change in that the policy premises which have supported the postwar
structure have collapsed. In the midst of a tense international situation, new
ideas will be questioned in debates at the Diet and other opportunities.

A Year of Many Difficulties

Prime Minister Suzuki said that "This is going to be a year of many difficulties
both domesticaliy and diplomatically" at his New Year's press conference. The

New Year began with the Polish situation in a hair-trigger situation. In the
Middle East the confsontation between Israel and the Arab states has become tense
again because of Israel's annexation of the Golan Heights. Depending on the situa—
tion in these areas, military tension may suddenly heighten throughout the world.
There is a strong fear that Japan may have to face new difficulties--beginning with
our Soviet policy, "the third oil crisis," and so forth.

As for the Japan-11.8. relationship, the Japanese Government worked out a 7.751. per-
cent increase in the defense budget, and the U.S. Government appraised it as wel-
come in statements issued by Secretary of State Haig and Secretary of Defense
Heinburger. For this reason the Japanese Government expects "a state of calm" in
the bilateral relationship for a while.

However, Senate and House hearings on U.S.-Japanese problems are scheduled to begin
in Frebruary. With the trade frictions symbolized by an increase in the bilateral
trade deficit vis-a—vis Japan in the background, it is likely tint 0.8. dissatis-
faction toward Japan will be brought up again. To eliminate nontariff barriers,
the prime minister intends to complete draft revisions of related laws by the end
of January and thereby demonstrate "Japan's effort to open its market."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I-SE 0V!)

However, concemed domestic industries are expected to lodge strong protests.
Moreover, even if the Japanese Government eliminates all nontarlff barriers, an
instant increase in imports from the United States cannot be expected. "The key
to the U.S.—Japan relationship is how convincingly the Japanese Government can per—
suiade the U.S. Congress that Japan is exerting efforts to open its market" (a
government source).

Political Life

In the midst of a severe international environment, Prime Minister Suzuki will
carry out "a real administrative reform" in accordance with the basic report
scheduled for presentation by the Second Special Administrative Investigation
Counc ll next June and will make preparations for reelection in the fall. This is
the prime minister's strategy. However, the basic report is expected to call for
"a bloody administrative reform" that involves revision of the manag-ent system
of the three public corporations and five government enterprises, which include
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation, Japan Rational Railways, and
Japan Monopoly Corporation, and the integration or abolition of several ministries
and agencies. Any one of these changes is quite a difficult problem.

"Without considerable leadership, it is impossible to realize them" (an LDP source).
The problem is not just the challenge posed by the basic report. The prime minister
could not hold dom an increase in government employee salaries and in defense
expenditure this year, and therefore could not even maintain the basic principle

of the report of the First Special Administrative Investigation Council. Further-
more, he has been cornered into issuing more government bongs to finance the def i-
cit. His public promise of "financial reconstruction" seems difficult to keep.

In part icular, the administration is planning to eliminate the issuance of govern-
ment bonds to cover deficits by FY—Blo. To achieve this goal, the target amount
for reduction of the deficit in Fit—82 is 1.83 trillion yen. Of that, the govern-
ment bond portion stops at 1.5 trillion yen. IEven within the cabinet, there is
some question whether "the target can really be achieved."

Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiqnzawa emphasizes the administration's intent ion to hold
tight to the final target of reduction of deficits financed by government bonds:
"Depending on economic trends, we can expect an acceleration in the natural in-
crease of taxes." If tax revenues decrease in 1-7-82 as they did last year, the
administration has to either increase government bond issues again, postpone the
date for achievement of the target reduction, or adopt new taxes such as a general
consumption tax.

Adoption of any of these three alternatives means that the financial reconstruction
and administrative reform on which Prime Minister Suzuki is wagering his political
life will have collapsed. Then, the prime minister will be cornered in a difficult
position.

A Havering Principle
The most outstanding characteristics of the 1982 budget draft, which contains an

abundance of problems, are an extreme cut in social welfare spending and a large
increase in defense expaiditures. The rate of increase for social welfare spmding

2
FOR OFFICIAL USI-l ONLY
is 2 percent, which is the lowest since the end of the war. It has put an end to
the welfare priority line, which every administration has adopted since the end of
the war. Priority has clearly shifted from "butter rather than guns" or "both
butter and guns" to "guns rather than butter."

For years there have been multiple brakes on defense spending: 1) the rate of in-
crease must be held lower than that of social welfare spending; 2) defense spending
as a percentage of all general account spending (percentage of the whole) must be
kep tlower than. the percentage of the previous year; 3) defense spending mat be
kept within 1 percent of the GNP.

Among these brakes, the rates of increase for defense and welfare spending reversed
by a narrow margin for the first time last year. The margin has been enlarged by
far this year. This year's percentage of the whole, 5.21 percent, also exceeded
that of the previous year, 5.13 percent, for the first time in 26 years. The ratio
of defense spending relative to GNP this year is 0.933 percent, which is the same
high level as 15 years ago. Moreover, the defense spending provided in the govern-
ment's budget draft has exceeded the maximm guideline (the ceiling) in the outline
for budget requests. This is an abnormal state.

Except for "within 1 percent of the GNP," all the brakes have failed. Moreover,
it is said that "the last line" of within 1 percent of the GNP "will surely be
broken within a few years" (a Defense Agency source).

The opposition parties are focusing on the "abnormal protrusion" of defense ex-
penditures as a target for attack. They are preparing to request amendments,
including a recompilation of the budget draft at the general session of the Diet
which will reopen late in January. Because of this, the Diet session may be, for
the first time in a long while, the place of "total confrontation between the
government and the opposition parties."

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuir Shimbunsha 1982

9896
CSO : lo 105/46

ma omcui use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ("VIA

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

PROSPECTS, POHER 0F TANAKA FACTION ANALYZED
Remarks by Rokosuke Tanakn
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 14 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] "it appears very likely that Mr Tanaka (the former prime minister) is
innocent, but if he is convicted, I think the Tanakn faction on the contrary will
be more strongly united." 0n the afternoon of 13 January, Liberal Democratic Party
Policy Affairs Research Council Chairman Rokusuke Tannka's bold statement ran through
the political world in which the festive mood of the New Year still lingered. It
was a straightforward analysis in a public place of a party leader's prospects in
the Lockheed trial, which is expected to influence greatly the ensuring political
situation and trends within the Tanaka faction. For this reason, Tanaka's comment
spread very quickly. No less than 30 minutes after his comment a leading member
of the Tanaka faction whispered to an acquaintance: "Hr Roku (chairman of the LDP
Policy Affairs Research Council) reportedly has said something."

Later Chairman Tanaka explained to reporters the true intention of his remark and
made the following correction: "Since it (the Lockheed incident) has been entrusted
to the judicial authorities, I cannot comment on it. Even if Tanaka is not innocent,
as some people say, the Tanaka faction will be strongly united and will not be
dissolved. Moreover, it seems that I mistook the meaning of the question and

gave the wrong answer."

At noon on 13 January LDP Policy Affairs Research Council Chairman Tanaka gave a

lecture at the annual New Year's meeting of the Kisaragikai sponsored by the KYODO

wire service. His lecture was primarily concerned with economic issues. After his
speech, one participant asked him: "If Tanaka is convicted and given an actual

prison term in the Lockheed trial, what will happen in the political arena? Is it

likely that the political situation will become unstable and the Diet will be dissolved?"

The chairman answered these questions frankly: “Since I know the relationship between
Mr Ohira [the late prime minister, Rokusuke Tanaka's political mentor] and Mr Tannka,

I truly hope that Mr Tanaka will be found not guilty. However, it seems very unlikely."
"When Mr Tanaka is in such position (being a defendant), people will flock (to the
Tanaka faction). This is, I think, because Mr Tanaka's gifted political sense and
policies attract like-minded fellows and they knock on Tanaka's door." "As to whether
this unity will collapse or not, people say that when a house is poor, a dutiful

child is born.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
People say that the Tanaka faction will disintegrate, but I think that on the contrary
it will be more strongly united." "Even if he is convicted in the first instance.

if he appeals to a court of intermediate appeal, he will continue his political
activities."

For the time being, people in the political arena are anticipating former Prime
Minister Tanaka's conviction, and how the Tanaka faction will act in such a case is
a focus of attention in forecasting the political situation thereafter. Several
views have been put forward--a view that the Tanaka faction will split into a
Nikaido (the LDP secretary general) group, a Takeshita (deputy secretary general)
group. and a Shin Kanemaru group; a View that a split in the Tanaka faction will
trigger reorganization of factions within the LDP and that a wave of generation
change will then surge over the LDP; or, on the contrary, because there is well-
grounded evidence of Tanaka's innocence, Prime Minister Suzuki appointed Hr Nikaido
of the Tannku faction the party's secretary general."

In this situation LDP Policy Affairs Research Council Chairman Tanaka, who says of
himself--"Although some say I am a shrewd old man, no man is more timid and naive
than I"-—asserted positively that, even if Tanaka was convicted. the Tanaka faction
would not disintegrate.

Leading members of the Tanaka faction seem more or less bewildered. They say:
“Still. wasn't there any other way to say it?" Chairman Tanaka is a leading member
of the Suzuki faction (Kochi-kai) and is extremely close to former Prime Minister
Tanaka. He is in a position to promote Suzuki's reelection. Therefore, within

the LDP there is the deep suspicion that "wasn't it his farsighted scheme to pretend
that the connmnt was a slip of tongue and in fact to tighten the unity of the Tanaka
faction so it will not waver hereafter?"

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha [982
Sources of Faction's Power
Tokyo NLHON KELZAI SHlMBUN in Japanese is Jan 82 p 1

[Text] There was no more hesitation in his mind. Mr Akio Hisama. and LDP Diet
member elected from the First District of Nagasaki Prefecture. vigorously opened

the door of Tanaka's office. Former Home Affairs Minister Gotoda, Mme Sato [Tanaka's
private financial secretary] and others were surrounding former Prime Minister Tanaka
and talking about something.

Hisama: "Thank you for helping us to deal with the succession problem of the Nagasaki
governorship and the appointment of Mr Hatsumura (current labor minister) to a cabinet
post. since the pending problems have been settled, I would like to formally join

the Thursday Club (Tanaka faction)." Tanaka: "I will convey your desire to Mr Nikaido,
the chairman of the vlub. Hr Oki (member of the House of Councilors) also told me
that he would join us. he will join together with you." Sato: "Then, the membership
will come to 108. Hho will be first?" Hisama: "Since I am younger than Mr Oki,

I may have more evil passions. So I will become the 108th member. [Buddhism holds
that man has 108 kinds of evil passion] Thus, Hr Hisama, who ran as a member of the
Komoto faction and was elected, became the 108th member of the Tanaka faction.

it was just before the cabinet reshuffle at the end of November last year.

5
son omcui vs: ONLY
FOR OFFICHI l SF ()\'l.\

A desire to belong to a group is said to be characteristic of Japanese. Politics
also operates by means of factions. A: the double election held in June 1980,

54 Tanaka faction members were eleCted to the House of Representatives and 32 members
to the House of Councilors. Within the year and a half since then, the membership
of the Tanaka faction has increased by 11 in both houses, and the Tanaka faction

has strengthened its position as the largest faction in the LDP. Hhile the Lockheed
trial has been going on, why is only the Tanaka faction expanding? In addition to
the "if you are to serve, serve the powerful for your own good" psychology of Diet
mexmers, the Tanaka faction possesses a mysterious power to attract Diet members.

The power of information: the Tanaka faction possess the knowhow for elections and
submission of petitions. The saurce of the Tanaka faction's information capability
is former Prime Minister Tanaka, who calls himself "a legislative consultant." He
is the most informed about elections of all LDP members. "I have been pitching in
the midst of political upheaval for 35 years. i know all about the objective of
laws, their processes of enactment, and the sort of influence they give." The
capability to deal with petitions of the Tanaka faction, which includes 31 former
cabinet members, is high, and this is an advantage in a system of politics by
petitiou.

The power of nwney: according to 'The Balance Statement of Political Contributions"
published by the Ministry of home Affairs, the income of the Tannka faction was 314
million yen in 1980, a 27-percent decrease from the previous year. it was sumller
by far in comparison with that of the Fukuda faction (approximately 1.1 billion yen)
and the Nakasoae faction (approximately 1 billion yen). however, together with the
income of leading nwmbers such as Mr Nikaido, it exceeds 1.8 billion yen. Because
the Tanaka faction is "a mutual aid group," leading members "pay to the authorities"
in cases when Tanaka alone cannot take care of financial matters.

The power of mobility: the membership of the Tanaka Faction Secretaries AsSociation
under the flag of “Tanuka nationalism" numbers approximately 500. They are personal
secretaries of Diet members as well as secretaries to the parent association (the
Thursday Club). The association appoints an executive secretary for each floor of
the Diet Office Building and promptly distributes the orders and nwssagcs of the
parent association to each member. At election time the assaciation establishes a
combined election headquarters with the parent assaciation and becomes the advance
guard in "a hoard-covering-the-ditch election." [In an election the secretaries
become the to boards cover up foul smelling things]

The three powers of the Tanaka factions are also the functions of the general trading
companies unique to Japan. After the first oil shock, the general trading companies
were severely criticized for "Stockpiling and begrudging sales." They were asked to
take some measures to stop "abusing the advantageous position" by the Fair Trade
Commission. That increased the conSciouSness of crisis among the general trading
companies, which led to the establishment of a management system capable of coping
with the second oil shock. In the midst of criticism in regard to the Lockheed
incident, the Tanaka faction also may have grown into "a more highly syscematized
political industry."

On New Year's Day this year, major figures from the political, business, and
bureaucratic arenas showed up at Tanaka's private home in Mejiro, Tokyo. With the
picture of a herd of 100 horses in the background, the former prime minister is said

6
FOR OFFICIAL lISE ONLY
prime mlnisrer." Tanaka will be judged in the lockheed trial this fall. in; Tanaka
faction's leading members say: "Even if Tanaka is convicted, we will not be disrupted.
Everyone knows that that would be disadvantageous."

Political stability has supported prosperity in Japan, and the core of this is the

LDP. Within the LDP, only the Tanaks faction has been expanding, and no antlmainstream
current is found now. In the field of economics, 'hnnopoly weakens economic vitality
and leads to degeneration." What about politics....

Interview with Former Prime Minister Tanaka
“An Inevitable Mutual Aid System"
[Reporter] What is a faction ?

{Tanaka} There are no factions in the present LDP. There are only groups. Why is

a group formed? it is simple. Because it is inevitable. It is inevitable because
of the election system. As long as we adopt the medium-size electorial district
system for the House of Representatives elections, group activity will certainly

not diminish. If I campaign for Candidate A today and for Candidate B tomorrow

in a five-seat electoral district, people will not allow it. To say, "Oppose the
small electoral district system, do not form factions," is the same as saying

abolish the LDP. If a politician wants to carry out his responsibility to the people,
he must form a group or join a group. In conducting a big project covering complex
and broad-ranging fields. how can one person do everything?

[Reporter] Why come to the Tanaka faction?

[Tanaka] Because they will be most satisifed in our group. The Tanaka faction brings
together various experts. (The Tanaka faction) is a general hospital. It is natural
that people want to come to a hospital that has doctors you want to consult with

and nurses who listen to your slightly selfish requests. In our group we don't quit
"like the doctor who goes back home when his regular hours are over.“ If someone
asks for our help. we help him till the end. We have such warmth in our group.

(The Tnnaka faction) is a mutual aid system, which is an inevitable in a profession
of great risks.

[Reporter] Politicians do a minimum of "collective bargaining." Even to become the
LDP's executive council chairman, no to mention LDP president, you must be supported.
in order to acquire a position and perform your function, it is fair to say that
belonging to a group is more effective. Moreover, Tanaka himself has been prime
minister once and does not have that ambition any more. If you have such a person

as the foundation, you do not have to experience unpleasant things. It is the opposite
of "thousands dying to raise one hero to fame."

[Tanakul I began my political career at the age of 27, and I am already 63 years

old. During my entire political career 1 have been in the midst of political upheaval.
For 35 years I have been pitching. It is different from having been a critic behind
the backstop. I am something like a school physician. I know the parents of a child
from the time of his birth. I can understand him because I know "his father was

this or that." That is why the second generation of politicians comes to join

my group.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1'8}: ()Nl.\

lKepancrI How many more?

[Tanaka] There are five or six individu:ls who are now in the process of registration.
By the end of this year the total membership ﬁill probably be ll5. After the next

election, the total number will be approximately 130. There are 34 or 35 who are
planning to run for the first time in the next election. I can name them if you want

me to.

[Reporter] what is the secret of managing a faction?

[Tanaka] In a very real sense, we have a basic policy of voluntary management. We
cannot accomplish anything if we do not tell our members everything we know. Things

move quickly today. I teach them all knouhou. Our economy has become an open economy.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9896
CSO: 4105/47

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FACTIONAL DISPUTES WITHIN LDP RANKS DESCRIBED

Unrest Within Suzuki Faction
Tokyo SANKEI in Japanese 8 Dec 81 p 2

[Text] The Kochi-kai, the faction of Prime Minister and LB? President Zenko Suzuki,
is being wracked by dissatisfaction over the recent cabinet reshuffle. This anger
is mainly over the fact that Rokusuke Tanaka was appointed chairman of the Policy
Affairs Research‘Council and that not a single new face was brought into the cabinet;
that factional elders and leaders who were not chosen this time to join the cabinet
share in this anger gives it its distinctive feature.

At one point. Kuniki Saito, the faction's executive secretary who served as Prime
Minister Suzuki's chief adviser, was even forced to submit to an angry cross-examina—
tion. Some Diet members now go so far as to predict a "riot" at the faction's year-
end party, which is scheduled for the 10th. By a "lightning" personnel shuffle, which
he carried out under the slogan, "everybody gets to play ball," the prime minister

has strengthened his prospects for reelection. At this rate, however, his first task
apparently will be to put out the fire under his own feet.

The skill exhibited by the prime minister in this recent reshuffle drama was truly
marvelous, and it brought the house down with cries of : "lle’s truly Hr Personnel!"
and ”He's even more skillful than former Prime Minister Satol"

while his chief adviser, Saito, was strengthening relations with the Tanaka faction,
Suzuki had Chief Cabinet Secretary Kiichi Hiyazawa act as liaison with former Prime
Minister Takeo Pukuda. The Pukuda faction took a hard line on the question of Mutsuki
Kato joining the cabinet, and ehwn its intention of having Executive Council Chairman
Ryuo Tanaka withdraw from the cabinet-forming headquarters was revealed, the prime
minister himself telephoned Chairman Tanaka and obtained his promise of cooperation.
In addition, some of Suzuki's actions seemed to show that he was trying to drive a
wedge between Fukuda and HITI Minister Shintsro Abe, the crown prince of the Nkuda
faction. Great skill was exhibited not only in the selection of the cabinet, but
also in moving ahead on the simultaneous selection of parliamentary vice ministers
and party division chairmen as well.

This speedy way of doing things, however, created dissatisfaction among the elders
of the Suzuki faction. Not only did the cabinet not include any new person from the
faction, but the number of posts allocated to the Lower House was reduced by one.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'MI. I’SE ()Nl.\

factions] leader, that Rokusuke Tanaka "should get no more than the chairmanship
of the Diet Policy Committee," but their surprise turned to anger because "when the

lid was opened, he had jumped three levels to chairman of the Policy Affairs Research
Council . "

One faction elder said that "the prime minister's personnel plan should not have
been that different from the picture I had drawn. Without doubt, it was Saito who

it with us." Osanori Koyama and Iwazo Kaneko visited the prime minister at his private
residence the day after the cabinet shuffle, 1 December, to speak with him directly.
Following this, on the 2d, the factional leaders grilled Saito at the Suzuki faction
office. and at the general meeting of the faction on the 3d, they obtained the

promise that, "in the future, decisions will be made in consultation with the fac-
tion's leaders, with Koyama acting as the supreme adviser."

The effects of this were quickly felt in the selection of the vice chairman of
thePoliticalAffairs Research Council. Former Minister of AgriCulture, Forestry,

Nishioka, who is close to the chairman, Rokusuke Tanaka, was being mentioned as Muto's
rival. And so it went, around and around. Ultimately, however, Saito gave in to the
strong wishes of the Kochi-kai elders and settled on Haruo Kino, a leader of the Suzuki
faction. This is generally viewed as a rebuff of Chairman Tanaka by the elders.

One Suzuki faction leader coolly said that "it will be difficult for Tanaka to use
someone of a different hue such as Kino. In the end, Tanaka probably will have to

run around by himself handling such matters as drawing up the budget."

that "Saito is the right man for factional affairs, so we have no objection to his
appointment as the senior leader." However, the anger directed against Policy Af-
fairs Research Council Chairman Tanaka is such that it cannot be easily softened.
The same elder said that "we gained by creating a disturbenace." Some say that
”Miyazawa must surely resent the fact that the result of his loyal service to the
prime minister was to see Tanaka move out in front of him." Other worrisome state-
ments are making the rounds, with some even saying that "this time, for sure,

whether Tanaka's 'brawn' or Hiyazawa's 'brains' wins, nothing can be done about the
Kochi-kai breaking apart." In the midst of all this, Saito visited the prime minister's
fficial residence on the afternoon of the 7th to confer with the prime minister

on remedial measures. Contrary to the prime minister's plans, the recent cabinet
shuffle seems to have further intensified the "Tanaka-Hiyazawa War."

Focus On LDP Vice-Presidency
Tokyo SANKEI in Japanese 9 Dec 81 p 2

10
FOR OFFICIAL IFSF. ONLY
Council have been chosen, the question of whether to appoint a vice president in
the LDP has surfaced as a new focus of attention. The Pukuda faction's deep-
seated dissatisfaction with the recent personnel changes, which are said to "favor
the Tanaka faction," seems to be at work behind this issue of the vice president.
The Tanaka faction. though, is not interested in pursuing this matter, so it seems
that there will be a number of twists and turns before a decision is reached.

The question of a vice president arose with the prime minister's statement at a
press conference the day after the cabinet shuffle, in which he said that "we

are considering whether to appoint a vice president. We want to make the decision
before the party conference (in January)." The selection of a vice president is
a matter for the party conference, so it is natural that such a decision would be
made before the conference. However, because the question of appointing a vice
president had not been discussed within the party, some people took this statement
by the prime minister to be “a hint that a vice president would be appointed."

The quickest reaction to this statement came from the Pukuda faction. Immediately
following the prime minister's press conference, former prime minister Taken
Pukuda said: "when I mentioned it to Prime Minister Suzuki (in their meeting on
30 November), he said he would give it serious thought." Thus, Pukuda expressed
approval of the idea of appointing a vice president. Moreover, the leadership of
the Fukuda faction had been checked by the Tanaka faction-dominated party manage-
ment, including LDP Secretary-General Susumu Nikaido and Assistant Secretary
General Noboru Takeshita, which claimed that "the concentration of power could not
be eliminated.“

The fact that the leadership of the Fulmda faction took this kind of posture meant
that it was concerned with the administration of the party being dominated by the
Tanaka faction. Should a vice president come from the mk'lda faction, the three
top party offices would then be filled by one person from each of the Tanaka,
Suzuku, and Fukuda factions, and the chairman of the party's Assembly of Members
of the House of Councilors would be the Pukuda faction's Kingo Machimura. With
this kind of lineup, one would have to say that, on the contrary, there was "a
concentration of power in the Pukuda faction." One mkuda faction leader said
that "Tadao Kuraishi would be a good choice for the Fukuda faction." The faction
seems to be "holding its breath."

Then, however, the name of Nadao Hirokichi appeared. with a reputation for being
a fair man of high character and, moreover, with no factional affiliation within
the LDP, he was perfect for the post of vice president. Also, Nadao is on such
good terms with the Fukuda faction that, during the "60-day struggle" in 1979.
former Prime Minister Pukuda at one point proposed that he serve as a "temporary
prime minister." The feeling, as expressed by one party leader, is that "Nadao
is perfect for the post of vice president. No, I should say that, if a vice
president is to be appointed, then by process of elimination, only Nadao would

be right for the job."

Seeing that discussion of this question was growing more active. on the 8th a
majority of those in the House of Councilors' steering comittee supported the
view that "if the House of Representatives was to previde a vice president, one
should come also from the House of Councilors." This action resulted from the fact

11
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

tint when the party's rules were revised last year, the rule which stated that

"one person can be appointed vice president" was changed at the wish of Upper House
members who wanted it possible for a vice president to come from the House of
Councilors as well. The revised rule stated that "vice president(s) may be ap-
pointed," and it left room for a vice president from the Upper House. Even here,
talk has escalated to the point where councilors say that "if the vice president

is to come from the House of Councilors, Upper House President Ken Yasui is the

only suitable person." Yasui, however, is from the Pukuda faction and so would
pose the same problems as Kuraishi.

In this intraparty debate, the Tanaka faction is clearly against the whole idea,
and as one of its leaders put it, the faction holds that "there is no need to have
a vice president with the present party administration." Because, in terms of
"status," a vice president would be above the secretary general, the Tanaka fac-

tion would "not agree to having a 'heavyweight’ placed above Secretary General
Nikaido . "

Nikaido, therefore, was also cool to the idea, saying: "I heard the prime minister
say that 'because such a question will come up at the press conference, I will
state that a decision will be made by the tune of the party conference.‘ However,
he has not consulted with me (on the question of a vice president)." The secre-
tary general intends to learn from the prime minister his true intentions concern-
ing this matter. The prime minister, however, as in the case of the strategy he
used in the recent cabinet shuffle, seems to be waiting to see what will happen

in the intraparty debate between the Tannka and Fukuda factions.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizai Shimbun 1981

9866
C50: 4105/34

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EARLY START OF GENERAL ELECTlON CAMPAIGN NOTED
Opposition Parties' Preparations
Tokyo NIHON KEISAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 19 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] Judging that dissolution of the House of Representatives is possible within
the year. every opposition party is hastily trying to prepare for a general election.
The Komci Party has already begun to make specific preparations for a general election
on the assumption of Lower House dissolution within the year. The Socialist Party
will start serious preparations after the party convention in February.

At first, the opposition parties adopted the slogan "Decisive Political Battle in
'83." anticipating that, in addition to unified local elections and the House of
Councilors election, a general election might be held next year. However, starting
late last year rumors of dissolution within 1982 have been spreading within the LDP.
Then some of the leading members of the opposition parties started shouting the slogan
"Decisive Political Battle in '82." On the dissolution within a year view, the
opposition parties strongly supported the observation that "the LDP's Tanaka faction
started the fire and the Komei Party has been fanning it" (a leading member of the
Democratic-Socialist Party). The story has spread that Chief Secretary Yano of the
Komei Party, who had been back home (the Fourth District of Osaka Prefecture) since
the end of last year, returned to Tokyo much earlier than his original plan because
of preparations for a general election. This story has spurred all the opposition
parties to prepare for a general election.

in relation to the Diet dissolution within a year view. the observation that a verdict
on former Prime Minister Tanaka would be handed down this year has found strong initial
support among the opposition parties. However, they are now revising their observa-
Lion on the timing of the verdict from this year to next year. Their analysis is

as follows: “(If Tanaka is convicted,) the LDP would be in a disadvantageous position,
should the general election be held after the verdict. Then, the LDP cannot dissolve
the Diet for a while. If dissolution is to occur in the near future. it must be this
year before the judgment in the Lockheed trial. It will be either before or after

the LDP's presidential election in November" (a leading member of the Socialist
Party).

The reasons for speculation are not limited to the Lockheed trial. One leading
member of the New Liberal Club made the following observation: "The revenue defect
of the FY-Bl general account budget will eventually be made clear and it will become

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIR ()l-‘FK‘HI. I'K'l' ()\l \

obvious that the real economic growth rate ol 5.2 percent predicted by the administration
for FY-82 will be difficult to achieve." He concludes that the Suzuki administration
will be driVen into a tight corner economically as well. There is also the view that
Economic Planning Agency Director Komoto is very likely to resign his cabinet post

during this Diet session. This may trigger the rise to the surface of L)? factional
struggles, thereby disturbing the political situation. in order to retain power the
Suzuki administration may have to dissolve the Diet. Some hold such views.

The Kumel Party. which has been working since last year on selection of official party
candidates, started to accelerate the pace of this work after the turn of the year.

On the other hand. the Socialist Party will start serious preparations after the

party convention scheduled for 4—6 February. It is hoped that the party's Central
Executive Committee will request each prefecture's main party branch to select official
candidates soon and conduct the firSt Screening of nominations for official candidacy
by April at the latest. Other parties are all trying to hasten the selection of
official candidates too. Both the Democratic-Socialist Party and the New Liberal

Club intend to start preparations, including electoral cooperation among middle-of-
the-road forces.

unweVer. among the opposition parties there are also those who question the grounds
for Diet dissolution within the year. hone observe as follows: "The possibility

of Dirt dissolution within the year is one out of ten thousand. We hear from the
LDP'a Fukuda faction that 'We will not let the administration dissolve the Diet.

we will force them into a change of administration.’ A change of administration is
more likely than dissolution" (a leading member of the Democratic-Socialist Party).
The opposition parties were defeated in the unexpected daubic elections the year
before last and fell into a condition of political asphyxiation. The bitter experi—
ence of the double elections seems to live on in the preparations for the next
genelal election.

COPYRlUHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha i982
LDP Preparing for Elections
Tokyo YUHIURI SHIMBUN in Japanese 4 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] From the beginning of this year the LDP already began to prepare for the
elections that art being focused upon as the "Decisive Political Battle in '83." the
unified iota] elections in the spring and the "nuSc of Councilors election in the
summer. For the LDP.‘Mhich does not burn until the last minute" (the party campaign
headquarters), this is an unusually early action. The background for it is the
political judgment that: 1) it cannOt completely deny the possibility of a double
election for both houses recurring: 2) it must be ready for the rcstricted-nameiist—
type proportional representation system which will be applied to nationwide electoral
districts in Upper House elections at some time in the future; and 3) it should
establish the leadership of Party Secretary General Nikaido, who manages the party.
This "headstart" by the LDP, which is aiming at acquiring an absolute majority in the
Diet. seems to have stirred up the opposition parties.

The Tunaka faction became the mainstay of the LDP when Nikaido and Takeshita were
appointed secretary general and deputy secretary general in the party personnel change
of last 30 November. Since then, the movement toward preparation for two major elections

1h
FOR OFFICIAL [55}: OM}.
in 1983 has suddenly become obvious. Among other things, Deputy Secretary General
Takeshits is, as admitted by both himself and others, the LDP member best informed
about elections. "If an election campaign led by the Nikaido-Takeahita line suffers
defeat, the leadership of Secretary General Nikiado would be damaged" (a leading
member of the Tanaka faction). This is the reason for the early start to preparations.

At the same time, based on "a lesson" from the great victory of the 1980 double
election in which the LDP obtained absolute majorities of 287 seats in the House

oi Representatives and 135 seats in the House of Councilors, some LDP members still
strongly hold the opinion that the Lower House election should be held simultaneously
with the Upper House election in 1983. Moreo\er, one outlook also holds that "voices
among the people are certain to ask that 'Prime Minister Suzuki call for a vote of
coulidence' in 1983" (a middle-level member of the Nakasone faction) if he is
reelected this fall.

0n the other hand. what has emerged in the forefront as a factor accelerating
preparation for elections is the restricted-namelist—type proportional representation
system applied to the nationwide districts in the Upper House election. Prime
Minister Suzuki has showed a strong intention to adopt the system for the Upper

House election of 1983. Therefore, the LDP campaign headquarters is forced to 'aeal
with unfamiliar measures as an election preparation“ (the LDP campaign headquarters).

The party campaign headquarters has already had (what Mr Takeshita called) " a study
meeting" for campaign headquarters' executive secretaries late last year. it started
reviewing the "Campaign Outline" and the "Candidate Selection Standards." it also
started a series of meetings explaining the restricted-namelist-type proportional
representation system to newly appointed party officials.

in the near future it also plans to instruct prefectural LDP main offices to set up
campaign headquarters. The party campaign headquarters and each prefectural LDP
main office first screen nominations of official candidates. They hope to announce
the results or the firSt screening by July.

However, while supporting early preparations for elections, some members in the LDP
are on guard against a campaign being carried out at "the pace of former Prime
Minister Tanaka, who is behind Secretary General Nikaido and Deputy Secretary General
Takeshita" (a leading member of the Komoto faction). Former Prime Minister Tanaka

led all members of the Tanaka [action to the front in the Tokyo metropolitan elections
last July and managed the election campaigns of metropolitan assemblymen. Since he
has "a past record," the influence of former Prime Minister Tanaka through the
Nikaido-Takeshita line will be reflected in the two major elections of 1982. This
view is strongly Supported among LDP members.

COPYRiGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1982

0868
C50: 4105/48

15
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIL ITARY

PRODUCTION OF [1.8. 203-!“ HOHITZER PARTS
0NO91305 Tokyo JlJI in English 1265 GMT 9 Feb 82

[Text] Tokyo. Feb 9 (JIJI Press)-—Japan and the United States Tuesday exchanged
notes on the Japanese license production of the 0.5. Army's 203-millimeter howitzer.

Foreign Minister Yoshio Sakurauchi and william Clark, Jr.. minister-counsellor
at the u.s. Embassy in Tokyo, affixed their signatures to the notes.

This is the 33rd exchange of notes based on the 1954 Mutual Defense Assistance
Agreement (MBA) between the two countries.

The 203mm self-propelled howitzer will be introduced by the Ground Self-Defense
Force (GSDF) as its main firepower artillery in the future.

it has a sufficiently long range to cover distant areas not within the reach of
the existing types of artillery in the possession of CSDF.

GSDF was authorized to procure six units of the howitzer in the fiscal 1981 budget
and is requesting to procure 13 more such units in the fiscal 1982 budget. The
Japanese fiscal year starts in April.

The guvo nment has originally planned to acquire a 0.8. approval for the 100 pct
license production of the howitzer, hut Washington refused to provide technology
for manufacturing its tube.

Moreover, U.S. Congress passed a bill sponsored by Samuel Stratton (D-H.Y.)
toward the end of last year. which barred the transfer to foreign countries
technology developed at U.S. military plants producing large—caliber artillery.
As a result, it became impossible for Japan to get technology for manufacturing
the muzzle break and the breech mechanism of the howitzer.

Under a detailed arrangement to be signed between the defense agency and the
U.S. Defense Department based on the notes, Japan will be able to produce under
the U.S. license only the chassis and the fire control equipment of the
howitzer.

C50: 6120/!69

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ISRAEL USES JAPANESE-MADE PATROL cmrr
owosiaoa Tokyo ms DAILY vonnnu in English 7 Feb 82 p 1

[Excerpt] Four speedboats exported by a Japanese company to Israel are being
used as armed patrol boats by the Israeli Navy in violations of Japan's three-

point ban on the export of weapons since Israel is in a state of belligerency
with Arab states, it was learned Saturday.

The four speedboats were introduced in the 1981-82 edition of Jane's fighting

ships as 'Kedma" class coastal patrol craft. They carried 20-millimeter
machine guns.

Each boat. made of reinforced plastic, displaces 32 tons. measures 20.4 meters
and is equipped with a pair of diesel engines with a combined output of
1,540 bhp. They have a cruising speed of 25 knots.

They were constructed by Toei Boat Company. a former shipbuilding company in
Yokosuka, Kanagawa-Ken, between September 1967 and July 1968.

Transport Ministry officials said the boats, which were ordered in the name of
the Israeli Customhouae, had been exported at the time but the machine guns were
mounted by the Israelis after delivery.

The boats had no gun emplacements on than when they were exported. they said.

However. when the boats were being examined for export validation. there was a
cunLroversy within the government over the propriety of selling such high-
performance boats to Israel in the light of the government's three-point ban on
the export of weapons.

1hc three-point ban on weapons export is that Japan may not export weapons to
(l) the communist bloc. (2) countries to which exports of weapons are banned
by the UN and (3) countries involved in an armed conflict or likely to be involved

in an armed conflict.

Toei Boat Company, established about 1965, was a leader in the construction of re-
inforced plastic boats but went bankrupt in December 1978 in the shipbuilding
depression following the oil shock.

COPYRIGHT: DAILY YOMIURI 1932

C80: 6120/149

1
FOR OFTWCIZL USEZCNHLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

MILITARY

BRIEFS

ARNS SALES T0 U.S.-~Kyoto, Feb 9 (JIJI Press)--An influential businessman
Tuesday came out in favor of weapons sales to the United States. The
government should permit exports of weapons to the United States, if Japan's
Pacific ally needs them, said Hosai Nyuga, chairman of the Kansai (Western
Japan) Economics Federation. He told a gathering of the Kansai business
community here that the government should also allow the supply of military
technology to the United by narrowing down the application of the nation's
three principles banning arms exports, since it forms part of cooperation
under the bilateral security treaty. Japan, which has the war-renouncing
constitution, maintains a total ban on exports of weapons to communist
countries, nations subject to the United Nations arm embargo, and countries
involved or in danger of getting involved in international disputes.

[Text] [ow091441 Tokyo JIJI in English 1&17 GMT 9 Feb 82]

NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY BxPORTS--At a 22 January cabinet session, the Japanese
Government decided that "it is inconceivable for Japan to export nuclear
weapon parts or technology usable in manufacturing nuclear weapons because
Japan is Committed to three non-nuclear principles.“ The government will
state this view when it replies to a question previously raised in the Diet
by Komeito dietman Shozo Kusakawa concerning the issue of military technology
exchange between Japan and the United States. The Japanese Government is now
in the prOcess of formulating a uniform stand that “military technology
exchanges between Japan and the United States are possible under the security
treaty." However, the view adopted at the 22 January cabinet session means
that technology which may be used in making nuclear weapons will be excluded
from military technology exchanges. In a reply to Kusakawa's question. the
government will also express the view that the U.S. forces in Japan are free
to procure arms and military technology inside Japan under the Japan—U.S.
status of forces agreement. However, concerning the U.S. request for Japanese
military technology, the Japanese Government plans to deal with the request
in accordance with Article 3 of the security treaty. not the status of forces
agreement. [Textl [OH24190b Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 22 Jan 82
Evening Edition p 2]

CSO: 4120/149

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NATION'S PER CAPITA GNP TO TOP U.S. IN 2000

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990, 26 Jan 82 pp 1. 19

[Text]

Japan's population in 21 Cen-
tury will age to a degree
equivalent to those in West
European countries and it: per
capita woes national product
will top that at theUS.

This was revealed in prelimi-
nary estimates made by the
Government's Economic Coun-
cil in its wont to complete a
long-range outlook oi Japan's
economic society by this May.

Some oi the salient points oi
its estimate as low are:

—1‘hoee oi as or older will
comprise 15.6 per cent oi the
population. compared to only
0.0 per cent in mo.

—.lapan will come to occupy
13 per cent (to per cent in team
ot the world's GNP. and its per
capita GNP will become 12-
iold that of the U.S.

According to the preliminary
estimate. the population growth
is going to dip in the future In
the live years. irom moo to
2015. the yowth will avenge
0.29 per cent yearly. greatly
down trnm theom per cent (or
the five years from 1975 to woo.

furthermore. lrorn zoos to
2010. the growth rate will tall to
not per cent. The population
will nearly level oil. and in the
five years lrom 2010 to ms. the

growth will turn to a minus 0. is

per cent.

Along with such a trend. the
shareolpeopleols'ioroverin
the total population in 2000 will

19

climb to 15.6 per cent from the
9.0 per one In 1m Ag": ot thc
population will lirther grow to
21.1 per cent in 2015. or "attain
a hiyi level ot aging unexperi-
enced as yet by any nation in
the world." it is predicted.

Willi the emergence oi the
higlhage society. the relation-
slip of burden tram one gen
crations to another is going to
change. With the incrcmc oi
the aged. the working gcnera~
tion will he called on to assume
a larger burden ol obligation to
pay tor the annuity and social
imrance oi the aged.

Moreover. the work iorce will
assume a more midtﬂe age and
elderly character. and hiring
wactica will have to charge.
The rate personal savings will
come down as there will be
more elderly people drawing on
their savings tor living. and
there is atrong likelihood that
the nature of consumption ex-
penditure and livirg will alao
change.

The estimate llgira that .la-
pan has the capacity to attain
an economic growth oi abouts
per cent yearly or slightly
higher than that ol the other in-
dustrially-advanced nations.

its reasons are: 11 The level
at Japan's technological level.
supported by sell-development
power and other lactora. will
surpass that ot other nationa;
2) The people's aavinga rate.
will continue to maintain a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK‘MI. l'Sl“. ONLY

Popuntion. Growth. Income in no.

Deg-ulna 'ﬂﬂ "noble"!
Hull-en) not“ 00" It”. Jo.“- I“)
I.“ mum-once ”I‘M N“ ”I .~ ~ I.“ “
“out III II. It. I) m ”A
(1 I) (2.1)
v.5 1" m )I I I. II. a "0.0
H 0) “0)
EC other 0!“) not-om 3' ll. ”.9 )0 ".0 ISI 1
(I 9) t} I)
1005! m "I 0| 1 ll 9' 6 "'6
II. 3) II) II
Conn-ml Ole: nut-on
u SSI.EulEuloneeI¢. m at I“ II 5” v0.2
(9 I) (7 4)
cm VI LII. a o S S i O I
III I) I" 9)
MID-Into... out I.“
W (comm . 2.37) 3.5“ I! I I! I o I) O
in II (99.!)
00nd 1cm . .. 4.84 5."! lab IO 3.) do
0”,.) mom
”on I” I. In. hill ”WW III oust-mo
level higher than that of the GNP vall climb from the to pet
othct advanced nations. cent to woo to [3.0 per cent In
As lot the U.S.. the European moo. Japan's per unit: GNP

Communities and other OECD
muons. they will record an
economic growth 0! 3 per cent.
each. the middle-income coun-
triengrowthot'lperoent.the
other developing nations 4 per
cent. end the Communist Bloc
mtiomagmthotlnercent

As a fault. the shore oi the
Japan's GNP in the world's

will also the from the 8.900 in
teen to 821.3") in mo 3: to sur-
pass America's "1.600.

The estimate says Japan's
role in the Free World further
will grow as atom with its
higher position in the world
economy, the positions at the
US. and EC cotrespoodingly
coming down.

982, the Nthon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOYOTA MOTOR, SALEf ARM WILL ME IN JULY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 991, 2 Feb 82 pp 1. l5

[Text]

Toyota Motor Co.. the worlds
No. 2 automaker. and its man
heting arm. Toyota Motor Sal-

Co.. annuinced last Monday
they had decided to merp as d
July I. tiis year after more
than 32 years oi separation

At a press cordcence in
Nagoya, THC Praident Elli
Toyoda and TMSC Pruidont
Shoicﬂro Toyorh said they had
aimed an agreement to merge
lntoanewlirmJobenamedn
Toyota Motor Co.. Ltd. under
terms yet tobeworted out

The two presidents said the
merger was decided to "tide
over the irlensilyirg global
war" in the small car buainas
and muting protectionism in

overseas markets. They said
the two inseparable functions 4!

and marketing mun
be perlormcd in an “integrated
and ﬂexible mantrer" to entire
further development of the

group.

According to the agreement.
the merger will take place
possibly on July I on an equal
basis. but for lorrnality. it will
taite the term oi THC. Japan's
biggest automaker. takira over
TMSC. That is. the new core
pny will take over all TMSC
employees which number 5.l6l
against TMC's «3.157.

The final date of merger will
be decided alter the two com-
panic study stock prices, the
value oi assets and other tech
nical matters to determine the

FOR OFFICIAL

merger ratio. Other delaih to
Worked out include the new
management and capitalisation
d the new company. dlicials d
the two eompania aaid.1he
two cornpara‘es will set up a
pepratory organ ltl' the
merger in study the details and
will sign the merger contract in
mid-March. Then. they will
hold an extraordinary stock-
holtbrs' meetirg in mitHlay to
sedt approval of the merger
and plan to haid the stock-

company in late September.

Industry observers said
TMSC President Shoichiro
Toyoda is likely to amme the
presidency oi the new company
with TMC President Eiii
Toyoda assuming board chair-
manship. Before the merger, a
massive reahtme oi leading
personnel oi the two companies
will take place. otﬂciah said.

in 150. TMSC was set apart
irorn its paler! THC in an
attempt to wet-come TMC‘a
management crisis at the time.
Since then. the two companies
have gown irao Japan's top
automaker and its marketing
arm water the leadership 11
TMC's ‘l'aizo lshida and TN-
SC's Shotaro Kamiya. The
merger will come alters: years
of the separation. Both presi-
dents judged there is "no
merit" in the separation now.

The merger will give birth to
Japan's' biggest auto manu-

21
USE ONLY

lecturing entity with arnial
sales totaling more than N
trillion. THC. capitalised at
it too: billion reported sales ot
”hiriliioniniu businas year
ended June so. tut. raise.
capitalised at Van billion.
reported sales of V3.6 trillion in
itsyearendedlasthtarch.

The net worth ratio to the
expected total capital of the
new company will be 50.3 per
cent. compared with General
Motors Corp.'s 50.7 per cent
and Nissan Motor Co.'s 6.5 per
cent. but is very likely to
become higher when variant
measures are talten alter the
merger.

Moreover. the expect-1| pie
tax recurring prolita oi tiw new
company will reach ”$7.5
billion. far ahead of Japan's
No. 2 maker. Nissan Motor Co
(Um billion). But THC oiliv
cials said the new company is

still tar belind the world's top
maker. General Motors Corp.

in terms oi sales. size and
curate].

lniorrnants said that Toyota
wishes to catch up with GM.
GM is presently spending sto
billion to develop small cars in
an attempt to secure a a per
cent share of the world's car
market as its ”world car
strategy." 0n the other lInd.
Toyota is trying to acquire a to
percentsliareot themarltet-
a part of its world strategy in
the nature in in. Toyota
accmnted for it per cent of total
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030067-1

COPYRI 6111':

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prodmtionotcanintheworid
endhopstoboostitbytpee
cent this yeer. Up until
ncently. Toyote Ins been
mastulhsettingupsuperb
enemhty ltnsendexporm
excelled end cheep ceIsell
overthewld.

But with the start 0/ the Im.
the “we!” in thesmell oer busi-
ness hes intensified worlwide.
and protectionism in oversees
markets he muted. Jepe-
nese eutonuken heve been
forced voitmteriiy to rutrein
cer expats to the us. Wat
Germany end other European
countries. Develop“; countries
eleo ere trying to set up their

own euto menu!
plents, thereby th
Jepenoe msrket s
thoseootlntries.
Feced with this 1
the two Toyote 1:
method that sepsret:
redaction and meet
eﬂective for e:
esselnhled cer seiee
suited (or ptomotion
humane! strategy
cannedes bed am
over ‘fvorld strata;
the merger is en e
elimlnete this an:
mute e united Toy
etretegthwesseid

1982, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

C50: 4120/1107

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00850R000500030057-1
BRIEFS

v.5. TARIFFS--The Japanese Government disclosed on 2 February that it will
file a complaint with GATT concerning the drastically increased U.S. tariffs
on imported small Japanese trucks because they violate GATT provisions.
This will be the first time Japan has ever appealed to GKTT against the
United States, or on a trade issue for that ﬂatter. Japan will argue that
"this tariff increase is import-restrictive by nature and hence is in
violation of GATT provisions." The United States has battered Japan with
strong demands over economic frictions between the two countries, and Japan
nLends to bring any unreasonable punitive measures to the attention of
international organizations. In September 1980 the governments of Japan and
r"e United States began informal bilateral negotiations on the 0.5. tariffs
\ small Japanese trucks. but the two sides remained in disagreement
throughout the subsequent negotiations, making it necessary to seek mediation
through GATT, a third party international organization. Thus, the issue was
brought before GATT in July 1981 for "formal negotiations“ under Article 22
of the GATT agreement. However, these formal negotiations have failed to
settle the issue. Therefore, the Japanese Government, having given up hope of
finding a solution through negotiation, has now decided to file an action

with chT. Japan will file a complaint when the GATT Executive Council
meets in Geneva in mid-February. [Excerpt] [0H080403 Tokyo YOMIURI SHIHBUN

in Japanese 3 Feb 82 Morning Edition p l]

€50: 4170/149

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GOVERNMENT TO RL’X SHORT OF ENERGY DEVELOPMENT FUNDS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990, 26 Jan 82 pp 1. 19

[Article by Shigeru Kornago]

[Text]

The Japanese Govemmcnt
will be short of funds in
financrng the development of
out. coal. nuclear power and
other energy sources in the
future. it was revealed last
week.

According to informed
sources. preliminary calcula-
tiorts indicated Utat as things
stand now. the Government will
be faced with a shortage of H
trillion of about “4 trillion
needed to achieve a provisional
plan for long-term entry
supply and demand for the next
to years. Sources aLso said
risks and other problems in
volved in the development
make it difficult to procure

funds from the private sector to
compensate for the financial

shortage.
Consequently. observers
warned that research and

development of nuclear-related
injects such as the construc-
tion of nuclear reactors and
urnniurn i-in'rclunent may be
delayed because of the unfore
seen lack of funds. They have
urged the Government to
clarify priorities in energy
development and review the
plan for securing lunch for
achieving the provisional long-
tertn energy plan which was
mapped after the ms Tokyo
Summit as a guideline for
promoting Japan‘s policy in the

future.

The Government is already
short of funds in this fiscal year
for energy development. hit
hard by lawng oil-related tax
revenues arising from the oil
glut and stabilized crude oil
prices. As a result. the Japan
Petroleum Development Corp.
decided to urge the Govern
ment to secure all funds needed
for the construction of oil
storage facilities from the
private sector. Preliminary
calculations show this lack of
funds become increasingly
acute as the years pass.

According to calculations.
about Vim trillion is needed
for the next ten years (twi-
tm: and Vin: trillion for the
next I!) years (to 1996) to
achieve the provisional plan for
long-term energy supply and
demand. That plan stipulated
that the dependence on im-
ported oil in overall energy
needs must he reduced from
the present 70 per cent toso per
cent In 1990 and 43 per cent in
I995.

Out 'of V102 trillion yen
needed for the neat to years.
power generation occupied the
most needs, accounting for 65
per cent or van trillion of the
total, which will be procured
mostly from the private sector.
Thus. Government lunch of v14
trillion expected to be offered
for the next to years account
for only to percent of the total.

2b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even under this pmpcct. the
Government needs an arousal
average of 1.6 times the present
outlay of “so billlon allocated
toenergy development.

In spite of those financial
needs. prelimtmry calculations
indicated that the government
could secure only V to trillion
for the next to years from oil-’
related tax revenues even on
the assumption that oil pricts
will go up by 5 per cent in real
terms for the neat to years.
This indicates that the Govern-
ment's provisional plan for
long-term energy supply and
demand was mapped without
any consideration of the funtb
mededto achieve it.

Sources said it is difficult to
procure from the private sector
funds which could not be
generated by the Government.
Preliminary statistics say the
funds expected to be procured
from the private sector for the
next to years will total V90
trillion. As things stand now.
there is little possibility of

securing that V90 trillion from
the private sector. For
example. the electric power
componies' corporate booth.
considered to be the major
incomegenerating means.
occupy about 00 pa cent of
total corporate Don“ and their
issuance is lately to be sup
pressed in the future. Further-
more. funds tobesecured from
2:. 1E Eco—<3 5 Ev
33. .3 so :9. 8.533 8
8 v8. 3:. 1 52881 29%
.33 :8 032538..

woo-:8 1 9a 8888..
“—83.9 o. :59. 88.43
mpg 385 93.3.25. 35
a. 958 .8 x: 78.2. 5.
.58. 9.an 2-: 2.818
5x... .838 coin. .3 =5 89
18:6 a 818m Sosa—o 3
:35 82638 2:. 38.5
8814. 933.895. 0?
823 :8 = a :3qu 8

O!’ ’I 33—: I", 3-.- :1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

SClENtiF. AND TECHNOLOGY

LASER BEAM CUTTER USING OPTICAL FIBER CREATED

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 991. 2 Feb 82 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT: 1082. the Milton Keizai Shimhun,

(280:

6120/14?

A laser-beam metal cutter
able to send its hot slicing
beams through optical fiber to
a metal object has been
developed by Toshiba Corp. of
Tokyo.

According to the Japanese
electronics maker. its new YAG
ty it trium-aluminum-garnett
laser. believed to be
precedented as a metal proces-
Sit“ laser device. can cut
throtMi a 4-millimeter-tla'clt
sheet of steel witha slash width
of 0.5 mm and a hum-thick
sheet with a slash width (10.15
mm. Such results were attained
when the metal objects were
placed 20 meters away. The
laser can also cut tlrough a t-
mm-thiclt sheet at silicone sub
strate to make electronic cir-
cuit waters in a chamber tilled
with some inactive gas.

The YAG laser emitting an
Mrs-red ray «1 1.8 microns in
wave length sods its beams
through a quartz type (1 optical
fiber line measurtng 1.2 mm
across in outer caliber and 0.8
in light-passing inner caliber.

Such industrial cutting lasers
using optical fiber lines. udilte
the existing surgical laser
have also utiILcing liber op
tics. had been considered dilli-
cult to develop because ot the
high heat energy output at the
laser. The beam-entering end
otthelinehadbeenloundtobe
easily damaged by the beam
and the beam-exiting end also
by the strorg reﬂection at the
beam from the object. The
company has solved the
problem by devising a special
heat-radiating copper device
[or both club.

Inc.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY‘
JTTA T0 PUSR PATENT SALES OVERSEAS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 20 No 99

[Text]

COPYRXGHT:

CSO'.

censing mediation service.
recently said it will promote
Internationally its services
with Mitaui I: Co. 01 Tokyo.
a leading trading company.

The association. aﬂlllated
with the Ministry at Inter
rational Trade Ii Industry
tMl‘l'li. will he the semnd
Japanese service to
accelerate international
licensing ot ltnovIledge to
follow up a like endeavor
recently started by the
Research Development Con
pontlon of Japan. a similar
Tokyo serVice. allilated with
the Science and Technology
Agency of the Prime Min—
isler's office. in tieup with
Mitsubishi Corp. ot Tokyo.
Mitsui‘s rival.

The latter is handling all

“20/“?

how under the jurisdiction at
Government ministries. etc.
The Japan lnternatioml
Technology Association is in
charge at all kinds of such
technology or Itnowhow
under the jurisdiction of
Ml‘l'l‘s Agency at Industri-
al science and Tech-
nology. Pooled in the as-
sociation's file are some
moo pieces 'ol such in
lormation. annually growing
by about 700. -and coming
from some to research in-
stitution and other places in
theagency'a care.
Dramatically. the associa-
tion.duringthepaat decade.
lad clanneled about 1.300
pieces ot information licen-
irg to indistrial firms. an-
nually eamim some V300
million for the Government
in royalties and tees. Inter-
nationally. it had inter-
mediated in such licensing
of only 11 pieces. Thus. it
has seen the need (or inter-
national promotim ol its

1982, the Nlhon Kcizni Sliimlitm, Inc.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. 2 Feb 82 p 13

work to help correct Japan‘s
technology trade deﬁcits.
though it is still short
ot support because letv
Japanese recognise such a
need except tor covering
hue investmmta of tax-

wlth Mltaui to launch its new
(rive by mam the most at
the latter's global hmlneaa
iidormation lam-wt)
plying senice network. a-
pecially cmlderlm the
tatter's recent succeaslul as
aistance ln licensing the
lam agency‘s controlled
Fermentation Research ln-
stitute's method of boosting
sugar productivity by a
special enlyme (mellhiasel-
using process ot melting
rallinme. a ltlnd ot mots”
in beet sugar rellnery

1hetechnologyvvaslicens-
ed to Great Western Sugar
Company and Holly Sugar
Corp. both at the U .S .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

'ASAHI' URGES NATION'S EFFORTS FOR ANTARCTIC ORDER
(”4040953 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English 3 Feb 82 p 7
[ASAHI SHIHBUN 2 February editorial: "Antarctic Diplomacy"]

[Text] Japanese scientists began making observations in Antarctica 25 years
ago. and the scale of operations there has grown enormously. The Shown Base
is now over 20 times its original size. A quarter of a century ago, it con-
sisted of four buildings and covered about 180 square meters. Now it consists
of 38 buildings and covers 3,900 square meters.

The results accumulated by Japan's scientific observation teams over this
period havu been significant. In research into auroras, for instance. they
have used various methods, including the launching of rockets into the centers
of these atmospheric phenomena. In this field, Japan leads the world. In
addition, the discovery by Japanese teams of large meteorites in Antarctica
has nearly doubled mankind's stock of these things.

Antarctica is often called earth's window on the universe by people who attach
great inputtau=. to making «tita;;:ic observations in Antarctica. a unique
place where auroras cecur as particles from the sun fall into place along the
earth's line of magnetic force.

But the significance of observations in this region go beyond the strictly
scientific. Antarctica is also known as earth's window on the future. For
instance, by analyzing the continental ice there, we can determine climatic
changes in the past. There are warnings that the temperature of the earth
will increase in the future because of the large amounts of carbon dioxide
that are building up in the atmosphere as a result of the vast consumption
of fossil fuels and deforestation. It may be possible to verify whether
this is happening by analyzing changes in the size of the polar ice cap.
Antarctica also acts as a measure of the extent of the pollution of the
earth: traces of PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) have been detected there.

But Antarctica has an even more important function: it represents a model
region for a new international order. Under the Antarctic treaty of 1961, its
use for military purposes is prohibited, no nations are allowed territorial

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rights there, and the freedom of scientific observation and the promotion of
international :ooperation there are upheld. Behind the promulgation of
the treaty was the desire to realize, partially at least, the ideals of mankind.

In recent years, however, problems have arisen in connection with the region's
natural resources. A convention has been concluded which deals adequately
with the question of organic marine resources. but with respect to mineral
resources there was only an agreement to work quickly toward a convention

on exploration and development. At present. however, there are no prospects
that such a convention will be agreed upon.

At an international conference last year, it was decided to establish a special
committee for the purpose of drafting a convention; its first meetings are to
be held this year in New Zealand. There will inevitably be difficulties
because the prospect of mineral resources being found is encouraging claims

to territorial rights which had been considered impossible under the Antarctic
treaty.

Should these negotiations prove to be prolonged. the review of the Antarctic
treaty, which is to take place 10 years hence, may run into difficulties.

The question whether the establishment of an international order in Antarctica
progresses or retreats may be seen as a test case that will determine mankind's
future. This order must not be allowed to falter.

In this connection. Japan should make greater diplomatic efforts. Since it has
renounced any territorial claims in Antarctica, Japan is in a position to
encourage the promulgation of a new treaty, and its scientific successes in the

region will give considerable force to its voice. Japan is in a good position
to act as a mediator in this respect.

It is important that a domestic organization be established for this purpose
first. A situation such as the one surrounding the 1964 report on the preserva-
tion ‘ A;:arctic fauna and flora must be avoided. At that time, cooperation
among the government agencies was poor, the preparation of domestic laws was

delayed and today Japan is the only country not to have approved the report's
recommendations.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

C50: 4l20/IA9

29
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-”(1.“. IS} (INlA

SC I ENCE AN l) ‘l'l-ICIINOIDGY

FACILITIES COMPLETED FOR INTERFERON PRODUCTION

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 991. 2 Feb 82 p 11

I 'l'vxt I

COPYRIGHT :

680:

(0120/1107

Takeb Chemical industries.
Ltd. and Ninon Roche K.K.
lave completed iacilitis to

e volumes oi inter-
feron for c inical trials. Their
recently completed facilities
we designed to produce 1
trillion uta'ls a month. each.
The mass production will pave
the way for trial use for about
s.ooocaneer patients.

Their sample alpha-inter-
feron (produced by means at
genetic engineering) was
shipped to liollmann La Roche.
with the us. eornpny so [or
detecting no problems with
Takeda's and it ail-idiary's
interferon mali'ies. The ﬁnal
continuation oi ’qualities is
likely to lead the two ﬁrms to
supply their illerleron to the
Government's ciin‘cal trials.
starting in the autumn this
year.

Until now. when genetic enci-
neerin. method generally was

30

not applied. no large volumes
of inter-'eron were available it!
large-scale ciliu'cal trials. in
conventional technique with no
genetic emineenng. interleron
is extracted irotn. anion:
others.theeells.

Takea and Nippon Roche
Iicenud the Nneriean Roche’s
genetic eno'neerim techniqte.
1n: Osaka-based drug catcern
invested vsoo million {or its
equipment. while the out
sidiary oi Roche group Invested
in billion. Animal tests in
Japan continued no pralems
with their sample' quill!-

ln clinical trial. a cancer
patient remind m million
units.

Prior to the genetically engi-
neered inierieron. three ﬁrms
— Surnltotno Chemical Co..
Green Cross Corp. and Tony
Industries. inc. - supﬂied
their interferon.

1982. the Nilmn Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FACSIMILE EWIPHENT EXPECTED TO CLIMB 25 PERCENT

Japan JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 991. 2 Feb 82 p 9

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

(:50:

Japan’s iacsimile quip
ment [reduction will keep
growing at an average
anntnl rate at 15 per cell in
the next live years from the
current fiscal year. ending
next March. to reach
"57.900 million in ﬁscal
was. accordirg to a recent
forecast by the Communicav
tion industries Association
oi Japan. The stimated
ﬁgure for was is mighty
three times larger than the
armal produﬂiat in iisal
1”

Among various kinds oi
equipment. the highspeed
type. capable oi sending a
sheet oiM size (29 x 21 centi-
meters) of paper within
I minute. will increase
at an average aura-l
aowth rate of 21 per cent
airing the live-year period
and Will reach me blll'tw
in fiscal I“. while the
medium-speed type (a
mil-steal will grow by ll!
per cent per annmn to us

Japan‘s Facsimile Production Estimated by the
Communication Industries Association ol Japan

(MUD-"dill Aver»!

one-m

Mm , m

n. ‘Vﬂ iv” an) lvas IV“ lv'lh‘.)

“Miami". . . 0-0 II. no no mo III. are
Medial-Immune m in no a). m ass in
Lou-Winn“! .0 I) u u I" I" 097
MP1! ‘5 60 I. '0 I00 I). 1”
low as.) la] a me m s at: l ”I e no

t'il «woes Mimics. t“?! web es la! Normal bit-us and
mass mole. MN Us «trill-no cloud («We

billion. the association

Especially amazing in
growth rate is the low-speed
type requiring 0 minutes to
sendasheet. whichisexpeci-
ed tosoarbycn per cent on
molly to V i?! billion in
ﬁscal 1905. This is became
the association lnCluded the
"Miniiax" equipment oi the
Nippon Telegraph I: Tele~
phone Public Corp. in the
category oi the law-speed

W99
Miniiss can send in w,

minutes a sheet 0! paper.
timgh insmallerAs size (21

1982. the Nihon Keizai Shlmhun. Inc.

Al 20/157

31

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

x 15 centimeters).

As soon as N11 start-
ed the Minilax service
last September at a rela-
tively cheap leasing charge.
orders rushed into N11. The
public corporation has a
huge hack log ol orders at
the moment. Total orders
[or Miniiax in the first hell-
year period oi its marketing
are expected to surpass
com sets.

The low-speed type earlier
had started to late momen-
tum with the introduction oi
nu, WW In!» at
lacstmile equipment.
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ()VI.‘

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RESEARCH. DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURES GROW 14.5 PERCENT

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990. 26 Jan 82 p 16

[Text]
cow" “MT:
(:30: «120/147

Japan's research and de
velopment expenditures in
fiscal I000 increased its per
rent from fiscal 1979 to V5146!
billion. according to the Statis-
tics Bureau at the Prime
Mira'sler's Office. R a D ex-
penditures in the tield 0! na-
tural sciences accounted tor
09.3 per cent ot the total. or
“.6010 billion. up 15.3 per
cent from the previous year.

As a percentage d GNP.
total R h D outlays reached
2.19 per cent. up 0.12 percen-
tage point. ~

In fiscal ms, the latest year
tor which international com-
parisons are paslble. Japan
ranked second after the us. in
R t: D expenditure. With Je
pan as 100. the 0.5. registered
it". West Germany l7. France
szand Britain 15.

The survey. conducted an
nually since 1953. covered
about 13.000 business corpora-
tions. 1.300 research institutes.
and 1.900 universities and other

32

poops.

The tisalnm survey showed
that expenditures by businesses
accounted tor 59.9 per cent d
the total. or V 3.l42.3 billion. up
11.9 per cent from fiscal 1m,
reﬂecting active it a D invest-
ment. The increase was the
largest since ﬁscal 1975. Re
search institutes spent V7619
billion ta 14.6 per cent stare).
up is 1 per cent. and universi-
ties and others V LWJ billion
(3.5 per cent). up 6.5 per cent.

By item. personnel expanses
marked ”592.7 billion. ac-
counting tor «A per cent at the
total. the first time it dropped
below 50 per cent since fecal
mt. Spending tor raw mate
rials was 1738.6 billion (a in
per cent stare». and tar tangi-
ble fixed assets $904 billion
(in per cent).

The ratio at R I: D spending
to total sales at enterprises was
Lst per cell. almost the same
as 1.55 per cent in the previous

year.

1982. the Nilton Keizai Shlmbun. Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HITSUI, GWONICS TIE UP FOR BIOCOMPUTBR TECHNOLOGY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 1n Ehglish V01 20 No 990, 26 Jan 82 p 16

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

4120/1107

Mitsui a Co. has become an
agent (or Gentrola'ca Inc. d
Rockville. Marylandtohelpthe
American company s.” its bio-
computer technology in Japan.
Launched in October. int.
Genlronics is best known (or its
long-range project to develop a
hiocomputer by combining
electronic: and biotechnology.
It is investigatiru nerve cell
physiology in an attempt to
develop a biocomputer with far
better capability than mechari-
calcomputers.

The application oi biotech
nology to electronics is da-
cribed as super lash tech
nology. with only about to
scholars and researchers
engaged inhaslcstudia world»
wide. Gentronlcs. noting
Japan's advanced him-how in
applying electronics. plane to
strengthen its connection with
Japan throat: tectnoloocal
sales: in Japan.

Tho Tokyohaaed trading
hour agreed .to Waite
three major iota: marketing
drugs and chernicah required
[or the hind ot ruearch and
development as the uarylaod
firm is worth; on. commie-

sionim research pojecta by
Japaneae clients. and helping
Japanese companiee invest in
melts firm.

if realized. hiocanputers that
could incorporate elements
whoae elliciency is xenon times
as good as the heat element
available today (the u kilohit
random acceas memoria) will
make the preeent computers
look crude

Semiconductor makera in
Japan are not entlueiaahc
about the new wmputers yet.
Their activitia are cordined to
follow-up tests to conﬁrm
reported data. But height re-
mrchers will perhaps nah to
nerve cell physiology mearch
becaueollts potential.

Biocomputer development
will depend in tarp meaaure
on discovering proteins that
serve as molecular switcha tn
the human brains (the heat
computers). Switcher in me-
chanlcal computers are made
of aemicmductors.

Discovery at such proteins
will hopefully load to their
mus production by genetic
engineering so that they can
replace semiconductors.

1982. the Nihon Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HITI PROJECT TO DEVELOP SUPBRCOHPUTER STARTS IN JANUARY
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 3 Jan 82 p 1

[Article: "Science and Technology High-Speed Electronic Computer Project Started
in Earnest; Entrusted by the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology, Six
Private Firms Form an Association"]

[Text] R&D of a high-speed computer system, or the so-called supercomputer, for
science and technology started in earnest in January. This research project is
being undertaken by the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) under
HITI with the cooperation of the Electronic Technology Consolidated Research
Center (LTCRC) and private computer makers. A "Technological Research Association
for the Development of a High-Speed Computer System for Science and Technology,"
which is a "saucer" on the private side. was established late last year. The

ATST is to sign an agreement with this association in early January concerning the
research contract.

The 1981 budget (quarterly) for R&D of a supercomputer was 30 million yen. This
budget consisted of two funds of equal amounts: the R&D budget for BTCRC and the
research fund for the private association. The 1982 government budget includes

the sum of 813 million yen earmarked for this project (117 million yen for ETCRC
and 696 million yen for the private association), and the two are to continue their
1981 research through 1982.

The objectives of the present R60 activities include development of basic
technology related to new elements and new processing formats. The ETCRC is
responsible for Ran of: l) niobium group Jusenolin [phonetic] junction (JJ)
element. 2) gallium-arsenic group field effect transistor (GaAsFET), and 3) multi-
instrurrinn single data (MISD) format. The private association is charged with
R60 of: 1) lead group JJ element, 2) intergration of GaAsFET, 3) high electrOn
movement transistor (BENT), and 6) multi-instruction multidata (MIND) and single
instruction multidata (SIMD) which are considered to be difficult even with an
application of parallel processing format.

0n the other hand, a technical research association (managing director, Takuma
Yamamoto, president of Fujitsu Ltd) consisting of six private firms--including
Fujitsu, Hitachi, Nippon Electric, Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric, and Oki
Electric--which is to participate in this supercomputer RGD project, was
established at Toranomon, Tokyo recently. As soon as the contract is signed with

FOR OFT-16%|. USE ONLY
the AIST, each firm will undertake a portion of R&D activity in the field of its
specialty. According to the agency authority, the research work will be carried
out at each individual's place of work, for the time being. Depending on the
budget situation and actual progress of work. a central research laboratory shared
by the six firms may be established. as was done during the RED of the super LSI.

The objective of this supercomputer RED project, which was started in 1981 and is
to last 8 years with a total investment of approximately 31 billion yen, is to
develop a prototype of a super-high-speed computer system for science and
technology with a processing speed of 10 billion FLOPS (number of floating point
operations per second), which is more than 1.000 times faster than the processing
speed (10 million PLOPS) of the general purpose large-scale computers today. There
are many computations for which the fastest computers today are not fast enough,
including, for example. processing of image information transmitted back from
artificial satellites, plasma simulation of nuclear fusion, meteorological data
analysis. and aerodynamic computation for aircraft. Therefore, a number of
commercial supercomputers have been developed in the United States. such as the
CRAY-l (processing speed greater than 150 million FLOPS) and CYBER 203 (100 million
FLOPS). The supercomputer which is being developed by the AIST is aimed at a

much higher performance.

However, in order to be able to achieve thid goal, a general system consisting of
the following components must he developed first: 1) high-speed logic elements and
high-speed memory elements to replace the silicon elements used today; 2) parallel
processing format for operating a large number of basic processors simultaneously;
and 3) parallel processing device for high-speed computation, large-capacity
high-speed memory device. and parallel processing device for distributed
processing.

The supercomputer research. which was started in January, must first of all
decide which parallel processing format is to be adopted, and then carry out
research activities related to it.

The performances of the elements to be developed by this project are as follows.
Logic element: packing density of better than 3.000 gates/chip, delay time of
loss than 10 picoseconds/gate for low-temperature element and less than 30
picoseconds/gate for normal temperature element. Memory element: packing density
of better than 16 khites/chip and access time of less than 10 nanoseconds.

TheSc elements are said to he used in the prototype of HlTl's "fifth generation
computers" also.

The goal set for the parallel processing device to he used in the high-speed
computation includes a speed of 10 billion FLOPS or more, a memory capacity of
more than 1 billion bites, a transfer rate of 1.5 billion bites per second or
more, and a maximum processing speed of more than 100 million PLOPS for the
parallel processing device used for the purpose of distributed processing.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1982

9113
C80: 4106/36

3
FORl0FF1CLAE.USE(NNLY
FOR OFF“ 1.“. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

USSR ORDERS LATRES-—Dainichi Knozoku Kogyo Co of Osaka has won a Soviet order
to Supply $730 million worth of lathes for delivery by February, 1983. The
Russian order breaks down into 21 large uni-purpose lathes and 2 large numer-
ically controlled lathes, worth #350 million, with shipments starting in July,
this year, and ¥380 million worth of uni-purpose lathes for automaking. with
shipments beginning in November, the same year. In addition, the Osaka com-
pany has received an inquiry from the Soviet Union for U2,500 million worth of
lathes for machinery and equipment to be installed at the Yakutia natural gas
plant. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990,

26 Jan 82 p 6] [COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.]

HORLD'S LARGEST ROBOT MILL-Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd., a top-rated maker
of industrial robots will build a factory in an industrial zone at Tarumi,

Kobe City, Hyogo Prefecture to mass produce industrial robots. The robot fac-
tory project, divided into three stages, will cost an estimated U17 billion.
Under the first—stage program, the company will begin constructing a plant this
fall to start it up in January, 1984. The projected plant will become the
world's biggest as a specialized robot-making factory, a Kawasaki HI spokesman
said. Kawasaki "I thus hopes to boost its sales of robots to $20 billion in
fiscal 1984, treble the I7 billion in fiscal 1981 ending next March. Second
and third plants will be constructed in accordance with demand growth. Japan's
sales of industrial robots are expected to swell to $600 billion in fiscal 1990
from the V78 billion scored in fiscal 1980. Kawasaki HI apparently aims at
assuring itself of retaining the No 1 spot in the field of high-efficiency
robots in Japan. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990,
26 Jan 82 p 6] [COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Reizai Shimbun, Inc.]

4K STATIC RAM's--Hitachi, Ltd announced that it would start sample marketing of
six types of 4-kiiobit complimentary—NOS static random access memory chips from
February 1. The 4K RAMs consume only about one-fourth the power of a high-speed
4K NHOS static RAMs while attaining a comparable maximum address-access time of
35 nanoseconds, the Tokyo company said. The high—speed address-access time and
low power consumption of the new RAMs were realized through the adoption of a
double polysilicon structure and 2.5 micron processing technology in combination
with hi-CHOS design technology. The combined techniques enabled Hitachi to
make the memory cells by the “MOS process and the peripheral circuits by the
CMOS process, it explained. Hitachi has already started mass producing the
HH6167H series at its Musashi Works in western Tokyo at a monthly rate of

36
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
several thousand units. It plans to boost theproduction capacity to the 100,000
unit level in May. Nearly half of the production is expected to he sold in the
v.5. fnr ﬂu-use in such areas as cache memories. buffer memories, program
memories and terminals for medium and small computers, according to Hitachi.
Prices for sample marketing will be between Vl,500 and ¥2,500 per unit. [Text]
[Tbkyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990, 26 Jan 82 p 8]

lCUPYRiCHT: I982, the Nihon Keieai Shimbun, Inc.

COMPUTER EXPORTS INCREASE--Fujitsu Limited, Japan's largest computer builder,
plans to step up computer exports to nearly 30 per cent of its computer divi—
sion's total sales from the present l0 per cent by the end of fiscal 1985. The
company has already set up footholds for penetrating the world market under
licensing agreements with Amdahl Corp. of the U.S., Siemens A.C. of West Ger-
many, and ICL of Britain. These partners are to sell Fujitsu's large-size com-
puters under their own brands and buy semi—finished products from the Japanese
company. Fujitsu's exports of large-size computers are likely to surpaSs do-
mestic shipments in fiscal 1985. Fujitsu is also readying itself for promotion
of terminal equipment exports. In 1980, it set up TRH-Fujitsu Co., in a joint
venture with TRH Co of the U.S., to handle sales of terminal systems for finan-
cial institutions and retail shops. Exports of terminal equipment in fiscal
I982 are expected to reach 47,000 units, three times larger than the estimated
fiscal 1981 performance. Fujitsu's total sales in the computer division in
fiscal 1981 are expected to reach #445 billion, up [6 percent from the previous
venr, with exports accounting for 13 per cent or $58 billion. For fiscal 1982.
the company predicts a 50 percent rise in exports. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONO-
MIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 990, 26 Jan 82 p 8] [COPYRIGHT: 1932, the

Nihon Kolzul Shimhun, Inc.

INTERFERON PRODUCTION BOOST-~Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratories, Inc, has
started expanding its interferon production capacity at Okayama City. Upon
completion of the V2.2 billion project in December, 1982, the company will be
capable of producing 600 billion units of interferon a year. The plan to dou-
hlc the interferon capacity follows completion in January, 1981, of a 300-billion-
unlt-a-yeur plant. including facilities to constantly breed 10,000 hamsters.
Besides the iS hamster chambers, the plant with a total floor space of 1,700
square meters is equipped with interferon cultivation and test facilities. The
company's interferon technique features hamster cell multiplication technique.
[Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20 No 991, 2 Feb 82 p 13]
COPYRICMT: 1982, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.]

CSO: 4120/147 END

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY