FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10051

14 October 1981

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAI. AFFAIRS

(FOUO 26/81]

gFBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l

14 Octot

USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 26/81)

CONTENTS
NATIONAL

Juridical Foundations of Private Plots Examined
(H. I. Kozyr'; SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, Aug 81) ....

REGIONAL
Numbers, Structurea of Lithuanian Kolkhoz Population Deacribed
(T. M. Tarshilova; TRUDY AKADBHII NAUK LITOVSKOY 88R.
SERIYA A. No 2. 1981) ....................................
Pit-met Planning, Control Needed in Resettlement of Nonchernozen
Population
(I. T. IUIlanov; SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, Aug 81) ..

Religious Survivala in Family that he Eliminated
(K. Numghanbetov; QAZAQSTAN AYELDERI, Jun 81)

- a - [III - USSR - 35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

JURIDIC“. POUNIMTIONS 01“ PRIVATE PLOTS MINE!)

Moscow somsxon: oosumns'rvo 1 mvo in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 3745

[Article by H. I. Kosyr'. head of ejector of the Institute or State and Law. 1138!!
Acadeny of Sciences; doctor or Juridical sciences and protessor: "Inprovenent in
the Legal Regulation of Private Subsidiary Fans of Citizens of the 088R?

ﬂex}? The presence or the private subsidiary (arms or kolkhoz taners. workers,
employees and other citizens. side by side with public production in kolkhones.
sovkhozes. and intertarm ﬁthomuvemyj. ogre-industrial and other enter-
prises and associations, is an important feature o! the socialist agriculture of
the USSR. The basic source to neet the country's constantly increasing require-
sents for foodstuffs and agricultural raw materials is their production in social-
iet enterprises and associations. but full utilisation of the resources of citi-
zens' private subsidiary fans for the production a! seat. silk. eggs. potatoes.
vegetables, fruits and other agricultural output is of great isportance.

There are approxiutely 3'0 million families sanaging private subsidiary fans in
the USSR. including more than 13 sillion mm» tansteads (Sammy mg.
more than 10 million families or eovkhos workers, and about the use nunbsr of
families of workers and employees in other sectors of the national eoonosy (2).
As or 1 November 1979. 8.‘o8 sillion hectares of land were in the ivate use o!
kolkhos farmers, workers and enployees (3). According to 'raSU antral statis-
tical Administratioﬁ data. as of l Janury 1981 there were 22.9 million head of
cattle (including 13.2 million cows). 1'...) million hogs. 1nd 29.2 sillion sheep
and goats on the public's private subsidiary tax. (‘5).

Development of the private mbsidiary (arms or rural workers where the correct
combination of public and private interests exists is not at variance with the
present stage of develophent of kolkhones and eovkhosee. Horeover, this lakes
it possible to cake use of the reserves in the increase in productim of agri-
cultural products without any kind of udditioml o'apital investnents by the state
to meet the public'e increasing effective deund for food products. For this
reason. it is not coincidental that the Basic Trends of Econuio and Social De-
velopment of the USSR for 1981-1985 and the period up to 1990 set the task of in-

public's private subsidiary fans and of rendering their ouners assistance in

purchasing younger aninls. fodder. seed and fertilizers. Apps-opiate legal re—
gulation also has been called upon to contribute to a solution or this test.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USR ONLY

The right of citizens to manage a private subsidiary fern has been guaranteed by
Article 13 of the Constitution of the USSR. Public relationships which take shape
in the field of nanaging a private subsidiary far- are regulated in detail by the
norms of state, land, civil, kolkhoz, family and financial legislation. The can
Central Cmnittee and 088R Council of hinisters decrees "0n the private subsidiary
ferns of kolkhcn farmers, workers, uployees and other citisens and on collective
orchard and garden cultivation" of 110 Ssptuaber 1977 (5) and "On additional sea-
sures to increase the production of agriculture]. output on citinens' private sub-
sidiary ferns” of 8 January 1981 (6) have been devoted to utilisation of the re-
serves of private subsidiary farms to increase the output of agricultural products
on them. These end other normative for-ml docuents, uhen they are duly put into
effect, unquestionably are celled upon to prosote the increased production of
agricultural output on citizens' private subsidiary ferns. However, it would be
incorrect to consider that legal aeasm-es to consolidate the private subsidiary
fern do not need further developoent and inproveaent. Substantial isprovenent
also is required in applying the law ﬁravopriaenitel'naya deyatel'nostj in this
broad and coaplex field of public relationships in the countryside.

A'he concept and socioeconomic nature of citisens' private subsidiary farns./
[in holdings] The private subsidiary fare is a transitional socialist forn of
production based on public ouncrship of the land and private ounership by the
workers of a socialist society of certain sense of production and of their per
sonal labor (7). Guided by this definition. we can formlate the following cha-
racteristics of citizens' private subsidiary tax-as: 1) it is a fern of production
which is based on exclusive ownership or the land by the Soviet state and the pri-
vate property and personal labor of the kelkhoz farmer, worker, euployee and sea-
bers of his family, and consequently has a labor character; 2) the private subsi-
diary fern derives iron and is dependent on developent of the public sector of
the kolkhoz, sovkhoz or other socialist enterprise (association), and has assmed
its socialist nature: 3) it supplenents public production, is subsidiary to it in
nature, and serves as an additional source of incooe for workers; and 10) it can
and should be utilized also to increase the production of livestock and other
output (potatoes, for mp1s) based on a contract for kolkhosee end sovkhozes.

In spite of the presence of features which reseable a cull-scale private fern
(the individual process of labor, the priaitive nature of the means and imple-
ments of production, and the like), the private subsidiary farm differs in prin-
ciple from s small-scale private fern by its continuous and indissoluble connec-
tion with public socialist productim, since it cannot give rise to any kind of
independent class or social group or regenerate nn's uploitation of nan.

In the Report of the CPS!) Central Omittee to the 26th party congress, L. I.
Brezhnev again stressed: "Kolkhones and sovkhoses have been and rennin the basis
of socialist egriculture. But this in no any means that we can disregard the re-
sources of private subsidiary ferns. Experience attests to the fact that such
terms can be of considerable help in producing neat, milk and certain other pro-
ducts. The gerdens, orchards, poultry and cattle belonging to the workers are
part of our cannon wealth."

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m its socioeconomic and legal nature the private subsidiary tars cannot and
should not, in our view, be identified with citizens' individual labor activity.
At the sane time, while the state has taken upon itself the legal responsibility
with regard to the private subsidiary farm of rendering assistance to citizens

in Innsging it (Art 13 ot the Constitution). the Constitution of the 0888 contains

the field of .11 handith industries. agriculture (in Imaging individe
peanut farms where they have been retainetD, and everyhy services for the pub-
lic, as well as in other fields based exclusively on the personal labor of citi-
zens and members of their faailies. And although in its socioeconomic nature it
is personal labor activity, by its character the production relationships which
emerge in the process. in our view, are still not socialist.

At the same time. we fully share the opinion 0! G. I. Shaelev and other agrarian
economists that the private subsidiary tars is a part of socialist agriculture
both as a subject and an object of econuic Inagesent. as well as by the charac~
tor Of production relations (8: 7: 9). "Its socialist nature," writes G. I.
suelev, "is determined by 1sportaat social functiaas. namely: by participation

statewide resume of food output. alpansion and extension or the any-sided
direct and indirect links. including coucdity ties. of public and private far-s
sake the socialist character of production relationdtips in the LPKh
(private subsidiary tum—NJ.) all the more obvious.” (2. pp 33-3“ .

It should be added 1.. what has been aid that. in chnrornity with the CPBU Cen-
tral Cannittee and USSR Council of Ministers decree "0n additional measures to
increase the production or agricultural output a citinens' private subsidiary
fans“ of 8 January 1981. Nivate subsidiary farms have the wt. on a strictly
voluntary basis, to conclude contracts with kolkhones, Mom and other agri-
cultural enterprises for the breeding and subsequent ale to these nterprises
ct cattle and poultry, as well as for the purchase of surplus silk. At the sass
time. it has been established that the umber of cattle raised under agreements

consumer cooperative organizations, can be kept above the established norms in
the private ownership of a kolkhoz farmer (kolkhon farmstead). workers. employees
and other citizens. Thus. the private subsidiary fans or oitisens who raise
cattle and poultry under a contract tor kolkhcses and sovkhosas should be consi-
dared as distinctive affiliates or these socialist agricultural enterprises.

Socialism radically changes the economic cognition of the private property which
is the basis for unnaging citizens' private subsidiary terms. It expresses rela-
tionships or comradely collaboration and mutual assistance devoid of the exploits-
tion of persons, and that is w it itself has a socialist character.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WFICIAI. USE ONLY

It is necessary, however, to more efficiently consolidate the socialist nature

of the private subsidiary farm and the right of property for its ownership in
the legislation in force. particularly in the Bases of Civil Legislation of the
ass: and of uniOn republics and the ox [61m mg of union republics when they
are brought into conformity with the Constitution of the USSR and of union repub-
lics and autononous republics.

This will mks it possible to extend the basic statutes and rules applied in the
socialist national econm as a whole (planning. crediting..and the like) to the
public relationships which take shape in the Wt of a private subsidiary
farm.

Let us note that different views are «pressed in the Juridical literature (in
contrast with economic literature) on the question of the social nature of pri-
vate property for the ownership of a private mbsidiary fan. Thus. A. A.
minnow, by correctly emphasizing in an article devoted to the constitutimel
bases for the right of private property in the 03812 that "the Constitution pro-
vides for the multi social role of private property which also is real.-

change the nature of private property (10). It is difficult to agree with this.
It appears that Vhili’. the social nature of private property in individual labor
activity, stipulated by Article 17 of the Constitution of the 088R. really is not
changed. it becomes a variety of socialist property when a private subsidiary
fern is mnaged in conforaity with Article 13 of the Constitution of the 0881!.

In the economic and legal aspects, the private subsidiary ferns of numbers of
kolkhozes, regulated by the Model Kolkhoz Bylaws of 1969 and the bylaws of speci-
fic kolkhozes, differ from the private subsidiary ferns of workers, eaployees
and other citisons working and living in a rural locality. The size of the plots
of land in use and the nominee nuaber of cattle which can be on the private aub-
sidiary ferns of citizens who are not kolkhos neabere are established by the laws
of union republics.

/Hhat is new in the legal regulation of citisena' private subsidiary famse,’

[in boldfac_e7 In recent years the party and the govmt, on a parallel with
development of meamee previding for the increase and consolidation of public
agricultural production and its intensification, concentration and specialization
on the basis of interfarm cooperation and ago-industrial integration, have been
actively supporting and promoting the develop-at of Soviet citima' private
subsidiary farms. Measures to increase agricultural production on private sub-
sidiary terms include: 1) eons-ins more caplete utilisation of private plots and
other available plots for the mnagaent of a private subsidiary farm; 2) render-
ing assistance to citizens in the construction of housing, garden sheds and farm
buildings; 3) rendering of assistance to citinens by heinous, sovkbones and
other agricultural enterprises in waging private subsidiary farms through ax-
psnsion of the ale to the public of young hogs. cattle. poultry and rabbits for
raising. the allocation of plots of land for grazing cattle and growing hay, as
well as additional plots of land for producing fodder, tilling of private plots,

'.
I-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

O
stone end gravel, send end other local construction nteriels. pleating stock
for fruit end berry crops. grepes, seeds end seedlings for vegetehle crops end
orchard end gerden inplesente. mined-cl :ertiliners end toxic chenicels in peck-

rerne in eccordence with the prices egreed open. on well es seesu-es to «pend
end reinforce the materiel hese of kolkhos mete with the sin of providing ci-

time with the necesary conditions for the ﬁle of surplus agricultural pro-

1n confcnity with the CPSU Centnl Omittee end USSR Council of Hinisters decree
"On the private suhsidiery terns or kolkhos toners. workers, uployees end other
citizens end on collective orcherd end gel-den cultivation" of lb Septuber 1W7.

The CPSU Centrel Committee end USSR Council of Ministers decree of 8 Jenmry 1981
substentielly develOps the right of lsnd use by citizens. Inlkhoz toners. work-
ers, employees end other citizens who conscientiously perticipste in public pro-
duction end pensioners who heve cettle, sheep end goete on privete wheidiery
forms will be granted plots for reieing by end grening settle for en attended
period when possible. For these purposes. agricultural land reeomes or kolkhon-
es end scvkhozee end the lends or the stete reserve end stete tisher reeomes end

or indeotriel, trensport end other nonegriculhu-el enterprises end orgenisetions
will be utilized in the esteblished procedure. Kolkhones. sovkhoses and other
enterprises should render eesietence to citizens in increesdng the productivity
of these lend resources.

An important innovation in the decree cited is the recounendsticn thet kolkhones,
scvkhozes and other agricultural enterprises grunt to the kolkhon toners. work-
ers, employees end other citizens who heve concluded contracts with these tens.
es well es with consumer cooperetive orgeninetions for the output of eninnl pro-
ducts, edditionel plots of lend for cultiveting fodder crops, both with private
plots end lends temporerily unused by terns when neceseery. The legel prectice
or granting citizens edditionel plots 0! lend (which. by the my. ere not subject
to taxation either under the egrioulturel or inoose ten for revenues received

f.
1

FOR OFF'N‘TAY. USE ONLY
INF. nrru Lu. “5?. UNIJ

It should be kept in nind that when compact construction of rural settlements is
in progress. citizens are apportioned all private plots near their houses
(apartments). The mining part of the plot of land is granted to than outside
the linits of the settlement's residential area. In a nuber of union republics.
in the Belorussian 88R and the Lithuanian 8812. for erasple. the experience of
kolkhoz farmers end sovkhon workers has been accusulsted in organising seclunined
cultivation of these plots of land in large oo-on tracts. which deserves careful
study and wider dissemination.

New measures providing for retention of cattle in citinens' private property were
outlined by the CPSU Central Committee and 0883 Council of Hinisters decree of

8 January 1981. Kolkhones, sovkhooes and other agricultural enterprises should
provide for the raising of young cattle and poultry and their ale to the public
in a quantity which nests the need for it by citizens' private subsidiary far-s,
taking into account the raising of cattle and poultry under contracts with kol-
khozes. sovkhones and other agricultural enterprises 0:4 with consular cooperative
organisations. Sovkhozes and other enterprises have been authorised under an
agreement with the trade union couittee to repay up to 50 percent of the credit
granted for the acquisitiou of cows and calves for worloers and employees who are
working conscientiously in these enterprises. as well as for teachers and physi-
cians working and residing on the territory of these enterprises. and for pension-
ers who have worked for an extended period in these enterprises. through the as-
sets of economic incentive funds. Local authorities should authorise construction
of livestock acccmodations in settlements on cooperative principles to keep the
cattle which are the private property of citizens.

In conformity with the 09311 Central emittee and 0888 Council of Ministers de-
cree of 8 January 1981. the USER hinistry of Apiculture. Ministry of Procwent.
Ministry of Finance. and Central statistical Administration drew up and on 12
March 1981 approved standard contracts for the mung and purchase of cattle and
poultry and for the purchase of milk surpluses on citinens' private subsidiary
farms.

With regard to introduction of the contract form of purchases of agricultural
products being implemented on citizens' private subsidiary faras. agrarian-legal
science is confronted with the task of mking known the legal nature of these
contracts. analyzing their content. mining the contracting experience and
working out valid recomendations for their refinement. And although these con-
tracts have as their final objective the sale of anilml products produced on the
private subsidiary farm, they cannot and should not. in our view. be identified
with the civil-legal sale and urchase contracts. since they are prinrily indi-

rect participants [oposredwut in the very production of agricultural output,
while receiving appropriate assistance of agricultural enterprises to provide the

citizens' private subo‘disry farms with young cattle and poultry. as well as with
fodder and in providing pastures. hsyfields. and other services. which is the le-
gal responsibility of the enterprise which concluded such a contract. The pre-
sence of the production side in the contract under consideration brings it closer
to a contract agreement for agricultural output. However. in contrast with the
contract agreenent as a planned agreenant. in accordance with the reason for its
existence, contracts for the raising and purchase of cattle and poultry and for
the purchase of milk from the public are concluded on a strictly voluntary basis.
and consequently are not planned contracts. In addition. contract agreements are
concluded only between socialist crganiutions.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rvx\Wt:Vlu v5a\WI\

All this provides grounds for considering the contracts for the raising and pur
chase of cattle and poultry and for the purchase of milk from the public as new.
independent ferns of contracts previously unknown in civil legislation. This
form of contract relationship, in our view. lust be provided for in the Bases of
Civil Lav and the civil codes of union republics. In a standardised procedure

it also is adviable to establish the forms and «tents of property responsibili-
ty of the sides for nonfulfillsent or imppropriate fulfillment of obligations
under the contract. Precisely this responsibility is referred to in Paragraph 5
of the Standard Contract for the raising on private subsidiary farss of cattle and
poultry belonging to kolkhoses, sovkhoses and other agricultm-al enterprises, ap-
proved on 12 March 1981.

The nmber of cattle raised under contracts with kolkhoses. soviniozes and other
agricultural enterprises, as well as centracts with comer cooperative organi-
zations, my be kept above the established norms for keeping cattle in the pri-
vate ownership of the family of a kolkhoz tanner (kolkhon farmstead). workers.
employees, and other citizens.

It is important that the rule has been established by the CPS!) Central Conittee
and USSR Council of Ministers decree of 8 January 1981 that cattle. poultry and
milk surpluses purchased by kolkhones. sovkhones and other agricultural enter-
prises under contracts with kolkhoz farmers, uorkers. eaployees and other citizens
are sold by these farms to the state and are taken into consideration by it as
production and in fulfillment of the state plan for purchases of agricultural out-
put. with the payment of established mimps for entity and quality indicators.
This will endow-age enterprises to emolude such contracts.

0n the other hand, for the persons concluding such cgtracts, equally with payment
of the difference between the stipulated 5oetenevoe and delivery weight of
the cattle being raised, a definite meet- of days off vykhododni? are counted
up with all the legal consequences resulting from this.

It has been recognized as expedient in determining the groups by age of the lead-
ing workers and specialists of sovkhoses and other state agricultural enterprises

to include in the production volue and ale of output of these fans the cost of
the cattle. poultry and milk purchased by sovkhoses and other state agricultural

enterprises under contracts with citiuns. It has been recon-tended that !:olkhos-
es adopt such a procedure.

The crsu Central Connittee and 0551: Council of Ministers decree of 8 Janmry 1981
has directed the attention of the central couittees of cmist parties and the
councils of ministers of union republics, party beckons and obkoms, the councils
of ministers of autonomous republics. )c-ayiepolltcms, oblispolkoas and party ray-
kcms, rayispolkons, economic organs. heads of kolldioses and sovlthosee and other
agricultural enterprises, the 'rsentrosoyun, and republic and local consuer co-
operative organizations to the fact that, at the use that measures are being
taken to increase the production of aninsl products on citizens' private subsidi-
ary farms under contracts with kolkhoses, sovlthoses and other agricultural enter-
prises, expansion should be enmed in the procure-ant activity of consular co-
operative orgenizations and development should be ensured in emission trade and

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UPFH'IM. IISR GNIN

trade at kolkhoz nrkets in meat and other agricultural products. The USSR Gos-
plan has been charged with providing, in the drafts of the state economic and
social development plan-3 of the USSR, beginning in 1982. apportioment to the
Tsentrosoyuz of concentrated fodders for reciprocal ale to citizens who have
concluded contracts with conmer cooperative organisations for the purchase

of cattle and poultry. It has been proposed that the councils of ninisters of
union and autonomous republics and the iepolkmls of hay. oblast, rayon and city
soviets of people's deputies carry out names to expand and reinforce the la-
terial base of kolkhor. markets in order to establish the conditions necesnry for
citizens to sell the surplus agricultural products which they have available.

Additional measures also will be worked out to increase the production and ﬁle
to the public of orchard and garden implmants, crates, packing laterials. and
small mechanized implements for agricultural operations.

/0n the necessity for standardisation of the legal re tion of the private sub-
sidiary toms of citizens of the “cm/[in mam. Up until mdoptim of the
Constitution of the USSR in 197?. the legal status of a kolkhoz member was cha-
racterized by the presence of a special legal institution-atlas kolkhoz farmstead.
The legal characteristics of the property of a kolkhoz farmstead differ from the
legal characteristics of the joint coamnlnity property of spouses typical in the
interrelations of the family of a worker or employee. In the Soviet countryside
two different procedures. in essence, function for regulating property relations
on the private farms of kolkhoz farmers and workers and employees which. in our
view, do not exist because of economic necessity. A significant part of the ru-
ral population now consists of the workers of sovkhozes, other state enterprises.
and the rural intelligentsia. Host of them have private plots and usage a pri-
vate subsidiary farm. However. their farms are not called farmsteads.

The living and working conditions or the collective farm peanntry and the work-
ing class have substantially converged. Kclkhon farmers, like the workers of
sovkhozes. receive basic incomes for labor on a public farm, but only supplemental
income from a private plot of land. The sizes of private plots of land in private
use and the number of cattle owned by kolkhon farmers and sovkhoz workers in any
regions are almost identical, too. Under these conditions. the presence of dif-
ferent norns to regulate property relations on the private farms of kolkhon farm-
ers. on the one hand. and of workers and uployees on the other, is difficult for
the rural dweller, especially the youth, to comprehend. It is also characteris-
tic that farmsteads in their legal sense have completely disappeared in the reor-
ganization of kolkhozes into sovkhozes. At the same time, no negative consequen-
ces of any kind took place for the magement of private subsidiary fen-s.

In our view, it is time to repudiate the retained but still formal distinctions
between the kolkhon farmstead and the private farms of workers and employees and
to introduce the appropriate changes in legislation. It is doubtful whether the
concept .of a "farmstead" can even be used tarminologioally. In many kolkhones.
compact construction of a village is under my. and two- and four-story and multi-
story houses are being built side by side with single-family houses. It would

be incorrect to call the kolkhon farmers and members of their families living in
separate apartments in such buildings a kolkhon farmstead.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0
It is not coincidental that, with the sin of increasing the motivation of young
families to establish and develop private subsidiary ferns. the CPSU Central Coa-
sittee and the 0881! Council of Ministers decree of 8 January 1981 has authorized
sovkhozes and other state agricultural enterprises to give—and has recc-ended
that kolkhoses give—these families young cattle free of surge through the fern

and to provide assistance in erecting farn outbuildings under the condition that
members of these fuilies work in the enterprises cited.

PrOgress in develop-out of the Soviet econow and thersntire sociopolitical sys-
tem and the consolidation of kolkhoses rake it possible to more fully implement
the Leninist behest "to eliminate the difference between the working class and
the peasantry. and to oake /everyone workers"/ [in italicg7.(l).

All this attests to the fact that it is necessary to eqmlise the legal character-
istics of the private subsidiary ferns of hollow: testers and workers and employ-

ees by introducing the appropriate changes in legislation. This has been done,
in our view, in the new Constitution of the 385}? and the cautitutions of union

and autonomous republics, although views have been «pressed against such a solu-
tion in the press (11). In contrast with the Constitution of the 0853 of 1936.
which confirmed the kolkhoz farmstead as the subject for the right of land use
and the right of private property (Art 7), the 197? Constitution of the "8812 no
longer provides for the institution of the farastead, having confirmed the single
right of citizens' private property, including for a house and a mbsidiary fern
(Art 13). Per this reason. the menbers of a kolkhoz, in our view, now should be
recognised as the subjects of the right of ownership of a subsidiary farm in hol-
khozes, and the extents of land use and the number of cattle in private omership
should be standardized for the family. similar to the By these probleas are re-
solved in sovkhozes. The land. civil, kolkhoz. family and other laws on the kol-
khoz farmstead in force. in our View. must be brought into conformity with the
Constitution of the USSR, and the concept of "the subsidiary farm of a kolkhos
member" must be juridically consolidated. At the use time that we strive to
retain a labor force in the countryside, we should study the problem of the ad-
visability of preserving for the families of kolkhos far-era and disseminating to
the families of workers and employees of state and interfam agricultural enter-
rpises the procedure of property inheritance established today by civil law for
the property of the farmstead after the death of the last set-bar of the farmstead.
The Hodel Kolkhoz Bylaws of 1969 recognize:- "the family of a kollduoz former (the
famatead)" as the subject for the right to a private subsidiary farm. However,
the use of this term in the Model aylaws attests only to the family aspect of the

It is important to establish a social climate everywhere in which kolkhoz farmers,
workers. employees and other citizens becone sure that by raising cattle and

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

poultry on a private subsidiary term and by engaging in the cultivation of or
chards and gardens they are performing useful state work.

At the same tine, of course, the well-being o! those who mange a subsidiary i'arm
also is increased, because they are receiving additional income from it above ‘ 2
their basic earnings in the kolkhoz or eovkhoz.

By carrying out the course of utilising the resources of the private subsidiary
farms of kolkho: farmers, workers, eaployees and other citizens to increase the
production of agricultural output, the party and the government are pointing to
the necessity of providing for the correct combination of social and private in-
terests in kolkhozes and sovkhoses, particularly of conducting a decisive struggle
against the mention [mum-any at private pm. to the detrisent of public
production.

BIBLINRAPH!

1. Lenin, V. 1., "Econclnics and Politics in the h of the Dictatorship of the
Prcletariat," "Polnoye sobraniye ecohineniy" Collected Hon-kg, Vol 39,
pp 276-277.

2. Shmelev, G. 1., "rho Economics of the Private Subsidiary Fan in Socialist
Countries," Hoacov, 1979, p 8.

3. "National Econow of the USSR in 1979. Statistical Yearbook," Moscow, 1980,
p 23?.

1+. vam, 2‘6 Jan 1931.

5. "Me Leninist Agrarian Policy of the OPSU. A Collection of the Most Important
Documents (“arch 1965-July 1978)," Moscow, .1978, pp 632-639.

6. 'Collection of Decrees of the USSR, 1981" No 6, Art 3?.

7. Belyangz, V. A., "rho Private Subsidiary Bars Under Socialism," Hoscov, 1W0,
PP 33‘ o

8. Shmelev, G. I., 'The Private Subsidiary Farm and its Link with Public Produc-
tion," Moscow, 1971, pp 30-31.

9. "rho Development of Production Relationships in Agriculture," Kiev, 1977,
pp 100-101. —

10. Ruhanov, A. 1., "the Constitutional Bases of the Right to Private Property
in the ussa." sovmsmm oosumasrvo I vao, 1981, No 14, pp was.

11. Polyenskaqa, G., "rho Kolkhon Mead," 12mm, 5 Aug 1977.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'mm", "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1981.

8936
cso: 1800/7n
I‘nl.’ m‘nnu I‘m (\\1\

REGIONAL

NUMBERS, STRUCTURES OF LITHUANIAN KOLKHOZ POPULATION DESCRIBED

Vilnius TRUDY AKADEHII NAUK LITOVSKOY 55R. SERIYA A in Russian No 2 (75) 1981
(signed to press 110 June 1979) PP 109-119

[Article by T. M. Tarshilova, Institute of History of the Academy of Sciences of
the Lithuanian $88: "The Number, Sex, Age and Professional Composition of Kolkhoz
Farmers in the Lithuanian SSR in 1971-197S"]

[Text] Introduction

The rapid growth of production forces at the current stage of development of the
socialist society and the improvement of production relations have resulted in
profound changes in the socio-economic status of kolkhoz peasants and in their
social and professional structure. The overall study and elucidation of these
changes is one of the main goals of Soviet social scientists.

The social changes in the development of the modern kolkhoz village have become
the subject of study by the historical, economic, sociological and demographic
sciences. A large number of works devoted to various aspects of the problem have
appeared.

The general tendencies in the development of the kolkhoz peasantry as a class and
changes in its social—prpfessional structure have been reflected in the works of
many Soviet researchers.

Research scientists of the Lithuanian SSR have published a number of works on the
dynamics of the population's numbers in rural areas and on the social structure of
kolkhoz farmers under conditions of scientific-technical progress in agriculture.2
An important place in the works of Lithuanian researchers has been occupied by the
question of the nature and direction of migrations of the rural population and its
effect on the social structure of the village.3 Nevertheless, there are still some
little-studied questions on the dynamics of the size of the population and the
social structure of kolkhoz farmers in Lithuania during the Ninth Five-Year Plan.

The purpose of the present article is to determine the basic tendencies and directions
of change in the population size and in the sex, age and professional composition
of kolkhoz farmers in the Lithuanian SSR in 1971-1975.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic sources for the study are the summarized annual reports from Lithuanian
kolkhozes which record the results of kolkhoz operations as economic and social
units. They contain abundant statistical material and can be utilized to elucidate
various aspects of the problem of the development of kolkhozes and of the

kolkhoz peasantry. Kolkhoz statistics provide information on their production,
economic and financial activities, on the population of the kolkhoz according to
sex and age and on duties and professions, thus enabling us to utilize the reports
in studies of the social structure of kolkhoz farmers.

The Population and Age-Sex Composition of Kolkhoz Farmers

Changes in the population of kolkhoz farmers under conditions of developed
socialism are the results of two interrelated processes--qualitative changes in
agricultural production and the intensive development of urban economy.

One of the most important characteristics of the development of agriculture under
conditions of developed socialism is scientific-technical progress within the
branch. Another is the industrialization of agricultural labor. These processes

are most clearly reflected in the changes in the material-technical base of
agriculture.

During the Ninth Five—Year Plan the kolkhozes of the Lithuanian SSR had a
significant quantity of technology at their disposal. In 1975 the machine-tractor
fleet belonging to kolkhozes included 29,495 tractors, 7,096 grain combines,

13,684 trucks and other agricultural equipment, or 17, 15 and 22 percent more
respectively than in 1970.“ The use of powerful and quick K-700, K-701 and

T-lSOK tractors and highly efficient combines has provided the foundation for
technical progress in kolkhozes. In 1975 the power supplies of kolkhozes increased
by 36.9 percent in comparison with 1971 per 100 hectares of agricultural lands.

The levels of energy supplies in Lithuania's kolkhozes were higher than the national
average. Thus, in 1974 17.5 horsepower energy capacity was available per kol hoz
worker in the republic as compared to 11.8 horsepower in the USSR as a whole.

During the Ninth Five-Year Plan complex mechanization in farming and livestock
raising was introduced at a rapid pace. In 1975 in the kolkhozes of Lithuania

the milking of cows on farms was completely mechanized (99 percent), the water
supply for farms raising large-horned cattle is 78 percent mechanized and that on
hog-raising farms is 95 percent mechanized. In farming operations such as the
sowing of vegetables. the mowing of vegetation for green fodder, the harvesting of
sugar beets and potatoes and the loading and application of mineral fertilizers
have been almost completely mechanized.

The primary result of production mechanization has been the curtailment of labor
expenditures per unit of production. In 1975 Lithuanian kolkhozes used an average
of 2.29 man-hours for the production of l quintal of grain, and 1.54, 2.73, 6.16,
31.7. 26.76 man-hours respectively for the production of sugar beets, potatoes,
milk, weight gain in large-horned cattle and weight gain in hogs. In 1972 the
corresponding figures comprised 2.91., 1.63, 3.27, 7.89, 36.1. and 30.15 man-hours.7
Labor productivity has also increased noticeably. In 1975 one average kolkhoz
farmer produced 21.7 percent more of the gross product than in 1971.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omaat USE ONLY

0n the one hand the level of development of the material-technical base of kolkhozes
was the reason for the liberation of the work force from the public economy. 0n the
other hand, the process of industrialization with the subsequent continued urbaniza-
tion of the economy had a significant effect on the changes in the population of
kolkhoz farmers. Up until 1970 over half of the population of the republic that
was involved in material production was concentrated in rural areas. The change
began in 1970, when for the first time in the history of the economic development of
the Lithuanian SSR the urban population, comprising 50.2 percent, surpassed the
rural population. At the same time the proportion of the population living in
cities in the Latvian SSR was 62.5 percent, and in the Estonian SSR--66.9 percent.

The pace of industrial development in Lithuania becomes graphic when we examine the
indicators for the degree of involvement of the urban population in material
production. In 1971 the proportion of workers and employeia in the sphere of
material production was 56 percent; in 1975--57.6 percent. The rapid growth of
the urban population reflected the level of the division of public labor in the
republic's national economy.

During the Ninth Five-Year Plan the changes that took place in the kolkhoz villages
of the Lithuanian SSR characterized the development of kolkhoz farmers during the
period of mature socialism. There was a continuation of the process of a decrease
in the absolute and relative population of kolkhoz farmers (Table 1). The periodic
outflow of the population from kolkhotes resulted in a drop of 8.6 percent in the
population of kolkhoz farmers over a period of 5 years. The dr0p in the absolute
kolkhoz population was associated with a general decrease in its proportion of the
republic's population from 15.1 percent in 1971 to 13.3 percent in 1975.

Table 1 '
The Po ulation of Kolkhoz Farmers in the Lithuanian SSR in 1971-1975
_.________________________________________________,_
Year
Indicator 1975 compared
1971 1972 1973 1976 1975 to 1971: 1
Number of kolkhoz members,
thousands of people 678.1 668.7 660.6 667.1 636.9 91.6

Proportion of kolkhoz

members in total pop-

ulation of Lithuania,1 15.1 16.6 16.2 13.7 13.3
Number of able-bodied

kolkhoz farmers, thousands
of people 272.6 265.6 260.6 252.3 266.6 89.7

Proportion of able-bodied
kolkhoz farmers in total

kolkhoz population, 1 57.0 56.7 56.6 56.0 55.9

The table was composed from data of summarized annual reports of kolkhozes of the
Lithuanian SSR (AHSKh LitSSR [Archives of the Ministry of Agriculture of the
Lithuanian SSR], Form 1, List 16, File 1066, Line 2; File 1186, Line 2; File 1363,
Line 2; List 6, File 200, Line 3; File 627, Line 1 (as of 1 January of the subsequent
year) and fro. data in the annual "Economics and Culture of the Lithuanian SSR in
1975," page 11.

13
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The average annual number of people who have been resettled has been about 10,000.
A characteristic feature of the Ninth Five-Year Plan was the accelerated pace of
migration of able-bodied kolkhoz farmers, whose numbers decreased by 10.3 percent.
The proportion of able-bodied kolkhoz farmers in total membership in the agri-
cultural sector decreased from 57 percent in 1971 to 56 percent in 1975. Able-
bodied kolkhoz farmers were one of the primary sources for the reinforcement of the
ranks of workers in industry and other branches of the urban economy. Rural cadres
of working age comprised over 92 percent of the population that resettled in
various cities of the republic. 1 This circumstance undoubtedly affected the
qualitative characteristics of the population involved in kolkhoz production.

The most intensive migration of kolkhoz farmers was observed in areas with
developing regional centers. Thus, in Alitusskiy Rayon an average of 272 kolkhoz
farmers moved to the cities each year; in Kapsukskiy-eb77; in P1ungeskiy--176 and
in Yurbarkskiy--23S kolkhoz farmers. In other rayons the migration of kolkhoz
farmers was relatively small. In Shal'chininskiy Rayon 64 kolkhoz farmers moved
to city enterprises to work each year on the average; in Zarasayskiy-—67 and in
Varenskiy—-90 kolkhoz farmers.12

while there has been a drop in the absolute numbers of koikhoz farmers in the
Lithuanian SSR, their general population per single kolkhoz has increased by an
average of 30.9 percent; the increase of able-bodied kolkhoz farmers has been
28.4 percent.13 This was the result of the enlargement of kolkhozes and the
reorganization of some kolkhozes and sovkhozes. As of 1 January 1972 in the
Lithuanian SSR there were 1,386 kolkhozes, with an average of 365 members per
kolkhoz; :8 of 1 January 1976 there were 966 kolkhozes with 652 members per
kolkhoz.1 The concentration of the work force in kolkhozes was based on the
industrialization of agriculture and the improvement of production organization.

The changes in the population of kolkhoz farmers result not only from economic
factors. Demographic factors occupy an important place in characterizing the
processes of development of the kolkhoz peasantry. Modern scientists note the over-
all drop in the birth rate of the rural population, which affects its natural
growth. In the Lithuanian SSR the birth rate coefficient of the rural population
was 15.7 percent in 1975 as compared with 17.6 in 1970.15

The sex and age structure of kolkhoz farmers in Soviet Lithuania has also changed
(Table 2). During the Ninth Five-Year Plan the labor resources of kolkhozes were
considerably reduced. The number of women in the total number of able-bodied
kolkhoz members decreased at a more rapid pace. Judging by the annual reports of
the kolkhozes 19 percent of the population consisted of 16-59 year old men in 1971
and 19.8 percent in 1975; 16-56 year old women-19.9 and 19.1 percent respectively;
men and women 55 (60) years old and over 29.3 percent in 1971 and 30.7 percent in
1975; children up to 12 years of age--22.7 and 20.3 percent respectively; and
children 12-16 years old--9.1 and 10.1 percent respectively.16

The growth in the proportion of men of working age was advantageous from both the
demographic and economic points of view. The fact is that for the development of

the agricultural economy a great deal of importance is placed not only on the
availability of labor resources but also on the amount of work time spent on work
in the public sector. Since the participation of able-bodied men in the production

1L
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2
The Sex-Age Structure of Kolkhoz Farmers in the

Lithuanian SSR in 1971-1975 gthousanda of persons}

Year All kolkhoz Men, ages Women, ages Men. 60 years Children Children,

populations 16-59 16-54 and over; up to 12 ages 12-16
Women, 55 years of
and over age
1971 701.3 133.3 139.3 205.4 159.4 63.9
1972 685.6 131.1 134.3 202.8 152.5 65.1
1973 671.3 129.4 130.9 200.0 145.6 65.4
1974 652.0 126.3 126.0 194.8 137.4 66.5
1975 627.9 124.2 120.2 192.5 127.4 63.9
1975,
compared to
1971,
2 89.5 93.2 86.3 97.3 79.9 99.5

 

The table was comprised from data of summarized kolkhoz reports of the Lithuanian
SSR (AHSKh LitSSR, Form 1, List 14, File 1046, Line 2; File 1184, Line 2; File
1343, Line 2; List 4, File 200, Line 3; File 427. Line 1 (as of 1 January of each
subsequent year).

processes of kolkhozes is expressed in the large quantity of man-days worked, then
naturally, the increase in their proportion in the total number of able-bodied kolkhoz
farmers will have a positive effect on the results of public production. In 1971

on the average in the republic able-bodied males worked 235 man-days; in 1975--

242 man-days. Females worked 163 and 182 man-days reapectively.17

A characteristic feature of the kolkhozes during the period under examination is
the "aging" process of the kolkhoz population. Between 1971 and 1975 the Smallest
percentage curtailment in the group of kolkhoz farmers of retirement age was
noted—-2.7 as compared with 10.3 in the group of able-bodied. This was encouraged
not only by the lesser mobility of older people. To a certain degree the role of
stabilizer was played by the improvement in the social circumstances of kolkhoz

farmers.

The data on changes in the population of the coming generation is interesting from
the point of view of the future development of labor resources in Lithuanian
kolkhozes. The large drop in the number of children up to 12 years of age is the
reSult of the migration of kolkhoz farmers with their families.

The Social and Professional Structure of Kolkhoz Farmers

As a result of the qualitative changes in agriculture an unavoidable process of
professional differentiation and division of labor in kolkhoz production took place.
This process was reflected in changes in the social-professional structure of
kolkhoz farmers in the direction of a growth in the number of trained professionals

15
ron ommt use ONLY
FOR OF1WCJAL.USE10NLY

in agriculture, of the development of new professions and the dying-out of old

professions in rural areas and in a drop in the proportion of manual and untrained
labor.

The primary structure-determining characteristim establishing the internal
boundaries among social-professional groups of kolkhoz farmers are type and nature

of agricultural labor. The social changes that have occurred in professional groups
of kolkhoz farmers are examined in the Biven article primarily from the point of view
of the differentiation of kolkhoz farmers according to the type of job and its place
within the organization of kolkhoz production. In the given case the research
encompasses all categories of workers involved in public production (Table 3).

Among the professional groups that determine the profile of modern kolkhoz produc-
tion an important place is occupied by machine operators and agricultural
specialists, the growth in the ranks of whom symbolizes the future kolkhoz sector.

In the kolkhozes of the Lithuanian SSR the number of machine operators, which
includes tractor operators-machinists of a broad profile and drivers, increased by
13.1 percent during the Ninth Five-Year Plan. Their proportion of the total
population working in agriculture was 11.8 percent in 1971 and 14.5 percent in 1975.
The machine operators in agriculture are the chief figures in the modern rural
region. Their work, which is based on a coordination of physical and intellectual
labor and on work with complicated agricultural equipment has acquired elements of
an industrial nature.

The republic's kolkhozes are being reinforced annually with cadres of workers who
are trained in machine labor. In 1971 each kolkhoz needed 18 isactor operators-
machinists and eight drivers; in 1975--30 and 20 respectively.

The introduction of complex mechanization had a considerable effect on the number
and composition of workers in livestock raising. The achievement of a high level
of mechanization in different production operations within livestock raising was
accompanied by a rapid growth in the proportion of workers involved in specialized
labor. Thus, during the Ninth Five-Year Plan there was a sharp increase in the
percentage of milknmids involved in mechanized milking operations. Whereas in 1971
55.5 percent of all kolkhoz milkmaids gere involved in machine milking, in 1975

the percentage had increased to 96.8.1

Mechanization in livestock farming has enabled us to free a certain number of

the branch '5 workers from production. A decrease in the number of milkmaids as a
whole accompanied by a constant growth in the number of milkmaids involved in
machine labor in mechanized sections of production was characteristic of the Ninth
Five-Year Plan. The number of cowherds-shepherds, swineherda and other livestock
workers has decreased. This was related to the enlargement of livestock—raising
farms and to the construction of livestock-raising complexes. At the same time the
growth in the herd of calves and the low level of mechanization of a number of
production operations (feed distribution, the cleaning of facilities, etc.)
necessitated an increase in the number of calfwomen.

16
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
1 2 3 6 5

l. Administrative-management
personnel (total)
a)Hanagers of the higher

20.3 6.6 20.6

links (kolkhoz chairmen,
their deputies, senior
specialists)

b)Managers of the middle
link (brigade leaders in
farming, farm directors,
brigade leaders of
construction brigades,
directors of repair
shops)

c)Accounting personnel
(bookkeepers, office
accounts personnel.
economists, planners,
accounts workers in
brigades, on farms)

2.Specialista (total)
Agronomists
Zootechnologists
Veterinarians
Engineering technologists,
mechanics, electricians

3.Hachine operators (total)
Tractor operators-
machinists
Drivers

(Continued on following page)

6.6

9.1

m

2.1

HHOU‘O‘
o . o o o
HH‘OUIQ
0

Nu
N‘-

11.8

21.6

66.8

5.6

8.3

no a- h-h-h-:a\

O O O O O

~ara n— e~saao~q
U. 9-

&~

HN

6400
.

VIN
Operations using norses
in farming (total) 148.9 46.8 117.4 39.8 78.7

 

Total 318.0 100.0 296.9 100.0 92.7

The table was composed from data of summarized annual reports of kolkhozes in the
Lithuanian SSR (AHSKh LitSSR, Form 1. List 14, File 1066, Line 29; List 4, File 627,
Line 10) (as of 1 January of each subsequent year).

 

Parallel with the tendency to curtail the number of some groups of workers in live-
stock raising there was an improvement in the special training and professional
mastery of livestock farmers. In the rural areas a new profession developed, that
of master of livestock raising. In 1975 there were 6.268 of them in Lithuanigs
kolkhozes, including 729 with class I qualifications and 3.539 with Class II.

During the Ninth Five-Year Plan there was a continuation of the increase in the
number of agricultural specialists--agronomdsts, zootechnologists, veterinarians
and veterinary surgeon's assistants and engineers-nechanics. Despite the small
proportion of this group among kolkhoz farmers (2.1 percent in 1971 and 2.7 percent

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 1975). it is difficult to overestimate the significance of specialists in

the organizational-production operations of the enterprise. Considering the profile
of the republic's kolkhozes, the basic role in the organizational and technical
management of production belongs to specialists in livestock raising. In 1971
every 10 kolkhozes in the republic had eight zootechnologists, eight veterinarians
and veterinary surgeon's assistants; in 1975 as a result of the concentration of
production and the growth in the number of specialist cadres these indicators
increased to 14 and 15 respectively. The availability of sgronomists was somewhat
lower: in 1971 10 kolkhozes shared 7 agronomists; in l97S-13, gespite the fact that
the fastest growth pace occurred for this group of specialists. 1

During the Ninth Five-Year Plan the tendency to decrease the number of workers
involved in manual operations and operations using horses in farming did not change.
In Lithuanian kolkhozes this contingent of kolkhoz farmers decreased by 21.2 percent
over a 5-year period and in 1975 comprised 39.8 percent of the total number of
average annual kolkhoz farmers. This circumstance is the result of the very same
process of saturating agriculture with energy and technical capacities, thereby
easing manual labor out of production operations to an even greater extent.
Nevertheless, this group of kolkhoz farmers still remains the largest within

the social-professional structure of all kolkhoz farmers.

several categories of workers in the administrative-management apparatus. Thus,
there has been a decrease in the number of kolkhoz chairmen. farming brigade leaders
and some groups of accounting workers.

However, the strengthening of the kolkhoz economy, the more and more extensive
inclusion of kolkhozes in general state planning and the growth in kolkhoz indepen-
dence have increased the role and significance of some groups of workers within the
administrative-management apparatus. Particularly noteworthy is the growth in the
absolute and relative numbers of senior kolkhoz specialists (by 44.2 percent),
released deputy chairmen of kolkhozes (by 56.5 percent) and directors of livestock-
raising farms (by 12.6 percmt).22

In order to more fully characterize the labor resources of the village we present
an analysis of the educational and professional levels of workers in kolkhoz
production (Table 4).

In the republic's kolkhozes the majority of trained cadres had a specialized
education: in 197l--53.3 percent; in 197S--60.7 percent. During the Ninth Five-Year
Plan as a whole the number of workers with a specialized education increased by 41
percent (together with practical workers). The proportion of specialists-practical
workers decreased in connection with the constant improvement in their educational
level.

The relatively small percentage of specialists with a higher education and of higher-
class tractor operators indicates that the kolkhozes of Lithuania have a significant
reserve for growth in the educational and professional level of workers.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OI1W(JA1.USE¢DNLY

Table 4
Level of Education and Training of Workers in Kolkhoz
Production in the Lithuanian SSR in 1971-1975

Indicator 1971 1975 1975 compared
to 1971: 1

Number of workers having a
higher, secondary special
education and practical
workers involved in the

public economy, persons 16,857 23,775 151.0

Specialists with a higher
education, 2 10.6 11.9

Specialists with a secondary
Specialized education, 2 53.3 60.7

Specialists-practical
workers, 1 36.4 29.9

Proportion of specialists-
practical workers training in
higher and secondary special

educational institutions, 1 15.1 16.7
Number of tractor operators-
machinists (total) 25,081 29,182 116.3
class I, 2 -1 25.8
Class II, 2 - 38.8
Class III, I - 3‘.‘
Unclassified, 2 — 0.96

1No data available

The table was composed according to data from statistical journals: '1he Availability of
Management Workers and Specialists According to Jobs in Kolkhozes, Sovkhozes and

Other State Enterprises as Hell as Machine Operators in Kolkhozes as of 1 April 1971,
Vilnius, 1971, pp 4-8, 10;'1Me Number of Management Workers...as of 1 April 1975.
Vilnius, 1975, pp 4-8, 10.

 

29
FOR OFFNJAI.USEGJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusions

1. 0n the basis of an analysis of summarized annual reports from the kolkhozes of
the Lithuanian SSR in 1971-1975 it has been established that during the Ninth Five-
Year Plan there was a drop in the absolute and relative population of kolkhoz
farmers in the republic's kolkhozes. In 5 years the population of kolkhoz members
decreased by 8.6 percent; their proportion of the total republic population dropped
from 15.1 percent in 1971 to 13.3 percent in 1975.

2. As a result of scientific-technical progress in agriculture and of the
industrialization of all branches of the republic's national economy the number of
able—bodied kolkhoz farmers decreased by 10.3 percent.

3. There were changes in the sex-age composition of kolkhoz farmers. The number of
able-bodied women and able-bodied men decreased at a rapid pace (by 13.7 and 6.8
percent respectively). The group of older kolkhoz farmers experienced the smallest
decrease in numbers (2.7 percent).

a. Noticeable changes occurred in the social-professional structure of kolkhoz
farmers. The proportion of workers involved in manual labor and labor using horses
dropped from 46.8 percent in 1971 to 39.8 percent in 1975. There was a rapid
increase in the number of specialists in agriculture (19.7 percent in 5 years)

and in the number of workers involved in machine operations, especially machine
operators (13.3 percent increase). During the Ninth Five-Year Plan there was a
curtailment in the number of some groups of workers in livestock-raising as a result
of the mechanization of some production operations in livestock—raising and of the
construction of complexes. Thus. the number of milkmaids decreased by 13.9 percent;
of cowherds-shepherds—-by 5.2 percent; of swineherds--by 6.7 percent; and of other
workers in livestock raising--by 10.5 percent.

There was an increase in the general education level of workers in kolkhoz
production.

FOOTNOTES

1. Yu. V. Arutyunyan, “Sotsial'naya atruktura sel'skogo naseleniya SSSR"[The
Social Structure of the Rural Population of the USSR], Moscow, 1971; P. A.
Ignatovskiy, "Krest'yanstvo i ekonomicheskaya politika partii v derevne"
(The Pcasantry and the Economic Policy of the Party in Rural Areas], Moscow,
1971; V. B. Ostrovskiy. "Novyy etap v razvitii kolkhoznogo stroya" [A New Stage
in the Development of the Kolkhoz Structure], Moscow, 1977; S. L. Senyavskiy,
"Izmeneniya v sotsial'noy strukture sovetskogo obshchestva" [Changes in the Social
Structure of the Soviet Society 1917-1970], Moscow, 1973; P. I. Simush,
"Sotsiai'nyy portret sovetskogo krest'yanstva? [Social Portrait of the Soviet
Pcasantry], Moseow, 1976.

2. P. Adlys. Lietuvos kaimo gyventojai.--Hokslas ir gyvenimas, 1971, Nr. 5;
Tarybu Lietuvos gyventoju socialines sudeties pakitimai.-Komunistas, 1974, Nr.
10; V. K. Skyabas, "Nekotoryye strukturnyye izmeneniya v kolkhoznom
krest'nanstve Litvy" [Some Structural Changes in the Kolkhoz Peasantry of

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

5.

10.

11.

12.

13.
16.
15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lithuania] in: "Problemy istorii sovreuennoy sovetskoy derevni" [Problems in the
History of the Modern Soviet Village 1966-1973], Moscow, 1975; Stanaitis A.,
Adlys P. Lietuvos TSR gyventojai. Vilnius, 1973.

Gaigalas B. Pramones isdestymo ir darbo resursu naudojilo k1ausimai.-

Ltaudies ukis, 1971, Nr. 6; Zenes ukio resursai ir ju naudojiuas.-Ten pat, Nr.
5; Januskevicius V. Teritorinis plaaviuss ir gamybiniu jegu isdestymas

Tarybu Lietuvoje.-Ten pat, Nr. 3.

"Sel'skoye khozyaystvo Litovskoy SSR v 1975 godu. Statisticheskiy sbornik"
[Agriculture in the Lithuanian 85R in 1975. Statistical Journal], Vilnius,
1976, pp 56-57.

"Archives of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Lithuanian SSR. Summarized
Annual Reports of Kolkhozes (AHSKh LitSSR), For. 1, List 16, File 1066, Line 2,
35; List 6, File 200, Line 22, 23; File 627, Line 21, 33 (Here and in other
footnotes regarding the given archive the calculations are the author's);

B. V. Ostrovskiy. p. 56.
"Scl’skoye khozyaystvo Litovskoy SSR v 1975 godu," op. cit., p. 61.

AMSKh LitSSR, Form 1, List 16, File 1186, Line 1, 19, 21; List 4, File 627,
Line 20, 22, op. cit.

Ibid., File 1066, Line 28; List 6, File 427, Line 9, 12.

"Naseleniye SSSR" [The Population of the USSR, 1973], Moscow, 1975, p 13.
"Ekonomika i kul'tura Litovskoy SSR v 1975 godu. Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik"
[The Economics and Culture of the Lithuanian SSR in 1975. Statitical
Annua1.l, Vilnius, 1976, p 12.

Lukosevicius V. Ir kaimui reikia jaunino.--Tiesa, 1971, sausio 13.

AHSKh Lit SSR, op. cit., Form 1, List 16, Files 1067-1050, report p 3; Files
1185-1188, p 3; Files 1366-1368, p 3; List 6, Files 203-209, p 3; Files
630-635, p 2.

Ibid., File 1066, Line 1, 2; List 6, File 427, Line 1.

Ibid.

"Ekonimika i kul'tura..." op. cit., p 13.

AMSKh LitSSR, op. cit., Porn 1, List 14, File 1066, Line 2; List 6, File 627,
Line 1.

Ibid., Line 28; List 6, File 627, Line 9.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18. Ibid., Line 2, 29; List 4, File 627, Line 1, 10.

19. Ibid.

20. "Nalichiye rukovodyashchikh rabotnikov i spetsialistov po dolzhnostyam v
kolkhozakh, sovkhozakh i drugikh goaudaratvennykh khozyayatvakh, a tskzhe
mekhanizatorskikh kadrov v kolkhozakh po aoatoyaniyu na 1 aprelya 1975 soda"
[The Availability of Management Workers and Specialists According to Jobs in
Kolkhozes, Sovkhozes and Other State Enterprises as well as of Machine
Operators in Kolkhozes as of 1 April 1975], Vilnius, 1975. p 57.

21. AHSKh LitSSR, op. cit., Porn 1, List 14, File 1066, Line 29; List 4, File 1027,
Line 10.

22. Ibid .

COPYRIGHT: Trudy Akademii nauk Litovskoy SSR. Seriya A, 1981

8228
C50: 1800/709

2}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

FIRMER PLANNING, CONTROL NEEDED IN RESETTLDlBNT 0F NONCHERNOZDf POPULATION
Moscow SOVETSKOYE COSUDARS'IVO l PRAVO in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 29-36

[Article by I. ‘l‘. Khlamov, senior scientific worker of the Saratov Economic
Institute and candidate of judicial sciences: “The Planning and Development of
Rural Settlements in the Non-Chernozen Area"]

[Text] The “Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in
1981-1985 and in the Period to 1990" foresee the continuation in the Non-Chernozen
Region of the RSPSR of the realization of a complex program directed at transforming
it into an area of highly productive farming and livestock raising and at developing
the corresponding branches of industry there. The couplex development of agri-
cultural production and social change in this largest region of the country during
the period up until 1990 is expounded in the resolution of the CPSU Central
Comittee and the USSR Council of Ministers. "0n Measures to Continue the Develop-
ment of Agriculture in the Non-Chernozea Region of the RSFSR," of 20 March 1975
(l). The program affects the working conditions. everyday life and standard of
living of many millions of people. '

The resolution of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers,
"0n the Continued Development and Improved Effectiveness of Agriculture in the
Non-Chernozem Region of the RSVSR in 1981-1985," published on 15 April 1981 (2),
additional measures were determined to further strengthen the material-technical
base, to provide social development for the village and to increase agricultural
production output in the kolkhozes and sovkhozes of this important area of the

country.

The resolution notes that in 1976-1980 31.2 billion rubles of capital investments
were allocated for the development of the zone's agriculture; this is an increase
of a factor of 1.6 over the Ninth Five-Year Plan. During the 11th Five-Year Plan
capital investments in the zone will increase to 39.9 billion rubles.

The Non-Chernozem Region is characterized by relatively favorable conditions for
agricultural management; in comparison with other regions in the Soviet Union it is
better supplied with labor resources. At the same time there are problems here that
make agricultural management more difficult. The historical settling pattern is a
considerable hindrance to improving agricultural production in the zone. The
settling of rural people in small settlements is now. like in no other region of the
country, in sharp contradiction to the level of development of agricultural production
and to the needs for cultural-consumer services to rural people.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new requirements for territorial organization of agricultural production in the
Non-Chernozem Zone cannot be realized without the redistribution of the rural
population. In connection with this it is planned to redesign and reconstruct over
20,000 promising settlements with she goal of resettling over 170,000 families from
farms and small villages (3).

This article attempts to investigate some of the legal questions related to the
planning and development of rural settlements as regards the Non-Chernozem Zone as

well as to the acceleration of residential construction in the rural areas of the
given region.

Regional nlanning is very important in implementing the complex program for the
Non-Chernozem Region. From the moment of confirmation the regional planning design
becomes a legal document. on the basis of which the corresponding region is

developed. For this reason it is important that all planning decisions have a
scientific basis. In the process of planning the project regional differences,
specific economic conditions and perquisites as well as the financial, material,
natural and labor potential of specific sections in the region and of individual
enterprises and settlements must be taken into account. Regional planning should be
viewed as the connecting link between national-economic planning and city-construction
design.

The main tendency in the reorganization of the rural resettlement in the Non-Chernozem
Region, which has been legally confirmed, is the transition from a network of small
settlements, with their gradual elimination,to a system of interdependent, larger
settlements in accordance with the future territorial organization of agricultural
production and cultural—consumer services for the population. The retention of the
network of small rural settlements in the Non-Chernozem Zone w0uld unavoidably have
reSulted in a lack of focus in construction and in a drop in the effectiveness of
capital investments. It would have made it more difficult to introduce amenities

into the towns and would have brought doubt to the idea of transforming them into
settlements with an urban organization of public services.

A differential approach to enlargina rural settlements must be taken for different
natural-economic conditions of the Non-Chernozem Zone. Otherwise this can result in

the growth of transportation expenses in the cost of production, or in a number of
cases this can encourage the exclusion of relatively small land tracts in agricultural
rotations. In developing regional planning projects production effectiveness

must be used as an evaluation criteria, that is, producing the maximum qunntity of
agricultural products with minimal expenditures. Social criteria must also be
considered--thc curtailment of travel time to work, rest, education and medical,
cultural-consumer and trade services. Practical experience in regional planning and
development confirms the validity of economists' calculations in regard to the fact
that there are minimal capacities for institutions and enterprises. The construction
of structures and buildings with less area is not expedient either economically or
(rem the point of view of basic conveniences for the population. For example, the
minimal capacity of a preschool is 25 places for a settlement with a population of
250-500; of an elementary school that is not completely full—-l92 places for pupils;
and of a club--150 places for a settlement of 1,000 persons. Under comparable
conditions when a settlement's population grows from 250 to 1.000 the expenditures

per resident decrease by 12 percent when organizing cultural—consumer services; when

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIFIAI. USE ONLY

the population increases from 1,000 to 3,500 expenditures decrease another 15 percent
(4). In accordance with the predictions of scientific and planning organizations

the most promising settlements here will have populations of from 500 to 6,000
residents (5). These parameters for settlements at the next stage of development

in the Non-Chernozem Region must be legally confirmed.

No less important is another aspect of the problem, requiring the gradual
implementation of meaSures for collective settlement, namely the necessity to
consider the private enterprise as an important source of income for rural
residents.1 In accordance with a resolution of the CPSU Central Committee and the
USSR Council of Hiniscers dated 20 March 1976 by 1980 the first stage should be
conpleted with the resettlement of 170.000 families in well-designed settlements;
by 1990 the second stage must be completed. In connection with this it would be
expedient to determine the specific stages of reorganization of rural resettlement
with a consideration of real resources allocated for this purpose for each oblast
and autonomous republic in the Non-Chernozem Region.

The question of limits to the population of rural settlements is directly related to
the amount of land used by kolkhozes and sovkhozes, the direction of their
specialization, future development and other factors. However, uniform norms for the
zone have not yet been developed to solve these problems in the best possible way.
Even within one specialization within the Non-Chernozem Zone the amount of land that
is used by an enterprise will differ from that used by another enterprise. Such
differences do not always have an economic basis and are not always justified by
regional differences; under the conditions of agricultural production their origin
was frequently arbitrary and accidental, reSulting in frequent changes in the sizes
and boundaries of enterprises and in the inefficient utilization of capital
investments. The invalid enlargement and diminution of enterprises, changes in their
specialization as well as in the boundaries of agricultural regions make it necessary
to alter regional planning projects and decrease their significance as legal
documents. For this reason the time has come to legally regulate the optimal area

of enterprises in various regions of the Non-Chernozem Zone on the basis of
scientifically-valid socio-economic calculations.

Regional planning designs acquire great practical significance in realizing goals
involving the efficient utilization of lands and the optimal distribution of
agricultural structures and complexes. At the same time these are legal documents
which determine the basic directions of planning and development in the region.

The "Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985
and in the Period Until 1990" point to the necessity of improving the quality of
planning, architectural and construction decisions.

There are shortcomings in the development and realization of planning designs in the
Non-Chernozcm Region which decrease their quality. All existing possibilities are
not always considered, the principle of gradual resettlement of the rural population

Over 36 percent of meat and milk is produced in private enterprises of the rural
population in the Non—Chernozem Region at the present time; 30 percent of the total
family income of a kolkhoz farmer comes from the private enterprise (5, p 186).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is violated and frequently proposals are made to centralize settlements too much.
Thus, the plans for the development of agriculture. which is the basis for rural
resettlement, and for solving other problems regarding the eradication of
considerable differences between the city and country, encompass a period of 10-15
years, whereas the develOpmental period for rural settlements is foreseen as 25-30
years (6). This type of lack of correspondence in future planning limits the
possibilities of technical-economic bases for planning decisions in the required
period.As a consequence, some projects do not include valid predictions of the
population of a region or of an individual settlement.

In our opinion, in order to curtail the plan development schedule and to improve the
quality of designs and construction it is essential to develop complex projects for
the most typical regions. In an oblast (autonomous republic) there are usually not
many of these (three-four). This type of project. which is developed for a given
region with a consideration of specific conditions, can then be extended to other
regions in the oblast (autonomous republic).

The time has come to extensively utilize mathematical methods and computer technology
(EVM) when developing planning and development projects. 0n the one hand this will
enable us to increase the productivity of labor of planners; on the other-to

utilize scientific principles in regional planning.

In order to successfully deal with these problems and to radically improve all
planning operations in rural regions it is essential to unify the efforts of planning
organizations that are under Gosstroy, of interkolkhoz construction associations and
of other organizations which perform planning work for rural construction into a
single center for complex rural planning having corresponding affiliates locally.

The creation of Such a center will enable us to pursue a single technical policy when
developing regional planning projects, general plans for settlements, residential
housing and structures for production and cultural-consumer services.

The existing law has established the procedure for confirming general plans

dealing with the construction of rural settlements. The general plan is examined
first of all by rural (settlement) soviets of peeple's deputies together with
representatives of corresponding sovkhozes. kolkhozes and agricultural and
construction organizations and then by the executive committee of the rayon's
soviet of people's deputies, which presents it for confirmation to the ASSR

Council of Ministers and the oblast executive committee (kray executive committee).
The existing procedure for confirming general construction plans needs to be
improved by further democratization. It seems that all of the citizens of a future
or existing settlement should be able to participate in evaluating the plans. Only
with a consideration of their desires can the best and most economical variant of
the general construction plan for their settlement be selected. Consequently, the
law must provide for an additional stage preceding the confirmation of general
settlement projects. that of an evaluation of projects by all rural residents (7).

however, the development of scientifically-based designs for planning and development
and of general plans is of itself no guarantee that the plans will be implemented.
Practical experience attests to the fact that in rural areas many plan violations
and violations of conscruction discipline are tolerated during construction work and
the guilty parties remain unpunished. Existing laws regarding the development of

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rural settlements in the KSFSR (8) and othe
sort of responsibility to

r such violations of the law.
sanctions for the putting together of low-q

in questions regarding the planning and
fundanental resolutions

cted at residential and cultural-domestic
rural areas of the Non-Chernozem Zone of the RSFSR Residential
housing with a total area of 22.8 million square mete

D
, Primarily these are few-storied
tructures with simple amenities. The data attests to the fact that state and
olkhoz-cooperative residential construction have not been extensiv
ust in their initial stages.

E capital investments. Centralized and non-centra
ere previously directed

mainly into production construction.
[on and the inclusion of

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The constant growth of the economic power of sovkhozes and kolkhozes in the zone
enables them to increase total capital investments from year to year directed

at cultural-demestic and residential construction. In solving the problem of
accelerating the pace of residential construction in rural areas a large role will
be played by party and state measures for strengthening the production bases of
rural construction organizations and for increasing their technical equipment.2

The resolution of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers,

"0n the Continued Development and Increasing Effectiveness of Agriculture in the
Non-Chernozem Region of the RSFSR in 1981-1985," admits the necessity of focusing
the capacities of contractual construction organizations on constructing residential
housing, educational buildings. structures for cultural-domestic purposes and for
agricultural enterprises and branches of industry that are related to it in the
rural areas of this zone. It is also planned to further increase the volume and
improve the quality construction of residential housing and structures used for
municipal management and cultural-domestic purposes and to improve the Supplies of
engineering equipment for these structures.

The practical experience of several krays and oblasts in the country as well as the
prospects for the development of a construction base in the Non-Chernozem Region
convince us of the fact that the contractual agreement form of development as the
most progressive must also play a leading role here (10, 11). A growth in the scale
of cultural-domestic and residential construction in the rural areas of the zone will
result in its concentration, i.e. in the planning and construction of groups of
residential houses, residential quarters and microneighborhoods by large planning
and contractual organizations. The concentrated, complex development of settle-
ments is an important direction in rural construction which secures a high
effectiveness of capital investments.

However, the complex development of the Non-Chernozem Zone is not yet in full swing
for a number of reasons, the main one of which, in our opinion, is the lack of unity
in financing sources. As practical experience demonstrates, this shortcoming can be
eliminated if a single order service is created within the boundaries of the rural
8dF‘ﬁiHLTJL1Vc rayon. ror example, a single order service [or rural canstruction
has been created for all of the rayons of the BSSR and it has fully justified it-
self in practice. Its function is realized by the administrations of capital
construction of executive committees of rayon soviets of people's deputies. They
control the capital investments of ministries and departments for production,
residential, municipal and cultural-domestic construction and they conduct technical
surveys of the construction of structures in kolkhozes using the management method.
Together with the office of the regional architect the administrations of capital
construction are responsible for complex development in accordance with the basic

2Suffice it to say that 85 percent of construction-installation work planned for the
Non-Chernozem Zone must be completed by the contract method. Here a large role must
be played by the rural construction combines that are developing everywhere and that
specialize in the production of structural members for agricultural production
buildings and for large-panel housing construction. No fewer than 60 percent of
residential houses in the zone will be constructed from completely prefabrictted
sections (S,pp 101-105).

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proposals of regional planning projects, general plans and schemes (16). A single
order service in rural areas enables us to move toward extensive cooperation in
material resources belonging to all types of developers within the region and to
simplify development. However, in the practical experience of cooperation (participa-
tion through shares) for rural construction many unclear and debateable questions
arise (concerning the forms and sizes of shares, etc.) (15). In connection with this,
we feel that for rural areas uniform state norms should be developed concerning the
shared participation of developers; their rights and obligations should be

specified. It seems to us that the fulfillment of the residential program in rural

areas of the zone will require the maximal development of all forms of residential
construction.

It is possible to solve the problems of reorganizing rural areas not only under
conditions of a thorough working through of the ways to move toward promising forms
of development with a consideration of the progressive directions of agricultural
development but also with an efficient coordination of public and individual housing
construction as well as the forms of organization of private enterprises for rural
residents. The artificial restraint of individual construction and the under-
estimation of cooperative residential construction in the zone in the near future

could became serious hindrances to residential construction in the Non-Chernozem
Region.

The "Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR" emphasize the
necessity of increasing the role of residential-construction cooperation, of further
improving the living conditions of the population and of expanding the possibilities
for individual construction of homes in rural areas. With this goal in mind it is
proposed to aid workers in cooperative and individual housing construction using the
incentives funds of associations and enterprises. This is one of the guarantees that

will give citizens a real opportunity for housing, as confirmed in the Constitution
of the USSR (article 64).

The resolution of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR C0uncil of Ministers of

20 March 1976 foresaw the awarding of privileges to individual developers who moved
to perspective settlements. They are given credit for construction over a 15 year
period with payments beginning 3 years after the loan was obtained (0.2 percent
annually).3 Under certain conditions some large enterprises of the Non-Chernozem
Zone will give credit to individual developers. For example, some kolkhozes issue
loans of over 5,000 rubles for individual construction, to be paid back over a period
of 25 years (13). This type of credit is available for every rural resident. For
this reason with the aim of stimulating individual and cooperative construction in the
rural areas of the Non—Chernozem Zone it would be expedient to provide legal rights
for individual developers and members of ZhSK's [Housing construction cooperatives]
to interest-less state credit with a loan repayment period of up to 25 years. It is
very important that with the overall stimulation of individual construction and an
increase of its proportion by only 1 percent of the residential fund planned in the
enterprises of the Non-Chernozem Zone we economize on public resources in a sum of

3Resett1ers of the Non—Chernozem Zone are awarded other privileges as indicated in
the resolution of the USSR Council of Ministers dated 4 January 1966 (12).

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apprOximately 200 million rubles (16). Individual developers and ZhSK's must be
completely freed from repaying loans for the construction of exterior engineering
structures and for the beautification of the settlement. Expenditures for this
part of the work should be covered by sovkhozes, kolkhozes and local sovicts of
people's deputies.

experience of individual construction in HOScow Oblast. The cost of construction
here is calculated according to the prices and norms established to determine the
estimated cost of state residential construction. The initial contribution of the
funds of individual developers comprises 20 percent of the estimated cost of build-
ing a house with outdoor structures. By agreement with trade union organizations
the directors of enterprises have the right to decrease the total initial
contribution to 10 percent for demobilized soldiers and young people and for workers
of mass professions in enterprises that are experiencing an acute labor shortage.

It would be expedient to give shareholders of ZSK's in the Non-Chernozem Zone the
right to interest-less state credit at a rate of 70-80 percent of the cost of a

COOPerative apartment.“ Moreover, individual developers and members of ZhSK's who

In our opinion, the acceptance of the complex of proposed measures will maxi-ally
encourage the development of residential construction and the securing of cadres in
the kolkhozes and sovkhozes of the Non-Chernozem Region of the RSPSR. These
neasures are just examples and are by no means exhaustive. Moreover, for sons of
them the very formulation of the question is controversial.

In connection with this the practices of individual construction of housing in the
rural areas of Bulgaria are interesting. The developer selects a model design for his
future house, which is constructed by the agricultural cooperative in accordance with
a contractual agreement. When the house is ready the developer receives the keys to
it. At this point he begins repaying an interest-less loan over a period of 20 years,
which is partially repaid from the cooperative's resources (17).
5The experience of rural cooperative construction in the Lithuanian SSR as well as
in M05cow Oblast attests to the fact that additional privileges available for ZhSK
shareholders significantly activate this form of construction in rural areas.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
SP USSR [Collection of Government Regulations and Decrees], 1974, No 9, p 39.
PRAVDA, 1981, 15 April.

"Kompleksnaya programme razvitiya Nechernozem'ya" [Comprehensive Program for the
Development of the Non-Chernozem Region], Hoecow, 1977, pp 40-42.

"Organizatsiya sistem kul'turno-bytovogo obsluzhivaniya na razlichnykh etapakh
prcobrazovaniya sel'skikh nsselennykh meet” [The Organization of Systems of
Cultural-Domestic Services at Various Stages of Reorganization of Rural

Settlements], Moscow, 1971, pp 29-30, 69.

"Petspektivy razvitiya ekonomiki i kul'tury Nechernozennoy zony RSFSR" [Prospects
for the Development of the Economy and Culture of the Non-Chernozem Region of the
RSFSR], Moscow, 1976, p 180.

SP USSR, 1968, No 24, p 119.

Balezin, V. P. "Pravovoy rezhim zemel' sel'skikh naselennykh punktov" [The
Legal Regiment of Lands in Rural Settlements], Moscow, 1972. pp 78-79.

SP RSFSR, 1970, No 14, p 83.

Farshatov, I. A., "Pravovyye voprosy zastroyki eels (Kampleksnyy analiz)"

[Legal Questions in Rural Development (Complex Analysis)], SOVETSKDYE GOSUDARSTVO
I PRAVO, 1980, No 4, p 65.

Yakush, V., "O: fundamenta do klyuchey" [From Paundation to Keys], IZVESTIYA,
1975, 4 March.

Basilov, D., "Stroyki Nechernozem'ya" [The Structures of the Non-Chernozem
Region], TRUD, 1977, 5 May.

SP USSR, 1966, No 2, p 12.

Goryanskaya, L., "Stroitel'nyye kooperativy na aele" [Construction Cooperatives
in Rural Areas], SEL'SKOYE KHOZYAYSTVO ROSSII, 1971, No 8, p 58.

Korol', V., "Krasivo i udobno" [Attractive and Comfortable], IZVESTIYA, 1980,
24 April .

Bel'chenko, V., "Kogda usiliya ob"yedcneny" [When Efforts are Unified],
IZVESTIYA, 1976, 27 September.

VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, 1974, No 10, p 57.

Bogush, 6., "Kak bolgarskiye krest'yane stroyat dlya sebya dome“ [How Bulgarian
Peasants are Building Their Own houses], SEL'SKAYA ZHIZN, 1968, 29 June.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060028-1

FOR OFFICIAL Um: ONLY

18. SEL'SKOYE KHOZYAYSTVU ROSS“, 1971, No 3. p 58

19. SEL'SKOYE STROITEL'STVO. 1978, No 1. p 25.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂank". "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo

8228
CSO: 1800/ 710

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060028-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

RELIGIOUS SURVIVALS IN FAMILY MUST BE ELIMINATED
Alma-Ate QAZAQSTAN AYELDERI in Kazakh No 6, Jun 81 p 16

[Article by K. Nurmaghambetov: "The Education of Children in the Family and
Religion]

[Text] Construction of communism, the grand future of all humanity, is a complex
dialectical process that takes place in the spiritual, as well as the material,
realm. Communist ideology, as a form of social reality, has a direct influence
upon members of society working with a distinct goal in mind based on an activist
stance in life. It was pointed out in the resolution "Concerning Further
Improvement of Ideological and Political Education work" of the CC CPSU and

in the decisions of the 26th Party Congress that the scientific-materialist world
View of Soviet citizens has become strengthened in carrying out a continual,
merciless struggle against remnants of the old order. Comrade D. A. Kunsyev,
member of the CPSU CC Politburo and first secretary of the Kazakhstan CP CC,
emphasized in his report to the 15th Congress of the Kazakhstan 6? CC and
Kazakhstan C? that: "It is no secret that all kinds of remnants and harmful
customs of the old order that shame man's honor and intelligence still exist
among us. Such unacceptable manifestations must be eliminated once and for all,
irrevocably."

Thus the scientific atheism education system, which combats both remnants of the
old order in men's thoughts and deeds and their blind faith in untruthful
religion, must educate all classes of people in a spirit of militant atheism,

but particularly children and young people so that they do not adopt religious
world views. The class and social foundations nourishing religion have been
overthrown in our country. Although most Soviet people are non-believers, never-
theless religious survivals continue to be preserved among the people, even among
children and young people. Results of sociological research in individual schools
in Alma-Ata, Taldy-Kurganskaya. szl-Ordinskaya and Chimkentskaya Oblasts show
that the number of school students listening to religious agitators and religious
teachers and praying had reached two to five percent. It was also revealed that
parents. brothers, sisters, and other relatives were the sources of such
religious lies. These facts prove that there are serious problems in providing
children atheism education in the family.

We can neither know nor understand anything about things not existing in this
world. A human being only understands and grasps when he can see, feel, hold or

3h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hear. In this \my .I pun-«In begins to have a knwiedge of the world. leewlse a
man cannot always have a correct conception of what he sees or hears. The reason
is that it is not easy to get to the bottom of natural secrets. a variety of
phenomena and various relationships among people. In addition certain elders and
parents believing in religion pour religious sayings such as "There is a God who
created the world." "Respect God," "Everything is in Allah's hands." "Man is
God's slave and the prophet is Muhammad" and "Everything is fated” into the ears
of children. The evil consequence of this are many. A child involuntarily
develops habits of deceit and dissimulation. The reason is that while, on the
one hand. they must listen to teachings at hone from their parents on "God" and
"the creator," on the other hand. they are trained in knowledge opposed to these
ideas in school. Such children gain two educations; they seek to go in two
directions at once and learn cunning.

"At home my father spoke about the formation of the world and various animals

in an interesting way, and everything that he said seemed to have foundation.

But when I began to study at school, everything he had taught me turned out to
be wrong. I couldn't understand this. but I didn't say anything to anyone. I
understood everything when I grew up." Thus. T. 1., a ninth grade teacher of

Vhamalghan Middle School. informed us.

We received a long letter from Alma-Ata Oblast tenth grade teacher Smaghul
Tengizbaev of No Two Middle School of Talghan City about how his father was
greatly offended when he failed to keep a fast.

To be sure, respect for elders. caring for juniors, being polite and listening to
the words of elders are honorable characteristics for any generation. However.
elders and parents must not forget that perversion of the younger generation
towards false religion merely to retain the good characteristics runs counter to
the needs of the times. A. C. Hakarenko, the noted father of Soviet education,
wroce regarding children's education that: "Although people and things both play
an educational role. man-~especia11y parents and teachers--is, most of all, the
richest source of support to education.

Some parents who practice religious customs such as begging or traveling as
mendicants strive to teach this to their children. Going from door to door in #0
houses to beg still goes on during religiOus festivals. It is wrong to train the
younger generation in such obsolete customs. Children cannot prepare their
lessons on time during such uproar--they join the ranks of the unprepared and
suffer consequently.

Islam. like all religions, is reactionary; it divides the world into believers

and infidels. It is well known how historically such teachings create hostility
between peoples and give rise to distrust. As a result, various serious mockeries
and sayings arise against the national honor of some peoples; authors of these
sayings are religious lords holding to Islam. such as Hollah, Hoja and Ishan

and the rich. In their view, adherents of Islam are superior to adherents of
other religions. Religious representatives have taught that infidels and Hoslems
are bitter enemies and must therefore live apart from one another. It is rather
common that religious parents pass on such views to their children.

35
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (‘FFICIAL USE ONLY

Parents must be wary of introducing religious customs and traditions that have
strangled and humiliated women for centuries into their children's family
education. Some families discriminate in the way that they treat boys and girls.
Sayings and proverbs such as "Don't trust the horse in front of you or the

woman in your embrace;" "Plop, plop. as natural as snow falling, he has found an
evil wife," and "A black headed man is better than a golden headed woman," are
recited by fathers who can do no wrong in the eyes of their children. These
sayings create unpleasant thoughts in boys and girls hearing such "guidance."

A boy begins to think that he is better than a girl, and this becomes a life-long

habit. This is one reason why such children later encounter family "problems."

For example: when ninth grader Serikpen of Kaskelen Middle School was speaking
about the family he said: “Fellows, love has nothing to do with it. Somebody
must cook the meals. The woman must be under the man's control." Later when we
visited his house, we saw that this view was his father's.

Today the arrival of a child. his naming, his marriage--the most important
festi\ities of a person's life are celebrated. In rural areas such occasions are
still, though rarely, observed according to custom in the Muslim manner. Also
during celebrations, there are cases where Hollahs teach the Koran and Islamic
practices. These "customs" cannot help but influence the younger generation.

what religion teaches cannot be perceived by man. It causes young men to suffer
and separates them from joy, laughter and friendly intercourse. Thus, every
family must establish a close connection with schools and efforts must be made
to raise apathetic children as active fighters for our ideals.

COPYRIGHT: "Qazaqstan Ayelderi“ 1981

11.433 n
cso: 1810/620 :ND

36
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY