FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10325
16 February 1982

Vietnam Report

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600030034-6

VIETNAM REPORT

(P000 3/82)

CONTENTS

MILITARY AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC SECURITY
Information on Vietnamese Military "nits ..............
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, TRADE AND AID

Corruption. Economic "on Plague Comuniat Government
(Thai Quang Trung; L'EXPRESS, 11 Dec 81)

“a- [IAI'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030034-6
INFORMATION ON VIETNAHESE MILITARY UNITS

[The following information on Vietnamese military units has been extracted from
Vietnamese press sources published in Hanoi, unless otherwise indicated. Unit
dcsignators and subordination are as they appear in the original source. The re-
marks include a brief summary of the salient information available in the news

item.l

 

Factory 59, Technical General
Department

Border Defense Post 303, Lai Chau
Province

Thac Ba Infantry 6p, Hoang Lien

8.33 Cp

Qunng Trung Missile Regt
-44th Be

Remarks

Subordinate units coordinate combat readiness
and economic construction. (NHAN DAN 6 Jan 82

92)

Completed 1981 plan. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN
1 Jan 82 p 1)

Photo of petrol. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 1 Jan 82
P 1)

Subordinate units include at least 15 companies
of which one is the 17th company. (QUAN DOI
NHAN DAN 1 Jan 82 p 1)

Activated in 1975 sometime after April. Com-
posed of regiments from the southern Central
Highlands of the 5th Hilitary Region. At that
time the regiments converted from combat to eco-
nomic construction. Has since cleared 10,000
hectares in Krong Pach and Ma Do Rac Districts
of Dac Lac Province. Is making preparations to
receive settlers from Thai Binh and Nghe Tinh
Provinces. (QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 1 Jan 82 p 2)

Commander: Trinh Lan [TRINHJ LAAN].
—Battalion Commander: Tran Hinh [TRAANF
MINE]

(QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 1 Jan 82 p 2)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
068 Transportation Gp

1st Bn, H.98 6p. lst HR

4th HR
Le hot tip
-"H" Engineer Cp

M.22 6p, Tay Bac Forces

8.56 Op, Toy Bac Forces

Vinh Quang Div

H.98 Rest

Vinh Quang Div, Huong Giang Corps
[Binh Donn]

09 Rest

56th Rest

4th Gp

Serving in Kampuchea. (QUAN DOI KHAN DAN 3 Jan
82 p 1)

Photo of patrol on the northern border. (QUAN
DOI "HAN DAN 3 Jan 82 p 1)

Provinces include Thanh Hos, Nghe Tinh and
Binh Tri Thien Provinces.

-Road construction at Le Hong Son.
(QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 3 Jan 82 p 1)

Located on northern border opposite PRC forces.
(QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 6 Jan 82 p 1)

II I. H II

Commended editorially for weapons maintenance.
(QUAN D01 NHAN DAN 4 Jan 82 p l)

Commended editorially for training accomplish-
ments. (QUAN DOI “HAN DAN 6 Jan 82 p 1)

Produced 2.8 million bricks and 290 tons of
lime to construct unit housing and equipment
shelters. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN d Jan 82 p 2)

Located in Lang Gian; District, He Bac Province.
(QUAN DOl NHAN DAN a Jan 82 p 3)
20th Bn, H.98 Gp, lst HR

7lst Air Force Gp

National Defense Plant 55,
Technical General Department

National Defense Plant 2.51

Machine Shop 55, Navy

19 May Cement Enterprise, hth NR

Signal Factory X.10

Armed Forces Folk Medicine
Hospital

lOer Military Hospital. Medical
Department, Rear Services General
Department

Navy
03 6p
“.07 6p

Commended for thwarting many PRC border viola-
tions. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 1)

Activities of unit training battalion reported.
(QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 1)

Director: Nguyen Van Chuong [NCUYEENX VAHN
CHUUOHNC]. Located in the south. (QUAN DOI
NHAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 2)

Photo shows that plant manufactures bicycle
tires. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 2)

Performs light and medium repairs for vessels.
(QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 2)

Production results given. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN
5 Jan 82 p 2)

Modifies vehicles for mobile communications and
command. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 2)

Commander [7]: Colonel Trieu Van Cu [TRIEEUJ
VAHN CUUJ]. A newly activated organization.
(QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 3)

Selects nurse and medical technician of the
year. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 5 Jan 82 p 3)

Youth union activities reported. (QUAN DOI
NHAN DAN 6 Jan 82 p l)
Photo of unit Sam missile. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN
6 Jan 82 p 1)

Hire tea-s self support Earning activities re-
ported. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 6 Jan 82 p 2)

Self support farming activities reported. (QUAN
DOI NHAN DAN 6 Jan 82 p 2)

Serving in Kampuchea. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 6 Jan
82 p 2)

Raising self-support vegetables. bananas and
chickens. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 6 Jan 82 p 2)

Located at Hung Thai Village. Bung Nguyen Dis-
trict, Nghe Tinh Province. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN

6 Jan 82 p 3)

Located at An Non Village. (QUAN DOI NHAN DAN
6 Jan 82 p 3)

Producing in support of economic construction.
(QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 8 Jan 82 p 1)

Road construction work. (QUAN DOI NNAN DAN
8 Jan 82 p 3)

Concentrates on improving basic level units.
(QUAN DOI NNAN DAN 8 Jan 82 p 3)
12th Infantry Gp, Quyet Thang
Corps [Binh Dnan]

Thang Long Air Force Cp

45th Navy Gp

“Hai 8a Trung“ Self Defense Rest.
Kim Dong Textile Plant.

Factory 1165, Rear Services
General Department

05 National Defense Factory

H.17 National Defense Factory
859th Gp. Quang Nam-Danang
Province

06 Gp, Chemical Warfare Forces

C50: 4209/20]

On 9 January 1982 was visited by a military dele-
gation from the GDR. (NNAN DAN 10 Jan 82 p 1)

Commander: Pham Thanh Ngan [PHAHJ THANK NGAAN].
On 9 January 1982 was visited by a military
delegation from the GDR. (NHAN DAN 10 Jan 82

p A) NOTE: On 1 October 1981 Pham Thanh Ngan
was reported as commander of the 8.71 Air Force
Gp.

Photo of artillery crew. (NHAN DAN 12 Jan 82
p 1)

Photo of unit personnel. (LAD DONG 17 Dec 81
p 1)

Photo of workers checking small rotors. (LAO
DONG 17 Dec 81 p 3)

Unit team chief commended. (LAO DONG 17 Dec 81
p 3)

A typical day at the factory described. (LAO
DONG 17 Dec 81 p 6)

Phoco of female unit members on firing range.
(pun xv VIETNAM 16-22 Dec 81 p 3)

Located at Ngoc Chan Village, Tan Yen District,
Ha Bac Province. (TIEN PNONG 29 Dec-6 Jan 82

p 3)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS. TRADE AND AID

CORRUPTION. ECONOMIC WOES PLAGUE COMMUNIST GOVERNMENT
Paris L'EXPRESS 11 Dec 81 in French pp 134-35. 137-38, 141. 163-46, 146
[Article by Thai Quang Trung: "Vietnam: The Lost Revolution"]

[Text] According to the most recent evidence. the economy
of Vietnam is experiencing a state of bankruptcy in the
Polish style. In order to pay its debts. the government
exports its citizens by the hundreds of thousands to the
U.S.S.R. Anarchy is rampant in the South. Underground
forces are developing. The military occupation of Cambodia
is bogged down. Six years after the fall of Saigon (April
1975). is the Vietnamese Communist Party about to "lose
the revolution" after having lost the peace? Has Hanoi
become one of the weak links of the Soviet system?
L'EXPRESS has asked Thai Quang Trung, Vietnamese jurist
and historian. to explain the amazing turnaround of this
situation.

The disaster is frightening. "Hill the ship survive?" an important member of
the Central Committee asked himself recently in an editorial in NHAN DAN, the
party newspaper. "The only thing the crew and passengers can do is maintain
discipline and obey the captain's orders fearlessly. The example is taken

from Stalin. His teaching is even more significant for us today." This rever-
ence for Stalin is doubly symptomatic of the state of disarray and the anach-
ronisms that have beset Ho Chi Hinh's party for the past year. In the rooms

of the Central Committee in Hanoi. Djougatchvili-Stalin coldly surveys the
future of party discipline. The Vietnamese Communist Party can no longer cope
with the present.

The party is sick. It is suffering from senility: "gerontocrats" are fighting
over power inHanoi. In the Politburo. by Vietnamese standards, the 4th age
reigns: Le Dunn is 74. Truong Chinh. 74, Pham Vam Dong. 76, and Le Duc Tho,

72. In the Central Committee it is the 3rd age. or close to it. The comrades

of Ho Chi Hinh--in the party since the 20's and 30's--were formed during the
Komintcrn period. The old guard is worn out. Theothers. whose character was
forged by.a long clandestine resistance, have a besieged citadel complex. This
caste has hardly changed. Politically paranoid, it refuses to free itself six
years after the "liberation." There is a formidable cultural monolith: Stalinism
reigns.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The party leadership is also afflicted with the "Albanian syndrome." Family
centralism, a clear sign of degeneracy here as in Albania, has replaced democratic
centralism in the party. It is the "gia-dinh tri," or family dictatorship. The
party-state is now practically controlled by three clans: the Le Duan family.

Le Duc Tho and his brothers, and the Truong Chinh group. Truong Nhu Tang,

former minister of justice of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South
Vietnam. and now an exile in Paris, analyzes the paralysis of the party-state

as follows: "Le Duan is obsessed with power. He means to reign as a family.

The Le But The system is a party within the party. The administration of Pham

Van Dong runs up against the bars put up by Truong Chinh. Everyone obeys only
the directives of his own clan."

Factional rivalries are grafted onto the Sino—Soviet quarrel. At the IVth Party
Congress, in December 1976. the Le Duan - Le Duc Tho coalition managed to eliminate
27 of the 69 members and deputy members of the Central Committee. Expelled from
the Politburo. Huang Van Hoan-—now an exile in Peking--is only the scapegoat.

The real target is Truong Chinh ("Long March"), who is well known for his Maoist
opinions. He managed to stay in the Politburo and to retain the presidency of the
National Assembly thanks to his loud llth-hour anti-Chinese talk. Truong Chinh

is a long-distance runner. This is not his first time around. Secretary-general
of the party from 1940 on, this orthodox theoretician had to step aside for Le
Duan after the failure of the bloody agricultural reform of 1956. But he has

been back in the Politburo since 1958. He has just made a strong comeback by
becoming--in July 198l--president of the Council of State, supreme governing body
of the country according to the new constitution. As commander—in-chief of the
armed forces, he presides over the National Defense Council.

Apparently Le Duan still has the upper hand in the party. Through his son. the
first secretary controls the special security force of the Politburo and of the
Central Committee. Through his brothers-in-law he oversees the Propaganda Commis-
sion. the State Committee on Science and Technology, and the school for party
officials. which Is directed by Tran Quynh. who has just lost the important
Planning Commission. For their part. Le Due Tho and his brothers have the same
inclination for family cculralism. The eldest is a member of the Politburo. The
other three are members of the Central Comnittee. Together they run the Party
Commission on SeCurity and Organization; the administration of Ho Chi Minh City
and the secret police in South Vietnam; the army's logistics; communications and
transportation; and the Confederation of Trade Unions of Vietnam. They have just
lost the promising Ministry of Petroleum. which didn't work out, unfortunately!
oddly, the Le Duc Tho brothers don't have :he same family name. This is undoubtedly
for camouflage and for a better division of labor.

As the Vth Party Congress--postponed until spring l982--approaches, these factions
are fighting among themselves, neutralizing each ether. The future strong man

of the regime seems to be Le Duc Tho. At the IVth Congress he was already in a
position of seniority, and spoke out warning the leadership against "divisive
{national activity in the party at all levels." A discreet man, he is nevertheless
behind every major turning point. He was the enigmatic man Kissinger negotiated
with; he was the author of the false peace of 1973. From the taking of Saigon in
1975 to the "north—nationalization" of South Vietnam in 1976, to the conquest of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI, USE ONLY

Cambodia in 1979. to the campaign to distribute party cards in 1980, he is always
there. The changes now being made in the highest quarters of the government
depend to a large extent on him. He is now the arbiter of the struggle between
Le Duan and Truong Chinh. Is a new coalition taking shape in Hanoi? Is so, who
will take the blame for the present disaster? whatever happens, Le Duc The will
have the last word.

From the troubled waters of the Politburo--which has become a veritable hornets'
nest--To Huu nevertheless emerges as the probable successor of Pham Van Dong. who
is said to be “very tired," as president of the Council of Ministers. At the age
of 60 this "youth" has somehow managed to get ahead of his elders, in particular
general Vo Nguyen Giap, who has been in a free fall ever since he left the Ministry
of National Defense in February 1980. To Nuu owes his ascent to his unparalleled
skill and eloquence in expressing the continually fluctuating party line. He is

the regime's official poet. He became famous in 1953 for a poem lamenting the
death of Stalin: "Oh Stalin! My love for my father, my mother. my wife, myself,
is nothing compared to my love for you. Oh Stalin! "hat is left on earth and

in heaven after your death?" To Huu wrote of the glory of Mao in the same vein

in another poem, which oddly enough does not appear in the latest edition (1979)

of his collected works. Does this rising star in the party represent the new order
which the old guard will give way to?

legend has it that the Vietnamese Communist Party is the most united communist
party in the world. The fact is that it has never been united, even when its
founder was alive. Everyone in the small world of Hanoi politics knows about the
feuding among Le Duan, Truong Chinh and V0 Nguyen Giap. There is a story:
"Shortly before his death, Ho Chi Hinh called allthemmmbers of the Politburo

to his bedside. He asked them to hold hands and made them promise to remain
united after he was gone." This pathetic scene didn't really take place. Hoang
Van Hoan, who as at Ho's bedside, says it didn't. His version: "The majority of
the Politburo wanted this meeting. Le Duan didn't, and opposed it. He said that
the Uncle's mind was wandering. Did he question the last wishes of Uncle Ho?"

But right after Ho Chi Hinh's death, which was at 9:47 am on 2 September 1969,
Le Duan convened a meeting of the members of the Politburo and read them the
Uncle's will--"a typewritten text, three or four pages long, according to Hoang
Van Hoan"-—"which was signed by both Ho Chi Minh and Le Duan!" Oddly, this will
appeared on the cover of NHAN DAN a few days later in another form. The beginning
of the text was in Ho Chi Hinh's highly characteristic handwriting and was dated
10 May 1969. The rest was printed. The signatures of both Ho Chi Hinh and Le
Duan were gone. Doubts began to arise in the minds of certain members of the
Politburo: "The will of Ho Chi Hinh is a historical document. Why not publish
the whole thing as written by the Uncle himself?" Hoang Van Hoan thinks that
"part of the text was manipulated by Le Duan for his own purposes." It's a dark
story strangely reminiscent of the use Stalin made of Lenin's will.

There is a crisis at the top, but also at the bottom. The Vietnamese Communist
Party is suffering from peasant-sickness. Between 1965 and 1975, the party's
membership doubled. Thepeasantry furnished the overwhelming majority of it
combatants. "Cannon fodder." as they were considered at the top. But Vietnamese

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
communism is still basically a peasant brand of communism. It is in contradiction
with the Harxism-Leninism it claims to be founded on. As the party leadership
can't hope to carry out an avant-garde revolution with the worker class, it is
reduced to eliminating its own peasant members. As of 1974 a resolution of the
Politburo called for the elimination of 200.000 party members. After the purifica-
tion campaign waged by the thh Party Congress in 1976, a new campaign was launched
in February 1980 "to help party members distinguish between true and false Marxism
and fight the poisonous influence of Maoism."

Used to constantly submitting to authority in war time, the "can-b0," of peasant
origins, no longer know how to use the power they have acquired in peace time.
There is Incompetence at all levels. Mme Ngo Ba Thanh, democratic alibi of the
government. explains: "Power is being transferred to the masses, who are ignorant.
That explains why things are badly done, irrational. He are suffering from growing
pains." But these people are far from young. The party has aged considerably,
from the ground up. In June 1979 an editorial in NEAR DAN denOunced the "narrow-
mindedness of a certain number of comrades who have grown grey under the harness,
their paternalism. and their refusal to let young people into the party hierarchy.

without mentioning its own position the leadership Is advocating a rejuvenation

of the upper ranks of the party because, as the REVIEU 0F COMMUNISH ("Tap Chi Cong
San") pointed out in February 1978: "In many party organs, both central and
provincial. a third to a half of the officials will be eligible for retirement

in the next 5 years."

The party is going through a crisis in the north, but even more so in the south.

A resolution adopted by the Politburo on 20 November 1980 about the organization
work done by the party recognizes the fact that "the party is suffering from a
permanent state of underdevelopment in the south, where the organizational structure
is not homogeneous.“ Al the time of the fall of Saigon the party had 200,000
members in the south (Inflated figure) out of a total membership of 1,533,500.

This is rather a small number, in view of the complete victory in the south. The
figures haven't changed much in the past 5 years: 273,000 in 1978 and 321,000

in 1980. many of whom are unreliable. the "can-b0 of 30 April" as they are called
In the south. The arrival of large numbers of officials from the north accentuated
regional chauvinlsn. The northern apparatchiks use the party machinery "like a
steam roller in the south." As for the southern revolutionaries. they are no
longer “in the vanguard as they once were." At all levels of the party they are
"eternally in second place."

The regional imbalance in the hierarchy In favor of the north has led to "wide-
spread revulsion" at the base of the party. The northern "can-b0“ are rejected
by the population in the south. which feels as though it were living under a
political—military occupation. Suddenly the party is withdrawing into cloistered
arrogance. On 22 June 1980, QUAN DOl NHAN DAN, the army newspaper, warned the
party against "narcissism. authoritarianism and sectarinnism of officials who no
longer have any tie with the masses." In fact, the party has lost the people;
the fish is irremediahly out of its water. As Roan Huu Quynh—-a party member for
14 years. now gone over to the other side in exile in Paris-~ssys: "In Hue even
beggars spit when the can-bu go by."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The party's weakness in the south reminds one inescapably of the Gulag. That is
part of the logic of totalitarianism. "We aren't so human as to commit suicide,"
Hoang Tung, editor of NHAN DAN. calmly admits. "It's better to arrest 100 innocent
people by mistake than to leave a single reactionary at liberty," says a directive
issued by the Politburo in the sunset of 1985, when people were arrested right
and left. The security forces arrest people. So does the army. But they are
outdone by the zeal of the peoples' committees. "The can—bo strike in the middle
of the night. The present and future of every citizen are the property of the
party and its policemen." Since almost everyone in the south has some link with
the old regime, it is hard to find a Vietnamese there who doesn't have a relative
or a friend in prison or a concentration camp. The Gulag--unknown in the past
history of the country—is now part of the Vietnamese landscape.

years in forced labor at the sinister concentration camps of Hoang Lien Son, in
the far north of Vietnam; today he is a refugee in Denmark. "The Vietnamese
Communist Party has mastered the art of dispensing death with a medicine dropper.
The terror is not immediate and bloody, but diffuse, visceral." The party has
certainly not been unworthy of Stal inism. Prisons. concentration camps, new
economic zones, displaced populations, and the use of gas are all part of a vast
program of liquidation of all opposition and dissidence-—politica1, religious, or
ethnic. The intelligentsia are the first victims because historically, educated
people have always been in the forefront of nationalist combat. Some "ideological
prisoners with doubtful antecedents" are literally sacrificed by the party in

murderous work or the removal of mines. They are usually blown up by the countless
bombs left behind by the last war.

In swallowing the south the party is poisoning itself with greed, and contagion
is immediate. In the summer of 1975 the south was overrun. "The can-bo fight—
sometiaes at gunpoint—-over public buildings, official residences, factories,
housing, automobiles, even furniture. After so many years of privation the can-b0
find it hard to resist the mirage of the south." Starting in the fall of the same
year, Radio Ho Chi Minh City launched a campaign to warn against "the evils of the
society of perdition." Enquiry comissions were set up in the spring of 1976 to
fight "abuses." In December of 1979 a report of the People’s Comittee of Ho Chi
Minh City revealed, however, that "highly-placed officials intervened to obstruct
the fight against corruption, while others even persecuted the denouncers of corrup-
tion." But could it be otherwise? "Even Le Duan's second wife controls--under

provinces.

At first corruption was considered a "minor offense." But it quickly assumed
astronoaic proportions. all the more so in that the party itself is engaged in a
deliberate racket, as a policy, against the bourgeoisie and other class enemies.
The effect is perverse. Corruption has become a sort of institution. an official
remedy for the pauperization of an entire people. "Now that shortages are so
widespread, the party has become a sort of asylum for economic refugees," Hoang

Hun Quynh admits. "Illicit trading there is almost legal." NHAN DAN of 12 Hay
1981 reported, after an inquiry. that the workers in 2,563 state firms and coopera-
tives in 15 provinces "ran" 303 million dong (about 121 million dollars) worth of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
goods during the first quarter of 1980 alone. "There must be an end to collective
illicit trading!" concluded the party newspaper.

Didn't the "boat people" racket bring almost 4 billion dollars-—imediately used
to repay debts to the USSR—-into the leaky coffers of the party-state in 1979?
Meanwhile almost 25 tons of gold "ran" through the ranks of the party. And the
"scraping" continues. even within the party. from the ground up. Nothing is lost
in such a system, in the last analysis. Like a cancer, corruption becomes wide-
spread. It reaches the north, as though avenging the south. Thus in March 1980
the REVIEW OF COMMUNISH noted. in its unique language, that: "Due to the inter-
action between the two parts of the country. the vestiges of the shameful practice
of corruption left behind by the neo-colonialist system have ended up invading
the north." In October 1979 the same journal looked back with nostalgia at the
revolutionary purity of the past; "Communists loved and protected each other in
the bush. Today many people think that it is hard to sustain mutual devotion in
peacetime."

The revolution is no longer what it was. It has gone bad, rotted. The evil is
twofold: corrupt ion in the south, bureaucracy in the north. "Bureaucracy
inevitably breeds corruption, which in turn nourishes bureaucrats," explains
Nguyen Cong Hoan, who was elected to the National Assembly in 1976 and is in
exile today in the United States. "What is novel about it is institutionalized
bureaucracy in a regime calling itself the master of the working people."
According to the new constitution the people are the masters, the party is the
leader and the state is the administrator. But in practice, as the new popular
saying goes: "When the master is collective no one is master and everyone is a
slave!" In fact, collective power has quickly degenerated into a regime of col-
Iective irresponsibility cloaked by abstract references to a fixed, imovable
hierarchy. At this impasse, the government is no longer associated with progress.
It is tending toward the self-reproduction of a degenerate body. 0n the occasion
of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the party, on 3 February 1980, Le
Duan lashed out against "corrupt and degenerate elements which are dishonoring
the party." And NllAN DAN decried the "oppression of the masses!" But "chinh
huan," or rectification campaigns, have become mere bureaucratic exercises.

All over Vietnam the little people are at the mercy of those whom a popular expres-
sion calls "six-legged men" (two legs and the four feet of a chair). These new
petty kings. always sitting like insects. guard all the "cua-quyen," or the doors
to power. The password ”dau tien" (priority). when the syllables are inverted
("tien dau"), means "Where is the money?" So the faster you pay, the sooner you
get in. Every signature has an equivalent in gold. To get into a hospital one
often needs an authorization with three signatures. And not just anyone can be
admitted. since the hospitals are reserved for highly-placed officials. Contrary
to all ethics, admission to hospitals (as well as schools. factories, and all
official entities) depends solely on the political status of the person wishing
to gain admittance. The families of prisoners, of "nguy" (phantoms), or of
refugees, and people of Chinese origin, are condemned for all practical purposes.

To bury a dead person you have to have a death certificate authenticated by the
head of the "khom" (island). stamped by the head of the "phuong" (village), and

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exchanged for an authorization issued by the head of the "quan" (district), which
allows you to go and stand in line in front of a state store to buy a coffin.

By the time you have finished with all this running around, your neighbor is in
an advanced state of putrefaction, and your purse is empty. If you happen to
commit suicide your survivors will have to pay a "deserter's tithe" to the state,
so only entire families commit suicide. Advanced communism, meant to create the
new man. has ended up devouring man. "The new cannibalistic order introduces

its own aberrations. The people are not eaten raw." Explains a refugee bongo,
"They are murdered over a slow fire on the altar of the party." In the summer of
1980 a soldier set fire to himself as a sacrifice for the first time in Hanoi--in
front of the National Assembly.

Thus civilized society is driven to wither in the haunting daily struggle for
survival. Above all, to avoid starvation. Does the party mean to control the
people through their stomachs. since it can't control them through their souls?
According to a recent PAO report. the average annual rice deficit is more than

2 million tons and will be 4.4 million tons for this year. In the fall of 1980
there were riots in Haiphong and Nghe Tinh because of famine. This had not
happened since the popular wave of discontent in 1956. In the south. the socializa-
tion of agriculture has turned into a catastrophe. In the Mekong delta—-once a
rice granary--ab0ut a hundred cooperatives are limping along. out of a total of
2000. In Cu Chi, the former stronghold of the Vietcong. the peasants would rather
slaughter buffalos than give them to the cooperatives, and prefer to keep the
surplus from the paddies for the pigs than "sell" it to the state.

Oddly enough. today the party propaganda is hesitating to resort to the explana—
tion of natural disasters which have plagued Vietnam since 1975. Would it be
anti-Marxist to "hold God responsible for all the evils on earth?" The fact is
that popular superstition is corrosive, formidable: "Heaven is definitely no
longer on the side of the communists." In the villages of Thanh Boa the peasants--
although indoctrinated since 1954--are coming back to the popular saying: "The
best ideology is that which fills the stomach with complete meals." A kilogram

of rice costs the equivalent of a fifth of an average monthly salary on the free
market! You can accomplish a revolution with "sans-culottes." but not with people
who are hungry.

Confronted with a catastrophe, the party decided at its 9th plenum in December
1980 to accelerate the liberalization of the economy. After extreme collectivism
it was back to the Nep. according to the teachings of Lenin. Two steps forward.
one backward. and start again. It is a vicious circle. But to their surprise

the Stalinists discovered the laws of the market and material incentives. A
reform of state firms and cooperatives is in progress, meant to "substitute con-
tractual work for collective work." With incredible candor. Hoang Tung admits

that “our former policy of equalizing salaries and prices only seemed egalitarian.
It produced inequality. Only an unequal redistribution of incomes can reestablish
true equality." Over the past 6 years the editor of NHAN DAN has said everything

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and the opposite of everything. But will the party end up finding itself by
engaging in all this double-talk? At any rate, there has never been such a final
confession of the failure of collectivism.

No doubt the party hopes to extricate itself from its difficulties with this
tactical retreat. All the more so in that it intends to keep the economy afloat
with monthly injections of about 200 tons of goods sent by the Vietnamese diaspora.
It is the height of Machiavellian: after chasing its class enemies into the sea,
the party encourages these unfortunate refugees to help their families who stayed
in Vietnam. Out of solidarity. one inevitably falls into the trap. Thanks to this
new form of aid, the people in the towns survive from day to day. System D is
surfacing again in "0 Chi Hinh City, where thousands of "pocket trades" sprout
like mushrooms. In front of the main post office, doctors practice right on the
sidewalks. Pharmacists undertake to fill prescriptions immediately by buying
medicines from people waiting for parcels from France and America.

But the system is incurable. Profits, which were introduced unequally into the
collective sectors. are accelerating corruption more than they are restoring the
economy, and at the same time they are whipping up inflation and the black
market. Successive reshufflings of ministers--four in 2 years, a real record for
the communist world--and the arrival of the "technocrats" haven't changed anything.
Day by day the new mandarins preside over the impasse. The new class takes full
advantage of its privileges. Huniliated and starving, the little people let
themselves slide naturally into the vandalism ofthedaily struggle. Before the
National Assembly, Pham Van Dong indulges in his favorite political tautology:
"Today we are taking stock of ourselves and our responsibilities before you."

But no one in Hanoi remembers that the first "directive against prevarication,
waste and bureaucracy" was signed by Ho Chi Hinh himself-—in 1952! The evil was
there from the beginning.

The party can't live without a scapegoat. In May 1980 it "suggested" to Mme

Duong Quynh Hoa-—another democratic alibi of the regime--that she should criticize
"the silence of intellectuals who did not sound the alarm in time." But what can
they do, these Outcasts whom the Sino—Vietnamese call "tri thuc" (those who remain
alert) who were once so zealous about politics and are now driven to voluntary
blindness? Ideological terrorism finally won out over the intellectuals' generous
romanticism. Even the scholar Tran Dai Nghia, once so highly praised by the party
press. has lost the presidency of the Commission on Science and Technology for
committing "the crime of lese-avant-garde": having dared to reflect about the
Heijdi era and the Japanese model in front of the Politburo, the "summum of his-
torical intelligence!" The mathematician Ton That Long. a refugee in France,
says: "According to the communists. everyone must sing the same song with the
same voice in the same tone. I refused to sing. In this advanced communist
regime people will no longer need a nose, eyes, or ears; it will be enough to
have an antenna on one's head to receive the party line."

While waiting for a miracle. the party urges the population not to give in to
"pessimism and discouragement." But more than 8,000 "boat people" still Flee

Vietnam every month. Not just tradesmen. Peasants are leaving. Former party
members. Only the regime's propaganda keeps leaning on the illusion of power,

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but the people are not duped any more. Their verdict about the will of Ho Chi
Minh--which states that nothing is more precious than independence and freedom--is
unequivocal: "The day after his death, president Ton Duc Thang meets Uncle H0 in
the kingdom of the dead. Uncle Ho asks him: 'Comrade. apparently things aren't
going too well on earth?‘ 'But they are, Uncle; the party has implemented a third
of your will!‘ The uncle is stunned: 'Hhat! What! There is nothing 1eft?'"

The Vietnamese people remain faithful to their traditions; popular humor takes
over. Theparty is laid bare. It's the death of a legend.

Disarray at home. but war abroad. Is the Vietnamese Communist Party incapable

of living in peace? For the old guard of Ho Chi Minh. the great plan of an Indo-
chinese Communist Party could only be achieved through militant communism. a
bellicose dialectic serving nothing but the wish for power. Before the VIth
congress of the Kampuchean Peoples' Revolu:ionary Party. Le Duan. on 21 May 1981.
reaffirmed the permanent goal: "The alliance between the Khmer. Lao. and Vietnamese
peoples now constitutes a monolithic bloc that no maneuver, however perfidious.
can break up." As good disciples of Stalin. the leaders of Hanoi transpose the
Soviet model of a European ramp to Indochina; under pressure of arms. treaties

of assistance are signed to "indissolubly link Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam like
three tributaries of a river." It is no longer the old Tndochinese Federation.
It is a tropical version of the Warsaw Pact!

Another legend has it that the Vietnamese Communist Party is "the most nationalist
communist party in the world." In fact it has never been so. Ho Chi Hinh "dedi-
cated his whole life to the revolution." as he recalls in his will. written for

the day when he would "join the venerable Marx and Lenin." No name of the builders
or heroes of Vietnam is mentioned there. This is symptomatic. The Vietnamese
Communist Party has in fact turned out to be a particularly active agent of the
world revolution. and above all of the expanding Soviet system. Its job is
undoubtedly not finished with the invasion of Cambodia. According to Hoang Huu
Quynh. the Soviet Communist Party has entrusted its Vietnamese ally with the

task of training—-at the Hoa Binh Central School of Nationalities--not only Lao

and Khmer communists. but the other communists of the region as well. in particular
Thai and Malaysian. At the Nguyen Ai Quoc Institute—-the school for party offi-
cials-—there is already talk of a "Union of Socialist Republics of Southeast

Asia" for the 90's. "as the Hanoi regime become both the defenderof the Soviet
order and the legionnaire of its future--another East Germany or Cuba?

Soviet aims and Hanoi's ambitions in the region certainly coincide. But the trap
is permanent. In the fall of 1978. when Moscow agreed to the invasion of Cambodia,
it was pursuing two complementary goals. First, to move the Sino-Soviet conflict
to the southern flank of China. dividing Hanoi and Peking by a lasting antagonism.
Then. to consolidate and extend its base of strategic support in Indochina. making
Vietnam more dependent than ever on Soviet policy in Asia. Thus coupled with the
advance across Afghanistan into the Arab-Persian Gulf, the Soviet thrust in South-
east Asia broadens the USSR's double penetration toward the south. It is a pincer
movement toward the Indian Ocean which is threatening the movements of the Western
world's merchant marines and navies. Through Vietnam. the USSR has finally
succeeded in completing the missing link in its whole naval strategy.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The alliance with the USSR is unequal. Hanoi lays down the law in Phnom Penh and
Vientiane, of course. But Moscow lays down the law in Hanoi. A limited sovereignty,
in chains, bound! According to Hoang Van "can, the Soviets have been asking for
the Cam Ranh and Da Hang bases since May 1975. In May 1979 Soviet warships. with
their nuclear submarines, entered there. "It is a duty devolving from the Soviet-
Vietnamese friendship treaty," says Moscow. More than 6,000 "lienxo" (Soviet
advisors, especially detested by the people) are operating in Indochina now. For
1981-1985, the Vietnamese 5-year plan is integrated into the Soviet Cosplan.
According to "the socialist division of labor," 500,000 Vietnamese will go to
work in the Comecon, probably in Siberia: "guest workers," as they are proudly
referred to in Hanoi! To keep the Vietnamese economy afloat, Moscow injects 6
million dollars per day into it—-60 percent of which is military aid. As long

as it has weapons. Hanoi's militant communism will keep going. Thus the Cambodian

trap has become the chain with which Moscow means to attach Vietnam to the Soviet
slave ship.

ls Indochina "a reliable outpost of socialism in Southeast Asia," as Leonid
Brezhnev and Le Duan claim? Is the situation tlere "irreversible"? Moscow didn't
lift a finger at the time of the "Chinese lesson" in the spring of 1979, and the
general mobilization decreed by Hanoi in March did not awaken the expected patriotic
fervor. "in the south the people are even hoping for a second lesson," admits
Hoang Huu Quynh. but Peking has chosen a strategy of attrition which is much more
costly for Hanoi and less risky vis-a-vis Moscow. China is arming certain anti—
Hanoi, Lao. Khmer, and Vietnamese resistance movements. ls time working for the
Vietnamese Communist Party this time? In any event, it must henceforth cope with
a rising tide of armed resistance. often trained at its own school of guerrilla
warfare.

But the threat is not only on its borders, or even on the periphery, in Laos and
Cambodia, where certain units of the occupation army desert regularly. It is the
regime lﬂﬁidt Vietnam that is at risk. NHAN DAN has been pointing to "subversive
fovi" for the past year in tho regions of Viet Bac (north Vietnam), Binh Tri Thien
(router) and Kim Ginny, (south). 'l'lu- mountain partisans of the Puiro took credit
recently for several attacks in the Konrum and Pleiku sectors. Radio Hanoi
regularly warns Lhn party and the army against "riots and uprisings in combination
with attacks from outside." Following the conference on security in the south,
which met in Ho Chi Minh City in May 1980, the Minister of the Interior has adopted
a series of measures to recruit the popula;ion against the rising insecurity.

QUAN DOI NHAM DAN often reports arrests of "bad elements who were masquerading

as members of the security forces and the army, or as state officials." South
Vietnam has become the soft under belly of the regime.

"Can you imagine for a moment that the USSR would tolerate a Scandinavian peninsula
under Chinese control?" Vietnam cannot live for long on bad terms with China,
whose borders it must share "like the teeth and the lips." Prince Sihanouk made
this sensible comment to us in Peking on 5 September 1980: "Just as it is mad
folly to try to pit 5 million Khmers against 50 million Vietnamese, it is simply
suicide to try to pit 50 million Vietnamese against a billion Chinese!" The
diplomatic alternatives now open to Hanoi are disastrous. Alignment with the

USSR is antigeopoliticnl and the Occupation of Cambodia is an adventure with no

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

way out. The UN's latest vote on Cambodia, on 21 October 1981, is clear enough
evidence of Manoi's political isolation.

The Vietnamese Communist Party has always lived beyond its means. It does not

have the means to achieve its ambitions. They are playing apprentice magician in
Hanoi again. using the power of theSoviet Union to satisfy their own lust for power.
It is a suicidal game for which the Vietnamese people must pay a terrible price.

But militant communism is locking itself into its own contradictions. In the long
run it runs the risk of a boomerang effect. Hanoi's fundamental weakness: "The
Vietnamese Communist Party," all the refugees say, "is no longer identified with
the Vietnamese nationalism from which it drew its strength for so long. Sooner

or later, the people will rise up." Nothing is irreversible.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 S.A. Groupe Express

9855
cso: 4200/15 END

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY