FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10642
7 July 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 25/82)

IFBISI FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI! 0mm]. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION EB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPF

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(two 25/82)

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Libya Cuts Aid to Lebanese Mat ional Move-eat
(AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI. 19-25 Feb 82)

OPEC APPAIRS

Recent Downward Trend in Oil Prices Analyzed
(Nicola Sarkis; AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI. 12-18 Mar 82) ....

Reasons for Price Decreases
Steps Reco-ended for OPEC

IRAQ

Text of Trade Agreement With USSR
(FOREIGN TRADE. May 82)..

SUDAN

AAAID Approves Contracts for Agricultural Projects
(MARCIIES TROPICAUX B'r MBDITERRANEENS, 7 May 82) ..... ..

Progress in load Program Reviewed
(MARCEBS TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS, 30 Apr 82)

Briefs
Canadians Aid Forest Projects
Mining of Chrome Ore
New RVI Opened
Pegaao Buses Purchased
Mixed Floor Production
Milk Plant
Modernization of Port Sudan
WK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

Opposition Abroad Said to Plan Strategy for Combating Aaad Regine
(AL-QATAR AL-‘ARABI. 7-13 May 82)

Covert Activities Conducted Within France Cited
(AL-WAN AL-‘ARABI, 30 Apr-6 May 82) .

Political Style of Preaident Hafiz el-Aaad Examined
(“mm onsmvmm’ ”Apr 82) IODOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOIC.

Text of Trade Agreement With USSR
(FOREIGN TRADE. nay 82)

TUNISIA

Tunisian-Libyan Railway Proposed
(NAMES TROPICAUX 31: 113mm. 11 Jun 82)

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

LIBYA CUTS AID T0 LBBANESE NATIONAL MOVEMENT
Paris ALPHATAN ALP'ARABI in Arabic No 262, 19-25 Feb 82 p 35

[Text] Beirut. Once again Damascus tried, through Amal and none other. to
make Yasir 'Arafat understand that it alone possesses the key to tranquility
in the parts of Lebanon heavily populated by Palestinians.... After the last
battles between Anal and the communists and the Palestinians, the Syrian
authorities advised 'Asin Qansuh to arrange a meeting in his house to put an
end to the fighting between the "Sons of the Unified Rank," and he did so.

The meeting, which was attended by members of the National Movement and the
Palestine Resistance, confirmed Damascus' desire to keep Anal in the Syrian
orbit and its other desire to brandish the Shi'ah stick in the face of the
Palestinians whenever the need to do so dictates.

However, the meeting between Yasir 'Arafat. Huhsin Ibrahin (of the Communist
workers Party), and Nabih Barri (of Anal) in the home of the Lebanese secre-
tary of the ruling party in Damascus van motivated by other factors, most
prominently the continuous Israeli threats of a "preventive war“ in the
South. This is not the time to settle domestic accounts. Then there is the
effort being made by the Lebanese government at this stage to enlarge the
area patrolled by the international forces in the South in order to assure
the further spread of the army in the Palestinian and non-Palestinian areas,
and in effect, bring these measures to the level of military resistance
proper.... Very crucial issues are at stake, so partisan battles must be
halted until further notice.

The Libyan Surprise

While AL-HASLAHAH was arranging for Syrian-Lebanese coordination, news from
Tripoli (in Libya) brought by the Libyan People's Bureau (the Libyan Embassy)
in Beirut indicated that Col Huammar Qadhdhafi had decided to cut in half aid
for the parties of the Lebanese Rational Movement, effective the month of
February. although the parties of the National Hovement separately. including
the central political council, had not received any aid from Libya for the
last 3 months. The Libyans ascribed the delay in offering the said aid to
the crisis from vhich the Libyan treasury has been suffering for several
months due to the decline in Libyan oil production.

FIIICHHHCIAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Officials of the Libyan People's Bureau on Wednesday. 9 February presented the
national parties with half the amounts allocated to them in the hope that the
situation would improve in the near future and thus permit the "compulsory
deduction" to be canceled.

It is worth noting that the amounts received monthly by these parties before
the "deduction" varied from $50,000 to $200,000 according to the degree of
support they showed for Libyan policy. Among the major aid recipients are
the Syrian National Socialist Party and the Arab Socialist Union. These two
parties are wholly dependent on Libyan generosity.

The parties of the Nationalist Movement fear the Libyan decision is the re-
sult of the stand taken by the Libyan leaders to exert pressure on these par-
ties to induce them to take more decisive positions in support of Libya
politically. The source of their fx‘t is that this aid covered a large part
of the military efforts of these parties which relied from the beginning of
the events on the principle of "unloading" those elements which demand as
much as thousands of liras monthly. There is no doubt that the Libyan "ra-
tioning" of aid will adversely affect the financing of the parties' "armies"
and then the financing of their information programs (newspapers, magazines,
broadcasts).

Some of the parties which had misgivings about the step taken by the Libyans
were genuinely disturbed. Some leaders wondered about the reason for this
Libyan restraint in paying its obligations and whether the step was a reaction
to the failure of Qadhdhafi's endeavor to settle the Lebanese crisis. How-
ever, Libyan millions are distributed here and there without limit in most
African countries, with no.results worth mentioning, under the slogan "Aid

for the Liberation Movements." But other sources in the "national parties"
assert that the Libyan treasury is experiencing a real crisis and that the
decision to cut aid included the Palestinian Resistance with all its groups.
The Resistance was placed in a situation which dictated this forced deduction.

lran Is the Problem

The same sources add that Libya tried in recent months to avert the financial
crisis by obtaining Arab loans from some of the Gulf states. It failed to
obtain loans of several billion dollars from the Emirates, but it succeeded
in Kuwait.

However, other sources affirm that the "financial crisis" through which Libya
is passing and which has begun to affect its overall relations with the states
and parties and liberation movements was caused not by stagnation in the Lib-
yan oil market but by the large amount of aid that Libya has given to Iran
since the beginning of its war with Iraq. This aid has totaled several bil-
lion dollars in loans and arms deals.... There are rumors going around that
Libya bought some gold in the world markets in behalf of Iran to help it
cover the enormous costs of the war.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the other hand, it appears that relations between Libya and the parties of
the Lebanese National Movement, especially lay parties like the National So-
cialist Party, the Communist Party, and the Progressive Party, have begun to
go through a difficult stage as a result of some of the attitudes exhibited
by the Libyan leaders, Col Qadhdhafi in particular. These stands are adverse-
ly affecting all positions and attitudes and assumptions in Lebanon. Then

too they are fundamentally incompatible with their ideology.

In the course of Col Qadhdhafi's last visit to Algeria and in the presence of
National Movement party leaders who at one tine used to obey official requests
from the Algerian government, the Libyan leader made a comprehensive speech

in which he said: “The Christian Arabs are now called upon to determine their
status--either become Muslims or become Jews!" That aroused the resentment

of all those who heard the speech, especially the Christian Nationalist lead-
ers. including In'am Ra'd and Dr 'Abdallah Sa'adah. After that Col Qadhdhafi
intentionally mocked the representatives of the Lebanese Nationalist Movement
by proceeding twice to postpone his appointments with them after they waited
more than 2 hours each time.

COPYRIGlﬂ‘: 1981 ALHATAN AL ARAB!

5216
C80: 4404/318

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPEC AFFAIRS

RECENT WARD TREND IN OIL PRICES ANALYZBD
Reasons for Price Decreases
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 265, 12-18 Mar 82 pp 57-58
[Article by Dr Nicola Sarkis]
[Text] "Look for Unemployment and an Economic Recession."

What Does the Decrease in Oil Prices Mean? What Are the
Explanations for This Phenomenon? Here We Present an
Analysis by, and an Interview with, the Petroleum
Expert Dr Nicola Sarkis Hho Answers Various Questions
Which Have been Posed Concerning This Hatter.

Perhaps the nest important decrease in prices has been the one on British
oil extracted from the North Sea/N which is called "high-grade type Torties
36.50'." The price per barrel of such oil was $39.25 on 1 January 1981.
Then the price went down to $36.50 by 1 January 1982, then down to $35 by
8 February 1982, and finally stabilized at the fundamental price of $31 as
of 1 March 1982. Thus its price became $3 less than the marker price of
Arabian light crude (which is of a lower grade), which OPEC had set at 334.

But let us go back to very recent tins.

When the Iraqi-Iranian war began in Setpember 1980, the Western nations were
afraid that a crisis in their oil supplies would occur. They took rapid
precautionary measures which had the objective, among other things, of
providing a permanent reserve stockpile (in storage tanks in the West) which
would be the equivalent of from 110 to 120 days of oil consulption. Cosnen-
taries began to focus on the iminent occurrence of a sharp rise in prices
as a result of the decrease in volt-e of exports from both Iraq and Iran.

An increase did occur on 1 January 1981, but it was not so sharp. The
increase ranged between 20 percent (Arabian light crude) and 25 percent
(Nigerian crude). Then it was said that this would serve to restore a
balance in supply and demand and would thus absorb the additional quantities
offered in the free markets. But this balance was not restored.

mmmmy
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The question which suggests itself is: What are the reasons for the decrease
in oil prices for the first time, after prices had always tended to rise?

In other words, if bringing supply in line with demand is what determines the
price, how do we justify the decrease in the price of oil and the existence

of a significant oil glut in spite of the continual decrease in oil production?

The fact is that supply decreased, but demand decreased even more. This
decrease in the amount of world oil consumption was the result of two
principal combined factors, which were:

1. A continuation of the phase of economic recession in the industrial
Western nations, which are the principal consumer nations of oil. The longer
the recession lasts, the less need there is for energy.

2. Resorting to extensive use of alternative sources of energy. To this we
must add two other elements, no less important than the two above-mentioned
reasons, which relate to the OPEC nations. During the last few years there
has been a production increase in several oil-producing areas of the world
which are outside the scope of OPEC. In addition to this, OPEC, as an
organization which embraces 13 oil-producing countries, has been unable to
establish a comprehensive plan which takes into consideration the factors and
dimensions of the crisis and which constitutes a long-range scientific and
well-planned response [to the crisis].

Let us review these factors.
Unemployment and Inflation

The Western industrial nations (the 17 industrially-advanced Western nations
embraced by the OECD [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development])
are suffering from unemployment. Between the years 1970 and 1980 the number
of persons out of work in those countries doubled. By the middle of 1982

the number of unemployed persons in those countries will be three times what
it was in 1970, that is, within 1 1/2 years (from 1 January 1981 to 30 June
1982) unemployment will have increased as much as it did during all 10 of the
previous years (from 1970 to 1980). By 30 June 1982 the number of unemployed
persons will be 28.5 million, and this will constitute 8 percent of these
countries' labor force. Of this total, 16.5 million persons are in the
countries of Western Europe alone. If we take into consideration the rate

of population increase and improvement in productivity. these nations will
have to increase their production at a rate of 3 percent per year if they
want their total number of unemployed persons not to go beyond the figure

of 28.5 million. The estimates are that the increase in GNP in these indus-
trial nstions in 1982 will be less than 3 percent. This means that there
will be an increase in the number of unemployed from now till several years
in the future (till 1985) if we accept the hypothesis of the long-term economic
cycle called the Kondratiev Cycle.

One factor which increases the unemployment is the increase in the banks'
interest rates in an attempt to put a stop to inflation. This rate of infla-
tion differs from country to country, in accordance with each country's
economic situation. Among the principal industrial countries, Britain, Italy,
and France have the highest rates of inflation.

FOI¢NHHCLALIIHBONIY
FOR‘OFFIJAI.USE(NVLY

Inflation put: a brake on investments and the existence of unemployment
increases the financial deficit of the public sector. The result of this is
less production and therefore there is less need for energy. Is the situation,
then. really a bad one? The answer to this is an unequivocal "no." Growth

is slow in comparison with previous times when growth was more rapid and more
obvious. This "weak" growth represents a much sounder situation than the
situation in the nonroil-producing nations of the Third World. The reason
that special emphasis is given to the phase of economic recession in the
western nations is the fact that the Heat is the main importer and consumer

of oil.

[Insert] Oil Inside and Outside OPEC
1970: The OPEC nations produce two-thirds of the oil produced in the world.

1976: The OPEC nations produce the largest quantity of oil in their history
(31.6 million barrels a day), but the percentage of their production goes
down to 50.6 percent of the world's total production.

1981: The OPEC nations produce no more than an average of 22.5 million
barrels a day. Their percentage of production goes down to 62.86 percent
of the world's production.

1982 (first 3 months): The daily average production of the OPEC nations is
19.8 million barrels, and they produce 61.25 percent of the world's production.

Changes in Daily Production Averages
(in millions of barrels)

1976 1977 1980 1981 1982 3 months

OPEC countries 30.7 31.6 27.0 22.5 19.8
Countries outside OPEC 27.6 30.7 32.7 30.0 28.2

Total World production 58.1 62.1 59.7 52.5 68.0

Percentage of production
outside OPEC- 67.16 69.6 56.77 27.16 58.75

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-NATAN ALP'ARABI
Steps Recommended for OPEC
Paris AL-HANTAN AL-' ARAEI in Arabic No 265, 12-18 Mar 82 pp 58-59

[Interview with Dr Nicola Sarkis, By Ania Senna: "OPEC Lacks Planning and
Needs to Decrease Production"; date and place of interview not specified]

[Text] Dr Nicola Sarkis Is an Economics Expert in Oil
Affairs. For the Last 6 Years Ne Has Been Head of the
Arab Center for Petroleum Studies in Paris. He Is an
Important Authority Concerning Everything Having to Do
with Arab Oil.

FOI1DPIIJAI.USIGIVLY
FKHICNWNCJAI.U8E(NNLY

[Question] Did the crisis in oil prices begin when the marker price (the
price of Arabian light crude) went beyond the level of $30 per barrel last

year?

[Answer] It is true that oil prices rose fast between the years 1978 and 1980,
that is, during the course of about 2 years. The so-called 'harker price".
that is, the price of Saudi Arabian light crude oil. rose during this period
from $12 per barrel to $32 per barrel, and then went up to $34 per barrel in
1981. In other words, the price nearly tripled. But price increases were
even greater for oil from a number of other countries (for example, countries
in North Africa. Nigeria, and the North Sea countries). Certainly these
price increases took place rapidly. Also, another great increase occurred
during the October War of 1973. The price per barrel went up from $1.80 to
$6 and $7, and later on to $12. All of this happened during the course of

2 years. All of this is a fact. But it is also a fact that this increase
was a type of reaction. "hat I mean by this is that oil prices, for a long
period of time, remained on a very low level and did not increase. This made
the purchase value of oil decrease at a time when the prices of all other
materials, during the quarter century befor: 1973, increased. There were no
increases in oil prices, and in fact there was a decrease in prices during

the late fifties.

Political circumstances which emerged in the Middle East duringlate 1978 and
1979 set the stage for a new jump in prices from $12 per barrel to $36 per
barrel. It would have been better if this had not happened during such a
short period of time. but rather if the prices had increased gradually and

in a controlled manner, with consideration being given to the inflation which
was taking place in the world and to the pressing and urgent need to develop
both new sources of oil and alternative sources of energy to cover the world's
energy needs.

OPEC was not able to establish a program of controlled price increases because
of the great pressures being exerted by the large industrial nations.

In short, the level of prices reached in 1981 was not an unreasonable price
level. OPEC is not the only organization which determines oil prices. Prices
are also set by non-OPEC nations such as Mexico, Britain, and even the 0.8.

In 1979 and 1980, the 0.3. administration was selling oil produced from
government-owned areas at prices which were higher than OPEC prices. There
was no justification for these high U.S. prices.

[Question] Is it not true that even the price of Soviet oil went up whenever
OPEC prices went up?

[Answer] Yes, this is true. The point that I am trying to make is that

there are other parties, outside of OPEC, which are pursuing the policy of
setting high prices. As an example of this, let me mention an incident

which occurred in 1972. On 1 June 1972, when Iraq nationalized the Iraqi
Petroleum Company [IPC], this coincided with the holding of an Arab petroleum
conference in Algeria. I was one of those who participated in the conference.
Another of those invited to the conference was an American whose name was
James Aikens who, at that time, held the position of director of the Office

INUI OFFICJAI.IIIIiCHVLY
FOR‘UFFKJAI.lEﬂ:ONLN

of Energy in the 0.5. State Department and was one of Nixon's advisers on

oil affairs. (Later on he became the u.s. ambassador to Saudi Arabia.) At
the conference Mr Aikens gave a speech in which he said that oil prices would
go up and that some nations would raise their oil prices from $1.8 per barrel
to $6 and $5 per barrel. I personally was astonished to hear this, and all
of the others attending the conference were astonished to hear this because
at that time nobody had even thought of such large increases, but [apparently]
the 0.8. Government had been thinking in these terms. The 0.8. point of view
was that if it was necessary to develop new sources of energy, then it was
necessary for the price of oil to go up. If the price of oil remained low,
then there would be no justification for searching for new sources [of oil]
and the u.s. would remain dependent on the oil-exporting nations.

So there is no doubt that the increase in prices is in the interest of oil-
exporting nations. but it is also not in conflict with the desire on the
part of sole of the industrial nations, including the U.S., to raise the
prices of oil for various reasons of their own.

One interesting fact is that after the years 1973 and 1974 the European
Common Market nations decided to set a minimum price of $7 per barrel for
the importation of oil. This price was three times what the price was
before the 1973 War. Their purpose for doing this was to protect the oil
produced in the North Sea area, which is oil which costs a great deal to
extract. It should be noted--and this is something which is very important--
that the International Energy Organization, which was basically created in
order to deal with OPEC, has stated that it is alarmed about the current
decrease in the price of crude oil which has taken place. The reason for
this organization's alarm is the fact that cheap oil will lead to a
slowdown in efforts to conserve energy and develop alternative sources of
energy.

The Price Can Go Down Even More

[Question] How far will the decrease in prices go? "111 the marker price
remain $34 when the price of North Sea 011 has gone down to $31 and at a
time when other nations such as Iran have begun to pursue a policy of
drastically lowering their prices because of their urgent need for cash?

[Answer] If the OPEC nations do not reach an agreement, or if some other
event does not occur, it will prove to be impossible to maintain current
official prices. As I have already said, there are nations which have stated
that they will not adhere to official prices. If no agreement is reached

to undertake a large d~crease in production, prices could go down to $30 or
even $25 per barrel. In my opinion, it is necessary to decrease production
at least to the point where the glut in the market will be absorbed.

[Question] How large is this glut?

[Answer] In purely mathematical terms this surplus amounts to 2 or 3 million
barrels per day. But we should not forget that there is also a psychological
aspect to this matter. Right now there is a tendency toward lowering the
prices, [and this means that] the prices actually will decrease.

'\

POI OFFIJAL.USIINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] You mentioned that the oil surplus, mathematically speaking. is
from 2 to 3 million barrels per day. The fact is that in the years 1981

and 1982 there was a noticeable decrease in OPEC's production. In 1981

the daily average production was 22.5 million barrels. During the first

2 months of 1982 this daily average production did not exceed 19.8 million
barrels. What this means is that during this short period of time the total
decrease in production was more than the oil surplus [in the market]. Never-
theless, the price of oil went down. Does this not indicate that there are
other factors at work besides the psychological factor?

[Answer] Undoubtedly there are. There is the factor of the economic reces-
sion which has been accompanied by the development of new sources of oil
and the development of new alternative sources of energy.

[Question] What have been the repercussions of the decrease in prices as
far as the non-oil-producing nations of the Third world are concerned?

[Answer] In the short run the nations of the Third World will benefit from
the decrease in oil prices. But cheap oil will curtail programs involving
the search for new sources [of oil] in the nations of the Third Horld,
especially in Africa. -

[Question] what should OPEC do if it wants to [successfully] deal with this
matter?

[Answer] OPEC should establish a comprehensive plan (dealing with prices and
production quantities) which takes into consideration the situation which
OPEC's member nations find themselves in, takes into consideration their
need for development, and also takes into consideration the world economy's
need for oil and the given factors of this world economy. Up till now OPEC
has not engaged in any planning which could be called comprehensive planning.
This is regrettable. So far OPEC's role has been restricted to its policy

of setting prices, and it has not expanded beyond this framework.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WANTAN AL-'ARABI

9468
C80: 4404/399

FOIlOFIICUULIEIECHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3W WITH USSR

IRADB in English No 5. May 82 p 52

The Governmem of the Unlon o! Sovlet soclellet Mice
endtheGovemntoltheneptbllcotlreq.

Implted by the deem to coneolldete end expend trede
nletlonebetweenbothmttrleeonthebeeleofemelityend
mutuel beneﬁt.

Have agreed ee Mlowe:

m1

LThetredetumoverbementheUnionoOSMetSocle-
llet Reubllee end the Republic of lag shell be ellected on
tllebeele o?Uete-A-end-8-.ettedied hereto.

tet-A-Mlndudegoodedeelgnetedloruportm
the Rewbllc ol Ina tome Union of Sovlet Socldlet Mice.

3.Uet-a-ehelllmludeooodedeelomtedforexoortlrom
theUnlonotSo‘netSoclelletaepublleetotheﬁepubllcon.

e.Llete-A-end-B-meybeemendedbyegumbe-
tween theOovec-nmenteofbotheotmnee.

Add.)

le-A-end-B-ettechedtothle Agreement. teklnoluto
consideration the mm which ntey be Introduced thereln
eublect to Article 1 of tlue Agnentent. dell not be Ilmltetlve.
Sovlet lorelmuedeorgentntlm.ontheonehend.mdlreql
omenintlone. Melee! end leoel pom. on the othet ltend.
meycomldewltheechotnermmleltnneectlonelwthe
mnmewortotooodenetmludedlntheeeldum-A-
W 03-.

m,

the trede mrnuvev between the two comtrlee ehell be
effectedmdertNerreementlneecotdencewMtlmw

rulee Methamutdexpert velldlnelther country.“
onttvebeeleotmm.

10

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m4

Both Govemmente ehell reoiprocelly prent eech
nioet-tevouredmlontreeuiiemmdlmttere peneinino
betweenhothcowtrieeJncludinpcuetomednieeend
chergeelevledonlmportendmort.endeieotoru
lormelitieereietedthereto.

TheprovieioneotthieArticleehellnotepplyto:

i.Privilepeeendfeoilltieechhhaveornnyoeaxtended
hyoneolthecovernmentetoedieoentcountrleeiorthepu-
poeeotleciliteting trontlertreltic:

2.Prlvileoee end tecilitiee. including cuetome once. which
havebeenextendedbyoneottheeovernmenuonthebeeieof

encoreementorundentendinpontheeetebltelmentoteiree
tredezoneorecuetoi‘neunion:

3. Privileoee end lecllitiee which the Republic 0! lreq nee
or may orent to Are!) countriee:

A. Privileoee end iecilitlee which the Union 00 Soviet Sociev
Iiet Republice end the Republic ot ireq have rented or ehell
grent to one or severe! neighbouring countriee.

3a
in:

“do!

Provtei'one ot ihle Agreement she" not obetruct the righte
of either Government to teke meeeuree ior prohibiting or llmlt-
Ing the Importetion end exportation ot goode. elmed et eneu
ring netionel eecurity. protection of heelth end lile of citizens.
end protection ot im end liore.

Artie“.

All payments to be mode between the Union of Soviet Socia
list Republice and the Republic of lreq under thie Agreement
shell be eltected in eny freely convertible currency by epree-
ment between the contracting pertiee.

Artie“?

Repreeentetivee ol both Government: mey meet to work
out enrml protocoie on trade turnover beeed on the lists of
goode mentioned in Article 'l of title Agreement. elternetely. in
Moecow end Bephded et mutuelly egreed detee.

me

Repreeentetivee of competent euthoritiee oi both countriee
eneli meet at mutuelly agreed detee in order to develop trede
bemen both countriee end review the irnpiementetion oi thie
Agreement. '

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ankh!

Both Governtnantaahailrendar.aaaistanoa withreoardto
participation in international ttada faira held in either country
“inmwmdpamanemortemporaryexiubitione
otonacomtryhthaterritoryottheothetinaccordancowith
thaiegiaiationandmiaaoieithercomryauhiecttoagreernenta
betweentheconlpetentwthoritieaoibothcotmriae.

Subiecttoiawaandmieainforcaineithermlry.boih
Govemrnantsahallparmitthaimportationo’raxoortationwith
thaexarnptionirornthaoaymantotcuatomadmiaaandany
othertaxaaandcharoaaot:

articles and equipment required tor holding Immtionai
faira and exhibition;

articieatoheuaodastradeaamoieaprovideddieyare
nothtendadioraaie:

advertisinonwterialathacoatorprieaoiwhichhaano
cornrnarcialvaiue:

axhihiu providad under re-exoort conditions unless compa-
tent authoritiea of both countriaa agree otherwise:
articiee. materiala. tooia. and dovicea Imported ior procu-

eing. treatment. uae ior aaaembiy and/or repair oi Moment.
oriorcomtructionorotharworknrovidedthayaramxportad.

Ankh 10

From the date oi thia Aoreamant coining Into force the
trade Agreemnt signed between the Union oi Soviet Socialist
Rembiica and the Republic oi iraq on October it. 1958. shall
cease to ba valid.

NWO"

thin Agraament ahaliberatiﬁsdorawrovedin accordance
withthaiegialationoieithermitrthahallcomeimoiorce
from the dateoi exchange of notaa confirming the Agreement.
andehaiihevaiidiorSyaaraJtahallheextendediouaubu-
ouamSyearnariodmiaaaonaoitheGovemnentainioma
theoihorGovarmmoiitaintantiontotermlnateitamntha
priortotheexpiryoithanoreeinem.

iioneottheoovarrlnentawiaheetoamendthiaAgreement.
itahailiMorrntheotharOovernmentinwritinoatieaets
momhanriortothadiamaionoiauchaoropoaal.

Mummm19.|ﬂi.MWto
thhaahan 1401 A.H..intwooriginaia.eachintha nuaaian
and Arabic images. both tam beino eon-"r authentic.

For the Covert-ant of the Union of For the Government of the Republic
Soviet Socialist Republics of Iraq
I. 'r. Grishin ““61 “m“ m“

COPYRIGHT: "Vneehnyaya torgovlya" 1982
English Translation "Foreign Trade" 1982

CSO: 6600/343

12
“WISEONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

MAID APPROVES CONTRACTS FOR AGRICULTURAL PROM
Paris HARCIIES MPICAUX ET MEDITERRAKEHS in French 80 1904. 7 May 82 p 1205

[Text] Following lengthy negotiations. the Arab Authority for Agricultural
Investment and Develop-ent (AAAID), sons of whose third developIIent phase
projects we explained in our 9 April 1982 issue (p 960), recently awarded the
first contracts for the realization of projects included in its first inter-
ventionary efforts. The following are especially important: a construction
contract for a starch and glucose nsnufacturing unit awarded to the Belgian
company Desmet (civil engineering insured by Six Construct), for an anount of
30 nillion Sudanese pounds; a construction contract for a dairy entrusted to
Danish Turnkey; a contract for the creation of a poultry farn, to the Dutch

company INA.

Moreover, the following projects night be included in the AAAID's realization
program, following approval by its administrative board: meat packaging
projects—this would involve organising the livestock markets of Oadurman
for the preparation and packaging of 10,000 tons of deboned neat for export;
the growing of rice through irrigation from the White Nile at Al-Duwayn; in-
tensive sheep raising for export; the growing of Arsbusta coffee in the
South-Sudan; develop-cot of the Pengko plain, in the province of Jonglei.
These five projects should be studied, and bids for limited offers from for-
eign consultants should be initiated to this end.

COPYRIGHT: Rene bran: at Cie Paris 1982

9927
C80: 0519/178

13

FOR OFFICIAL [5! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

PROGRESS IN ROAD PROGRAM REVIEWED
Paris MARCHES 1'80le 31' HEDITBRRANKBNS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1166

[Text] Many road projects are underway in Sudan and they have reached various
stages. The situation in the major projects can be amused up based on infor-
mation provided by the French office of economic expansion in Khartom.

-—Streets of Khartoum The Roads and Bridges Corporation (REC) is repairing
oneof the city's main arteries, the Sharia El Baladya, using its own materials.
There have also been preliminary contacts with the Ronanian Government to
repair the streets of Ryad, a residential district southeast of the city. The
Italian conpsny Recci is said to have offered to send to Khartoum expatriate
engineers who will work for the REC supervising and helping with local Opera-
tions.

--The Khartoum-Hadi Halfa-Asuan Road. This major road running through Sudan
and Egypt over a distance of more than 1,200 has had already been given an
allocation of 300 million lire (an Italian gift) destined to finance a feasi—

bility study. However, this sln is not sufficient. That is why Iwresit-
Italconsult-Pint, the consulting consortium chosen to conduct the study, did

not pursue this project.

The RBC has also approached the African Develop-cut Bank (ADB) with a request
for funds.

--lhm Rwabah-Al-Ubbayyid Road (170 inns) and Dilling-Babilah Road (40 has).
The firm Arabic Engineering House-Dar Bl Randasa, a Lebanese company, is
conducting a feasibility study funded by the World Bank.

«Kashn Al-Qirbah-Nev Haifa Road (95 he). Italconsult and Stripe are con-
ducting a feasibility study financed by the World Bank. The estimated cost
of building that road is $60 million and is included in the program of

the World Bank. A call for bids will be announced in 1982.

--Al Pashir-Nysla Road (150 kms). The consulting firm Ilsco (Netherlands) and
the construction company Steveroads (Netherlands) are working on this project
which is financed with a gift of 20 million florins from the Dutch Government.
--Road linking Al-Jayli, Shandi, 'Atbarah and Hayya (450 ha). Feasibility

studies for the 'Atbarah-Bayya section and detailed studies for the Al-Jayli-
'Atbarah section will be financed with bilateral Italian aid.

14

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

“ﬂattens-Had Hsdsni Road (190 has). The Arab Fund is financing a feasibility
study to double the width of the existing road or, as an alternative. to build a

parallel road of the opposite bank of the Blue Nile. The prequalification list
of the consultants is being drawn up.

«Khartou-Jahal Al-Mliys Road. The world Bank is reported to have listed
that section in its develop-ant program. But first. an econo-ic study will

have to be lads to assess the feasibility of repairing this road.
COPYRIGHT: Rene Houreux et Cie Paris 1982

8796
(280: 6520/173

15

MMMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

BRIEFS

CANADIANS AID FOREST PROJECTS-Canada is aiding Sudan in several ways. This
year it will especially provide $7 million in food aid to import flour, as
well as a $3 million loan to import capital goods. Additionally, within the
framework of its 5-year aid program to Sudan, Canada will finance, for $12
million, the following forest development projects: construction of a produc-
tion unit for construction wood at Al-Suki (cost: $3 million); construction
of a sawmill at Subo ($6.7 million); a forest localization study at Kurmk
and Ingessana ($500,000); an inventory of forest resources in the provinces
of BahrbAl-Ghazal and Buhayrat ($2.5 million); the establishment of a coordi-
nation center at Khartoum to follow the development of these projects. [Text]
[Paris MARC-8 TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1904, 7 May 82 p 1205]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9927

MINING 0F CHROME ORB-0hromite is the principal ore exploited in Sudan. 1981
production is estimated at around 19,000 tons. Sales for 1979-80 and 1980-81
were 19,000 tons and 25,000 tons and brought in a total of $3 million. Japan
was the principal customer (more than 50 percent of the shipnents). As for
other ores, it should be noted that the American company Mine: is soon to be-
gin experimental extraction of gold from the rubble of an old mine, located
in the Red Sea region, which dates from the tine of the Pharaohs. This same
company recently signed a contract for tungsten prospecting in the Es
Sabablouga region (Rhartoul province). As for the Sudanese Inning Corpora-
tion, it has two projects under study: one, in the Khartoum region, involves
the production of granite granules; the other, in the Port-Sudan region, in-
volves a gypsun crushing unit. Financing would be local. [Test] [Paris
HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET mmmms in French bio 1904, 7 May 82 p 1205]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9927

NEH RVI GARAGE OPENED-“The Darfur Public Transport Company's garage was open-
ed last 2!. March. Built by Renault Vehicules Industriels (RVI), its $6.2
ninion franc cost was insured under the 1978 French-Sudanese protocol. It
is to be used for the maintenance unit of the corporation's RVI trucks. The
garage is the group's second in Sudan, following that at Had Hadsni, which
is used for the maintenance of the bus fleet of the Al-Jarirah Public Trans-
port Company. [Text] [Paris means TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French
No 1906, 7 May 82 p 1205] [COPYRIGII'R Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9927

16

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'EGASO BUSES PURCHASED-~In March. the Kordofnn Company for Trade and Engineer-
1m; received 30 of the 150 Pegaso buses it had purchased from the mass Corpo-
ration (Spain). This purchase is financed up to $11.1 million by a Spanish
loan, which also provides for the supplying of spare parts for $1 million and
the construction of workshops for $300,000. [Text] [Paris mass TROPICAUX

er mmmms in French so 19m 7 u. 82 1205 o ‘
Morena et en Paris 1982] 9927 ’ y P l [c mmn. Rene

MIXED FLOOR PRODUCTION-4n view of a growing consumption in Africa of wheat
flour, which is in short supply there and hard to produce locally, the FAO and
the UNDP [UN Development Program] launched a project inl975 to promote African
grains. One of the facets of that project was the creation in Shambat (Sudan)
of a Food Research Center with facilities which included a mill and a pilot
baking-oven. Research conducted there resulted in a mixed flour milled from
sorghul (durra variety) and wheat and with satisfactory color. nutritional
qualities and taste. The center's bakery produces daily 1,500 loaves of

bread and more than 2,000 rolls containing between 15 and 20 percent of sor-
ghu. In Khartoum, a flour mill has started producing this nixed flour and

it mills between 3 and 5 tons a day. Another mill is under construction in
"ad Hadani. [Text] [Paris meats TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French

No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1146] [COPYRIGliTz Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

HILK PLANE-The Kuku milk plant is a joint venture project launched in partner-
ship by the Sudanese state coamany Animal Production Public Corporation (APPC)
with a 37.5 percent share; the Sudan Development Corporation [SDC] with a 37.5
percent share, the Swedish company Alfa-Laval with a 12.5 percent share; and
the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) for the rest. By the mid-
dle of this year, this plant is expected to have a daily output of 60,000
liters of reconstituted pasteurized milk made frompowdered milk and butter oil.
The project is financed by Sudan to the amount of $6 million and by Sweden
which provided $3 million. A production company has been created and will be
given $2.2 million by the SIDA and a $3 million loan by the SDc. The success
of this project depends on the efficiency of its distribution network (cosme-
tition from the "donkey man" remains strong although the bacteriological qual-
ity of their milk is poor) and on whether or not this reconstituted milk
appeals to the consumer. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX 3T HBDITERRANBENS
in French No 1903. 30 Apr 82 p 1166] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Koren: et Cie Paris

1982 8796

mDBRNIZATIOR 0? PORT SUDAN—The International Development Association (IDA),
an affiliate of the world Bank, has extended to Sudan a credit of $25 million
destined to improve the physical handling capacity and the operational effi-
ciency of Port Sudan. The project is mainly intended to improve the ability
to handle unitized cargo and to prepare Port Sudan to increase the movement of
roll on-roll off containers. Improvements will be introduced in the grain
storage and handling facilities and in the conunications system of the port.
hese improvements will enable Port Sudan to meet future requirements mostly by
introducing the unitized cargo method in the existing piers. [Tut] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX 8T HBDITBRRANENS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1166]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

C80: (05201173
17

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HNLY

OPPOSITION ABROAD 8AID TO PLAN STRATEGY FOR COMBATING ASAD REGIME
Paris ALPHATAR AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 273, 7-13 May 82 pp 21-22

[Article: "European Security Mobilization to Heat the Possibility of a
Counter-war Breaking Out"!

[Text] Is there a plan being prepared by the Syrian opposition to respond to
the Syrian regime's terror with violence? In other words, is the war of
liquidation abroad being met with a similar war, launched by elements of the
Syrian opposition trained in this type of operation?

This is a very serious question. It was raised in several secret meetings
of the "var Council" which was formed in Paris the morning after the massacre
aimed at AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI on Bus Harbeuf.

The war council is tasked with countering the acts of violence and terror.

It is composed of Interior Minister Gaston Defferre. General Seaulne. special
chief of staff to the president, Maurice Grilot, the director of the office
of the minister of the interior. Nation Padir, director general of foreign
security, and Chalet, Direction de La Surveillance de Territoira (internal
security).

In order for this council to have a special importance and weight in the cur-
rent circunstances, President Francois Hitterrand decided to chair it himself.
He supervises its operations and discusses its plans and the ways of combat-
ing the terrorisn that has spread its germs to France, which only yesterday
was nearly isolated from the octopus of international violence.

The question currently occupying the war council and the French police and
intelligence organizations is clear and definite: Is the Syrian-Syrian war
of liquidation spreading to France?

This main question, for its part. spawns a group of questions that are cur-
rently being discussed in couplets secrecy behind the scenes in various
branches of French security.

Bye for an Eye and Tooth for a Tooth

The questions today are searching for definite answers. French authorities
fear an extremist "reaction" from the Syrian opposition. French territory

18

FOIIOIIICIAL.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(apart from several European cities) would be a bloody stage for this. Among
these questions:

1. Has the Syrian opposition movement, especially the Muslim Brotherhood, re-
cently and secretly made a basic decision to respond to the liquidatiOn with
liquidation abroad?

2. what would prevent such a war between the Syrian regime and the opposition
from being carried out in Europe?

3. How can this possibility be met?

4. "hat would be the repercussions of such a war on the future of French-
Arab relations?

5. will non-Syrian Arab or foreign elements participate in this "counter-war"
this time, on behalf of the Syrian opposition?

Green Light

AL-RATAN AL-‘ARABI, relying on reliable security sources, can confirm that
these questions were raised at the highest security levels. not onlyinFrance.
but also in other European nations, including "est Germany. London. Austria
and Spain, by virtue of the coordination and cooperation that exists among
European security organizations in terms of combating terrorism. In an at-
tempt to find convincing answers to various questions. the different French
security organizations are today assessing the data and facts that AL-HAIAN
AL—‘ARABI has uncovered.

Secret information has reached these organizations regarding a secret meeting
of the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood recently held in a European city, at
which the possibilities of shifting ”the battle" abroad, in certain very
extraordinary cases, were discussed. This was in order to respond to internal
massacres through "reprisal actions" that would deal with symbols of the Syr-
ian regime or those who collaborate with it who live abroad permanently, or
those who travel between one European city or another.

This information also indicates that the Syrian opposition movement discussed
these possibilities from different angles, especially their pros and cons.
Views were divided. There were those who said that "the battle is all one
and cannot be divided. We are involved in a vicious war, in which the regime
uses its airplanes and tanks against defenseless people. Consequently, it
must be kept off balance through swift. tactical operations to paralyze its
ability to move outside of the opposition's 'trap.’ Foreign violence must be
met with similar violence."

In its analysis, this view relies on a group of factors. the most important
being that "foreign actions" will not be the alternative, but rather, they

will be complementary and integrated with the domestic battle. Moreover. the
general international view puts the Syrian regine in the column of "terrorist

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nations." The opportunity is now clearly propitious to take field action
abroad, which could prompt the European countries to pursue the "saboteurs

and terrorists" whom Rif’at al-Asad has sent to Europe. This would have
positive repercussions in terms of causing the regime to lose the opportunity
to assassinate the oppositionists, such as happened to the martyr Binan 'Assan
s1-‘Attar in the German city of Aachen a year ago, to Salah al-Din Bitar and
to one of the Huslim Brotherhood officials recently in Madrid, and so on.

Those who hold this view also say, in justifying reprisal operations, that

the opposition is superior in this field due to several considerations, in-
cluding the intense training to which the brotherhood is being subjected, and
the joining of the “movement" by many youths who lost loved ones in the mas— .
sacres of Tudmur, Aleppo and Hanah, as ”kamakazis" seeking martyrdon in order
to save Syria. They also say that the battle with the Syrian regime has
reached the "breakingpoint" and all avenues are open, or rather, that they
must be opened if they are to lead to the salvation or share in hastening its
date.

The Other View

However, this overzealous view is not unanimous. There are those, within the
opposition itself, who do not agree with it. The justifications and pretexts
in this regard are numerous; perhaps the most important are the following:

1. Shifting the battle abroad "will only harn our people abroad, by virtue
of the difficulties to which Syrians residing or traveling abroad will be
subjected." The European police will of necessity impose strict controls
over bearers of Syrian passports, and Syrians might be subjected to arbitrary
detention both within and outside of airports, and some of them forcibly sent
back to Syria, which night create "resentment" against reprisal operations
abroad.

2. ,The real battle is at home. Anything other than that is just a "skirmish"
which will not break the regime's neck, bearing in mind that they use up time,
effort and lives that could be used in the hoaefront battle.

The fact is that this information that the European security organizations
have gathered has given the “green light" to a broad assessment of the opposi-
tion's movements and the possibilities of an unstoppable war of liquidation
breaking out.

The Madrid Incident

This has increased the fear that the Syrian opposition has begun intensive
activity recently in a non-European country, in the midst of prophecies that
the opposition has comprehensively assessed the symbols of the Syrian regime
abroad, in terms of financiers, businessmen, journalists, merchants and stu-
dents, and those who cooperate with Syrian Intelligence and informants. The
incident of the shooting of Haaan Diyyub, the Syrian "cultural" attache in
Madrid on 27 April, reinforces these fears, or rather. firmly establishes
then. Preliminary investigations in Madrid indicate that persons unknown

20

l-‘OIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fired several shots at the cultural attache's car, while he was preparing to
enter the garage of the building in which he lived. He returned the fire in
kind.

Bye witnesses stated that the persons who carried out the operation fled, and
the investigation has not determined their identity.

This incident, which was the first of its kind, has caused several European
countries to ask: Has the counter-war begun? The most important question
is: Has some political decision been made in this regard?

The French authorities began at once to study the possibilities of this war,
especially since these organizations recently received secret information
indicating that some persons identified with the Syrian regime were "threat-
ened." ALPHAIAN AL-‘ARABI has confirmed that same security preparations have
been made in this context.

On this premise, these organizations have assessed the Arab establishments
identified with the Syrian regime which could be a "target" for some operation
or other.

Search For Intelligence?

The security guard around the Syrian Embassy has also been reinforced, as well
as the Syrian cultural center in Paris and the office of the Syrian news
agency, which is directed by Ghassan al-Rifa'i. The principal operatives
(such as Lt Col Gayyath Anis, nicknamed al-Zsbib) requested the increased
guard and are, for their part, taking individual precautions.

The dossiers of several Arab and Syrian persons in Paris have begun to be
studied in order to determine their tendencies and leanings, and the possi-
bilities which might be met.

This information is being exchanged with non-European security organizations.
Is there a state of security mobilization?

Certainly!

It is also confirmed that the Syrian opposition has not disclosed its inten-
tions. It has issued no statement regarding its course of action regarding
these fears, nor has anyone publically taken responsibility for the shooting
at the Syrian "diplomat" in Madrid. There aze those who say, or rather,
stress what Syrian Intelligence itself is behind the circulating of this in-
formation and the spreading of a climate of alarm in Europe, for the purpose
of preparing for future bloody terrorist operations and pinning the blame on
imperialism, and the Muslim Brotherhood, in a desperate attempt to get rid of
the good "reputation" which pursues members of the regime in circles of world
public opinion.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI

7005
cso: b404/469 21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

COVERT ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED WITHIN FRANCE CITED
Paris ALPHATAN ALP'ARABI in Arabic No 272, 30 Apr-6 May 82 pp 25-26
[Article: "Syrian Intelligence 'Accomplishments' in Paris“]

[Tent] If the French government had charged the Syrian authorities. either
directly or indirectly, with the responsibility for the "Rue Harbeuf" crime,
other various French political and media circles have been perfectly clear

in their accusations against the Syrian authorities. in specifying the Syrian
regime's responsibility for this crime.

The fact is that these accusations do not come forth out of a vacuum. but
rather are generated by numerous precedents on the French scene, which bear
the imprint of Rif'at al-Asad himself, and specifically his intelligence
apparatus belonging to the Defense Companies.

There is no doubt that ALPHATAN ALP'ARABI has had a "lion's share" of this
activity. It has been exposed to three criminal attempts in the last 2 years.

The first attespt happened in April 1980, and was aimed at the general super-
visor, Comrade Valid Abu Thahr. It was his custom to leave his hone in one
of the old suburbs of Paris at exactly 0900 each day. However, contrary to
custom, the morning of that day he delayed leaving for his office at ALPHATAN
AL-'ARABI.

By coincidence, his neighbor opened the door of his apartment at exactly 9 am.
He was immediately seized by masked men and beaten about the head with an iron
bar.

When the criminals realized that the victim was a French citizen. they left
him lying on the floor in a pool of blood and fled in an unknown direction.
The police have been unable to apprehend the criminals. nor to determine
their identity. However, Comrade Abu Thahr was clear in his accusation that
it was Syrian Intelligence.

Due to the nature of things, the series of crises did not stop at this. After
AL-HATAR AL-‘ARABI alone published the story of the assassination of the

French Ambassador in Beirut, Louis Delamare, and exposed the role of Syrian
Intelligence in the crime, it has received various threats. These threats

22

IKI!(Hﬂﬂ(JAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have multiplied, since the French authorities have confirmed AL-UATAN AL-
'ARABI's information regarding the Syrian regime's complicity in the case,
and after other French newspapers (such as LIBERACION) expanded the exposure
of this complicity. Accordingly, the second warning attempt occurred.

The AL-HATAN Ab-‘ARABI watchman, on the evening of 19 December 1981, discov-
ered an explosive gift on the fourth floor in front of the entrance to our

offices. The authorities were inediately called to defuse the device. If
it had exploded, there would have been many victims.

As a result of the investigation. it was clear that a person named Hikha'il
"Michelle" Kasuhah, who was described as a diplomat in the Syrian mbassy,
was the one who prepared the explosive device.

Therefore, the French authorities sent a strongly worded letter to the Syrian
government, in which they exposed Rasuhah's complicity in the crime. However,
the Syrian regime has not responded.

The Hamah Massacres

The Syrian authorities believed that this explosive warning would be suffi-
cient to threaten AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI and to silence it. However, we exposed
the crime and published its details and directly accused Kasuhah. His pic-
ture was also published on the front page under this headline: "This 'Diplo—
mt‘ Is Behind the AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI Explosion."

The threats continued against AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, but the editorial direction
continued as before. Then came the massacre in the Syrian city of llamah.
AerATAN AL-‘ARABI was the only Arab magazine to give this event its pr0per
attention and treatment. In consecutive issues, it devoted important space
to the popular uprising in Hamah and other Syrian cities, shedding light on
the number of victims (20,000 killed) and the methods of attacking the civil-
ians (rape, cutting open pregnant bellies, plunder, intinidation and arrests
without cause). AerATAN Alr'ARABI also left room for the opposition to
voice various opinions and political leanings.

However. as is the nature of things, that did not please the Syrian regime.
Accordingly, AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI received secret information from Damascus
indicating that a team of Syrian suicide commandos would be going to Paris
to carry out "something" against Ala-"ATM! AL-‘ARABI or its general super
visor.

The French police confirmed this information for AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI and ine-
diately took precautionary security preparations.

They also undertook secret surveillance of some diplomats from the Syrian Em-
bassy, including someone called Hasan 'Ali (Naval Cot-lander, Acting Military
Attache), and Mikha'il Kasuhah, the assistant cultural attache, who received
his orders from Lt Col Gayysth Anis in the Embassy, and who sometimes coop-
erates with Sabba Nasir, the cultural attache in the Embassy.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY

However, the blowing up of AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI was not the only "indicator” of
the Syrian Intelligence apparatus in Paris. The secret French investigation
discovered that ﬂasan 'Ali had been observing the offices of AL-UATAN AL-
‘ARABI in Rue Harbeuf from inside a white Mercedes. There was cooperation
between him and Kasuhah. In a subsequent incident, they participated in the
Syrian demonstration against the regime, which took place on the Boulevard
Saint Germaine Du Paris on 5 March, by both of them acting to break up the
demonstration and beating those that organized it with iron clubs and chains.

ALPHATIN ALP'ARABI was the only one to publish a picture of Kasuhah, caught
"redhanded."

The Accomplishments Are “any

If we were to take a look behind some of the incidents, we would find that
the Syrian regime's imprint is behind the assassination of Salah al-Din Bitar

(July 1980) in Paris. The French organisations have a thick dossier on this
matter.

The Facts Are Numerous

Hasan 'Ali himself kidnapped the Syrian officer, Barid al-Baridi, from Paris,
because he had connections with certain opposition circles, and "sent" him
to one of the Damascus prison cells.

The investigation has so far not learned the way in which al-Baridi was gotten
out of Orly airport.

There are other operations as well in the file of charges, including the mur-
der of the Syrian student, Zhafir al-Attasi, by a bomb in his room in Paris,
as well as the strangulation of another opposition Syrian student in Stras-
bourg.

Elements from Syrian Intelligence slipped into his bathroom and killed him.
Other student elements in Lyon were directly tasked by Basan 'Ali to open the
mail boxes of Syrian students living in the city and to steal the letters
that they receive.

The imprint of Syrian Intelligence was very clear in all these cases. In
Nancy, another Syrian opposition student was recently stabbed with a dagger.
The perpetrator was not discovered.

Syrian "Technology"

The tales of "Syrian students" in France who are with Syrian Intelligence are
numerous and detailed. The Defense Companies received from hasan 'Ali a
secret report indicating that the opposition was very active in Syrian stu-
dent circles and that many of them had begun to join the ranks of the opposi-
tion. Consequently, there is no doubt that surveillance of Syrian student

circles was intensified. Rif'at sl-Asad commanded his representative in
Paris (Hasan 'Ali) that measures be taken.

26

FOI<OFFRJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Syrians wanted to find an appropriate "channel." The Ministry of Defense
concluded a contract with one of the French institutes to train Syrian stu-
dents on "the most modern technological means." The institute is the Univer-
sity Institute of Technology (IUT) and its headquarters is in the French city
of Saint Denis. It has numerous branches in other French cities. The strange
thing is that the Syrian Defense Ministry stipulated to the director of the
institute that this contract he kept secret.

The French authorities are currently investigating the circumstances of this
contract's signing and the reasons for the director of the institute agreeing
to keep the matter secret, especially since there is no justification for
keeping it secret so long as it is strictly scientific. However, the matter
does not require a "soothsayer" to discover the siren-stances of this agree-
ment. Syrian Intelligence found itself a good ”channel" to bring reliable
elements, loyal to the regime. into France, under the guise of "scientific
study." Some of these elements are charged with keeping an eye on Syrian
student movements and to intervene. when necessary, to suppress any opposi-
tion movement. This is exactly what happened in the Boulevard Saint Germaine
demonstration, in which sole students from the various branches of this insti-
tute participated. for the purpose of suppressing the opposition deaonstration.

The French Goverth is currently studying the status of this institute. and
information available to AL-HATAN ALP'ARABI confirms the intention to abrogate
the agreement with the Syrian Ministry of Defense, which has so far brought

in about 500 students to study the "technology" of espionage.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

7005
cs0: 6406/469

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fillCﬂﬂﬂKﬂAl.U8lZGﬂ‘LY

SYRIA

POLITICAL STYLE 0? PRESIDENT HAFIZ AL-ASAD BXAHINED
Paris-LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR in French 30 Apr 82 pp 38-39

[Article by G. 5.: "The Al-Asad Systen"]

[Text] Disputes between France and Syria exist. There are differences of
opinion on a distant country in the Near East and different views on the fate
of Lebanon. Iraq, the enemy brother of Syria. purchases a part of its weaponry
in Paris. The Dela-are file has not been closed. These disputes do not prevent
the two countries from continuing to maintain civilised relations.

The slide toward a secret war could perfectly well have been avoided if one had
been dealing with a regime other than that which has governed in Damascus for
12 years. President Hafiz al-Asad and his brother Rif'at built a system which
runs on violence in order to remain in power. Without this fuel. it stops.

When two nations differ as France and Syria do. they have a whole range of
diplomatic procedures. economic sanctions and rhetorical battles with which to
settle their quarrel. Under the al-Asad system. these procedures are deemed too
mild. loreover. a bomb is persuasive.

Between the ambassadorial dealings and war. the Near East has for some years
concealed a middle path-international terrorism. More than an ”energetic pro-
test" and less than landing the marines. commando unit operations constitute a
subtle blend of war and peace.

Syria was not the first to make use thereof. The Palestinians established the
model. The Libyans and the Iraqis took up the model. but the Syrians did not
join in until late. Two different forms of international terrorism can be dis-
tinguished. There is top level terrorism. wherein a foreign politician believed
to be irreplaceable is seen as the problem. For example Faysal of Saudi Arabia.
Mousaa Sadr. the imam of the Lebanese Shiites. or Kamal Junblat. the Druse
leader. They are eliminated-one less piece on the chessboard.

French School Training

Terrorism by intimidation is no longer popular. I have normal and perfectly
cordial relations with someone. I want something from him. I kill his little

26

F0lilHﬂCUU.UUl(l§LY
FOR OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

2-year-old daughter. whom he adores. and I go to present my condolences to him
as a saddened friend. He suspects that I am the assassin but he can do nothing
against me except declare war on me. I can hope he will be more flexible.

This procedure is not without its efficiency in the emirates of the Persian
Gulf. which are unstable states. Billions of dollars and not a few votes for
the Arab League were won in this fashion. But that the Syrian government could
imagine that what works in the emirates also works with a European country is
definitive proof of the absolute isolation into which it has sunk.

The coronation of Hafiz al-Asad as head of state in 1971 was regarded as a real
deliverance. He succeeded a team of frenetic "socialists" which had just barely
spared the ahoeshine boys in the wave of nationalizations. which broke off rela-,
tions with the whole world except for the USSR. and suffered plunder by Israel
in 1967. Al-Asad was a moderate: he moved closer to Egypt and then the West.
allowed private enterprise to flourish and agreed to detente in domestic politi-
cal life. The army. instead of decamping at the first shot fired. fought re-
spectably against Israel. For the first time since 1945. Syria enjoyed the
delights of a stable and almost popular regime.

But the rejoicing did not last long. Syria soon returned to its swirl of prob-
lems. The country has no fewer than 18 religious communities. The al-Asad
brothers belong to the Alawite sect (10 percent of the population). the poorest
and that most scorned. Hafiz al-Asad remembers the time when the sheik of his
village was likely to be stoned if he went down to the city on a prayer day.
For a thousand years. the Alawites have clung to the flank of a chain of moun-
tains. Jebel el-Noussayriya. which drops away sharply into the Mediterranean.
Grains of sand in a Sunnite ocean. they only came down from their rocky home to
provide the pashas with fresh supplies.

At the origin of the split was a somewhat unorthodox interpretation of the
message of the Koran. Like the Shiites. the Alawites venerate Ali. Mohammed's
son-in-law. To this they add belief in a divine trinity--close to the Christian
concept--believed to have appeared seven times in three different guises since
time began. Exhausted from scratching a living from arid rock. the Alawites had
little leisure to devote to theological subleties. They do not know a great
deal about their religion. All that they know is that they are the damned of
the earth.

Hafiz al-Asad was born in 1930. during the French mandate. in Kardaha. one of
those mountain villages built of dried mud. His father must have been a
notable. because their home was a permanent one and the children were sent to
the French school.

while the Sunnites (70 percent of the population) grumbled against and fought
the French. the Alawites. on the contrary. saw colonialism's good aspects. They
enlisted in the small Syrian army commanded by officers from Bordeaux and
Strasbourg to earn a bit of money and to seize the opportunity to abuse the
Sunnites. while the bourgeoisie in Damascus and Aleppo disdained the military.
and sent their sons to study in the faculties of law and medicine.

27

FOR OFFRJA1.USB(NVLY
ltlltﬂﬂHCJAl.lEﬂi(H'LV

At 16. while attending the secondary school in Lattaquie. "iii: joined the
brand new Baas Party. To the accompaniment of whacks from a ruler. he was
taught the prodigious history of France and Europe. The Baas lanty'teught him
that the Arabs too could become a great nation. Their glorious 53.: was in no
way inferior to that of the greatest powers of the world. The renaissbnce'vould
come when religious and tribal divisions were eliminated. United in a secular
spirit and justice. the Arabs would raise themselves to the highest peaks. The
horizon for Hafiz opened up. No inevitable force bound the Alawite to his moun-
tain any longer. The days of contempt were past. To the two of us. Damascus!

Elected president of the students' cummittee at Lattaquie, and then in 1951
president of the Syrian students’ congress. he enrolled in the war college in
Hams. Syria had been independent for 6 years. It had experienced its third coup
d'etat. The Baas Party knew that winning power depended on guns. It urged its
young members to attend officers' school. The Alawites had less hesitation
about enlisting in the military. a habit acquired under the French. Hafiz
emerged as an air force lieutenant.

Head of State

It took the Bass Party only a dozen years to infiltrate the army sufficiently
and to establish itself in power in 1963. It is still in power. Hafiz al-Asad.
in an advantageous position. quickly rose to general and then commander in
chief of the air force. From this strategic position he controlled the country.
No coup d'etat against him was possible. The tanks and artillery could always
try something. but the air force had the last word.

. .
in order not to lose the ground gained. he needed to surround himself with reli-
able people. The party had divided up into military. civilian. pro-Egyptian.
pro-Iraqi. leftist and moderate factions. Relying on it was risky. it was only
possible to have confidence in someone of one's own family or tribe. Hafiz
aI-Asad then began to establish his Alawite nation within the Syrian state. It
very soon became impossible to shake his position. when he was officially
elected president of the republic in 1971. it was only a formality. He had long
since had everything nailed down.

Kissinger was to say of him in his memoirs: "he is probably one of the greatest
chiefs of state 1 have had occasion to meet." Probably one must ascribe a part

of this compliment to diplomatic flattery, but it gives the man his due weight.
To retain power in Damascus for more than 12 years is more than a performance:

it is a miracle--the miracle of the special services and the militia.

ﬂafiz al-Asad did not have evil intentions. He sought to achieve a reconcilia-
tion with his old mentor. Salah liter. who along with Michel Aflak founded the
Baas Party. instead of simply throwing him in prison. he talked with him for h
hours. Hithout reaching any agreement. from his noble position. the president
allowed Salah Bitar to depart for Europe. "here it was necessary to have him
assassinated: the old gentleman continued to criticize the government.

When he sent his army to Lebanon in 1976. Hafiz al-Asad was implementing his
dream as a young militant--to reestablish Greater Syria. Taken separately. each

28

I0.H0llﬂ€lhl.lﬂll(l§b¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country in the Near East is weak and ungovernable. An empire extending over the
entire region could put an end to the tribal quarrels and embody a glorious
ambition. "as this not the very essence of Arab nationalism?

Neither the Lebanese nor the Palestinians could understand this language. One
after the other, the Lebanese clans clashed with the troops of Hafiz al-Asad.
He came as a liberator but was treated like an occupier. Particularly since his
soldiers truly behaved like invaders.

A driver stopped at a Syrian barricade in a Beirut street. The sentry on duty
did not even glance at him. but continued to sip his coffee. One had to wait
until he saw fit to make a move. If one asked "Hay I pass?" he might well
punish the questioner by letting him roast for 3 hours in the blasing sun with
all the windows closed.

Syrian officers engaged in smuggling on a large scale to supply the markets in
Damascus, still too "socialist" to be supplied in proper fashion. Shipments of
hashish departed for the West, wisely escorted by colonels. Instead of provid-
ing security. the Syrians thought themselves clever in letting private armies
multiply. In this they succeeded-causing the development of a Lebanese nation-
al feeling against them which had never before existed. Failure in Lebanon.

In the Baas tradition. al-Asad tried to secularise the country, getting a new
constitution adopted in 1973 which did not specify the religion to which the
chief of state should belong. There were demonstrations in all the towns and up-
risings of Sunnite leaders which forced the president to yield. And to use
machine guns against the rebels. Since then. religious opposition has been con-
tinuous. and so has repression.

Reign of Terror

The government prohibited demonstrations on the birthday of the Prophet. Baas
Party militiamen tore the traditional veils from the faces of women still wear-
ing them in the streets. The Sunnites became enraged and acCused al-Asad of
atheism. The Moslem Brothers headed the rebellion with a staggering degree of
fanaticism. Their willingness to die is greater than the regime's effort to
kill them. They always go out on operations wearing a belt full of grenades.
The troops have orders to take them alive. when a Hoslem Brother is cornered.
he takes the pin from one of the grenades in his arsenal and blows himself up
along with those seeking to arrest him. When a Moslem Brother is spotted today
he calls out to the policeman: "Come and get me. then!" They form a circle. but
at a distance. And the police summon the army: "We've found a Hoslem Brother.
You'll have to arrest him." The army arrives, moves into position and tele-
phones the secret service: "He have a package for you." All this time, the
Hoslem Brother is laughing at them. he knows that they will never take him
alive.

The intelligence service of the regime is frustrated by these fanatics. But its
organization remains intact. It is based on Alawite personnel. Seventy percent
of the officers at the army command post belong to the sect or are loyal to it.

29

FINICIWWCIAI.[EHE(NULY
IIIICNHHCJAI.lEﬂ£(HHLY

like 50 percent of the troops. But apart from the army. a special force of
50,000 men is almost 100 percent Alawite. It is commanded by the brother of the
president, Rif‘at.

From Beirut to Abu Dhabi. the mere mention of Rif'at's name causes terror. It
is known that he is capable of anything, or everything.

Until a few months ago. three of his children attended the small French school
in Damascus (indicating his devotion to our language. which is not unimpor-
tant). They no longer go to classes. Too dangerous. The Hoslem Brothers might
kidnap them. The leaders and the whole regime live in a constant state of
siege. The president has had a palace-fortress built for himself on a hill in
Damascus. from which he could shell the city. even if the whole of it were to
rise in rebellion. The Alawites will not yield.

Control of a City

The rebellion in Hana a few weeks ago was put down with brutality rare in
modern history. The al-Asad brothers subdued Hams like the Soviets and the
Americans subdued Berlin. Then they forced the survivors to parade in a demon-
stration in support of the government. An astonished Syrian newspaperman re—
marked to a soldier: "There are a lot of people. after all." "Yes." the other
responded. laughing. "but not as many as we killed." The operation pursued
against Hams was entirely carried out by Alawite troops.

If there has not been a coup d'etat for 12 years. it is because the sl-Asad
brothers have invented a new science. In the 1930s. the coup d'etat technique
was discovered. For their part. they have found a technique for preventing
coups d'etat. It is not an exact science. The al-Asad brothers might lose one
day. No one questions the effects of their fall. It would mean a bloodbath. The
Alawites would be assassinated on every street corner. They would have but one
last resort--to retreat with their special forces to Alawite territory.

Everything is ready on the Mediterranean coast of Syria to create an Alawite
state in the event of disaster. Just as the Christians have their redoubt. the

Alawites would have theirs. which Syria would not recognize. A war would then
be inevitable. Yet another.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "la Nouvel Observateur"

SIS?
6803 4619/18

30

FOIiOFFICIAl.USE(NULY
TEXT OF TRADE AGREEMENT wrm USSR

Moscov FOREIGN TM” to Rachel: No 5, Kay 82 p 510

[Text]

the Government or the um or Soviet Sociaiiet newne-
wmmmdmswmmw.

Guided by the proviaiona oi the Treaty on Friendehio and
Cooperation between the Union of Soviet Socialiat “Mice
and the Syrian Arab Reotbiic oi October I. 1”. and the Long-
Term Trade Agreement lumen the Union oi Soviet Socieiiet
Republica and the Syrian Arab mature at November 4. 1905.

In connection with the eucceaeiul imoiernentation oi the
AgreernentonlraoeTunoverbatweentheUSSi'iandtheSAﬂ
for 19764900 of January 21. 1976. and

Desiring to promote further deveioornent of trade between
the two countries on a tong-term basic.

Have agreed as ioiiom:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m3

To helm-u tho Inﬂammation 0! this Wt both
Wawl.llm.mmmm.forwbwpou
demwlmummuu
mummunwmum.

Ml

Womwlummmmmllnmdm
mmmmmdumumwmuwt
mmhuhuﬂndudumoimdw.
m. mm mu mm!» mm m Jammy
1.1m.

MuMmWnimJnlmmlmlmmhln
MMMMMIw.Mmmme

mm.
For the Continent of the Union For thc Govern-ant of the Syrian
of Soviet socinlint Republic. Arab Republic
l; 1). team - Mahmud Al—Atrash

COPYRIGHT: "Vnulmnyn toxsovlyn" 1982
English translation "Foreign ruin" 1982

080: “000/363

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TIMBER-LIBYAN RAM? PROPOSED
Paris MRCIBS TROPIﬂUX 3‘! MW” in French No 1909, 11 Jun 82 p 1500

[Text] The bulletin of econonic news liungero-Press, pub-
lished by the hungerian Chsdier of Connerce, is publish-
ing the report below on the studies of the projected rail
link between Gabes, in Tmisie,.and the Libyan-Egyptian
border. A liungarian fire was co-issioned with these
studies.

In North Africa, the countries situated on the coast of the Mediterranean
should be linked by a transcontinental railway several thousand kilometers in
length. Only the Egyptian section of this line has been built thus far, and
it operates as far as the Libyan border. The line which is to run fron Gabes,
in Tunisia, across Libya to the Bgyptian border has not been built. In 1972.
the Govern-eats of Tunisia and Libya set up a joint co-eission which in 1975
initiated an international contest for the suhnission of studies for a
standard-gauge railway bemoan Sfax, Gabes and Tripoli. At the end of this
international contest, the emission charged the Enterprise for the Study of
Roads and Railways (Waterv) of Budapest with carrying out the studies. This
line will be about 500 he long. As regards the completion of the Sfex
junction point, an alternate route has been proposed which would per-it the
normal flow of port traffic in keeping with the urban development projects.
This alternative was accepted in agreement with the counnal council.

The cross-section of the projected line is expected to feature a 7.20-neter
wide ubanlment and a 9.20'neter wide cutting. The enbsnlueent is surfaced
with a layer of asphalt eight centimeters thick in order to drain off sur-
face water and increase the load capacity of the substructure.

The line fro- Sfax to (3st necessitates the construction of thirty large
bridges and 272 smaller bridges of reinforced concrete. The section extend-
ing frh Gabes to the border includes 35 large bridges and 186 smller ones.
Pro- Tripoli to the border and to Tripoli itself, it will be necessary to build
21 causeways, six high-level bridges as well as 50 snell reinforced concrete
bridges and tubular culverts. The railway bridges, causeways and culverts
which will connect at the railway line are all standardized structures.

33
The line would hsve 31 stations of which 28 stations will be for pessenaers
and three ststions for cargo. In addition, the studies slso include 82
other buildings, corresponding to -lol different models, which will help op-

erste and service the rsilrosd. Uvsterv has also begun studies for eight

underground passages and voter towers in two sizes to be constructed in
seven pieces.

COPYRIGlE: Rene lbreux et Cie hris 1982.

080: 4519/ 2 12

36