FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10623
29 JUNE 1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUD 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“01E

JPRS publications contain information prinrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mtion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of due 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0P
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
MIU‘I’ARY AFFAIRS

(rouo 8/82)
Comems

GROUND FORCES
Excerpts hon Book on Firing Against Armored Targets
(N. I. Iezhov; M'BA 8 WM TSELYAHI
(mmmm mm), 1W7IOOOOIOOOOOO0.0.0.0.000...
IDGISTIGAI. mess AND SPECIAL TROOFS

Book on ﬂax-time Transportation Services
(m u mm, 1981) 000.00.000.0000.00.000.000.

-a- [III-USSR-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY

GROUND FORCES

BXCBRPTS FROM BOOK 0“ FIRING AGAINST ANDREI) TARGETS

Moscow sown s snoumovmm 'rsnmn omomcassmz 90503113) in Russian 1977
(signed to press 18 Oct 76) pp 1, 7a, 77, 3.5. 6-7, 32-33, 50-51, 69-71

[Title page, annotation, table of contents, introduction, chapter excerpts,
and conclusion from book "Codaating Armored Targets methods Manuel)". by-
N. I. Yezhov, Voyenizdst, 25,000 copies, 78 pages]
[Excerpts] Title Page
Title: "Bor'ba s Bronirovsnnyni 'l'selynni Oietodicheskoye Posobiye)"
[Coﬁsting Amred Targets (Methods Hanualn
Author: R. I. Yezhov

Publisher: Order of the Labor Red Banner Military Publishing House
of the USSR Ministry of Defense (Voyenizdst)

Place and Year of Publication: Moscow, 1977

Signed to Press: 18 October 1976

Copies: 25.000

Pages: 78
Annotation
This manual is intended for consnders of submits in the ground forces.
The manual gives recouendations on the organization and methods of conducting
training periods with personnel to teach methods of combating tanks, anti-
tank weapons. and low-flying helicopters and sirplsnes. It also gives recon-

mendations on certain questions of psychological conditioning at tactical
training periods.

Table of Contents

Introductionoeeeaseaeeenseeeeeeeesea-assuage. 3

1
MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1. Combating Tanks, Infantry Conhat Vehicles, and

AmredPerlonnOICarriert.....a.......o.-........ 6
T‘nksaosea-seasone-eaaa‘oegeasoaeaallo7
Armored Personnel Carriers and Infantry Combat Vehicles . . . . . . . . 15
Organization and Conduct of Training Periods To Tech

Personnel Methods of Conhating Tanks. Infantry Colﬁat
Vehicles, and Armored Personnel Carriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
ChapterZ. CombatingAntitankUeapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Antitank Guided Missiles Used from Armored Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . 33
Sclf-Propelled Anti-tank Launcher. o o o o o o a o o o o a e e s a a s e 39
Antitank Rocket Launchers and Grenade Launchers . . . . . . . . . . . 102

Organization and Conduct of Training Periods To Teach Personnel
Methods of Combating Antitanlt Weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ’03

Chapter 3. Combating Helicopters. Airplanes. and Unnamed Air Attack
vehicle‘s.eoeesaeaaeaeaaehthoseeaseasons.50

Helicopters (Fire Support and Hultipurpose) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Airplanes............................... 56

Organization and Conduct of Training Periods To Teach Personnel
Methods of Combating Low-Flying Aerial Targets . . . . . . . . . . . 62

Conclusion.............................. 69

Appendix. Outline Plan for Conducting a Tactical Training Period
with the Personnel of a Motorized Rifle Company . . . . . . . . . 72

Introduction

In the time that has passed since the end of the war the armies of various capi—
talist countries have been equipped with many different types of weapons. most
isportant of which are tanks, self-propelled guns, infantry conbat vehicles, anti-
tank guided missiles launched from armored vehicles, and low-flying aircraft
with armor (fire support airplanes and helicopters). This requires that fight-
ing men in modern warfare exert greater effort and skill to repulse massed
attacks by armored vehicles, air strikes, and the like under conditions where the
enemy has used weapons of mass destruction and incendiary substances.

It is obvious that the entire burden of contating the enemy's armored ground and
low-flying aerial weapons which have not been destroyed by our artillery and
aviation will fall mainly on the forward subunits of the ground forces, motor-
ized rifle, tank, and other subunits. Many factors will naturally affect the
consciousness and psyche of fighting men in conditions where large numbers of
different armored vehicles are used. We must not exclude any possibility of
temporary stress in the soldiers and the appearance of the feelings of fear and
dissatisfaction in the struggle against a menacing enemy.

To avoid such negative occurrences in battle or at least to minimize them, dur-
ing the process of combat and political training each. commander must system-

atically prepare the men to be able to operate and defeat the enemy in the most
complex situation.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, take field training periods in coaﬁating tanks. which are con-
templated by the Coﬂiat Training Program for motorized rifle and other sub-

units in the topics on tactics. The main purpose of these training periods is
not just to teach accuracy and range of grenade throwing against moving armored
vehicles, but also to give the soldiers a strong will to victory at the same time.

Unfortunately, there are cases where certain conunders conduct training periods
on the same terrain, which has been studied in detail, without enough sim-
lated objects or target equipment. The men solve tactical problems that are
generally the same and do not carry out the full series of actions necessary to
achieve success in battle. but only a few of the elemmts. In another varia-

tion they will perform all the actions, but under simlified conditions, without
the necessary physical exertion.

To avoid all simplification and indulgence in organizing troop training in
methods of combating armored vehicles, the suhunit cos-lander should strictly fol-
low the principle "Teach that which is necessary in war.”

Under the difficult conditions of contesporary warfare and also in different
weather conditions acidiers should learn to wipe out various armored ground and
aerial targets suddenly and quickly.

Skillful use of the elements of danger, risk, and tension during training
periods is very important to teach the fighting men fearlessness. courage,

and confidence in combating armored equipment. The most effective way is for
the comander to use automated simulation equipment, simlators of atomic
blasts, artillery shells, and aerial bombs, and complex obstacles and Barriers.
Then the actions of the submit are accospanied by the relayed noise of con—
temorary warfare during repeated practice of rolling tanks over soldiers, dis-
mounting and assaulting from moving tanks, firing against armored targets over

the heads of the subunit and from the flanks, throwing live grenades against
tanks, and the like.

When elements of danger and risk are introduced in practical training, safety
precautions should be followed strictly to preclude accidents.

The con-sander must take the personal characteristics of his men into account
when practicing methods of combating armored targets. The individual approach
should be used for every trainee, watching for correct performance of pro-
cedures in using the weapons and remeaﬁering that certain mistakes can he
caused by special characteristics of temperament, body build, and vision.
Thus, the soldiers who are easily distracted should be given fixed atten-
tion. The comnder must correct them more often, patiently and persistently
teaching the procedure which they do poorly. It is advisahle to assign ‘well-
trained fighting men to such soldiers. Support and correction from a com-
rade is sometimes as effective as criticism by the cot-lander. Special attention
should be given .to those soldiers who are passive, tentative. and lack confi-
dence in practicing the procedures of combating enemy armored equipment.

Thanks to correct comhat training and party political training among the fight-
ing men, during their time in the service they do develop the necessary practical

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

skills and the moral-political and psychological qualities which. will help
them win victory in a faceoff with enemy armored equipment.

Chapter 1. Coasting Tanks, Infantry Combat Vehicles, and Armored Personnel
Carriers .

The commands of the armies of the capitalist countries consider tanks, infantry
cowat vehicles, and armored personnel carriers as the main striking force of
the ground forces when waging combat operations where they use either conven-
tional weapons or weapons of mass destruction. This is not accidental. The
tracked and wheeled armored vehicles adopted by the amiss of the capitalist
countries have, in the opinion of foreign specialists, the necessary mobility,
armor protection, and firepower. Many vehicles, especially tanks, are equipped
with various mechanisms and devices which give them a high. rate of fire, range,
armor-piercing capability, and precision when firing both from a spot and on
the move.

According to statements by foreign military specialists, the experience of com-
bat operations in Southeast Asia and the Middle East has shown that close

cooperation between tanks and mechanized infantry is particularly important
where troops have high mobility. As a result of this, the con-made of the
capitalist amiss are now devoting special attention not only to improving
tanks, but also to building infantry combat vehicles and the further development
of armored personnel carriers. In their opinion, broad use of modern armored
vehicles increases the tactical mobility of the infantry and enables it to wage
combat operations together with tanks in conventional battle formations. There—
fore, foreign specialists are taking all possible steps to improve the fighting
and technical characteristics of the armored equips-t now available. To do
this the quality of the armor itself is being improved and refinements are being
made in the shape of the body and tower of the armored object. Special screen-
ing devices and nets are used to protect the body against the action of hollow
charge shells. In addition, reducing specific pressure, inproving the suspen-
sion system, and increasing engine power make it possible for combat vehicles

to move across broken terrain at high speed. Mounting large-caliber guns with
good ballistic characteristics, antitank guided missiles, and other powerful
weapons on these vehicles, inproving the fire control system, and increasing
the standard summition package enable them to wage effective fire against tar-
gets from long range.

Every armored vehicle has its own characteristics and distinguishing features.
To combat them one must have a good knowledge of their fighting characteristics.
tactical-technical specificaticns, and vulnerable points as well as knowing the
combat capabilities and methods of using one's own fire weapons.

The combat characteristics make it posdhle to determine how dangerous and how
important an armored target is. One can recognize the brand and type of armored
object by distinguishing features such as the shape of the uuzzls brake of the
cannon. the placement of the ejection device on it, and the shape of the body,
tower, and running gear. A knowledge of the dimensions of the body (length.
width, and height) makes it possible to determine the range to the target using
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

standard angleogage optical instruments or available means, and a knowledge of
the vulnerable points enables a squad (team, crew? leader to choose the correct
type of weapons and ammunition to destroy the target reliably.

We give below the combat characteristics and distinguishing features of the

principal models of tanks, infantry, vehicles, and armored personnel carriers
of the capitalist armies.

Chapter 2. Combating Antitank weapons

Along with improving tanks, infantry combat vehicles, and armored personnel
carriers the armies of foreign countries are devoting considerable attention to
the development of various antitank weapons. Their tactical-technical charac-
teristics are being improved continuously and the principles of using them in
battle are being refined. The number of antitank weapons, in partiCular self-
propelled weapons based on armored vehicles, has begun to increase rapidly in
recent times in the armies of the countries of the aggressive NATO bloc. The
greatest development has occurred with the most dangerous antitank weapon , the
antitank guided missile. In the opinion of foreign specialists, it has greater
destructive range, better armor piercing capability, and greater accuracy than
the other antitank weapons.

It is not accidental that antitank guided missiles occupy the leading place

among antitank weapons. and to some degree are supplanting the others. Anti-
cank guided missilelaunchersare mounted on various armored vehicles, personnel
carriers, and tanks. In the U. 8. Army, for exalple, in addition to the Sheridan
light tank, a tower' with a 152 millimeter gun, a launcher for the Shillelagh
antitank guided missile,has also been mounted on the H—GO A2 medium tank.

Plans contemplate arming several other prospective tanks in the armies of the
United States, Rest Germany, and other capitalist countries with antitank guided

missles.

Certain classes of helicopters are also being equipped with these weapons be-
cause, foreign specialists believe, they can fire at an armored target from a
more advantageous angle and destroy it even when it is in a trench and not
visible to ground observers.

Antitank guided missiles, self-propelled antitank guns, and other antitank
weapons are being supplied not only tonotorizedinfantry, tank. and artillery
subunits, but also support and even rear subunits. They enable the enemy to
create a deeply echeloned antitank zone with mutually overlapping sectors of
antitank fire both on the forward edge and within the depth of the battle for-
nations. Combating antitank weapons, especially antitank guided missiles, will
be difficult and tense. This is one of the most important missions of all sub-
units which aupport the combat actions of tanks, infantry combat vehicles,
armored personnel carriers, and other combat equipment.

To master the methods of protecting combat equipment against fire by antitank
weapons and to combat them successfully, one must have a good knowledge of their
combat characteristics, tactical-technical specifications, strong and weak points,
and identification signs, and also know the combat capabilities and methods of

INJI‘OFF1C1A1.USEI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of one's own T/O weapons on offense and defense. In conteworary- battle with
highly effective means of destruction, the winner on a duel with antitank weapons
will be the one who detects the target and executes aimed fire first. Therefore,
skillful reconnaissance by observation and rapid preparation of initial firing
data are crucial conditions for successfully accleishing this mission. There
can be no question of effectiVely combating antitank weapons if the fighting men
are not able to detect them quickly by- identification signa, give correct target

indications, and beat the enemy in opening fire.
We give below the basic models of antitank weapons of the capitalist armies.
Chapter 3. Combating Helicopters, Airplanes, and Unmanned Air Attack Vehicles

Antiaircraft artillery is effective and the most active ground weapon in coﬁating
means of aerial attack. It is able to hit airplanes and helicopters at various
altitudes. But it is much more difficult for this artillery to combat aircraft
operating at low altitudes because of their high angular velocities.

In view of this, during the war in Southeast Asia U. S. aviation mastered the pro-
cedures for flight by combat aircraft and unmanned scout planes at low altitudes.

The military comand of Israel also used airplanes operating at altitudes of 30-
100 meters for reconnaissance and destroying targets in Egyptian territory.

According to the conclusions of foreign specialists, if an airplane flies to the
target at an altitude of 50 meters or less this even minimizes the effectiveness
of antiaircraft missiles used against it.

Rifles can be used extensively to cowat enemy aircraft operating at low altitudes.
The experience of the Great Patriotic War, as well as war experience from Korea
and Vietnam, testifies to this. During the Great Patriotic War some 500 aircraft
were shot down with rifles. During the wars in Korea and Vietnam fire from
rifles, machine guns, and antitank guns made it difficult for American pilots to

operate at low altitudes without punishment.

Because even with the availability of contemporary antiaircraft weapons — anti—
aircraft missiles, rapid-firing antiaircraft cannons, and machine guns - the
role of the rifle in combating low-flying targets has not diminished, connanders
at all levels should devote considerable attention to training men in combating
aerial attack weapons with fire from No rifle weaponry.

Special emhasis should be put on the exceptional ﬁncrtance of psychologically
preparing personnel to couiaat low-flying targets when they carry out massed at-
tacks. Of course, every fighting man understands that massed aerial attack
weapons operating at low altitudes or tree-top level represent the greatest dan-
ger on the field of battle. Therefore, when training in combating aerial attack
weapons the principal attention mat be focused on eliminating this so-called
fear of aircraft in the men.

To combat airplanes, helicopters, and unmanned enuy weapons successfully, one
must have a good knowledge of the nature and procedures of their actions against
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ground targets, tactical-technical specifications, and vulnerable points to the
fire of rifles, large-caliber smchihe guns, and other weapons, as well as a
knowledge of the combat capabilities and methods of using one's own T/O weapons
to combat aerial targets. Only with a knowledge of all this will soldiers,

crews, teams, and subunit commanders destroy the aerial enemy confidently and
reliably.

We give below the basic characteristics of different means of aerial attack of
the armies of certain capitalist countries.

Conclusions

Learning methods of combating tanks, antitank weapons, and low~£lying helicopters
and airplanes is just part of the large set of troop combat training questions
which are inseparable from the entire process cf training, indoctrination, and
military service.

It can be seen from the examples of training periods considered above that train-
ing the men in these important matters begins with individual training. Then

the methods and procedures of combating armored targets are refined as the squad.
platoon, and company work together during tactical training periods and exer-
cises, as well as in training periods on other combat training subjects. Let us
consider fire training. One of its most important missions along with tactics is
instilling in the men those qualities which insure stability of professional
skill as military specialists on the field of battle and allow them to carry
out the combat mission successfully in their designated roles. For example, it
is important for automatic riflemen, machine gunners, and gun layers to develop
the ability to preserve in a complex situation of contemporary warfare the habits
acquired during the process of peacetime training: firing the regular weapon
accurately, the ability to drive back attacks by tanks and infantry combat vehicles,
and the ability to combat antitank guided missiles, including those mounted on
helicopters. low-flying airplanes, and unmanned enemy weapons.

For this purpose, fire training periods should be used to demonstrate convincingly
the capabilities of the standard weapons and combat equipment in combating ground
and aerial armored targets. There should be numerous drills that develop the
men's actions to the point of automatism, and a situation similar to actual
battle must be created for training fire. To do this firing ranges are usually
rigged up with two variations of targets installed at different distances and in
different directions and dispersed along the front and in depth. Targets that
represent armored vehicles, both painted and camouflaged as an actual combat
situation requires, are installed. The target field is prepared in secret from
the trainees, and during firing the targets are partially or completely rearranged.
Changes are made in the method of simulation or lighting of the targets, the posi-
tion for firing, and so on.

To develop psychological stability in the men, inert grenades are fired at the
tanks of the combat training group which is moving toward the trainee—grenade
throwers.

In addition, systematic work should be done to develop the men's skills in iden-
tifying dangerous armored targets during rifle drills, firing, and tactical and

7
FOR¢HﬂﬂC1Al.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

other field training periods. All these Important questions of training fighting
men in the methods and procalures of combating armored targets can only he

solved through the joint efforts of contenders. political workers. party and
Komsomol organizations, and teachers at military schools.

One of the conditions of success in this work is raising the level of combat
training of subunit commanders, who are ohliged to coastantly refine the
methods and procedures by which fighting men oppose enemy armored equipment.

when organizing training periods one must Begin from real conditions and con-
struct them with due regard for the time allocated, the availability of physical
facilities for training, and the group of trainees. In some cases training
periods at the training site are done by squads, while in others it will he the
platoon. Where there is additional time it is useful to conduct a second
training period in the subject as a practice drill.

Work to develop the necessary practical skills in the men and to instill them
with strong psychological qualities during the process of teaching methods of
combating armored targets must be combined with purposeful party political work
to indoctrinate them in loyalty to the military oath and regulations, love of
their homeland, and hatred for its enemies.

Propaganda for the glorious combat traditions of our Armed Forces and instilling
the feeling of civil and military duty greatly facilitates the formation of the
necessary qualities in the men. Passing on stories of the heroic deeds of
Soviet fighting men during the Great Patriotic War should play an important part
in this work.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat , 1977

ll . 176
C80: 1801/200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LOGISTICAL SERVICES AND SPECIAL TROOPS

UN 355.4151
BOOK 0N wmnm TRANSPOKIATION SERVICES

Moscow rsuzwn 2A nsmouon in Russian 1981(Signed to press 11 Jun 81)pp 1.2.2138
3—4, 5-12, 13-17, 13-75; 76—77; 124; 125-128, 162; 163-164.; 208-209; 210-211,
233-239; 2400-261

[Title page, authore' collective, annotation, table of contents, foreword, intro-
duction and selected excerpts tron hook "Train after Train", edited by Lt Gen
Tech Trpa A. s. Klenin, Izdatel'etvo ”Voyenixdat", 30,000 copies, 268 pages]

[Excerpts] Title Page [p 1]
Title: Bechelon ea Bahelonon [Train after Train]
Signed to press: 11 Jun 81
Copies: 30,000
Pages: 268

Authors' collective [p 2]

A. V. Dobryakov (head). N. V. Boriaov, V. I. Dnitriyev, A. P. Zavadskiy,

H. P. Zaglyadinov, Ye; I. Zinin, A. z. Elinovitskiy, L. A. Korzun (deputy head),
Ye. M. Kul'kov, G. G. Holdavanov, K. I. Pavlovich, V. P. Pashkovskiy, N. A.
Pornogov, s. N. Ryahokohylko, H. P. Sakovich. N. L. Sokolov, and S. V.
Khvoshchev

Annotation [p 2]

This book is dedicated to the heroic labor of the personnel of nilitary con-
nunications agencies, the railroad troops, railroad workers, and water
transportation workers during the Great Patriotic War. The authors here pre-
sent in popular forn the cmla and multifaceted work of the military coun-
nications agencies and railroad troops and show their working experience in
solving military transportation proﬁlens of planning and carrying out military
ship-ants by rail and water transportation during the war years.

The book is intended for a broad range of readers.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Cortents [p 248]

Forev'ordi..:..‘............................ 3
Introduction................................ 5
Military Shipping by Rail During the Far Years. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . 13

Railroad and Military Comnications Troops Engaged in Building and
Rebuilding Railroad Facilities in the Front Region . . . . . . . . . . . 76

The Operation of Railroads in the Front \nd Nearv-Pront Zones . . . . . . . . 125
MilitaryShipnenthyVateruay .......................153
Air Defense of Railroads and Combat Support for Military Shipping . . . . . 210

Party Political Work in Institutions and Units of Military Col-unications
andRailroadTroops...........................240

Foreword [pp 3-10]

The Soviet Arned Forces, formed hy the Commist Party under the direction of
Vladimir Il'ich Lenin, have traveled a legendary path and covered their battle
colors with unfading glory.

During the Civil War the young army of the Republicof Soviets smashed the uni-
fied forces of internal counterrevolntion and the armed intervention of the
imperialists. In the following years the Red Army had to defend the inviola—
bility of Soviet borders more than once. '

The most severe test of our entire people and our Armed Forces was the Great
Patriotic War of the Soviet Union against fascist Gernany.

Responding to the call of the Columnist Party, the Soviet people and the fight-
ing men of the army and navy rose up to defend their native land and by their
heroism and selfless labor secured victory over the hated enemy.

Transportation workers and personnel of the military communications service and
railroad troops made a worthy contribution to the canon victory over the
enemy. '

All the operations of the Great Patriotic War were inseparably linked to broad
use of all forms of transportation. with movement of enormous masses of per-
sonnel and materiel. The organization of military shipping, methods of re- '
building comications routes, and the organizational structure of military
transportation services and troops were steadily improved. from operation to
operation.

The further the events of those heroic years are from us in time, the more ap-

parent the full significance of the wealth of experience accumulated during
the Great Patriotic War is to us. This experience. gathered by snall pieces.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is teaching new generations the difficult art of defeating a powerful enemy.
It serves as an example of courage and heroism, of aBsolute devotion to our
native land and to military duty.

Books that tell about the combat experience of the Great Patriotic Har have both
historical and practical value.

This book, "Train after Train," is dedicated to the work of transportation work-
ers and the personnel of military communications and railroad troops during the
war. It deals with the questions of preparations for and the work of transpor-
tation under wartime canditions, organizing and carrying out mass troop trans-
fers, blockading and rebuilding communications routes, technical coverage for

them, and improving the military communications service. The book reviews one
of the key problems. insuring continuity of military shipping.

The book will undoubtedly be interesting not only for specialists working in organ-
ization and support of military shipping. but for all officers and generals of
the Soviet Armed Forces and a broad range of readers who have an interest in
questions of preparing and using transportation for military purposes.

General of the Army 8. Kurkotkin
Introduction [pp 5-12]

The tern "military communications" refers to land, water. and air communica-
tions routes that have been prepared and equipped with necessary means for
moving troops and performing all types of military shipping in peacetime and
war, as well as the military communications agencies working on them.

The military communications service in Russia originated in the early 17th
century. According to the "Military Charter" of 1716. which was developed by
Peter I, the job of organizing the shipment of military cargo for the army and
road repair and maintenance was assigned to a military communications service.
Hith the appearance of railroads and the electric telegraph, the military com-
munications service was given the job of operating, destroying, and rebuilding
railroads and dirt roads and operating waterways and post and telegraph lines.

Railroads were used for military purposes in Russia much earlier than in the
United States and Prussia. The first military shipment was carried out in 1851,
when the railroad between Moscow and Saint Petersburg was built.

In the spring of 1852 the first statute on Transport of a Military Unit was pub-
lished. No other country which had railroads had such a statute at that time.

The development of railroad building in Russia in the late 19th Century cre-
ated new conditions for mobilization and concentration of an army in theaters

of military operations. This was reflected in the 1890 Statute on Field Troop
Control, which devoted considerable attention to the military communications
service.

At the start of World War I Russian rail transportation and the military commu-
nications service carried out major shipments to mobilize and concentrate troops.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But failures at the front and enormous devastation in the Russian econony
created an exceptionally difficult situation in transportation. In Septesber
1917 V. I. Lenin wrote as follows: "Russia is threatened by an inevitable
disaster. Railroad transportation is disrupted beyond belief and the situa-
tion is becoming worse. The railroads will rise up. and shipment of raw
materials and coal to the factories will stop. The shipment of grain will
stop."1 The campaign to rebuild the transportation system began immediately
after the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution. It took gi-
gantic efforts from the Commist Party and the young Soviet State to overcome
the paralysis in transportation.

V. I. Lenin devoted enormous attention to transportation, enphasizing the spe-
cial role of the military commications service. He called railroad trans-
portation "the key material factor in the war.” Without railroad transpor-
tation. he wrote, "Modern warfare is an empty phrase."3

History has demnstrated that the teachings of the revolutionary leader were
entirely correct and timely. '

The party and the country took all possible steps to build up their defense
capabilities, increased the fighting strength of the Red Army, and improved
the work of railroads and waterways. On 30 November 1918 the Soviet Government
instituted martial law in railroad transportation.

A special commission of the Soviet for Defense of the Republic was formed to
work out measures related to planning transportation work. The decree of the
Soviet for Defense on 11 Decewer 1918 entitled "Putting the Work of Railroad
Transportation in Order," the May 1919 directive of the Central Committee on
military unity, and the decisions of the 9th Party Congress with respect to
transportation (April 1920) played a large part in this.

During the years of Civil War V. I. Lenin worked constantly to iuprove the
work of transportation and support military shipping.

Speaking at the Plenum of the Moscow Soviet on 3 April 1919, V. I. Lenin said:
"We say once again to all comrades — more people must be enlisted for work

or food and transportation. Transportation work demands the greatest intensity.
We have to see that workers at every meeting ask themselves how they can help
transportation . ""

During the process of building the Red Army and Navy the military commutica-
tions service was also formed. Its Jobs were to support military shipping,
rebuild railroads, and improve transportation work.

On 5 March 1918 the Directorate of Military Communications of the former Head-
quarters of the Supreme Command was transferred to the newly—formed Supreme
Military Council of the Republic, and on 8 May 1918 the People's Comissar
of Military Affairs by order No 339 established the all-Russian Main Bead-
qunrters, which also had a Directorate of Military Coununicationa. These two
supreme agencies for management of military comunications in the republic

. ONLY
F0310FFKJAL.USE(MQLY

existed in parallel until 2 September 1918 when they were merged into the
Central Directorate of Military Communications under the Revolutionary
Military Council of the Republic.

Directorates of military communications were set up in the headquarters of
fronts, armies, and military districts; the line military communications

agencies - directorates of the chiefs of troop movement and military com-
mandants - were set up on the railraods.

During the Civil War the military communications service was given the mission
of rebuilding and developing railroads, waterways, highways, and dirt roads,
organizing troop movements and freight shipment, operating the postal and tele-
graph services (until 10 September 1919), operating motor vehicle columns,

managing troop and worker trains, security and defense of railroads, and the
like.

Thousands of railroad workers and employees, Red Guardsmen, soldiers, and also
former officers in the fsarist army who voluntarily joined the side of the

revolution and put their knowledge and experience to work for it became the
cadres for the military communications agencies.

The party organizations did a great deal of work in the army and navy military
communications units and institutions. They exercised a major influence to

indoctrinate personnel in a spirit of boundless devotion to the Soviet State,
the Communist Party, and the people. The commissars of the military communica-
tions units and institutions were old Bolsheviks such as 2. Ya. Litvin-Sedoy,
an active participant in the revolution of 1905 at Krasnaya Presna in Moscow,
as well as P. V. Ribe, V. V. Fomin, Ya. A. RemtirI S. Ye. Shchukin, A. P.
Shishov, L. V. Lemberg, A. Kh. Cruzdup, N. P. Sokolov. and others. Many of
them were later transferred to comand positions in military comnications.

During the Civil War years the volume of military shipping by rail was more
than 33,000 operational trains and almost 7,000 trains with supply cargoes.
About 25 million men with weapons and equipment were moved by rail. Many units

were moved from one front to another between two and five times in this period.5
All these things made it possible to regroup personnel and equipment in time to
deliver devastating blows against the enemy.

During the Civil War railroad troops rebuilt more than 22,000 kilometers of
track and more than 3,000 bridges and repaired 16,500 railroad cars.6

Taking note of the heroic work of the railroad troops, order No 258 of the
Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic on 31 January 1921 pointed out

that the victorious advance of the Red Army was made significantly easier by
the conscious and unselfish activity of railroad units to rebuild the rail-
roads, the vital arteries of the active army.7

During the Civil War and subsequent years considerable attention was devoted

to training command personnel for military communications agencies. Special
schools were set up to train junior and senior command personnel for the mili-
tary communications service. Special schools to train junior and middle-level

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

command personnel for the military communications service and courses for
instructors to train Red commanders of military communications and railroad
troops were set up in Torzhok in 1918. In 1920 they were reorganized into a
single school, which in 1922 was transferred to Petrograd. In 1937 the
school was renamed the Leningrad Military Communications School imeni H. V.
Prunse.

For training senior command personnel in military communications the Military
Engineering Academy in late 1918 set up a military roads division, which

later became the department of military communications and existed until 1925.
In 1925 the training of senior personnel began to he done in the military di-

vision of the Leningrad Institute of Engineers of Communications Routes, and
after 1932 was transferred to the Military Transportation Academy. The first

head of this academy was corps commander S. A. Pugachev. deputy chief of staff
of the Worker-Peasant Red Army.

After bringing the Civil war to a victorious conclusion our country began peace-
ful building. V. I. Lenin and the Communist Party considered restoration and
development of transportation to be of paramount importance.

Industrialization of the country supported technical reconstruction of trans-
portation, which in turn promoted accelerated development of industry and
agriculture and an increase in the country's defense capability.

0

Between 1921 and 1927 more than 6,000 kilometers of new railroads were built,
the fleet of steam locomotives and cars was augmented, and the average daily
load on the rail system increased.

The country's transportation system continued to develop rapidly in the 1930's.
The traffic capacity of the most important rail sectors increased and new lines
were laid with due regard for economic and defense needs.

It was during these years that K. Ye. Vorshilov. speaking from the podium of
the 17th party congress in 1936, called railroad transportation the blood

brother of the Red Army.

Railroad troops and military communications personnel took an active part in
building and reconstructing the railroads and performing major overhaul work.

The military communications service continued its development during the years
of peaceful building. In August 1921 a statute was published which concen-
trated the questions of preparing communications routes, military roads. and
the organization of military shipping at the Central Directorate of Military
Communications of the Headquarters of the worker-Peasant Red Army.

In 1925 the first Statute on Troop Movements of the Worker—Peasant Red Army
was published, and in 1929 a manual on troop movement by water came out.

Considerable attention was devoted to the questions of combat and special train-
ing for the units and agencies of military communications. Beginning in 1931

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

major military transportation exercises Iere held at the Central Zone training
area and district training areas almost every year. These exercises also in-
volved units of military aviation and, in some cases, airborne units as well.
Among those participating in these exercises were K. Ye. Voroshilov, H. N.
Tukhachevskiy, S. S. Kamenev, S. H. Budennyy. the chiefs of the main and central

directorates of the People's Commissariat of Defense, and management personnel
of the military communications agencies.

The head of the Central Directorate of Hilitary Communications during the Civil
War was N. H. Arzhanov, a strong-willed and decisive military engineer with a
great deal of experience working in transportation.

The heads of military communications of the Red Army in the 1920's and 1930's

were, in order, V. I. Sergeyev, 8. Te. Barskiy, M. H. 01'shanskiy, B. F. Appoga,
A. Ye. Kryukov, and N. I. Trubetskoy.

Corps commander E. P. Appoga made a particularly important contribution to the
development of the military communications service in the 1930's. He devoted a
great deal of effort to improving the service and preparing for large-scale
military shipping. Under his direction a theoretical investigation of the most
important problems of preparing and using transportation for military purposes
was begun.

A number of steps were taken in the second half of 1960 and until the start of
the Great Patriotic war to prepare communications routes and military conun-
nications units and agencies for work in wartime. But many of the planned
projects had not been completed By June 1961.

The Great Patriotic War changed transportation work greatly. The system was
transferred to a military footing very quickly.

Transportation work reached its highest intensity during the battles of Moscow,
Stalingrad, and Kursk, during preparation for and conduct of the offensive oper-
ations in 1954-1945 (Belorussian. East Prussian, Hisla-Oder, and Berlin), and
during the operation to crush the troops of imperialist Japan in 1945.

In the course of maneuvering operations transportation moved not only large
units. but entire army and front formations.

This demonstrates the high level of organization in the work of railroad workers
and military connunications officer under wartime conditions on rail sectors
that had just been rebuilt.

In his book "Small Land" where he describes the events during the transfer of
the 18th Army to the Zhitomir axis in November 1903, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
remarks on the rapid advance of the trains: "The train which carried the Mili-
tary Council, army headquarters, and political department left first. The

trains carrying army units followed after it. They traveled quickly, stopping
only to change locomotives."8

15
son omen. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (Mlshevik), the State
Committee on Defense, and the military command devoted eaeptionally great at-
tention to transportation and military comnications. In the first days of
the war A. A.Andreyev, secretary of the party Central Committee, previded
a great deal of help in the military communications work of the General Staff.
He solved complex problems and helped work out ecoperation between the
Directorate of Military Communications and governmental bodies in transporta-
tion comisaarists. The comittee headed by I. V. Stalin. formed in 1962 under
the State Comittee for Defense played a large role in organizing shipping.

The service was headed by generals I. V. Kovalev and V. I. Dmitriyev in 1941-
1945. The following generals and officers worked knowledgeably in important
sectors: 5. A. Andreyev. P. A. Eaknlin, K. V. Vasil'yev, A. V. Vlasov, S. A.
Casparyan, B. N. Goryainov. M. I. Griahin, V. P. Dikushin, A. V. Dobryakov,

P. I. Zelentsov, I. V. Kargin. I. G. Kashcheyev-Semin, I. K. Kechedzhi, A. N.
Korolev, S. N. Kresik, A. A. Korshnnov, S. M. Koatikov. A. C. Mgvdeladze, V. P.
Medvedev. G. G. Moldavinov, M. V. Ohyden, N. P. Pidorenko, P. I. Pirogov, K. A.
Rassalov, P. I. Rumyantsev, V. V. Stolyarov, Ye. V. Tulupov, S. V. Khvoshchev,
A. C. Chernyakov, Ya. I. Shchepennikov. and many others. Generals A. G
Chernyakov and S. V. Khvoshchev later headed the Central Directorate of Military
Communications of the USSR Ministry of Defense.

Military connunications officers frequently served not only as organizers of
shipping but also as the actual performers of plans under difficult conditions.
More than 7,000 persons were awarded orders and medals for outstanding per-
formance of military duty, courage, and valor.

In the work of rebuilding railroads the most outstanding units of railroad
troops were those comanded by the following generals and officers: V. A.
Golovko, I. A. Pros-virov, P. A. Kabanov. N. V. Borisov, A. Ye. Kryukov, I. S.
Kartenev, V. V. Bezvesil'nyy, A. P. Smirnov, D. A. Lebedev, P. N. Doronin,

A. S. Dugin. V. P. Tisson, P. I. Hakarev. A. Ya. Kirichenko. P. I. Korshunov,
A. M. Kuznetsov, Sh. N. zhilzhilashvili. D. A. Teryukhov, and others.

The party and government valued the military feats and labor valor of railroad
troop personnel in the Great Patriotic war very highly: 28 servicemen were
given the lofty title of Hero of Socialist Labor and Sgt. V. P. Miroshnichenko
was made a Hero of the Soviet Union. More than 35.000 servicemen were given
orders and medals.

The leadership and teachers of the Military Transportation Academy and the
Higher School of Military Communications, who trained highly skilled cadres,
made a significant contribution to victory over the enemy.

The State Committee on Defense and the Headquarters, Supreme High Comand,
devoted great attention to planning and using all types of transportation for
military purposes. Marshals of the Soviet Union B. M. Shaporshnikov and A. M.
Vasilevskiy and generals of the army A. I. Antonov, S. M. Shtemenko, A. V.
Khrulev, and N. F. Vatutin did especially good work in management of military
shipping and restoration of demolished transportation facilities.
FORKOFTTCJAI.USE1ONLN

With the development of transportation in the postwar period the military com-
munications service was also improved. The questions of military transpor-
tation support to operations began to he decided in a new way based on the
experience of the Great Patriotic War.

Marshals of the Soviet Union V. D. soholovskiy, H. V. Zakharov, and I. Kh.

Bagramyan and generals of the Army 5. S. Haryakhin and S. K. Kurkotin devoted
constant attention to further development and refinement of transportation sup-
port for the Soviet Armed Forces in the postwar years.

The domestic transportation system overall withstood serious tests. A high
level of organisation and continuity of shipping was maintained and the system
kept its mobility and survival capability through the joint efforts of trans-
portation and military communications agencies.

It must be emphasized that cooperation Between military communications personnel
and transportation workers grew even stronger during the war years.

During the Great Patriotic War military communications agencies carrying out the
assignments of the General Staff and headquarters of Rear Services of the Red
Army cooperated closely in work with railroad troops, the motor vehicle

road service, and representatives of the supply directorates at the front and in
the Central Zone. Already then the war experience had demonstrated that the

full volume of military shipping can he handled successfully only with integrated
and rational use of all forms of transportation.

The idea of comprehensive preparation and use of various types of transportation
is new universally recognized in the national economy as well.

During the Great Patriotic war, the country's transportation system, using all
forms of transportation, performed a volume of shipping never before known in
history. The railroads alone handled 443,213 trains (about 20 million cars)
carrying troops, weapons, combat equipment, and supplies. Yet in the first days
of the war the average daily load of troops and materiel was about 50 percent of
the total load on the entire USSR railroad system.

It should he noted that 95 percent of shipping from the deep interior of the

country to the rear boundary of the fronts was carried by railroad transpor-
tation.

Hater transportation delivered more than 6 million troops, more than 785,000
wounded and sick, 4,500 tanks, 10,000 field pieces, and 21 million tons of
materiel. Air transportation carried more than 2.7 million persons and more
than 300,000 tons of freight.

After the Great Patriotic War the workers in all forms of transportation and the
military communications service had to solve the complex problems of restoring
and building up the capacities of the country's transportation system. By the
heroic efforts of the entire Soviet people, the prewar level of development of
transportation was not only restored, But also significantly exceeded in a

short time.

17
FIHRINHNCJAI.USE1DNIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of military comications was aluys directly dependent on
the methods of waging var, improvements in the transportation system, and
qualitative and quantitative growth in transportation equipment.

The problems of transportation support to the Armed Forces are much more
complex today. To solve them today requires integrated measures to improve
the«country's entire transportation system, continued develop-eat and

rapid introduction of new means of transportation, and developing more powerful
means for construction and reconstruction of transportation facilities and for
the use of automated control systems in transportation. Military mummies-
tions personnel are working hard on these problems in close cooperation with
transportation workers.

The military comunications service of the Armed Forces celebrated its 60th
anniversary on 5 March 1978. In his greeting in honor of the service's 60th

anniversary, Mar 50 D. F. Uatinov, USSR Minister of Defense, praised the ser-
vice highly, pointing out that during the years of its existence the military

communications service has played a significant part in supporting the life and
activities of our Armed Forces and raising :heir combat readiness. He observed
that the personnel of the service today are successfully performing the stepped-
up socialist obligations they adopted for uninterrupted transportation support

to the Soviet Army and Navy.
FOOTNOTES
1. Lenin, V. 1., "Poln. Sohr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 35, p 155.
2. Ibid., Vol 38. p 1000.
3. Ibid., Vol 35, p 395.
4. ma, Vol 38, pp 248, 21.9.

5. "Ukhodili na Front Eshelony" [The Trains Departed for the Front], Moscow,
"Voyenizdat", 19710, p 8.

6. "Sovetskaya Voyennaya Bntsiklopediya" [Soviet Military Encyclopedia],
Moscow, 1977, Vol 3, p 322.

7. "Zheleznodorozhnyye Voyska a 1851 po 1941 God" [The Railroad Troops from
1851 to 1941], Hoscov, "Voyenizdat", 1957, p 150.

8. Brezhnev, l... 1., "Malaya Zemlya" [Small Land], Moscow, Folitizdat, 1978,
p 1.1.

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Military Shipping by Rail During the War Years Ipp 13—17]

During the prewar five—year plan the communist party and Soviet people did a
great deal of work on technical reconstruction and development of railroad

transportation, equipping it with advanced machinery, and introducing pro-
gressive forms of traction.

In a short time a large number of rail centers and marshalling yards were fun-
damentally reconstructed, new depots-and car repair points were built, the track

in the primary sectors was overhauled and light rails were replaced with heavier
ones, and new railroads were built.

By the end of 1960 the total length of the rail network reached 106,100 kilom-
eters. The average daily load grew to 117,000 cars and freight turnover on the
railroads was 415 billion tons (85.1 percent of the country's total freight

turnover). The fleet of steam locomotives and cars was improved. It included
28.000 steam locomotives and about 878,500 railroad cars. The total freight

capacity of the cars reached 19 million tons. The percentage of four-axle

cars increased. The average gross weight of a freight train was 1,301 tons,
compared to 578 tons in 1913.

Planned development and reconstruction of railroad transportation made it pos-
sible to establish a network of main sectors with uniformly good technical
equipment, figured for a standardized length (120 standard axles) and weight
(900 tons) for military trains (the figure was 550 tons in 1913).

The methods of organizing shipping were improved. A systemwide traffic
schedule and unified plan for forming trains were developed. Car flows were or-

ganized on the basis of through shipping, and technical planning and integrated
development of the carrying capacity of the railroads were introduced.

The reconstruction and technical re-equipping of railroad transportation fa-
cilitated further consolidation of our country's defense capability.

Hith the start of the war the flows of military trains moving toward the western
boundaries of the country and evacuation shipping traveling from threatened re-
gions near the front to the east increased sharply. This demanded hard, un-
selfish work, flexibility and resourcefulness in decision-making, and true
labor heroism from railroad workers and the military communications agencies.

Not just at the start of the war but throughout the entire Great Patriotic War
the employees of the railroads, military communications agencies, and railroad
troops, disregarding time and often going without sleep or rest for several days,

insured timely loading of troops and materiel. rapid travel to the front, and
quick clean-up after enemy aviation attacked railroad transportation facilities.

This labor enthusiasm. augmented by advances and successes in the development and
fundamental re-equipping of transportation, made it possible to emerge from the
difficulties with honor and insure performance of the missions that arose from
the demands of the Communist Party and Soviet Government with respect to defense

19
m ommt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the socialist homeland. This enthusiasm mas invaluable in achieving victory
over a powerful and treacherous enemy.

The Great Patriotic war confirmed this- in full and showed how important rail-
road transportation and military comnications were in supporting the combat

operations of the Soviet Armed Forces, who mauled the enormous Nazi war
machine.

"Without good railroads," liar an 0. K. Zhukov wrote, "we would not have been
able to carry out the large operational shipments that were comparatively fre-
quent during the war, or even to keep up uninterrupted supply of materiel over
great distances."2

Bach operation conducted by the Soviet Army during the last war demanded enor-
mous expenditure of personnel and materiel. More than 10 million tons of am-
nition was used during the Great Patriotic War. and 16 million tons of fuel
and lubricants.3 The expenditure of other types of troop materiel also increased
imaeasurably. All these things had to be delivered to the front in a steady
supply at the right time. No one form of transportation, no matter what its
capacities, could have handled this enormous job of delivering everything that
the troops needed for life and for battle. Therefore, all forms of transpor-
tation were enlisted to perform this vast mission. In the troop and army rear
areas motor vehicle transportation was most important. while in the rear area
of the front railroads and motor vehicle roads were used. Railroad shipping
played the most important and decisive role in shipping from the rear of the
country to the theater of military operations and shipping between fronts.

During the Great Patriotic War about 20 million csrs (more than “0,000 trains)
carrying troops, weapons. equipment, and materiel—technical supplies were de-
livered from the rear of the country to the front by rail.“

During World War I about 6,000 cars (150—170 trains) a day traveled on the rail-
roads of all the fronts. But during the last war up to 6.000 cars were loaded
on front roads on some days just in preparation for the Kursk operation;5

this is as many as were loaded on all front railroads in World War I.

During the Civil War and foreign military intervention between 1918 and 1921,
60.1.01 troop trains and about 10,000 transports carrying supplies (6,679 trains)
with an average of 50 cars in a train were shipped.

The experience of the last war showed that in the hands of the military command
railroads were a crucial means of strategic maneuvering with personnel and
equipment. The transportation link between the rear of the country and the
theater of military operations was accomplished mainly by rail.

The Soviet Armed Forces carried out 55 strategic offensive and defensive opera-
tions in the Great Patriotic Far. During the period of preparation for each
strategic operation large shipments were carried out to concentrate and regroup
troops, replace personnel losses, and restore stocks of combat equipment, wea-
pons, ammunition, and other forms of materiel. All this demanded especially
intense work by railroad transportation and the military commications service.

20
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

Thus, during the period of the defensive Battles at Moscow in preparation

for the counteroffenaive. 333,500 cars carrying troops and military supplies were
delivered on the railroads running toward Hoscow.7

Delivering the troops. equipment. ammunition, and other military supplies for
the three fronts that participated in the Battle of Stalingrad required about
250,877 cars.”

During preparation for the defensive operation and offensive at Kursk, more
than 313,000 cars were delivered and unloaded under the centralized plan alone,

while the total volume of military shipping to support the Battle of Kursk was
667,255 cars.9

The Belorussian operation required 040,000 cars.

To supportthelﬂvovhSandomiercz and Iassy-Kishinev operations 260,000 cars
carrying troops and supplies were shipped.

During the period of preparation for the Berlin operation more than 192,000 cars
carrying military supplies were delivered to the railroads of Poland.

Major troop regroupings were carried out by rail during the war. For example,

it took 896 trains to move the troops of the Don front from the Stalingrad
region to form the Central and Steppe fronts. In the fall of 1943 730 trains
were used to move the troops of the Bryansk Front to form the 2nd Baltic Pront,1°
and 506 trains were required to form the 2nd Belorussian Front in the spring of
1964. It took 860 trains to move the troops of the 4th Ukrainian Front from the
Crimea in the summer of 196k. The regrouping of troo s from the west to the Far
East in June-August 1945 required about 1,700 trains. 1

Each strategic regrouping of forces by rail required major organizational-
technical measures to insure continuous performance of these massive troop
transfers.

During preparation for operations the agencies of military communications and
railroad administration had to cooperate in a precise, operational manner on
planning, organization, and conduct of the shipping. Before the start of
shipping the large and complex job of regulating rolling stock would he done to
insure an uninterrupted supply of the required number of boxcars, flatcara, and
steam locomotives to the loading roads. Loading and unloading areas for the
trains were prepared in advance. front rail sectors and loading and unload-
ing regions had to be given air cover.

To insure secrecy of shippingtrainloading and travel was ordinarily done during
the hours of darkness, which made operating conditions for the railroads much
more difficult and required special precision in organizing train traffic. To
avoid complications in the operation of the front railroads rigorous checks
were established on timely loading of trains and removal of empty trains from
the unloading region.

21
INJI‘OFIICJAI.IJSE2(H§LY
INJR‘OFF1CLAI.USE(JNLN

The times allotted to prepare railroad transportation for strategic troop re-
groupings were generally very limited. Therefore everything possible was done
to see that the planning process and time required to transmit shipping assign-
ments to performers took as little time as possible. The method of planning
shipping established by the Central Directorate of Military Communications long
before the war made it possible to lay out plans for shipping any volume very
quickly. The operational shipping plan written at the Central Directorate of
Military Communications was transmitted personally to the people's coamdasar

of railroads or G. V. Kovalev, his deputy in charge of traffic. Before the
shipping plan was given to the People's Comissariat of Railroads approximate
figures on the planned shipment were communicated (number of rolling stock by
loading roads, beginning of the shipment, and its pace). The Central Direc-
torate of Military Communications also gave the preliminary order to the

chiefs of troop movement on the loading roads and to the chiefs of front and
district military communications concerning the beginning time and place of
shipping for each particular unit. This kind of preliminary orientation of the
People's Conmdssariat of Railroads and military communications agencies in-
sured that shipping would begin at the time set by the military command.

It was very important to have constant information on progress in loading, train
travel, and unloading. The military communications dispatcher service. which
was set up during the Civil War and later refined, insured precise, operational
monitoring of the condition of each train at any time of the day or night.
Reports on operational shipping were submitted to the Central Directorate of

Military Communications and the front directorates of military communications
twice a day; for especially important trains reports were made four times a day.
The positions of trains at the report hours were entered on a map of the rail
system, which gave a graphic picture of the location of the trains and, if
necessary, made it possible to carry out shipping maneuvers.

Soviet troops moved forward to meet the enemy, train after train.
[99 73-75]

During the Great Patriotic War the soviet Armed Forces carried out 55 stra~
tegic offensive and defensive operations, each of which required enormous work
by the railroads, military communications agencies, railroad troops and special
formations of the People's Commissariat of Railroads.

An enormous amount of work was done by the Headquarters of Rear Services of the
People's Commissariat of Defense, the political agencies, the headquarters of
the arms of troops, the Central Directorate of Military Communications, and the
supply directorates to form and give material—technical support to reserve units
and operational formations. This took place throughout the war, but especially
in the initial period when 291 divisions and 94 Brigades were transported to

the front before 1 December 1941, chiefly by railroad. The commands of the mil-
itary districts, local party, Soviet, trade union, and Komsomol organizations,
and the military commissariats did a great deal of work to support these forma-
tions.

The Soviet command used railroad transportation to concentrate troops during
preparation for and conduct of such operations as the Battle of Moscow. the

?2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Battle of Stalingrad, the Battle on the Rural Salient. the operation to break
the Leningrad blockade, the Felorussian, East Prussian, Vials-Oder, Berlin,
and Far Eastern operations, and many others.

In addition to moving troops from deep within the country, the Soviet command
very often carried out significant troop regroupings by rail. For example,
after the fascist troops were smashed at Stalingrad (February 1943), the forces
of the Don Front, some 900 trains, were moved to the central axis. The same
year the troops of the Bryansk Front were transferred to the Velihiye Luki
region. The shipment of troops By rail from East Prussia and the region around
Prague to the Transhaikal and the Par East, a distance of 9,000-12,000 kilom-
eters, in the summer of 19‘s was a very important and difficult mission. The
pace of this shipping on the Transsiherian railroad reached as much as 30 troop
trains a day. This major transportation operation was carried out successfully
on the whole.

During the Great Patriotic Ear many shipping operations were carried out by com-
bined rail, motor vehicle, and water transportation. Hany divisions,corps,

and armies used all forms of transportation broadly in different combinations,
which greatly speeded up the concentration of forces in the chosen axis.

The Soviet command successfully maneuvered with troops which were en route in
the trains.

Operational shipping was carried out according to plans and assignments from
military communications agencies following decisions of the General Headquarters,
while shipping within fronts was done according to decisions of the front head-
quarters. Experience with planning operational shipping acquired during peace-
time was used extensively during the war.

The volume of operational shipping was 244,603 trains, which was 55.2 percent of
the total volume of military shipping.

Supply shipping occupied a significant place in the total volume of military
shipping, 198,610 trains or 46.8 percent.

Military communications personnel had a very active part in organizing the evacu-
ation of sick and wounded by rail. A total of 5,338,350 persons (11,863 trains)
were evacuated.

The military communications service always took an active part in evacuation
shipping of military plants and storage depots to the rear of the country and
helped railroad workers and shippers in the evacuation.

The rapid inprovement in technical equipment of the army and navy was reflected
in support for military shipping and in its volume. Shipments of special and
technical troops increased. The need for open rolling stock, especially large-
capacity flatcars, increased greatly.

The presence of heavy combat equipment on the military trains forced the mili-
tary communications service and railroad workers to re-equip and prepare the
loading and unloading regions.

23
INMR‘OFIICIAI.IIHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The personnel of front and army military commications agencies took an
active part in working out plans to restore (and Blockade) railroads, provide
them with technical equipmt. and clean up after enemy air attacks in order to
get trains swing through the demolished facilities quickly.

Military conunications agencies sorting together with engineering troops did
a great deal of work to conceal troop movements and organize dung (deceptive)
rail shipments.

FOOTNOTES
1. "SSSR i ZaruBezhnyye Strany posle Poﬁedy Velikoy Oktyabr'skoy
Sotsialisticheskoy Revolyutsii. Statistichesliy Siornik" [The USSR and
Foreign Countries after the Victory of the Great October Socialist Revolu—
tion. Statistics], Moscow, "Statistika", 1970, pp 105-109.

2. Antinenko, N. A., "Na Glavnom Napravlenii" (In the Main Axis], 2nd ed”
Moscow, "Nauka", 1981. p 10.

3. "Tyl Sovetskiky Vooruzhennykh 811 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyne 1961-
1945 gg." [The Rear of Soviet Armed Forces in the Great Patriotic War of
1961-1945], Moscow, 'Woyenizdat", 1977. p 5.

lo. "Voyennyye Soohshchuniya za 50 Let", [Fifty Years of Military Comica-
tions], Moscow, "Voyenizdat", 1967. p 63.

S. "Tyl..." op. cit., p 235.

6. "Voyennyye Soohshcheniya..." op. cit., p 23.

7. "W1..." op. cit., p 230.

8. Ibid.. p 232.

9. Ibid., p 121.

10. "Voyennyye Soohshcheniya..." op. cit., pp 48. 49.

11. Ibid., p 1.9.

Railroad and Military Comunications Troops Engaged in Building and Rebuilding
Railroad Facilities in the Front Region [pp 76-77]

There is no other case in world history where a country carried on restoration
and construction of railroads on such enormous scale concurrently with major

strategic operations. -such as occurred in the USSR during the war.

In the prewar period questions of planning and development of the transporta-
tion system in the theater of military operations and preparation for, organi-

zation, and implementation of restoration and blockading work on railroad lines
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within the People's Commissariat of Defenseweredirectly managed by the Direc-
torate of Military Communications of the General Headquarters of the Red Army.
The headquarters of the military district and front had divisions of military
communications which were directly squrdinate to the chief of staff. For
restoration, construction, operation, blockading, and technical support of rail-
roads used for military shipping there were railroad troops subordinate to the
commander of the district or front through the chief of military communications.
In addition. in connection with the broad scope of railroad construction in the
country, the Special Corps of Railroad Troops of the Worker-Peasant Red Army was
formed in 1932. Until 1941 it worked on reconstruction of existing rail lines
and construction of new ones on assignment from the People' a Commissariat of
Railroads. The units of the Special Corps had 55, 000 men at the start of the
war.1 The total number of railroad troops at the start of the war was 97,100.2
The railroad unit subordinate to military districts began to be reorganized in
l9bl. The districts began forming detached railroad brigades which included

road maintenance battalions, bridge Battalions, work mechanization battalions,
operations battalions, and the like.

By the start of the war 10 of the 13 existing railroad brigades were engaged in
building railroads in the western border military districts(three in the Western
district, four in Kiev district, and three in the Odessa district).

To slow down the enemy advance, the fighting men of the railroad troops and
military communications, who were retreating together with combat units of the
Red Army, took steps to blockade the railroads. They removed technical equip-
ment and dug up and mined tracks, bridges, and other structures.

There were no railroad units on the railroads of the Baltic region and many
railroad lines of the western oblastsat the start of the war, so blockading
was done chiefly by engineer and rifle units in the regions of their combat
operations. Demolition was focal in character and chiefly involved blowing up
large bridges. Working engines and most of the railroad cars from these lines
were withdrawn to the rear.

Planned blockading work began to be done on a line from east of Narva,
Velikiye Luki, Orsha, and Mogilev with the arrival of railroad units that had
been mobilized.

There were many examples of courage and heroism by personnel of the railroad
troops and military counmnications doing blockading work during the Great
Patriotic War.

[p 124]

During the Great Patriotic War the railroad troops and special formations of
the People's Commissariat of Railroads plus military communications agencies
improved the organization of construction and reconstruction work on railroad
lines and technical equipping for them. By the end of the war the level of
technical equipment among railroad troops had increased substantially compared
to early 1942: seven times for cranes, eight times for pile drivers, 11 times

for mobile power plants. four times for compressors, and five times for saw
frames.3

25
ma OFFICIAL use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Byearly 194‘ the number of railroad troops had Increased to 253,000, by war's
end it was 272,000.“ All this facilitated an increase in the rate of railroad
reconstruction. Thus, whereas the pace of reconstruction in the winter of 1961-
1942 was just 3.6 kilometers, in 1963 it was already five kilometers, in 1944'—
seven kilometers and in 1965 eight kilometers a day. In certain operations the
rate of reconstruction of railroads reached 15-20 kilometers a day and more.

Along with increasing the pace of restoration of rail lines the quality of re-
construction work improved. Thus, the proportion of restored rail sectors in
USSR territory that received "outstanding" evaluations when turned over for use

rose from five percent in 1963 to 50 percent in 1965.5

During the war years the railroad troops and special formations of the People's
Comissariat of Railroads with the vigorous help of military communications
agencies and the local population, restored and put Back in working condition
about 120,000 kilometers of railroad track Between December l9bl and war'a end.
In addition they built and rebuilt 2,756 large and medium sized bridges with a
total length of 2&2,163 running meters, more than 13,000 bridges and culverts,

46 tunnels (23,230 running meters), 2,348 water supply stations, and more than
729,000 kilometers of railroad communications wire. Railroad units explored and
removed mines from more than 180,000 kilometers of railroad track, 19,967 bridges
and other manmade structures. and more than 13,000 railroad stations and centers.
The combat engineers of the railroad troops disarmed and destroyed more than
1,293,600 mines and high explosive shells, about 60,000 unexploded aerial bombs,
and almost 1 million artillery shells.‘

FOOTNOTES

1. Kabanov, P. A., "Stal'nyye Peregony" [Steel Runs], Moscow, "Voyenizdat",
1973, p 58.

2. "Tyl Sovetskiky Vooruzhennykh Sil v Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyne 1941-1945
gg." [The Rear of the Soviet Ground Forces in the Great Patriotic War of
1941-1965], p 52.

3. Ibid., pp 242. 243.

4. Terekhin, K. P. et a1., "Voiny Stal'nykh Magistraley" [Fighting Men of the
Steel Roads], p 179.

5. ZHELBZNODOROZHNYY TRANSPORT, 1968, No 7, p 17.

6. "Tyl...," op. cit., p 263.

The Operation of Railroads in the Front and the Near-Front Zone [pp 125-128]

With the start of the Great Patriotic War an extremely difficult situation was

created in USSR railroad transportation. It was a result of the fast-changing
operational situation on the fronts, the increased volume of military shipping,

and the vigorous actions of enemy aviation.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the prewar period the Communist Party and Soviet Government had devoted
considerable attention to improving the technical level of the railroads and
streamlining their work. The fleet of locomotives was updated, with series B
and SU steam locomotives replaced 8y series PD and SO steam engines which were
twice as powerful. The fleet of fourvaxle cars was enlarged, and automatic
coupling was introduced. Heavy-duty rails were laid on the main trunk roads.

Major changes took place in the organization of railroad operations. There was
a systemwide train traffic schedule and a unitary plan for forming trains.
Cadre training received considerable attention. Reorganization of the railroad

system was accompanied by the development of socialist competition and intro-
duction of progressive labor methods. All these things created the foundation
for successful work by the railroads during the war years.

With the start of the Great Patriotic War railroad operating conditions changed
abruptly. The flow of trains increased steadily and therouteschanged. The
volumes and urgency of shipping increased. The administrative boundaries of the
operating sections were altered. Management of operations work was often done
by agencies operating temporarily in the particular section, unlike the peace—
time situation. Most of the railroad workers and military communications offi-
cers, especially those called up from the reserves. had not had the initial

period of experience and were inadequately prepared for work under such condi-
tions.

In the difficult military situation military communications agencies became more
responsible not only for organising and carrying out military shipping. but also
for the quality of railroad operations, particularly in the zones of action of
the fronts. Military communications personnel took an active part in organiz-
ing train traffic on rebuilt railroads. Military communications officers had
to be highly practical, flexible, inventive in decision-making. and firm and
persistent in carrying out decisions. This made heightened demands for the level
of technical training. organizational capabilities, and moral-volitional quali-
ties of military communications personnel.

The war did not change the basic principles of organizing railroad operations.
Centralization of the management of operations work, planning, a high level of
labor discipline. and broad initiative by railroad workers in local areas to per-
form their production assignments were effective throughout the entire war, both
in the rear and on front railroads.

Planning time for railroad technical work changed. Beginning in the second half
of 1941 the technical plan was compiled semimonthly and by 10-day periods. in-
stead of monthly. The work indicators of the road were reviewed each month and
adjusted depending on the situation. The front roads worked on the basis of oper-
ational assignments.l

0n the front railroads, unlike the situation with roads in the rear, work plans
began to be compiled at traffic service divisions. not road administrations.

0n the basis of the demands of the military connnndants of rail sectors and the
chiefs of directorates of military restoration work. the section chiefs would
draw up plans for train and freight work over the next 24 hours and give them to

2?
FTIRCHﬂHCJAI.lEHEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the road management. The road management and the chief of troop movement wrote
up a systemwide daily plan.2

The temporary loss of the Donets Basin and failure to restore the Moscow coal
basin completely led to an acute shortage of fuel. Fuel problems slowed down the
trains at centers and led to a reduction in switching work. It was necessary to
resort to extreme measures: to shut down the steal engines.

The military command helped the railroads look for and deliver fuel to c081
storage facilities. When Bakhmach and Priluki stations ran out of coal reserves
to supply to steam engines in August 1963, the coal was found at an inoperative
sugar plant and delivered to the railroad's storage area by trucks belonging

to the front. In the fall of 1964, on assignment from the command of the 1st
Belorussian front, personnel of railroad and vehicle troops prepared and deliver-
ed 540,000 cubic meters of wood for the Kovel'skays and Brest—Litovak railroads.

By decision of the State Committee on Defense coal train traffic was speeded up
to overcome fuel difficulties on the railroads. The roads established minimum
supplies of fuel. Some railroads such as the Gor'kiy, Northern Yaroslavl', and
October lines were partially switched to heating the locomotives with wood.“

A movement to conserve coal developed on the initiative of the locomotive
engineers. Coal substitutes began to be used, in particular a coal mixture.

The normative carrying capacity, established by technical specifications for

the first phase of restoration, was 12 pairs of trains per day on a single-track
line. This goal was not always met. Sometimes the traffic capacity of road
sectors turned over for operation was just 6-8 pairs of trains.

Some rebuilt sectors were not accepted for use because of numerous flaws (the
second track of the sector from Smolensk to Krasnyy Bar in the spring of 1944).5
On occasion a sector that had already been adopted for use would be shut down
again because of its unsatisfuctory condition. For example, two days after com-
pletion of restoration of the Zhitomir - Korosten' sector traffic had to be
stopped to take care of flaws.

These cases were minimized where representatives of military communications
agencies exercisedhigh standards in accepting rebuilt facilities for permanent
use. An exceptionally difficult situation developed on the railroads because of

failure to fulfill plans for the regulation of rolling stock. For example. in
January l9h4 the working fleet of cars on the Southwestern Railroad was three

times the established norm. As a result, the speed of travel of military trains
declined to 90 kilometers a day, while for supply transports it was much lower.

A group of officials from the Central Directorate of Military Communications

and the People's Commissariat of Railroads was sent out to fix up the situation

on the road. Once in the local area the commission took steps to speed up train
passage through the Kiev center, to encourage restoration work. to intensify
unloading work. and so on.

The situation was practically identical in April-June 1946 on the Hestern
Railroad. The pace of unloading transports fell behind the pace of their ar-
rival at the unloading regions, and the difficulty of forming trains from
empty cars complying with the requirements for car selection by type caused

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large numbers of empty cars to accumulate. At this time an average of 210-295
trains (8,400—14,800 cars) per 10-day period were arriving on the road. while
163-235 trains (8,100-12,700 cars) were released from the road.

The station tracks were overloaded with.empty cars. The road's work indicators
began declining. while norms for operating speed were mainly fulfilled (the
norm was 26.6 kilometers an hour and performance ranged from 22 to 28 kilom-
eters an hour), sector speeds were regularly below established norms.6 The
norm was 16.4 kilometers an hour. hut actual performance was 10.6-12.5 kilom-
etrers an hour.

Through constant concern on the part of party. state, and economic bodies so—
cialist competition was developed and support provided for all progressive
initiatives by railroad workers to overcome the problems in work. The Ukase of
the Presidium of the USSR Supreme soviet on 15 April 19h3 instituted martial
law on railroads was very important for strengthening discipline in transporta-
tion and raising the precision of railroad work. All the workers and employees
of the railroads were declared mobilized for the period of the war and assigned
to work in transportation.

On 25 April 1963 the Sovnarkom ratified a new Statute on Discipline for Workers
and Employees of the USSR Railroad Transportation. Extensive party political
work to explain the new Statute produced positive results very quickly.7

[p 162]

Experience with the operation of railroads in areas liberated from the enemy,
especially abroad, demonstrated the great efficiency of assigning mobile forma-
tions to the fronts: VEO's [expansion unknown]. steam locomotive columns from
the special reserves of the People's Commissariat of Railroads. and repair
trains. Their composition and equipment made it possihle to organize train
traffic quickly in sectors which did not have operations organizations.

The transshipment areas which were organized at points where railroads with dif-
ferent track widths intersected played an important part in using Western
European railroads for military shipping.

Our allies in the anti-Hitler coalition had high praise for our successful use
of railroads during the Great Patriotic War. "we should note the outstanding
use of railroads by the Russians. Using railroads the Russians carried out
strategic concentrations and transfers of one or several armies in unbelievably
short periods of time. Using railroad transportation the Russians were able to
stun the German command, because such speed of shipment by rail was completely
outside their experience."8

The railroad transportation and military communications agencies successfully
handled their missions of insuring operation of railroads in the front zone
and near the fronts during the war years.

F0!(NHH(1AI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

1. Kovalev, I. V., "Transport v Reshayushchikh.Operatsiyakh Velikoy
Otechestvennoy Voyny" [Transportation in the Decisive Operations of the
Great Patriotic war], p 13.

2. Povorozhenko, V. V., "Organizatsiya Dvizheniya Poyezdov na Prifrontovykh
Dorogakh" (The Organization of Train Traffic on Railroads Near the Front],
Moscow, "Transzheldorizdat", 1963, pp 20, 21.

3. Antinenko, N. A., "Na Glavnom Napravlenii," op. cit., p 201.

b. "Ukhodili na Front Eshelony", op. cit., p 182.

S. "Arkhiv 117' [Archives of the Ministry of Defense], Fund 241, Inventory 2611,
File 5, Sheet 5.

6. mm, File 20, Sheet 21.1.

7. Kumanev, G. A., "Na Sluzhbe Fronta i Tyla" [Serving the Front and the Rear].
p 223.

8. "Voyennyye Soobshcheniya as 50 Let", op. cit., pp 58-59.

Military Shipment by Waterway [pp 163.164]

Hater transportation was used extensively during the Great Patriotic War for
military transport support of combat operations for transporting troops, march
replacements, and military supplies from the rear of the country, and for
medical evacuation. River ships were used on a Broad scale to organize ferry
and bridge crossings in support of operations by Soviet troops. In addition.
water transportation was used to evacuate the sick and wounded, storehouaes,
industrial enterprises, and population. River and maritime transportation
played an important part in maintaining shipping for the cities of Odessa,
Sevastopolﬁ Leningrad, Stalingrad, Novorossiysk. and Kerch'.

The transportation work of maritime and river transportation workers, navy men,
and personnel of the military and naval communications service was performed in

a difficult operational situation requiring maximum exertion of efforts of will,
initiative, and courage.

The planning, organization, and support of military shipping on sea and river
lanes during the Great Patriotic war had its own characteristic features in each
basin. The maritime and river fleet was used most fully in those cases where
water routes were the only means of communication.

At the start of the Great Patriotic War the length of usable internal waterways
was 107,300 kilometers. River transportation had 3,494 self-propelled ships

and 5,866 non-self—propelled ships. Maritime transportation had also developed.
Its fleet consisted of 530 ships with a total load capacity of 1.67 million tons,
including 89 oil tankers with a load capacity of 356,200 tons.

LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Central Committee of the Comunist Party of the Soviet Union and the Soviet
Government devoted great attention to the development of maritime and river
transportation. Despite considerable upgrading of the fleet, it still had ahipa
which were 50 years old and lure.

Shore facilities developed significantly along with the fleet. River transpor-
tation had 5,800 ports and docks, and new ports were built. The large ports
were equipped with 1,600 units of cargo-handling machinery which did 47 percent
of the loading and unloading Work.1

The port system of maritime transportation developed significantly. Major

ports such as Leningrad, Riga, Odessa, Novorossiysk, Baku, Batmai, Arkhangel'sk,
Murmansk, Vladivostok, and others were equipped with loading-unloading machinery.
But maritime and river transportation had very few ships designed for carrying
heavy machinery. There was a shortage of movable equipment to use to adapt

freighters for carrying personnel, and there were not enough heavy-duty cranes to
handle tanks at seaports.

The line organizations of military communications in water transportation were
formed by late 1937 by the People's Comissariat of the Navy. They were direc-
torates of the chiefs of military transportation service of the maritime steam-
ship companies subordinate to the chief of naval communications.

Directorates of the chiefs of troop movements were not formed on internal water-
ways until just before the war, when they were established for the following
basins: Volga-Kama, Western, Moscow-Volga, Northern, and Northwestern. The
line agencies of military communications on internal waterways, with the excep-
tion of the Northwestern and Amur basins, were included in the composition of
the military communications agencies of the People's Commissariat of Defense,
while the two exceptions mentioned above were subordinate to the People's
Comissariat of the Navy. The organization of military comunications service
in water transportation did not meet defense needs. During the war these
agencies of military comunications were not formed until much later than they
were needed (for example on the Dnepr and Don).

The Statute on the Chief of Troop Movements in Water Transportation was ratified
on 9 October 191.0, and in early 19(02 the Statute on Line Military Communications
Agencies and River Transportation (for Wartime) was ratified.

with the initiation of military operations all work by river transportation to
carry out the orders of the Central Directorate of Military Communications and
the Main Naval Headquarters was monitored by the directorates of the chiefs of

roop ovements in the river basins. During the 1942 shipping season there were
13 directorates of military commandants of water regions and ports in the central
river basin.

[pp 208-209]

In a short survey it is difficult to cover the full range of work related to
planning, organization, and performance of military shipping by water during

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the last war. But the figures that have been given show that the river,
lake, and maritime fleets were very important in transportation support of
najor operations (in the defense of Odessa and Sevastopol', the Battle of
Stalingrad, the defense of Leningrad, and elsewhere), in nass troop transfers
and shipping strategic cargo such as petroleum. and in organizing crossings
over najor water ways.

In the preparation and work of the river, lake, and naritime fleets under war-
time conditions there were both positive and negative aspects (lack of pre-
paredness for the war in the ao-called rear steauhip companies, failure to
adapt the fleet - especially repair ships. to carry heavy nilitary equipment,
delay in deciding the question of conﬁat support for troop shipments by water,
lack of preparedness to combat the danger of nines. failure to find operational
solutions to organizational questions of military communications in water trans-
portation. failure to develop steps during prewar times for rebuilding trans-
portation facilities, including the organization of ship hoisting work and so
on). All these shortconings were over-cone for the most part during the war.

The actual work of military shipping was done by the personnel of the river and
naritime fleets, but ship personnel had a special role. The crews o‘. nany ships
who performed assignments for the comand denonstrated exceptional diligence,
courageousness, heroism, fearlessness, and devotion to their socialist home-
land. The fleets and flotillas took on a large share of the military labor of
supporting and carrying out military shipnents by water.

The personnel of military and naval comunications agencies did an enormous
amount of work in water transportation during the Great Patriotic Har. They
were a fairly small detachment, for the most part highly skilled specialists

in preparation and use of water transportation for military purposes. They
were people who knew nilitary affairs, were devoted to their native land, and
performed their duty to the end heroically, sonetimes giving their lives. Under
extremely difficult conditions they planned and carried out significant military
shipping by water, participated in restoration of port and dock facilities,
ships, and waterways, and solved my problems that arose during the Great
Patriotic War.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Transport 1 Svyaz' SSSR" [USSR Transportation and Commicationa], Moscow.
"Statizdat", 1957, p 143.

Air Defense of Railroads and Conbat Support for Military Shipping [pp 210-211]

During preparation for its attack on the Soviet Union, the Nazi comand envi-
sioned massed strikes against our country's transportation arteries, especially
trunk railroads, as one of the foremost niasions. The Barbarossa plan pointed
out that Russian railroads and commications routes would have to he cut off
or knocked out. depending on their significance for the operation.

3?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Railroad transportation found itself in a difficult situation as a result of

the sudden enemy attack. Taking advantage of tenorary air supremacy, the
fascist command tried to paralyze the work of our railroads in the front zone
and near the front.

0n the first day of the war enemy aircraft carried out massed attacks on the

border railroads. Strikes were delivered chiefly against major rail centers,
stations, and bridges.

In the following days the intensity and scale of attacks by German fascist
aviation on border railroads grew. During 22 and 23 June 1961 more than 100

railroad structures in the western part of the country were destroyed by enemy
bombing and artillery shelling.l

Enemy aviation operated on a Broad front from the Barents Sea to the Black Sea
and subjected railroad facilities to a depth of 350-400 kilometers to intensive

bowing.2 In certain months of l9bl rate than 20 railroads were in the sphere
of enemy air action at one time.

Between June and December 1941 fascist aviation carried out 5,939 air attacks
against railroads and dropped more than 106,000 aerial 5068.3

At the outset of the second day of the war our country's air defense was de-
ployed primarily to repulse an aerial enemy at a depth of 500—600 kilometers.“

Units of border zone air defense were forced, while protecting targets, to wage

battle against advancing enemy ground forces at the same time. Antiaircraft
artillery was enlisted to repulse tank attacks, and antiaircraft machine gun
units were turned against enemy infantry. Nonetheless. it was possible to pro-
tect most of the important sectors of railroad and highway and major bridges

and crossings. They functioned witlwut prolonged interruptions until the Soviet
forces had withdrawn from the regions they were defending.

The special resolution of the State Committee on Defense of 2 September 1941
entitled "Steps Toward Air Defense of nail Centers, Bridges, and Transports"
played an exceptionally important part in improving the defense of comunica-
tions lines. The resolution outlined specific steps to organize the air defense
of key railroad facilities in the Soviet Union.

An extensive air defense system including antiaircraft weapons (artillery,
machine guns. and antiaircraft armored trains), fighter aviation, and anti-
aircraft machine gun platoons, followed later by antiaircraft-machine gun-
cannon platoons, was created to protect railroad sectors, centers, bridges,

tunnels, front regulting stations, supply stations. troop loading and unloading

regions, and other important rail facilities against enemy aviation froa the
first days of the war.

[pp 233-239]

Until the Great Patriotic War railroads were guarded by rifle guards of the

People's Comissariats of Railroads and NKVD [People's Comissariat of Internal
Affairs] troops.

33
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE20NLY

With the start of the war the protection of all key railroad facilities was
turned over to NKVD troops, which guarded more than é,100 railroad trans-
portation sites.5 In some cases railroad-militia was enlisted for security.
In leading sectors of the fronts railroad units guarded important manmade
structures until the arrival of NKYD subunits.

Railroad facilities in the deep rear were guarded by the paramilitary guard
of the People's Commissariat of Railroads.

The number of NKVD units allocated to guard the railroads of a front depended
on the operational situation, the length of the lines, the number of sites being
guarded, and the number of units available to the command.

The average density of guards was 2-3 persons for two kilometers of track (it is

interesting to note that German fascist troops assigned 9—12 persons per one
kilometer of track).

The number of railroad sites to be guarded and their names were determined by the
central commission and the interdepartmental road commission which included rep-
resentatives of the People's Commissariat of Railroads, military communications
agencies, the “KGB [People's Commissariat of State Security], and NKVD troops
assigned to guard the particular objects.

In the difficult year of 1941 alone NKVD units and subunits guarding and de-
fending bridges and rail sectors wiped out more than 26,000 enemy soldiers and
officers, 60 aircraft, 150 tanks and armored vehicles, and 77 field guns of
various calibers.6 The territorial and transportation agencies of the NKVD
and “KGB, the border troops, and the internal troops of the NKVD of the western
districts provided reliable protection and defense for the rear of the active
Soviet Army. There were especially hot and bloody battles in the first days of

the war for bridges and crossings and rail centers and lines in the border
regions.

The three squads of the 8th Security Detachment, headed by Sr Lt P. K.
Starovoytov held the railroad bridge across the Western Bug River in the Brest
region for four hours. The fascists attacked the bridge three times, but each
time were rolled back. They poured artillery fire onto the border guards from
two armored trains that were shooting across the river and they hurled mortars
at them. Then the enemy tanks moved in. Almost all the defenders of the bridge
perished.7

The battle for the railroad bridge across the San River at Peremyshl' was espe-
cially bitter and stubborn. The bridge was attacked by two enemy companies at
the same time, with artillery support; the bridge was defended by small groups
of Chekists from the bridge seCurity garrison and border guards headed by
deputy chief of the 14th Security Detachment Lt P. Nechayev. The enemy took no
account of losses in his attempt to seize the bridge. The defenders of the
bridge fought without fear for their lives. When new groups of border guards
came up from the reserves the attacks were driven off.

3h
. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thefightingfor the railroad bridge across the Prut River in the Kagul axis,
in the sector of the 5th Security Detachment of the 25th Kagul Border Detach-
ment of Moldavia, went on for two days. On 23 June 1941 the detachment re-
ceived an order to blow up the bridge. It was seized and blown up by a lJ-man
group led by Sr Lt A. K. Konstantinov, assistant chief of staff of the border
comandant's office. One part of the group performed the mission of seizing
the bridge. while the second did the demolition work, and the third provided
combat security. While an assault group distracted the enemy the combat
engineers placed explosives under the bridge supports. The explosion rang out.
But the bridge was only damaged. On 24 June the operation had to be repeated
with a larger group. The bridge flew into the air at 2200.

Our country valued the feat of the Kagul soldiers highly. Three of them, in-
cluding A. K. Konstantinov, were given the title Hero of the Soviet Union andthe
others who fought in the battle received orders and medals.9

Fortresses on wheels is what armored trains were called during the war. The
armored trains of the lat Division of NKVD troops assigned to guard especially
important railroad structures took part in the fighting at Novograd-Volynskiy,
Zhitomir. in the Belotserkov axis, and many other trunk lines of the South-
western front.

Armored train BP-56 especially distinguished itself. It was covering the with-
drawal of ourunits in the Novograd—Volynskiy region and found itself cut off
from friendly troops. Fascist infantry with artillery and tanks appeared on the
railroad crossings along the line frOm Novograd-Volynekiy to Korosten' on 6 July
1941 and knocked out the train's path of withdr 'al. There were only two things
to do: either blow up the train or repair the track under constant enemy fire
and fight through to Kiev. The second plan was adopted. After repairing the
damage and wiping out the guns and armoredvehiclesthat blocked its path, the

armored train broke through the enemy battle formations and arrived in Kiev on
11 July 1941.

The armored train was given the mission of guarding and defending the railroad
line from Kiev to Teterev, preventing the German offensive from enveloping the
Kiev Fortified Region. The fighting men of the train together with a ground
security detachment discovered and disarmed the fascist spotters who were cor-
recting the actions of the German bombers and then repulsed attacks by enemy
aviation with antiaircraft fire. On 12 July 1941 the train was sent to Borodyanka
station (50 kilometers northwest of Kiev) with the mission of helping our units
stop enemy attempts to cut the trunk line from Kiev to Korosten'. "aging battle
against enemy artillery and tanks, the armored train with the cooperation of
infantry and the fighting men of a railroad battalion thwarted the enemy attempt
to out the rail line.

On 14 July 1951 BP—56 repulsed several attacks by fascist aviation in the
Borodyanka sector and again fought against enemy tanks.1°

At the same time BP—A of the railroad militia in cooperation with fighting men
of the destroyer battalion of the Kiev railroad region and units of the Kiev
Fortified Region, heat back attacks by tanks attempting to take Vorzel' station

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and damaged the railroad track near the bridge across the Irpen' River where
the line of defense ran.']

Armored train No 73 distinguished itself on the approaches to Moscow. It entered
the battle against the enemy in Belorussia in the first days of the war, and

then later fought at Leningrad. In August 1941 it defended a sector of the
October Railroad between Gryady and Volkhovo stations.

On 21 November 1941 armored train No 73 arrived to defend the capital. It was
assigned to guard and defend the rail sector from Yakhroma to Dmitrov. The
guns of the train waged fire against enemy tanks, field guns, and mortars while
its machine guns were used against infantry. During the war armored train

No 73 also fought at Stalingrad and in the liberation of the Western Ukraine.

Throughout the war in many rail centers, stations, and sectors armored trains
were assigned to guard and defend them against ground attacks by the enemy.

1n the second half of 1944 the antiaircraft-macbine gun-cannon platoons were
also assigned to defend trains against attack by sabotage gangs. These pla-
toons were equipped with machine guns mounted on the train for firing at ground
targets, automatic weapons, and grenades for the fight against bandits on the
L'vov, Kovel', Kishinev,8elostok,and Brest-Litovsk railroads.

The personnel of antiaircraft—muchine gunocsnnon platoon No 360, which was es-
corting military hospital train No 1131 when it was subjected to attack by

enemy automatic riflemen, demonstrated great heroism and steadfastness.

Despite the fact that the platoon lost almost one-quarter of its personnel, they
drove back the enemy riflemen.

During the summer—fall offensive of 1944 guarding and defending the rear of

the active army became especially important, especially in the western oblssts
of the Ukraine, Belorussia, and the Baltic region. Nazi agents organized sub-
versive activity by bourgeois-nationalist gangs in an attempt to disrupt the
life that was being reorganized in the liberated regions. Therefore the Soviet
command took steps to bolster the security of the railroads and motor vehicle
roads, bridges, communications lines, and other facilities.

The 12th Detached Air Defense Battalion especially distinguished itself in the
fight against bandits. It beat off 16 attacks by them against trains and trans-
ports it was escorting on the L'vov Railroad. The battalion killed 72 of the
bandits and took 175 prisoner. In the course of the entire war the anti-
aircraft-machine gun-cannon platoon repulsed 63 attacks by enemy saboteurs and
other groups.

With the entry of the Soviet Army onto the territory of neighboring countries
in the second half of 1944 the mission of guarding the rear took on new, dif-

ferent features. On 18 December 1944 the State Committee on Defense adopted
the decree entitled "Guarding the Rear and Communications Lines of the Active
Red Army in the Territory of East Prussia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and

Romania." This resolution ordered the People's Commissariat of Defense to form
six divisions of 5,000 men apiece and turn them over to the NKVD. Three of them
FOR.0F1HC]AI.USE1)NLY

began performing their missions during the Wislavoder and East Prussian
strategic operations in East Prussia, Poland, and Czechoslovakia. In the
second half of February 1945 three more divisions began combat activities in
Romania and Hungary. They reliably supported the security of the front rear
and communications lines of the active army.12

Considerable attention was also given to ground security and defense of the
railroads of the Far East and their principal sites. Armored trains and anti-
aircraft armored trains were used in addition to NKVD units. The security and
defense of important sites was assigned to the border troops.13

Because the NKVD troops did not have a trained reserve, the security of
Manchurian railroads liberated from the enemy was organized by the front com-
mands. To do this each army assigned rifle units within its own rear region
and their performance was monitored by military communications agencies. The
2nd Red Banner Army of the 2nd Far Eastern Front, for example, assigned 400 men
to guard railroads at the disposal of military communications agencies.1”

According to a decision of the Military Council of the Front, units of the 215th,
68th, and 97th rifle divisions of the 5th Army of the lat Far Eastern Front
were enlisted to guard the Kirin Railroad.

In addition, the chiefs of army military communications were also given platoons
from reserve regiments. They were used to guard and escort trains from army
bases to unloading stations.

The security of stations, bridges, water pumps, and sectors was provided by
garrisons. The commanders of large rifle units distributed units at security
sites according to requests from military communications agencies, which moni—
tored the security of the railroads.

The local population was used to guard little-used railroad sectors in
Manchuria. In this case security was organized and monitored by military com—
munications agencies.

Military trains in assembly areas, at loading-unloading stations, and en route
provided air defense and ground security with their own T/O means.

In the final stage of the war a significant share of the National Air Defense
Forces, which were deployed in the rear of combined arms fronts, were used to
cover communications routes, above all railroads, at a depth of 300-500
kilometers from the front line. For this purpose they assigned 10-36 percent
of fighter aviation, 13-54 percent of antiaircraft artillery, and 27-60 percent
of antiaircraft machine guns.15

All this led to a decrease in the number of attacks by enemy aviation and a
change in attack tactics. Whereas enemy aviation carried out 5,8b8 air attacks
on railroad targets in 1942, in 1943 the figure was 6,915, and in 1944 only
1,161 attacks were made.16

37
FOR OF11C1A1.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tnthesecond half of the war the German fascist aviation was forced to change
from daytime attacks to night attacks, and they directed their efforts pri-
marily against railroad transportation targets. Whereas the number of night
attacks against railroad targets in 1941 was 9.5 percent of the total number
of attacks, in 1944 the proportion of night attacks rose to 85 percent.17

Between 1941 and 1945 enemy aviation made 19.863 attacks on USSR railroad
targets, with the participation of about 60,000 aircraft. They dropped more
than 243,000 high-explosive and fragmentation bombs and more than 120,000
incendiary bombs.18

During the war years 44 percent of the bombs dropped on the Soviet-German front
were used against railroad targets.19 Despite this, the enemy was not able to
disrupt the work of the railroad for any extended period.

The average length of interruptions in train traffic after each.attack by enemy

aviation was about six hours, and only in isolated cases did the interruption
exceed 24 hours.20

Considerable credit for the fact that, despite furious attacks 5y enemy avia-
tion on the railroads, we did not lose a single newly formed tank or rifle unit
in the entire war, goes to the personnel of the Air Defense Forces.21

Timely and correct organization of air defense of the railroads and combat sup-
port for military rail shipping played an important part during the war years in
insuring stable work by the railroads and uninterrupted performance of large.
scale military shipping.

FOOTNOTES
1. Kumanev, op. cit., p 64.
2. "Tyl". op. cit., p 227.
3. "Istoriya Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza 1941-1945"

[History of the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union of 1941-1945], Vol 2,
p 169.

4. "Istoriya Vtoroy Hirovoy Voyny 1939-1945" [History of World war II of 1939-
1945], Vol 4, p 48.

S. "Voyennyye Soobshcheniya za 50 Let", op. cit., p 51.

6. "Biblioteka TsUPVOSO HO" [Library of the Central Directorate of Military
Communications of the Ministry of Defense], inventory No 6218, sheet 195.

7. Ibid., sheets 305, 206.

8. Ibid., sheets 211, 212.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. l‘hid., sheets 21k, 215, 216.

10. Ihid., sheets 217, 218, 219.

11. Ihid., sheet 219.

12. KRASNAYA MZDA, 6 rehruary 197$.

13. Vasilevskiy, A. 14., "Delo Veay Zhizni" [Work for a Whole Life], p 527.

14. Grishin, H. 1., "Voyennyye Soohshcheniya v Kaapanii Sovetskiky Vooruzhennykh

811 na Dal'nen Voatoke" [Hilitary Communications in the Campaign of the
Soviet Armed Forces in the Far East], p 95.

15. "Voyska Protivovozdushnoy Ohorony Strany" [The National Air Defense Forces],

p 328.
16. Kumanev, op. cit., pp 250, 301.
17. "Voyska Protivovozduahnoy Ohorony Strany", op. cit., p 328.
18. "Voyennyye Soohshcheniya 2a 50 Let“, op. cit., p 510.
19. "'i‘yl"..., op. cit., p 227.
20. Ibid.

21. "Sovetaltiy 1311 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy' Voyne" [The Soviet Rear in the
Great Patriotic War], Hoscov, "Hysl'", 19710, Book 2, p 226.

Party Political Work in Institutions and Units of Hilitary Conunieations and
Railroad Troops [pp 210-2101]

The Columnist Party of the Soviet Union, arming the Soviet people with a hroad
prograa of struggle against the German fascist aggressors, attached great im-
portance to party political work in the army and the navy.

The conditions of the war denanded that party political work he reorganized to
conform to the nev situation and subordinated to the primary ohjective oi
smashing the German fascist aggressors.

Ihe Communist Party attached enormous importance to political and ideological
indoctrination of Soviet fighting nan. Propaganda for the ideas of Marxism-
Leninisn and explaining to personnel the policy of the Col-unis: Party and the
just, liberating character of the Great Patriotic War played an inportant

role in ideological and political indoctrination. Indoctrinating personnel in

the spirit of Soviet patriotisn and Boundless love for their socialist hone-
land hecane paramount.

Revealing the life-hating, aggressive essence of fascism and instilling Soviet
fighting nen with burning hatred for the German fascist aggressors played a

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large part in the ideological and political indoctrination of Soviet Army
fighting men.

One of the main areas of party political work in the Soviet Army, including
the institutions and units of military comnicationa- and railroad troops.

was the campaign for high troop fighting effectiveness, combat and special
skills, and firm military discipline. This was important Because many front
and line military consndants' offices on railroads and waterways. air defense
units of military commications, railroad troops, and special formations of
the People's Comissariats of Railroads were operating under the difficult
conditions of a coﬁat situation.

The new missions of party political work and the special features of doing it
under wartime conditions demanded that commanders and party and Komsomol organi-
zations of military comunications agencies and railroad troops search for
more effective forms and methods of personnel indoctrination. Hass agitation
work became the leading form of political indoctrination of fighting men.

The principal activities were political meetings, political information
sessions, discussions, reading of newspapers, reports from the Soviet Informa—
tion Bureau, orders of the Supreme Commander, Bulletins, and the like. skillful
use of all the many different form of party political work was an important '
condition for successful activity by party and Komsomol organizations on po-
litical and military indoctrination of Both the personnel of military commu-
nications and railroad troops and the fighting men Being transported by rail

and water.

The institution of military comissars in the Soviet Army and Navy- was very
ilportant. The commisaars of the directorates of the chiefs of front military
couamnications, air defense units, railroad troops. and the directorates of
chiefs of troop movements on railroads and in river Basis did an enormous
amount of work on political and military indoctrination of personnel, managed
party and Komsomol organizations of the units and institutions, and monitored
performance of orders from the command. During the war their main efforts
were concentrated on guaranteeing execution of plans for military shipping,
achieving a high rate of restoration of railroads and waterways, reliable
combat and technical cover for them, disseminating the work know—how of leading
fighting men and workers of rail and water transportation, and introducing
progressive labor methods in practice.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

11, 176
050: 1801/ 199 END

ho
TCIAI. USE ONLY