FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10042
9 October 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 35/81}

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trsnsliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10042
9 October 1981

r

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(rouo 35/81)
CONTENTS

INTEﬁﬂATIONAL AFFAIRS

Iraq, Turkey Strengthen Ties
(HI-"AT“ All-'MI, 21-27 Aug 81) osooeoooaoooeeoooaaeeeeeeea 1

Iraq, m Stress Economic Cooperation
(‘1'.me All-'ARABI, 21-27 ‘ug 81)00.000.00.00.00000001100000 3

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Briefs
Iraqi, Egyptian Auto Ventures 5

mm GULF AREA

Reasons for South Korean Contracts Discussed
(AL-“TAN W'MI, 113.20 Aug 81) OOOOUOOOOCOOOIIOIOOIOIOOOI. 6

IRAQ

U.S. Neutrality Towards Iran-Iraq War Questioned
(AL-“TAN W'MI, 7-13 Aug 81) O...OOQOOOOIDOOOIOOODDOOOOOO 8

LIBYA

Italian Paper Cites Libyan Agency on Ties
(cmmmsm, 11 “p 81) IOCOOOOOOIOICOOCOOOCOOOUCOCOO 13

Briefs
Desalination, Power Plants 15

SAUDI ARABIA

Implications of Neumann's Resignation Discussed
(AIPwATAN AIP'ARABI, 7-13 Aug 81) IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOIOOOO. 16

SUDAN

Al-Slarif al-Hindi on Opposition Plans, Impending Uprising
Al-Sharif ail-Hindi Interview; Ala-HAW AIr'ARABI, 31 Jul-

Aug 81)....ooooooelooooooooi00tov0.0000000oe'o-ootooooooooooo 20

ca- [III-usaa-lzlrouol

IPA“ nmw- ' new “\WV
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

INTBENAIIONAL AFTAIRS

IRAQ, TURKEY STRENGTMBN TIES
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ABABI in Arabic No 236 21-27 Aug 81 p 56
(Article: "Iraqi-Turkish Rapprochement After Signing the Economic Agreement"]

[Text] Baghdad-There is a feeling of great satisfaction prevalent in the Iraqi
capital concerning the development of relations of friendship, cooperation. and
good-neighborliness between Iraq and Turkey. This feeling took hold after the emer-
gence of the agreement concerning economic, technical. and cultural cooperation
which was signed by the two countries last week in Ankara, along with the protocol
concerning remapping the border which was signed in connection with it.

Through this agreement the Iraqis hope to have Turkey once again be concerned with
the Arab and Muslim worlds. Turkey's concern with problems in the Middle East
subsided somewhat after the emergence of the military regime there about a year ago.

Mr Taha Yasin Ranadan, member of the Revolutionary Com-and Council and first deputy
prime sinister. who was the chair-an of the Iraqi delegation in the Ankara talks.
described the agreement as being a progressive step along the path of cooperation
between the two countries.

Turkey‘s high officials who participated in the talks were led by the head of state,
Gen Kenan Evren, and the Turkish prime minister. Bulend Ulusu. Mr Ramadan informed

then that Iraq hopes that Muslim Turkey will play a more progressive role in the
Palestine question. Iraqi officials hope that. in this particular realm. Turkey's
solidarity with the Arabs will help to deter Israel and discourage it from engaging
in aggressive adventurism in the Middle East.

Mr Ramadan explained the the high Turkish officials Iraq's position concerning its
conflict with Iran. and emphasized Iraq's ardent desire to end the conflict. He
told themthatlraq has no aspirations concerning Iranian territory. but that Iraq
will not renounce its legitimate rights even though the war might continue for
several years. he also affirmed that the Iraqi forces will withdraw whenever Iran
recognizes Iraq's rights.

The Iraqis consider the new agreement to be an affirmation by the Arabs of the

necessity of establishing economic and political relations with Turkey on the level
of the historic and religious ties and relations which bind the Arabs and the Turks.

1
FOIGMHHCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Turkish officials assured Hr Randan of their determination to develop their

country's relations with Iraq and with the other Arab countries. and expressed
their hope that the war between Iraq and Iran would end.

The protocol concerning the border included the formation of a joint comittee

between the two countries which will take over the task of remapping the border
and fixing the denarcation lines during the next 3 years. This is to be done on

the basis of the border treaty between the two countries which was signed in 1926.

Others who took part in the Iraqi delegation were Hr Tayih 'Abd al-Karin. minister
of oil. and Hasan 'Ali. minister of trade.

COPYRIGHT: AL-HATAN AL-'ABABI. 1981.

9&68
C90: 4303/138

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

IRAQ, FRG STRESS ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Paris AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 236 21-27 Aug 81 p 55
[Article: "Economic Cooperation Thrives Between Iraq and Rest Germany")

[Text] Baghdad--Iraq has expressed its hope that the economic cooperation between
it and Heat Gemny will continue on "a clear and firm basis of respect for each
other's sovereignty. equality. non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
and respect for the laws in the other country."

This comentary was aside by an official Iraqi source in response to a West German
protest following the arrest of an Iraqi interpreter, Ya'qub Butrus. who was accom-
panying a West German delegation which recently paid a visit to Iraq. Butrus was
charged with committing "crimes punishable by Iraqi law."

The prevailing belief here is that the incident will not constitute an obstacle to
further improvement of economic cooperation between the two countries. In fact. the
value of contracts which Iraq has awarded Heat German companies now totals about 10
billion DH. Thus Iraq has replaced Saudi Arabia as the primary market in the Middle
East for West German products. The latest contract which was awarded to the Heat
Germans is the contract which was granted to the M.A.N. Comany to supply 400
large-size trucks. There was stiff competition among the companies of the Western
nations to receive this contract.

These trucks will be imported for the IraqioJordanian Transport Cospany and will be
used on the road between 'Aqabah and Baghdad. The contract. which totals about 270
million DH. also includes the provision of spare parts and maintenance.

Economic relations between the two countries have undergone tremendous development
since 1971., which was the year when diplomatic relations were restored between the

two countries after they had been cut off for 9 years.

Two temporary crises occurred [effecting relations between the two countries]. The
first one resulted in a limited cessation of awarding contracts to West German com-
panies, the purpose being to correct the large gap in balance of trade in favor of
West Germany. The second one resulted in the West German hermes Insurance Company

refusing to insure West German companies operating in Iraq. This happened shortly
after the outbreak of the conflict with Iran. But in spite of this, mutual
cooperation and exchange have once again reached a high point at the present time.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Between last December and last April. West German cospanies were awarded contracts
worth about 6.5 billion DH. The Heat Germans are interested in participating in

the implementation of public service projects such as those concerning the building
of roads. dams. and those having to do with the automobile and cement industries.

The Iraqis are interested in obtaining advanced West German technology. However,
they are complaining about the fact that West Germany is not buying very mch Iraqi

oil and thus is not helping to eliminate the large deficit in balance of trade
payments between the two countries.

Economic cooperation between Iraq and Rest Germany has been thriving ever since the
latest visit to Bonn which was made by Mr Taha Yaein Ransdan, member of the Revolu-
tionary Comand Council and first deputy prins minister. and Mr Hasan 'Ali. ninister
of trade.

COPYRIGHT: AL-WATAN AL- 'ARABI. 1981

9668
C80: 5304/138

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

IRAQI, EGYPTIAN AUTO VENTURBS--‘rhe Arab World is looking with special interest
toward establishing autonobile industries, ained at saving large mounts of hard
currency, which it spends annually to inport thousands of trucks and automobiles,

as well as to ensure work for the donestic workforce. Currently in the Arab World.

t are the nest interested in establishing a domestic industry for auto-
mobiles. Iraq intends to spend about $5 billion to establish this inportant in-
dustry. Production of trucks should begin in 1985, when annual production. aiter

a short period of tine, should reach 25,000 vehicles. In the past week, Egypt _
signed a basic contract with the Dealer-Benz colpany to build an auto-obile pro-
duction couple: in the city of Tenth of Median, which is considered one o! Cairo'e
suburbs. The value of the contract it about $22 million. [Text] [Paris MATH!
All-'AMBI in Arabic No 234, 7-1.3 Aug 81 p 531 ZUOPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-UATAN AID-MM}?

7005

cs0: «304/127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MSIAN GULF AREA

REASONS FOR SOUTH KOREAN CONTRACTS DISCUSS!)
Paris AerATAN Ab-‘ARABI in Arabic No 235.. 16-20 Aug 81 p 53
[Article: "Bight Billion Dollars Worth of Contracts to South Korea in 1981"]

[Text] Riyadh—The success of South Korean companies in getting contracts and
implementing construction and road-building projects in the Arab Gulf countries is
considered to be an indication that a Third-World country is capable of coweting
with the advanced countries in the international market if it makes the effort.
demonstrates perseverance, shows determination, and knows what fields it can
specialize in.

Although the Arab Gulf countries coqlain about the foreign labor force which
threatens to have negative influences on the structure of their Arab society, these
countries nevertheless find themselves compelled. because of the urgency of their
development programs and their lack of a skilled domestic and Arab labor force, to
draw upon the help of Korean companies which have demonstrated their efficiency in
carrying out projects and their excellent work-anship.

Probably the first South Korean company which began operating in Saudi Arabia was
the Sam Ewan Company about 10 years ago. Although this company carried out a
road-building project which was not financially profitable for it, this did pave
the way for the company to conclude other deals and engage in other projects which
brought the company ample profits later on.

South Korean companies are considered to be the most successful foreign coapanies
operating in the Hiddle East in the field of contract work, construction, and
road-building. The Haeunda Company is one of the foremost cmtrecting companies in
the world.

Unoffiical estimates indicate that South Korea currently occupies sixth place among
the countries which engage in projects and are awarded contracts in the Arab Gulf
countries. For example, in 1979 Korean companies were awarded contracts worth
$6.5 billion--out of a total of $60 billion worth of contracts awarded in the Arab
countries. It is believed that this figure has already gone up to $8 billion this

year .

Saudis and Gulf Arabs have no explanation for this Korean phenomenon other than the
fact that it demonstrates the vitality of these companies which possess an organized,
disciplined, trained, skilled labor force which is also perhaps relatively cheap.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The Koreans depend on using their heads in order to get contracts. For exanple.
they do not compete with Japanese. Anerican, and European coQanies in an effort

to get contracts which require advanced tectnology. hut they do enter into
alliances and partnerships with these cowanies in order to carry out the construc-
tion jobs which these projects require such as building plants—including parts and

stages of buildings which constitute steel. petrochenical. and water desalinization
plants.

Nevertheless, Korean coupanies have started to face stiff coIpetition due to the
fact that the Gulf countries are anxious to acquire advanced technology and skills
in the projects which they entrust foreign coupanies with the job of inplenenting.
There has also been a decrease in allocation for construction projects in the Gulf
development plans generally. The decrease has been from 24 percent in the
seventies to llo percent in the first half of the eighties. Furthermore, the wages

of Korean workers have gone up and workers from Bangladesh and India have begun to
compete with then.

It has also happened that several South Korean coapanies have suffered bankruptcy
and financial difficulties while carrying out projects in the region. An example

of this is the (Shin Supung) Company which was iaplenenting projects in Kuwait and
Jordan worth $170 nillion.

South Korean embassies, which look after the interests of these companies and their
workers in Saudi Arabia and in the Gulf countries, say that the Korean government
has established a capital fund amounting to $500 million to encourage their
companies to change over fro. using intensive labor to using advanced technology.
These embassies are also calling upon the conpanies to work together with local
conspnies, as stipulated by the new regulations in the Gulf countries and in order
to facilitate the process of getting contracts.

COPYRIGHT: AIrUATAH Ab-‘ARABI, 1981

9668
C50: 4306/1310

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

U.S. NEUTRAL“? TWARN IRAN-IRAQ WAR QUESTIMED
Paris Ala-“ATM AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 234, 7-13 Aug 81 pp 33-34

[Article: "The Principle of America's 'Non-Aliguaent': 'Hashington Wants a War in
Which Iran Cannot win and Iran ammo: Lose' -]

[Text] Iraqi doubts about Anerican "neutrality" in the Iraqi-Iranian war go back
sometime before the disclosure of the Argentinian airplane. however, the reel Iraqi
scorn is directed against “reheran's "Arabs", who put their "weight" and rested their
hopes on supporting Iran against kaq. We ask then: What do they think, now, about
Iran's "good intentions," after the evidence of Israelialranian cooperation.

The Israeli-Iranian eras deal did not surprise bsghdad. Intonation fron various
sources had reached the Iraqi capital, confining the existence of Iranian-Israeli
cooperation in providing spare parts end a-unition for the Anerican weapons, which
Iran owns.

Baghdad was never reluctant to express its suspicions regarding this relationship.
Its voice was constantly raised, accusing the Anericsns of standing behind this
criminal relationship. Sone doubters among the Arabs accused baghdad, privately or
openly, of exaggeration or of not conplying with the facts and with objectivity,
regarding its accusations against the "Islanic religious regiae” in Teheran.

Iraqi suspicions, regarding the Alerican role, reached their peak during the final
stage of the negotiations over the American hostages. Baghdad believed that the deal
included, as one of its points, achanging the hostages for weapons, through a third
party, which would have been Israel or someone else. In a letter to the UN special
committee for Palestinian rights, on the day of world solidarity with the Palestin-
ians which was celebrated at the end of last year, President Seddan Busayn said:
"Once again we find the United States helping this country, Iran, which has waged
aggression against our land and our people for 2 years. This is what forced us to
defend our rights, our nation, and the security of our citizens." It is no secret
that the suspicions regarding the American position forned one of the reasons, which
prevented and continues to prevent the resunption of diplomatic relations between
Iraq and the United States, which have been severed for nearly lb years. This is in
addition to the basic reason, which is that there has been no noticeable change in
America's biased position towards Israel and Zionisn, and against the Arabs and their

basic issue of Palestine.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL l‘SE ONIJ‘

All this bolstered the Iraqi wapicinns, in addition to all the information received
about the Iranian-Israeli connection, with American approval. The clincher was the
American press campaign, in particular, and that of the Western media in general,
against Iraq in an attempt to distort its victories and image in the military con-
frontation with Iran. Such distortions continued even at the height of the American-
Iranian dispute over the seizure of the hostages. The least that the American cor-

respondents, journalists and analysts said was that Iraq was the "surrogate" of
Russia in the war with Iran.

American diplomacy did not resitate from whispering in Baghdad's ear, through its
Arab and non-Arab channels, that the United States stood neutral regarding the Iraqi-
Iranian conflict, but American neutrality always seemed, in Baghdad's view, to be
mere words, with no basis in fact.

Washington: Tactics and Strategy

One could say that the 11.8. Strategy, which has been based on exploiting the Iranian
attack against Iraq, from the early days of the revolution until now, and which has
been carried on behalf of American interests in the region, has not changed. How--

ever, the tactics have varied and fluctuated, depending on the circumstances of the
conflict.

During the first stage of the armed conflict, the 0.8. [hiding their true convic-
tions] tried to appear as being understanding of the reasons, which led Iraq to re-
spond to the Iranian attacks.

In the second stage, after Iraq's military superiority became clear, American logic
began to take on the appearance of "non-alignment” with respect to either side.
However, at the same time, Washington was using Iraqi victories, and Iranian threats
against the Gulf states, to "frighten" those states may from the combatant parties:
from Saddam Husayn and from Khomeyni.

It used the defiance and excessive tactics of the Iranian revolution‘s attacks against
Iraq and the Gulf Arabs, on the one hand, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,

on the other, as justification for building up its arned presence in the region, on
the pretext of protecting the oil and the lines of navigation. With its allies, it
built up a vast fleet of 60 ships, in the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea, and the
entrance to the Gulf. It concluded an agreement to establish bases or facilities for
its forces in Somalia, Kenya, than and Egypt. It philosophized all this with the
Carter doctrine, which came into being in the early 1980's, and which was tantamount
to reinstituting'the Eisenhower doctrine, and the theory of "filling the vacuum,"

of the 1950's.

As for the third stage in the 0.5. tactic, it began with the freeing of the hostages.
It was manifested in a tendency to bolster and support the Khomeyni regime, on the
basis that he had corrected his mistake, and that there was no longer any justifica-
tion for incompatibility of interests between Washington and 'i'eheran.

During this stage, the Iraqis began to notice that something was going on between
Iran and Israel, and that Iran had reamed nibbling at the forbidden Israeli apple,
despite all its Arab and Islamic slogans that it had raised, and that Washington
was not far from reopening the channels between the two countries.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the contrary, Hashington used sane of its Arab friends to persuade Iraq not to
prepare a military campaign to liberate the three Arab islands in the Straits of
Hormz, which Iran had forcibly seized from the United Arab hairstes in 1971. It
alluded to the use of force to defeat the Iraqi campaign, on the pretext that carry-
ing the war to the southern Gulf would threats: the oil shipping lanes.

Later it became evident that Washington had obtained, in one way or another, a
"gentlmn's agreement" from Iran not to ahell the Straits of norms, in «change for
preventing Iraq's liberation of the three islands.

Now, after having confined the flaes of war to the upper Gulf, and the United
States having made sure that it did not spread to other oil wells in the region, or
to the Straits of Hormuz, it became evident, through increased infiltration of
American spare parts, weapons and ammunition to Iran, through Israel or some other
country, that it wanted to prolong the war, or as a senior Iraqi official told me,
"the United States wants a war that Iraq cannot win and Iran cannot lose."

The Iraqi View of the American Position

The Iraqi view of the American position, before and after the disclosure of the
recent Israeli-American deal, can be unearned to the effect that the Ihited States
does not want Saddam huaayn to stand alone in a prominent and powerful role in the
region.

This view concentrates on two utters: the first is America's covert and overt dip-
lomatic and military activities in the region, and the second is Saddm Busayn's
policy, which displeases the strategic planners in ﬂashington. ﬁe insists on his
complete independence, and on the right of the Arabs and the nations of the region
to make their political decisions themselves, in accordance with their national and
pan-Arab interests. He rejects the international polarization, represented by the
buildup of the 0.8. military presence in and around the Gulf region. Further, he

is opposed to Canp David, and has barred Sadat from the role given him to carry out
in the Gulf , after his role ended in the confrontation with Israel.

Iraqi suspicions regarding the hidden herican role in the Israeli bombing of the
Iraqi nuclear facilities are incorporated into the framework of this View: Namely
the United States, whether it encouraged Israel, or. supplied it with the necessary
intonation, or not, does not want the Iraqis to realize their high aspirations
through internal stability, economic prosperity, and victory on the field of battle.

The strange thing is that the Soviets, whose international interests are totally in-
compatible with American interests, have found themselves captive of American logic
in dealing with Iraq, at one of the stages of the Iraqi-Iranian war. They upressed
their annoyance at the strong Iraqi response to Iranian armed intervention along
their borders, and, for not too short a period of time, they stopped fulfilling the
contracts to supply arms. Perhaps they even encouraged Libya and Syria to offer
aid and assistance to Iran.

Whatever the case might be, what one hears constantly in Baghdad is that Iraqi
policy will not be changed, whether by positions of the United States or the Soviet
Union, and Baghdad will continue to call on the region to adhere to an independent
Arab line, because that is the only way to safeguard Arab interests, and to keep
the region free of the international polarization.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If Iraq had dealth with the facts and the reality of the international situation as
it is, it would not have gone on record, when the Foreign Ministry sumoned Barbara
Bowdin, an official of the 11.8. interests section in the Belgian anbassy, with either
its protest or its complaints about the increased flow of American weapons into Iran,
through Israel or through world black market channels. It would have seen that it
must stop here to hold accountable Teheran's "Arabs", who have moved heaven and
earth [became furious], when Iraq forcibly responded to the new Persian regime's
sttanpts to attack Iraq, interfere in its internal affairs, and threaten the Arabian
of the Gulf.

Iraq did not need the disclosure of the Argentinian aircraft to confirm the truth
and integrity of its position regarding Iran, or to convince Teheran's "Arabs" to
refrain from continuing to support Iran at the expense of their brotherly relations
with Iraq. There was a great deal of evidence, prior to the aircraft [incident], to
the effect that Khoaeyni Iran's support for the Arab issues does not go beyond mere
words and propaganda, neither hindering nor advancing then. The painful thing is
that Teheran's "Arabs" no longer ranber their Arabian, except for their language
for which they are laughed at in the service of Persian barbarian.

What Happened to Abu Valid in Teheran

It is sufficient here to point out what happened to the Palestinians. The PLO
trained the nucleus of the revolutionary guard, who today are charged with protecting
the Iranian regime. The Palestinians tried to be the spokesman of the Iranian revo-
lution in the Gulf and elsewhere, or rather, some in the PLO thought so highly of

the Khomeyni regime's “intuitions" that such views reached the point of disagreement
and rupture with Baghdad.

Hhen the decisive hour came, the Khoneyni regime dmied the PLO, in the person of
its leader Yasser 'Arafat, a golden opportunity to reap international diplomatic
and propaganda value, when Khoneyni persistently rejected his earnest requests to
land the hostages over to the no, so that it could carry out negotiations with
Washington. That would have been the occasion to force the 11.5. into a direct
dialogue with the PLO, to recognize it, and to void Kissinger's pledge to Israel in
1975 not to conduct this dialogue with the PLO before its recognition of the Zionist
state.

Abu Halid, a senior officer in the Palestinian cal-land, went himself to Teheran to
rmew "arafat's efforts, by virtue of the fact that he had supervised the training
of the Iranian "fedayeen " in the past. It was a surprise to him when they rebuked
the no, because Zahdi al-Turazi, its representative at the UN, had said that the
Palestinians would act as mediators to solve the hostage crisis.

The second shock was that Khomeyni refused to receive him. Then, Abol Bassan Bani
Sadr received him. At that tine, he was acting foreign minister. He told him that
the Iranians were shocked, because the Palestinians were interfering in an internal
matter on behalf of the 0.8.

Abu Valid replied that the Palestinians' goal was to serve the Iranian revolution,
and pointed out to him that the seizure of the hostages, and the occupation of the
0.8. embassy building, were not benefiting the revolution. He warned him that the
United States might use those two things as justification for occupying the Gulf.

11
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite all this, Teheran‘s "Arabs" have not ceased the "j ihsd" on the side of Iran.
It could be understood. for example. why the Syrian regime offers assistance to Iran.
on the basis of the proverb, "the enemy of ny many is my friend," i.e., its hatred
of the Ba'thist regime in Iraq. However, it is not understandable, for example, that
the Libyan regine should show such increasing enthasinn for financing and using
Iran, and should have adopted none of those who are outside of the law, like Barrani's
supporters.

There might be a "connection" which President al-Qadhefi suddenly discovered, that he
throught would unite himself and Khomeyni, as a motive for his enthusiasm. But what
is his View today, regarding the compelling, decisive and definite evidence of the
arms "connection" that has been planted for the Khonsyni regime in Israel?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AIL-'ARABI

7005
(:80: 4303/12?

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJA1.USE(NVLY

LIBYA

ITALIAN PAPER CITES LIBYAN AGENCY 0N TIES
"1151503 Milan comm DELLA SBRA in Italian 11 Sep 81 p 15
[Unattributed report: "Al-Qadhdhafi Backtracks with Italian Ambassador"]

[Text] Tripoli--JANA has issued a note concerning a meeting between al-Qsdhdhafi
and the Italian, Turkish, Spanish and Greek ambassadors. The main topic of the
document is the interpretation of the 1 September speech in which the Libyan
leader threatened, among other things, to attack Sicily in the event of further
incidents with the United States in the Gulf of Sirte.

The JANA note states that there is a "defamatory campaign" against the Jamshiriyah,
that is, the Libyan People's Republic.

"This campaign," the document states, "has been mounted by the 0.8. administration
through its propaganda means and through the various reactionary rightwing press
organs with the aim of distorting the Libyan stance and upsetting and damaging

the relations of friendship that bind Libya to the friendly Mediterranean countries.
This campaign has been furthered by spreading a false interpretation of the con-
tent of the speech which the leader of the revolution delivereden the 12th anni-
versary of the 1 September Revolution.

"The ambassadors of the four friendly countries." the note continues, "agreed in
their statements released following their meeting with the leader of the revolu-
tion. They said that their countries refuse to accept any aggressive 0,8. stance
with respect to the Jamahiriyah. They added that their countries will not permit
the United States to use their territory for any aggressive action against Libya.

"The Italian, Turkish, Spanish and Greek ambassadors said that their countries
will not sacrifice their interests and historical and civilized relations with
Libya for President Reagan‘s sake. The ambassadors stressed that their government
leaders assess their relations with Libya positively and safeguard these relations
for the sake of mutual interests and for the evolution of their interests with
Libya."

"The statements by those countries' ambassadors," the note continues, "were made

to reject all the accusations and false claims circulated by the 0.8. administra-
tion and by the interpretations of the rightwing newspapers within the sphere of

influence of the United States and its security services."

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<OFFKJAI.USEZ(NVLY

The Libyan note accuses LA REPUBBLICA, along others, of reporting "false state-
acute" and asserts that "the daily OORRIBRB DELLA SHEA has published a speech
by the Italian defense minister containing direct threats against Libya.

"A statement by the Italian Government," the note adds, "reports an anza version
of an official con-unique, according to which the Italian Government has expressed

its desire to pursue a policy of stability and peace in the Mediterranean region
in cooperation with all the littoral states.

"Moreover, Italian Foreign Minister Emilio Colombo said in an interview broadcast
on Italian television Channel Tho that there is no crisis between Italy and Libya,

adding that we refuse, despite the disturbances in the Mediterranean. to describe
then as a crisis."

"Apart from the official Italian statesents. which point to the rejection of all
0.5. pressures to damage relations with Libya and falsify Libya's stances in its
legitimate right to defend its people's freedom against 0.8.. :ionist and reac-
tionary imperialist attacks, the Italian people's masses," the Libyan note con-
tinues. "have expressed their stable and independent stance with respect to the
patent u.s. interventions. rejecting the attenpts to destroy the relations of
mutual interest and the historical relations with the Jamahiriyah."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editorisle del "Corriere della Sera" s.s.s.

C80: 4528/1

1h
FOIIOFFICLAL lﬁiitﬂqlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

BRIBPS

DESALINA‘HON, rowan PLANTS—Libya has conniseionad the Germ-Swiss Brown-Boveri
Cie. to ilplenent a contract to expand a power station in Tubruq, on the shore of
the Mediterranean Sea. The contract is valued at 200 million Heat Gemn narks.
Work will be cowleted by the niddla of 198‘, and the power output will be increased
to 260 megawatts. Libya concluded a similar contract. 3 months ago. with the cane
firm to expand a generating station in Dar-nah. The two plants will produce
electrical energy and desalinata sea water. in order to neat the needs of the
developing industrial area in North East Libya. [Text] [Paris MAIN! MP'MI
in Arabic No 236, 21-27 Aug 81 p 55] 7005 (comment: 1981 AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABII

080: 10504/ 75

15
non OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SAUDI ARABIA

IMPLICATIONS OF W's RESIGNATION DISCUSSID
Paris Alz-WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 235 7-13 Aug 81 p 22

[Article: "The First Victin of the AHACS Deal: Robert Reumnn Resigned in the
South of Lebanon"]

[Text] The replacenent of the 0.8. ambassador to Saudi Arabia was not an innocuous
decision. The removal of Robert Remnn. one of President Reagan‘s closest associ-
ates, is considered to be a concession on the part of the “hits House in an issue
which is closely connected with America's stumbling around in its dealings with the
hot situation_in the Middle East. Exactly what is this concession?

Washington—Last 20 July the phone rang in Senator Charles Percy's office in
Washington. The person on the other end of the line was Robert Neunann, U.s.
ambassador to Saudi Arabia and an old friend of Percy. He asked him: "Did you
watch TV yesterday? I heard Eaig's statenents. and believe me he ads me want to
vomit." Neunann continued talking,_ not knowing that what he was saying would be
used as a pretext, a few days later, to force him to resign fro: his position.

Neumann was recalled fron Riyadh to Washington early last nonth after the Wits
house had made an "internal decision" to propose to Congress the sale of AHACS
planes to Saudi Arabia next September. Since the white louse knows that those
members of Congress who oppose the plan are gathering their forces in order to
defeat it and prevent the deal from taking place, Neumann was recalled so that he
could make a number of contacts with these members of Congress in an effort to
convince them of the necessity of selling the AUACS planes to Saudi Arabia.

When he arrived in Washington it was clear to him that his task would involve
numerous difficulties. Relations between the ambassador and his direct superior,
Secretary of State Alexander ﬂaig, had never been good. Newman had occupied the
position of foreign affairs adviser inReagan's transition teen, and after Reagan's
victory he was appointed head of the "transition team" in the Department of

State. This team was entrusted with the task of examining the policies of the old
administration, rendering an opinion concerning than, and then incorporating these
policies into the work of the new administration.

When Reagan announced his choice of Gen Alexander Raig to occupy the position of
secretary of state in the new adminstration, Neunann felt that the efforts of the
transition team were in danger [of being in vain]. ﬂaig did not support the "policy"
which he had adopted and which he had expressed during Reagan's election canpaign

and when the new government was taking over its functions—particularly in the
Department of State.

16
m omcnu. uss ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

One of the most important differences between the two men concerns 0.8. strategy
with regard to the Gulf. Neumann is in favor of developing relations between the
0.8. and the Arabs and disregarding Israel's reservations concerning this matter.
Haig is in favor of continuing the policy of the "critical balance" between the

Arabs and the Israelis. guaranteeing that the Israelis will have the upper hand to
some degree or other.

When the situation in the Middle East exploded after the events which took place
starting this sum-er, it became clear that the differences between the two men would
lead then to a parting of the ways similar to that of a divorce. After the bombing
of the Israeli nuclear reactor, Neumann pointed out that it was necessary for the
11.8. to reconsider supplying Israel with F-l6 planes. whereasliaig, after the raid,
announced that delivery of the planes to Israel would be resumed after a "temporary
delay." Then came Menachem Begin's victory in the Israeli Knesset elections, which

was followed by the savage attacks on Iebanon, and all of this made Neumann even
firmer in his stand.

The former ambassador said that the 0.8. had more than one good reason to review
its policy with regard to Israel. But ﬁaig, in the television program which Neumann
referred to in his telephone conversation with Percy, stated that he refused to link

the delivery of the P-16 planes to Israel’s raids against ubanon, and he reaffirmed
that these were two separate matters.

After that the White House made the decision to suspend the shipment of the airplanes
to Israel. Neumann said that the secretary of state did not mean what he said, and
pointed out that the White House's decision contradicted the opinions which ﬂaig had
expressed during ABC's television program "Issues and Answers" on the evening of

19 July.

Neumann told many of his friends who were members of Congress that it was necessary
to quickly reevaluate American policy in the Middle Bast before it was too late for
Washington. He added that the real obstacle to accomlishing this was not in the
Congress, but rather "in the Department of State”-a reference to Alexander Haig.

On 23 July, after Haig had gathered together sufficient evidence that Neumann "was
putting the secretary of state publicly in a bad light," he sun-oned him to his
office in Washington in order to confront him with this evidence. A number of
Neumann's friends have said that the meeting was a storny one. ﬂaig suggested that
the real reason for Neumann's acrimonious remarks was the fact that the ambassador
aspired to occupy a position more important than that of ambassador to Saudi Arabia
in the Department of State, and that perhaps he aspired to occupy the position of
secretary of state itself. But Neumann insisted that the real reason for his
remarks was the policy of the Department of State and that he refused to allow the
matter to be transformed into a "clash of personalities."

These are the interpretations which the two man have presented concerning their
differences. However, rumors which have gone around government offices in Washington

after Neumann announced his decision to resign have tended to explain things quite
differently.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Israeli Condition?

One of these "unofficial" interpretations says that Neumann's dismissal was one of
the conditions set by Begin before he would stop his' raids into Lebanon and observe
the cease-fire. The basis of this interpretation is that, before Neumann was dis-
missed, he was active in trying to push the MACS deal through Congress and this is
what led the Israeli prime minister to demand his dismissal.

This unofficial interpretation goes on to say that Begin's demand was indirectly
welcomed by Haig who already knew the nature of the criticisms which his ambassador
in Riyadh was directing against him.

There is also another "unofficial" interpretation which says that the strong opposi-
tion among the White House staff to Raig‘s policies led the secretary of state to
fear that the White House staff would "polish up" Neusann's image in preparation for
the time when llaig would be resigning-and it was believed that this time was not far
away.

It has been confirmed that, during the last few days before he was dismissed.
Neumann was saying that the secretary of state's principal concern was to prepare
for the coming presidential elections which he intended to enter, and that this was
precisely the thing that caused him (that is, ﬂaig) to hesitate to take a decisive
position with regard to Israel since he desired to maintain good relations with the
Zionist pressure groups in Hashington.

The important thing is that. after the 23 July meeting between Raig and Neumann, the
secretary of state made a direct request from the President to give him "a free
hand" to deal with his rebellious ambassador. Raig succeeded in receiving this
authorization after he convinced Reagan that differences between the Department of
State and one of its ambassadors concerning such a sensitive position could paralyze
the effectiveness of American foreign policy.

After that one of Baig's aides got in touch with the ambassador and informed him
that the secretary of state felt that it would be better for him to submit his
resignation. Then he explained to him that the secretary of state had received
authorization from above to do what he wanted.

It should be noted here that Reagan apparently is determined to continue the game of
balancing people off against each other inside his administration. The dispute
between Baig and the White House staff is growing, and the atmosphere is growing
heavier with each new crisis which the Reagan administration faces. However, the
President is always careful to compensate one faction for any gain which is achieved
by the other faction. The matter here goes beyond personal considerations. Reagan
knows that his administration will be in a very criticalposition if he disregards
the alliances between the huge American establisinent groups which are represented
in his administration. He realizes that the differences between Haig and
Weinberger. for example, are not personal differences as such as they are tactical
differences between the institutions which each of the two men represents. Thus

if he decided the dispute in favor of either one or the other person. such a
decision would go beyond personal considerations and would involve political
considerations-considerations in which any internal disorder could make it more
difficult to formulate "American policy."

18
ran omcm. USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

The unfortunate thing is that the continuation of this dichotomy within the
American administration also makes it more difficult to formulate American policy.
Proof of this is the absence of a definite 0.8. position with regard to the Middle

East. This absence of a position is the thing that, up till lately. Menachel Begin

has been able to profit from and which has led the 0.3. itself to be at the top of
the list of the victims.

COPYRIGHT: AL—HATAN AL-'ARABI, 1981

9468
C50: 4304/136

19
FOR OFFICIAL use 01m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

AL-SHARIF AL-BINDI ON OPPOSITION PLANS, ROWING “PRISING
Paris Ala-HAW Ab-‘ARABI in Arabic No 233, 31 Jul-6 Aug 81 p 38-39

[Interview with sl-Sharif al-nindi, leader of the Sudanese Opposition, by Ahnad
Refer: "The Sudanese Regine is the tourth Partner in 'Caqa David'" in London, date

not specified]

[Text] Al-Sharif llusayn al-Bindi (58 years old) is the senior leader of the
opposition political parties in Sudan, and their nest influential and albitioue.
He alone among the national leaders has rejected conciliation. He insists on re-
building a more deancratic, just and econonically developed Sudan. AL-HATAN AD"
ARABI net with him in London, and interviewed him concerning hie future endeavors,
and the regine's troubles.

[Question] th are you in opposition from London? Hould it not be lore appropriate
for you, a historic party leader, to be there in Sudan, among those members of
your party that are fighting?

[Answer] Opposition fron abroad was not sonething we invented. It is a recognize
nethod all over the world, and throughout history. higre opposition began during
the time of the Prophet Huber-ad, when he and his followers fled to Christian
Ethiopia, to avoid the injustice and oppression of the Mecca unbelievers. The
Islamic call was spread by the enigres abroad, and the supporters at hone. Karl
Marx did not set foot in Leningrad until the revolution was successful. [sic]
What I wish to stress is that all liberating forces began with work abroad, coupled
with action at hone, in continuous coordination. mat is the course of world
struggle, of which we consider ourself one supporter. Our presence abroad allows
us to:

*Report our case on the international level, and to inforn all the world of the
Sudanese regime's worsening practises against the people of Sudan.

*Support, materially and morally, the opposition forces at hone. lie now have

armed organizations, trained on the latest weapons, based in the various reaote
areas of Sudan. We have our organized political cells, which the regime cannot get
at. That could not be done, were it not for the leadership's freedom of movement,
which would not be in our power, if we had renained inside Sudan, where it would be
easy to find us and throw us into the darkness of prison.

We have been able to gain material and political support from politically liberated
nations and organizations, through tireless contacts that we are nalting fron our
exile abroad.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bcononic Bankruptcy
[Question] kactly what do you have against the Sudanese regime?
Let us begin on the donestic level.

[Answer] Are you prepared to write a large volume? A- I going to be able to dictate
it to you in one sitting?

[Question] A volune, no...we have roon for the aiwle facts.
[Answer] You have permission to record.

There is police rule in the Sudan today, in collusion with a group of rulers who
doninate the country's assets. There are 20 million Sudanese people. but only a
snall group of individuals of the armed forces, some hidI-ranking officers in the
police force, and a handful of nilitie own the decision-asking power, own every-
thing. The najority are isolated; they are the Sudanese people, in nest of its
classes. Nenty nillion Sudanese are losing the siwlest necessities of a proper
social life. Their incomes are insufficient to cover 20 percent of their expenses.
The Sudanese people are in a state of political and economic subjugation. The
economy is facing bankruptcy; it exists on loans. This leans the deterioration of
the Sudanese pound's purchasing power. Today it is 10 percent of what it was in
1968. Prices have risen 12 tines over their level of 10 years ago. Inflation
continues its frightening esculation.

Prior to May 1979, there was not a single nillionaire in Sudan. Today, there are
nillionares by the scores, or rather, hundreds, while the Treasury is facing a
disgraceful deficit, and is printing banknotes without production or gold cover.
All social services are non-existent. There are neny sick who cannot find treat-
ment, or a bed in a hospital. There are nany of school age who cannot find a seat
in school, or a book. In a word, I can say that Sudan is starving today, its
body broken. The ragine is trying to cover up this tragic condition.

[Question] what about the donestic political situation?

[Answer] Clearly the regime has tied itself to the defeatist, capitulationist,
political and inerialist circle. The regine's leaders are the only ones in the

Arab World who publicelly approved of the Cap David agreenent. They were not even
content with that. On the contrary, they signed with Sedatist Egypt a mutual da-
fenae treaty, and the so-called econonic integration, which is s nesningless

phrase. Let us not forget the state-ant of the Sudmese president about his readiness
to establish foreign Anerican bases, Whether by leasing or lending or sale, or even
as a gift."

It is a policy of isolation from the Arab Co-mity, and its pan-Arab concerns.
The minim requested is condemnation of Carp David, and adherence to the Khartoun
conference's four "noes." This is support for the Arab policy against the Zionist
ens-y.

Accordingly, we consider the Sudanese regine to be the Egyptian regine'a partner
in damaging the Palestinian case. It is the one who expelled the PLO publically,

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTHCJAL.UBEZ(RULY

and in front of the entire Arab World. It locked up its offices in Khartoul, as
if the Palestinian right was a rejected matter!

[Question] But don't we clearly see the intent of the Egyptian-Israeli partnership?

[Answer] The imperialist plot begins in the-bosphorus, passing through the Suez
Canal and penetratine Sudan. The plan calls for the seizure of the Red Sea, and

the establishment of military bases in its ports. Sudan participates in the so-called
Nile Basin nations' conference. It is a conference aimed ultimately at channeling

the Nile waters to the Negev Desert. The Israelis, therefore, will have achieved

a part of their Old Testament drean, Whu'land, O Israel, from the Nile...to the
Euphrates."

Then, there is the war now going on in Lebanon, and the fact of the partition there,
the plan of the Haronite state, and the daily annihilation of the Palestinian
people, all of this, inter-connected links of the basic conspiracy.

[Question] Inasmuch as the Sudanese regime is this isolated, how do you explain
the fact that it stays in power?

[Answer] All I can say is that the Sudanese national popular movement and the
Sudanese opposition together, fron 1960 until now, have carried out nunerous military,
qasi-military, popular, student, trade-unionist and farmer uprisings. A year does
not pass but the regime faces frol the Sudanese opposition a series of violent
movements. '

This year, Sudan experienced the famous Darfur uprisings, when the entire province
was engulfed in civil disobedience. The masses there seized all parts of the pro-
vince, and many martyrs fell. Then, the total uprising followed in the province

of Kordofan, in which cars belonging to the so-called Socialist Uhion were burned,
and its offices destroyed. The people seized the province‘s capital, and the rest
of the regional cities. After that came the railroad workers' uprising, which is
the nerve system of transportation in vast and huge Sudan. The railway workers
stood firm in the face of fire, weapons, and the hesvily-srued security forces, which
dragged citizens froa their homes, and locked up their livestock, and used the
vilest forms of oppression and terror. Nevertheless, the workers stood steadfast.
demonstrating their courage with incidents that stunned the entire world, and they
are still steadfast. They were followed, in several movements, by the rest of the
trade unionists, despite the laws in Sudan forbidding strikes, and imposing
execution as punishment. I can say that all of this continues, and that popular
uprisings prevail in all parts of Sudan. Although they have not exploded in a

total and collective sense, that is attributable to other reasons, for which a solu-
tion must be found in the very near future. However, the revolution is now located
in the hearts of the Sudanese.

"hen Does the Erplosion Come?
[Question] Hhat are these reasons?
[Answer] First, let me assure you that the total explosion of the revolution is

only a few months away. As regards the reasons which you want to know, I shall
summarize them as follows:

22
FOR 0FFKJAI.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. The Sudanese popular opposition is not only directed against the Sudanese regime
itself, but against all those things that stir up the Sudanese people in various

and sundry forms. All of this has hastened Sadat and his allies to suppress this
revolution. You mat have heard of the recent meeting which President Numayri held
with officers of the armed forces of various ranks, after his trip to Egypt, and

the meeting with President Sadat in Aswan. He asked for more Egyptian forces to

be sent. Squadrons of Egyptian aircraft are still based inside Sudan, at Nasser
airbase and Jabal al-Awliya. There are in fact, trained and armed soldiers among
those Egyptians living among the population. They are dressed an civilian clothes,
and circulate among the citizens.

[Question] Do you consider President Numayri'a desire to resign to be true, or
merely a maneuver?

[Answer] It is theatrical. President Numayri gathered together the officers of
the armed forces; he told them that he was resigning, and asked for their views.

He asked them: “Shall I hand over power to civilians or to military?" Their
collective reply was that they had not participated a single day in governing.

and that the political apparatus of the Socialist Union was responsible for the
failure of the regime in dealing with economic and social crises. Numayri left
this meeting furious. When the officers insisted on seating with him again. he
told them again that he would resign next September. Nevertheless, the opposition,
along with the armed forces, does not believe a single word of what he said.

The gravity of what is happening in Sudan becomes clear, when we are aware that
President Numayri will be sending a military delegation to Hashington. headed by
his deputy, the commander in chief of the armed forces, 'Abd al-Majid Khalil, to
meet with the American Secretary of Defense. Numayri has entrusted the Egyptian
President, during his forthcoming visit to London on 2 August, to discuss on his
behalf a formula for coordination with NATO leaders. He personally will go to
Washington, after Sadat's trip, and before Menachen Begin arrives. The conspiracy,
in some of its aspects, in fact begins with the second meeting, which took place in
Athens, between Hahghoub Sulayman, minister of state for media affairs, in the
Office of the Presidency, and General Sharon, the Israeli minister of agriculture.

The contacts continue, through the Israeli ambassador in Cairo, Hoisha Shaaun, who

is, coincidentally, a Jew of Sudanese origin, who previously worked in the post of
directory of the Khartoum municipality. He is married to the daughter of the

previous rabbi of Jews in Sudan. He could be considered an expert in Sudanese affairs.

Therefore, you can see that the Sudanese opposition does not only face the Sudanese
regime itself, but also the Egyptian regime, Hashington, Tel Aviv, and those who
spin in the American-Zionist orbit.

We Are Allied with All
[Question] “hat is your position regarding the rest of the Sudanese opposition groups?

[Answer] I want to emphasise that the Sudanese opposition encompasses the entire
Sudanese region, against the ruling regime. with its various identities and back-
grounds. It is a broad and comprehensive opposition; no one can isolate a single
Sudanese citizen fro: this opposition. I mean that the Sudanese opposition had
gone beyond the political framework, and has become a collective masses opposition.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Accordingly, defining the framork fer the popular opposition is only a part of
the definition. The Sudanese popular opposition, with its allies and brothers in
conbat, encomasses the entire Sudanese people, representing them fully.

Our party. the Democratic Union, is one of the major leaders of this opposition,
since it began to oppose the regime only hours after its establishment on 25 Hay
1979. It has not concluded a truce; it has not ceased to fight for one hour. It
still insists on not participating with, nor negotiating with, nor reconciling

with this regime. It will not be content until the regine is completely eliminated.
It will stand against any regime, whether military or civilian, that succeeds it,
and will only accept cleete public freedoms and democracy, a revolutionary rule
of law. independence of the judiciary, and full, democratic popular representation
of the masses of the Sudanese people.

Standing with the Denocratic Union Party in these trenches are the Arab Socialist
Ba'thist Party (Sudanese Region), the Sudanese progressives, in their various forms,
and the over-whelning najority of the al-Ansar, with their leader, "the absent Inan"
al-I-ladi al—Mahdi, as well as the Southern opposition in its various organizations.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Ala-"ATARI Alr'ARABI

7005
C80: 6504/75 END

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY