APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPB2-00060R000200020007-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2041

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as Appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCU'RMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Honthlz Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office, Hashington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It» mum Ill-nu zoo a...)

   
   
   
   
    
   
  
  
  
    
     
    
  

This serial report contains information on socioeconouic. government. political,
and technical develop-ents in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

 

._———-

 

II. Doom" Anny»! a. Map...

    

Political Science _Inter-Arab Affairs __Libya _Sultanate
Sociology _x__Non.h African _xHauritania of Oman
Economics Af fairs Aﬂorocco _Syria
Culture (Social LAfghanistan _People's Demo- _Tunisia
Sciences) _§_Algeria cratic Republic _United Arab

Ethnology __Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _X__Egypt __Persian Gulf _x__Heatern Sahara
chhological LIran Area __Yenen Arab
Military Sciences X_Iraq _Qatar Republic

_Israel _Saudi Arabia

_§_ Jordan _Spaniah North

_Kuuait Africa

1 Lebanon _x Sudan

b lawman/Open rm Tm

¢.Couur.owm~n 50. 5C. 5K. 15
.‘i'.;L..;;.I‘§;;;::.'————

1’. M am ("an Inn:

llnlim ted Availability UNCLASSIFIED
3—way" awn—mum"

Sold by u-rrs
Sprinnlicld, Virginia 2216] UNCLASSIFI-

mo anon—Inn. u. mun"... .. m cutout row 211 «J!-
llum-Iy nus-w
Dal-01m 0' MW“
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2041

CONTENTS PAGE

um AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Events Connected With Sahara Problem Related
(Buds al-Husayn13AL-WADITH, 21 Sep 79)

pa

Peaceful Solution to Sahara Problem Proposed
(mmmn, 22 Sep 79) 7

Social Problems Afflict North Africa
(Editorial; 1.3 mm, 16-17 Sep 79) 1o

AFGHANISTAN
Briefs

Meetings With Yugoslavs l2
Amin Receives French Ambassador l2
Amin Receives Pakistan Ambassador 12
Amin Receives Iraqi Ambassaf r 12
Finance Minister Returns Mom Belgrade 12
Greeting Ihssage to DIRK 13
Rally To Support Amin 13
Amin Receives Indonesian Ambassador l3
Amin's Election Support 13
Official Ends om Visit 1h

mam

Return or Oppositionists Urged
(LB norms, 16-11 Sep 79) 15

Algeria's Political, Economic Situation Discussed
(Buds. al-Husayni; AL-HAHADITR, 5 Oct 79) 16
coxrsrvrs (contents ))

mm

Minister of Planning Discusses Plans for Future
('Abd-al-Razzaq 'Abd-al-Phjid Interview; AL-AHRAM,
17 Aug n) l0...O.I.O...OIOOOOOOOIOIOOUOI'IIOOOOOOI

Supreme Constitutional Court Law Promlgated
(AL-JARIDAH MW, 6 Sep 79)

Details on Universities' Guards thits Given
(Rif'nt Fayed; mm mum, 13 Oct 79)

Preliminary Report on Establishing Military Radical
Acadew
(AL-WM, 10 Oct n) 0000.000000000000000000000...

Ayatollah Nuri Criticizes Government Bureaucracy
(mm, 20 Sep 79)

Nation's Future Economic, Social Policies Spelled on.
(W, a &p 79) 0.0000000000000000.000.00000000

Drive To Make nation Self-Sufficient in Agriculture
Proposed
(mm, 20 &p n) O..-IOOIOOOOOOIOO0.0.00.0000...

Aral: Governor Accuses Komitehs of Terrorism
(mtoriu new”) OIOOOIOIIOIIOIQIOOOIOIO0.00.000.

Seminar on Economic Problems Discusses Smuggled mas
(W, 22 Sep D) 000.00.00.00000000.0.99.0000...

Experts Discuss Thorough Arabic Schooling
(mu, 20 &p 79) OIIOOOOOIOOOOOOIOOOQOQOOI0.0.00

Housing Minister Explains Policies to Seminar
(mm, 20 “p 79) 0000000000000000000000000000.00

Briefs
Death Threat to Arak Governor

Delays in Constructing Housing Complexes Explained
(Za'im al-Ta'i; AL-JMLRIYAB, 27 Aug 79)..........

-b-
comm-s (Continued)

Establishment of Integrated Automobile Industry Planned
(All- , 28A‘18n) IO.I...QIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Josmn

Briefs
New Industries
Phosphate Exports
Pareign Trade
Oil Refinery Expanded
Bank Deposits
Water Project
National Hater Plan
Technical Training Center

LEBANON

mommy mmc' Interview With Raymond Edde
(Raymond Edde Interview; my mum, h-18 Oct 79)

Interview With Ibrahim Qulaylst
(Ibrahim Qulaylnt Interview; AL-HAHADm, 21 Sep 79).

Finance Minister hplains Attempts To Bolster Revenues
(Ali el-Kbalil Interview; MBA! mm,
22-28 at n) 00...IOI..00.000.00IOOOOOOODOOODIOOIOOO
MAURITANIA

mm Heydalle Seeking Clearer-mt Support From France
(Paul Belts; LE mm, 18 Sep 79)

”0000

Governor Named for New Province of It‘rane
(mm 80m, 19 &p 79) OOOOOCOOIOOOODOOOOOOI0.0.0...

Intonation on Installation of Governor of Ifrsne
(MAROC som, 20 Sep 79)

Briefs
Denial of um President

SUDAN

Opposition Leader Says Revolution Against Numsyri Imminent
(Hussyn 'Uthmn mastu- Interview; AL BMW,
2, 6 Sep .9) essence-cooI.enus.oesoouosooss-ooooeeees

-¢-
comma (Continued) page
wesrm 3mm

Eight. Reporters Confirm Serious Moroccan Defeat.
(mmel Junqua; LB m, 19 Sep 79) 123

Report of Energency Plan for Wed macho!)
(Men Azzam; L'opmml, 20 Sep 19) 125
EVENTS CONNECTED WITH SAHARA PROM RELATED
London Ala-HAWADITH in Arabic 21 Sep 79 pp 22, 23

[Article by lluda al-ilusayni: "Morocco and Algeria Face to Face: the Mili-
tary and the Political Balance Shift and the Conciliation Approaches"]

[Text] Algerian President Chadli Bendjedid has so far attended two sun-nit
conferences outside Algeria since he succeeded Bouledienne to the presi-
dency. These conferences are: the African Su-it Conference in Honrovia,
the capital of Liberia. and the Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Rations in
Havana. the capital of Cuba. At both-conferences the Algerian president re-
nsined quiet like a sphinx; he did not utter a single word.

Observers disagree about explaining this silence on the part of Algeria's
president. Il'here are those who say that Chadli has nothing to say. but the
more likely explanation for his silence is that the Algerian president does
not want to say anything that would further conplicate the situation with
Morocco.

A neeting was to have taken place between the Algerian president and the
king of Morocco at the Monrovia Smit. But this nesting did not take place
because it was resented by Libyan President Mu'amr al-Qadhdhafi. When
al-Qadhdhafi found out about the proposed nesting, he sent a Polisario
division equipped with heavy weapons and rockets. and it attacked the city
of Tan-Tan. It was this operation that foiled the meeting between Chadli
and hasssn. The Algerisns feared that Libya may control the Polisario, and
they would thus lose this card. They wanted to show that they were the only
ones who were responsible for the Polisario in spite of the fact that Libya
was supporting than against Morocco. 'l‘o effire their control over the Po-
lisario, the Algerisns sent a force of Bedouin fighters who occupied the
Lebouira area for 2 days. A fierce battle with Moroccan troops took place
there, and King Esssan decided after this battle not to go to Honrovia and
not to meet with Chsdli.

This tine the Algerian president was not the only one who was silent. His
silence was shared by Libyan President Ku's-ar sl-Qedhdhafi. In the speech
he delivered on the 10th anniversary of the first of Septeder Revolution in
which be commended Saudi Arabia. Kuwait and the Arab Gulf states. the Libyan
president did not closely or renotely touch upon the problen of the Sahara.
Arab delegations who were participating in the Libyan festivities on that
day interpreted this as an indication of a significant change in the Libyan
position because, according to one of the Arab enbassadors in Tripoli,
"Libya had begun to recognize the danger of the game after al-Sadat declared
his deternination to send nilitary aid to Morocco."

Has the balance begun to shift in Morocco's favor?

Tunisian circles respond to this question by saying that the Moroccan situa-
tion has inproved militarily and internationally and that Morocco has become
less isolated that it was previously. It was for this reason that Tunisian
President Babib Bourguiba thought that the tile was appropriate for his to
intervene personally in an attenpt to bring King Hassan and the Algerian
president together in a aeeting in Tunisia for the purpose of establishing
a quick solution to the problem. The fact that the Moroccan king accepted
the Tunisian invitation inediately indicates a relatively stronger negotia-
ting poeition that differs free the position that forced his to boycott the
Monrovia Conference.

But Algeria's reticence about the Tunisian invitation makes the proposed
meeting unlikely at the present tine. Althoudx Moroccan circles are incli-
ned to believe that the Algerian president's response to nest King Bassan in
Tunisia was "a man's response" to the lbroccan eonerch's refuel to attend
the Monrovia neeting, French diplomtic circles think that a nesting is still
possible. They enphssize that this nesting will take place in Paris, and,
according to then, it will be sponsored by French President Giscard d'Estaing
"because the broad features of the French plan to settle the dispute have
succeeded . "

Hhat are the broad features of the French plan?

The French plan. as it is viewed by sources close to the Quei D'orsay (the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs). is based on rseoving Mauritania fron the
struggle and on neutralising Libya. The struggle would thus becou a bi-
lateral struggle between Morocco and Algeria, and it could be solved in a
meeting between lessen and Chadli. The French think that the possibility for
a solution does exist "because the najor powers do not want North Africa to
explode. at least not at this stage."

The French describe their plan as "intelligent and long-winded." As the
aforementioned sources state, "The plan serves the interests of Morocco with-
out hurting either Algeria or French interests in Algeria."

It is the opinion of the French sources that the develop-eats which led to
Mauritanie's withdrawal free: the Sahara after the Algiers Agresnent between
the present Mauritanian govern-ant and the Polisario did at the seas tine
bring about an improvensnt in the Moroccan nilitary position for the follow-
ing considerations:
First, Morocco was cospelled to defend Mauritania and both the northern and
southern parts of the Western Sahara in the past. Moroccan troops were
scattered from Tindouf on the Algerian borders to Mauritania and along

the Sahara. The fact that the troops were spread out throughout this vast
terrain was a reason for the dissolution of the Moroccan army and the source
for its exhaustion. But Mauritania's withdrawal from the struggle did re-
lieve the Moroccan troops somewhat of the responsibility for defending Mauri-
tania in accordance with the 1976 Mutual Defense Treaty between the two
countries. The circle of operations for the Moroccan arIIy shrank so that
the stay was protecting specific and well-known borders where its presence
had become heavy in uteriel and nunbers.

Second, a U. S. position that is more supportive of Morocco than that of the
past has merged. The Anericans decided to supply Morocco with modern wea-
pons to strengthen it. This decision followed a strong political ceepaign
that was led by a mater of influential congressmen and was eatraced by for-
mer Minister of Energy Janes Schlessinger. Morocco benefited from the U. 5.
political caspaign that grew after the fall of the Shah in Iran and, after
that, of Sonora in Nicaragua. Charges inside the country and abroad that
Washington '51“ abandoning its friends" were becosing more esphatic.

Third, al-Sadat nade a surprise announce-ant on the eve of the Conference of
Non-Aligned Nations in havens that he was ready to assist Morocco silitarily
in spite of King ﬁassan's position against the Camp David Accords and his
adherence to the Baghdad Su-nit resolutions. Egypt did in fact send Morocco
weapons and transport airplanes (18 Hercules 0-130 airplanes were sent).

The french believe that it was the Anericans who encouraged al-Sadat to

take this position. They thus killed three birds with one stone. By doing
so they strengthened Morocco's military position; they reduced al-Sadat's
isolation f ran the Arabs; and they aroused the fears of Algeria and Libya
about the possibility that the Egyptian-Israeli alliance lay enter as a party

ageth than to keep then from intruding into the struggle to a harmful. de-
gree.

It scene that sl-Sadat's initiative was effective because, according to a
statement made by a Palestinian official, Yasir 'Arafat. the chairmn of the
Executive Conittee of the PLO quickly became interested in the matter "so
that the organization would not lose Morocco's support." Abu 'Aalaar sent
his political adviser Bani sl-Easan fron Havana to Rabat where he net for two
hours with King hassaa. [After the nesting] al-llasan node a statenent sup-
porting the Moroccan position. The Palestinian official told Alf-BAMBI“.
"This position that Abu 'Anar has taken is due to the fact that entering
into any confrontation with Morocco. whose people stand mitsd behind the
king on the question of the Sahara, would signify pushing Morocco to align
itself with al-Sadat's casp. But the liberation organisation is concerned
about keeping the Moroccan position co-itted to the Baghdad Strait and
supportive of the liberation organization without reservations."
Palestinian interest in the question of the Sahara is not new. In 1975 dur-
ing the final session of the Arab Sunnit Conference in Rabat, the king spoke
about his deter-ination to liberate the Sahara from the Spanish people, [and
he said this] in the presence of the late Algerian President Bouari Bounc-
dienne. “men the king turned over the floor to Yasir 'Arafat, he joked
with him and said. "And now a word from Brother Abu 'Ansr, who is called
\‘asir 'Arsfat." Ahu 'Ansr expressed his support for the king's efforts to
liberate the Sahara, and he said, "Re have no horses or noney to offer you,
but we are willing to place our experience in guerilla warfare at the dis-
posal. of King Massan to liberate the Sahara fro- the Spanish people." Five
years after this incident, the situation was turned upside down: the Span-
ish people, who had given up the Sahara to Morocco, recognized the Polisario.
and suddenly Yasir 'Arafat was in Madrid.

When King Hssasn was boycotting the Monrovia Sui-it, it so happened that

the "Jerusalem Cos-ittee" was neeting in Morocco. This conittee had grown
out of the conference of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Islanic
Countries that was convened in the city of Yes. 'Abd-al-Muhsin Abu Mayzar
was representing the PLO at that meeting. During the seeting Abu Mayrer
beta-e indisposed and was taken to the hospital where the Moroccan Minister
of Foreign Affairs M'Bsned Boucetta visited hil. Hhile in the hospital the
Palestinian representative proposed to Boucetta an idea that he phrased in
the form of a question. Abu Mayaar told Boucetta, "th don't you give Al-
geria a moral victory and recognize the Polisario? After you do this a meet-
ing can be held in which all the parties concerned in the struggle of the Sa-
hara can participate and you would investigate the matters of the area."

Boucetta left the hospital and went inediately to the royal palace where he
informed the king of this idea, and the king approved of it. Ahu Mayrar
thought that he had succeeded in his aission. and he sent a cable to Yasir
'Arafat and at the sane tine notified Syrian officials. Syrian action was
faster than Palestinian action. The Syrian president, throng: his amassador
in Morocco sent a letter to ﬂassan telling hie. "Is it true that you are will-
ing to nest with the Polisario? If what we have heard is true. this is a
significant turning point." King Hassan sent a handwritten letter in which
he said that he was willing to nest with the Poliaario to advise those who
are free the Sahara to go back to their aother country and to advise those
from Mauritania to go back to their country.

Morocco adhered to this position, and even at the Havana Conference Prime
Minister Msati Bouabid delivered a speech in which he said, "th did we
not hear of something called the Polisario during the Spanish occupation of
the Sahara? Not even in the Conference of Ron-Aligned Countries that was
held in Algeria in 1973, did either Algeria or any of the other countries
make aeration of anything called the Polisario. Ever since 1963 at the Uni-
ted Nations it was Morocco who was the spokes-an for the Sahara, and there
was no other voice from the countries, from the organizations or frost the
parties claining otherwise."
Then Bouabid said, "The Sahara extends from the Atlantic Ocean (the western
Sahara) to the Red Sea (the Eastern Sahara). Why isn't Morocco allowed to
have its stretch of the Sahara while Algeria and Libya are allowed to have
theirs? Accordingly. if you wanted to raise the question of the Sahara, it
must comprise the entire area from the ocean to the Red Sea."

And now, what is the balance of profit and loss on the geographical and poli-
tical scenes?

King Hassan has so far lost Mauritania, and he has given up Tindouf to A1-
garia. He cannot under any circumstances lose the Sahara since he has tied
his future and the future of his throne to it. On the international scene
he has won the support of the United States and has regained the support
of Prancr-King Massan made three secret visits to the French capital re-
cently. He has accepted military support from Egypt without losing [the
support of] the PLO.

But what remains (for reckoning] is the Soviet Union with whose weapons the
Polisario is fighting. Hhat is the Soviet Union's position? "hat is King
Massan's position on the Soviet Union? Hill the king exert pressure on the
Soviets because their bloc in Havana took a stand against Morocco in the
question of the Sahara?

The Moroccans are saying that their king will not allow the Soviets to take
phosphate and fish from him and then take a stand against him on the Sahara.
But the Moroch add to this that the Russians did recognize that the Sa-
hara was Moroccan territory when they signed the fishing agreeeent with
Morocco. The agreement does mention that the Soviets have the right to

fish in Moroccan waters that extend from Tangiers to al-Dakhilah, which is
located in the southern section of the Sahara, the section that Mauritania
gave up and Morocco annexed to its territory. "There is an explicit Soviet
recognition in this agreement that the entire Sahara is Moroccan. The fact
that the Russians are taking phosphate from the Sahara and fish from the sea
signifies that they also recognize the land and the coast lines as Moroccan."
This is what the Moroccans are saying about the Soviets.

hmat are the expectations after these developments?

French sources are stating that if Algeria were to carry out operations now
against Morocco, these operations would take place inside vital Moroccan
territory. and this would cause Morocco to carry out operations inside A1-
gerian territory. Incidents of this kind have in fact occurred inside Al-
geria as a kind of Moroccan warning (See the "Arab Findings“ in the last is-
sue of AL-HAHADITH).

These sources add that Algeria is now experiencing a difficult period of
transition and that the direct Egyptian interference will nake it fearful
of Egypt's direct interference in the matter of the Sahara via Morocco.
In the end Algeria will accept a formula for a direct understanding with
Morocco.
But if an Algerian-Moroccan agreement were to take place, on this basis. what
would be the future of the Poliaario?

So far, there is no definitive answer to this question. But the whispers

that are being heard in Moroccan and European diplomatic circles indicate
that Mauritania will become the lot of the Polisario.
PEACEFUL SOLUTION T0 SAHARA NOBLE! PROPOS-
Paris AL-MUS‘IAQBAL in Arabic 22 Sep 79 p 18

[Article: "AL-MUS‘I‘AQBAL Publishes Details of Peaceful Plan To Solve the
Crisis of the Sahara Between Morocco and Algeria; Sahara State To Be Ee-
tabliahed in Rio de Oro; Saguia Bl llanra To Be Annexed by Morocco; Algeria
To Be Given an Outlet to the Atlantic; Area Resources To Be Put to Profit-
able Use vith Libyan Funds and French Technology"]

[Text] Following the proclamation of the Peace Agreenent between Mauritania
and the Polisario Front in Algeria last August 5. relations between Morocco
and the weak party in the struggle for the Sahara, Mauritania, deteriorated
to the point that some people believed that the Arab Maghreb was on the verge
of a certain war between Algeria and Morocco and that that war nay engulf
other Arab and international parties. This was especially because Morocco
had announced i-ediately [after the Peace Agraeuent] that Tirie El-Gharbia
(the Mauritanian part of the Sahara) was Moroccan territory and had raised
the Moroccan flag on that area. This increased the intranaigence of the
positions of both Algeria and Mauritania.

But those who have secret intonation in Algeria and Morocco are certain
that both countries are avoiding var because of difficult donestic and eco-
nonic conditions. The undeclared four-years' war between the two countries
has eadlauated then: to a large extent. In addition, [the outcome of] a crip-
pling war on the shifting and vast sands of the Sahara is not at all cer-
tain for any one of the two parties.

If a military solution is considered to be unlikely by the two parties that
are directly concerned, it is not acclained by the renaining areb and inter-
national partiea. The United States of Anerica and the Soviet Union are
quite interested in preserving their econoaic interests in the area. It
seem that washington is supporting Morocco politically, but its economic
interests are nore closely tied with Algeria because 80 percent of Algeria's
basic resources, natural gas, is nonopolized by U. S. coapanies. At the
same tine the Soviet Union needs phosphate froa Morocco even though it ap-
pears to be politically on the side of Algeria.
hence, nilitary warfare has been replaced by diplomatic warfare in the Arab
Maghreb. On this scene it seem that Algeria had scored a number of vic-
tories by virtue of the fact that a large outer of African and nonaligned
nations had recognized the Polisario Front. This made Morocco feel that is
was isolated diplomatically on the international scene.

But this situation did not prevent a nunber of Arab countries. beginning
with Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan and also including Tunisia and the Pm, from
offering to mediate between the contending parties in order to find a solu-
tion that would please everybody. Tunisian President liabib Bourguiba sent a
message to King Hassan II and President Chadli 2 weeks ago and invited each
one of them to a meeting that would be held to solve the problem of the Sa-
hara peacefully. Algeria objected to the invitation. affirming that the
dispute was "between Morocco and the Polisario Front." King Hassan 11:, how-
ever, personally welcomed the Tunisian initiative. The most recent media-
tion attempts [in this area] were those that were carried out by Mr Yasir
'Arafst, chair-an of the PLO, a few days ago during a visit he made to A1-
giere and Rabat. Because of the moral weight 'Arafat has on the Arab scene.
the two capitals preferred that there be no discussion in the media about
the kind of mediation that took place or the extent of its success. But an
informed source in Algiers told AIPHUSTAQBAL that 'Arafat's mediation was

an extension of other Arab mediation efforts, and that he was careful during

this mediation not to have the question of the Sahara dispute affect Arab
solidarity.

The same informed source emphasized that there was no possibility for war
between Horocco and Algeria and that that had been the case ever since the
problem of the Sahara surfaced during the Green Harsh that Morocco carried
out in Rove-her 1975 and in the course of the Tripartite Madrid Agreement
that followed. This is the agreement which Spain recently abrogated when it
recognised the Poliserio Pront as the representative of the people of the
Sahara.

The informed source added. "There is a peaceful solution to the problem; it
was devised ever since that date by several parties. and it is now sinering
on the back burner. The purpose of the diplomatic war that is being waged
now is only to give this peaceful solution the final form that would please
all the parties. that is, a no-win no-lose forurle."

AL-HUSTAQBAL was able to obtain the broad outlines of the plan for a peace-

ful solution to the Sahara crisis in the Arab Maghreb. They nay be su-sri-
zed as follows:

First. a referendum is to be held in the Western Sahara under the supervision
of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and in the pres-

ence of representatives of all the concerned parties. This referendu is to
include two parts:

1. A referendum in the Tiris El-Gharbia area (Rio de Oro) whose outcome,
by virtue of the tribal relations that exist between this area and North

8
Mauritania. would be the establishment of a Sahara state under the leader-

ship of the Polisario Front. This state would proclais itself a federal
republic with Mauritania.

2. A referendt- in the area of Saguia Bl Basra (the Moroccan part of the
Sahara) whose outcose, by virtue of the tribal relations that also exist
between this area and South Morocco, would be the endorsement of the pres-
ent situation. that is, the proclamation of the final return of the area to
Moroccan sovereignty.

Second. the implementation of a huge econonic project from which all parties
concerned would benefit is to be undertaken. This project consists of the
joint utilization of the mineral resources that are in the area, that is,
the phosphate of Sagui Bl Haste, the iron of This Bl-Gharbis and the lines
of the Algerian Tindouf area that have been closed and unutilized since the
Algerian-Moroccan border dispute in 1963. The backbone of this huge project
would be French technology, Libyan finances, and Algerian, Moroccan and
Mauritanian labor, especially the thousands of iuigrant workers who will be
laid off by France in the next 3 years.

Third, Algeria is to get an outlet to the Atlantic Ocean for the purpose of
exporting some of its resources, and especially for building natural gas
pipelines from the Algerian Sahara so it can export the gas to the markets
in North America.

‘Ihis peaceful plan to solve the problem of the Sahara is now getting the
blessing of almost all the parties. Only the final touches resain before it
can be presented to those concerned with the latter. AL-MUSTAQBAL has
learned that only one party has not yet given its final approval to the
plan. and that is, Algeria. Algeria is waiting for the emergency confer-
ence of the Front Liberation Party to be convened. This conference is ex-
pected to convene next November. me conference will make a decision about
all the issues that are pending in Algeria and especially those of develop-
ment, and of Arab and international foreign politics. AL-MUSTAQBAI. has also
learned that the year 1980 will witness the onset of the implementation of
the proposed peaceful solution for the area of Arab Maghreb in its entirety.

From now on and until such a date, Arab, African and world-wide diplomatic
mediations and actions to complete the script of a solution will be revealed
so that the creation of this solution would be sound.

8592
C50: “002
SWIM. ROBLENS AFFLIC‘I.‘ mm AFRICA
Paris LB MONDB in French 16-17 Sep 79 pp 1, 2
[Bditorialz "The Parasites of the Maghreb"]

[Text] Algeria which, during the past decade, gave the impression of
having mastered its development, is now facing some social problems in
its turn, following Morocco and Tunisia. For 2 years strikes have
multiplied in several sectors even though the press avoids talking about
them. In the large cities, particularly in Algiers, the quality of life
and the environment have been downgraded continuously over the years:
overcrowded living quarters, water shortages, sparsely-stocked markets
and feelings of insecurity in some sections. In a sharp reaction to this
existing state of affairs the authorities have, for the past 2 weeks,
engaged in a battle against the "social scourges and parasitism," particularly
in the capital city.

In imitation of the lack of vigor prevalent in a number of Third Horld
countries the Algerian rulers have generally pursued a policy of voluntarism,
which has often given spectacular results in a good many areas. for
instance Algeria, independent since 1962, has twice as many children in
school--more than three million of char-than Morocco, which has the same
number of inhabitants--18 million--but regained its sovereignty already

in 1956. Algeria has assured its economic takeoff as well at a rapid pace.
But the results obtained have been at the expense and to the detriment of
agriculture and of some social sectors. Are free medical care and social
security, unknown in most of the neighboring countries, and intensive
schooling, sufficient cupensntion for the rural exodus, for the overpopu-
lation of the cities and for the fact that young people in increasing
numbers hang around the streets and engage in "illegal activities" when
opportunity arises? .

'l'he "parasites" denounced and tracked down by the authorities did not fall
from the sky, however; they are the result of a development process put
into effect by the state. It is also shocking to see then the same state
having them run down with rubber truncheon blows in a capital city that
seems to be "in a state of siege" at certain hours. Comaenting on this
"operation of purification" in the capital, M. Mohamed Yahyaoui, the co-
ordinator of the m, explained that "the objective is to contribute to the
education of the citizen."

10
One may ask why the state doesn't make better use of its media of information
to assure the civic discipline of its citizens, in particular those of

rural origin, who have invaded the cities and are ignorant of the restraints
that living in them imposes.

Faced with problems which they do not succeed in mastering some govermnents
resort only too often to premature flight or to repression. For instance,
beyond crystallizing national sentiment on the Western Saharan affair

the "Green March" organized in 1975 was a way for Morocco that permitted

the postponement, though not prevention, of '.‘~.:- outbreak of a grave economic
and social crisis then developing in the country. Similarly in

March of 1978, barely 2 months after the blooiv revolt in Tunis, the
Tunisian parliament rediscovered s 1966 project to track down its own
"parasites." The law adopted provided that every citizen between the

ages of 18-30, unable to prove either employment or enrollment in school

or in a vocation training establishment, would be compelled to spend an
indeterminate period in a "civilian service."

The ”slips" that occurred in the internal planning of the different
countries of North Africa are the more regrettable as they are added

to the regional tensions and conflicts, of which that over the Western
Sahara is the most serious because it has blocked a building up of the
Maghreb that started 10 years ago and was a development that muld have set

an example in the midst of an Arab world shaken periodically by the
conflict with Israel.

9291
680: M00

11
BRIEFS

KEETINGS WITH YUGOSLAVsnAhdul Karim Hisaq, minister of finance and chief
of the Afghan delegation at the board of governors conference of the World
Bank and International Monetary Fund, which is being held in Belgrade, had
discussions yesterday on topics of mutual interest with the deputy prime
minister [as heard, presumably vice president of federal executive council]
of Yugoslavia and the minister of comaerce [as heard] of that country. lie
also eat with the vice president of the World bank and discussed World
Bank loans and grants for a number of development projects in Afghanistan.
[Text] [Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT 6 Oct 79 CF]

AKIN RECEIVES FRENCH AMBASSADORu-The intonation office of the ainistry of
foreign affairs reports tint Hafizollah Anin, secretary general of the Cen-
tral Co-ittee of the People's Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and prime
sinister, received HE Georges Perruche, French ambassador in Kabul, at the
People's House at 1330 this afternoon. [Text] [Kabul Domestic Service in
Dari 1600m40ct 79 GP] '

AMI“ RECEIVES PAKISTAN ADBASSADOR—At 1330 this afternoon, Hafisollah Aein.
secretary general of the Central Conittee of the People's Denocratic Party
of Afghanistan, president of the Revolutionary Council and prime minister,
received HE Risa Pirachs, ambassador of Pakistan in Kabul, for a farewell
meeting. The tern of mission of the above ambassador in Afghanistan has
come to an end. [Tent] [Kabul Doeestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT 6 Oct 79 GP]

AKIN RECEIVES IRAQI MASSADOR-Jafisollah Alain, secretary general of the
Central Connittee of the People's Daocratic Party of Afghanistan, president
of the Revolutionary Council and prise minister. received a courtesy call
at the People's house at 1‘00 hours this afternoon from Iraqi Ambassador
Pathi Hussyn al-‘Ali. [Text] [labul Domestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT 9 Oct
79 GP]

FINANCE MINISTER RETURNS mm BEISRADE—Abdul Karin Misaq, Politburo menber
of the Central Co-Iittee of the People's Deencndc Party of Afghanistan

and minister of finance, who headed the Afghan delegation to the World Bank
and International Monetary Fund annual conference in Belgrade, returned home
today. He stated upon his arrival that the bank officials pledged coopera-
tion and expansion with regard to projects in Afghanistan. While in Belgrade,

12
the Afghan delegation had meetings with the delegations from Laos and
Vietnam and discussed topics of mutual interest. Abdul Karim Hisaq also
attended a banquet given by the Iranian minister of finance and discussed
the matters of mtual interest to Afghanistan and Iran with him. [Text]
[Kabul Domestic Service in Dari 1600 GMT 9 Oct 79 GP]

GREETING MESSAGE TO DPRK—A congratulatory message has been comunicated on
behalf of the Central Cossaittee of the People's Denocratic Party of Afghani-
stan addressed to the Central Co-ittee of the Horkers' Party of Korea in
Pyongyang, the capital of that country, on the occasion of the anniversary
of the establishment of the Korean Uorkera' Party. [Text] [Kabul Radio in
Dari to EurOpe 1900 an 10 Oct 79 Lb]

RALLY TO SUPPORT AKIN-om support of the resolution by the extraordinary
plenum of the Central Conittee of 16 September 1979, rallies and marches
are staged daily by various Khalqi organizations supporting the appoint-
ment of Hafizollah Aain as secretary general of the Central Committee of

the People's Democratic Party 01' Afghanistan. president of the Revolutionary
Council and prime minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. Among
others, participants in these rallies and marches included the preliminary
party organization of the ministry of planning and the family planning of-
fice of the same ainistry. Mohammad Sediq 'Alemyar, minister of planning,
delivered a lengthy speech addressed to participants and said: "From now
on, under the slogan of "inunity, legality and justice," our toiling people
vill be able to lead their own honorable lives and defend courageously the
fruits of revolution until their last breath." [Text] [Kabul Domestic Ser-
vice in Dari 1600 cm 8 Oct 79 GE]

AKIN RECEIVES INDONESIAN AMBASSADORnHafizollah Allin, secretary general of
the Central Conittee of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan,
president of the Revolutionary Council and prime minister. received a
countesy cell at 1400 today at the People's Rouse from About-Rahman
[Conadedis], Indonesian ambassador in Kabul. [Text] [Kabul Domestic Ser-
vice in Dari 1600 an 8 Oct 79 GP]

AHIN'S ELECTION SUPPORT-om resolution of the 16 September extraordinary
plenum of the Central Co-ittee of the People's Democratic Party of Afghani-
stan, on the election of Rafizollah Amin, heroic commander of the Great Savr
Revolution, as secretary general of the Central Con-ittee of the People's
Democratic Party of Afghanistan, president of the Revolutionary Council and
prime minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, as well as the
appointment of the members of the co-ission for drafting the constitution
were today supported by thousands of our noble people at Grand Khalqi meet—
ings, and rallies in the capital. and provinces. At a grand meeting held for
his purpose by conmsrce ministry officials at that ministry, 'Abdoloqoddua
Ghorbandi, co-erce sinister, made a passionate speech, saying: We are
dutybound to provide guaranteed conditions in order that the people my
enjoy a constructive life imbued with happiness and enthusiasm in the light
of immunity, legality and justice. And I give you the news that our con-
stitution will be the most democratic constitution that has hitherto existed

in the world. [Excerpt] [Kabul Domestic Service in Pashto 1530 GMT 7 Oct
79 L0]

13
OFFICIAL ENDS GDR VISIT-~91“ puma Suns, member of the Politburo of the
Central Conitee of the Peop1e's Democratic Party of Afghanistan and the
“his“? 0f hither 8nd vocational education, who had gone to the Gerun
Democtatic Republic to participate in the 30th anniversary of the establish-
ment of the German Denocratic Republic, left that country for Afghanistan

the day before yesterday. At Berlin airport the deputy prise ninistet and

the ministry 0’ “Chunky and sciences of that country. and Path Gol Hound,
the ambassador. and where of the Afghan Embassy in Berlin. were present tobid

farewell to Professor Sums and the delegation accompanying hin- [Text] [Kabul
in English to Europe 1900 (in 10 Oct 79 LB]

CSO: 6920
WIN 0? OPPOSITIONISTS URGKD
Paris LB MONDB in French 16-17 Sep 79 p 2

[Text] H. Mohamed Boudiaf, Algerian oppositioniet and
founder of the P88 (Party of the Socialist Revolution)

in 1962, now living at Kenitra in Morocco, has written

to us concerning some adjustments in an article he cites
(LAMONDB 31 August) and we extract here some of his principal

points:

I have taken a clear position to the Western Sahara conflict in my declaration
of 31 December end reiterate the conclusion: "I am convinced of being
listened to when I raise a cry of alarm directed at Algerian men and

women. be they inside or outside the country, to oppose with all their

might the disastrous involvement which could lead us to a fratricidal
confrontation."

In taking that position I merely defended one of the ideas for which I

have fought for 39 years: to have friendship, cooperation, solidarity and
peace among the people of north Africa. I am also firmly convinced that

as long as people presently in power continue to ignore that objective our
region will remain divided and unable to resist in the battles for influence
that are now racking the African Continent. If. for defending such ideas,
I am being accused of "compromising" vith [lessen II or any other chief of
state, that is a tremendous confusion of values....

Concerning what the newspapers qualify as overture and which consists

of the offer of some "acts of clemency" and permission of return to
Algiers to certain oppositionists, as sign of a fresh beginning, I believe
that the only freedan of choice offered to oppositioniste who want to
return to their country is to live in obscurity and silence, with the
possibility to integrate with the cohorts of opportunists and beggars

that populate the avenues of power since the first day of independence.
Given such conditions there are still some Algeriene who will decline

and I have the honor to be one of them!

9291
C80: 4400 15
AMERIA'S POLITICAL, BCONNIC SITUATIOI‘ 131301.385!)
london AL-HAUADITK in Arobic 5 Oct 79 1) 2‘6

[Articlo by Huis ol-Hmmis “ﬂay Rolooood Don Dolls For ‘Publicity.’ So no
mm to you tho mat-go to Hocool']

[Toxt] Porosi- Algorion Prooidont Ahood Don Bollo's roquoot for mission to
go to nocco to pox-ton tho roliaiou duty of pilgri-go boo confusod tho A1-
gorion gmmoont. Tho Algorion loodorship hold s ssrios d outings to dioo
cuso tho nttor. ospociolly troo tho otsndpoint of politicol nporcusoioos on
tho doosstic ocsno in coso non Dolls loovoo tho country on! altos oohrroooing
ototooonto, or nfuoos to roturn to Algorio.

In Psris. s for-or con-ado of Bon Bollo soil! thot tho tor-or possidont Id.
his roqusst bocsuso ho sctusm onto to pontoro tho pilgrim. it tho osoo
tioo. ho roots to notiiy doosotic on! nob public opinion thst his rolooso
was s ”publicity” rslooos on! nothing non-o. boom” ho still dooo not onJoy
troodool

non Bollo'o friond om thst oooo visitors to non Bollo on thst ho sooso to
ho soolom tron tho rsligiou standpoint on! opoob with ohviou rolieiou
oxubonnco, ho it in junction; roli‘iooo coxooonios or in boiu ohoorbsd in
Iolooic concopto.

Amman sskod non Bollo's triond mothor tho for-or Algorion wooidont
intondo to nouo politiosl sctivity in cooo ho is roolly solo-sod on! pino
hiomlltnodoo. ﬂoooidthotbonkolloionotthinkiudthototwooont.
but hio liool docisioo doyooio on tho politicol odjutoonts an»; phoo dur-
in; tho silout strvulo for yous: hotsoon Prsoidsnt Ghodli mum on Port:
Ioodor Hobo-so Soloh rshiooui.

Thou-itotpoosrinncorionuhostrodiotincthoodoinodolicotohsl-
onco.siocsbothofthoomtryin‘togotohoodooutimlystthoupsnooot
tho othor.hoitoothsdooosticorthotoroia lovol. Prositiont audli's
rolotioosvithmncoontnosntohovuym.mmhottorthonthoy
oorodnringthotiooottholotohosidontamimuno. aoiotryinc
to oxponi thooo rolotions utholuroosonlovol. Prooidont Mli's onnomos-
oont othis scooytoncs of on mitotic: to vioit Dol‘iu. tho soot of tho
www.coooomthishoodin‘.

16
But tho dooootic ooono io otiu mo upon-tout. ond io govornod on tho one
hond byodolicoto bolonooertpolitieol fecooo. end antho othorhondbyon
unotoblo ocenenic on: politicol oitmtien. ‘l‘horotoc'o. tho Algoriono coll tho
prooont otogo through which thoir country io poooing o 'tnnoitien otogo."
ovon thou): ot prooont thoy think it unlikoly thot Poo-nor Prooidont Ahood Don
Bollo will roturn to ploy o tundooontol rolo. eporotin; on tho booio of o
fooou Algorion nation ”neon: loovoo pewor dooo not nturn to it.“ Howovor,
thoy oro ooying thot Don Dollo in o opociol cooo. bocouoo it would bo losicol
for hio to roturn to ploy tho rolo ed oovier in cooo tho bolonco :o dioturbod
All! tho oitmtion aplodoo.

Tho oignificonco e! tho mount bolonoo io thot it involvoo on obviouo rivoh-y
hotwoon the ow ond tho civilion crooniootieno. oven than; Iohiooui hoo on
oxtonoion within tho orood fed-coo in viow of tho toot thot {or o o loo; tioo
ho woo hood of tho "Chorcol' wor college. whoro o lorgo nnobor of micoro
aodutod mdor bio. on! ovon though tho now wooidont. who goinod hie position
with orny copper-t. in trying to crooto hio own boooo in tho odoiniotrntion and

tho potty.

But tho ocenooic on! oeciol oituotien in tho mooning, wont olooont. no tho
Algoriono thonoolvoo ony. Alcorio io otill oconooicolly bound by tho plono
of tho not ton yooro. lod by Boloid Abdooooloo. who boood Algorion oconooic
policy on giving priority to hoovy indmtry. ho it in tho potrochoniool or tho
iron on! otool oocter. which put ouicultm'o in oocend place. Bocouoo of tho
iobolonoo which occmod oo o roonlt of thot. louodiono took o poroonol in-
toroot in outcnlturo through nan-ion rotor-n. notionoliootien ed loud. ond
ito utiliootien oithor through individuol oxploitotion or ocean-ding to tho
oociolint cooporotivo oyoton.

Tho policy follewod by Boloid lod to ortonoivo oxponditmoo on big indmtriol
projocto. which bmdonod Algeria with dobto in excooo at tho production coyo-
city. Shun-Ly. motion soled-o. no it woo corriod out, hooponod opicul-
turol production to o groot ortont. Aloo. tho nothod followed by Boloid in
industrialiootien woo thot of internotienol bidding for contracting plonto
oquippod with tho lorgoot nchinory to tho onlloot tools (Turn-boy Projocto).
which tho dlgorion worlnoro ond tochniciono could not coopdohond. Tho moirod
oucoooo hoo not boon ochiovod. oinco nowodoyo tho plonto in Algorio on work-
ing ot no ooro thon enoothird thoir production copocity. Ao for tho woolmooo
in ogriculturo. it hoo roochod tho point whoro oeot booio {couture oro io-
portod fre- obrood. Spot ohm-toga of thooo goodo in tho nrlnoto hoo booono
o rocm-ring phone-own. coming o growing wnvo of popnlor cooploint. Tho ur-
ltotooronototochodinoneruniood-nnor.ondthoyuo\noblotoooot in-
crooood conouoor donnd.

Tho othor otrongling crioio io tho housing crisis. for rocont ototiotico ohow
thot thoroioonomoofoiortporoonotooIZ-oquronotorrooo. Thio
oituotien oreoo oo o molt ed tho high roto of onigrotien fun tho country-
oido to tho citioo. end boeouoo a! the inﬂm of lorgo group of Bodonino
into nojor oottlod orooo. oopociol]; tho copitol city of Alain-o. Inoioooim
tho oovority of this crioio io tho high birth roto. oinoo tho yoorly inmooo
in birtho io ootiootod ot 3.6 poroont. tho hiahoot roto in tho Thixd World.

17
This senenl coeplnining hee cbvicue pcliticel repercmione. eepeoielly eince
it in still eccowpenied by ecte of repreeeion. the stilling of freedoee. the
increeee in the efficiency of the eecwrity end intelligence agenciee. end the
deprivetion ct politicel righte for eny dieeenting voice. At one tile or en-
other thie hee led to popula- outbreeke not curbed to thin dny. Thie eu-er
e nunber of lebcr unione hunched 1cm etriluee. eceetieee eccceyenied by ecte
of violence. whether by the etriltin; worm or by the euthod'itiee. The
etuient m worlner etrikee hece- ce'iticel during the finel due of Boundiene.
but the lete preeident wee eble to ccntein end encircle then. while he hi-el!
conducted direct negotieticne with lebcr end etuient eectcre. dun-ix the pop-
ular crannieetion cond'enencee in which there eppeered clendeetine. crgenieed
trende.

Then there ie the etrong. influentiel clue of bneineeeeen. which includee here
then l.600 eillioneiree conetitutim e huge finenciel em econceic force heving
diveree reletione with the euthoritiee end the edninietreticn. whether thrown
hueineu treneectime end brokeregee or throw bribery. in eddition to their
releticne with foreign forcee end eepecielly the big nltioneticnel coepeniee.
Thin cleee' eole politicel ecele ie'ite intereete. end therefore it cuppa-to
metever eitueticn eneme ite intereete. Algeria circlee in Perie eey thet
the nillicneire clue in et preeent on the eide ct Preeident medli. in view
of hie leenime townrde the ﬂeet. end in view of their reletione with the cen-
icr officere end we: veterene who left politice end took up cc-erciel ectiv-
itiee but who etill heve their roote em pceitionl d influence in the govern-
eent. Moreover. they tee: the ledtiet. ottentinee redicel new the wevee
c! which rehiecui ie riding ineide the petty creenieetion.

Ae opened to BendJedid'e neleticu with hence end the ﬂeet. Seleh Yehieoui
ie eetebliehin‘ nnifold mention with Aub end Ielenic etetee. eepecinlly
nbye. Recently he took en Areb tou- which included Syd-in. Lug end can
Arebie. In edditicn there en hie {in r'eleticne with the Soviet Union.
Yehieoni hee e been intellect end in deeply cultu-ed. He Imowe Arebic very
well eui epeehe it with eloquent eeee. He in wen cepble in cmnieeticn m

plenum.

The foreign problen beering heevily on the Algerien eitueticn ie the Heetern
Sehere proble- end the pceeibility of the outbneek of wer between Algerie end
horocco. Thie problee‘e difficulty too: the two eidee ie thet they inherited
it tron Boundiene. but both of then en trying to tun it to their eccount.
eceetinee in the direction of calving it end cthor tieee by cceplicetins it.
Inailethepcpulerbeeeinhcroccoieetendingeluueidekineﬂeeeeninthe
Sehere problee. the populnr beee in Algerie ie not eccen- {or wer. Therefcce.
the Algeria governnent hee now beccee nod-e inclined to eclve the problee
through ‘runieien end Punch nedieticn. AL-hAlADm hee leexned fro com-cu
clcee to Tunieien Foreign hinieter hchened Pitcuri. who vieited Algerie end
Morocco end not with Preeident madli end Kin; ﬂeeeen. thet direct contecte
between the two govern-ate heve been goin; on eecnetly for two nonthe.

‘l'heeeecm-ceeeeythetthe Algerienpmeidentweereeeem'edbyxingheeeen'e
eteteeente et hie lest preee ccnterence. when he ennconced hie finel cur-render

18
to Algeria in tho Timon: mien. mi his willingnooo to give Alan-in on out-
lot to tho Atlantic.

Thou oourcu boliovo thnt tho Wining point is non phoephoto. tho only topic
which tho Horoccon kins did not touch on in his mu coutoronco.

Anothor moon inpolling Alan-in to mount. and touch n solution in tho in-
orouin; financial union it in incur-rim fro- ouypoa-tixu Polinu'io. Iinoo
Algeria now spend. $6 nillion a an on tho Sub-n m. in addition to upon»
for W Quin-at for tho Marion m u o motion mint poooiblo
not with Morocco. But Mario'- ooution oriooo tron ito {our of tho coupli-
cntiono which Lion pout to it by its adoption on! Poliouﬁo. Mutton. it
would prefer tho solution to ho ocooptoblo to on tho concornod portion.

8559
(80: ““2
MINISTER OF PLANNING DISCUSSB PLANS FOR FUTURE
Cairo AL-AHRAM in Arabic [7 Aug 79 p 5

[Interview with Minister of Planning Dr 'Abd-al-anzaq 'Abd-al-Majid by
Ibrahim Nafi': "Minister of Planning Asked: Are He Still in the Stage

of Listing Problems and Planning Solutions, 0r Have He Reached the Stage
of Application"? date and place not given]

[Text] This week Dr 'Abd-al-Razzaq 'Abd-al-Hajid, minister of planning,
explains his ideas about and hopes for the economic and financial situation
in Egypt, and the priorities and tactics connected with it.

Actually, the basic impression which we received from him from the talks
which have been discussed on this page for 3 weeks is great optimism
about our future.

Today we go into the causes and details of this optimism, which we
imediately say must be connected with work and efforts which must not
be stopped for even one day. Let us hear from the minister of planning.

[Question] What are the priorities of the next plan, and on what basis are
these priorities defined?

[Answer] To begin we must reach agreement on a series of points which can
define a plan of priorities for us. They are:

I. There are some who believe that priorities must be defined according

to the problems which we face, meaning that food security, housing and
construction, for example, are major problems in society whose treatment

must be reflected radically in the form of a greater share of investments

for these priorities. However, this does not mean that if we set a priority
for food security, housing and construction the other sectors will get a
lesser share of these investments, because investment in the housing
operation is an investment in building cement factories, and building

cement factories requires investments in the mines and quarries sectors

and consequently require: investments in the transportation and connunicotions

20
sectors to transport these cosanodities. All of this requires financing

from abroad, and this requires exporting as much as we can in the way of
tourism and petroleum. This means that investments are required in all

sectors in order to serve one sector which has priority.

If we want priorities, we must--and this is most important-«wove all
factors influencing the sector and concentrate on the sector itself. There
is no economic activity which can be carried out successfully if it takes
place in a vacuum. He must take the whole picture into consideration.

The objection which says that there are no defined priorities is unsound,
because priorities are indeed defined and well-known, as we said, and they
are food security, housing and the development of education, but in order
for us to realise these priorities we must work in all fields of economic
and social activity so that we can meet them.

2. Investments are not the standard by which we measure priorities.

3. These are severe limits before us. Income is limited, and there are
open projects. lie are still being drained of this income to a great extent.
If our investments were 2.5 billion pounds a year, and open projects which
are based on priorities agreed upon before 1973, over which we have no
authority, require aboiit 1.5 billion pounds to canplete, then this freedom
of movement remains granted only with respect to the difference between the
two, or 1 billion dollars. This means that if we open new projects which
go along with the new national priorities, then our freedom of movement

is only within the limits of the free sum.

The final point in the field of priorities is, taking food security for
an example: is it realized in Qazu al Sahara' 7 Is it realized in al-Hadi
al-Jadid, and in al~Parafirah, and in al-Hahat al-Kharijah, etc.? Or on
the shores of Lake Nasir, or in the north of the Delta, or in al-Salihf‘yah,
or the east of the Delta or the west of the Delta? Naturally we cannot
follow all of these paths and reclaim all of these areas.

[Question] Have there been adequate scientific studies prior to the prepara-
tion of the plan?

[Answer] The basis for adequate studies is finding scientific apparatus

to study projects, and such apparatus is almost nonexistent, either because
it was never present, or because it is weak, or because it is not linked

with a way to prepare the plan. There is variety in this apparatus. ‘lhere
is the Industrialization Authority which prepares independent industrial
projects completely separate from the Agriculture Authority or prdjects

for agriculture, cospletely independent from construction planning, caapletely
independent from the Ministry of Reconstruction, which is complete independent
from the Ministry of Land Reclamation. Bach operation in society plans
projects independent from the others. In reconstruction, which means
creating a new society, there is the capacity and the resultant labor

21
required for reclamation of land, industrialization, railroads, communications,
utilities, etc. What apparatus brings together all of these different areas
and coordinates among all of these agencies?

Frankly, in the preceding cabinet of Dr Hustafa Khalil there was a Ministry
of Reconstruction for this purpose, but there was no committee for
reconstruction in this ministry.

I am speaking as minister of planning. I tell you quite frankly that a
multitude of planning agencies in society leads to innumerable problems
when we want to move. People are tired of defining problems, analysing
problems and classifying and describing problems. It is my true feeling

as I visit the governorates that the people are familiar with these problems
and are more sensitive to them than many of the designated officials. It
is interesting that we left the stage of problems and emmerated them in

15 volumes in 1977. I challenge anyone to uncover a problem which is

not found in the volumes of the 1977 plan, where all of the problems
are placed in a framework.

Ve Want To Apply Solutions

we have gone beyond this stage and have begun to draw up solutions.
Solutions have been devised for most of these problems, from price support
to "caster" [subsidized flannel-like material used for clothing], from
extracting soybeans to the manner of fumigating cotton to the operation of
converting cotton waste and everyday garbage. We have found the solutions,
but what we want to do now is to apply these solutions. I do not want to
talk about the solutions; I went to talk about applying the solutions.

Our mental attitude is still unable to apply these solutions. The apparatus
within whose framework we are working is unable to put these solutions
into effect. He went to move, but the apparatus which we are using is not
ready for the investment operation. We have heard true stories about 10
hospitals on which construction was started in 1970, but they are still
unfinished. We have also heard about water projects started in the 60's
and not completed, and machinery still in its crates. why? Because credits
are shortsighted. his year we take 10 plasters, next year 2 million, then
none, and so on according to political, economic and social conditions.

I am not laying blame for these conditions, nor am I blaming those in
charge of financing. However, if we all decided that we would work on a
specific project, then it would be a crime if it were not given complete
financing to complete it. The solution which we have come up with is the
investment bank. This solution is written in the form of a republican
resolution, but we have not applied the solutions. When we talk about

the public sector and its weakness and say that it must be stabilized,
reorganized, and given qualifications, we have set down basic conditions,

defined them and given then high priority, as the Horld Bank is conducting
studies of qualifications.
Also, a percentage of income from petroleum will be allocated for development
in Iran, Mexico and Indonesia just as we do. As the result of the existence
of a single treasury we take what is there, and what is there is subject

to political and social considerations which have a direct effect on
development.

I warn that these considerations are the object of price support, and this
is what hampers our ability to obtain sufficient investments to enable us
to confront the priorities which we have actually agreed upon. It is not
true to say that the priorities are unknown. We all know that our priorities
are concentrated on utilities, housing, and basic structure such as sewers,
water, electricity, food and clothing security, and the development of
education, and we have reached the point that when we set these priorities
we should set percentages so that these percentages will not change when
the minister of planning or minister of finance changes. There is always
disagreement between the two, centered on the fact that one wants to
increase investments and the other wants to reduce the budget deficit.

If we agreed on a percentage for investment and reached agreement with the
minister of finance on it, the matter would be ended.

[Question] Has the public sector become a base for economic enterprise?

[Answer] We always say that the public sector is the economic base which
we need constantly, and the time has come for us to face the problem of
confidence. What has the public sector done for the Egyptian people?

There is no bread in the morning for breakfast; there is no white cheese.
Areas of agrarian reform are not used to grow beans; homes are not built
because the cement factories are deteriorating and their production is

dropping.

What then has the public sector done? If the role of the public sector
is still a socialist tool to serve the masses, then it has failed in this.
If the role of the public sector is to produce fans, televisions,
refrigerators, etc. for the middle class and upper middle clean. than it
has succeeded in that.

If the role of the public sector is to provide a heavy industrial base,
such as the steel industry, then it has failed, not because it is unable
but because the technology needed for these industries requires great
speed, and consequently the public sector cannot handle it without
constant participation and production.

Do we use the public sector as a tool for distribution to ensure social
justice and to distribute the national income, meaning that col-Iodities
are sold at less than cost, and this is considered a grant presented to
poor people?

23
Is a cola plant useful because it is a tool to redistribute income and we
permit it with a loss so that the citizens can drink a glass of sicola

for less than cost? Is this logical, or is it logical to build plants

for "caster" in order to clothe the poor, or do we use the agrarian reform
plants rather than growing grapes in Jiyanklis and planting beans and
lentils for the masses? In order to have enough beans we would need
58,000 feddans, 60,000 feddans, 70,000 feddans, and for lentils [0,000 feddans.
This year the growing of beans expanded a little due to the increase which
the government established in the price of beans. What I want to say is
that what we need to increase the production of beans and lentils is tons
of thousands of feddans, not hundreds of thousands.

The public sector has a great role, but in different types of projects
from those we now have. I do not want a plant for wood for manufactured
furniture! The cooperative society in Damietta is already manufacturing
it on a high-quality level.

[Question] Is all of this a problem for the public sector, or are these
problems which you have imposed on it?

{Answer} It is true that we have bound the public sector in red tape
through which it cannot move. For example, the pricing of commodities

is fixed, or is about to be fixed. Middleman have entered because fixed
prices are not in keeping with a society with inflation, and consequently
there is the role of the middlemen. All of the soap, "castor," meat, all
supported canmodities produced or distributed by the public sector go
through middlemen.

How Do You Guide the Public Sector?

If we really wanted to give freedom and guidance to the public sector we
would have to let it act without restriction, but it cannot act no matter
how much we diminish restrictions and offer incentives and encouragement
because it is unable to determine efficiency. It is unable to separate
what is not persistent or not required to enable it to move. It cannot
change prices and cannot even change its type of production. For example,
it is now difficult to sell yarn and easy to sell cotton craps. These
scraps are exported at very low prices, or less than the prices of supported
cotton. "hat the German mill is doing is finding cotton which has been
processed once, twice and three times until it has reached the stage of
yarn which has some defect. It is reprocessed immediately, spun and woven
until it becomes an excellent type of fine yarn.

Sixteen Percent of National Income for Support
Hhen support was 200 million pounds we were irritated, but we accepted it.
However, when it reaches 1.2 billion pounds the matter has come to the

point where we cannot keep silent about it. This year support of bread,
wheat and top-quality flour, 500 million this year, has raised the price

2h
of wheat 100 dollars a ton now. Thus, it is expected that if prices continue
at this level, support of a loaf of bread will reach at least 1.1 billion
pounds, in addition to the price of other support commodities. We have
about 1.6 billion in support a year. This is not proper, because it is
unreasonable that 16 percent of the national income should be directed

toward support.

[Question] what do you see for the public sector after the certainty of
the lack of cooperation between the complete economic organization, the
failure of specific organizations and the failure of the retail councils?

[Answer] You know how the former system of retail organizations was applied.
For example, take cotton from well-known ginneries. In order to apply

this system they separated the ginnery from the oil press and from the soap
factory. All of that is an integral unit, but the ginnery is assigned to
the Ministry of Trade, the oil to Light Industry, etc.

He are aiming at local government and the regional planning areas, and we
want integration among the governorates and we would like to create
industries which complement existing industries. This in fact represents
the role of the private sector. He want to see the public sector in a
complete picture; that is, we take a complete group of industries in a
complete area. For example, we take the Aswan area, which grows sugar cane
and processes it, manufactures grained wood and paper, has potential

in phosphate plants, etc.

All of these industries require complementary and common areas, and also
all of these industries must be analyzed on the general level. We are
thinking of regional planning not on the governorate basis but on the
basis of a group of governorates representing similarity, integration
and serving one another. If a group of existing companies were to belong
to a holding company, as is intended, that would have to be on a
geographic level, for geography has an important role.

[Question] How can we achieve cabinet supervision? Or do the ministers
accept that?

[Answer] Cabinet supervision is not desirable, except for ownership, as
long as the goals have been determined. I believe that we agree in that.

He must really follow this solution and not intervene. He discussed
administration of the goals, and we all agree that we must let the units
operate and check to see that the goals are achieved. Penalties and rewards
must be in earnest. Ownership of the public sector is one thing and
administration of it another. Administration has been left to the operating

units.

We want to organize the operation, we must concentrate on the apparatus
which is able to fulfill the goals. Frankly, what is lacking is boldness
in applying solutions. The important thing is the name of the apparatus
which takes you where you want to go.

25
There are not enough projects when we talk about attacking the problems
of food, housing and basic construction.

[Question] He went to speak precisely. What are the projects which can
be set up next year?

[Answer] The projects which have been studied are listed with the planning
agency and can be identified by name.

"hat we want to do is to set directions and complete coordination among

all sectors so that planning can take place and consequently can be
established everywhere and in every project. There are projects ready,

and this argument from which we suffered from 1973 to 1976 has ended. The
projects are ready, and we went to Paris last year with prepared projects.
A surprise occurred at the meeting of the investment group, where there
were many projects. Several projects were studied, and many were presented.
There are two problems. The first is that I do not want to open new

projects because they may actually lend themselves to the private sector
and not the role of the government.

The second problem is the problem of finance. Foreign financing of various
types has been granted for the projects which we set up, and sometimes
projects contracted for have not been included in the plan nor in the
priorities, at a time when projects in the plan cannot find financing.

I ask for funds for projects approved by the World Bank and incorporated
in the plan, and there are no loans for them. I have also said that there
have been financing and several loans for projects without economic
advantage which have not been studied and are not incorporated in the plan,
which will lead to cancellation of a large number of loans.

when there is a project to be set up and this requires domestic financing
and foreign financing, there is a ministry to plan the projects, a ministry
for domestic finance and a ministry for foreign finance. 1 see no logic
in this. There must be integration of domestic and foreign finance.

The important thing is that there are projects, but unfortunately they
receive shoddy treatment. [word illegible] true that the powers given to
the local government make me warn that we are headed toward what is called
the capitalist system in the state. Each governorate wants to have a farm
to produce meat, a slaughterhouse, a plant to convert garbage to fertilizer,
fisheries, and a farm to fatten calves and poultry, and each governorate
wants not only these but other tourism projects.

[Question] We have set specific priorities. 1he financing is insufficient,
whether local or foreign. What projects will the public sector or the

government set up, which projects will the private sector initiate, and
which will be allocated to the cossnon sector?

26
[Answer] Basic structure is the function of the government, first. If
something remains-~we try to supply high-quality services to the citizens,
especially housing, developing education, health (which we have neglected
for a long time), then food, food security. How do we achieve food
security? Food security will require that we have at least a two years'
stockpile of grain. That has priority for me. If wheat were available

in the silos, I would permit land to be cultivated in order to produce
wheat. Hhen we say electricity, for it is one of the major utilities,

the answer to your question would be the same, only I differ with you in
the question itself. You have neither local nor foreign income. Re have
forgotten the use of local income. Because of this I believe that support
must receive radical treatment to force us to use it and the people to
accept this, because we cannot accept the standard of living which the
officials are enjoying. Guiding the distribution of domestic income can
increase it, according to a very good speech by the minister of finance
last week. But can it really be accepted? Indeed, about 5 million pounds
were taken in this year from general revenue and real estate!

we can also reconsider implementation of the agricultural crop plan. We
reduced the acreage planted in cotton and increased the profit, because
the peasant planted cotton on choice land. Last year we achieved the
highest profit in Egypt's history, and this year we hope the return will
be good. This operation has a great effect on the operation to determine
- income, because producing 10 tons of soy beans and oil at home costs
one-tenth of its cost abroad. Thus the price supports are rediced, and
ability to obtain foreign financing improves. Thus far we have about 5
billion dollars which have not been used, and we spend annually 2 billion
dollars.

[Question] "hat you mean is that the government cannot and must not set
up all of the projects which we would like to do quickly. Do you agree with
a policy of more development and more production?

[Answer] Naturally I approve of more opportunity and more development.
You can walk along any street where the private sector is putting up a
building and see that the floors are used as soon as they are completed
without considering finishing off the whole building.

He must do the same thing. He must say that we must consider implementing
all water, electricity, road and sewer operations. We begin by building

a new city, for example. That means a big expenditure without any profit.
If we want to build, then capital must replenish itself and circulate.
Capital in Egypt must circulate much more than it now does, because as
long as the volume of financing is limited it helps to have greater
concentration of circulation in order to compensate for or cover needs.

For example, I tell Sa'd Ha 'mun, governor of Cairo, that if there were 10
million pounds in the budget for housing than he could reach agreement with

27
the banks (the housing bank and the real estate bank) to deposit this sum
as security, and he would borrow 100 million pounds on it and carry out

his projects with this money. However, this operation cannot be implemented
in the government as long as investment requires payment entirely in cash.
The investment bank can handle this operation.

He now would like development banks in private sector development positions
to finance land reclamation, construction and housing. This is a good ides,
but these small banks must have a "mother bank" to supply them, as is the
case with the national bank and the comercial banks. The National
Invest-en: Bank is the apparatus which can make the development banks an

actual fact.

My optimism increased after my visits to the governorates, because I felt
that there are possibilities for working on the role of the private sector
and the method of financing its role in development. He also want to
organize the public sector, and we are determined to set up projects very
quickly so that construction of a hospital will not be delayed for 7 years.

7587
680: 4802

28
SUPREME MSTITUTIOﬂAL COURT LA" mm

Cairo AL-JARIDAH AL-RASHIYAH [Official Cezette] in Arabic llo 36, 6 Sep 79
pp 530-38

[Articlez "Law No 108 of 1979 Pronulgating Suprene Constitutional Court Lew”)
[Text] In the nene of the people,
The President of the Republic.

The People's Assembly having approved the following law, we have pro-ml-
gated it:

Article One

The provisions of the attached lsw concerning the Suprene Constitutional
Court shell he implenented.

Article ‘No

All cases and appeals presently before the Supreme Court and falling under
the Jurisdiction of the Suprene Constitutional Court in accordence with the
attached law shell be referred to the letter court in their present state
and without fees upon the for-stion of this court.

The appeals before the Suprens Court for suspension of rulings by the exist-
ing judiciary bodies shell slso he referred to the suprene Constitutional
Court in their present state and without fees so that this court say issue
its decision on these ceses in accordance with the provisions of low No 81
of 1969 prosulgeting the Suprene Court lew end lew lo 66 of 1970 pronulgat-
ing the let concerning the procedures and fees of this court.

Article Three

The provisions of articles 15 end 16 of the attached law shall apply to the
lawsuits regarding the refutetions. disputations. salaries, pensions and sini-
ler netters concerning the Supra-e Court sewers. The Constitutional Suprene
Court elone shell settle such lawsuits and sppeels.

29
Article Four

The Supreme Constitutional Court shall be represented in the judiciary bod-
ies by its chairman. In case of the chairman's absence, the court shall be
represented by its most senior mevber.

Article Five

Taking into cognizance the provisions of the third and fourth paragraphs of
article five of the attached law, the first fornation of the Supreme Con-
stitutional Court shall be issued by a decree from the president of the re-
public and shall provide for appointment of the court chairman and of its
meabers from among individuals aeeting the conditions stipulated by the at-
tached law, after consultation with the Higher Council of the Judiciary Bod-
ies insofar as the where are concerned.

The court members shall take the oath stipulated in article six of the at-
tached leu before the president of the republic.

Article Six

The members of the Supreme Court and members of the State Conission of
Counselors [hay'at mufawadi al-dawlah] who are not included in the forma-
tion of the Supresne Constitutional Court shall return by law to the authori-
ties in which they had worked before their appointment to the Supreme Court
and shall retain their seniority, their grades, salaries and allowances in a
personal capacity.

Article Seven

Inediately upon its formation, all workers of the administrative, clerical
and other sections attached to the Supreme Court shall be transferred to
the Supreme Constitutional Court.

All the financial allocations included in this year's budget for the Supreme
Court shall also be transferred to the Constitutional Supreme Court.

Article Eight

The forner chairman and letters of the Supr-e Court, and their families,
whose service in the Supreme Court has ended shall benefit from the services
of the fund stipulated in article 18 of the attached law and under the condi-
tions spelled out by this law.

Article Nine
without violating the provisions of article two of the promulgating law, the

Supreme Court law issued by law No 81 of 1969, the law concerning the proced-
ures and fees of this court issued by law No 66 of 1970 and law No 89 of 1976

30
concerning none provisions pertaining to the Supreme Court shall be abol-
ished. Every provision conflicting with the provisions of the attached law

shall also be abolished inedietely upon fornetion of the Supreme Constitu-
tional Law.

Article Ten

This lav shall be published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE and shall go into effect
2 weeks after its publication.

This law shall be sealed with the seal of the state and shall be inplenented
as one of its laws.

Issued at the Presidential Office on 29 August 1979.
husni Mubarak

Suprene Constitution Court Law

Chapter One

Court Organization
Section One
Court Structure
Article One

The Suprene Constitutional Court is an independent judiciary body in the
Arab Republic of Egypt, headquartered in Cairo.

Article No

In implementing the provisions of this law, the word "court" is intended to
mean the Supreme Constitutional Court and the phrase "court neuter" is in-
tended to designate the court chair-en and nenbers, unless a provision to
the contrary is present.

Article Three
The court shall consist of e chair-an and of a sufficient umber of alters.

Its rulings and decisions shall be issued by seven nsnbers and its sessions
shall be chaired by its chairaen or by its nest senior nenber. “ten the
chairmanship position is vacant. when the chairman is absent or when the
chairman is prevented by any reason fron being present. all his powers
shall be taken by the east senior ne‘er, then the second lost senior end
so forth down the line.

31
m individual appointed nesber of the court is required to possess the gen-
eral qualifications required for appointment to a judgsship in accordance
with the provisions of the judiciary authority law. He is also required not
to be less than 65 years old.

The nenber shall be selected fros anon; the following groups:
A. The present nenbers of the Suprena Court.

3. The present and former nembers of the judiciary authorities who have ser-

ved in the position of counselor or in a sisilar position 5 successive years
at least.

C. Current and forssr law professors in the Egyptian universities who have
served a period of at least 8 years in the position of professor.

0. Lawyers working before the Appellate Court and the Higher Adninistrative
Court for a period of 10 successive years at least.

Article tive

The court chairman shall be appointed by a decree free the president of the
republic.

The under shall be appointed by a decree from the president of the republic,
after consultation with the Higher Council of Judiciary Bodies, fron anon;
two individuals: One nominated by the court's General Asseably and the
other by the court chairman.

At least two thirds the court nesbers shall be free anon; nsdters of the
judiciary bodies.

The appointnent decree shall determine the senber's task and his seniority
in the court.

Article Six

Before assuring their duties, the court chairman and ned>ers shall take the
following oath:

"I swear by the alaighty God to observe the constitution and the law and to
judge justly."

The court chairun shall take the oath before the president of the republic.
The neders shall take the oath before the court's General Assedaly.
Section No
Court's General Assedaly
Article Seven
The court's General Assedbly shall consist of all of its nerbers.

The assembly meetings shall be attended by the chair-en of the Weston
of Counselors or by the co-ission's nost senior neeber who shall have a
counted vote on setters pertaining to the co-ission.

Article light

In addition to what is stipulated in this law, the General Assetbly shall
lsve the power to consider matters pertaining to the court's organization,
to its internal affairs, to the distribution of work among its leaders and
to all letters concerning these were.

The sessﬂly nay delegate sons of its payers to the court chairman or to a
co-ittee consisting of its nsnbers.

The asseebly's opinion not be taken on bills concerning the court.
Article line

The General Assenbly shall seat at the invitation of the court chairman or
at the request of one third its nenbers. Its Ieeting shall not have a
quorun vithout the presence of the majority of its sewers.

The essedny shall be chaired by the court cheirnsn or by whoever represents
his.

Its voting shall be public unless it decides to have it secret.

The assenbly shell issue its decisions by an absolute nejority of those
present. If the votes are equal. then the side with the chairman's vote
shall prevail. unless the voting is secret in which case the proposal shall
be considered rejected.

The minutes of the General Assenbly works shall be kept in a record signed
by the court chair-en end by the court's general secretary.

Article Ten

The Provisional Affairs Co-ittee shall be fornsd on a decision free the
General Assedly under the chsimnship of the court chair-en and with the
senhership of two or note setters. This co-ittee shall aseune the General
Assedsly's powers on urgent utters during the court's judiciary holiday.

33
Section Three
Herbers' Rights and Duties
Article 11

The court mentors cannot be dismissed or transferred to other positions
without their approval.

Article 12

The salaries and allowances of the court chairman and were shall be
deteraioed in accordance with the list attached to this law.

However, if the nether occupies before his appointment to the court a posi-
tion with higher salary and allowances than those set by this list. he shall
retain personally the salary and allowances earned in the previous position.

Otherwise. no master shall be given special personal salary and allowances
or be treated exceptionally in any manner.

Article 13

The court Inesbers may only be delegated or loaned for legal works in the in-
ternational organizations or foreign countries or to carry out scientific
tasks.

Article 1!.

The rules applying to the retireaant of the Appellate Court counselors shall
apply to the court leaders.

Article 15

Regarding the unsuitability, removal, rejection and disputation of a nea-
ber, the rules applying to the Appellate Court counselors shall also apply
to the court meters.

The Supreme Constitutional Court shall decide with all its nedaera. exclud-
ing the aforementioned aster and any other matter who my be excused. the
appeal rejecting and disputing this seiner. Consideration in the nmber of
more present shall be given to order of seniority so that the noat junior
nedaers say be excluded.

A rejection or disputation of all the court “are or of a number of then

that brings down the under of the remaining were to less than seven
shall not be accepted.
The court alone. to the exclusion of all other authorities. shall have the
power to decide on the requests pertaining to the salaries, awards and pen-
sions concerning the court members or their beneficiaries.

The court shall also have the exclusive powers to decide the requests for
cancellation of final administrative decisions concerning any of the wers'
affairs. as well as the compensation deaanda emanating fron such decisions.

In an exception to the provisions of Article 36, the requests referred to

in the two aboveeentioned paragraphs shall be signed by those submitting
them.

Taking into cognizance the provisions of articles 35 to 1'05, the rules applied
to the Appellate Court counselors shall be applied in regard to these de-
mands in cases for which no provisions are present in this law.

Article 17

The operative rules concerning vacations in the judiciary authority law
shall apply to the vacations of the court embers.

The court's General Assembly shall assune the powers of the Higher Council
of the Judiciary Bodies in this regard.

The court chaimn shall assume the powers of the minister of justice.
Article 18

A fund with a legal status shall be set up in the court. The state shall
allocate for this fund the resources necessary to finance the Health and So-
cial Services Agency of the court nesbers, its Counselors Co-ission and
their families.

The rights and col-itnents of the fund set up in accordance with article
seven of law No 79 of 1976 concerning a nder of rules pertaining to the
Supreme Court shall revert to this fund.

An individual benefiting from this fund may not benefit from the health
and Social Services Fund of the eeﬁera of the judiciary authorities.

A decision free the court chair-an shall he issued. with the approval of
the General Aaseebly, to organize the fund, its nanagenent and its rules of
spending.

Article 19

If a court nesber is accused of anything that say underline confidence or
estees or nay seriously haeper the duties and require-ante of his position.

35
the court chairman shall refer the matter to the court's Provisional Affairs
Cousittee.

If the cos-ittee decides, after owning the Isobar to hear his statenents,
that there is cause for proceeding with neasures. it shall delegate one of
its meters or a couittee consisting of then to conduct an investigation.
The “CT referred for investigation shall be considered on compulsory leave
with full pay as of the date of this decision.

On coapletion. the investigation shell be presented to the General Asseﬁly
convened in the for- of a disciplinary co-aittee, excluding the meters per-
ticipating in the investigation or the accusation, to issue—after hearing
and examining the meder's defense—its sentence of not guilty or of retir-
ing the meter as of the date of the issuance of the sentence. The court de-
cision shall be final and not subject to appeal in any way.

Article 20

The court's General Assembly shall seems the pwers stipulated in article'
95 and 96 of the judiciary authority lav and the powers of the disciplim 2y
council stipulated in article 97 of the said law.

With the exception of the stipulations stated in this part of the law. all
the guarantees, privileges, rights and duties detersined for the Appellate
Court counselors in accordance with the judiciary authority law shall apply
to the court were.

Section Four
Conission of Counselors [hey'at al-vmfawwadin]
Article 21

The court's Co-ission of Counselors shall consist of a chairman and a suf-
ficient nwer of counselors and assistant counselors.

men the chair-an is absent, his place shall be sssmaad by the nest senior
of the couission were. The Main chairman shall organise the con-
Inission's work and supervise the co-ission.

The salaries and allowances of the conission chair-an and members shall be
set in accordance with the list attached to this law.

Article 22

The qualifications stipulated in article four of this law for appoint-ant
to the court newership shall also he demanded of the individual appointed
to the co-ission chairmanship.
The qualifications demanded for appointment to the position of counselor or
assistant counselor in the conission shall be the qualifications stipulated
in the judiciary authority law for the appointment of their comterparts in
the appellate courts and for the appointment of chairmen of the courts of
first instances.

The coalission chairman and nembers shall be appointed by a decree issued by
the president of the republic on the nomination of the court chairmen. after
consultation with the General Assembly.

Appointment to the position of comaission chairman and counselor shall come
by way of promotion from the position inediately below this position.

However, individuals with the qualifications stipulated in paragraph one
and two of this article may be appointed to the position directly.

The court chairman may delegate mesmers of the judiciary authorities to work
in the Omission of Counselors if they meet the provisions of paragraph
four after he takes the opinion of the General Assedaly and acts in accord-
ance with the procedures stipulated by the law of the authority in which the
appointees work.

Article 23

Immediately before seaming their duties, the chairman and meters of the
Co-ission of Coumelors shall take the following oath:

"I swear by the almighty God to observe the constitution and the law and to
perform my work sincerely and truthfully."

The oath shall be taken before the court's General Assesbly.

Article 210
The chairman and members of the Cot-ission of Counselors cannot be dis-
missed and they may not he transferred to other positions without their ap-
proval.
Insofar as their guarantees. rights. duties. retirement and vacations and
the disputes pertaining to their promotions. salaries, compensations and pen-
sione--for theuelves and for their beneficiaries-«are concerned, the rules
set for the court eaters shall also apply to them.

The stipulation of article 13 of this law shall not apply to the con-ission
umbers.

Chapter 1V0

Jurisdictions and Procedures

37
Section One
Jurisdictions
Article 25

The Supra-s Constitutional Court shell. to the exclusion of all others, have
the following powers:

First. judiciary control over the constitutionality of the late and the
regulation.

Second, settle disputes of jurisdiction by appointing the juridiciary author-
ity concerned or the authorities with the judiciary power if a lawsuit on a
certain issue is raised before two judiciary authorities and if one o! the
two authorities refuses to disnies the case or if both authorities refuse

to consider the case.

Third. settle any dispute arising over two final and conflicting rulings,
one of which is issued by s judiciary authority or an authority with judiciary
jurisdiction and the other issued by another authority.

Article 26

The Supreee Constitutional Court shall interpret the laws pronulgsted by the
legislative authority and the decrees by lot issued by the president of the
republic in accordance with the provisions of the constitution should dis-
agree-ant arise in the inplenentstion end should the disagree-ant be signi-
ficant enough to require a uniforn interpretation.

Article 27

In all cases. the court any rule that any provision in any law or regulation
presented to it on the occasion of its exercise of its jurisdiction and con-
nected with a dispute referred to the court is unconstitutional after fol-
lowing the procedures set for preparation of the constitutional lawsuits.

Section No
Procedures
Article 28

Excluding what is stipulated in this section. the referral decisions, law-
suits and requests subnitted to the court shall be subject to the provisions
of the code of civil and co-arcial procedures, provided that they are not
in violation of the nature and jurisdiction of the court and the conditions
set for it.
The court shall exercise judiciary control over the constitutionality of the
laws and regulations in the following manner:

A. Hhile considering a lawsuit, if a court or a judiciary authority concerned
deems that a law provision or a regulation pertinent to settling the dispute
is unconstitutional, it shall suspend the suit and shall refer the papers
without fees to the Supreme Constitutional Court to settle the constitutional
question.

3. If a disputant contests in the course of a lawsuit before a court or an
authority with judiciary jurisdiction the unconstitutionality of a provision
in a law or a regulation necessary for settling the dispute and if the court
or the authority considers that the contest is serious. it shall postpone its
hearing of the case and shall set for the contestant a period of no more
than three months to bring a lawsuit on the issue before the Supreme Consti-
tutional Court. If the lawsuit is not raised in ties. the challenge shall
be considered as non-existent.

Article 30

The decision on referral to the Suprene Constitutional Court or the lawsuit
paper [sahifah] referred to this court in accordance with the provisions of
the preceding article must include the text of the legal provision whose con-
stitutionality is contested. the constitutional provision allegedly contra-
vened and the aspects of violation.

Article 31

Any side concerned may ask the Supreme Constitutional Court to appoint the
judiciary authority with the jurisdiction to consider the case referred to
in paragraph two of article 25.

The request lust point out the subject of disputation, the viewpoints of” the
judiciary authorities that have examined the dispute and the aeasuree that
each has taken in connection with the disputation.

Submission of the request shall result in suspending the lawsuits pertaining
to it until a final decision is made on the dispute.

Article 32
Any side concerned may ask the Supreme Constitutional Court to settle a
dispute concerning the implementation of two final and contradictory rulings
in the case referred to in provision three of article 25.

The request Inst point out the existing dispute concerning impleaentation
and the aspects of contradiction between the two rulings.

39
The court chair-an may order. at the request of the contestants concerned.

suspension of implementation of one or both rulings until a decision is made
on the disputation.

Article 33

The request for interpretation shall be submitted by the minister of Justice
at the request of the prime minister, the People‘s Aeeedaly speaker or the
Higher Council of the Judiciary Bodies.

The request for interpretation must point out the legislative provision to be
interpreted. the conflict it has created in implementation and the degree of
its significance that requires that the provision be interpreted so that it
may be implemented uniformly.

Article 36

The requests and lawsuit papers submitted to the Supreme Constitutional Court
nust be signed by an acceptable lawyer who can appear before the court or by
a member of the Goveth Lawsuits Department with the grade of counselor at
least. The request stipulated in articles 31 and 32 shall be subaitted

with an official copy of the two rulings over which the disputation or the
conflict has arisen, otherwise the request shall be unacceptable.

The registration section shall record in a special register sat for the pur-
pose the referral decisions reaching the court and the lawsuits and requests
presented to it on the day of arrival or subaission.

The registration section shall notify through the clerical section the peo-
ple concerned with the abovementioned decisions, suits or requests within
15 days of the abovementioned date.

The government shall be considered a party concerned in regard to the con-
stitutional lawsuits.

Article 36 [sic]

The office of the lawyer who signs the lawsuit or request shall be considered
a place [an address] selected by the plaintiff and the office of the lawyer
acting on behalf of the defendant shall be considered a place [an address]
selected by the latter for notification. unless each of the two sides desig-
nates a place through which he can be notified.

Article 37
Any party notified of a referral decision or of a lawsuit shall deposit in

the court's registration section within a period of 15 days of the notifi-
cation a memorandum containing his observations and coupled with docunents.

1&0
The opponent may answer this nanorandum and the docusents within the 15 days
following the end of the period set in the preceding paragraph.

If the opponent uses his right to reply. then the first party shall have the
right to Inks a rebuttal within the next 15 days.

Article 38

The registration section may not accept after the dates set in the preceding
paragraph any papers from the opponents. The section lust write an official
report containing the dates of the submission of these doculents, the naee of
the party submitting then and its status.

Article 39

The registration section shall submit the lawsuit or request paper to the
Comission of Counselors on the day following the end of the dates set in
article 37.

The comission shall prepare the subject. To do this, the cousisaion may
contact the parties concerned to acquire the necessary doculents or papers.
The cot-ﬁssion may also sun-on the parties concerned to seek from then clari-
fications on facts that it deem necessary and to ask them to submit couple-
nentary docunsnta and nemoranda and any ask for other investigation neasurea
within the date it sets.

The co-issioner nay issue a decision levying a penalty of no more than 20
pounds on whoever causes repeated delays of the lawsuit. The omissione'r's
decision in this regard is final. The co-issioner nay also relieve the
guilty party of this penalty if this party produces an acceptable excuse.

Article 40

After preparing the subject. the Co-ission of Counselors shall present a
report defining the constitutional and legal issues brought up and the con—
nission'a opinion, with the reasons for this opinion.

The parties concerned lay be familiarized with this report at the court's
registration section and any request a copy of the report at their own ex-
pense.

Article 61

Within a week of the deposition of this report. the court chairnan shall
set the date for the session which will examine the lawsuit or the request.

The registration section shall notify the parties concerned of the date of
the session by registered nail.

The date of presence [session] shall be within 15 days at least. unless the
court chairman orders in case of necessity and at the request of the parties
concerned to reduce this date to no less than 3 days.

1+1
The parties concerned shall be informed of this decision and notified of the
date of the session.

Article 62

A conission neuter. with the grade of counselor at least, must attend the
court sessions.

Article 43

Lawyers accepted to appear in trials before the Appellate Court and the Su-

prene Administrative Court shall be acceptable before the Supra-e Constitu-
tional Court.

The lawyer representing the govern-ant shell have at least the grade of
counselor at the Govern-ant Lawsuits Administration.

Article 195

The court shell issue its sentences on the cases and requests referred to
it without proceedings at law.

If the court deens verbal proceedings necessary. it any hear the lawyers of
the disputsnts and the representative of the Co-ission of Counselors. In
this case. the disputsnts shall not be permitted to appear before the court
without a lawyer.

Disputants who have no nanoranda deposited in their name in accordance with
the provision of article 37 shall not have the right to deputise a lawyer
to attend the session on their behalf.

The court nay pernit the disputants' lawyers and the Comission of Counselors
to present complementary neuorande on the dates it sets.

Article 65

The rules of presence and absence stipulated in the civil and co-ercial

code of legal proceedings shall not apply to the lawsuits and requests re-
ferred to the court.

Chapter Three
Rulings and Decisions
Article 46

The court's rulings and decisions shall be issued in the name of the people.
Article 1.7

The court shall decide of its own accord all the subsidiary issues.
Article 68

The court's rulings and decisions are final and not subject to appeal.
Article 69

The court's rulings on constitutional lawsuits and its decisions on inter-
pretation shall be binding to all the state authorities and to all people.

The rulings and decisions referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be
published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE free of charge within a naxinun period of
15 days of their issuance.

A ruling on the unconstitutionality of a lav provision or of s regulation
sakes it incmbent to refrain fron applying it on the day following the pub-
lication.

If the ruling on unconstitutionality pertains to s penal provision, the sen-
tences of guilty issued in reliance on this provisions shall be void. The
chair-an of the Conission of Counselors shall notin the public attorney

of the ruling inediately upon its issuance so that the necessary neasures
nay be taken.

Article 50

The court, to the exclusion of all others. shall settle all the disputes con-
cerning inplelentstion of the rulings and decisions issued by it.

The rules set in the civil and connercisl code of proceedings shall apply
to these disputes in whatever is not in violation of the nature and juris-
dictions of the court and of the conditions set for it.

A disputation shall not result in stopping inplenentation unless the court so
orders until the disputation is decided upon.

Article 51
The rules set in the civil and comerciel code of proceedings shall apply to
the rulings and decisions of the court in cases for which no provision is
stiuplated in this law, provided that the application does not conflict with
the nature of these rulings and decisions.

Chapter Four

Fees and Expenses

1&3
Article 52

No fees shall he collected for the requests stipulated in articles 16, 31,
32 and 33 of this law.

Article 53
A set fee of 25 pounds shall he charged for constitutional lawsuits.

The fee levied shall include all the judiciary proceedings pertaining to the
case, including announcement of the papers and of the rulings.

0n subnitting the case paper, the plaintiff shall deposit a guarantee of
25 pounds in the court treasury.

A single guarantee shall be deposited it e masher of plaintiffs submit their
case in a single paper.

The court shell decide to seize the guarantee in case it rules that the law-
suit is unacceptable or in case it rejects the lawsuit.

Hhile taking cognizance of the provisions of the next article. the registra-
tion section shall not accept a paper unless coupled with a proof of deposi-
tion.

Article 5‘

Any party proven incapable of paying nay he exenpted from all or part of
the fee and fro: all or part of the guarantee, provided that the lawsuit
is likely to be won.

The chairlen of the Main of Counselors shall decide on the station
requests after faniliariring hinself with the papers and hearing the state—

nents of the applicant and the observations of the registration section.
His decision on this issue shall be final.

An application for exanption shall result in speeding up the date for hear-
ing a lawsuit pertaining to unconstitutionality.

Article 55
The provisions stipulated in law No 90 of 19“ on judiciary fees for civi-
lian matters and in the civil and co-ercial code of proceedings shall apply
to fees and expenses in cases for which there is no provision in this law.
Chapter Five

Financial and Administrative Affairs

1th
Financial Affairs
Article 56

The court shall have an independent annual budget prepared after the pattern
of the general state budget and beginning with the start of the fiscal year
and ending with its and.

The court's General Asaedily shall have the powers to which the sinister of
finance is entitled in the laws and regulations pertaining to the ilplenenta-
tion of the court budget. The court chairnen shall have the powers to which
the minister of administrative develop-eat and the chairman of the Central
Organization and Managenent Agency are entitled.

The provisions of the general state budget law shall apply to the court's
budget and final account in cases where there are no provisions spelled out
by this law.

Section M ‘
Adninistrative Affairs
Article 57

The court shall have a general secretary and a sufficient umber of workers.
The court chair-an shall have over then the powers of sinister and of assis-
tant minister stipulated in the lows and regulations.

Article 58

A workers affairs co-ittee consisting of two court ne-bers and the general
secretary shall be forsed on a decision by the court chairnan and shall have
jurisdiction over all appoint-eat, pronotion, transfer and allowance affairs
concerning the workers.

After consultation with the Uorkers Affairs Cos-ittee, the court chair-en
shall issue a decision setting the controls, for worker pronotion.

Article 59

Without violating the stipulation of article 57, s co-ittee consisting of
three court senbers selected by the court's General Assedly annually shall
be in charge of disciplining workers.

A decision of referral to this co-ittee shall be issued by the court chair-
Inn. The Co-isaion of Counselors shall assune the task of prosecution be-

fore this co-ittee. The co-ittee rulings shall be final and not subject
to appeal.
Article 60

The rules applied to civil servants shall apply to the court workers in cases
for which there is no provision in this law or in the judiciary authority
law.

List of Positions, Salaries and Allowances Attached to Supreme
Constitutional Court Law

1 . Court Hatters

 
     
    

Annual Allocations

Position Salary Representation Allowance Periodic Raise

    
     
 
      

Salary, representation allowance and pen-
sion shall be set in appointnent decree

Court newer 2,200-2,500 pounds 1,500 pounds raised to
2,000 pounds at top of

grade scale

 
     
 

  

1. Every person appointed to the court nenbership shall be given the first
step of his position's scale pay as of the date of appointment, unless the
salary he earns before his appointment is equal to or exceeding the first
step. If this is the case, he shall be given an increase mt exceeding the
top step of his position's pay scale.

The granting of such an increase does not change the date for getting the
periodic raise.

2. The provisions of presidential decree No 211 of 1979 pertaining to the
fixed annual transportation allowance shall apply to the court nedaers.

3. The salary and allowances of a meter say not be less then those of eno-
ther nenber next to his in seniority.

4, A court nnber with a salary of 2,500 pounds shall he treated as a nin-
ister insofar as pension is concerned.

5. The representation and transportation allowance shall be exempt from
all kinds of taxes. The reduction stipulated in law No 30 of 1967 and its
a-endnents shall apply to these allowances.

1‘6
2. Modern of Conission of. Counselors

 
    
 
 

Annual Allocations
Annual

Positions Increase

  
  
 

    
    
    

   
  

 
   
 

Salary Representation

Allowance

Judiciary
Allowance

  

  

  
  

   
 

      
 
      
 
 

 
  

  

   
    
   

   
 

      
 

Pound Pound Pound Pound
Comission Chaimn 2,200-2,500 - 1,500 raised 100
to 2,000 when
salary reaches
2,500 pounds.
Counselors 1,500-2,060 1.200 when sa- 75
lary reaches
1,800 pounds.
Assistant LION-1,980 426.8 rai- 72
Counselors sed to 450
when salary
reaches 1,800

 
   
 

pounds.

 
 

1. Any individual appointed to a grade with a hotton and a top step shall he
paid the botton step of the grade as of the date of appoint-eat. unless the
salary he earns before appoint-ant is equal to or exceeds the step. In this
case, the appointees shall be given one of the increases set for his grade,
provided that the increase does not put hi.- ahove the hotton step of the

next higher grade. The granting of this increase does not change the date
on which the periodic increase is deserved.

2. The provisions of presidential decree No 211 of 1979 pertaining to the
fixed annual transportation allowance shall apply to the were of the Con-

niss ion of Counselors .

3. The salary and allowances of a nenher nay not be less than those of ano-
ther ne‘er next to his in seniority in the position to which he is appointed.

lo. A nanher of the Co-ission of Counselors with a salary at the top step

of the pay scale of his position shall get the periodic increase set for

the position directly above his in accordance with this list. even if he is
not pronotad to this position, provided that his salary does not exceed the
top step salary of the higher position. In such a case. he shall be entitled
to the allowances set various steps of this higher position.
5. A camission cheirnsn with s sslery of 2,500 pounds shell be treeted es
s court senber insofar as pension is concerned.

6. The representstion, judiciery snd trsnsportetion sllovencss ehe11 not be
subject to say kind of testes. They ehsll be subject to the reduction stipu—
lsted in In No 30 of 1967 end its snendnsnts.

A representation ellovsnce md s judiciary snowsnce my not be contined.

8495
680: £802
DETAILS ON UNIVERSITIES' GUARDS UNITS GIVEN
Cairo MAR AL-YAHH in Arabic 13 Oct 79 p 5

(Article by Rif'at Fayed: "University Guards. Hith New Specifications,
Bach University use Prepared a Guard Unit According to its Special System")

[Text] Our universities have comleted the formation of the miversity
guard with the beginning of the new school year. Most of the universities
have decided to form these mite free the workers in the university, along
with using the services of a group of retired or pensioned police officers.
There will be a special uniform for the special secuirty mite in each
university which will be directly subordinate to the president of the
university.

Bach University Has a Systa

The presidents of the universities held a nmber of neetings in recent
weeks to fornulate the regulations concerning the work and tuition of
these units and defining the suitable locations [for positioning than].

Maj Gen Hhanud Lutfi, the responsible officer for the security apparatus

at 'Ayn Shane University, said these mite will guard the installations and
laboratories at the university and each of its colleges and all [university
public utilities. Moreover, each college will fore a branch security unit to
guard its installations which will be directly subordinate to the dean of
the college. The central co-end in the university is to be in direct
contact with all these units.

Also to be formed are branch units owned of those having at least
intermediate [education] qualifications. Their nission is to usist
university students; they are to concern thenselves with the requests of
miversity visitors and answer their questions. ‘l'heee mite will also
regulate the entry and departure of vehicles at the university. The nmber
of security personnel [at 'Ayn Shane University] will be about 350 persons.

As for Asyut University, miversity president Dr Essen Randi confined

that the miversity‘s security apparatus which is to be for-ed will conprise
university enployees and not be subordinate to any external euthority. It

’69
will be under the direct supervision of the university president. he
said the university security apparatus will encourage students to feel
completely safe. for the first time. inside their university.

Higher Qualifications for the University Guard

At Suez Canal University, [university president] Dr 'Abd-al-Hsjid 'Uthman
requested that the security apparatus personnel have university qualifica-
tions so they would be conscious and understanding of all the students'
needs and the services required of them. There will be 30 persons assisted
by a group of watchmen to guard the installations and laboratories in the
university's colleges, apart from the administrative apparatus for these
personnel.

The university president said that he has decided not to expand greatly
university security dde_to the small number of colleges in the university
and the small number of students there, when compared to the other universities.

At sl-quaziq Universityjﬁueiversity president Dr Talbsh 'Uwaydah said that
he had completed setting up the university's security apparatus 2 whole years
ago. "He preceded all the universities in that to the point that we are

able to guard the installations and laboratories at al-Zaqaziq University
which are worth millions of pounds. An adviser has been appointed to
university security and use is made of a group of pensioned police officers
who have strong links and good rapport with the students." he added that
al-Zaqaziq University this year will expand it by setting up fire-fighting
units and civil defense units whose number will not exceed 30 persons.

Hulwan University Readied

Simultaneously, Hulwan University has colpleted reorganizing its security
apparatus, according to university president Dr Isma'il 'Alam-sl-Din. Its
members who will be selected from graduates of the university itself. will
have a special unifors with university insignia. This security apparatus
will regulate the arrival and departure of vehicles from outside the
university. The president said that each of the colleges will have subor-
dinate to it a security force whose personnel will not exceed seven persons
due to the small number of students in the university.
PRELIHUMRY REPORT ON ESTABLISHING MILITARY MEDICAL ACADm
Cairo AL-AHRAM in Arabic 10 Oct 79 p 8

[Article: "Military Hedical Academy to Include Hilitary, Naval and
Aviation Institutea"]

[Text] The People's Assembly is to discuss in its next session a bill
proposed by Defense Minister wen Kamal Baeen 'Ali regarding the establish-
nent of a nilitary medical academy in the armed forces. The bill, which
the aseenbly's National Security Conittee is to discuss tonorrov, Thursday,
calls for establishing a ailitery aedical academy headquartered in Cairo
having a corporate personality and subordinate to the Minister of Defense.
The goals of the academy are training and instructing armed forces medical
services officers in various specializations of military medical services;
undertaking studies in specializations; and conducting, following-up and
pronoting applied and scientific medical reserach in the various sciences
of military and clinical medicine.

The acader is to be comosed of:

l. The Institute of Military Medicine, specializing in the science and
operation of medical services; surgery and field treatment; protection and
treat-ant from weapons of total destruction; and medical supplies in the
field.

2. The Institute of Military Health and Prophylaxis, specializing in the
sciences of nilitary health, prophylaxis. contagioas diseases and epidemics.
laboratory research and envirouental health.

3. The Institute of Naval lbdicine, specializing in the sciences of narine

medicine, depths and diving aedicine and the study of health problens for
navel personnel.

Io. The Institute of Military Aviation and Space Hedicine. specializing in
medical instruction and research in the fields of eeromedicine and new
developments in space medicine.

51
5. The Higher Clinical Medical Studies Authority, subordixmtc to
which are the existing educational divisions in the armed forces' major
medical units.

The academy is to be sdninistered by the Higher Academy Council heeded by
the Minister of Defense and composed of the Assistant Defense Minister for
Treatment Affairs, the Chief of the Armed Forces Organization and Adninistra-
tion Authority, the Chief of the [Armed Forces] Training Authority, the

Chief of the [Armed Forces] Supply Authority. the Director of Officers'
Affairs, the Director of Medical Services, the President of the Academy and
the directors of the subordinate institutes.

The Higher Academy Council will foreulate general policy; propose the
establishment of new medical institutes; approve general study policy; and
determine the number of students in the courses of each institute or
instructional hospital and their acceptance require-ante. The president of
the academy. whose appointment is for a 3-year period and subject to
renewal by approval of the defense sinister. will administer and manage

the academy'a [day-to-day] affairs.

The academy'e faculty will consist of active [i.e.. full-time] masters who
are armed forces medical officers approved for working in the academy;
armed forces medical officers recalled and retained in the service;
specialists in the acedemy's sciences who apply for faculty positions which
are announced as available and who are appointed as armed forces officers;
and part-time members, civilian and military, who are used for teaching
and research.
AYATOLLAH NURI CRITICIZES GOVERNMENT BUREAUCRACY
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 20 Sep 79 p 2

[ﬁrticlez "ﬂojjatoleslam Abdollah Nuri's Open Letter to the Government
Spokesman: The Bureaucracy Dominating Departments Has Driven Peopre to
Daspairﬂ/

IIertl Hojjatoleslam Sheykh Abdollah Nuri is one of the committed and com-
bative gracious scholars of the clerical area of Bsfahan; he played a very
effective, valuable role in the events of the struggles of the past few
years, especially in last year's strikes, demonstrations and sitins in
Esfahan. In an open letter to the government spokesman, he has strongly
objected to the latter's statements. The text of Hr Ruri's letter is as
follows:

It is a source of great sorrow that you are still in the position of de-
fending your acts, in spite of all the chaos that is to be observed in the
country, the laxity and lack of discipline dominating departments as a re-
sult of the lack of decisive government action, and the extremely grave
losses and damage which have been imposed on the Iranian people in
Kurdestan. Instead of responding to fatherly observations and accusing the
great men of the Iranian Islamic revolution in an uninformed manner, would
it not have been better for you to accept the advice and guidance and to
act on it? In the open letter you wrote to Ayatollah Hontezeri, y0u de-
scribed the conditions in Iran, the actions of the government and the in-
vestigation in Kurdistan in such a way as to make them seem like very in~
teresting and noteworthy activities, and to make it seem that even if
there were riots in Kurdistan. they were in no way foreseeable and that
counterrevolution had seized the area suddenly, like an earthquake or a
flood. Hr Tabataba'i, what results did the visit by the minister and un-
dersecretary to Kurdistan prior to the recent disturbances produce? Hhst
action was accomplished? If a plan had really been set in motion, how
did counterrevolution grip the entire region and become so powerful?
Doesn't counterrevolution go into play where the government is weak?
hasn't it been pointed out many times in the newspapers and by revolution-
ary sympathizers that Kurdistan was in an explosive state? Heren't the
guards in Harivan slaughtered some days before the slaughter of the guards
in Paveh? wasn't no reaction observed on the part of the government--to
the point where some newspapers severely criticized the government and de-
manded that the perpetrators of the Harivan bioodbath be prosecuted, but
still no steps were taken? It is astonishing that you were thinking about
Kurdistan and making investigations from the first days of the revolution
but that events of this kind still happened? Undoubtedly the proud, brave
Moslem youths who were travelling there and constantly pointing out that
basically there was no government in Kurdistan did not understand. Really,
was there no government in Kurdistan. or could the counterrevolution pre-
pare itself in that area and brainwash the people better than this? Now
what kind of government is it whose presence in a region is no different
from its absence? This is an enigma. Hr Tabatabe'i, you have presented
statistics on the number of trips. First, assuming the statistics are
correct, I think these statistics are the sum of working, recreational and
even harmful or provocative trips. Secondly, the time for presenting
statistics has ended and today is the time for seriousness and work. The
people are watchfully waiting for the results of the measures, plans and
trips, and enumerating trips will remedy no ills. If the trips were ef-
fective, then what need would there be for historical speeches on the emam '
and his absolute orders? Ayatollah hontezeri, once again, does not want
the emam to express such displeasure and wants your prestige with the emam
and the people to be better preserved, as a result of his cautionary re-
marks, so that there will be no more need for this kind of fiery speech.
Hr Tabataba'i! Isn't the bureaucracy dominating departments-~whlch is a
source of the people's discomfort and despair, has disrupted work to a
very large excent, and has also made the gordisn knot of the nation's af-
fairs unsolvable--related to the government and its decision-making? Yes,
it is possible that letters stay in the ministers' desk drawers, but the
departments are so encumbered with paperwork that if results were attained
it would make no difference. Most active revolutionary young people, who
have entered the realm of action only for the sake of God and to preserve
the gains of the revolution, have found such obstacles and so much obstruc-
tionism placed before themselves that it has disturbed their work and they
have reached a state of despair and hopelessness. An example of that which
can be seen by the naked eye is the plan for the crusade of construction,
which you have attributed to the government without cause, since most ef-
fective forces carrying out the work of the crusade are unhappy and dis-
content with government departments. their way of treatment and their
activity.

Hr Tabataba'i, where is the wisdom in your coming forth in order to re-
spond to Ayatollah Hontaseri all at once, after your first Friday prayer
speech, in the guise of government spokesman, and a few more times under
another guise? Didn't you want to respond to the emam's statement under
this guise when he was criticising the government? Montateri's statement
supplemented the emam's, and his cautionary statements were those of the
leadership of the revolution.
At a time when the emam is saying that Montazeri is a great combatant, a
venerable jurist, an extremely valuable man and a committed molla, ve sud-
denly see that the most important matter and the greatest duty of the gov-
ernment spokesman and of several other persons is to respond in a so~called
respectful manner to this personality. It is to be hoped that friends have
not taken the instruments of schemers and enemies in hand but are thinking
about the course of the revolution and the emam. As Ayatollah Montazeri
says, with a little wore crash effort and less unremitting concern for
administrative regulations, the work will be completed.

The nation of Iran requests decisiveness, crash revolutionary action and
rapid movement. He also wish for the success of the goverment of the

Islamic Republic of Iran in carrying out and implementing the requests of
the nation.

lglgneﬂ Abdollah Nuri
NATION'S FUTURE ECONCMIC, SOCIAL POLICIBS SPELLBD OUT
Tehran KEYHMI in Persian 22 Sep 79 p 2

article: "Principles of the Country's Bcongmic and Social Policies Are
Announced by Islamic Revolution Plan 0ffice'_'/

/_'i_‘ex£/ In preparing a preliminary report, the Revolutionary Planning of-
fice has declared the general economic and social policies of the Iran of
the Islamic Republic end has identified the goal and philosophy behind
these policies.

We herewith convey sections of this report:

"In a unificationist society, the system of life is firmly inlanted on

the principle that everything belongs to God. that man is the trustee of
God's property, and that these properties are to be used in order to pro-
vide the recognized, reasonable material needs of society, without squand-
ering or prodigality, for the salts of progressing toward God. This society
is not unmindful of the possession of and desire for those things being
realised in other societies of the world which are not devoted to turning
toward God, and it is trying to warn these societies against possessing or
desiring these things.

"In this unificationist society, every individual considers himself com-
mitted to looking after the rights of others and feels responsibility in
his work: the feeling of boundless generosity, gsntlemanliness, thrift,
love of country, self-control and sense of duty is strengthened within
him and the study of and belief in the manner of conducting himself have
struck root within him.

"In this society, every individual holds all members of the society in re-
spect, especially those to whom he, as a master, has taught an idea or a
profession, and he also enjoys appropriate respect. In this classless
society, no individual enjoys any preference over others and the people
consider those among them who are the most chests and self-sacrificing to
be the most beloved, in accordance with the criterion "rhe most generous
of you is the most pious in God's mind!

56
The Principles of Economic and Social Policies

This report stated that the socioeconomic system which is to be mobilized
for the sake of attaining the desires of the Islamic revolution of Iran
will possess the following principles and characteristics:

l. Attainment of a prosperous, acquisitive society is not the objective;
rather, this objective is the means for men's progression toward God.

2. The economy should meet society's reasonable acknowledged material
needs without profligacy.

3. People are equal in the right to use ell God-given resources.
lo. There is a balance between economic progress and morality.

5. The creativity and usefulness of individuals is encouraged and guaran-
teed through moral and material means.

6. Pollution end sabotage of the environment should be kept to the mini-
mum possible.

7. The optimum use should be made of manpower and natural resources.

8. The necessary inclination and acquisition for growth and application
to the conditions of the people's time, place and culture exists in the
economy.

9. Education, the upbringing of the young and development are an insepar-
able part of all economic and social activities.

Social and economic policies have been codified in accordance with the
following means and characteristics:

1. Stabilization of the fundamental sectors of the economy, which consist
of the free economic, or popular, sector; the mixed economic, or popular-
government, sector; and finally the governmental economic sector.

In the first sector, the government takes measures to create the environ-
ment, and provides the possibility, for the expansion and progress of this
sector. In the second sector, the government participates with the people
in economic activities, as well as creating or supervising the environment
and on occasion contributing to capital investment.

In the third sector, the government, while drawing the participation of

the people, places the principal leading (strategic) economic activities
within the cospass of its own decisionmeking.

57
2. In economic activities, profit or value added will be apportioned
among the workforce, the society and capital (in order to encourage cap-
ital investment and consequently advance the popular and mixed economies).
The government will determine the workforce, society and capital's shares
of /_t_his profit/ in proportion to the type of activity, the volume of
capital investment (the eaximum encouragement of email capital investment),
the location of the activity, the stage of society's development and ex-
pansion, end so forth.

"The free sector: this consists of small and medium productive and ser-
vice unite, with the participation of the people.

"The mixed sector: this consists of medium and large productive and ser-
vice units with the participation of the people and supervision or capital
investment by the government.

"The government sector: this consists of heavy principal leading (strateg-
ic) productive and service units, or units in which the popular sector for
one reason or another is not inclined or able to participate."

3. By disbursing greater profits to their capital investments, limiting
wealth and collecting escalating taxes from high incooes, the people will
encourage capital investment in economic activities and will pranote the
just distribution of wealth among the units of the society.

lo. The principle of "total participation by the people in all matters,"
as a national slogan, will he the motive force for solidarity among vari-
ous groups and classes and will ensure the cohesion of society.

5. with the determination of policies bearing on economic stability and
continuity, the control of inflation, specific financial and credit poli-
cies, policies bearing on worker-”layer relations and policies for the
development and expansion of the outlines of infrastructure installations
and services, and with the determination of policies for economic and ser-
vice activities on the national, regional and local levels, the economic
activities of the popular, mixed and government sectors will expand in the
urban and rural areas.

6. Through the solution of land problems, the establishment of a system

of family exploitation, the optimm mobilization and use of water resources,
and the cultivation of fellow lands, the nation's agriculture will prosper,
the basic needs of society in the form of vegetable, animal, industrial and

other materials will be met, and some crops with appropriate quality will
have export potential.

Through the preservation of diverse productive activities and the estab-

lishment of rural and small industries suitable for the characteristics
of each area in those areas with balanced, stable nationwide coverage,

58
the revenue, welfare, and level of the quality of life in rural society
will be raised and brought into parity with urban society.

7. Pull employment will be established in an appropriate fashion in all
sectors of the ecmomy, with a balanced distribution between rural and
urban areas, and the employment structure, with attention to women's par-
ticipation, will not include children. Minimum wages and salaries will
be set on the basis of the living requirements of the family.

8. Crude oil and gas exportation will be avoided as far as possible and
use will be made of these hydrocarbons for petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals,
paint and so forth.

9. The optimum use of the national resources of the nation, in particular
oil and gas, which belong to all the generations of Iran, will be made and
the income obtained from their sale will be spent on infrastructure ac-
tivities.

10. The consunption of oil products in the country will gradually be re-
duced and use will be made of natural gas for providing energy require-
ments through a national gas distribution system. Other energy resources
such as the sun, wind, geothermal power and others will be subjected to
research and development and will be used in special cases.

Uith respect to the exploitation of different types of non-oil energy,
such as sun, wind and so forth, Iran will acquire a leading role, especi-
ally in the third world.

ll. The nation's industries will enjoy a national, domestically-created
technology and provide the basic industrial needs of the society. Hili-
tary industries will reach the stage of self-sufficiency where they will
be able to defend the nation's independence and territorial integrity.

l2. The population will enjoy a distribution and growth in keeping with
the country's goals of expansion and development and will dwell in an in-
terrelated urban and rural system; irregular migration (especially to the
big towns) will be avoided.

13. The manpower required for socioeconomic activities will be formed
through on-the-job training at the level of the high school, the vocation-
al and the university.

The Time Frames for luplementation of Socioeconomic Policies

In order to reach the desired state of a unificationist society, provision
is made for three time frames, short, medium and long range, as follows:

1. The first, two-year short-range stage, the transitional stage, from
21 March 1980 to 20 Harch 1982.

59
2. The second, 8-year, medium-range stage, comprising two 6-year plans,
from 21 March l982 to 20 March 1990.

3. The third, 12-year, long-range stage, conprising three lo-ysar plans,
from Zl March 1990 to 20 March 2002.

The first, short-range stage has been allocated mainly for the purpose
of completing many existing projects and coapleting a series of necessary
crash programs.

The second stage of the policy is established to the end of constructing
a strong social and economic base; in the third stage, attention will be
given to raising production from the qualitative and quantitative stand-
points and to social welfare.

0n the assumption that the first government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran is established in November 1979. it will be possible to prepare and
set down the details of the short-range stage by 20 March 1980.

The year 21 March l980--20 March 1981 will be spent in tabulating and gath-
ering statistics and precise information and in generally evaluating the
projects which have been conpleted by that date, and in the year 21 March
1981-20 March 1982 planning for the first a-year plan, which is for the
years 1982-1935, will be carried out.

Continuity of the nation’s expansion and development plans will in practice
be preserved by establishing a gap of 2 years between the start of presi-
dential terms and the start of subsequent plans, so that a president will
have 1 year in which to plan for his policies and another year in which
gradually to provide for necessary changes in existing plans, so that he
may be able successfully to implement his policies.

Note 1. If it is practically possible to establish a republic on 21 March,
it will be easier to have the fiscal year, planning and the presidential
term coincide.

Note 2. The holding of all presidential elections in November and the in-
stallation of the republic in March will provide an adequate opportunity
for acquainting each new government with the existing political and econom-
ic environment.

Principles To Be Observed in the First Short-Term Stage

I. National security and the guarantee of rights of individual and per-
sonal freedom.

2. Establishment of confidence among the people in the country's govern-
ment and future.
3. Preparation of the groundwork for economic, social and political
stability.

1.. Solving the problem of bureaucracy and introduction of carefully cal-
culated blows against the phenomena and agencies of the previous regime,
in order to guarantee the survival of the revolution.

5. Attraction of the participation of and preparing and mobilizing the
people for construction.

6. Strengthening the spirit of generosity and self-sacrifice in the soci-
ety with the objective of avoiding the spread of unrealistic consumer de-
sires and anarchistic social tendencies.

7. Organization and creation of the necessary wherewithal for the survival
of the revolutionary movement and the inplementation of plans.

3. Performance of the necessary basic and infrastructure studies and com-
mencement of their inplelnentation.

9. Continuation and conpletion of "acceptable“ previous plans.

10. Counencement of the creation of capacity and environment in various
fields:

The relationship between the individual and society and the free, mixed
and government sectors on the one hand and all laws and decrees on the

other.

Physical infrastructures.

Social and consnercial infrastructures.
Manpower training (creation of man).
Intelligence and statistics.

ll. Provision of a resource base to prepare for responding to problems
which have not been taken into account.

Principles To Be Observed in the Second, nedium Term Stage

1. Maintenance of national security and the guarantee of rights of indi--
vidual and personal freedom.

2. Maintenance of confidence among the people in the country's government
and future.
3. Creation, maintenance and preservation of economic, social and polit-
ical stability in the country.

Jo. Sustained outfitting and nobilization of the people in the crusades
for construction.

5'. Preservation and strengthening of the spirit of generosity in society
and avoidance of proi'ligacy and unreasonable expectations.

6. Continued research and investigation into the solution of problems re-
lated to the expansion and development of the country.

7. Continuation, expansion and completion of activities of creating en-
vironmenc and capacity.

The relationship between the free, mixed and governmental sectors and
economic, social and political laws.

The physical, social and couurcial infrastructure.
Manpower training.

information gathering and statistics.

Principles To Be Observed in the Third, Long-Range Stage

1. The maintenance of national security and the guarantee of rights of in-
dividual and personal freedom.

2. Maintenance of the people's good confidence in the government.
3. Preservation of economic, social and political stability in the country.

lo. Preservation and maintenance of the people's participation in matters
related to themselves and the country.

5. Preservation and strengthening of the spirit of generosity and gentle-
manliness saong the people and guidance of the society toward thrift and
the avoidance of profligacy and unreasonable expectations.

6. Continued examination and research into solutions bearing on the ex-
pansion and development of the country.

7. The continuation and conpletion of elements and activities of creation
oi the environment and capacity.

3. Raising the quality and quantity of society's production and welfare.
DRIVE TO MAKE RATION SELF-SUFFICIENT IN AGRICULTURE PROPOSED
‘l'ehran KEYHAN in Persian 20 Sep 79 p 3

/_Zrticle: "In the Conference ‘l‘o Examine the State of the Econony, It Has
Recommended ‘l‘hat Imports of Agricultural Products Be Prohibited?!

[Iexgl 0n the third day of the Conference to Examine the State of the
Nation's Economy, which was devoted to agriculture and its deficiencies,
Ali Mohamed lsadi, minister of agriculture and rural development, re-
ferring to the agricultural problems of the past, stated:

"The basic outlines and new policies of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development are to increase production, eliminate want and provide
a minimum living standard for the inhabitants of rural areas. The partic-
ipation of the people, the policy of nonintervention by government offic—
ials in farmers' affairs, and inprovement of the system of production are
among the factors we must keep in mind to reach these objectives."

lzadi said, "Ownership of pastures will be made public and inalienable and
all decrees aimed at the exploitation of pastures will be eliminated. In
addition, the expansion and mobilisation of fishery activities aimed at
proper use under a single administration and the exploitation of ocean and
internal waterway resources to make up for the shortage of protein mater-
ials required for human and livestock nutrition through the industrial
rearing and production of water organisms will be among the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development's plans.

"Also, revival of cooperative principles in accordance with the tradition
and usage of the area, together with the derivation of benefit from exper-
iments of the past and a fundamental, qualitative review of existing co-
operation will occur. Creation of service centers in the rural areas,
which in fact are the motive force for balanced and harmonious growth and
development of the countryside, will function under the supervision of the
village councils, the rural areas and the tribal councils."
In conclusion, the minister of agriculture and rural development stated
"Fellow and unused lends included in the laws will be revived and placed
by law at the disposal of individuals or groups who exert themselves in
developing them."

After the minister of agriculture and rural development's statement,
Mohamed Bayebardi of the Plan and Budget Organisation stated "If we want
to be self-sufficient in the agricultural field, why nust we 'be worried
about a shortage of certain comadities, and that only for 2 or 3 years,
and have agricultural iworts of up to 110 billion tomans a year for the
wellbeing of a liaited group? Let some people eat less or not find the
conmodities they are interested in in the market. There are 30 million
hectares of arable land in Iran which also have productive potential but
only about lo million of these are exploited in irrigated or dry farm-
ing fashion annually."

He added, "Eighteen million people, more than half the population of Iran,
live in the rural areas and are located in 60,000 scattered villages.
Proper use is not made of this great force. with respect to the forests
and pastures, one must say that there are about 60 million hectares of
natural pasture and 18 million hectares of forest in Iran, and the pastures
can place about 8 million tons of attractive foodstuffs at the disposal of
livestock which in themselves can produce about 800,000 tons of animal meat.
In Iran there are about 10 million head of cattle and 80 million head of
sheep from which one can cover the agricultural shortage and the nation's
meat through scientific exploitation." He also said, "Since about 87 per-
cent of the rural inhabitants own less than 10 hectares of land, 87 per-
cent of the development budget lust therefore also be placed at the dis-
posal of this group.

"Use nust also be made of the workers' productive systems in the rural
areas and mechanization must proceed to the point where tractors and
vehicles will take the place of livestock and cattle."

H8 DBCLARED, "Imports of all types of crops and agricultural, food, live-
stock and dairy products, which total $2 to 33 billion per year, should be
prohibited, government financial aid should be cut off in the field of
meat, bread, granulated and hard sugar and vegetable oil subsidies. and
the amounts obtained, totalling 20 billion tomans per year--three times
the development budget of the Ministry of Agriculture--should be allocated
to the development of rural areas." In conclusion, he said "Iran can pro-
vide food for 60 aillion people from its own natural resources." Ali
Aeghar Mo'infar, minister of stats and chairman of the Plan and Budget 0r-
ganization, also said: "One must meet the interests of the country and
the neede of the deprived people in the countryside and not evict farmers
from their areas, their land and their farming by creating big landowners.
He must fully weigh the human aspect of the matter. One must link the
social state of the people to the agricultural situation and not look at
it in a one-dimensional fashion. Therefore to separate the question of

6h
inproving the life of rural society, which accounts for more than 50 per-
cent of the country's population, from the objective of increasing agri-
cultural output in a great error and we will in reality arrive at the lat-
ter objective only by realizing the former one and eliminating the tra-
ditional agricultural land reforms of Iran."

Hohansnsd Ali Howlavi, director general of the Central Bank of Iran, also
stated at this conference "The reason for industrializing the country is
to combat overall poverty, raise the standard of living and create the
wherewithal for economic power. However, economic development must be
harmonious; without agricultural progress, economic independence for the
country is not possible; there must be coordination in all fields."
ARAK comm ACCUSES KMTEHS 0P TERRORISM

[Editorial Report ID] mu m in Persian 9 October 1979 reports fro-
Arsk, adninistrstive capital of the Central Province. that in a discussion
Central Province Governor-General Abbas Sani'i accused revolution Roeiteh
nenbers of acts of terrorisl in the city and of the torture and harrass-
nent of prisoners. According to the paper, Sani'i said that one Cholsn
Ali Sharestsni, who was killed in an attack, identified the killers as
Koniteh nenbers before he died. Sani'i reproaches the Islanic Revolution
Court for returning a dossier on the case on the grounds that the accusa-
tion lacked foundation. The governor-general indicates that a religious
terrorist group called the "liudud" has clailed responsibility for this nur-
der end is apparently inplicsted in others.

The governor-general says that although those killed nay have been smugglers
and people of bad reputation, "Nobody is entitled to take the law into his
own hands."

0n the subject of Koniteh intereference in govern-est business, Sani'i says
that the revolution guards stationed at the police station and the new prison
have no permission to be there and are seizing people in broad daylight.

The report states that the "Senjsn" Koniteh arrested 60 itinerant musicians
and, sfter subjecting then to ill-treatment, sent then to the office of
the governor-genera of the Central Province for vork. They also meddle

in agricultural affairs and the Arak prosecutor has been asked to inter-
vene to stop this.

"The unsenctioned, illegal and untoward actions of the Kositeh place a
heavy burden on the police," Governor-General Sani'i declares.

CSO 6906

so
SEMINAR ON ECONMIC PROBLEMS DISCUSSES SHUCGLBD FUNDS
Tehran “YEAH in Persian 22 Sep 79 p 1

article: “At the Seminar on Economic Problems, It Has Stated That $2 _
Billion in Contraband Foreign Currency Have Been Removed from the Countryj'l

liars-l— The Seminar to Examine the Country's Economic Problems ended in
the meeting hall of the Prime Minister's Office last Thursday after eight
sessions which were attended by the country's economic authorities.

Delivering speeches at the seventh and eighth sessions of the seminar on
Thursday were Poruhar, minister of labor and social affairs; Dr Sadduqi,
undersecretary of labor for workers' affairs; Mohamed Ali Mowlavi, gen-
eral director of the Central Bank; Rashidi, managing director of Pars Bank;
Dr lieu Sadr, minister of comerce; Dr Hoseyn Pirnia, professor at the
university; Ali Hajj Tarkhani, representative of the emam and heed of the
Chamber of Connerce; and Mo'infar, secretary of the Plan and Budget Organi-
ration.

Hohanansd Ali Howlavi, director general of the Central Bank, who also was
assigned the chairmanship of this session, referring to the inportance of
coordinating and maintaining a balance between money and comdities on
the market, said "In the past the Central Bank had policies and a special
role which can no longer be continued following the revolution, and changes
must take place." He added, "The banks are empty and their condition fol-
lowing the revolution, after people had exported their deposits or set fire
to them, has become chaotic. Of course one must not just hold the revolu-
tion accountable for this current economic crisis--even if there had been
no revolution, we would have been faced with a different type of economic
crisis at the present time because of the erroneous policy of the past.
Even though the situation now is not satisfactory, it is not like that of
the previous era. Fortunately, the banks have become able to place neces-
sary credits in the connmrcial sector today; in addition, they have pro-
vided credits to help the government in the field of industry, housing,
foodstuffs and agriculture, among which, in the current year, the govern-
ment has given b-percent interest loans of l20 billion rials to provide
granulated and hard sugar and 85 billion rials to help owners of industries."
Huwlavi said, "Another matter is that numerous problem have been created
with the nationalization of banks, which we hope will be eliminated as
soon as possible by the bill we have drawn up. As soon as these problems
are eliminated, the government's economic policy will also become clearly
known. It is as a result of this unclear situation that the Central Bank
cannot take a decisive position regarding hard currency. He cannot deter-
mine the volume of our oil revenues and we therefore have no choice but to
pursue a temporary monetary policy. when you say that we have foreign cur-
rency reserves of ll billion, that is not very much. Through thrift, ef-
fort and exertion, we are trying to meet requirements so that no need for
foreign borrowing will arise. Of course the government will introduce
changes into monetary policy." Howlavi said, "what goes without saying is
that exporters met be protected and encouraged."

Ali Rashidi, managing director of Pars Bank, said "The law regarding the
nationalization of banks which was ratified by the Revolutionary Council
was very hasty. Before this law was ratified, eight or nine banks should
have been declared bankrupt after an investigation into the condition of
banks because this precipitous measure inflicted losses of about $100 mil-
lion on the government. Moreover, the matter of bank mergers must take
place in a regional manner, to provide effective assistance to regional
planning."

Dr Reza Sadr, the minister of connerce, stated "we passed through several
stages in arriving at the nationalization of banks-~that is, we did not in
fact start the job with the nationalisation of banks; the question of
nationalieing banks was raised in second place. Following the revolution,
in the course of investigations we noted that all the country's economic
power and industries were in the hands of a special group which had co-
ordinated its policies with those of the devil. In order for us to advance
the revolution, we had no choice but to disarm that group, that is, to
nationalize the banks, emerge from the field of influence of this group,

which was carrying out its influence within the banks, and coqletely close
this road off."

Dr Hoseyn Pirnia, university professor, then said "He met pursue a move-

ment of economization in every area and teach it through the mass media
and even the schools.

"Islamic economy, as history has shown in the past 1,100 years, was most
prosperous during the period of Islamic civilisation. During that period
one broad market, from China to Morocco, held the economic artery of the
world in its hand. He can mobilise solutions in accordance with that

system, applied to the requirements of the era, and eliminate our economic
problems."

Then Ali hajj Tarkheni, the emam's representative and head of the Chamber
of Comerce, said "Although nationalization of the banks was hasty, it was
wholly realistic. Most people who owned stock in the banks were modest
and even underprivileged people who had bought them through the stock ex-

change, and the government should pay the profits on their shores as soon
as possible."

At the conclusion of this session, Henjani of the Central Bank said "Un-
fortunately the governnent has not yet succeeded in preventing the outflow
of foreign Currency. In 6 months, $2 billion in foreign currency has been
smuggled out via the country's ports. Also, the government must make a

couplete review on sending out foreign currency for students, which cones
to $2 billion e year in volume."
EXPERTS DISCUSS TROROUGH ARABIC SCHOOLIM
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 20 Sep 79 p 16

IXrticle: “During the Ratification of Points 19 and 21 at the Egperts'
Council : Arabic Language Schooling Is Proposed at All Leveleﬂ/

ljexgl Two points of the constitution, l9 and 21, were ratified at the
Council of Experts [sessions] held yesterday under the chairmanship of

Dr Beheshti. Some other points were also subjected to exchanges of views
and their ratification was postponed to today. Regarding Point 18, rati-
fication of that, with agreement over the point'e statement that "imple-
mentation of the executive power will be carried out by the president of
the republic, the prise minister and the Council of Ministers in a manner
to he arrived at through discussion within the crecutive power." was post
poned until a later time. This point was submitted to Commission 2 with
40 affirmative and two negative votes and 16 ahetentions.

Hr Akrami was the first person to rise in defense of this point. stating,
in discussing this issue, "we have agreed that the sovereignty of religi-
ous jurists will not alone have the power to implement the laws but that
they must assign this matter to others; in this case, the question of
executive power will be solved."

In opposition to that point, Dr Ayat then said "This point has been drawn
up without attention to prior ratifications. How the views of the persons
drawing it up have now changed! Now the clause 'implementation of the
executive power by the leader or leadership council' should be added.“ He
added that the sovereignty of religious jurists is in no way dictatorial;
when the conditions are present, anyone reaching the stage of knowledge of
religious jurisprudence will have the power of sovereignty and it will be
nobody's monopoly. The issue of the sovereignty of jurists should also

be reflected in the other points."

Mr Makers. considered that this point was compatible with the sovereignty
of religious jurists and said "It is possible that a jurist could even be
president. It cannot be imagined that the presidency of the republic will
end with the ratification of this point." In answer to the question

70
whether the president should be a jurist or be supported by jurists,
Mnkarem said "We will discuss this in the conditions for being president,
and the powers of the president will be identified." In answering Rabbani
Anoieehi, who had asked what would become of the issue of the presidency
when leadership power was concentrated in the sovereignty of jurists,
Hekerem said "The point is Such that the president's powers can be deter-
mined in the future and its description will appear in the executive power."
Continuing this discussion, Kievosh said "He wrote this point at a time
when we were not precisely informed about the limits of the sovereignty of
the executive power; therefore Mr Hekarem's statement is just a justifi-
cation."

In continuation, Dr Ayat said "The legal superiority of the laws of Islam
over other laws is the sovereignty of religious jurists and one must rely
upon that."

Ayatollah Montaseri made the following statement: "The leadership of the
religious jurist is the leadership of all three powers. It is the link
e-eong powers and the chairmanship of all powers. General amnesty lies
within that and it breathes within all three powers." A vote was taken
after this stage and the matter was submitted to Commission 2.

No Social Manifestation

After a lengthy discussion on the executive power, Point 19 was read out
by Dr Beheshti. Point l9 says:

"Inlementation of the judiciary power through the courts of administra-
tion of justice, which met be formed in accordance with Islamic criteria,
is concerned with ruling on cases, preserving public rights, expanding and
inplementing justice and establishing divine contracts."

Husevi Jesayeri, one of the representatives, asked "What will the duties
of the revolutionary courts be following isplementation of this point?"

In response Beheahti said "Ratification of the points in the session can-
not actually change any social phenomenon or create any new social phenom-
enon, until all the points are ratified by the council and by public opin-
ion through a referendum."

This point was ratified, with 60 affirmative and two negative votes and
five abstentions. The draft of Point 20 was not presented after ratifica-
tion of Point 19 because of its connection with previous unratified points
and Point 21, which concerns script and language, was subjected to dis-
cussion by the representatives and was ratified after a period of dis-
cussion with a little change in the proposed text. According to this
point, the cannon, official script and language of the people of Iran is
Persian, and official documents, correspondences and texts and textbooks
must be in that language and script, although free use may be made of local
and ethnic languages in publications and mass media and instruction of
these languages' literatures may take place alongside the Persian lang-
uage in the schools.
The representative of the Armenians said "The Armenians have no particu-
lar place, and if we add the word 'ethnic' to the point, that will cause
no problem." This statement was supported by the representatives and the
world "ethnic" was added to Point 21.

This point was also ratified, with 63 votes in favor, none against and
five ebstentions.

Unity of Language

Discussion then took place over Point 22 and was postponed to today's ex-
ceptional meeting without conclusion. Article 22 says "Since the language
of the Koran and the Islamic foundation and culture is Arabic, and Persian
literature is thoroughly steeped in Arabic, this language mat taught at
all educational levels." Hr Kiavosh stated, as one who was in favor, "One
of the ruses of the enemies of Islam and Iran was to alienate the people
free the language of the Koran. I can even remember that the late Rusbeh
was saying 3 or lo years ago that the regime wanted to eliminate the Arabic
language. I believe that the blow we received was from not knowing this
language, for which reason they interpreted the Koran to us the way they
wanted. For exewle, they interpreted the verse 'Spend for the sake of
God and do not allow your hands to submit to ruin' for us as 'put some
change in your pocket in the morning and give it to the poor.' Thus these
became the verses of our crusade--the verse on escape and spending became
the nurturing of beggars-whereas spending means the elimination of class
contradictions. Even I spend about an hour's tine trying to understand
one verse of the Koran."

Klavosh referred to the point that one of the wondrous points of the
Islamic republic must essentially be the creation of unity through language--
a language which has been supported by all linguists.

Kiavosh recon-sanded that letters sent to Arab countries through diplomatic
channels be written in Arabic. He also stated that coqiletion of this
language at the guidance and secondary levels seems sufficient.

Rabbani Aaoleshi then races-ended that this language be taught at all
levels "because we have even seen inperialists in countries trying to teach
their language to the people of a country starting with the eleuntary
stage; one rust realise that Arabic language instruction does not have the
status of school work as far as we are concerned--rather, it is to becone
acquainted with the texts of the religious schools."

Hr Qorshi said, "If Arabic is to be taught for the sake of the Koran, it
would be better if the Koran itself were taught."

Dr Beheahti recosssended, "It would be better if Dr Bahonar, who is a speci~
alist in this matter. offered a clarification in this regard." Dr Bahonar
said, "It is not our expectation that Arabic should become a conversation-
al language; therefore no need is felt to teach it in the elementary stage,
because many experts are of the belief that if a non-conversational lang-
uage is taught in the elesuentary stage it will be harmful for the child's
mother tongue."

Bahonar added that Arabic language instruction in the university is not
necessary either, because 6 years are sufficient for teaching it. However,
for departments where there is a need to read texts, such as departments
of philosophy, law and literature, it would be better if it were taught.

Ayatollah Honcazeri said "In the previous regime they taught 6 years of
Arabic but in practice the students knew nothing upon graduating. There-
fore I recosnend that it be explained in the point that Arabic language
instruction should be such that people will be able to read Arabic texts
by the and of the year."

This discussion ended without conclusion and it was determined that a de-
cision in this regard would be taken at this morning's exceptional session.

At the end of the session, a letter from the Radio and Television coupany
was read to the council by Dr Behesti. In this letter, the council was
requested to express its opinion with regard to the full simultaneous
broadcast of the program on Channel 2 of radio and television, or the
partial broadcast of the program during the evening hours; if some of the
council's discussions were to be broadcast, a representative with full
powers should describe the sections which had to be broadcast to Radio

and Television, because some representatives stated "The parts related to
us are being censored."
ROUSING MINISTER EXPLAINS POLICIES 1’0 5mm

‘l‘ehran mum in Persian 20 Sep 79 p 13

IZrticle: "The Minister of Housing and Urban Development Stated at the
Seminar on Bcgnomic Problems: In 6 Years No One will Be a Landowner in
Pee Anywhereﬂ/

lflfexsl At the sixth session of the Seminar to Examine the Country's Econ-
omic Problems, the minister of housing and urban develop-ant announced
that regulations concerning the abrogation of land ownership and means for
assigning land to the people were in the process of being drawn up and the
definitive assigment of large lands would be clarified by the coming week.
This program has been organized in such a way that in 6 years' time no one
will be a landowner in fee anywhere.

The minister of housing said "In accordance with Islamic legal principles
we believe that unused lands must not have owners. The government's pol-
icy in respect to reducing housing costs has been to lower the cost of
land in the first place."

The sixth session of the Seminar to Examine Economic Problems, which was
held yesterday, was concerned with investigating matters related to hous-
ing and construction. This seninsr was held under the chairmanship of

Eng Kstira'i, the minister of housing. At this session the minister of
housing and urban development referred to Central Bank statistics and

said "The ratio of landowner to tenant in the large cities is 43 to 57
percent. At the present time we have 2.38 million sanitary and unsani-
tary housing units; in terms of the current population we have a shortage
at the same rate as in the past. that is, 1977-8, on condition that we do
not take the loss of mud housiu and old housing into consideration and
also that there be no migration into the towns, would take 10 years." He
said, "Housing costs are people's biggest living expense, swallowing up
about 70 percent of people's incomes. In 1977-8 the cost of land accounted
for about 65$ percent of construction costs. Therefore. through the com-
preheneive investigation which the government and the Revolutionary Council
have made in order to solve the housing problem, a law has been ratified
abrogating unused urban land ownership, also codified in accordance with

7h
lslanic legal principles, and an effort is being made to reduce the price
of land to a minimum." in describing the role of the three factors of
manpower, building materials and land in creating housing, Katirs'i said
"Lowering workers' wages has not been possible in current conditions nor
has lowering the price of building materials, which in themselves are re-
lated directly to workers' wages, because the likelihood exists of unem-
ployment and paralysis of the building material manufacturing plants.
Therefore we deemed it more appropriate to break the price of land; since
there are more than 200 crafts on the job in a building, we must try to
strengthen all these branches. Also, the government is not able to create
housing and construction alone; we must also obtain help from the private
sector. Although a class of people known as 'build it and sell it' has
acquired a bad name as a result of the role it played in the past, this is
not: a general phenomenon; we must assign construction work to the builders
and sellers through careful control and supervision and encourage and
strengthen them. Money and credit are of course also important in the con-
struction of housing, and we, through the effort and exertion we have made,
have been able to place this credit at the disposal of people asking for
it at relatively low interest, through the aid of the National Bank.“

90 Percent of Housing has Been Solved

Katira'i, stressing that the government would act in a very serious manner
on the housing issue, said "Through the measures which have been made,

90 percent of the problems in the way of creating housing have disappeared.
Us hope that there will be no issue by the name of housing problem in the
country in the coming years." lie said, "With the implementation of the
law sbrogsting ownership of unused lands, large properties are to revert
wholly to the government and small properties, if not built on by their
owners within 3 years, will also revert to the government at no charge."

Following the minister of housing and urban development's statements,

Eng Javad Salehi, technical undersecretary of housing, stated "Placing
land at the disposal of the government, in addition to preventing a market
in speculating in and raising prices, is strengthening the government and
municipality's hand in putting the city plan into operation and is allow-
ing us to make transformations in constructing a good city as well as pro-
viding housing. Abrogation of land ownership has not only helped solve
the housing problem--it has also strengthened our hand in providing munic-
ipal and welfare services in the form of roads, schools, and hospitals and
other services, because in the past private ownership was a big obstruction
to inplementation of the basic city plan."

lie added, "Lowering rents must bring down the bank interest rate base.

"hat is to be taken for granted is that the government will provide the
people and the private sector land to build on; in this regard, regulations
are in the process of being prepared, and, if they are imlemented, you
will see how the value of land will drop."
The Value of Land Must Drop to Zero

Ar'ter Salem's statements, Mohammad Ali Howlavi, director general of the
Central Bank, stated "First it must be clear what the lslaaic Republic's
policy in regard to the situation in Tehran is: should Tehran become
bigger or not? Should the old sections gradually be turned into new ones,
or not?" He said "Building must be cospatible with the social condition
of the country: do the people need 10' or lS-story apartrent buildings or
not? Must the vslue of land drop to zero, with no land transactions taking
place? Laborers and construction mat be used in such a way that the added
cost of wages should have no effect on construction costs. Special credits
should be provided for consumer goods, including construction, and the
volume of instalments a person must pay should be coepetible with the wages
he receives. These are all matters which must be taken into consideration
at the outset."

He added, “In other countries mnicipalities buy land and thereby avoid
centralization, placing the land at the disposal of people who build houses.
The government mun accept the fact that it itself cannot assume the re-
sponsibility of housing construction and mat assign this task to the
people themselves."

At this seminar, the minister of finance said "Government expenses are
weighty-astronomical. The country's current expenditures are 350 to 1.00
million tonans a day, or about 900 billion rials a month. Of course 250
billion rials have been paid out in construction expenses this month but,
because of the deficiencies which exist, not all equipment has been pro-
vided or put to use." He added, "The government sector swallows up a sig-
nificant portion of the budget, but esployment is an isportant matter and
one mat not consider it siaple."

Mohamed Ali Howlavi, director general of the Central Bank of Iran, also
stated at this seminar "The purpose in industrializing is to combat general
poverty, raise the standard of living, improve the environment, and create
the wherewithal for economic power. awever, economic expansion met be
coordinated. The country's econnnic independence will not be possible
without agricultural progress. There must be coordination in all f ields."
He added, "In the past, the refora of ownership, which was merely a sub-
division of land, had no positive results, because the subdivision of land
met be accospenied by financial aid, machinery, seeds, the provision of
insecticides and so forth. Unfortunately, they lgnly/ tool: into account
breaking up the land in the land reform. It is necessary that there be
some connection between the increase in crops and price increases. The
Governnent oust place credit facilities at the disposal of farmers so that
the level of agricultural output say be raised."
BRIEFS

DEATH THREAT 'IO M GOVERNOR—Arakn‘l'he governor-general of the Central
Province has received a death threat from the "Siyah Jamegsn" [Black Suits]
group. In a telephone discussion with the ETTBLA'A’I‘ correspondent in Arak
Abbas Sami'i spoke about recent terrorism and criticism of the Komitehs:
"OI-ling to the acute problems occurring in Arak, only a small number of
which appear in the press, I have been threatened with death by letter and
telephone. I as not, of course, worried about anything happening to me
personally, but I am concerned for the coununity that this sort of thing
continues. I recently received a death threat in a letter fro. the Siyah
Jamegan group which said that if I continue to follow my present course they
will destroy me. As I have said, this group. and any other group, must know
that I am not afraid of anything that might happen to me and I have not an
atom of fear. since I tread a constructive and righteous path.‘I [Text]
[Tehran ETIELA'AT in Persian 13 Oct 79 p 10 LB]
DELAYS IN CONSTRUCTING HOUSING COMPLEXES EXPLAIN!”
Baghdad AL-JUMMURIYAH in Arabic 27 Aug 79 p 6
[Xrticle by Za'im al-Ta'i: "Alternative Solutions for a Continuing Crisis27

[Text7 I do not know who it was that once said that a man's shelter is his
nation. Nor do I know why the incidents portrayed in the film (Di Sika)-
"The Roof"--p1agued my mind while I was proceeding through the different
phases of this report, which concerns the residential apartments that the
state has constructed to house a large segment of the citizenry and save
them from the housing crisis which has gripped so many. However, I do not
believe that we have undergone a crisis like that experienced by the star of
the film (Di Sika), who lets himself get married without insuring that he
has a house or a roof over his head--even though he works in construction.
building houses for people-~and is forced to spend his married days hanging
around on the street or in friends' houses.

In an interview we conducted with the general director of the State Housing
Organization, Mahmud shakir Fahmi, we opened a conversation dealing with the
organization's plans and the solutions it has employed to solve the housing
problem. Mr Fahmi said:

The Problem and the Solutions

"Hith the support of the party and revolution leadership, and in accordance
with the decisions of the Revolution Command Council concerning the estab-
lishment of housing projects in all areas of the country--in particular
decision 232 of 1979 which refers to the construction of houses, buildings
and apartments to match the population density in all governorates and guar-
antee that every citizen can obtain a home where he can seek refuge and feel
that he belongs-our organization is fully involved in its current trend
toward high-rise construction, which has many advantages not found in hori-
zontal construction. Among these advantages is the ability to insure ser—
vice, health ard recreational facilities in one location. In addition, the
organisation's plan contains new projects which are currently under study
commensurate with the organization's available resources. He have already
constructed 2,000 apartments in the city of al-Mahmndiyah and in al-Sayyidiyah,
and l,b50 dwelling units in al-Dawrah and Karadah Haryam.

“This has occurred in the short time since our organization began operating
independently. It began carrying out its actual activities less thatn 3

years ago."

The director added: "He will soon begin work on construction of a housing
complex in the city of al—Thawrah in which we will build 1,000 dwelling
units. In the area of Ziyunah, we are nearing the completion date for the
second and final phase of a project which includes construction of 3.000
dwelling units on a new basis, such units never having been constructed in
the country before. This is occurring in accordance with a Revolution Com-
mand Council decision issued in 1977. It was decided that the buildings in
the project would consist of two types: five-story structures and three-story
structures. Thus the apartments can be divided into five different types on
the basis of floor space and type of structure. all the modern means of
construction were employed in all types of apartments, not to mention the
provision of various service institutions such as schools, kindergartens,
day care centers. markets, parking lots and parks. The total cost of the
project is around 3l million dinars, with 22 million dinars used for the
construction of the dwelling units and 9 million diners for the remaining
services.

Field Trip to Ziyunah Housing Complex

After our interview with the director of the State Housing Organisation. we
decided to visit this project, which is the subject of much conversation and
a few details of which are known by some people.

When we arrived at the housing complex, we were startled by the huge buildings
which had been built using prefabricated construction. The buildings consist-
ed of scattered apartment blocks which had been completed a few days earlier.
and comprised the first phase of the new residential building project. The
blocks occupy an area of approximately $2.5 hectares and contain 1,977 units
which are expected to accomodate 11,826 occupants. The project consists of
149 blocks, 63 of which are five-story structures. Each five-story building
contains 15 apartments, consisting of 10 two-bedroom apartments and five
three-bedroom apartments.

The remaining 86 blocks are three-story structures with 12 apartments per
structure. consisting of six two-bedroom apartments and six three~bedroom
apartments.

The service facilities as described for us by the director of the project in-
clude the following:

Two kindergartens, each accomodating 150-180 children; two day care centers,
each accomodating 100 children; six elementary schools; two middle and second-
ary schools; a main market with 3,000 square meters of floor space; and
dispersed markets with parking lots.

The project director added: "Sixty-three blocks will be constructed by means
of (af-nafaqiyah) forms. He began the undertaking of the project in May 1977
and it will be handed over during 1980."

Work Obstacles

When we asked the project director about the constant delays which some say
befell the project, he replied:

"Because of the country's exceptional circumstances, such as the multiplicity
of projects and the scarcity of materials, for example, in spite of the fact
that a special exception was made for us in ordering and importing raw materi-
als for the project. However, I believe that many times when the construction
sector has dealt with other sectors in the course of its work, its schedule
should have corresponded with the schedules of these other sectors in order

to take advantage of time and prevent the aforementioned delays. However. 1
do not think that the loss of time was due to any particular party, but raw
materials and building materials do not come easily. Another factor is mis-
use of machines for which spare parts are not available at the present time.

not to mention the small size of the middle and technical cadres. He also
suffer from a lack of masons.

"He learned from some of the engineers in the project that there were no more
than 10 masons." The project director enlarged on his remarks as follows:

"Just imagine that we were delayed for 3 months because of cement and bricks,
until a contract was concluded recently with private plants to supply us with
these two materials."

The Delay and Its Causes

The delay is said to be 1% years, in view of the fact that the project was
supposed to be handed over on 21 August 1979.

The project director responded: "The initial faltering was caused by the lack
of materials, as I said. And then some materials arrived which we did not
need at the time. There was also a disruption in shipment."

As for the general director of the organization, he responded: "Apartments
will be handed over within 3 years of the contract date, and the first con-
tract was concluded with the first applicant in the latter part of 1977.
Some 70,000 citizens requested application forms, but only 6,000 of these
persons applied and out of these 4,000 names emerged."

/6uestion7 But do you see this as due to the increase in the amount of the
first installment which is required as a one-time advance?

[Knsweg7 The installment payment period has been fixed, and along with it an
amount between 15 and 20 percent according to the cost of the apartment. I
do not believe that there has been a reconsideration of either the coat or
the calculation of the first installment. It is conceivable that it has ex-
cluded some people, but it has benefited others. It has excluded those who
are unable to pay the amount of the advance, of course. But now the oppor-

tunity to sell applications has been closed, and we hope that the others
will meet with good luck in our caning projects.

8591
CSO: 4802

81
ESTABLISHMENT OF INTEGRATED AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY PLANNED
Baghdad AL-THAURAH in Arabic 28 Aug 79 p b

[Krticlez "Planning Council Decides To Undertake Establishment of Integrated
Automobile Industry; Use of Pan-Arab Scope in Establishing This Industry27

£Text7 The Planning Council has decided to undertake the establishment of a
complete and integrated automobile industry in the country through the con-
struction of a central complex incorporating main production divisions which
will endeavor to produce the greatest possible range of automobile components.

In a recent decision, the council urged concerned agencies to move toward the
production of mid-sized and compact sedans in view of the economic and tech-
nical advantages they offer over large automobiles, as well as the production
of trucks, buses and other types of vehicles needed in the domestic and Arab
markets.

The council also called for a pan-Arab scope to be employed when this industry
is established in order to provide an efficient economic scale for the project,
benefit from Arab technical expertise and the advantages of the Arab countries'
economic and industrial integration, and bind the project to a time schedule
for the training. development and qualifying of a domestic cadre to provide
the project's manpower requirements.

The council requested that an expert and competent international consulting
agency be commissioned along with a specialized Iraqi organizational chart

of personnel to prepare studies of the technical and economic benefits of this
industry and draw up detailed plans for it.

The council stressed the importance of strengthening and developing the indus-
tries which supply the automotive industry. as well as impelling the socialist
sector to participate effectively in the industry and encouraging the private
and mixed sector to take part in setting up some of the projects under the
supervision and direction of the socialist sector.

Moreover, the council urged competent specialized agencies to take the neces-
sary steps to develop the domestic road systems and bring them up to inter-
national technical and engineering standards, and to introduce advanced and
modern scientific methods into the traffic systems and apply modern driving

principles on internal and external roads in order to increase their accomo-
dsting capacity and facilitate the flow of traffic.

8591
680: uses 82
BRIEFS

N5! INDUSTRIES --The Planning Coulittee of the Ministry of Trade and Industry
has approved the creation of 10 new industries with a contained capital of
1.99 million dinars. The approval was announced at the end of a coaasittee
meeting held yesterday under the chairmanship of deputy minister Dr Hashim
al-Dabbas. The new industries and their respective capitals are: A
marble producing plant, 150,000 dinars; an insecticide plant, 150,000
diners; a fruit juice plant, 50,000 diners; a sheet metal plant, 150,000
dinars; a sodium silicate plant, 120,000 dinars; an aluminum foil plant,
650,000 diners; a plastics plant, 160,000 diners; an animal feed plant,
210,000 diners; a mineral water plant, 500,000 dinars; an envelope
producing facility, 50,000 diners. [Text] [lumen AL-WSTUR in Arabic

6 Sep 79 p 6] 9063

PHOSPHATE EXPORTS-~Jordan's phosphates exports during the first 7 months

of this year have increased by 151,186 tons over the corresponding figure
for the same period last year. Figures released by 'Aqabah's Port Authority
put the ﬂaosphates exports during the first 7 months of this year at
1,427,829 tons compared with 1,276,665 tons for the same period last year.
[Text] [Amman AL-DUS’NR in Arabic 13 Sep 79 p 5] 9063

FOREIGN TRADE-“me Statistics Office has released its report on foreign
trade for 1978. The 712 page report gives a emery of foreign trade
statistics for the years 1969-78 and includes a section on trade with Arab
countries for 1978. The report indicates that Jordan's exports in 1978
were valued at 64 million diners, compared with 60 million diners in l977.
Imports in 1978 were pegged at 459 million diners, as opposed to (055 million
diners in l977. Jordan's inorts from Arab countries in 1978 were placed
at 87 million diners, comared with 73 million diners in l977. Jordan's
imports from Arab countries in 1978 were placed at 63 million diners,

compared with 36 million dinars in 1977 [sis]. [Text] [A-an AL-DOSTUR
in Arabic 18 Sep 79 p 2] 9063

011. REFINE!“ EXPANDED-J11“ expansion program currently underway at Jordan's
Petroleum Refinery under the direction of a Romanian company is in its
final stages. The new facilities will soon be turned over to the refinery.
[Text] [Amen AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 19 Sep 79 p 3] 9063

83
BANK DEPOSITS--Sources at Jordan's Central Bank have disclosed that deposits
from all sectors during the first half of this year have increased by
83,203,000 dinars over the figure related at the end of last year. As of
the end of last June, total bank deposits were given as 531,713,000 diners,
compared with 448,510,000 dinars for the corresponding period in 1978.

The sources added that the largest increase came from Jordanian residents,
whose combined deposits were put at 58,661,000 dinars. This was followed
by non-residents, with deposits of 12,515,000 diners, quasi-governmental
institutions, 6,191,000 diners, municipal governments, 3,037,000 dinars,
and, finally, governmental agencies with deposits of 2,732,000 dinars.
[Text] [Amman AL-DUSTUR in Arabic [9 Sep 79 p 3] 9063

HATER PROJBCT--The director of the Hater Department's technical office,

Mr Thain Abu Hasil, announced that actual work to pipe drinking water from
a1-Sawwaqah to al-Qastal region will begin early next year. The project,
according to the announcement, will bring drinking water to 45 villages.
Responding to a question by AL-RAY, Hr Tamil Abu Hasil said, "The project
will end the water crisis in the South Amman region." Speaking of the
region that will benefit by the project, the director indicated that 45
localities will receive adequate water supplies. These include: Hadaba,
Na'een, Um al-Burak, Um al-Basatin, Um ol-‘Amad, Jiza, al-Qastal,

Um al-Rumman, Hanjah, al-Hakhyat, Kfir Abu Nadi, Kfir Abu Sirbat, Kfir

Abu Kan'aan, Ibn Hamid, Hallul, Huwwarah, Safa, Um Qasir, Um al-Halid,
al-Huborak, Abu 'Alands, al-Rajib, Mushirfit Sahab, al-Ksshifiyyah,
al-Turbah, al-Hatila, Um Butmah, al-Huwaqqcr, al~Juwaydah, Um al-Sahhaq,
Na'or, al-‘Asakir, Qaryat Nafi, Ruja al-Shami, Thuhaybah al-Shsrqiyyah,
Thuhaybah al-Gharbiyyah, Khuraybet al-Suq, Jowa, al-Lubban, al-Tanib
al-Yadudah, al-Huqablin, Um Qasir, ai-Bunyat al-Shamaliyyah, al-Bunyat al-
charbiyyah, Um al-Qanafid and al-‘Ai. He added that the water project
will also serve 'Alia's housing project, the teachers' housing project

and the army's housing project, and pegged the total cost of the undertaking
at 3.25 million dinara. He explained further that 22 kilometers of pipe
out of 51 kilometers ordered have already been delivered, and that digging,
construction of storage tanks and the erection of a main pumping station
will soon begin. [Text] [Amman AL-RA'Y in Arabic 19 Sep 79 p 3] 9063

NATIONAL WATER PLAN--The Natural Resources Authority has prepared the first
national plan for water to serve as a basis for a comprehensive water
resources policy, one that will take into consideration Jordan's available
water supplies, its present and future needs, as well as its priorities

for economic and social development. Natural Resources Authority sources
indicated that the authority has already examined numerous water reservoirs
in an effort to determine their capacities and to develop them further.
[Text] [Amman AL-RA'Y in Arabic [9 Sep 79 p 4] 9063

TECHNICAL TRAINING CENTER--The Vocational Training Institute yesterday signed
a contract with the Soviet Techno-Export Institute according to which the
latter will conduct preliminary studies for constructing and equipping a
technical training center in the village of Hakma in the Irbid Governorate.
A reliable source at the Vocational Training Institute said that the
proposed center will have a 300 student capacity. The 3~year program,
following junior high school, will include training in metallurgy,
automotive repairs, industrial electrical technology, central heating and
construction. The contract was signed by Mr Hunzir al-Hasii, director
general of the Vocational Training Institute and Mr Kornilov, state

representative for foreign econolic affairs. [Text] [An-tan AL-RA'Y in
Arabic 19 Sep 79 p lo] 9063

050: 10802
'MONIMY MORNINC' IN'I'IZRVII'M WITH RATE-ION” EDDI'Z

liolrut MONDAY MORNING in English 1o-l8 Oct. 79 pp 30-36

[Interview with Raymond liddc by Mom cE-Sald in Paris, no date give-n]

[TchI

The self-exiled Lebanese leader Raymond dee has called on the Arab states to
contribute troops to the UN. Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).

Eddc, talking to Monday Morning in Paris last week, said the only useful thing that
the proposed Arab summit conference could produce lot Lebanon would be a decision
"to place at the disposal of the U.N. several thousand non-Syrian Arab soldiers who
would then participate in UNIFlL."

The move, he said, would enable the international torce to complete the withdrawal
from South Lebanon of the Israeli Army, which was still in position in several
Southern villages.

The Maronite MP, who heads the Lebanese Parliament's National Bloc, was a
candidate for the Presidency in 1976. After he lost to President Elias Sarkis and
escaped two attempts on his life, he left the country and has not been back since,
promising to return only when he can have freedom of speech and political action in
his own Country.

Edde said the only other resolution the Arab summit can produce which could
benefit Lebanon would be a resolution "to stop delivering oil to the United States."

“It is obvious," he added, "that such a decision is impossible to even dream about."

The rightist leader accused the Carter Administration of going ahead with the plan
worked out by former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to partition Lebanon into
Moslem and Christian mini-states and resettle the Palestinian refugees in the Moslem
half.

He said the United States supported Israel's March, I978 invasion of the South. as
confirmed by the former U.S. ambassador to the U.N., Andrew Young, and he asked:
“What evidence do we have that the United States has since then changed its position
on South Lebanon? "

Edde also:

OCalled for the deployment of UN. troops in all parts of Lebanon, to replace the
now wholly Syrian Arab Deterrent Forces:
OUrged the Lebanese authorities to declare the Lebanese-Palestinian Cairo
Agreement null and void and work out a new accord with the Palestine Liberation
Organization "which is consistent with Lebanese-Israeli (armistice) agreements, which
doleshot vtolate Lebanese sovereignty, and which does not damage LebanesePatestinian
re atrons”;

O Dismissed the new US. initiative for a "broader truce" in South Lebanon as a
_“test balloon";

OSaw no possibility of a Lebanese solution before the Palestinian problem was
:ettied, and no chance that the Palestinian problem would 'be settled in the near
uture; .

OAppealed to the Lebanese people to "wake up to the situation into which their
leaders have led them" and come back to their senses. "They are good people," he
said. “They are people who build their nation and their life with the sweat of the'a
brow, and not by piracy and murder, as the? leaders are asking them to build it now."

The full interview:

What have you heard about the new

American initiative to promote a

"broader truce" in Lebanon, and what

is your opinion of it?

What i have heard is that this initiative
is not really there, in the sense that it is
only a test balloon.

At any rate, the solution for the South
will be frozen pending the Presidential
elections in the United States, and South
Lebanon may be a bargaining tool.

So you don't think that there is any

chance of holding an international

conference on the South which would
bring together all the parties concern-
ed?

To begin with, who are "the parties
concerned? " If they're referring to the
parties present in the South — Israel, the
Palestinian Resistance and Lebanon -
how can they hope to bring those three
to the negotiating table with an American
representative, or the U.N. secretary
general or the representative of any other
country? Such a conference would be
another Camp David, and I don't think
Lebanon can participate in it.

If they’re talking about a Lebanese-
Palestinian conference, the President of
the Lebanese Republic has already met
with (Palestine Liberation Organization

87

Chairman Yaser) Arafat, and i don't think
the meeting will yield any results.

Why not?

Because as far as I know, what was
discussed was the PLO's approval of
Lebanese Army deployment in South
Lebanon. Poor Lebanese Army! It needs
special permission to go to part of its own
country. It needs the permission of this
party, that leader or the other organiza-
tion before it meekly enters the area.

I believe that if the Army is deployed
in South Lebanon, its situation there will
be no different than its situation in
Keserwan and Byblos. where the militias
are frolicking with their weapons with the
Army unable to challenge them.

Just recently, on the Tripoli highway
in the Byblos district, the militias in that
area killed several people near an Army
checkpoint, and the Army was unable to
intervene, to ask what was going on, to
try to capture the perpetrators

There is no difference between Army
presence and Army absence in Keserwan
and Byblos, and i don‘t think the
situation will be any different in Tyre and
Nabatiyeh, if the Army is deployed there.

The officers and the soldiers are
definitely not to blame for this. The
responsibility rests with the political
leadership, which still does not have the
courage to issue firm orders to the Army.

One of the reports circulating about the
U.S. initiative talks about the possibi-
lity of replacing the Arab Deterrent
Forces with UN. troops. Do you think
such a thing could happen?

That is my fondest wish. Everyone
knows that I have been demanding foreign
U.N. troops for years, because the Arabs
are incapable of sending joint forces.
Proof of this can be seen in what
happened after the 1976 Riyadh and
Cairo summits, in which it was decided to
form a joint Arab force of 30,000 troops
to be placed under the command of
President Elias Sarkis. As it turned out,
most of the force was made up of Syrian
soldiers, of whom there were 28,000, and
the President's "command" was rendered
nominal because of the preponderance of
Syrian Army presence in the ADF.

In this connection, I would like to
thank the 2,000 soldiers who came from
the other Arab countries. I would also
have liked to thank the Syrian soldiers,
but unfortunately, due to the orders of
their commanders. their treatment of both
Moslems and Christians in Lebanon was
bad, and for that, I cannot be grateful to
the Syrian authorities.

In contrast, the UN. troops sent to the
South came from several countries, and
each country's contingent was equal in
size to each of the others’. Furthermore,
none of the participating countries had
any ambitions in Lebanon.

For this reason, I wish that the
European states and the Arab states which
have no ambitions in Lebanon would
place some of their troops at the disposal
of the secretary general of the United
Nations. And i wish, as I have said before,
that the provisions of Security Council
Resolutions 425 and 426 (calling for UN.

assistance to reestablish Lebanese sover-
eignty in the South) would be extended
to cover all parts of Lebanon. This would
allow Syria to withdraw its Army, and

make it possible for President Sarkls to
build the army of the “new Lebanon"
and instruct it to gather up all the arms in
the country with the support of the
international forces.

Otherwise, I don't see how President
Sarkis can ask the Syrian Army, which is
not an Arab deterrent force, to pull out
of Lebanon. .

Regarding the situation in South Leba-
non, I say the American Administration is
responsible for it, and I will give you
proof of this:

When the Israeli Army entered Leba-
non on March 15, 1978, Mr. (US.
Secretary of State Cyrus) Vance said the
American Administration had not asked
Israel to put a stop to its invasion of
Lebanon but was watching developments
carefully.

And a month ago, on August 19, 1979,
the former US. ambassador (to the U.N.,
Andrew) Young, stated on American
television that the United States support-
ed lsraell expansion into Lebanon.

And we must not forget that Israel
uses American weapons, and that It used
cluster bombs on Lebanese villages, dis-
placing 220,000 Southerners, who became
refugees In their own country.

That was the American position on
March is, 1978, as confirmed by Ambay
sador Young. What evidence do we have
that the United States has since then
changed its position on South Lebanon?

After the resignation of Mr. Young. the
American people felt the power the
Zionist lobby wields in the American
Administration. Now, the Presidential
elections are approacl‘ing, and the candi-
dates, especially the candidates of the
Democratic .,Party, are interested in at-
tracting the Jewish vote. We can expect
Washington to bow to the wishes of the
Jewish lobby, which wants to take over
South Lebanon after driving 200,000
Muslem Shiites out of it.

The only way to stop Israel from doing
what it wishes is to send more U.N.
troops to this region. But the question is,
would the states which have troops in the
Soth be willing to send more soldiers if
the U.N. secretary general asked them to?

Do you think the presence of UN.
troops in all of Lebanon would be
more effective than theb presence has
been in the South?

Yes. Because after the withdrawal of
the Syrian Army, there would be only
two regular armies in Lebanon: The UN.
force and the Lebanese Army. In the
South now, however, we have the Israeli
Army, which has no interest in defusing
the situation in that area. That is why
South Lebanon is the only part of the
world where a UN. force has been
unsuccessful.

Given the new US. initiative, vague
though it may be so far, do you still
think the Carter Administration Is going
ahead with the "Kissinger plan" to
partition Lebanon, as you have said in
the past?

In September, 1974, i said that there
was a plan to divide Lebanon into two
Lebanons — a Moslem one and a Christian
one, with the Damascus road as the
border between them - to allow for the
resettlement of 400,000 Palestinians in
Moslem Lebanon. That is the Kissinger
plan, which I called a conspiracy.

In June, 1975, President Suleiman
Franiieh said that in the light of his
meeting with Kissinger before I974, he
was convinced that it was Kissinger who
worked out the plan for the Lebanese
disturbances to give South Lebanon to the
Palestinians. '

I believe the conspiracy is continuing,

because I am convinced that the United-

89

States can put an end to Israeli inter-
ference in Lebanon. But as I said, the
elections are approaching and the Caner
Administration does not want to upset
the Zionists in America.

I will be very happy if, after this
interview is published. the American
Administration denies what I am saying
and assures the Lebanese people that it
supports the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of their country
within its internationally recognized
borders. Assurances, of course, would not
satisfy me. I would want something
tangible. I would be very happy indeed,
and so would the sweeping maiority of
the Lebanese, if the' United States were to
provide tangible evidence that its position
on Lebanon had changed.

The first three years of President
Sarlris' regime do not encourage one to
trust American assurances Despite the'
assurances the President received from
America, the incidents In the South
continued and, in March, I978, Israel
launched a land, sea and air invasion of
the entire South, attacking 'its peaceful.
innocent people.

What hopes are you pinnlm on the

Arab summit conference, which is

expected to discuss the South Lebanese

problem as a major item on its agenda?

I am told that the summit will be
preceded by an Arab foreiyt ministers’
meeting in Tunis. I hope, of course, that
they will decide to defend the South -
not with speeches and emotions or with
feeble financial‘compertsation, but with
action. I don't think they will take such a
decision.

And if after the foreign ministers'
meeting Syria decides to send more troops
to Lebanon, the situation will become
worse. ‘~especially since those forces are

not allowed to go south of the Litani, the
so-called "red line.”

Exactly what would you want the
results of the Arab summit to be?
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPO2-00050R000200020007-0
I want the summit to place at the
disposal of the secretary general of the
UN. several thousand non-Syrian Arab
soldiers who would then participate with
the UN. Interim Force in Lebanon.

When that happens, UNIFIL will be
able to get the Israeli Army out of South
Lebanon. The Israeli Army, according to
the information at my disposal. is still
maintaining positions in several Lebanese
villages, including Yarin, Maruhin,
Kawzah, south of Bint lbail, south of
Aitaroun, Kleia, Hula, Marieyoun,
Kfarshouba, Majidiyeh... The lntemationai
forces will then be able to implement
Resolutions 425 and 426, and Resolution
444, especially Article 7 of it, and
Resolution 450. After that, authority in
the South can be returned to the
Lebanese government, and the Arabs can
rebuild the villages destroyed by the
Israeli Army and compensate the villagers
— because the South and its people have
been victimized by the Arabs, who have
allowed them to lace our common enemy
alone.

If the summit conference decides to
place Arab forces at the disposal of the
UN. secretary general, the Arabs will have
truly done their duty toward South
Lebanon and the Lebanese people.

Do you agree with the Lebanese Front

leaders who are sayirg that the Leba-

neselhlestlnian "coexistence" agree-
ment which the Sarlcis regime is aiming
at through contacts with the PLO and
through the Arab summit is Illtely to
consecrate and formalize Palestinian
presence in Lebanon, lncreaslrg the
threat of the permanent resettlement of

Palestinian refugees there and therefore

the possibility of partitbnl

I don't know what kind of formula
President Sarkis has worked out for
Lebanese-Palestinian coexistence, but I
would favor any agreement with the

Palestinians that is consistent with the
Lebanese-Israeli armistice agreement and
does not violate Lebanese sovereignty.

I recently read a statement by Presi-
dent Chamoun quoting President Sarltis as
saying that the Lebanese-Palestinian Cairo
Agreement cannot be amended and that
the alternative was to "freeze" (Pales-
tinian military) operations in the South.
Responding to that statement, Chamoun
said that the Cairo Agreement no longer

~ exists, since the House last year adopted a

decision prohibiting all military operations
on Lebanese territory.

I disagree with Camille Chamoun’s
view. The Cairo Agreement will remain in
effect until it is revoked by the executive
or legislative authority. Because the agree-
ment was signed - on November 3, I969
— by Army Commander General Bustani
on behalf of the Lebanese government,
and it was later approved by majority
vote in Parliament.

Camille Chamoun and Pierre Gemayel
must do what they did after the adoption
of Security Council Resolutions 42S and
426. They must demand the annulment of
the Cairo Agreement. But neither
Chamoun nor Gemayel dare make such a
demand, for fear of angering the Pales-
tinian Resistance, especially these days,
when both of them are outdoing each
other in their wooing of the Palestinian
Resistance.

The executive authority wants to
maintain the Cairo Agreement and con-
tents itself with a request for the
suspension of military operations. And
Abu Ammar says no one can force the
Resistance to withdraw from the South,
and he apparently says this on the
strength of the Cairo Agreement, which Is
still valid.

The presence of the Resistance In the
South is aimed at the mounting of
operations which are the speciality of the
Resistance. If the Resistance suspends Its
operations, the suspension will not be
permanent, and if It is meant to be
permanent, then the Resistance must pull
out of the South, because its presence
there no longer has any justification.

Do you agree with Lebanese Front

leaders who say that the Arab summit

will be a waste of time?

Yes i do — if the result of the summit
is not what I have just told you: a
decision to send Arab troops to the
South. There is another decision which
would also make thesummitworthwhileza
decision to stop supplying the United
States with oil. It is obvious that such a
decision is impossible to even dream
about. But aside from these two decisions,
I see no other useful resolution that the
summit can adopt.

How should the Lebanese state deal
with the question of Palestinian pre-
sence, in your opinion?

i told you how: by announcing that
the Cairo Agreement is null and void. This
has become possible now, after the
adoption of Resolutions 42S and 426?“~
The resolutions contradict the provisions
of the Cairo Ayeement, and Article 103
of the UN. Charter gives U.N. resolutions
precedence over other decisions. After the
Cairo Agreement is revoked, either by the
executive authority or by the legislative
authority, Lebanon can enter into a new
agreement with the PLO which is con-
sistent with Lebanese-Israeli agreements,
which does not violate Lebanese soVer-
eignty, and which does not damage
Lebanese-Palestinian relations.

llow would you evaluate the govern-
ment's performance over the past few
months — starting with its performance
on the Arab level. What do you think,
for instance, of the initiative the
President took in sending personal

91

letters to the Arab chiefs of state on

South Lebanon?

i understand that Sarltis informed the
Arab states that they must take a serious
interest in the situation in South Leba-
non. And today, i read a statement made
by Syrian Foreign Minister (Abdelhalim)
Khaddam to “An-Nahar" in New York, to
the effect that the South Lebanon issue is
a threat not only to Lebanon but also to
the security of all the Arabs, that it is
only natural that the Arabs move to
confront this new result of the Camp
David policy and help Lebanon and the
Palestinian Resistance, and that all we
need do now is wait for the resolutions
which will issue from the Arab summit
conference.

You will notice that Khaddam says the
Arabs must help Lebanon and the Pales-
tinian Resistance, which is not what
President Sarkis wants to do. President
Sarkis wants to suspend military opera.
tions in the South.

This evening, l was visited by Mr. Rene
Moawwad (MP), who delivered the PresL
dent’s letters to the Arab heads of state.-
In answer to my question, he said he was
satisfied with the positions of the Arab
leaders with whom he met.

That is ail l have to say on this'
subiect...

0n the lrttematlonal level, the Pope,
when he mentioned Lebanon in his speech
at the General Assembly, stressed the
importance of the Lebanese coexistence
formula. This means that the Pope wants
a Lebanon of coexistence, not a Lebanon
of Maronites, as some want it to be.

As for the effect the Pope's speech will
have, I hope that the states which
applauded him so much wil allow their
policies to be influenced by what he said

- especially what he said about Lebanon
and the Palestinian cause.

For the hundredth time, i would like to
stress that it is in the interest of Lebanon .

and the Lebanese peeple that a Palestinian
state be established. It is unacceptable
that a people, any people, remain without
a homeland. It is inconceivable that the
Palestinians be deprived of Palestine,
whose name they carry. After the estab-
lishment of Palestine, the Palestinians who
remain in Lebanon will not be refugees or
commandos, but normal people enjoying
the same rights and having the same
obligations that other non-Lebanese resic
dents of Lebanon have.

What have you been doing to help

Lebanon since we last talked to you?

Have you had any contacts with Arab

or Western governments on the issue?

i have no official status to enable me
to make such contacts. I am a member of
Parliamertt, nothing more.

But you have had contacts with the

French foreign ministry and the Vati-

can. Last week, you were in Bonn, and

now you’re planning to visit the 0.5.

I have some private contacts in those
capitals, and l speak to them in my
capacity as a member of Parliament and
the leader of a Lebanese party. I explain
to them the situation in Lebanon and the
danger posed to my country, and I
sometimes suggest measures that can be
taken by those countries in defense of
Lebanon.

Have you met with any Palestinian

officials?

No.-

Have you met with the leaders of other

Lebanese parties?

Yes, but not with Pierre Gemayel and
Camille Chamoun, of course.

You are in fact in contact with various
politicians and officials in the Arab

92

world and outside it. lnthe light of what
you have heard from them, do you
think there is any possibility that the
Lebanese problem can be solved in-
dependently of the Middle Eastern
‘crisis?

My contacts aside, there is an in-

evitable link between the Lebanese and
Palestinian issues. Evidence of this can be
seen in the speech of Pope John Paul II at
the General Assembly, in which he said
that Lebanon's independence, security and
territorial integrity are linked with a lost
solution of the Palestinian problem. That
is true as long as Israel wages war on
Lebanon because of the presence of the
Palestinian Resistance.

For this reason, the Lebanese autho-
rities and the friendly Arab countries
must do everything in their power to
promote a just solution of the Palestinian
problem. Only when such a solution
emerges will the Middle Eastern and
Lebanese crises be settled.

Do you see such a solution coming in

the near future?

How do you expect a solution to come
in the near future, as long as Kissinger's
plan for Lebanon, the conspiracy, is still
being implemented, and as long as the
Arabs don't really want to cooperate with
Lebanon, and as long as some Arab
countries don't want a Palestinian state to
be established (if we are to believe what
President Carter said about not a single
Arab leader telling him he favored a
Palestinian state)?

lodging by your current evaluation of
the situation, when do you. expect to
return to Lebanon?

I will return when l complete my

contacts outside Lebanon and when it

becomes possible for me to take political
action in full freedom in my country.
That is when I will return. and nothing on
earth can keep me away.

The Lebanese people miss you, and

would like to get a message from you;

what do you advise them to do to help
end the Lebanese tragedy?

I cannot put it better than His Holiness
Pope John Paul II, who said in his speech
in Ireland that violence is a crime against
humanity and that there is no war
between Catholics and Protestants.

I convey the same message to the
people of Lebanon. The Lebanese people
must wake up to the situation into which
their leaders have led them. The time has
come for them to leave those leaders and
return to themselves, for they are good
and lowing people: they are people who
build their nation and life with the sweat
of their brow, and not by piracy and
murder. as their leaders are asking them
to build it now.

93
INTERVIEW WITH IBRAHIH QULAYLAT
London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 21 Sep 79 pp 12-14

[Interview with Ibrahim Qulaylst, Lebanese leftist leader of the "Hurnbitun,"
by correspondent Halid 'Awad; date and place not given]

[Text] After the conflicts that broke out within the "National Movement“
and the battles that occurred between some of its groups, the "Hurabitun"
have again surfaced as a political and military stance which is demanding a
comprehensive evaluation of the previous stage and preparation of a clear
future path that will not perish among the currents of the leftist parties.

The name Ibrahim Qulaylat has again appeared, playing a role and taking a
stance in the western area.

Many people are at a loss as to how to evaluate this role. Some of those
in the eastern area who differ with him and who oppose his policy see him
(correctly represented, in their opinion) in the articles which were
recently written by Jean Larteguy in PARIS HAICH (No 1576) as an investiga-
tive report about Lebanon. They were cruel and biting articles. And some
people consider him to be temporary legality in the western area in the
absence of legality.

He said to the Kuwaiti ambassador, 'Abd-al-Hamid al-Bu'ayjan, when he came
on behalf of the Follow-Up Committee: "I am ready to close down my radio
station if that would help to establish legality and pave the way for the
government to take matters firmly in hand and implement its existence."
Al-Bu'ayian was delighted and passed these words along to Lebanese officials.

And until the government takes matters firmly in hand, Ibrahim Qulaylat will
be fully in evidence, politically and militarily.

As you stroll around his office and sit down together with him, you are at
a loss as to what words to choose to describe his personality.

Some time ago, after his period of medical treatment in Geneva, the medicine

on his desk disappeared. He had thrown it all out the window. And along
with it disappeared his unhappy moods which resulted from hit condition of

9h
fatigue. But there is one thing which did not disappear, and will never
disappear, from Ibrahim Qulaylat's desk, and that is President 'Abd-al-Nasir's
picture (the only picture there), his quotes, andeverything that is connected
with his historic stances.

In all of this ataosphere, and after having a sip of the green tea which
Ibrahim Qulaylat likes, I asked him:

[Question] The war is a testing ground for men and events. "here do you
stand now, after lo years of war?

[Answer] Our position is still firmly rooted in the principles which have
been the basis for our decisions to assume our responsibilities during all
the years of the Lebanese war, a war which is military and political at the
some time. For me the political war is the more vicious one and demands
effective and vigilant participation in order to deal with it. The
difference between the military war and the political war is that the former
is, for the most part, a visible, material war, except in some of its
elements which are dictated by political decisions, and the latter basically
depends on what is concocted in the invisible kitchens behind the scenes.
This requires vigilance, pursuing matters, and keeping abreast of every
event in order to gain an in-depth knowledge about it.

He, as an organization of Nasserite independents, the Hurabitun, continuing
to see our position as being within these dimensions, are convinced, due

to the experience of past years, that the Lebanese arena—in the context of
a settlement of the Middle Bast problem, taking into account it Arab,
Palestinian, and Lebanese dimensions—constitutes the central arena in the
struggle to attain this settlement, in both the geographical and political
senses. This distinctive role played by the Lebanese arena has, clearly
and without a doubt, decided, politically and militarily, the stances
assumed and the roles played by the forces which are dire. Ling the strmle
in the area.

Through objectively analyzing our movement, its duties, and its continuity,
and through taking a more profound look at our movement's concept of the
basic given factors that constitute the facts of the case, the docuants,
and the decisions in the dossier of the Middle last issue, we feel that the
national progressive forces and our movement are not permitted to play any
real role in building the future of our nation, Lebanon. Also their pan-
Arab role is perhaps being curtailed in the realm of this problem. this
role, as we appraise it, is at best tantamomt to political pressure moves.
at intermittent stages, for the purpose of seeking improvement of the
conditions stipulated by the large forces, which are running the conflict.
in the dossier of the Middle East issue. ,

[Question] Who is the obstacle and who is the one who is standing aside?

[Answer] The first would be the forces in the struggle which are definitely
and by nature hostile to us. The second would be--and this is something

which is really regrettable—tbs large, allied forces which are directing
the struggle. 95
[Question] Under the category of objective criticism of you, it is said
that your military arm is stronger than your political arm, and that you
have not waged a political battle which, for example, has had the spirit
of the military "Holiday Inn" battle in 1976!

[Answer] This statement can be rejected from two standpoints. This first
is that our movement is a political, ideological movement whose roots extend
back 21 years, to the 1958 revolution to be exact, and I do not believe

that the movement would nave been able to survive with its military and
political institutions, from that time until now, if it had not been for

the fact that it is based on the clarity of its political position. In our
movement there is not distinction between the political aspect and the
military aspect. Our party and organizational work does not respect or heed
any such distinction, because we always take into consideration all the
party and organizational experiences which occurred when the false idea of
such a distinction was tolerated between the wings of [the movement's]
organizations, particularly since this tolerance, especially in the Third
Horld, is a practice employed to encourage conflicting trends among those
engaged in party and combat activity. The second standpoint which rejects
the accusation of a distinction [between the political and military aspects]
in our movement is the fact that our military achievements, which have taken
place continuously for 20 years, are the result of a political decision.

[Question] In people's minds the National Movement is the antithesis of
the Lebanese Front. Do you not believe that the balance of power has now
shifted in favor of the Front, especially after the clear disparity in the
positions taken by the facts in the National Movement?

[Answer] In the scientific balance [of forces] in the conflict in the Leb-
anese arena, the National Movement constitutes the only organization which is
actively confronting the plans and cOurss of action of the Lebanese Front. This
balance is what determines the basic aims on which the National Movement is
based, along with the basic aims on which the Lebanese Front is based. Accord-
ing to the patriotic concept, the balance [of power] cannot fail to be in favor
of the National Movement. And if there are any defects in the balance which
favor the Lebanese Front, it is not a result of the patriotic, political, and
military positions of the Lebanese Front. It is a result of the impact of Arab
and international considerations related to decisions, at different stages,
which are included in the dossier of the Middle East issue, to which the

Lebanese issue is attached. It is acircumstsntial case which disappears along
with its causative factors.

[Question] If the Lebanese Front is not the dialog partner on the other
side, then who is?

[Answer] After the journey of suffering the Lebanese have gone through, we
have become convinced that the Lebanese Front does not really represent the
patriotic Christian faction, and this is sufficiently indicated by the
disintegration which took place in the Front after President Sulayman
Franjiysh withdrew from it, and by the present position of Raymond Iddih,
or by two parties of the Front, the Phalangists and the National Liberals,

AI
after a number of their political leaders, such as Col Pu'ad Lahud left
then. We are adhering to our patriotic political stance in order to arrive
at a solution which would enable our country to pull out of its misfortune
so that the patriotic Christian faction. which is outside the realm of

being subordinate to the Lebanese tront, can have the asin effective role in
the dialog and in creating a new, advanced, civilized fornuia--without the
concept of the Lebanese Front-which would be suitable for the building of

a nation which would be capable and have healthy, deeply entrenched roots
for mutual understanding. No patriotic person would disagree with this
demand, in any location within the arena of Lebanon.

And if the Lebanese Front is to have a role, then first it must remove the
factors which caused the members of the Front to switch over from being
nationally categorized as being asong those who tolerate Israeli occupation
of a cherished part of the our country to being among those who collaborate
with this occupation, and thus with the Zionist enemy.

[Question] More than one leader in the National Front feels that Aain
al-Junaayyil and Dany Shae'un do not collaborate with this occupation, nor
with Israel. And this qualifies thee to play the role that you are talking
about.

[Answer] The logic of hawks and doves in the‘two parties of the ubanese
Front is a farce which was toppled by the conditions of the confrontation
with the enemy, and it does not form a link between the formula sought and
arriving at final solutions to the crisis which has been going on for 6 years.
And if Amin al-Jumayyil and Dany Shae'un are not openly in contact with
Israel, they are still part of the contact with Israel, they are still part
of the contact with Israel through their two parties. The day that both of
then withdraw from their parties, than they will have really chosen the

path of breaking off relations with the Zionist enemy.

[Question] There is information to the effect that the two of them are

conducting a dialog with you by means of written and oral messages, and

that the ambassador of a neutral European country has passed on to you a
message from Shaykh Amin al-Jumayyil.

[Answer] It is true. Our channel of cosmunications has been open for some
time. There was a aessage that cane to us from Deny sham'un, a written
letter which constitutes a channel which paves the way for a dialog. Also,
2 years ago, at the end of the war, we received an oral message from Bashir
al-Jumayyil, through a press organisation, which proposed a dialog. and
this was before the stage of collaborating with Israel. The message
suggested holding a meeting in a place agreeable to both parties. A very
short time ago we received, via the asbessador of a western European
country, a message from Amin alahneyyil which, in his View. constitutes a
basis for a national dialog. But we did not dwell on it for too long since
it mentioned no means of dealing with the basic, root causes for the existing
incompatibility between us and the two parties, the Phalsngists and the

97
Liberals. So we told the ambassador, who is friendly with both sides. that
the message, with its rather pale contents, was about as useful to us as
blowing on cold ashes [to keep a fire going].

[Question] Some people do not like what you said about an agreement with
the Maronites, at a time when there is a prior need to have the Moslem
leaders come to an agreement. Do you, for example, need to come to an
agreement with the Moslea bloc before making an agreement with Amin
al-Jt-ayyil and Dayn Sham'un?

[Answer] Hhen we advocate the necessity of undertaking a national agreement
with the Maronite faction. we are including the necessity of a Maronite-
Moslem agreement. The Lebanese war has defined the positions of all of the
factions, and the progressive Moslem masses have conclusively categorised
the forces in the struggle, the patriotic and unpatriotic ones, and the
Mosle- and Christian ones. Many of those toppled by the war in the patriotic
Mosle- area are making cannon cause with the unpatriotic Maronites. And
here a distinction should be made between the patriotic Maronites and

independent Maroniteson the one hand, and the Maronites of the Lebanese
Front on the other hand.

It shoud also be made clear that the Moslem bloc has patriotic Moslem
personalities with whom we see eye to eye in sany issues which directly
concern our Moslem masses.

[Question] When you openly state that there are Trojan horses in the
Palestinian revolutionary movement and the National Movement, you are
moving over close to [the position of] the sident aajority or to a position
mid-way between the rightista and the leftists. Or how would you otherwise
designate this position?

[Answer] In circumstances like those in the war in Lebanon it is not
something unusual if forces playing a destructive role infiltrate into the
Palestinian revolutionary movement, and into the progressive national move-
ment. Both of them are in the thick of having to deal with the challenges

to the causes of our masses. But the revolutionary leadership and
mentality--connitted to its cause-which is inside the Palestinian resistance
movement and the National Movement, is capable of bridling and liquidating
the Trojan horses inside their movements.

[Question] People raise a hue and cry about the secondary wars between
factions, deployed along the same battle-line, that are fighting in the
streets and between houses. Three weeks ago there was Sidon and 2 weeks

ago there was the Mazra'sh area. Do you not think that this fighting makes
you lose a lot of what you have gained?

[Answer] These negative phenomena that sometimes abOund in the Palestinian
revolution and the National Movement are, without a doubt, wearing down our
forces, apart from the battles that our duty forces us to take part in.
For this reason it is incumbent upon us all to prevent this, by all possible
means and sumoning all Our courage, otherwise, as tine goes on, all this
light turn into a characteristic situation which could be profitable only to
the enemy . The Murabitun--the novenent of independent Nasseriteswhswe
already counteracted the negative phenomena which occurred in Sidon by
issuing a statenent at that time which consented on the strike in the city
as follows: "Sane growths have appeared on the body of the Palestinian
revolution and the National Movement, and they have secreted many excesses.
These should have been dealt with and we should have loudly desanded the
cessation of their harnful effect on the Palestinian and Lebanese nasses who
both suffered, to an equal degree, from this her- and these excesses."

Fron Beirut and Sidon we turn to the far south concerning which the question
addressed to Ibrahim Qulaylst is:

[Question] ﬂy is the south not the main arena of military activity and
concentration of armed troops? What role do the Hurabitun play in the war
in the south?

[Answer] There is no doubt that our natural location at this fateful stage
is the south. In our movement's concept the south is politically and
geographically the central link in the Middle East conflict, and all scans
of combat should be mobilized for it. And if there is any obscuring of our
role in the south, this is not our concern and will not alter our path,
because in the south we are fighting for the sake of 'Usar's lord and not
for the sake of 'Unar [i.e., we are fighting for iaportant principles and
not for soaething insignificant]. We are in the lands of the south, with
all of our conhat resources, we have nan who fall in battle, and we are
continuing to remain side by side with the people of the south who are
staunchly holding out in their positions. Everybody knows that the Intrabitun
fighters in the city of Sidon were the last ones to retreat fro. their
positions, on the norning of the Israeli attack, to the outskirts of the
city, and were the first ones to return and enter the city. We also were,
and still are, in al-‘l‘ayyibah, 'Adlun, al-Qasiniyah, and Arnun. Two of

our nen have been taken prisoner by the Israeli eneny. They are Nisan Kirbaj
and Muhamad Barb.

Since the south is presently the focus of the conflict, we are busy drwing
up a plan based on a clear policy of allying our forces more closely with
the progressive Hosles forces in the south in order to facilitiats their
doing of their duty, on the national, pan-Arab, and international plane.

A discussion of the south naturally leads us to talking about the disappearance
of the has: Muse al-Sadr.

[Question] It is said that your organisation, with its scans of gathering
infor-ation, has definite knowledge about the fate of the has al-Sadr, but
that it is not in your interest to spread the secret at the present tine.
Do you not think that the fact that the Sunnis and Shi'ites have unified
their ranks wakes it iuperative to say sosething decisive in this setter?

99
[Answer] 0n the basis of the information gathered by the organizations in
our movement. considering all of its national, domestic, pan-Arab, and
international dimensions, we have kept in mind cur duties as dictated to

us by our position in the united ranks of the Hoslems. and have searched for
a clue that would lead us to leaning about the fate of the Imam and his

two comrades, but so far we have had negative results. But we, along with
those in the patriotic, Arab ranks, are demanding that efforts be pursued

to uncover the circumstances surrounding the disappearance of the Imam,
especially since they are circumstances which, at this stage, do not serve
the cause of unifying the ranks of the Moslems.

[Question] In conclusion we ask you: Have you given up calling the 1943
Covenant the Lebanon Hotel Formula. or have you found a palpable substitute?

[Answer] Each new day subsequent to the 1943 Covenant strengthens our
conviction that the 191.3 deal was, at best, nothing more than [the formation

of] a shareholding company between a bloc of families which were obliged
by the imperialists to sign that formuls's decree.

[Question] Do you and Shaykh Bashir al-Jumayyil agree about this? his
approach to this formula is that of a rejection similar to yours.

[Answer] But he criticizes it on a completely different basis than we do.
We view it from a purely patriotic viewpoint, whereas his understanding of
these principles is based on forming a screen for Israeli occupation in the
south. This is on the one hand. 0n the other hand. he approaches this
formula through hypotheses and family rituals. amorted by the slogan:
God, country. and family.

[Question] De Gaulle himself talked about the French family.

[Answer] The atmosphere in which De Gaulle was talking is one thing, and
the atmosphere of the Phalangist Party is quite another matter. De Gaulle
did not base a family political party on ideas such as: the father is the

godfather. the firstborn son is the political arm. and the second son is
the military arm.

And so on. Ibrahin QuJaylat admits that the present stage is a stage of
political aggressiveness, not one of military aggressiveness. In this
connection. he is receiving ambassadors and receiving messages.

Maybe in the end, after all the cards are on the table, he will be the one
conducting a dialog!
FINANCE MINISTER EXPLAINS MTBlPl‘S 'ro Bowman REVENUES
Beirut; menu mm in English 22-28 Oct. 79 pp 2h-29

Enteniev with All ill-Khalil, finance minister, by Hans el-Seid date and
place not giveﬂ

[Texg Finance Minister All athalil expects Lebanon’s customs duties
to be doubled by the government's current efforts to combat
smuggling and phcy.

in an interview with Monday Morning last week, the minbtc
said Lebanon's antiosmugglir‘ campaign involves:

0 Reduction of "some" customs duties;

0 Modern antivsmuggling equipment for the customs auo
thorities;

O A drive to reestablish law and orda' in all parts of the
country, lncludim the numerous coastal locations which now host
illepl harbors.

The anti-smuggling crusade is one of the matures the minister
mentioned in an all-out effort to build up the trickle of State
revenues into a “reasonable" flow.

Other measures the minister cited were:

o “A reconsideration of tax legislation." This measure he
studiously avoided elaborating on, giving the impression that the
next few months may bring us fatter taxes. Since one of the
government's aims is to “reduce the burden of limited-income
coups," as Khalil put it, one assumes that it is the other groups
who will begetting more acquainted with their tax-collectors.

0 “An improvement in tax-collection operations.” This
improvement has already started with a decision to cancel all fines
for late taxpayers and encoune them to come up with titer bacit
taxes by extending the payment period and Introducing an
installment plan.

To "reduce the burden of limhed income groups," Khalil said.
the government fully Intends to tilt with trﬂation and take on the
cost-of-l ivlng ogre.

To reduce inflationary pressures and bolster the tebanese
pound, for instance, the authorities are trying to absorb surplus
liquidity by Issuing Treasury bonds.

101
To control prices, they are trying to “revive" and “mobilize"
pricecontrol legislation and agencies — with a few possible
amendments in the legislation in question.

Where bolstering the Lebanese pound is concerned, the minister
protested that the currency was doing exceptionally well,
considering the battering it has received.

The pressures to which the pound has been subjected would
have destroyed the currencies of many other countries, he said,
but they have hardly affected the Lebanese pound — thanks to its
gold coverage and "the wise policies which the monetary agencies
concerned are using to support and protect it."

The fact that the dollar has soared from LL. 2.40 to LL. 3.25 is
not a sign that the LL. has dropped; it's a sign that the dollar has
risen. Ditto where sterling is concerned.

And what about the recent survey in the lmtirutioml Investor,
in which International banking institutions rated Lebanon as the
least creditworthy country in the Middle East, bar Turlteyi

if the survey is accurate, Khall declared, the rating is only
temporary and “will in no way affect Lebanon's ability to obtain.
international loans." in fact, generous loan offers are already
“pouring in," but Lebanon is poihely rejecting them because its
plan is to start with domestic loans (Treasury bonds) and then go
on to external loans.

Will Lebanon ever regain its status as the unehallerged financial
center of the Middle East?

No question about it, the minister said, reporting that "even in
these bleak times, all regional and international financial
institutions have unanimously nominated this country — and this
country alone - to be the maior career of all financial activities in

the entie region, when it regains instability and security."

Following is the full interview:

Could you summarize for us the

financial policy which the new govern

ment of Premier Selim ﬂoss is follow-
ing?

in its policy statement, the government
pledged to use all possible means to
implement urgent construction and de
velopmcnt programs, improve the condi
tions of the Treasury, combat inflationary
pressures and the high cost of living, deal
with social, labor, health and education
problems, and promote private enterprise
in the national economy.

These represent the major steps that the
government intends to take at this stage to
deal with the country's financial situation
— in such a way as to achieve social justice,
lead to economic prosperity, improve the
conditions of the Treasury, fight inflation,

it?

control the cost of living and reduce the
burden of limited-income groups. These are
the major issues which the government
intends to deal with at this time, with a
view to setting the financial situation of the
country on the right course.

This requires a reconsideration of tax
legislation, an improvement in tax collec-
tion operations, and various measures to
limit inflation and combat the high cost of
living, whatever form it takes.

To invigorate the tax-collection opera-

.tion, the government has extended the

deadlines for the payment of certain taxes.
To absorb some of the excess currency
liquidity, it has issued Treasury bonds. And
it is now in the process of taking the
appropriate measures to deal with the cost
of living. All this is being done in
accordance with a clear, well-defined plan.

Could you give us an idea of the

broadlines of the national budget for

1980, which was recently approved by

the Cabinet?

The broadiincs of the budget can be.
summarized as follows:

A. Once more, the expenditure is more
than the income. This is due to the
increased expenditure on security affairs and
on construction and development projects.
The gap between expenditure and income
will, naturally, contract as security condi
tions improve.

B. It is hoped that this budget will help
us develop clear principles on which to base
a dynamic financial policy — a financial
policy which is neither inadequate nor
helpless.

C. It is also hoped that customs
revenues will increase as a result of the
official action planned to combat smuggl-
ing and piracy - action which should
double those revenues.

Most countries in the world are sufferitg

from Inﬂation and the costoof-iiviq
_ spiral — and Lebanon is, perhaps,
suffering more than others. Exactly how
do you plan to deal with this problem?

More accurately: do you think you can

deal with this problem, given the

authorities’ continuing absence from
some econornic sectors and vital econo-
mic facilities?

There is no doubt that inflation and
rising prices are phenomena from which
Lebanon, like other countries, is suffering.
And as you know, these two phenomena
have external and internal causes.

Where the external causes are concern-
ed, these are an international responsibility;
they can only be dealt with by joint action
on the part of all countries in general, and,

more specifically, on the part of the _

international financial institutions.

103

As for the domestic causes, these can be
summarized as follows: the rise in internal
liquidity, and the failure to control prices.
The responsibility for these causes must be
borne by each country separately.

The Lebanese government is using the
means at its disposal to deal with the
internal causes of inﬂation and the rising
cost of living. It is trying to absorb surplus
liquidity by seeking domestic loans (Trea-
ury bonds) and by adopting a certain

' banking policy. It is trying to control prices

by reviving the price-control agencies and
mobilizing them by means of mobilizing
the legislation pertaining to this matter and
introducing the necessary amendments to
it when such amendments are needed.

Observers here have noticed a steep shop
in State income - in the collection of
taxes and customs duties - and they
have attributed this drop to the mush
rooming of illegal ports upand down the
Lebanese coast. ﬂow do you intend to
deal with this particular problem?

There is nothing surprising about the
drop in Treasury revenues in recent years;
indeed, it would have been surprising had
the revenues not dropped, considering the
paralysis that gripped State institutions as a
result of the painful incidents this country
has witnessed.

But the government has not stood idly
by. It has taken several measures to restore

a reasonable flow of revenues to the
Treasury, of which I cite the following:

A. Fines for delays in tax-payment have
been cancelled. the period for the payment
of back taxes has been extended and
installment facilities have been introduced.

8. Some customs duties have been
reduced, smuggling is being combatted and
the customs authorities are being provided
with modern equipment to help them limit
smuggling

in addition. the Lebanese government is
rebuilding its security agencies with a view
to reestablishing law and order in all parts
of Lebanon — including, of course, the
parts where those illegal ports you asxed
about are located. As I told you in my
answer to your previous'question, the
government is exerting serious chm» to
combat piracy and smuggling, using all the
means at its disposal -- and it is doing so to

protect national interests and the interests
of the Lebanese people.

The exchange rate of the Lebanese
pound is still plummeting, The dong,
which used to be worth LL. 2.40, is now
worth LL. 3.25. The pound sterling was
LL. 4.20 and is now LL. 7.65. What steps
do you intend to take to rest ore t:..- mm,
of the Lebanese pound?

No country can go through what
Lebanon has been through without having
its national currencY affected in one way or
another. And yet, we find that the
Lebanese pound has more or less held its
position, and' has only been relatively
slightly affected, if compared with other
currencies.

This is very impressive. You will notice
that the currencies of many countries —
countries which have not been subjected to
a fraction of what Lebanon has been
through — have been greatly affected by
international ﬁnancial conditions, either
dropping or soaring, unable to achieve
stability, despite their past strength and
immunity.

In comparison, the Lebanese pound has
performed well in those internailonal
ﬁnancial conditions, more or less maintain-
ing its' strength and immunity. This is due
to the strong gold coverage it BDJOYS and
the wise policies which the monetary
agencies concerned are using to support
and protect it.

it may be worth mentioning here that
the dollar's rise against the Lebanese pound
— from LL. 2.40 to LL. 3.25 - and
sterling's rise against the Lebanese pound —
from LL. 4.20 to LL. 7.65 - do not
indicate a drop in the value of the Lebanese
pound; rather. they indicate that the dollar

and sterling have improved, regaining
some of the stature they had in the not too
distant past.

At any rate, we are aware that support
of the Lebanese pound requires close
coordination between our monetary and
financial policies, and that is what the
Lebanese government is trying to achieve
by invigorating the various economic
sectors through the Touristic and Industrial
Development Bank, the Reconstruction
and Development Council, the National
institution for the Insurance of invest-
ments and other agencies.

Do you think Lebanon can still regain its

status as the major financial center of

the Middle Sast?

The best evidence of Lebanon's ability
to do so is the factthat, even in these bleak

times, all regional and lntematlonal finan-
cial institutions have unanimously nominat-

ed this country — and this country alone -
to be the major center of all financial
activities in the entire region, when it
regains its stability and security.

in addition, some of the foreign
financial institutions which were forced to
suspend their activities in Lebanon during
the two-year war have begun to return and
resume their activities. This is proof enough
of the fact that although Lebanon may lose
its special financial status temporarily, it is
bound to regain it and become stronger and
more immune than before.

The Institutional Investor periodical
recently surveyed international bankir'
institutions to get thei views on the
creditworthiness of various countries
around the world. That survey ranked
Lebanon as the least creditworthy
country in the Middle East, with the
exception of Turkey. Our question: if
this is Lebanon's current reputation,
how is the country to obtain the
international loans it needs?
If what this periodical published about
Lebanon's creditworthiness rating is true,

10h
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: CIA-RDP02-00850R000200020007-0

that rating is temporary and bound to
change. It will in no way affect Lebanon's
ability to obtain international loans.

In this matter, Lebanon depends on the
good reputation it still enjoys in inter-
national circles and among foreign and
Arab financing institutions. This reputation
is based on the international confidence in
Lebanon's ability to recover, and the
international conﬁdence in the Lebanese
people, who have been famous down the
ages for their competence, their experience,
and their ability to overcome difficulties and
adapt to the most trying circumstances.

This confidence, in fact, is Lebanon’s
capital. It is Lebanon’s most valuable
possession. .

That is why we have always had grea
hopes that Lebanon would be able to
secure the external loans it needs. Indeed,
generous offers are already pouring in. But
Lebanon wants to move in accordance with
a well-studied plan which starts with
domestic loans by means of Treasury bonds
and then moves on to external loans. This
plan takes into consideration the current
circumstances and the dictates of the
reconstruction and development operation
in its various stages.

cso: h820

105

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02100: CIA-RDP02-00860R000200020007-0
OULD KBYDALLA SWING CM'CUT SUPKJRT m” FRANCE
Kris LE POMS in French 18 Sep 79 p ‘6
[Article by Peul Belte]

[Text] The prime einieter of Peuitenie. Lt Col Hoheeed Ould Heydslle, wee
expected to errive in Prence Monday 1? Septeeber on e 3-dey offioiel vieit.
He is echeduled to not with Gieoerd d'ﬂeteing, who will receive hie et
lunch on Uednesdsy.

The POLISARIO Front ennounced in Algiere thet it hed inflicted loeees
eeounting to eeverel hundred killed or teken prieoner leet Sundey during en
en‘oueh nee: Zea in eouthern Morocco. ibr its pert, Rehet cleiee to hewe
inﬂicted heevy loeeee on the Sehreouie leet Thuredey during en etteck on
Denied. Newseen who were teken to the scene by the guerrillee reported
on their return to Algiers thet they had counted e totel of 51 horoccen
ereored vehicles destroyed or ebendoned during the hettle et Lebouirete on
2‘5 Auguet. Lestly. it wee reported thet Yeeir 'Aretet. who ie preeently in
Horocco following hie visit to Algerie, will etteept to eediete between the
two countries.

According to his neocietee. Lt col lbheeed Ould Heydelle proposes to
expound to hie French convereetionel pertner hie concept of the bileterel
cooperetion, in the light of the doeeetic end foreign perils thet threeten
hie country. The two pu-incipel perile ere. he beliewee. "deetebilisetion'
of his govern-em end ”pertiticn" of the netionel territory.

’nne priee einistea' reportedly hoped to eeintein e position equidietent {roe
Rehet end Algiers end to nintein good reletione with both cepitele. Sole
of hie eseocietee explein thet ever since Nouekchott eigned the peece
egreeeent with the POLISARIO Front Morocco hee been etteepti to overthrow
the )huritenien Governeent. firet by deleying the wiuzdruelnfnow coepleted)
of ite troops etetioned in Hemitenis. end euheequently by etteepting to set
up e ”countergowerneent" in Heuritenie end by orgenising, in Morocco iteelf,
en opposition front proeoted by e tmcoet, Lt col Abdel Keder.

The new huritenien "etrong een" will eleo cell the ettention of Preeident
Giecerd d'neteing to the "eechinetions" of verioue proteaoniste for the
purpose of pertitioning lleuritenie. Hie intieetes recell thet Preeident
Senehoruwho supports the Horocoen position in the Sshsren confliotuis in
turn supported by Rsbst when he speeks of the possibility of sttsohing
southern huritsnis. which is populstsd by blscks. to Senegsl. These
circles slso csst doubt upon oertsin French circles in ere sllegedly
equating the differences between the ﬂoors end the blsoks, wherees these
differences could—-they ssy-cbe essily resolved in en stsosphere of cell
snd serenity.

The group now in power in Nouskchott believes thst sny "destsbilisstion‘ o!
huritsnis would give rise to “generelised mills wsrtsre" thrown

the region and would hsve repercussions in Senenlm-s develop-sat thst

would not be in Psris' interest. The lhuritsnisns ere pleesed with the good
relstions they ssintsin with Irsnoe end slso with the sid hence hes given
the- to defend their sovereignty. end they would like Pox-is to poetics so
"even sore sctive policy of neutrslity" by ulnar-tine those govern-eats 05st
nigat hers huritsnis‘s integrity to set with discretion end sodmtion.
They would elso like the French Goverment not ”to let itself be outﬂenked"
by the ssneuvers of whst the entou-ege of Lt Col Ould Reydslls unease is s
'oolonisl lobby" estsblished in the Seamless cspitsl with offshoots in
Nouskchott sud Pu'is.

10992
Go. M00

107
GOVERNOR NAMED FOR NEW PROVINCE OF [FRAME
Casablanca HARDC SOIR in French 19 Sep 79 p 1

[ﬁrtic1e: "Ifrane, a New Province: Yesterday His Majesty the King Appointed
Hasssn Nader as Head of the Government; Abderrahman Alaoui, Pasha of the
Touarga District17

[Text] Yesterday at the close of the Council of Ministers. His Majesty
hassan 11 received Hassan Nader, pasha of the Touarga district and presented
him with a decree of nomination as governor of the new Province of Ifrane.

Addressing himself to the new governor in particular. the sovereign spoke

as follows: "By our decision to nominate you as governor of the new Province
of Ifrane, we would like to create a model and touristic province, the capital
of which will be the city of Ifrsne. He see in you a man who loves nature and
is dedicated to the conservation of the environment and to maintaining the
equilibrium between man and nature.

The inhabitants of lfrane remember you with great pleasure and we are sure
that your nomination will come up to their aspirations and noble objectives.
We are also convinced that your qualities will permit you to overcome all

the difficulties which could arise in the field of coordination between
agriculture and tourism, and we who have visited Ifrsne from time to time,

are willing to examine all the problems which you may bring to our attention."

His majesty the king then received Abderrahmane Alaoui. pasha of the city of
Ifrane and presented him with his decree of nomination as pasha of the district
of Touarga in Rabat, replacing Hassan Nader.

On this occasion the sovereign stressed the devotion of the pasha of the
district of Touarga to "Arab and Moroccan traditions" and underlined the
administrative experience and the qualities which will be very valuable to
him in the accomplishment of his duties to the very best of his abilities.

7993
C50: 6400

108
INFORMATION ON INSTALLATION OF GOVEMOR 0F IFRANE
Casablanca HAROC SOIR in French 20 Sep 79 pp 1,2

[Excerpts] On Wednesday morning the minister of interior. Driss Basri,
presided in the seat of the Municipality of Ifrane at the ceremony of in-
stallation of Hasssn Nader as governor of the Province of Ifrane, the
creation of which was announced yesterday by His Majesty King Hassan II.

The young Province of Ifrane which becomes the 39th province of the kingdom
will include in particular the municipality of Ifrene, Tazeguit district,
the autonomous center of Azrou, the Brklaouen district, the Timahdite
district and other regions including Dayet Aoua.

After the reading of ﬂassan Nader's decree of nomination as head of the
Province of-Ifrane by "Cadi At Tawfik," the minister of interior delivered
an address in which he conveyed to the inhabitants the solicitous concern
and great interest of the sovereign for the region elevated to the rank of
province whose future economic and social development is an auspicious omen
for a better future for its citizens.

The minister added that the "creation of this new province is in keeping

with his majesty the king's policy, which aspires to the rapprochement of
the administration, the citizens and the coordination of all the efforts

of the state with a view to achieving an economic and social renaissance

and the improvement of the living standards of the people."

After pointing out that the number of provinces and prefectures in the
kingdom had risen to 39 at the present time, the minister indicated that
creating the Province of Ifrane is an inperative necessity with the aim
of coalescing the objectives of the administration which consist in the
realization of a harmonious development of the great incomparable natural
riches of this region and its touristic potentialities.

The minister continued "Prom an agricultural point of view the Ifrane region
embraces an immense forest and animal inheritance. Its rational exploitation

and conservation entails the combined efforts of the people and the administra-
tion. in accordance with the decree of 1975."

109
"on city planningﬂ'heudded."thlsyoung province is in a position to profit
from the efforts the state is exerting in this field while maintaining the
specific individuality and appearance of the city."

Basri stated further: "In the field of tourism the Province of Ifrane dis-
poses of various immense potentials and is favored by nature and an incom-
parable climate, which could be instrumental in shaping it into a pilot
province in the tourist sector.

"In the general interest all this natural wealth must be developed in the
framework of a coordinated and fruitful action between the elected members
and the citizenry."

In addition Driss Basri underlined the administrative experience and ex-
cellent qualities which predispose Hassan Nader, governor of the new
Province of Ifrane, to be equal to the mission entrusted to him by His
Majesty King Massan II in the best interest of the region.

He finally urged the elected members and the citizens to work in agreement
with the new governor in order to promote the development of the young
province in all its domains.

The following were present at the installation ceremony: the minister of
transports, Mohand Naceur, the governors of the provinces of "shoes, Pea

and thnifrn. Mohamed Doubi Kadmiri, Moulay Mehdi Alaoui M'rani and Mohamed
Afoud respectively. ministry of interior officials, deputies, elected members.
local authorities and people of consequence.

7993
CSO: 4400

110
BRIEFS

DENIAL 0F UNEH PRESIDENT—~All the students are ready to participate in the
defense of territorial integrityuﬂohaned Boubekri, president of mm
(National Union of Moroccan Students) categorically denied the reports
alleging that a fraction of the students who had taken part in the XVIth
UNEH congress were opposed to the question of the Sahara being discussed.
At a press conference held on Tuesday mrning at the UNEH headquarters,
Boubekri reaffirmed that the students are ready to participate actively
in the territorial defense of lbrocco, and to this effect they have pro-
posed the establishment of training cups for the students. [Text]
[Casablanca HARDC SOIR in French 19 Sep 79 p l] 7993

(:50: 1.1.00

111
OPPOSITION LEADER SAYS REVOLUTION AGAINST WWI MINT
Damascus Ala-BA'TB in Arabic 2 6 6 Sep 79

[Interview with Busayn 'Uth-an Hansur, Leader of Denocratic Unionist Party.
by 'Abd-al-Ra'uf al-Kafri]

[2 Sep 79 p 3]

[Text] The individualistic, oppressive and dictatorial regime of lhnayri
is on its death bed in these moments. It is on the brink of an abyss and it
has conitted an obvious treason against our country by throwing itself in
al-Sadat's am. This regime has sought the help of the Egyptian regine's
gendsrmery only to preserve its survival, sacrificing the Sudanese people's
dignity and independence.

Hhen the regine found that it is isolated, it owned the troops of a1-
Sadat, the similar agent dictator. who has betrayed the national cause. The
price of our hateful dictator's fall in the am of al-Sadat has been exorbi-
tant because he has taken part with a1-Ssdat in betraying the Arab nation
and disovning its history.

This is what has been stressed by Busayn 'Uthmsn Mansur. a leader of the Su-
danese Denocratic Unionist Party and the information official of the opposi-
tion Sudanese People's Rational Front.

[Question] what has recently happened and what is now happening in the fra-
ternal country of Sudan?

[Answer] For a long time, Sudan has been undergoing important developnents.
A state of anxiety and dissatisfaction has been prevailing among the Sudan-
ese masses due to the political. economic and social deterioration in the
domestic situation, not to nention the national position represented in tying
Sudan' a foreign policy to the imperialist interests by supporting al-Sadat' a
policy in the area. I would like to stress that Sudan will experience sur~
prise developunt in the coming days.

112
The latest popular uprising was a clear reflection of the state of dissatis-
faction and of the Sudanese nasses' rejection of this policy. not to lention
rejection of the latest cabinet reshuffle which is tantamount; to another sign
of the crisis that is eroding the Sudanese ragine.

[Question] Before eﬂaarking on our Sudanese people's current revolution.

it is useful to deal with the situation of your party. considering that you
are one of the leaders of the Sudanese Denocratic Unionist Party. “hat

were the early beginnings of your party and what are the phases through which
this party has passed?

[Answer] The party was originally called the Party of Brothers and inclu-
ded the first forces opposed to colonialisn. It was founded in 19“ and
sought at the outset to realize the Bile Valley unity between Egypt and Su-
dan. When the July 1952 revolution broke out. it was decided to unite the
parties calling, by varying degrees, for unity with Egypt. Those parties
were united and started to work under the name of the Unionist Rational Party.
In 1954, a split occurred in the party and another party under the nan of
the Democratic People's Party was formed. This party was lore strongly in-
clined toward Egypt than the Unionist National Party. The two parties then
reached agreement again and the Sudanese Denocratic Unionist Party was for-ed
in 1956.

[Question] There is no doubt that the organizational, as well as the cultural.
issue is of utnost significance. Hhst about the party‘s leases and friends
"in terns of the nature of the structure of your party?"

[Answer] The nature of the party's structure is alnost that of broad fronts.
It includes various factions and sectors of the Sudanese people: Workers,
far-era, minor civil servants, national intellectuals, students, nsrchants
and national capitalise. It is a party built on the alliance of the peo-
ple's forces.

[Question] what are the Sudanese Denocratic Unionist Party's fundanental
inclinations--inclinstions that the party charted as its goal at the outset
of its fornation and that it is viewing as its goals?

[Answer] Since its formation, the party has had inclinations toward unity
with Egypt. In 1957. and before 'Abd-al-llasir's rise. the party leadership.
with its liberationist and progressive inclination, started to hold nesting!
with the Socialist Arab ba-th Party. Pro- Cairo. a nessage was sent by
Shaykh 'Ali 'Abd-al-Rahnan to the Ba'th Party leadership at the tins and
agree-ant was reached to hold a dialogue on the basis of adopting the so-
cialist Arab thinking by our Denocratic Unionist Party which was known then
by the nale of the Denocratic People's Party.

[Question] On what basis was your inclination toward unity with Egypt founded?

[Answer] The Arab nationalist thinking wu not fully clear to our people
at the tine. The issue was a spontaneom one. both to us as a party and to

113
the Sudanese masses. however, our call for unity with Egypt was founded

on an Arab basis, by evidence of our slogans: The unity of the language.
the unity of the spiritual sentiments, the unity of religion, the unity of
canon struggle, the unity of land and than the unity of the Nile Valley.

[Question] Is there a specific theory that defines and governs the inedi-
ata and future struggle of your party?

[Amwer] I would like to assert that the Democratic Unionist Party is not-
despite the fact that its popularity is deep-rooted in all the provinces of
Sudan and, despite the fact that it is a well-organized party with the full
ability to save. considering that it is the leader of all the political
novementsna theorized party and does not have any specific "theory." Its
struggle is inspired by our national conscience. We adopt our national posi-
tions vigilantly and firmly. benefiting from the experiences of all the

Arab progressive forces. But since the hard recent experience that cane in
the wake of the Hay 1969 coup, it has become certain to us that we are build-
ing with the progressive Arab forces a strongly neshed and firm political,
intellectual and ideological structure and that through what we have suffered
in our fight against the oppressive regime in Sudan, we have learned how to
build a party that lacks nothing other than scoring the victory against the
military dictatorship and toppling this dictatorship. Therefore, our party
is an Arab party, in the sense that we believe in the pan-Arab call as a
strategy and a goal, and even a seam to build our Arab, and especially Su-
danese, homeland. Re are also a progressive party, in the sense that we
denand freedom for ourselves and for the others and demcracy for ourselves
and for the others. We are an indivisible part of the Arab cause.

He assert that our Arab position is not at all determined by the treacherous.
defeatist, subsevient and disgraceful position taken by Ja'far Numayri, the
oppressive dictator, as a hateful backgromd for the traitor al-Sadat.

Horeover, we are a socialist party that believes in the socialist experience
in the Arab homeland, especially in Syria as a progressive Arab leadership
that knows through experience how to theorize and how to act, not only for
Syria but also for the Arab nation.

Our party is an Arab socialist progressive party that believes in the prin-
ciples of the Socialist Arab Ba'th Party. We are unionist and socialist Arabs.

[Question] "hat is the desired goal of your visit to Syria and your seet-
ings with the party leadership?

[Answer] After forsation of the Sudanese People's National Opposition Front
which has included the opposition forces. I was entrusted to visit the
struggling Syria to assert in the name of the Sudanese people and through
their legitimate representative--the opposition—their opposition to the
treacherous and oppressive regime, to assure the struggling Syria and the
coarade leader Rafi al-Asad that the heroic Sudanese people have nothing

at all to do with the treacherous positions that luayri is taking in support

11‘;
of al—Sedat and that the Sudanese people are a nationalist Arab people who

rushed to support the Arab cause from the beginning. Many Sudanese martyrs
fell on the sacred soil of Palestine in 1968 and the Sudanese people contin-
ued to support the Arab cause firmly. crowning their support with the Khar-
tom conference and its three famous no's. 'Abd-al-Nasir bestowed on Khar-
tom at the time the name of the capital of steadfastness. Had you seen how
'Abd-al-Nasir was received, you would have realized that the Sudanese people
not only refuse but also cannot betray the Arab cause and cannot accept the
cepitulationist and treacherous positions currently taken by Ja'far llumayri.

Therefore, it is important for us that the heroic Syrian people understand
that the nationalist Arab Sudanese people appreciate their steadfast stance
in the fact of the enemy and that the Sudanese people will not abandon them
and will not stop supporting them at any time.

[Question] How do you View and evaluate your meetings-wand the discussions
that took place in them—with some leaders of our party?

[Answer] It is a true victory for the Sudanese opposition leaderships to
meet with the top leaderships in the Arab Syria. This confirms that the Arab
progressive forces in the entire Arab homeland are in full agreement and have
established among themselves good political and ideological harmony that is
capable of strengthening the fundamental battle against 0. S. imperialism,
world Zionism and Arab reaction. I can say that I have been cmletely das-
zled by my meeting with comrade 'Abdallah al-Ahmar-na meeting in which he
assured me that the leading Arab thought is well and that we can ”91th em-
perience, thought and application" score every victory for the Arab home-
land and for the Arab causes. I have also set with the minister of informa-
tion and with the assistant minister of foreign affairs.

[Question] In the light of your official and party talks, how do you evalu-
ate the Syrian position?

[Answerl It is obvious that there is no longer any force capable of con-
fronting the Zioniet enemy in the battle of the Arab cause other than the
army and forces of the heroic Syria. It is definite that the Syrian armed
forces. which are confronting the forces of the aggression and of its allies,
are the rock on which the Camp David accords have been smashed. When the
vigilant Syria takes this courageous position against the forces of aggres-
sion, imperialism and Arab reaction. it is fully aware that it will suffer
heavily as a consequence of this heroic stance. But Syria has not and will
not pay any attention to such suffering and will not retreat. his is why
Syria has become the first and last bastion of the Arab cause. There is no
longer anyone else in the battlefield.

The signs of the imperialist-Zionist-reactionary plots against the progres-
sive nationalist Syrian Arab regime have begun to appear in the suspect
movements of the [Hmlim] Brotherhood which is an agent of Arab reaction,
U. 8. imperialism and world Zionism.

115
“hat happened in Aleppo is nothing but a crime against Islam, against Arab—
dom and against humanity and nothing but a reflection of the plots being
hatched against Syria.

0n the other hand, let me say that were it not for the ability of the Syrian
leadership, the situation in Lebanon, on the Arab borders and in the entire
area would have exploded in a manner harmful to the Arab interests. But
Syria and its unimpulsive leadership have been able to score a political vic-
tory and to gain full control. The world no longer thinks that Begin and al-
Sadat can say that they are in control.

Syria has gained the respect of the world public opinion with its superior
self-restraint ability-wan ability with which it is keeping its finger on the
trigger while at the same time performing successfully a role in the U. N.
efforts to establish peace in the fraternal Lebanon whereas the U. N. for-
ces are incapable of establishing peace in a small area in southern Lebanon
as a result of the Zionist provocations.

[Question] Considering that all the Sudanese opposition forces are in unani—
mous agreement on toppling Numayri, what about the efforts to complete the
unity of all the Sudanese Opposition factions in one front and where have
you gotten in regard to achieving this goal?

{Answer} From the outset, the opposition front consisted of the Democratic
Unionist Party, the Nation's Party and a number of nationalist factions.

The front's first charter was formulated in Aba Island in 1969 and was signed
on behalf of the nation's Party by martyr al-Hadi al-Mahdi who was killed

in the 1970 incidents and on behalf of the Democratic Unionist Party by a1-
sharif Busayn al-Hindi.

when the regime hit Abs Island, al—Sharif al—llindi tried to persuade a1-
Sadiq al-liahdi to join the front and to replace his uncle al-ﬁadi al-Hahdi.
Al-Sadiq agreed and al-Sharif al-Hindi ceded the front's chairmanship to
him. After the failure of the Muhammad Nur Sa'd agreement in 1976, the re-
gime embarked on efforts to end the disputes with the front. Al-Sadiq a1-
Mahdi went to Port Sudan and met with amyri under "the auspices of Saudi
Arabia" where the two sides claimed that an agreement was reached. But it
was not a written agreement and Numayri was able to manipulate it in his
interest. Another mediation was made and culminated with the written Lon-
don agreement which was announced to the world public opinion and which was
signed by our party on 12 April 1978. This agreement called for restoring
democracy, guaranteeing public liberties, holding free elections from bot-
tom to top and abolishing all the special measures restricting liberties.
But as usual, Numayri's regime breached the agreement and persisted in its
transgression, thus leading the country with its rash policies into wretched
poverty, rampant corruption, domination by graft and favoritism and disin-
tegration in the Sudanese society. The straw that broke the back has been
the regime's support for al- Sadat‘s treasonous initiative. The london agree-
ment has been thus buried completely.

116
Tne Progressive National Front now consists of the Sudanese Democratic Union-
iat Party. the Socialist Arab Ba'th Party, the Conunist Party and the lla-
sirist forces.

[Question] As I know, and everybody else knows. the Sudanese opposition front
has a strategy at present. In your capacity as the front's infomtion
representative, would you explain the dimensions of this strategy?

[Answer] The front's and party's strategy at present is to topple Nmsyri's
dilapidated regime imediately and finally. There is no chance of sitting
with this regime for any kind of negotiations because it has been proven to
the entire world that Nunayri is not a man of his word, that he does not keep
his promises and cannot be trusted at all. This is the conviction of all the
nationalist forces in Sudan. both those forces inside the front and those
outside it. Numayri has no ally now other than the reactionary forces repre-
sented in the lanolin Brotherhood. These are weak forces incapable of doing
anything. There are also other forces created by the regime and consisting
of corrupt, mercenary and opportunist elesents. The Muslim Brotherhood or-
ganization is extrenely divided. The university students reject this ugly

prostration by their organization's leadership before an already collapsed
regime.

[Question] What is the story of the recent bloodless coup that took place
in Sudan and what is the role of Husni Mubarak [Egyptian Vice President] in
the dismissal of Abu-al-Qasim, Numayri's deputy?

[Answer] when the latest coup attempt—organized by Cairo which betrayed
Abu-al-Qasim Ibrahim, Nmayri's first deputy and the general secretary of
the Sudanese Socialist Union—was exposed, it became known that Husni
Mubarak invited Ibrahim to Alexandria and gave his advice at the residence
of the U. s. massador specifically. Together, they entrusted the task of
carrying out a coup against Numayri to Abu-al-Qasim, telling him that Lt
Gen 'Abd-al-Hajid ﬂuid Khalil will be on his side. When Abu-al-Qesis ar-
rived in Khartoum and told 'Abd-al-Hajid, his conversation concerning the
coup was recorded and the recording was delivered to Numayri. As a result.
'Abd-al-Hajid becane Numayri's first deputy. They thus got rid of Abu-al-

Qasiln.

It is obvious that the policies of all the Egyptian governments from the
first Khedive to the latest Khedive. al-Sadat, are built on a single strategy,
nasely to the Khartoum government weaker than the Cairo governunt. They
thus sought to ouster Abu-al—Qaaim because having the military in power fur-
ther weakens Nuaayri who is already weak. It is well-known that 'Abd-al—Ha-
jid malil and 'Iu-al-Din 'Ali Halik, the chief of staff of the Sudanese
army, are considered agents of the Egyptian regine.

[Question] A lot has been said about the causes and dimensions of the re-
cent Ramadan uprising. Waa it a spontaneous uprising resulting from the
economic pressure under which our people in Sudan are living. was it an in-
tantional uprising for which the front's leadership had planned or what?

117
[Answer] The Ramadan uprising was not due to inflation and to the shortage
of goods in the Sudanese narket, as many people imagine. Inflation and the
shortage of goods is something old. The uprising was planned by the front's
leadership and the aim of stirring it up was to stress that our people are
not asleep and that they keep up with all the moves taking place around them.

Nunayri has tried to claim that oil will be produced in Sudan, keeping in
mind that the Sudanese people are aware that even if oil is produced, this
will not happen before 5 years to come. Thus, the Sudanese people's reply

to Numayri's claims concerning oil was to flare up so that the Chevron Com-
pany may know that there is no stability is Sudan. The company will not con-
tinue its drilling operations [if there is no stability]. Nmayri was

thus embarrassed and he sunoned additional Egyptian forces to control the Su-
danese people's uprising.

[6 Sep 79, p 3]

[Text] [Question] what are the current priorities of the struggle insofar
as the progressive nationalist forces in Sudan are concerned?

[Answer] while waging its decisive battle, Sudan is raising the slogan of
unity of the progressive nationalist forces. The battle requires this unity
and the priorities of the phase dictate that efforts be made to deal with
the major contradiction between the people and the regime.

The class and political assessment of the regime stresses that it is a back-
ward capitalist regime under which a minority has enriched itself at the ex-
pense of the overwhelming nsjority of our Sudanese people. under which agri-
cultural capitalism hss been allowed to be established with foreign capital
and under which plants have been set up through middlemen and suspect for-
eign monies. This has caused the popular forces in Sudan to stand united
against the regime and its lsckeys.

Politically, the regime is an agent of the world imperialist forces. This
regime is opposed to all the nationalist and pan-Arab policies. Domestically,
the regime imposes an oppressive, dictatorial and bankrupt rule. At the
pan-Arab level, the regime follows a line subservient to al-Sadat's treason-
ous line. Internationally. it has adopted hostile position toward all the
liberationist policies and has become an open agent of the imperialist for-
ces. There can be no salvation and no guarantee for the success of our Su-
danese people's revolution except through unity of the progressive and na-
tionalist forces in a declared front that derives its legitimacy from its
sincere struggle for the people and for the issue of nationalist and demo-
cratic liberation. The truth is that formation of the Sudanese opposition
front has been founded on this mainstay.
[Question] As usual, Numayri throws the blame for his regime's failure on
the ministers and on the regime's leaderships. “tat is your evaluation of
this attitude?

[Answer] Numayri cannot disavow the responsibility by a mere speech he makes.
Sudan is living under the worst economic, political and social circus‘uces
it has ever experienced.

Sudan has never undergone as many successive crises as it has experienced
under the canopy of Numayri's regime which has acknowledged this fact re-
peatedly. Numayri'a appeal to the Sudanese people to extend the ropes of
their exhausted patience is tantamount to an official admission that the
economic. political and social situation is no longer bearable. The regime
is acknowledging its failure and this is something that no longer needs any
proof. This situation has motivated all the people's groups to move and to
oppose the regime openly and comrehensively.

The opposition masses are no longer unarmed. Many military men have been
discharged under the present regime. most of them dishonorably. There are
also trained men smong the opposition ranks. Moreover, there are thousands
of armed men in various parts of Sudan and there are the southern rebels.
All these elements are now on the side opposing the regime. The battle is
truly passing through its last moments.

[Question] The alliance existing between al-Ssdat's and Nmyri's regimes
needs no proof. It is certain that had not Numayri enlisted the help of al-
Sedat regime's forces, he would not have been able to contain the recent
Randan uprising. Wat about the Egyptian military presence in Sudan?

[Answer] The Egyptian military presence in Sudan has been proven, despite
Nunyri's and al-Sadat's allegations that there are no Egyptian troops in
Sudan. It is proven that the Egyptian troops are present in western Sudan
in camps known as the (Flamingo) camps which are close to the coast nearer
the Ethiopian-Sudanese borders. These camps are swarming with Egyptian
military aircraft, tanks, infantry and artillery forces nmnbering nearly
10.000 troops and administrative officers. Horeover, there are Egyptian
forces in Wadi Sayyidna. This camp provides a true picture of the Egyptian
military presence in eastern and northern Sudan. There are Egyptian forces
in Khartoum also. Additional Egyptian forces arrived recently to crush the
popular uprising and to besiege the Sudanese army. These forces consist of
paratroopera and special security elements and have been deployed in Jabal
al-Awliya's area. Nobody can enter or leave Khartoum now without being sub-
jected to inspection. The goal is obvious, namely to protect Ntnnayri's
regime from any popular uprising or coup attempt. Moreover, Sudan has be-
coas a part of the U. S. strategy implemented by al-Sadat's regime.

[meetion] "hat comes after the recent Ramadan uprisings?

[Answer] The nature of the Sudanese people's movements is unique. What
happened in the 1964 revolution astonished many revolution theoreticians in

1 19
the world. The Sudanese revolution is not subject to the ebb and flow condi-
tions dominating society. The Sudanese msses rebelled in 1964 even though
a relative state of prosperity was prevailing. The nilitary dictatorship in
power at the time was toppled and democracy was restored. If there has re-
cently been an ebb in the wake of the recent Ramadan uprising, this does not
at all mean the end of the revolution in Sudan. It is just a respite for
Sudan's revolutionaries. He would not be exaggerating if we say that the en-
bers of the Sudanese revolution are snoldering and that its volcano is ex-
plosive. The whole world may be surprised by a revolution that continues un-
til it achieves victory and by rapid and imminent developments.

[Question] Such an affirmation takes us ask what the components of the vic-
tory are, i. e. what is required of the Sudanese opposition front at this
particular time?

[Answer] As I have already pointed out, the National Front consists of the
Democratic Unionist Party, the Sudanese Commist Party and the modern [sic]
Arab (Nasirist) forces. This front was formed in London recently and has
made its goal to topple the regime. This requires by necessity mobilizing
the Sudanese masses and pushing them in the right direction.

[Question] we now reach in our dialogue the issue of the south, especially
the issue of the regime's persecution of the (Sano) Party mentors, not to
mention the regime's claim that the southern problem has been solved.

[Answer] The issue of southern Sudan is not a new issue. The regime's al-
legation that this issue was settled by the Addis Ababa agreement reached
under the auspices of Emperor llaile Selassie and of the World Churches Coun-
cil has been proven void. It has been proven that Nmyri's regime is in-
capable of solving the problem of the south. The armed southern opposition
against Numayri's regime is still present and Numayri has not and will never
enjoy stability in the south. he is meeting violent opposition from the
southerners. The latest attempt to topple Nuayri's regime was the attespt
of Samel (Aro), the deputy speaker of the People's Assesmly. who is a pri-
soner in Cooper Prison along with his colleagues.

Our southern brothers are considered genuine opposition forces in Sudan.
Their stance helped the 1964 revolution to succeed. The land of southern Su-
dan has always been a source of annoyance and anxiety for all the dictator-
ial governments in Khartoum. Moreover, the oppressive regime in Sudan is
conducting an extensive campaign of arrests against sedaers of the Ssno
Party and is placing its main leaders under house arrest. keeping in nind
that the influence of this party relies on the most numerous tribes in
southern Sudan, namely the (Dinka) tribe and other tribes.

[Question] "hat is the degree of the link between the opposition in the
south and the Sudanese opposition front?

[Answer] There is a link between us and our brothers in the south in their
capacity as a front, a party and a vanguard. They have had an effective

120
role in the various uprisings and confrontations experienced by Sudan re-
cently.

[Question] Nunayri has sore than a vacillating position--at least in his
statements—insofar as the Eritrean revolution is concerned. that is the
truth of this matter?

[Answer] The treasonous regime of Numayri which has disowned the Arab na-
tion and its causes and which has sold Sudan to the treacherous Egyptian re-
gime will not at all hesitate to sell the Eritrean revolution to its enemies.
The regime's betrayal of the Eritrean revolutionaries is not at all unlikely.
However, the only guarantee for the continued presence of the nationalist
Eritrean revolution in its launching bases in Sudan lies in the opposition's
success in toppling the present regime.

[Question] Nunyri insinuates through his moves and his visits that he is
still the man in full control in Sudan. what do you say?

[Answer] At both the domestic and external levels, Numyri's regine exploits
sone contradictions existing internally among some Sudanese groups and in-
dividuals. At the external level, Numyri tries to exploit the conflicts in

the Arab honeland. He raises conflicting slogans that no rational person can
believe.

Numyri's regime is a regina of contradictions fundamentally. If we try to
evaluate it politically. we find that it is primarily an agent subservient to
the U. S. imperialism and a lackey of al-Ssdat. In class terms, it is a re-
sine that coexists with a class of parasitic new millionaires who. the re-
gime calls the national capital. The regime has thus created the "bogy nan"
who will swallow the regime itself. There are nearly 20 new millionaires
now whereas there wasn't a single Sudanese millionaire on the dawn of

25 Hay 1969.

Thus, the flareup of class struggle in Sudan between the class of surfeited
millionaires and the rest of the poor Sudanese masses has Lotus-e a nudity.

[Question] Political leadership has a fundamental and effective role in
mobilizing the mass. It is noticed that some leadershipa of the Sudanese
Reconciliation [al-muaalahah] Iront have emigrated from Sudan. Doesn't such
an emigration affect the course and victory of the revolution in Sudan?

[Answer] The emigration of some political leadershipa fro- Sudsn was not on
a decision by Numayri. It was a necessity because the revolution movenent
forced some leadershipa of the nationalist forces to select exile and strug-
gle from abroad. They have been able to lead the domestic struggle success-
fully and to escalate it to the level of armed struggle. The leadershipa
that are outside Sudan are very snll nuaerically. Bwever, they are very
effective in exposing the regime to the entire world. This leadership (the
opposition vanguard) is the leadership that worked to train and arm the revo-
lutionary forces which have waged the numerous and well-known battles against
the regime.

121
[Question] Hhat is the lesson derived from the total events and develop-
ments that the Sudanese people have undergone and continue to undergo?

[Amer] The experiences. victories and defeats of peoples in the struggle
battles are the connon property of the people. He, the Sudanese people, bene-
fit from all the ideological. nationalist and progressive revolutions lived
by the peoples of the world. We are an indivisible part of the liberation-
ist revolutions known to the third world generally and to the Arab world in
particular. If there is any lesson derived, it is the lesson of unity of

the nationalist forces. of escalating the role of the masses and nobilizing

them and of a firm resolution to achieve victory. regardless of how heavy
the sacrifices becone.
EIGHT REIOWS mNPlF-H smlbls KIRLCCAN MAT
Kris LB FUNDS in French 19 Sep 79 p to
[Article by LE mum correspondent Daniel Junqua]

EText] A1giers--The POLISARIO mm. confined on Monday 17 Septesber that
ts troops had won a ”new victory” overnight near the stronghold of zsg in
southern Horocco. where a substantial part of the nin body of Moroccan
troops is easssd opposite Tindouf (13 WNW. 18 Septeaber). A sharifian
unit fell into an asbush and reportedly sustained very heavy losses in sen
and ssteriel. Fbllouing the spectacular offensive on 28 January of this
year aainst Tan-Tan, capital of Tat-rays Province. the fighting has steadily
intensified. as is attested to by the 2“ August attack on the town of
Labouirate despite the fact that it was defended by the third araored

sqmdron group of the royal any. The Rabat governsent acknowledged that
the town had been surrounded, while the POLISARIO Front reported 800 killed

on the Moroccan side end the destruction of 15 arsored vehicles--figurss
which at the tise seesed very high (LE Hunt. 28 August).

The ssgnitude of the reverse sustained by lbrocco, however. was no longer
in doubt after the return to Algiers of eiyzt neusaen. including three
Prenchsen. who had been taken by the guerrillas to the battlefield (the
POLISARIO Front had. curiously enough. not seen fit to invite the corres-
pondent of L3 mum to go along). Ming s 9-hour period the newsaen
visited the destroyed and deserted positions. the shelters. and even the
artillery at the central co-and post. where they viewed the files of the
unit and even the "operations log" of the coshnding officer of the forti-
fied cslp. hjor Mel-at.

"The hesy Chose To Hithdrau"

Rene ham-ies. special correspondent of the 139901: DE NUILIBE. was in this
way enabled to count 26 1-30 heavy tanks of Soviet sanufacture that. had

been hit by rocket fire or abandoned by their crews without giving battle.
and also counted 12 unit arsored cars and thy araored troop carriers. u.
confiraed on all points a news story that had appeared in the weekly MEIR
AcrUALITR and esphasized the deaoralisation of the 1.200 soldiers of the
garrison. ”tho had not been relieved for ‘5 years” and had already sustained
very heavy losses on 6 July and 10 August.
Following tho firot ottock. Nor mint had uprooood tho boliof (in hio
roport. o copy of which no found ot tho Icono) thot without tho roinforco-
oonto of Ion ond nuriol ho hod boon roquooting ‘tho third aroorod oquadxon
group woo dooood to dootruction.‘ Tho any oftor tho oooond ottock. whoa tho
Sohrooui guorrillu had ponotrotod to tho hoart of tho troop fomtion. ho
wroto with o touch of irony:

"l'ho onony chooo to withdnw oftor owooping our pooitiono cloon of ovory-
thing thoy oontoinod.‘ Bo addod thot hio unit had boon "mum” ond
"woo no longor oporotionol.‘

Ilhon tho prioonoro woro quootionod nou- rindouf by tho nowooon. thoy ooid
that tho circlo of ontronohod and portiolly Mormon! pooitiona protooting
tho town bod boon ovorrun in '50 ninutoo and thot oaomltioo had boon "onor-
noun."

A doouont found ot tho ooonnd poot roportod. mod-v.1 duo boforo tho
ottock. tho prooonoo of o ”now inopootion niooion by two ironoh offiooron
o oolonol ond o captain.“ who oooood along etha- thingo to bo dioootiafiod
with tho porfornanoo of tho 12.7 uohino guno. hon mro unupootodiy.
thoyoloo fomdanoxdorofthodaywhiohhadboonroodtothotroopoond
eonoiotod booioolly of o profaoo to o propaando troct oolobroting tho
”goon Itch“ of 1975. It who hvioh in it. mioo of tho manually and
box-o tho oignoturo of tho ooadooician lhurioo 1113011.

To bring bronco to hool, tho POLISARIO hoot thon docidod to toko tho war
to tho va'y torritory of ito admnry. Abandoning for tho nooont ito
oporotiom agoinot tho ooaatol towno of tho Hootorn Salute-which on
strongly dofondod by tho royal foreoo-‘and roliovod of my oonoon with
roopoct to tho oouthorn front following tho ogroolont “and with lbuakchott.
tho POLISARIO forooo diroctly ongogod tho nin body of tho horocoan ooobot
forooo doployod olong tho Ligation boxdor. with tho oil of inflicting
"mcooptablo' looooo on tho broom forooo. Although tho httor had only
rooontly boon roinforood by tho roynl troopo that hod boon withdrown fro-
Zoiro and llauritanih. they ooaood to hovo rooiatod only with incroooing
difficulty. “mo oituotion in tho oouthorn port of tho kingdo- han rooohod
tho throohold of tho intolorablo," King Hanan II doclaxod on 8 North in o
ooooago to tho homo of roprooontotivoo. Io not that oituation bocoaing
ovon noro tonoo for tho kingdon todoy. now thot tho ow and tho nonuignod
countrioo are procloiningnono aftor onothor-tho right of tho Soho-noni- to
oolf-dotoroination and indopondonoo and m donouming homeco'o notion?
REPORT OF ENERGENCY PLAN FOR OUED EDDAHAB
Rabat L'OPINION in French 20 Sep 79 pp 1.10
[Article by special correspondent Alem Azzam of MAP]

[Text] The day after our arrival in Dakhla a dense crowd of men and women
in blue robes had congregated around the temporary headquarters of the Banque
dc Maroc. They had come to exchange their Mauritanian ouguias for Moroccan
dirhams at the profitable rate of one ouguia for 10 centimes. causing the
treasury to sustain a deficit of almost one billion centines.

1he representatives of the Hinistry of Equipment who cane in full force,
already knew what to expect. After repairing the lighthouse on the jetty
which is Inst essential in a port which registers heavy tonnage ships
navigating in unsuspected dangerous currents. they acquainted us with their
plan of immediate action. They will invest 52.800.000 dirhams over a period
at 6 to 7 months. Needed immediately: a cold storage installation to pre-
serve perishable foodstuffs which a boat already chartered by the Southern
Regions Supply Office will deliver to a city short of provisions. after
leaving Casablanca yesterday. The port itself will swallow up half of

this amount: 25.5 million dirhams will be used to equip the principal

Jetty with lifting equipment, mororboats and tugboats. as soon as the costly
dredging operation is completed. A master plan for the installation will

be drawn up while a restructuring study covering the port of Dakhla as well
as that of Laguira will be implemented.

'nnis plan also foresees the reconstruction of the causeways as well as the
construction of the first sections of the Dmkhla-Laguira road. Eight million
dirhams are destined for the National Promotion yards which have been entrusted
with the task of rebuilding the dwellings. sporting complex and the women's
shelter.

As regards public works. they will also receive ten million dirhams for
sanitation purposes. restoration of administrative buildings, repairing
roads and for green spaces.
Finally, about 2.300.000 dirhams will be used for canalization and dis-
tribution of drinking water. In this connection a new water system will
be needed for the elimination of the high percentage of sulphur contained
therein.

All of this is only a first step as the Province of Dakhla is very promising.
What it offers in the field of fishing is inconceivable, and the people in
charge, judging from their enthusiasm, plan to make Dakhla an industrial
pole capable of coupeting with any port in the northern part of the country.

The greatest Surprise will be the vegetable gardens which encircle the city
owing to water reserves, which are difficult to imagine when speaking of
the Sahara. A few feliaheen, obviously inexperienced, succeed in producing
vegetables of the most astonishing dimensions. The Spanish records per-it
us to anticipate a positive future on this level. with water possibilities
avaiiable it is already practicable to irrigate almost 5,000 hectares in
the Dakhia periphery alone while the region of El Argoub offers the ease
chances. according to the people in charge. If the forecasts are found to
be true. the city and even the neighboring localities will be able to be
self-sufficient in fruits and vegetables in the very near future.

To watch the people in charge bustling about and making plans and forecasts.

it is difficult not to imagine that the Sahara is a real school where civilians
as well as the military call upon their abilities and deem it an honor to
attain a sense of pride in being a Moroccan.

7993
C80: 6400 BID

126