FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10421

29 March 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

[FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING GHNERSHIP 0P
HATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOF BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/

29 more

HORLDHIDE EPORT
Teucommcmous Poucv, Rasemcu mo DevaLorm

(rouo 7/92)
Commas

ASIA
JAPAN

N'I'I‘ Satellite Project To Face Opposition
(mm WIN m, 3m82) IOOOOIOOIODQDIIOOOOOOIOO...

WEST EUROPE
INTMATIWAL AFFAIRS

L-SAT To Provide High Parloads, wide Coverage, )4 Uses
(Pierre Lengereux; AIR 3? comes, 23 Jan 82 .............

ITALY

SIP's President on Develoment of Teleﬂwne Services
(Ottorino Beltrami Interview; II. ammo, 15 Jan 82) .......

UNITED KING!!!

Plans for Satellites Announced
(Elaine Williams; m3 FINANCIAL TEES, 2 Her 82) .........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

NTT SATELLITE PNJECT 10 PACE OPPOSITION
(”061215 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NW8 in English 3 hr 82 p 3

[Text] Nippon Telegraph and telephone [1m] Public Corporation has decided
to put two nassive business communication satellites into orbit by 1992.

But the plan seem likely to run into opposition from the Space Development
Comittee headed by Science and technology Agency chief Ichiro Nakagawa over
plans to use America's space shuttle instead of donestically produced
rockets.

N‘l'l‘ will launch a one-ton satellite similar to America's successful INTELSA'I
in 1988 to handle the nounting flood of international business comica-
tions. mile the satellite would contain some 10,000 telephone circuits, it
would be a baby cowared to the second stage of the project: a four-ton

giant that could simultaneously handle 100,000 circuits. It would be launched
in 1992.

N1”! will debate the proposal further with the Ministry of Posts and Telecon-

nunications and other organizations before taking it to the space co-ittee
this su-Ier.

But the sunset presentation is not likely to be a rubber-atasp affair.

One of the basic goals of Japan's space progras is tt build up the country's
technological capacity by using doustic technology. However, the h—lA, a
three-stage liquid-fuel booster that is Japan's hope for the late 1980s.
will only be able to put 550 kilogram into orbit.

mat is far short of what would be needed for m's business satellites,
leading the comication giant to decide that the cavernous cargo bay of

the 0.5. space shuttle is the only place where its satellites could fly into
orbit.

The Space Development Conittee already has plans of its own to launch two
business coauunications satellites, the 350-kilogran 08-2, with 4,000

circuits, in fiscal 1982. and the SSO-ton 68-3, with a 6,000-circuit capacity,
in fiscal 1987.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPFILIAL U32. ”I‘L'

m, however, says denand will far outstrip the linited capacity of the CS
series. which it labels unecononical. It is going ahead with “:3 plane, and
has already established a research section for the giant satellites.

"Satellite comnications once had an image of being used during disasters,
or for connicating with distant islands," an official Koji Needs said.

"Satellite comications also cost lore than ground-based comications.

"m has offered as inexpensive a service as possible, which is why we thought
of wing the space shuttle at less than a third the cost of domestic rockets.”

A spokesman at the Space Development Uomittee offices in the Science and
Technology Agency said recently that 1m had yet to contact the connittee
directly. But he warned that any plan to use the space shuttle would run

counter to the Japanese space progran's policy of using donestic technology.
COPYRIGT: Asahi Evening news 1982

cs0: 5500/2152

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
L-SAT TO PROVIDE HIGH PAYIDADS, WIDE COVERAGE, MN! 0888

Paris AIR 8? cosmos in French 23 Jan 82 pp £0-43

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "the BSA Is Preparing the Most Powerful ‘i‘elecomuni-
cations Satellite']

[8) :erpt] The BSA [European Space Agency] has undertaken the construction of the
world's most powerful telecouunications satellite: The L-SA'I‘ [Large Satellite].
a large experimental high-frequency telecomunications and direct 'rv satellite.
which will also be the largest satellite ever built in Europe. This satellite's
dimensions (a span of from 25 to 46 meters). its weight (2.4 to 4.3 tons) and its
power (Eros 3.5 kit to more than 7.8 kit) will surpass anything that has been built
until now. even the largest and most powerful American satellites.

The L-SA'i‘ program has as its dual objective the development of a large multipur-
pose platform—of the Ariane-3 or -4 class (2.4to3.4 tons) or equivalent Shuttle
«suitable for most future telecomunications and direct TV missions. and the
launching in early 1986 of a first L-SA'I‘ 1 experimental satellite that will enable
the in-orbit testing of several European payloads intended to stimulate the in-
terest of potential users and promote new mercial missions, by way of a com-
plete demonstration and operational program.

Large Platform

L-SA‘I‘ has thus been conceived as a multipurpose platfors capable of adaptation to
a large variety of telecommunications and direct TV uses requiring payloads in

excess of 500 kg and powers of over 2.5 kw during solar eclipse and over 7 kw
during solar illumination.

This L-SA‘I‘ platform is intended to accomdate the building of the four principal
classes of telecomunications satellites of the 1990's. namely: satellites of the
semi-Ariane-3 or ‘Shuttle-Pm-D class. satellites of the full-Ariane-a or Shuttle-
class with perigee motor. satellites of the semi-Ariane-e (or full-Ariane-Z)

or shuttle-Pm-n class. and satellites of the full Ariane-e or Shuttle-108 class.

L-SM‘ will therefore be the platform of the future Ariane-4 launcher satellite

which will be capable of placing 2- to 4.3-ton satellites in synchronous transfer
orbit beginning in 1986

FOIOFHCIALIJSEONLY
evm \II‘I‘ILIAL VOL Ul‘hl

The platform will be stabilized about three axes in transfer and earth-synchronous
orbits, and designed for mission durations of 10 years. The general architecture
of the platform, which will consist essentially of three parts (on-board utili-
ties module, propulsion nodule, and telecommunications nodule), is flexible
enough to accommodate the different missions being anticipated. The satellite's
hull, in the form of a parallelepiped (1.15 x 2,10 x 3.50 meters), is dimensioned
as a function of the Ariane-a and -§ shrouds (3 and 4 meters in diameter). It is
also designed to carry the telecommunications antennas (nondeployable), 2 to 3.5 m
in diameter, on the east and west sides of the parallelepiped. This is so as to
avoid the need for an antenna-support mast, which would increase the congestion
beneath the shroud. The north and west sides of the hull carry the telecommuni-
cations equipment (power amplifiers) and heat-loss panels (consisting of heat-
sinks) having a total surface area of 9 m2 and capable of dissipating up to

4.5 kw of energy not used up by the on-board equipment (allowing for the effi-
ciency of the amplifiers). The satellite's electric power supply-utilities and
payload--is provided by a a large, non—rigid solar generator (deployable on an
'astromast') of the silicon photocell modular-network type, which is constantly
oriented toward the sun. This generator is made up of two large panels of photo-
cells that can be deployed in parallel to furnish up to 3 kw in transfer orbit.

or fully deployed in earthesynchronous orbit to deliver a maximum power of over
7.8 kw at the end of its service life (10 years). Its maximum power in eclipse
can reach over 3.6 kw with 35- or SO-ampere-hour nickel hydrogen batteries. Its
electrical energy output is distributed to the satellite by a regulated direct-
current (so-volt) bus for high-power equipment (amplifiers) and by an alternating-
current bus for low-power equipment (utilities, etc). The remote control and
telemetering system utilizes a central data-processing unit connected sensors
distributed along a bus.

Another feature of the LPSAT platform is its use of an integrated liguid-bipro—
pellant propulsion system for its injection into earth-synchronous orbit (apogee
motor),as well as for orbit and attitude control throughout the service life of
the satellite, regardless of its mission: Only the quantity of propellants
(liquids) contained in the tanks is varied, as well as the attitude. and orbit-
control system software (in accordance with the weight of the satellite). This
propulsion system is contained in a cylindrical tube located at the center of the
structure. Attitude and orbit control is effected by means of a conventional
3-axis stabilizing system,including gyroscopes for yaw control and four inertial
wheels for the control of roll and pitch all associated with infrared sensors or
radio markers and commanded by a central microprocessor unit. The platform's
aiming accuracy is thus held to within approximately 0.1 degree, with its anten-
nas also equipped with an automatic vernier-aiming device.

L-SAT 1 Satellite

The BSA program provides for the building, on this basis, of a first L-SAT 1
experimental satellite to be launched at the beginning of 1986 in geostationary
orbit by 19 degrees West using an Ariane 3 rocket (or the Shuttle). This satel-
lite weighing 2.‘ tons at launching, of which 1.2 tans is propellants (liquids)
for its maintenance in service over 7 years, will be equipped with a 3.3-kw solar

FOR OIIICJAI.lEﬂ!(MVLY
generator (power consumption 3 kW), imparting to L-SAT l a span of over 26 meters.
Three developmental models of the satellite (structural, thermal and electrical)
will be built, as well as a qualification-test model which will in fact be the
first flight model. A second flight model is to be built and partially integrated
before the first launching,so as to be available for injection into orbit, should
this be necessary, 1 year after L-sas 1.

Four experimental payloads will be carried aboard L-SAT l on this first demonstra-
tion and new services promotion mission.

An 11.7-12.5 GB: (reception at 17-10 682) direct-TV payload, desi ed and built
by Selenia (Italy), will consist of two woe @rogressive wave tube 230-Hatts-each
channels (FIRE [expansion unknown] 6l db“) and beam antennas of 1.6 x 1.6 degrees
an 1.0 x 2.4 degrees. One of these channels will be dedicated to a pro-opera-
tional direct TV service over Italy (see AIR 8? cosmos No 874): the other channel
will provide European coverage and will be used particularly to transmit experi-
mentally a single TV program throughout all of Europe, as has been suggested by

a number of 330 [European Broadcast Union] countries.

A 12-14 on: “specialized services" payload. designed and built by Marconi (Great
Britain), will be used to extend or improve commercial leased circuit facilities
that will be put into service between now and then with EUTELSAT's [expansion
unknown] European acs [expansion unknown] satellites and the French DGr's [General
Directorate for Telecommunications] Telecom l satellites. These links with

L-SAT 1 will use small terrestrial terminals with 3-meter or lesser diameter
antennas; the satellite will cover all of Europe using a multibeam antenna with
five 1.3-degree "spots” (pins 45 am and time-division multiple access [as-m].

A 20-30 GB: telecommunications payload, also furnished by Selenia, and using two
transmitting-receiving antennas 1 meter in diameter (one a single-beam and the
other 0.6-degree dual "spot'), will provide demonstration of various types of
higher-frequency services: Video-conferences (point-to-point or multipoint) digi-
talized at 8.44 Mbits/sec throughout Europe; tele-education (to multiple addres-
sees) via digital or analogue links (video and sound) over a limited zone: data
and video transmissions (digital) at 2.048 “bits/sec over Western Europe; and
wideband transmissions of closed-circuit signals over one station.

A 12-08:, 20-6Hz and 30-Gﬂz prOpagation payload, designed and built by Bell Tele-
phone Manufacturing (Belgium), will be used for propagation tests (amplitude and
frequency stability, quality of polarization) over Europe with these new frequen-
cies that have not yet been used operationally (except for 12 GHz). A group of
some 40 organizations will take part in these experiments, which are aimed at
establishing a propagation model (attenuation and depolarization of the signal,
etc). The 12-682 (unmodulated) signal will also be used for tracking the satel-
lite by the control station.

The L—SAT 1 platform will be built by some 40 firms under a British Aerospace
prime contract: British Aerospace itself will build a portion of the hull, the
deployment mechanisms and the attitude control. The principal contractors will be
Fbkker (Netherlands) for the essential bus assembly, Aeritalia (Italy) for the

5
somomcm. use omv
CU“ W'mtﬂh ws’. UNLI

thermal control system, and Spar Aerospace (Canada) for the solar panels. Spar
Aerospace will also participate in the final assembly of the satellite in Canada,
at the Canadian Teleconunications Research Center's new David Florida Space
Simulation Center.

This new program will rank British Aerospace among the leading European builders
in the field of telecommunications and direct TV satellites, and a rival of the
Franco-German Eurosatellite group with regard to large platforms. British Aero-
space has in fact already partici ted in the European ems [expansion unknown].
BCS and HARECS [expansion unknown programs and has just been awarded a contract
for the British Skynet 4 military telecommunications satellite. It is also clear
that British Aerospace will be the leader of the industrial consortium that will
build the British direct TV satellite if this program is adopted, which it very
probably will be.

L-SA'l‘ Market

Market studies carried out in 1979-1980 indicated a total of around 150-200
satellites to be launched during the periods 1986-1994 or 1986-2000. of which more
than 110 would be of the L-SAT class. for the market that is “open" to interna-
tional competition, that is, the market outside the USSR. the United States and
Japan (see table). According to estimates, European industry could 'reasonably"
expect to provide 20-30 satellites (BSA estimate). possibly even more than 40
satellites (British Aerospace estimate), of the L-SAT type of this total market
requirement, which is estimated to be worth 5 billion pOunds sterling. These
estimates do not seem unrealistic if one considers that the European market alone
now represents 26-34 satellites (according to the BSA).

A more recent analysis (July 1981) has furthermore identified a certain number of
potential missions for L-BAT: A second-generation successor to BUTBLSAT's ECS
satellites (enabling accoasodation of a 10 percent per annum increase in traffic
until 1991); intercity links (high traffic density) for Italy; intra-European
comercial links (data transmission and video-conferences): direct 'rv service for
small European countries (Switzerland Luxembourg): direct TV service to Canada
(over six zones): an augmented-capacity 'INTELSA‘!‘ 6' satellite (37 version) for
intercontinental links: etc.

‘No applications in particular have been studied: Direct TV to Canada using an
b-SA'r satellite (326-kg payload, 5.8 kw of power) equipped with 36 TOP-type,
40-" (ls-ml: bandwidth) repeaters and a 1.8 x 2 meter antenna: and direct TV over
Switzerland and Luxembourg using an L-SAT satellite (280-kg payload, 3.7 kw of
power) equipped with two groups of mP-type 50- and 100-" (27-4132 bandwidth)
repeaters , a 1.0 x 2.6 antenna for Switzerland, and a 1.0 x 3.1 m antennna for
Luxembourg.

According to British Aerospace. the cost of such systems, using L-SA'r satellites,
would come to around 140 million pounds sterling-approximately 1.4 billion
francsuof which 70 million pounds would be for the development and construction

6
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

.naccouca noun-32v Euo.~ 3
2&6 9:3 :msxic 378:

.1393 9:300: accuouumu on
a atmlu 5.3 nomuugoo aquacusm
,0 "(W

5. , W’
' ~ﬂ£«r"§‘i\\ -

‘Open' Market for Large Satellites and L-SAT Share

 

mates.

it from 1986 to:
I‘ share.

I. market.

aean market.

\. I: C. 1982

J95

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

SIP'S PRESIDENT 0N DBVBIDPHENT 0F TELEPHONE SEVICBS
Milan IL mum in Italian 15 Jan 82 pp 38-39

[Interview with Ottorino Beltrami. president of SIP, vice president of STET,
by Ettore Hazzotti: "The Private Investor Host Answer"; date and place of
interview not given.]

[Text] "Telecommunications, and telephones in particular. together with
housing. will act as the shuttlecock for the economic recover we are all
awaiting." This is what Ottorino Beltrami has promised, and as president of
SIP [Italian Telephone Company] and vice-president of STBT [Telephone Finance
Corporation], he is the person who bears the largest share of responsibility
for the management of phone service while simltaneously detemining policy
for those conpanies which manufacture phone equipment. Beltrami is also a
mnager who is prepared to sacrifice development programs in favor of balanced
management and proper financial management for his companies. 0n the other
hand. the situation he inherited from SIP (over 6.500 billion lire in the

red by the end of 1980, double the intake figures) appears to go in the
direction of amortizing the development of telephone service. Telecouunica-
tions companies also are having a rough time, with Italtel serving as a prime
emample of this. This company, which is owned by STBT. is Italy's leading
producer of telephone sets. It lost over 300 billion lire in two years and
plans to lay off some several thousand enployees. With the above in mind.
national industry has to face competition from the likes of multinationals
such as ITT. Therefore, what is Beltrami's optimism based on? he explains
this himself in this interview with IL muse.

Question: What will short and medium term new telecemnication development
have on Italian economy?

Answer: Just a few data are needed to provide a picture of the possibilities
open to the national economy through the development of telecouunications,
and of telephone service in particular. In five years. for telephone related
matters. we foresee an investment of 21.180 billion lire. If one then applies
the multiplication factor to these investments a much higher sum is realized.
which then guarantees the development and employment of a business sector
which between management, manufacture and distribution counts upwards of
300.000 employees.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the same 5-year period. 4.5 million new customers are expected. of which
over one million are to be business accounts.

To these figures I add two other considerations to aid and better define the
leadership effect telecosmnnications development has. First of all, the
possibility of providing advanced technologies to our country: in addition
to the new telematic services. there are the diffusion of electronic com-ute-

tion (1,450,000 units by the end of 1986) and optical fiber transmission
(20.000 kilometers of fiber). Secondly, a better qualified staff. Today
SIP has over 70,000 employees. In 5 years there will be fewer generalists
and more specialists, technicians and engineers. In short, again thanks to
the phone, the technological gap between Italy and the other more advanced
countries will be lessened.

Question: What are the main objectives of the five-year plan presented by SIP
to the Hinistry of Posts and to State Shareholdings.

Answer: In brief. they are five: upgrading of basic telephone equipment
coupled with improved service; improvement of the company's public image and
its overall telephone service; expansion of new services; a motivating thrust

for electronic industries at the national level; and the attracting of new
capital from private investors. A goal of singular inportance is that

involving the investor's trust. Our plans include up to 30 percent of the
social capital to be contributed by private investors beginning in 19810. In
order to obtain this goal. it is necessary to rekindle the sense of trust in
the SIP company via the balance of economic management. improvement of
financial programs. equal distribution in wages from social capital during the
current year, and improvement of relations with the consumer as a result of
actions aimed at bettering service and the company's imge. '

Question: How will the investments foreseen by SIP be distributed?

Answer: It is not possible to give an accurate account of which funds will

be used for the different types of clients inasmuch as, for exanle. main
plants and networks service both family and business accounts. I am able to
say that our attention regarding business accounts is being underscored by
earmarking the sum of over 1,700 billion lire (over 8 percent of the total)
during the five-year plan for investments in telematic services as well as
user systems.

Since 1981 prices (and taking into account the hypothesis of an ever increasing
comittment) the primary sources of investment in the 3-year period from 1982
to 1984 are, in billions of lire:

Customer Units 151 152 153
Main Offices 978 1027 1106
Urban and Sector Networks 859 890 908
Long Distance Network 2110 230 240
Buildings/Offices 190 180 170
Data Processing. new services, etc. 218 251 285
Totals 2610 2730 2860
13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: From a price/quality perspective, is providing Italian electronic
equipment [to the market] competitive with foreign equip-ant?

Answer: In general. we feel that Italy's industrial position is competitive.
Many cospanies export their products, which is proof of their quality and
competitiveness. Naturally. regarding costs. Italian industry is beset by
significant problems due to their having to sustain, unaided. all costs
directed to research and development. It is now necessary that legislation
be passed which calls for quick procedures in order to come to the aid of
researching financing.

Question: Italian manufacturing companies state that they will be able to

produce electronic telephone connections and have a balanced budget if the
market will absorb beginning in 1982, one million lines per year. From known

data. SIP foresees at the very most, in 1982. the installation of 850.000
lines for a total investnent of 3.000 billion lire. Who is to be sacrificed?

Answer: I don't believe the first concern of the manufacturing companies

in the number of lines produced as such as the cost/profit ratio. Neverthe-
less, we are not far removed from the figures you mentioned. Our 1982 plans
call for an outlay of 3.050 billion lire which will allow us ultimtely to
service 850,000 new customers. In 1983 we plan an increase of 880,000 new
customers. 900,000 for 1984. as well as that same figure for both 1985 and
1986. By that time. there will be an average 31 customers per 100 inhabi-
tants and 72 percent of all families will have phone service. compared to 56
percent at the end of 1980. Our long-range goal is to reach. by 1990. 100
percent of the people in order to provide them with phone service.

Question: Does SIP intend to recognize a "political price" of Italian goods,
namely prices that take account of disparities in the production of phone
equipment?

Answer: We can categorically state that we never engaged in preferential
treatment. above all to the detriment of quality. The relationship between

SIP and the industrial sector is the same as the one usually found between
producer and purchaser. The same can be said for price policy.

Question: Why does SIP deem it necessary to restrict the distribution of
new electronic systems for phone services while at the same time it encour-
ages the presence on Italian markets of foreign enterprises such as CIT
ALCATEL?

Answer: SIP has always been concerned with employment problems. with foreign
industries as Italian soil and those companies working under foreign license.
A company such as ours cannot allow itself any illusions of monopoly due to
the fact that in our sector. the quality of service and the balance between
profits and costs are closely linked to technological development. which does
not know national boundaries. In addition. we met protect the interests of
our customers as well as the country's economy by keeping up to date and
knowing and even experimenting with that which is done abroad.

12;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: In what manner will the financial backing be drawn up for 519's
investment programs?

Answer: Financial backing for invest-ant program has, as a given.
maintenance of the balancing fund at the ease level, a franchise profit
margin of 50 percent. and finally rate increases designed to maintain oper-
ational costs constantly in line with cash intakes.

The rate plan. however. can only function within the linite of the inflation
ceiling if the provisions for rate increases are enacted pronptly so as to

avoid those gaps and debits that resulted in years past. (Rate increases are
expected to be 10.2 percent for 1982 and 7.0 percent for 1983. effective
1 January of each year.)

As a result of a timely and constant rate Iodification, users will be able to
benefit from a service of improved quality and decreased real costs. This
will be possible thanks to a more dynaaic use of incomes (by initiatives
directed toward development of the traditional narket and of new services) and
by a more controlled increase in operating costs (by means of redesigned

operational procedures and organizational structure proposed by SIP). Plans
dealing with the financial-holding sector, on the other hand, have as a given,
new infusions of risk capital and an easier access to the banking comnity
for credit requests.

Question: In the development of talecomnicationa. is one of Italy's main
goals the coaing up to international standards, even at the risk of going
abroad to acquire advanced system. without developing its own native planning

capability?

Answer: We are actively engaged in research and experimentation though we

are also careful in mintaining our contacts abroad. Sons of our suppliers
belong to first level lulu-national concerns.

Given this opportunity of first-hand cowarison. our coupanies should in no
way feel inferior. Furthermore. we have always supported the utilization and
development of national telecmmications systene. Personally. I an most
confident in the value of our research and devalopnent capacity and of the
quality of our national production.

COPYRIGHT: 11. “DO 1982

9209
050: 5500/ 2100

15
was omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDOM

PLANS FOR SATELLITES ANNUNCBD
”£21557 London THE FINANCIAL TIMES in 313118}: 2 Her 82 p 10

[Report by Elaine Hillians: "The Satellite Hay to Europe"]

[Excerpts] By the end of 1983 British TELECOH plans access for UK companies
to satellites for private business cos-unitations to Europe.

Services such as electronic mil. teleconferences, high speed counter data
and even conventional telephone calls will be offered.

For organizations needing to send large value of intonation over long

distances as quickly as possible satellites could be nore convenient and
cheaper than existing system.

But in order to assess the potential of such a service. British TELEOOH has

plans to run 12 trials this year. Snell dish serials perched on office roof
tops will transmit and receive digital data signals via the orbital test
satellite, the forerunner to Europe's first co—nnications satellite system.

THE FINANCIAL TIMES, however, was the first organization in Europe to
cooperate with British TELBOOH and Deutsche Bundesposte. the Ger-en telecon-

munications authority in running business trials on the orbital test satel-
lite.

In Novenber the satellite linked the PT's London headquarters to Frankfurt
where the international edition is printed.

For two weeks complete facsinile pages of the newspaper were transmitted from
London to hankfurt for production and distribution by road and rail across

Europe and by air around the world.

As well as demonstrating remote printing in Europe for the first tine—an
important nilestone for the European newspaper industry—it showed the

tremendous potential for businesses which need to transmit rapidly large
volumes of information around the world.

The data signals representing words and pictures were transmitted from a smell
dish on the roof of THE FINANCIAL TIMES building. via the satellite to a small

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dish provided by Dornier. the West Gerunn aerospace concern, at the company's
printers in Frankfurt.

Originally, it had been hoped that the Novedaer trials would have involved
transmitting pages of the newspaper to Stockholm, Paris and Rome, but
adninistrative and minor technical problem prevented this.

As well as saving money, satellites could inrove the service to readers and
offer new types of services such as electronic sail for 'he newspaper-all
applicable to any type of business.

British TBLBOOH expects that the total capital cost of providing a small dish
satellite service in Europe will be about 100-: pounds.

Agree-ant was reached two years ago to start the service after the launch of
rcs, the first European co-unications satellite run by sums“ and TELBCOH l,
the French donestic satellite.

Coverage will range fro. the Shetlands to Gibraltar and iron Sweden to Greece.
British mama has already announced a link up with satellite business sys-
tens to allow UK customers access to the private system run by 888 throughout
the U.S. by the end of this year.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial lines Ltd, 1982

080: 5500/ 211.2 3ND

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY