FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10466

19 April 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parrnthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS I

19 hp:

USSR REPORT
CYBERNsths, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(1000 5/82)
CONTENTS

HARMRE
Improved 188.105” cmputer O...0OIOOIOOOOOCOOOOIOOOIOOOIOOI.-
Ps‘zm cmputer complex 00.0.00.Dee-00000000000000...DO.so...

Questions of Simulating Large Boundary Problems by
Approximate Diakoptics Method ..............................

Associative Processor for Problems of Controlling Affiliated

Systems ....................................................

Analog Memory Unit of Analog Computer ........................

Physicotechnological Problems of Computer mgineering ........

Broad Application Memory Unit ................................
SOFTWARE

Adapting Machine Graphics Program Packs to Graphic Information
maplw Mice: 00.00.000.000...00.0000...IOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOO

Central-Level-Data "stipulation Language in Heterogeneous
mu Base Intonation 31986118 eoooeeeoooeo0.0000000000000000

Collective-Use Computer Center Software, Use of Natural

-
“mes 'OOOO‘OOOICCOIOOO...OOOOOOOOUOOOOOCIOOCOODOOOII...

Analysis of Space of Rank Estimates and Synthesis of Structural
Analytical Models for Automating Expert Decision ﬂaking ....

Creation, Application of Automated Dialogue Training Systems..
Hulticriterion Optimization Problems .........................

- a - [III - USSR - 210 Si

FA“ amt-v I V "N‘ AQ'I I!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development and Introduction of Packages of Applied Programs....

Selected Items From Journal 'AIOORITHHS AND PROGRAHS',
septmber 1981:31'bru8 0"...0....0.0......OOOOQIOOOOOCOOO...

More Selected Items From Journal 'AIGORITHHS AND PROGRAHS',
septmber 1981 OOIIDIOOO0......OOOIOOOIOOOOOCIOOOOCOO0.0.0....

Selected Items PrmmJournal'AIﬁORITHHS AND PROGRAHS',
mtober 1981 COCOOOIOOODOIOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOCOIOO'OIOOIC0......

APPLICATIONS
Automated Supervisory Control System in 11th Five-Year Plan ....
Survey of Work on Syntactical Component of Machine Translation

systans Oooooooooooooocootoeocooooloooooolonoooooooson-anon...

PARALLEL - CWTING

Parallel Computer and Programing Systems oooooooooooooooooooooo

Realization of Operating System for Multiprocessor Complex
of Superprocessors of El'brus-l Multiprocessor Computer

Complex ......................................................

Parallel Processing in Estonia ...........;.....................
OPTICAL CHARACTER READERS

General Review of Optical Character Readers ....................

Main Characteristics of Soviet Character Readers ...............

Design, Operaticn of Rota-701, Sever-3 Character Readers .......

Design, Operation of Chars Character Reader ....................

Equipment Costs, wages for Character Readers ...................
CONFERENCES

International 'Diagnostic Facilities for Digital $78tem8'

Conference .0'000...OOOOOOOOCOOOOOO‘OOOIOIOOOOIOOOIOOIOOOOIOIO.

optimization of Control systm Cocooooooooooooooononooonooooooo

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUBLICATst
Methods of Numerical Simulation of Atmospheric Processes ......

Selected Items From Journal 'INSTRUHENTS, MEANS OF AUTMTION
AND WWII SYSTW', Februm, 1981 OOOCQOOOOOI'IOIIIIIOOOOO

Selected Items Rom Journal 'INSTRUIENTS, MEANS OF “IMHO"
AND CWTROL SYSTB‘S', April 1981 .0...000.00.000.050000000000

Selected Items From Jourml 'INSTRUMENTS, MEANS OF AMATION
AND (:me SYsTms', m 1981 I0......IODOOOOOIOOOOOUOOOOOOC

Selected Items From Journal 'INSTRUMDITS, MEANS OF AU‘IWATION
AND CONTROL SYSTBB', November 1981 goo...coconvooeoooo'eoeeo

Selected Items From Journal 'INSTRUHDITS, MEANS OF AUTOMTION
AND WWII srsm', member 1981 QOCOOOOOOOOCCCCJOUIC'0...

-c-
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3:65.011.8
IMPROVED YeS-lOSSH CG‘IPUTER

Moscow PRIBOR! I sxsrm UPRAVLEQIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81
pp 7-9

[Article by engineer-economist A. Gruenewald, Gerlar Democratic Republic]
[Text] As every year, the V33 Kombinat Robotror. presented its latest articles
in the field of information processing and office equipment at the Leipzig
Spring Pair in Harch 1981.
The main exhibition among them was the inproved Yes-1055M computer of the
Unified Carpets: System (Ryad-Z). The res-105531 computer (see figure) was
shown at the fair in the followi ag configuration:

the Yes-2655 central processor (German Democratic Republic);

a specialized processor-the mm matrix nodule (German Democratic
Republic)!

operator console with Yes-7069 display (German Democratic Republic):

Yes-556775067 plug-in disk store with capacity of 100 bytes (Peoples
Republic of Bulgaria):

Yes-5517/5017.02 magnetic tape store (German Democratic Republic);

Yes-7033!! parallel printer (Polish Peoples Republic);

Yes-6016 punch card input device (CSSR):

Yes-8371.01 remote data processor (Polish Peoples Republic) connected
through modems to the Yes-8577 progranable multifunctional user station
(German Demcratic Republic):

Yes-790231 equipment couple: (German Democratic Republic)!

Yes-7920!! display system (German Democratic Republic);

Yes-5075 floppy disk store (CSSR).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new SWYeS operating system and the improved OC/Yes system are used in
the Yes-1055!! computer.

'lhe innovations related to modernization of the Yes-1055 are described in this
article.

he Yes-2655!! Central Processor

The res-265514 central processor differs from the Yes~2655 processor in the
following inprovemente.

1. Internal storage (020) is realized on the basis of highly integrated
microcircuits, its capacity was increased to 4 Mbytes and all 4 Mbytes are
based on two panels and are located in the processor rack.

The doubled capacity of the internal storage (4 conpared to 2 Hbytes) facil-
itates organization of the user operating mode, contributes to an increase of
task processing productivity and thus ensures an increase of cosputer operat-
ing efficiency. When functioning in the virtual mnory or working file re-
write lode in the internal storage, the external stores, for example, plug-
in disk stores, are freed.

Due to the absence of a special cabinet for the internal store, the total
volume of devices and the area occupied by the central processor are reduced
to 1.74 m2 (cospared to 3.7 m2). The power supply unit is designed on the
transfomerless principle and due to using new integrated circuits for the

internal storage, the consumed energy was reduced to am (compared to 7.4 kw).
The required output of air conditioners was reduced in this case.

The microprogram store based on Pqu [semipermanent memory] (memory for stor
age of constants) was replaced in the Yes-2655M processor by a reprogramble
microprogram storage device based on statistical conponents of the P20 [read-
only memry]. It consists of a main rigidly progranned part and a freely
loaded auxiliary part with capacity of IX nicroinstructions (unlike the 32
microinstructions of the Yes-2655). loading speed is considerably increased
due to the presence of a loadable microprogran storage device.

The mtrix Module (mm)

The matrix module is a specialized processor for expanding the capabilities
of the Yes-265514 processor when performing certain calculating operations
(for example, matrix and vector calculations, correlation calculus, rapid
Fourier transforms and so on). The mm module is not an independent device
but operates under the control of the Yes-2655M processor. on do this, the
corresponding control programs are provided in the svs (system with vertical
remory) and os/Yes operating system.

The "MD nodule controls the instructions in machine code. ‘Do do this, the
set of instructions of the Yes-2655/2655H central processor is supplemented
with nine control instructions (for debugging and accounting) and 28 instruc-
tions for prep nration of fields and lines.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Debugging microprograms, direct error-detection programs, error analysis sys-
tem, debugging programs and special conpcnents of the operator's console have
been developed for convenience in Operating the matrix nodule. A diagnostic

' bus. new in its solution, provides access to all flip-flops of the matrix
nodule and to all cells of the read-only uonory of the matrix nodule. The
presence of a special diagtostic device in the matrix nodule creates good con-
ditions for servicing and diagnosis of the matrix nodule.

The structure of the matrix module permits parallel and independent perfor-
mance of the following functions: microprogram control, data storage in a
buffer, operations on numbers with floating point and operations on exponents.

An increase in the productivity of the matrix nodule is achieved by realizing
parallel performance of operations and the assembly-line method of processing
instructions, storage of data in a buffer, induced processing («hich provides
a saving of manory and machine time), selection of versions without increas-
ing machine time and programing simplicity.

In this case productivity is increased compared to usual fulfillment of pro-
grams approximately lO-SO-fold and depends on the file size, loading density
and communication algorithm.

New Yes-790214 and Yes-5075 Peripheral Devices

The new Yes-7902M conplex is an input-output device with standard interface

of the Unified Conputer System using papertape and cassette magnetic tape as
data carriers. The Yes-7902 pspertape complex used until now has been re-
placed try this device. The device is produced in two versions: H1 as paper-
tape devices and cassette magnetic tape store and M2 as only papertape devices.
The main advantages of the Yes-7902M device compared to the Yes-7902 papertape
couples: are the following: higher reliability due to use of modern component
base, less occupied area (0.6 instead of 1.5 m2), lower mass (260 instead of
325 kg) and lower volume (0.8 instead of 1.45 m3).

The Yes-SO75 device-—a floppy disk input-output device (CSSR)--was first of-
fered in the closed operating node and permits direct reading from floppy
disk carriers. A device of this type is used widely in the decentralized
computer equipment devices of the V88 mmbinat Robotron.

Inproved OS/Yes Operating System

The expanded version 6.1 of the OS/Yes can operate on the Yes-1040, Yes-1055
and Yes-lOSSH modem. Part of the nunber of the expanded functions is real-
ized in configuration of svs control programs and can therefore be used in
the Yes-1055 and YeS-lOSSM. The functional expansions are compatible in a
"bottom to top" operating system or are alternatives in use.

The following modifications have been made.

1. Emotional task servicing expansion. The "Spool" system, which offers a
number of advantages to users, has been introduced: maximum operating speed

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of devices with systems input-output for punch card input or punch card output
devices and printers, increased capacity for tasks, better utilization of disk
sections of direct access devices to memory, new capabilities of control of
Yes-5075 floppy disk store and new functions and improved reliability with
systems output to punch card output printer.

2. The capabilities in sorting and fusion of data have been expanded. The
sorting process is accelerated due to new methods. However, these methods
can be used only in new models of the Unified Computer System since they are
implemented only with expanded instruction reserve.

3. Joint use of OS/Yes and SVM/Yes system. The function of coubining sys-
tems in expanded version 6.1 of the OS/Yes was developed to increase the oper-
ating efficiency of the SVS under the control of the Sim/Yes. This function
is realized in several cosponents of the SVS control program and ensures ef-
ficiency of the svs both in real and virtual machines.

4. Software of user stations of the Unified Computer System. The was Kombinat
Robotron has developed software for unified Computer System user stations us-
ing the di .ect access method during remote data processing (VTAH and TSAM)
within the framework of the production program ”Decentralized cosputer
equipment.”

The use of new devices in the system permits a considerable expansion of user
stations (terminals) and thus permits one to take into account the most diverse
user requirements.

These devices include the Yes-8577 programmble multifunctional user station,
Yes-792511 and Yes-8556 programmble display user stations and Yes-8551 univer-
sal programble user station designed to solve scientific, engineering and
economic problems.

Realization of the Concept of Virtual Machines Using the New SWYes Operating
System

The general operating principle in virtual computers, being the basis of the
SVH/Yes system, consists in the fact that parallel operation of several users
on the same couputer is also carried out in addition to multiprogram process-
ing. In this case a virtual machine is offered to each user. The internal
storage is determined so that each user has his own. The central processor
is offered to each user in the time-sharing mode for equal intervals. Input-
output devices are shared or designated so that each user has at his disposal
a specific number of input-output devices.

The SVM/Yes operating system adjusts virtual machines to the real configura~
tion of couputers and provides servicing and control of parallel operation of
virtual machines. Every virtual computer operates for the user as an inde-
pendent computer with its own resources and under the control of its own op-
erating system selected with regard to user requirements.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Because of parallel operation of several virtual machines, the user can con-
trol the selection of operating modes-~batch processing. dialogue, debugging
and system servicing.

The SV/Yes operating system is distinguished by its broad capabilities:

it permits a) parallel operation in dialogue and batch processing modes,
b) performance of systems programing and technical servicing tasks parallel
with the production process and c) parallel processing of the most diverse
problems on the same conputer. Its advantages are the absence of idle times
related to replacement of inoperating system, high operating reliability and
reliability of data due to independence of virtual machines and simplicity
for operators to master.

The following can be used as operating systems operating under the control of
the Sim/Yes system for virtual machines:

1. The OS/Yes operating system. which can be used not only for batch process-
ing but for dialogue problems as well. It can function in parallel with all
configurations of control programs (m, HVT and svs). Adjustment to operate
under the control of the svs/Yes system has been realized for the configura-
tion of svs control programs to improve the efficiency of the system as a
whole.

2. The DOS/Yes [Disk operating system of Unified Computer System] operating
system, which can be used under the control of the SVh/Yes as a batch process-

ing system. In this case the users having program packs for the Dos/Yes do
not have to rework than for new versions of the operating systems.

3. The PTS programming and debugging system related to the SVM/‘leS file. The
PTS system is designed to develop, debug and fulfill programs in the dialogue
operating mode, for which the PTS system has been provided with its own in-
struction language and control files. The PTS system is distinguished by
high flexibility in use and simplicity to master.

4. The PETS reuote file transmission system, being a component of the SWI/‘les
and controlling file transmission between distant input-output devices and
virtual machines and between ms data stations. The main designation of the
arts consists in transmission of control data, program and results of debug-
ging when working out programs under the control of the MS system at remote

displays .

S. The P035 error analysis system-~a component of the SVM/Yes system, having
special modules and procedures for error analysis and used to supplement the
91‘s system. The PDAS system is used as a valuable auxiliary device for the
systems programmer for gathering, servicing and analysis of errors of the
SVM/Yes operating systems and devices.

The YeS-lOSSH computer displayed at the hipzig Pair corresponds to modern
international trends in development of computer equipment'with extensive use
of microelectronics and the related increase of productivity with a simultan-
eous reduction of construed energy, occupied area and volume and also its own
modern software and coamon characteristics of the system.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”hashinostroyeniye”. "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya',
1981

6521

C50: 1863/69 5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PS-ZOOO COMPUTER COMPLEX

Kiev ELEK’I’RONNOY‘E MODELIROVANIYE in Russian Vol 4,No 1, Jan-Feb 82 inside front cover

 

[Text] PS-ZGOO computer complex developed by the Scientific Research Institute of
Control Computers and the Severodonetak I‘wpul‘s [Pulse] Scientific Production
Association together with the Moscow Institute of Control Problems. Designed

for high—efficiency processing of. data obtained as the result of geophysical and
oceanographic research, tests of various complicated equipment and the like.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvu "Naukova dunks", "Elektronnoye modelirovaniye", 1982

8831
cso: 1863/95 6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 537.212.001.24

QUESTIONS 0? SIMULATING LARGE BOUNDARY PROBLEMS BY APPROXIMATE DIAKOPTICS
METHOD

Kiev ELEKTRONNOYE MODELIROVARIYE in Russian Vol 4, No l, Jan—Feb 82 (manuscript
received 13 Jun 80) pp 1.04:6

a

t,’
[Article by Yakov Il'ich Tetel'ba , unior scientific associate, All-Union
Petroleum and Gas Scientific Resea with“. Hoscow]

[Excerpts] In [1] a description is given of the method of approximate diakoptics
for a machine solution with limited equipment of large two-dimensional boundary
problems represented by means of electrical nets with a very great number of

nodes. This method is applicable for "net - digital computer" (“Saturn-l") hybrid
computer complexes or for digital computers with a working storage capacity in-
sufficient for accmmmodating the entire field. Direct methods of calculating
complex electrical and electronic circuits have been developed on the basis of
diakoptics [2-6]. By the method of diakoptics a large system (electrical circuit)
is broken down into several small subsystems each of which is calculated separately
and then the particular solutions are united by means of a "skeleton intersection
circuit" (skeleton diagram). This is a general major system described only by means
of variables included in the conditions for joining aubcircuits, i.e., variables '
(e.g., voltages) at boundaries at points of sections. The skeleton diagram of the
general circuit is made up of the skeleton diagrams of subcircuits, whose parameters
are determined from experiments in short-circuiting and breaking the circuit (no-
load) for the boundary points of the joining of subcircuits. These experiments are
performed on a computer by means of digital or analog simulation.

The boundary problem for a system with distributed parameters is replaced with the
accuracy of a finite difference approximation by a system of linear algebraic equa-
tions simulated by means of a resistive electrical net representing an electrical
circuit for which it is possible to obtain a precise solution by the method of dia-
koptics. As compared with a complete system of finite difference equations for the
entire region represented by the electrical net, the equations of the skeleton
intersection diagram contain considerably fewer variables (just for points of the
joining of subregions), which simplifies the solution.

Methods of diakoptics are effective when the circuit is divided into parts at a
limited number of points. In the case of the finite difference representation of
boundary problems subregions are divided along boundaries regularly containing a
great number of nodal points. The advantage of the direct method of diakoptics

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here is practically reduced to nought because of! the labor intensiveneas or a
precise determination of the parameters of the skeleton diagrams of individual
subrcgions. Consequently, a new method became necessary (called the method of
approximate diakoptics) which is based on simplification of the skeleton inter-
section circuit for determining voltages at the boundaries of. joined subregions [1].
This method either directly or with refinement through iteration makes possible a
substantial reduction in machine time. and the direct method of approximate dia-
koptics is not in opposition to iteration methods, but organically supplements

them when the initial approximation is unknown. The method of approximate dia-
koptics in terms of the number of exchanges with the external storage is consistent
with just a single block iteration. since experiments in breaking the circuit
(no—load) and short-circuiting require only a onevtime call of a subregion to the
parallel processor (net) or to the working storage.

Experience has demonstrated the high accuracy of approximate diakoptics solutions,
which results in a considerable saving of mchine time. This is obvious from the
graph shown in fig 1.

 

Figure 1. Curve Comparing Convergence of Solutions by the Method of Block
Iteration and the Hethod of Approximate Diakoptics with Refinement

Key: .
1. 2.

Nd [diakoptics] Ni [iteration]

The rate of convergence of iterations [7] has the form

(1)

where 6 and 6k are measures of the error vector ([1. + N) and of k itera-
tions (mfg: values).

Designating the initial error of the iteration process as G , the initial error

after diakoptic approximation as 6 . the maxim permissigie error of the
analog parallel processor or of. digggsl refinement as 6 , the number of iterations

without diskoptics as N1 , and the number of refining igerstions with the existence
of a diakoptic solution as Nd . from (1) we get

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 5n. l 6.
”nu—7131K. haul—710$;-

Let for the boundary nodes of the joining of subregions (from the experience of
solving problems) r - 0.45 , Gd - 0.003 , 6 - 0.001 and 6 - 0.5 ; then,
taking into account the fact that the time fgr a diakoptic solution corresponds

to a single iteration, we have the following saving of time for a hybrid computing
complex of the net - digital computer type: “1/(1 + Nd) - 4 times end with r -
- 0.65 , 6P - 60d - 0.003 , we have “d - 0 and N1 - 10 times.

Relatively high accuracy is obtained for approximate diahoptics in spite of the
rough approximation of the skeleton diagrams of subregions as compared with the
precise skeleton diagrams determined by the method of diakoptics for electrical
nets. According to the procedure described in [1] the connection of subregions is
performed not at all boundary nodes, but with a certain spacing of the "lattice

of net electrodes," whereby in determining the parameters of the skeleton diagrams
of subregions only the major connections between electrodes are taken into account.
The rough approximation of skeleton diagrams substantially simplifies machine cal-
culation of the field; however, the simplifications cannot be universal since from
this it would follow that the complex problem would be equivalently reduced to a
simple one. Therefore, the use of skeleton diagrams of a specific type is justi-
fied only with a corresponding restriction of the class of problems which can be
solved: The broader the class, the more important the organization of iteration
control of the accuracy of the method and, when necessary, the performance of
additional refinement of the results. with this the use of the approximate dia-
koptics method always gives a good initial approximation.

Below a theoretical verification is presented of the method of determining voltages
at the boundaries of joined subregione. a procedure is presented for solving a
boundary problem in a large region part by part and questions relating to the inter-

polation and iteration refinement of the boundary voltages of joined subregions
are discussed.

The method described can be extended easily to several subregiona, is quite simple

for purposes of algorithmization and possesses good convergence. ?ractically
speaking, problems in which a region was divided into 2 to 15 subregions have been

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a parallel processor for 1024 nodes is designed for four subregions, i.e..
for 1.096 nodes of the net. Information on some problems which have been solved
is presented in the table.

Table 1.

Number of problem 1 2 3 lo 5
Number of net nodes 730 1500 1500 1300 4096
Number of subregiona ' lo 2 2 15 lo
Number of sources 60 19 19 36 172
Number of net electrodes 25 8 lo 38 33
Spacing of net electrodes 2 lo 8 lo 4

Mean arithmetic error of
determination of boundary
voltages. percent 0.3 0.93 0.3 1.96 0.85

Bibliography

1. Tetel'baum. Ya.I. "Solution of Difference Equations for Boundary Problems
of the Elliptical Type by Circuit Theory Methods," ELEK'I'RICHESTVO, No 5, 1978,
pp 57—60.

2. Kron, c. "Issledovaniye slozhnykh sistem po chastyam--diakoptika" [Study of
Complex Systems Part by Part--Diakoptics], Moscow, Nauks, 1972, 564 pages.

3. Khepp, Kh. "Diakoptika i elektricheskiye tsepi" [Diakoptics and Electrical
Circuits], Moscow, Mir, 1971., 364 pages.

la. Pukhov. G.Ye. "Direct Methods of Calculating Electrical Circuits," ELEICI'RI-
cursrvo, No 10, 1963, pp 23—28.

5. Nagornyy, L.Ya. and Zhukov, LA. "0n the Question of Simulating Low-Density
Systems of Nonlinear Differential Equations of Large Dimensionality on a
Digital Computer and Hybrid Computer Complex." ELEKTRONIKA I MODELIROVANIYE,
No 15, 1977, pp 9-11.

6. Baranov, A.V. "Elements of the Theory of Coupled Systems," Moscow. VES’I'NIK
usu, srn. 3, No a, 1965, pp 36-40.

7. Vazov, V. and Foraayt, Dzh. "Difference Methods of Solving Partial Differ-
ential Equations." Moscow, Irdatel'stvo inoatrannoy literatury, 1963, (087 pages.

6. Danilina. N.I.. Dubrovskaya, N.S., Kvasha, 0.P. et a1. "Chislennyye metody"
[Numerical Methods], Moscow, Vysshaya shkola, 1976, 368 pages.

9. Tetel‘baum. LM. and Tetel‘baum, Ya.l. "Modeli pryamoy analogii" [Models of
Direct Analogy], Moscow, Nauka, 1979. 384 pages.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks“, "Elektronnoye modelirovaniye", 1982

8831
cso: 1863/95

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 681.32
ASSOCIATIVE PROCESSOR FOR PROBLEMS 0! CONTROLLING ASPILIATBD SYSTEMS

Kiev BLEKIRONNOYE MODELIROVANIYB in Russian Vol 6, No l. Jan—Feb 82 Onanuscript
received 8 Dec 80) PP 55-58, 96

[Article by Gennadiy Aleksandrovich Nikitin. candidate of technical sciences and
assistant professor. Boris Vasil'ysvich Vinnikov, junior scientific associate,
Yevgeniy Vasil'yevich Kapranov, junior scientific associate, and Igor' Leopol'do-
vich Kaftannikov, instructor, Chelyabinsk Polytechnical Institute]

[Text] Among problems of controlling large numbers of systems in real time can be
distinguished those which are characteristic of systems possessing the following
features:

All controlled systems are homogeneous (of the same type) and form a single hier-
archical level. '

Local control of an individual system is independent and is carried out according
to one and the same algorithm.

The data files describing each controlled system have identical structures and
dimensionality and form the system's data base.

Global control requires taking into account the interrelationships of systems and
forming from their data bases a unified file of data to be processed.

He will call such controlled systems affiliated, e.g., machine tools with program
control when processing identical parts (performing one and the same operation).

Problems of the local control of affiliated systems (checking parameters, detect-
ing impermissible deviati..s. etc.) are reduced to processing various data bases
according to the same algorithm and create the prerequisites for system multipro-
cessing [1]. which is most effectively implemented with a parallel computing
structure. Global control (ordering the operation of systems and displaying the
progress of processes) is based on the sorting of files formed from data bases,
which requires the use of associative processing methods [2].

Associative Processor with the Classical Structure

The classical organization of a parallel associative processor (PAP) assumes
structuring its memory on the basis of associative memory elements (fig 1).

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By means of an input unit containing data and mask registers access is made pos—
sible to one or more hit slices of memory words. Any operation (arithmetic,
logical, search) on multibit operands is performed by microprogram "simultaneously"
on all words of the memory by means of elementary polling and write micro—opera-
tions. Control signals are formed by a central control unit (T800) and a local
control unit (HUD) makes possible the modification of microinstructions to be
executed by taking into account the information to be processed in each word of

the associative memory. which in this case it is appropriate to call the associa-
tive decision field (ARP).

 

Figure 1. Classical Structure of Associative Processor with Modular
Organization

Key:
1. Output unit 6. Local control unit (HUD)
2. Module 5. Central control unit (TsUU)

3. Input unit

For the purpose of organizing parallel processing, the data base for each system
must be accommodated in a single word of the associative memory. Obviously, this
kind of organization for a PAP is not distinguished by structural flexibility,
since changing the number of controlled systems or the size and structure of their
data bases results in the necessity of changing the dimensions of the associative
decision field. A modular structure with a layer-by—layer arrangement of data
bases is preferable (cf. fig 1) A layer is formed by memory words of the same
type of all modules. which makes it possible relatively easily to increase the
capacity of the PAP when changing the dimensionality and nature of problems
solved. A channel for regular communication between modules of the AR? in solving
problems of a given class can be executed most simply in the form of lines for

the parallel transfer of the results of associative processing successively from
one module to another (in parallel for all words).

Generally, control problems include not only logical and search operations, but
also arithmetic processing. Since any processing in an ARP is performed in

12
FOI.OFTIC1AI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

synchronism, then for the purpose of characterizing the speed of any operation it
is possible to use the number of elementary polling and write microinstructions
required to execute it.

Investigations have demonstrated that the algorithms for arithmetic processing in

an AR? developed in [2] are insufficiently fast. Shortening the length of micro-

programs as the result of combining polling and write micro-operations or adding

a one-bit adder to each string of the associative memory [3] somewhat improves the
algorithmic speed of the ARP. However, formation of the mass result of an arith-
metic operation is performed serially bit by bit, and in parallel (simultaneously)
only for subsets of words activated by a given microinstruction. This results in
the fact that multiprocessing at the microinstruction level proves to be consider-
ably inferior to that potentially possible.

Of interest is the development of algorithms which make possible the fruitfulness
of each polling and write micro-operation simultaneously for the entire set of
operands to be processed. One of the simplest is the inverse write-in method [4].
based on the possibility of writing into a location of the associative memory the
direct or inverse write-in code depending on the results of associative polling.
This method makes possible the arithmetic processing of a single operand bit
after a single microinstruction, but the operation is performed serially bit by
bit. The synchronous implementation of the principles of asynchronous summing [5]
makes it possible to form with a single microinstruction no less than one bit of
the mass result, but requires additional hardware costs and hampers the use of a
standard associative memory as the basis for constructing a decision field.

Thus, with considerable amounts of arithmetic processing in problems of controlling
affiliated systems the use of the classical structure for an associative processor
proves to be inadequately effective.

Processor with Parallel-Associative Processing

Development of the arithmetic capabilities of an associative decision field has
resulted in the structure of a processor with parallel-associative data processing
[6]. This processor is in the form of a set of independent processor elements
(PE's) operating under the control of a central control unit (fig 2) which forms
control signals for the next microinstruction and feeds them simultaneously to all
PE's. A local control unit for each PE, taking into account the data to be pro-
cessed, modifies the microinstruction to be executed and forms for the central
control unit signals informing of the result obtained.

The data to be processed from controlled systems is entered via an interface by
means of an input unit into the processor's memory, formed by the memory units of
individual processor elements. Data bases are arranged layer by layer. The mem-
ory addressing mechanism implements both address and associative methods of ac-
ccssing. In address accessing the principle of separation into layers with sec-
tionalization of the memory is employed. which makes it possible to process in
parallel data bases placed in the memory units of various processor elements with
an identical relative address. Associative addressing makes it possible to acti-
vate for subsequent processing data bases located in any layers of the processor's
memory. When performing associative and nonassociative operations with an
operand identical for all words to be processed. the processor is placed in a

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

general register. The input unit contains registers used not only for inputing
information but also for organizing associative processing. Information is output
through a readout buffer. Each processor element is assigned its own readout
register for the purpose of increasing speed. Both address and associative access
to data to be read out are possible; furthermore, any word is identified by its
address.

The basic functional unit is the processor element (fig 3), containing a section-
alized memory and independent logic for performing arithmetic and associative
processing. The entire memory field of a processor element can be broken down
into the following areas in terms of type of processing: arithmetic processing
(RAM memory area); associative-arithmetic processing (associative memory areas
connected to an adder); associative processing (associative memory areas not
having access to an adder); and the working area (associative memory area used for
the local control unit).

 

Figure 2. Structure of Processor with Parallel-Associative Data Processing

Key:
1. Arithmetic-logic unit (EAL) 6. Input unit
2. memory unit 7. General registers
3. Local control unit 8. Readout buffer
4. Processor element 9. System interface

5. Central control unit

Arithmetic-logic processing is performed in the arithmetic field formed by the
arithmetic-logic processing units (BAL's) of all processor elements. In this case
processor elements operate in parallel (according to a single algorithm), making
possible system multiprocessing of the problem to be solved for data bases prelim-
inarily activated by the associative method or those located in a single layer of
the memory. The arithmetic-logic superstructure equipping the processor elements
contains a 2-byte combination adder (SH) with an output register (RSH). Operands
for summing can be supplied from various areas of the memory unit. For the
associative processing of files (sorting, ordering, search and the like) the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
associative memories of all processor elements are united into an associative
decision field making possible access to any bit slice of operands.

 

Figure 3. Structure of Processor Eleasnts

Key:
1. Common operand 8. Local control unit
2. Output register (RSH) 9. Coincidence indicators
3. Combination adder (SH) 10. Priority chain
h. Readout register 11. Address coder
5. Memory unit 12. From write-in registers
6. RAH 13. From associative processing
7. Associative memory registers

This organization of the processor, as theuresult of some restructuring of the
decision field, makes it possible to create the computing structure best suited to
specific algorithms to be run. An increase in the dimensionality of problems to

be solved and in the number of controlled systems, without altering the basic struc—
ture of the processor, is compensated either by a proportional increase in the
capacity of each memory unit or by the addition of additional processor elements.

Instruction Set Features

The familiar principles of informstiveness and logical complexity form the basis
for developing the instruction set [7]. which has made possible the high effective-
ness of programs and has made it possible to take into account the features of
parallel. group and associative processing. The instruction set includes "rapid"
instructions of the "register-register" type and instructions for a complicated
search in a file.

By taking into account the architectural features of a processor with parallel-
associative processing it is possible to create economical formats for instructions
for processing in the decision field which in terms of their content are closer to

15
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFWK]AL.USE¢DNLN

the statements of a high-level programing language than to traditional cowuter
instructions. The instruction set has been structured as an open one with great
capabilities for expansion as the result of the addition of new instructions and
modifications of those already implemented. The use in the processor of an automa-
tic check of the level of the location of data bases (of the size of the area
occupied) frees the programmer from the need to take into account the size of

files to be processed.

The data addressing unit is an area of the processor's memory (cf. fig 3), and a
single address field of an instruction can address several areas of the memory
simultaneously. By changing the number of address fields instructions of the same
type of various lengths are obtained (the most used instructions have the shortest
format).

According to the kind of operations performed, all instructions are divided into
arithmetic, associative-arithmetic and associative processing instructions and
auxiliary instructions. Operands can be files or subfiles (groups) and individual
words which are placed either in the memory or in the general register or directly
in an instruction. For the purpose of programming kinds of data processing differ-
ing from "statement" instructions. in the instruction set associative polling and
write instructions are provided for any area of the associative memory through a
random control character with masking, and these instructions have the longest
format.

A distinctive feature of control instructions involves the fact that in parallel
processing of a file in the processor a multiple transfer condition is formed
(e.g., the presence of just a single word in the memory with the required control
character). In this case it is a good idea to separate instructions for forming
conditions and for organizing direct transfer.

A program is formed as a file which can be placed in a program memory with page
organization. Here a transfer instruction makes possible the transfer of control
within the limits of just the current page. and for the purpose of transfer between
pages an instruction for setting the page register is used.

Thus, problems of controlling affiliated systems make possible a high degree of
multiprocessing. The information bases of a group of systems are procesred most
effectively by means of a parallel processor and it is appropriate to use associa-
tive processors for the mass comparison and sorting of files.

A parallel-associative processor with a modular structure of the associative de-
cision field. which makes it possible to increase its capacity with a change in
the dimensionality and nature of problems solved, has the greatest structural
flexibility. The disadvantages of an associative decision field are associated
with the relatively low degree of multiprocessing at the micro-operation level in
arithmetic processing. Employment of the inverse write-in method or of the syn-
chronous implementation of the principle of asynchronous summing make it possible
to increase algorithmic speed in forming the mass result of arithmetic operations.

A computing structure with parallel-associative data processing unites the ad-
vantages of parallel arithmetic and associative decision fields. Reordering of
the structure of the decision field as a function of the processing algorithm is

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

made possible. Employment of the principles of direct and associative addressing
of data make it possible in addition to the usual vector processing to implement
group processing according to control characters. The modular structure of the
decision field makes it possible to increase its computing capacity by adding
additional processor elements.

The instruction set is oriented primarily toward the vector and group processing
of files and has great capabilities for expansion. Associative polling and
write instructions for any control character are provided for the purpose of
programing any kind of processing.

Bibliography

1. Vilenkin. S.Ya., Intenberg, 1.1. and Nabatov, A.S. "Mu1tiprocessing in
Processors with a Single Stream of Instructions and a Multiple Stream of
Data," UPRAVLYAXUSHCHIYE SISTEMY I MASHINY, No 3, 1980, pp 61-65.

2. Prangishvili, I.V., editor. "Odnorodnyye mikroelektronnyye assotsiativnyye
protsessory" [Homogeneous Microelectronic Associative Processors], Moscow,
Sovetskoye radio, 1973, 280 pages.

3. Medvedev, I.L., Prangishvili, I.V. and Chudin, A.A. "Mnogoprotsessornyye
vychislitel'nyye sistemy s perestraivayemoy strukturoy" [Multiprocessor
Computing Systems with a Rearrangeable Structure], Moscow, 1975, 74 pages
(Institute of Control Problems Preprint No 85).

4. Vinnikov, B.V., Kaftannikov, I.L. and Nikitin, G.A. USSR Patent No 700863,
"Processor Module," published in BYULLETEN' IZOBRBTENIY, No bk, 1979.

5. Kaftannikov, I.L. and Nikitin, G.A. "Asynchronous Method of Performing a
Group Addition Operation" in "Informatsionnyye i upravlyayushchiye elementy
i sistemy" [Data Processing and Control Elements and Systems], Chelyabinsk,
1979, pp 169-151.

6. Nikitin, G.A., Vinnikov, B.V., Kapranov, Ye.v. and Kaftannikov, I.L. "Pro-
cessor with Parallel-Associative Data Processing" in "Parallel'nyye mashiny"
[Parallel Machines], Kiev, 1980, pp 32-34. (Preprint No 223, Ukrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences Institute of Electrodynamics).

7. Arlazarov, V.L., Dinits, Ye.A. and Yemel'yanov, N.Ye. "One Approach to Con-
structing a High-Level Instruction Set" in "Mnogoprotssssornyye vychislitel'-
nyye sistemy" [Multiprocessor Computing Systems], Moscow, 1975, pp 45—53.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Naukova dunks", "Blektronnoye modelirovaniye", 1982

8831
cso: 1863/95

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANALOG MEMORY UNIT 01" ANALOG COMPUTER

Kiev ELEKTRONNOYB MODELIROVANIYE in Russian Vol 4, No 1. Jan-Feb 82 inside back
cover

[Text] The analog memory unit developed at Kazakh State University is a unified
component of special—purpose analog computers in which resistive networks are
used. The unit's circuit contains access and storage circuits connected in
parallel and operating alternately over time to store and compile analog informa—
tion obtained in the resistive network. Information is stored in the form of
voltage of a specific magnitude in the plates of the memory's capacitor. The
analog memory unit is designed for the cyclic precision transfer of the analog
voltage value from one point in the resistive network to another.

 

Figure 1. Analog Memory Unit

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Automatic correction of the error originating as the result of the joint effect of
zero drift and temperature-related zero drift and the displacement and offset
current is employed in the unit. Correction is combined in terms of time vith

the access mode, as the result of which accessing of the analog signal is accom-
plished with an accuracy of not less than 0.0005 percent.

Reed relays are used as switching elements for the purpose of reducing_the error
resulting from switching. The minimum access time thereby equals 5.10 3 s.

The error arising as the result of leakage of the charge from the memory capacitor's
plates and the polarization of the dielectric is reduced to a minimum by selecting
the type of capacitor and by appropriate circuitry solutions. The rate of distor-

tion of an analog quantity during storage is not greater than 0.001 percent per
minute.

The input voltage range of the unit is from -10 V to +10 V. The unit has a simple
pulse sequence for controlling the accessing, storage and correction processes.
The overall dimensions of the unit's printed circuit board are 150 x 150 an and
the supply voltage is +15, -15, +5 V.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", "Blektronnoye modelirovaniye", 1982

8831
C80: 1863/95

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORG)FFNJAI.USE¢0NLY

030 621.382

PHYSICOTECHNOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF COMPUTER ENGINEERING

Kiev FIZIKO-TEKHNOLOGICHESKIYE VOPROSY VYCKISLITEL'NOY'TEKHNIKI in Russian 1981
(signed to press 17 Jun 81) PP 3-6, 8-14, 24-25

[Preprint 81-33, "Physicotechnological Problems of Computer Engineering", by

Ali Mamedovich Abbasov, Anetoliy Ivanovich Zolotopup, Ol"ga Vasil'yevna Dronova,
Igor' Vyacheslavovich Zavalin, Yuriy Yakovlevich Kanevets, Viktor Alakseyevich
Tarasov and Aleksandr Hikheylovich Bogdanchenko, Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Cybernetics, 300 copies. 28 pages]

[Excerpts] 1. On One Method for Formalizing Drawing of LS! Circuit Topology

A central problem in automating design of integrated circuits [IC] is the synthesis
of topological drawings (TCh) for large-scale IC's [L85]. Inadequate formalization
of this process is the main reason for the decline in efficiency of application of
computer-aided design [CAD] systems for L51 topology [1].

Host methods for automating synthesis of LSI topological drawings are based on
using sketches of topological drawings developed manually, which can be quite
varied: rough (dimensionless) depiction of the topological drawings, their simpli-
fied graphic representation and symbolic representation. Simple and convenient for
computer representation is a sketch of a topological drawing that is a conventional
depiction of the elements and connections in the electrical circuit (BS) on an
orthogonal topological grid [2 - 4]; it is sometimes called a symbolic representa-
tion or draft (SP) of the LS! circuit. with special rules for drawing the symbolic
draft and certain metric and geometric descriptions of the elements in the layout
drawing and grid, it is possible to construct a symbolic draft of an LSI circuit,
isomorphic to the layout drawing [3, a].

The main stages in design of an L8! circuit. such as minimization_of the chip area,
reduction of path intersections in the same technological layer and optimization

of circuit characteristics, are solved precisely at the stage of drawing the sym-
bolic draft. In the process, manual drawing.of the symbolic draft does not permit
meeting the criteria cited above to an adequate extent. also, the probability of
errors in it is not precluded; therefore, the symbolic draft itself has to be com-
pletely checked. Given below is the technique for formalizing the drawing up of a
symbolic draft for the layout drawing of an L5! circuit.

In conclusion, let us note that the technique cited for formalizing the compilation
of a symbolic draft for the layout drawing of an L5! circuit when it is applied in

20
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the symbolic method [3, b] for designing the layout drawing for an L5! circuit per-
mits full automation of the layout drawing synthesis process. Programs that imple-
ment this technique are now being debugged on the BESM-6 computer and it is planned
to include them in the SIMPAS computer-aided design system [a].

2. Formation of Low-Resistance High-Temperature Layers in Integrated Circuit
Technology

The widespread introduction of 16's in the national economy urgently requires hu-
proving the electrical characteristics, raising the reliability and expanding the
operating conditions for IC's both through developing new physical principles and
through improving their manufacturing technology. A special role in solving these
problems belongs to the development of multilayer metallization which meets the
complicated requirements of IC technology.

In LSI circuits, particularly in those with a high scale of integration and speed,
increased demands are imposed on the longitudinal resistance of the buses, which
leads to the necessity of developing multilayer high-temperature metallization [6].

These problems can now be solved by applying thin films of infusible, chemically
stable, low-resistance materials with metallic type of conductivity. Such materials
include certain borides, for example "84 and La86, tantalum carbide TaC, transition

metal silicone HSi MoSiz, TiSi2 and others. The metallic silicons "812 end T1812

2’
are most promising because of their unique properties: rather low specific resis-
tances Ro - /12.5 ... 25/ microohms.cm, the capability of obtaining barrier-free

contact to silicon of n+ and p, types ofzconductivity with low specific contact
resistance Re a [2 ... 8/ .10" ohma.cm , high eutectic temperature with silicon
Teut is greater than or equal to 1200‘C, good adhesive-cohesive properties with
silicon, glass ceramic and quartz, and the high reliability and stability of para-

meters over prolonged operation [7 - 9].

A number of methods are available for forming silicide films on the surface of a
silicon wafer: deposition of the film by the method of discrete evaporation of
silicide powder, and by the method of sputtering of a silicide target in plasma of
direct or alternating current and of spraying of silicide by an electron beam;
formation of a silicide layer by high-temperature annealing from a metallic film
spray-coated on silicon; formation of a silicide layer in the process of spraying
metal on the substrate heated to a certain temperature (800-1000'C) and formation
of a silicide layer by simultaneous spraying of silicon and metal from two sources
by two electron beams.

21
FOI.OFFN]AI.USE11NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
l. R. in ohms/C1

2. h in micrometers

Shown in fig. 1 are the graphs of
the specific resistance of films
based on silicides “Siz and ‘I‘iSi2

as a function of the thickness
obtained by the different methods
under various conditions.

Curves 1 end 3 are for sputtering
of H812 from a target in a plasma

of direct current when

P98 - 4.10-“ torr and

953 = 5.10'3 torr. respectively§

curve 2 is for sputtering of H
froma target in a plasma of
direct current when

-3
PM : 10 torr “1d Teubstrate-
900'C; curve 4 is for sputtering of WSi2 of powder by discrete vaporization when

 

P - 10'6 torr; curve 5 is for forming ”Si2 with sputtering of H and by electron
-7 . .
been when P - 6.10 torr and Tsubstrate' 1100 C, curve 6 is for deposition of H

and Ti from two sources by two electron beams; curve 7 is for forming ‘l'iSi2 with

deposition of Ti by electron beam when P - 4.10'7torr and - lOOO'c.

Tsubs trate

Formation of film by the method of discrete vaporization of silicide powder permits
performing deposition in a high vacuum on the order of

10'6 - 10'7torr, which enables obtaining layers of high electroconductivity
(Rs . 0.5 - 0.6 ohm/u ). However, this method has a number of substantial short-

comings. The high temperature for silicide vaporization leads to rapid destruction
of the tungsten evaporator, which results in contamination of the film by the
evaporator material. The nonuniformity of silicide powder supply from the vibrat-
ing feed bin hinders checking the growth of the thickness of the silicide layers
and results in formation of defects in the form of embedded particles of silicide
the size of 2 to 10 micrometers on the surface of the silicide layers.

lhe method of sputtering of a silicide target in a plasma of direct current enables
obtaining, just as in the previous method, silicide layers on substrates of various
materials (both silicon and dielectric). Because of the low rate of deposition and
the high reproducibility of the process, this method enables obtaining different

sizes of silicide layers with fine reproducible thickness and electrical parameters.
But the shortcoming in thsi method is that, just as in deposition of metallic films,

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is difficult to obtain low-resistance layers because of the introduction of an
inert gas and residual oxygen into the film. Using this method, we obtained films
of "Si2 with a thickness on the order of 5000 A with a specific resistance on the
order of 2-3 ohms/a after annealing ata temperature of 1150'C for 20 minutes.
This method also requires manufacturing silicide targets with high purity and a
specific porosity to avoid destruction of the target in the sputtering process.

Deposition of films by electron beam from a target of molybdenum silicide, obtained
by the method of powder metallurgy, did not permit formation of silicide layers
with the required stoichiometry because of the destruction of the silicide in the
process of vaporization and primary deposition of silicon on the substrate.

Formation of silicide layers by the method of deposition of metallic films and sub-
sequent high-temperature annealing enables obtaining qualitative layers of silicide
with the required stoichiometry. But this method does not permit obtaining layers
of "Si2 and HoSi2 with a thickness of more than 0.6-0.6 micrometer, which provides

a specific resistance for such films on the order of 0.6-0.8 ohm/u .

Obtaining thicker silicde layers is possible when the metal is sputtered on a highly
heated silicon substrate. in doing so, silicide is formed in the metal sputtering
process. This method requires selecting the optimal metal sputtering rate and sub-
strate temperature. The substrate temperature determines the silicide growth rate,
however, it may vary within fixed limits. At a low substrate temperature (less
than 700’C), the rate of formation of silicidee of tungsten and molybdenum is very
low; at a high temperature (over 1000'C), the atoms of the deposited metal pene~
trate deeply into the silicon substrate, which results in an excess of silicon in
the layer being formed. Experiments have shown that an optimal substrate tempera-
ture must be selected for each metal. For example, for titanium, this temperature
lies within the range of BOO-900°C, and for tungsten, up to 1100'0 at high rates of
metal feeding (on the order of 40-50 A/s). The optimal metal feed rate is selected
after selecting the substrate temperature. Disparity between the metal feed rate
and growth of the highest phase of the silicide HeSi results in deterioration of

the stoichiometry. Additional annealing can eliminage metal excesses in the
silicide film.

The method of forming a silicide layer by simultaneous deposition of silicon and
metal from two sources by two electron beams is promising. It enables forming a
layer with the required stoichiometry on any substrate, but the complexity consists

in selecting and ensuring the required relationship between rates of deposition of
the silicon and the metal.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key: (1)
l. Ra’ oils/O a;

O .
tsubstrate’ c “

Fig. 2 shows the plot of the specific
resistance of titanium film with a thick-
ness of 1.05 micrometer deposited on a
silicon substrate REF-0.5 [III] by the
electron-beam method as a function of ‘3
substrate temperature ts. The sputtering

was performed in a vacuum of 5.10"7 torr
at a constant metal feed rate Ve of 33 Al

 

minute; Vl-Va are the rates of diffusion 00 a an M ﬂi‘qc)
of the silicon into the film at the dif-
ferent temperatues.

Fig. 2'.
when the substrate temperature is raised
to 600°C, the specific resistance of the film is reduced insignificantly through
the processes of recrystallization and improvement in the film structure. In the
process, there is still no noticeable mutual diffusion of the silicon and metal.
Electron-diffraction studies have revealed the polycrystalline structure of the
metallic film.

When the substrate temperature is raised to 700'C, film resistance sharply rises
two- to threefold through the intensive diffusion of the silicon into the metallic
film. In the process,_electron-diffraction studies have revealed the
quasi-amorphism of the film structure.

With a further rise in substrate temperature to 900’C, specific resistance of the
film declines through formation of the low-resistance silicide phase and. according-
ly, the decline of free silicon in the metallic film. The primary presence of
titanium disilicide TiSi2 in the film is confirmed by electron-diffraction studies.

Hith a further rise in substrate temperature, film resistance changes insignificant-
ly; this is due to the approximate equality in the rates of metal feeding V. and
of diffusion of the silicon through the silicide layer V3.

It should be assumed that as substrate temperature increases above 1200'C, specific
resistance Will increase due to the quantity of silicon concentration in the
silicide layer.

Thus, as a result of the studies made, the conclusion can be drawn that the most
acceptable methods for forming high-temperature metallization are the methods of
obtaining silicide layers by annealing of the metallic film deposited by an electron
beam in a single vacuum cycle and the method of forming silicide in the process of
metal sputtering on a hot silicon substrate and the combination of these methods

in one cycle.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Batalov, B. V.; Nazeryan. A. R. and Rndenko, A. A., "Trends and Prospects for
Automating Design of Electronic Items," ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', No 4,
pp 3-11, 1979.

2. Selyutin, V. A., "Hashinnoye konotruiroveniye elektronnykh ustroyotv" [Computer
Aided Design of Electronic Devices], 383 pages, rbocov. Sov. radio, 1977.

3. Gibson. D. and Nance, 8.. "Symbolic System for Circuit Layout and Checking."
Prod. of ISAS, Phenix, USA, pp 436-440, 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibernetiki, 1981.

8545
C80: 1863/90

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.327.67

BROAD APPLICATION MR? UNIT

Moscow PRINRY I 515m UPRAVLBNIYA in Rmsian NO 11. Nov 81
up 9-11

(Article by engineers N. I. Velichko, B. Ye. Vasil'yev, G. v. Vshivtsev, N. P.
Gritsayenko, Yu. I. Statylko and V. 2. Yampol'skiy]

[Text] The nodular principle of designing storage devices (20) that provide
ease of increasing the mesory. the capability of further development and high
reliability of the entire syst-n, finds broad application in computer design.
The main requirements placed on the manor-y unit are simplicity of the control
circuits and technological outfitting at all phases of manufacture and testing.
Fulfillment of these requirements permits the memory unit to be used in dif-
ferent computers and production of it over a prolonged time in large volumes.

'mo principles of internal storage design are possible. Henry units can have
a functionally complete structure. i.e., they may contain their own control
circuits and interface [1]. Increases of the memory capacity are achieved in
this case by parallel connection of auxiliary memory units to the mainlinee of
the oouputer interface. This structure of design has ".nsiderable disadvan-

tsgesa the memory unit cannot be used in computers hanng communication inter-
face different from the memory units and it is complicated to monitor the

storage median.

In the other case the internal storage of the computer is fulfilled in the
form of a set of memory units of the same type and functionally complete con-
trol and interface units. The storage capacity is increased by connecting
additional mmry units with the number of control and interface unite remain-
ing unchanged [2. 3].

The latter of the named design structures of the menory was adopted when de-
veloping the A211-lS and Azll-lé ferrite memry modules, that have found ap-
plication in different oolputer complexes of the SH EV)! [International Smell
Conputer system]. no 39-38 (B?) semiconductor memory unit, which is used
extensively in various storage devices of the international small computer
system. was developed for the second unit of the 8!! M.

Dynamic type integrated memory microcircuits with random access of type
xsssnul. constructed on n-channel bop-devices and enrich are a single-digit

26
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

storage device with capacity of 4,096 bits, are used as the storage elements
in the semiconductor Ilenory unit.

The main characteristics of the semiconductor senory unit are presented belw.
The characteristics of ozo-wrsozo [1) and HSV ll-B memory modules of the DEC
Company (United States) are given for cosparison.

BP-38 for OZU-NTSOZD
SM-lﬂ, SM- Hodule for MSVll-B
2, sat-2:1 Elektronika for
and Other nrsozo LSI-ll
motors Coguter Coaster
Bit capacity 8! x 22 an x 16 41: x 16
Access time, nanoseconds 300-400 550
Access cycle, nanoseconds 600-800 750 --
Specific consuned power,
law/bit 0.1 0.09 0.19
Specific capacity, bits/m3 226 202 186
Type of mory Seniconductor
Capability of working with
ﬂaming codes Yes No

The specifications of the suiconductor mry unit are presented in the table
as a function of its versions.

Version of Semiconductor Memo Unit
Parameter 39-3821 ”-3822 32-3843 BP-38d4

Time , nanoseconds z

 

cycle 600 800
aces" .2;- 400
Regeneration period, as 2

Type of microcircuits 16658013 16658018

Method of address and
number transmission:

parallel Yes No Yes No
serial No Yes No Yes
Power supply voltage, V *5, -5, +12

A functional diagram of the semiconductor savory unit is shown in Figure 1 and
includes the following functional assemblies: address reception, number re-
ception and retrieval, control signal reception, access signal shapes, seni-
conductor usury unit tuning, usury and encoder.

The address reception assembly is based on 10.31181 nicrocircuits and is de-
signed to receive and distribute address signals. In semiconductor awry
units with serial trmnission of address and nunber, the signals of the latter
are fed alternately over the sane buses. In these semiconductor usury units,
microcircuits 01 are not installed and the address is transnitted through the

27
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-THAI. USE ONLY

number reception and retrieval assembly and matching resistors for distribution
to the inputs of microcircuits 02. In all versions of the semiconductor memory
unit, a lZ-digit address code is fed from the output of the address reception
assembly to the address inputs of the mmry microcircuits, to which the sig-
nals of the six bottom digits of the address are fed in the regeneration node.

The number reception and retrieval assembly is based on 689n26 microcircuits,
which are bus shapers with inversion. It is designed for reception of the
nulber code of the write node from two-way buses of the semiconductor memory
unit and also of address signals in the write, read and regeneration nodes for
versions of the semiconductor memory unit with serial address and nulber trans-
mission. A 22-digit nmber is fed from the output of the assembly to the in-
formation inputs of the mmry microcircuits. In the read mode, a 22-digit
number is fed from the outputs of the memory microcircuits through the nusber
reception and retrieval assembly to the buses of the semiconductor mesory unit.

A control signal reception assesbly is provided for reception and matching of
the following gating signals: csl-cs4 crystal selection, C31 and C32 access
authorization, "2 write authorization, UV reception-retrieval control and
“Reg" regeneration signal. The assembly is based on 10.31:.” microcircuits.

 

Key.
1. Address 9. Control device gate
2. Address reception 10. Regeneration
3. ”emery 11. Control signal reception
4. umber address 1-22 12. (:2 access signal shapers
5. Number reception and retrieval l3. Semiconductor memory unit
6. Number 1-22 14. Adjustment of semiconductor
7. Read number memory unit
8. Control device 15. Encoder
28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The CE access signal shaper assesbly is used to match the access input of the
memory microcircuits having high MOP-level to the control signals of the ML-
circuits. The assembly consists of four shapers, each of which is designed
for its own group of memory microcircuits. A diagram of the shapers is pre-
sented in Figure 2. It contains a switch Dl, Vl n-p-n-transistor and V2 dis-
charging p-n-p transistor, switch D2 and auxiliary transistor V3.

In the initial state (during the pause between two accesses). a high-level
signal (logic "1”) is fed to the inputs of switches 01 and D2, based on two
inverters with mssml open collector and in this case the cut-off voltage

is fed to the base of the V1 transistor. the voltage at the output of the
shaper will be equal to the saturation voltage of switch DZ (not more than

0.4 V). If a low-level voltage pulse is fed to the inputs of switches 01 and
DZ, transistors V1 and v3 are opened and the charging current of the load ca-
pacitor flow through resistor R4 and in this case transistor V2 and switch 02
are closed. Transistor V3 increases the total amplification factor for stage
current in transistor V1 and reduces the voltage drop on resistor 21 by reduc-
ing the base current of transistor Vl.

When the voltage at the input of switches 01 and D2 is cospared to the level
of a logic '1," transistors V1 and V3 are closed and transistor v2 is opened
and in this case the main discharge current of the load capacitor flows
through resistor R3 and transistor V2. When the voltage on the load capacitor
becomes equal to l v. transistor V2 is closed and discharge then proceeds
through resistor R2 and opens switch DZ. As a result the potential at the
output of the shaper is set equal to the voltage drop on the saturated tran-
sistor of switch DZ (not more than 0.4 V). Resistors R3 and R4 are damping
resistors that limit the current during charging and discharging of the load
capacitor of the access input of the memory microcircuits. Resistor 32 limits
the current through switch DZ.

The encoder is designed to shape the conformation signals of receiving access
to the selected semiconductor meuory unit: PM or PPZ, by means of which the
storage device of one of two time diagrams can be formed. Thus the operation
of a storage device with semiconductor mmry wait of different speed (with
KSGSRUlA or KSSSRUlB microcircuits) is provided. The encoder is adjusted by
setting the diode to one of two adjusting points, depending on the type of
memory microcircuits used in the semiconductor mesory unit.

The adjusting assembly of the semiconductor somry unit is used for automatic
selection of the mesory unit corresponding to the access address in the stor-
age devices of computer systems having internal cosmunication interface of

the IUS. One of the characteristic features of the latter is the fact that
the general installation connections should be made identical in it for all
inter face points. which does not permit radio comunications with each semi-
conductor storage unit. At the same time it was necessary to exclude tying

in the semiconductor storage unit to a specific interfaCe point and to make
the unit universal. It is the adjusting assembly of the semiconductor menory
unit that permits one to create a semiconductor memory unit access circuit to
the storage device that meets this requirement. It is connecting links laid
with printed-circuit conductors between specific contacts of the semiconductor

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

memory unit plug. The semiconductor memory unit is selected through its ad-
justment assembly by the corresponding signal of the number decoder of the
semiconductor meeory unit shaped in the control unit of the storage device.

 

rigure 2

Key:
1. CB start 2. CE input of RSGSRUl microcircuits

The memory unit--a storage matrix with capacity of 8,192 words x 22 bits--is
designed to store information. A capacity of 8x bits is provided by combining
two memory microcircuits in a single digit. One of them is selected with a
corresponding oonbination of CS and CE signals.

An important condition for successful realization of a semiconductor memory
unit based on dynamic memory microcircuits is precise calculation of the tol-
erances for the power supply and synchronization parauters. a no less impor-
tant aspect is careful layout of the power supply circuits on the printed
circuit card of the semiconductor msmry unit and decoupling of them. As an
example let us consider filtration of power supply circuits of +12 v. Bach
notary microcircuit may consume peak currents from 50 to 120 ma with fronts
of 20-30 nanoseconds along the front and drop of the pulsed CE access signal.
Local filtration of the power supply circuits is used to reduce the resulting
voltage fluctuations . i.a.. a capacitor with minimum length of communication
to the corresponding contacts of the microcircuit to which the power supply
lines are fed is located alongside each mmory microcircuit. Moreover, each
memory micmcircuit consmes from 20 to 50 m.\ DC during access signal CE. The
power supply feed system should ensure that these are direct currents with
retention of voltage on the memory microcircuits. 1b do this, the power sup»
ply lines are made in the form of a network of printed-circuit conductors laid
in the vertical and horizontal directions and having maximun possible width

(4]-

Selection of the type of decoupling capacitors is very important. On the one
hand, they should have low series resistance and on the other they should have
sufficiently high capacitance. Ceramic capacitors meet these requirements

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

most fully. Therefore, m5 capacitors with capacitance of 0.033 M? are in-
stalled for decoupling through power supply circuits of _+_ 5 v and partially
for those of +12 v. K53-4A capacitors with capacitance of 2.2 u? are pro-

vided alongside each memory nicrocircuit through the power supply circuit of
+12 V.

Correct distribution of the address. data and control signal circuits is also
significant. The main synchronizing signal is the (:8 access signal, which is
fed to the access input of the sensory microcircuits in a pulse with anplitude
of +12 V. Rigid requirements on the length of the front, square-wave nature
and high and low signal levels are placed on the paraueters of the CB access
signal. A C: access signal shaper based on digital coeponents described above
was developed to meet these requirements. The nemry sicrocircuits must be
arranged near the shaper so as to provide the necessary parameters of the Cl:
access 819ml. The control signal. address and data lines should have minimum

length.

With regard to the foregoing. a design of a semiconductor senor-y unit located
on a printed-circuit card measuring 234 x 220 m was made. The logic micro-
circuits are located in the first row from the plug. The next four rows oc-
cupy melory nicrocircuits (11 each in each row). The storage medium in each
row is divided into two parts, between which are two 10.3le logic microcir-
cuits to distribute the address and a CB access signal shaper for the memory
nicrocircuits of this row, due to which the length of any con-unications line
does not exceed 14 cm. This design of a semiconductor munory unit made it
possible to lay the data lines perpendicular to the address and control signal
lines, which reduces crosstalk.

High production outfitting during production is typical for the described
semiconductor memory unit. Input verification of the muory microcircuits is
accomplished on the Elekon P-ZU functional testing installation. The menory
microcircuits are checked in "Beg l (0),“ ”Paired read l(0)"and "Harsh” tests.
It is further proposed that a progrannable bench with expanded set of tests
be used for these purposes. A Film-2211 storage device tuning console is used
to check semiconductor mmry units. The check can be made in the automatic
mode according to the test program, which contains the following tests: ”l,"
'0," "Number code equal to address" (direct and inverse). “Run 1(0)." "heavy
code" (direct and inverse) and ”Alternating 1/0 by addresses.“ Moreover, the
following dynamic tests are made: "Mar h," "Multiple address access,” "Trav-
elling 1(0) by addresses: and "Paired reading 1(0)." All tests can also be
performed on the regenerative frequency. The enumerated tests are designed
for functional checking of semiconductor memory units with different versions
of information distribution in the actuary. This set of tests is recommended
to check the storage medium of devices and complexes containing and given semi-
conductor nelsory unit.

The semiconductor nesory unit is now being produced serially by several plants.

31
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Titov, Yu. L. v. A. Shakhnov and V. N. Shnigel'ekiy, “Semiconductor In-
ternal storage Module for Nietocomputere,” ”Hiktoelektronika i poluprovod-
nikovyye priboxy" [Hiczoelectronice and Semiconductor Devices] . collection
of articles, No 4, Macaw, Sovetekoye radio, 1979.

2. Velichko. N. 1., G. v. Vehivteev. N. I. mlokholov end v. z. Yeml'ekiy,
"Design end Henufecture of the Internal Store of the Internntionel Snell
Oonputer System,” "xonetruiroveniye i pxoizvodetvo zaponinayuehchikh
ustzoystv". neteriely kxetkoerochnogo seninere" [Design and Production of
storage Devices, Proceedings of e brief seminar], Leningrad. LDNTP. 1980.

3. Ognev, I. V. and x. 1’. Sanchev, “Investigating Modular Semiconductor In-
ternal stores.“ "may Hoekovskogo ordene Lenine energeticheksogo inetitut,
Temeticheekiy ebornik, Avtonltizetsiye proyektizoveniye i uprevleniye"
[Proceedings of the Moscow (rder of Lenin Power Engineering Institute.
topical collection, Design end Control Automation], No 3 (80), Moscow. MEI.

4. Keilbotte, "Cherecteristics of Designing system with Dynamic Storage
Devices," mmrn, No 3, 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Heshinostroyeniye”. 'Ptibory i sisteuy uprevleniye",
1981

6521
C50: 1863/69

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOFTWARE

UDC 681. 326

MAPPING MACHINE GRAPHICS PROGRAM PACKS TO GRAPHIC INFORMATION DISPLAY DEVICES

Moscow PRINRY I SISTBHY UPRAVLBNIYA in Russian No 11, NOV 81
po 1-2

(Article by engineers S. N. Grinfel'd, M. N. Sorokin, M. I. Kislyy and v. Yu.
Skobarev]

[Text] The development of computer equipment is now characterized by ever wid-
er use of graphic display devices. The use of graphic displays and graph plot-
tors of various types permits information to be obtained from a computer in a
form convenient for perception and subsequent analysis. There is a large
variety of display devices mainly having different instruction systems. Image
programming by using these instruction systems is a very laborious process:
therefore, special languages and machine graphics program packs are being de-
veloped in our country and abroad that permit the progrumer to describe the
inmge in a higher level language than the graphic display or graph plotter in-
struction system.

When developing the software (m) for graphic devices (GU). developers are
faced with a very important pmbler-to achieve independence of the machine
graphics program pack from the computers and displays used. Il'he use of gen-
eral-purpose programing languages for graphic programing permits one to
solve to a certain degree the problem of providing independence of the graphic
software from the conputer being used. The general-purpose programming lan-
guaga most widely used at present in machine graphics is FORTRAN. Thus, for
exasple. the input languages of well-known graphic program pacts GRAPOR, PAD-
EC and DISGRAP [1-3] are the set of FORTRAN language operators CALL. Provid.
ing the independence of the machine graphics software from the instruction
system of the graphic information display devices is very timely, although
specific results have already been achieved in solving the given problem.

‘the purpose of this article is to analyze the existing situation and to work
out an effective method of solving the problem.

The graphic device software usually has two levels: functional and basic.

The functional level includes programs that realise operations which are in-
dependent of the graphic device. The basic level consists of programs that
perform operations determined by the specifics of the instruction system for
control of a specific graphic device. Thus, in order that the software of a

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given graphic device can be used with another display, the basic level program
must be reworked or finished while coupletely retaining the functional level
program. In devaloping the graphic device software, one must decide which
program to include in the functional level and which in the basic level. Let

us consider :0»: this problem is solved in Soviet machine graphics program
packs.

The segment plotting programs, i.e., the programs that form the control infor-
mation for the graphic device by coordinates of the beginning and end of the
segment. can be assigned to the basic level in GRAPORnthe graphic program
coupler in FORTRAN language [1]. The problem in the graphics software system
(SHOG) can be solved in similar fashion [4). Here the basic (butter) part of

generator. The programs of the basic graph dialogue program paclt (level I)
for the 8584-6 DISGRAP [3], the same as in the (5me system for the Dev-2.
hava frames at the output that carry intonation about the segnnnts which the
graph plotter should plot. The basic program pack (level III) that programs
the graphic images in A1601. language for the M-222 computer omnpler-the auto-
matic graph-drawing machine ITEKAN-ZH [61 generates information at the level
of graphic couponents "straight line," ”arc“ and 'sysbol line." The basic

formation of the ”segment," "broken line.” “arc of circle" or ”circle.”
"curve," “text" and "marking symbol" type is the input information of the
PADB pack.

 

Parr-i-th graphic program pack: Pr-j-th postproceesor:
GUj--j-th graphic device

Analysis shows that the existing basic parts of machine graphics program packs
were developed for specific graphic devices. The basic part of these packs

3!.
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
must be modified in order to use them for other graphic devices, which is a
rather laborious process. Moreover, qualified specialists and detailed infor-
mation on integration of the basic and functional parts of the pack are re-
quired to modify the basic part of the graphic packs. The literature
published on the graphic pack frequently does not include all the intonation
required to modify the basic part of the pack, since the user is not always
able to develop a new basic part of the pack independently. If he does take
on this work, the need for frequent consultations with the developers of the
graphic pack does not contribute to rapid development of the new basic part
since the users and developers of graphic program packs are frequently located
in different cities of the country.

It was pointed out in [5]. devoted to the computer software and GRAPIK graph
plotter system. that expenditures to develop the basic parts of the system for
graphic devices having no principle differences from UGO-2, Dav-4, Yes-7051,
res-7052, Yes-7053 and ATLAS, with "the participation of the primary develop-
ers in their formulation,” may comprise 15-20 percent of the total expenditures
for the initial development of program modules for the DGU-Z. And what if the
future user of the GRAPIK system is unable to bring the developer in to devel-
op the basic part that he requires? It is not always easy for the user to
determine the clear boundary between its functional and basic parts when work-
ing on the graphic pack. Moreover, both of the parts must be completed in
some realizations. Thus. for example, information on systole is generated in
the functional part of the system in snoc. If the graphic device is equipped
with a symbol generator. the user mat either reject the use of a hardware
symbol generator (the counting tine. computer menory capacity, size of the
control program and accordingly the tine required to plot graphic documents
increase in this case) or he must correct the functional part of the pack.
which is rather cmdaersone and requires special knowledge and skills.

'lhe problems enumerated above occur for the user of the graphic program pack
who solves the problem of tying it in to the graphic information output de-
vice. A solution of these problem would be development of a standard inter-
mediate graphic data structure (SPSGD) . which should be formed by the graphic
program pack. i.e., which is the end result of their work. A program for
converting the information in the form of the SPSGD to the control program
for a given device (postprocessor) should be develomd for each graphic de-
vice. Formation of output information from all the graphic program packs
being developed in SPSGD and the presence of postprocessors for all graphic
devices produced permit one to solve the problem of ensuring the independence
of graphic program packs from the graphic devices being used (see figure).

The requirements placed on the SPSGD are met to a considerable degree by the
intern" liate processorpostprocessor language CLDATA (Cutter location data--
data 0|. tool nation [7]). designed to standardize the development of post-
precessors for machine tools with cum [Nmrical program control] and to
ensure integration of postprocessors with different automated control program
preparation systems (processors).

The intermediate processorpostprocessor language has been adopted by CEMA,
is recommended by ISO and is used extensively in development of software with

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

output to machine tools with ChPU. The conformity on the content of CLDATA
recordings to the ISO data format permits a considerable reduction of expendi-
tures to develop postprocessors for graphic devices having the data format
recommended by the ISO for machine tools with deU [8]. These devices may in-
clude, for exauple, the Yes-7054 (CSSR), the hristograph and Aristoeat of the
Aristo Conpany [West Germany], the nus-21 of the Ooradi Company (Switzerland)
and so on. It is suggested in [9] that the data format of 190 be used for de-
vices with GIPU developed with regard to the characteristic features of
graphic information display for all autonomous graphic devices.

The use of intermediate CLDATA language to display input information when
forming the control programs of graphic devices also seems promising to us in
light of the broad capability of using graphic devices to check the control
programs of machine tools with chPU. Thus, enterprises having a postprocessor
with CLDATA language for graphic devices can make a check drawing without ad-
ditional development of special program with receipt of graphical doomentat
tion prior to developing control programs for machine tools with 01W.

The given analysis leads to the following conclusions.

1. The use of CLDATA language as the SPSGD permits the user having a post-
processor from this language for a specific graphic device to work with any
graphi program pack or even with several similar packs simultaneously.

2. Use of CLDATA language providesfor tying the grahic program pack to a
specific graphic device without additional expenditures.

3. The language is described in detail in the literature. which permits the
user himself to easily develop a postprocessor for the graphic device avail-
able to him. The participation or at least many consultations of the develop-
ers of the given pack is necessary for modifying the basic part of existing
graphi program packs.

4. The intermediate CLDATA language was recommended by ISO and cm for pro-
gramming systems of machine tools with ChPU, but at the same time it contains
the required set of recordings for graphic devices and permits the capability
of both progranmed and hardware generation of symbols. which is not realized
in all graphic program packs.

5. The format of the CLDATA language recordings corresponds to the format
recomuended by ISO for programming machine tools with chPU. A mmber of

graphic devices now has the data format recomnded by 150 for programing
machine tools with ChPU and the number of these devices will increase every

year.

6. CLDATA is used extensively as an intermediate processor-postprocessor
language when programing machine tools with ChPU. Thus, control information
for graphic devices and machine tools with dam will be written in a unified

language. This will make it possible to debug the control programs for ma-
chine tools with Chm in graphic devices.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic part of the widely used PAD-EC program pack that ensures formation of
graphic information in CLDA'I‘A language has been developed at VNI'rIpribor [All-
Union Scientific Research Technological Institute of Instrument Making] , NPO
[Scientific Production Association] ‘nenp (Moscow) and a postprocessor from
CLDATA language for the Aristo coordinate graph has been developed.

The use of the CLDATA intermediate processor-postprocessor language as the
standard intermediate structure of graphic data permits users to reduce the
time and labor expenditures on adaptation of machine graphics applied program
packs to a graphic device and to achieve a considerable saving.

1.

2.

4.

6.

8.

9.

B IBLIOGRAPHY

Bayaxovskiy, Yu. H., '1'. s. Lebedeva and A. I. Mamayeva, "GRAFOR--Graphic
Program Complex in FORTRAN language," No 2, Moscow, Preprint of IPM AN
SSSR, 1973.

Zozulevich. D. M., G. B. Borisova and L. G. Maksinova, “Pakety program
avtomaticheskogo chercheniya dlya yedinoy aisteny EVE" [Automatic Plotting
Program Packs for the Unified Computer System], Minsk, I'rK AN 8831!, 1978.

"Machine Graphics and Its Application," in UPRAVLEGIYE I INFORMATSIYA,
No 24, Vladivostok. Dal'nevostochnyy nauchnyy teentr AN SSSR. 1972.

Gladkikh, B. A.. Yu. L. Koatyuk and V. A. Pozolotin. "SMOG-wsistema mate-
maticheskogo obespecheniya grafopostroitelya" [SW-Graph Plotter Soft-
ware System]. 'romsk, Tomskiy gosudaretvennyy universitet, 1974.

"GRAFIK--sistema Inatematicheskogo obespecheniya EVM i grafopostroiteley'
(GRAPIKuConputer and Graph Plotter Software Wstem], Kiehinev, shtiintsa.
1975.

Yegorov, v. A., A. I. Fedotov and L. I. Shub, "Hatematicheskoye obespechen-
iye chertezhno-graficheskogo avtomata ITEM-2H na EV! “-222" [Software of
the ITEKAN-ZM Automatic Graph-Drawing Machine Based on the M-222 Computer] ,
Minsk, I'i‘K All BSSR, 1977.

Deryabin. A. L., I. A. Vul'fson and L. M. Xavnatskiy, “Promezhutochnyy
yazyk protsessorpostprotsessor: Rekomendatsii" [Intermediate Processor-
Postprocessor Language--Recomendationsl. Moscow, sums, 1976.

Draft of International Standard ISO/DIS 1056. Numerical Control of Mn-
chines--Punched 'rape Block Formats," Coding of Preparatory Functions and
Miscellaneous Functions," Moscow, International Organization for Standard-
ization, 1974.

Petrov, Yu. A. and L. v. Semnov, "Selecting the Data Format for Autono-
mous Graphic Devices." VOPMSY RADIOEIEK'I'RONIKI. SERIYA M, No 4. 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya",

1981

6521
C50:

1863/69

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 658.51.011.56

CBNTRAL—LEVEL-DATA MENTION LANGUAGE m HBTERME'NEOUS DATA BASE INTEGRATION
SYSTEMS

Kiev YAZYK HANIPULIROVANIYA DANNY‘KI TSENTRAL'NOGO UROVNYA V 515m W511
NEODNORODNYKR 3A2 pm in Russian 1981 (signed to press‘ 17 Jun 81) PP 2-8, 55

[Annotatiom introduction. sec 2 and conclusion from preprint "Central-Level-Data
Manipulation Language in Inhomogeneous Data Base Integration Systems", by

Leonid Andreyevich Kslinichenko. Ines'sa Aleksandrovna Chaban and Aleksandr
Sergeyevich Nazarov, Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Cybernetics
Preprint No 81-21. 300 copies, 58 pages]

[Text] In this study a characterization is given of the input language of the
central-level data processor in the SIZIP inhomogeneous data base integration sys—
ten, which makes possible the independence of applied prograns from data base con-
trol systems (SUBD's) and their simultaneous interaction with many data bases or—
ganized by means of various SUBD's. The central level of the subsysten for the
interpretation of operations on data in the 8121? system is based on a general re-
presentation of data which is independent of SUBD's. The general central-level-data
manipulation language contains the following statements: relational algebra; cyclic
relation - module - virtual data base processing; parallel programing and distri-
buted processing; relation conversion; and logic, arithmetic and control statements.

This study is intended for a wide range of programer—nathematicians.
1. Introduction

The accumulation of various data bases in data base control systems (5030‘s) of
different types has created the problem of the simultaneous and cosbined use by an
applied program of several data bases as a combined whole, which are incompatible
in terms of software and data. The solution to this problem is one o! the main ob-
jectives of the inhomogeneous data base integration system project being developed
at the Institute of Electronic Control Machines. The following are being developed
within the scope of this project:

An expandable conceptual model of data making it possible to represent effectively
in it randon virtual models of data (net. hierarchical and relational. utilizing
structured and unstructured data).

Methods, algorithms and software for the representation of various models of data in
the conceptual model.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A language for programming operations on high-level data bases.

The architecture and algorithms of a program complex making possible the combined
use by applied programs of inhomogeneous data bases stored in individual computers,
multimachine computing complexes and networks employing ASVT-ﬂ [modular computer
hardware system], Yes [Unified Series] and SM [international system of small compu-
ters] computer facilities.

The central component of the inhomogeneous data base integration system is the pro-
gram processor, implementing functions of the interpretation of statements of the
general data manipulation language (YaHD), which is independent of the YaHD of
specific operative SUBD's. This processor, called a logical processor below, im—
plements the following:

Interpretation of the statements of the general data manipulation language.

Interaction with processes of applied programs (receiving from processes macropro-
grams-sequences of statements of the general data manipulation language defining
operations on integrated data bases required by these processes—-and the output of
results to applied programs).

Interfacing with program converters of data models of specific SUBD's into the
conceptual data model.

Storage of central-level intermediate information formed in the process of inter-
pretation of a macroprogram.

Control of the execution of a parallel macroprogram as applied to the conditions of
a multicomputer complex or a computer network.

In the present study a formal definition is contained of the general language for
the manipulation of data in integrated data bases which makes up the input language
of a logical processor implemented by_means of an M-6030 computer.

2. Functions of the Logical Processor in an Inhomogeneous Data Base Integration
System

In relation to applied programs the inhomogeneous data base integration system re-
presents a data base control system with an inclusive programming language, as
which in the version of the system implemented PASCAL is used. The inclusive lan-
guage is expanded by means of new types of data, statements and functions making
possible operation on a virtual data base (VBD)-a homogeneous representation of
integratable data bases which is independent of specific data base control systems.
These statements and functions utilize the constructions of a first-order predicate
logic language which can be converted by a compiler into programs in the input lan-
gtage of the logical processor. Relational algebra statements form the basis of
this input language. The main operations for the interpretation of operations on
conceptual-level data by means of specific data models are performed by drivers-
dynamic converters of internal data models into the conceptual model. Each data
base organized by means of some sort of data base control system is represented at
the conceptual level as a group of virtual data base relations (modules). A virtual
data base relation each cortege of which is united with unstructured data-an

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

associative cortege-—forms a data module representing a group of data complexes.
Associative corteges represent ordered groups of corteges of random unary and binary
relations specified in sets of values of the properties of entities (domains).

The logical processor interacts with drivers by means of an instruction language
independent of the type of data base control system, whereby each instruction in-
dicates the execution of some sort of operation on the virtual data base relation.

The operation unit to be communicated by the applied program's process to the
logical processor is the macroprogram-«a group of statements each of which causes
the execution by the logical processor of specific control operations or operations
on the virtual data base relation (nodule) or on a working relation. The macropro-
gram prior to output to the logical processor is set up by means of an interface
concentrated in the same program section with the applied program, and actually

the logical processor uses precisely this copy of it.

The macroprogram is transferred from the applied program to the logical processor

in parallel form as a group of asynchronously executed branches and their data
connectives. The logical processor can receive simultaneously for execution both
macroprograms from the processes of applied programs concentrated with it in one and
the same computer and branches of macroprograms from remote logical processors.

Normal relations are the main form of data representation at the level of the logical
processor. The domains of relations have fixed scalar types and fixed representa-
tions receives in the logical processor. The required transformations of types

in interaction with applied programs or data base control systems are functions of
individual interfaces or drivers. The logical processor has an internal memory for
storing intermediate normal operating and intraprogram relations existing only during
the execution of an applied program.

Virtual data base relations (modules) or working relations are the key objects of the
operation of statements of the inpu; language of the logical processor. As the re-
sult of the performance of an operation on a virtual data base relation (module)

a working relation can be formed which in turn can become the object of the opera-
tion of subsequent statements of the macroprogram. The statements of the logical
processor are so constructed that even if the object of their operation is a hier-
archical relation or as-uciative structures of a virtual data base module the result
is represented in the form of a normal relation.

In the distributed variant of the system when a macroprogram is run its various
branches are implemented by means of various logical processors, which transfer to
one another the results of the execution of branches-norma1 relations. It is

assumed that the interconnections of logical processors (through virtual channels)
form a complete graph.

It should be mentioned that the end result of the execution of a macroprogram can be
data structures which are directly transferrable to an applied program, such as
corteges. associative corteges, complexes, arithmetic or logical values. If the

end result is formed by a branch to be executed remotely it is transferred from one
logical processor to another and only than to the applied program.

The logical processor performs the following key functions:

60
FOR‘OFFK]A1.USE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It receives nacroprograma from interfaces of applied programs interacting with an
integrated data base.

It organizes the execution of branches of macroprograma to be run on the computer-
the residence of the logical processor.

It interprets individual statements of a macroprogram, including control, relational
algebra, cyclic processing, relation modification and transformation, parallel
programming and remote processing statements and logic statements.

It organizes the issuing of instructions to drivers of various data base control
systems functioning in the computer-~the residence of the logical processor (these
instructions are formed in the interpretation of control and relational algebra
statements, relation modification and transformation statements and logic and arith-
metic statements carried out on virtual data base relations and modules)-—and
organizes interaction with drivers in the process of executing instructions.

It organizes the execution of a macrOprogram within the framework of a distributed
data base.

It controls internal resources, including the distribution of the logical processor's
memory for storing intermediate working relations.

It organizes the output of the results of the execution of a macroprogram, via an
interface, to the applied program's process.

4. Conclusion

In this study a definition has been given of the central-level-data manipulation
language in an inhomogeneous data base integration system, including relational
algebra statements, virtual data bank relation (module) cyclic processing state-
ments, statements for parallel programming with distributed processing, relation
transformation statements, logic statements, arithmetic statements and control
statements. The facilities of the general data manipulation language are sufficient
for the purpose of implementing data manipulation operations both in the concentrated
and distributed variants of inhomogeneous data base integration systems and make

it possible to carry out the required operations on virtual data base relations
(modules)-representstions of data structures in real data bases. The set of
general data manipulation language facilities determines the functions of the
central level of data manipulation in inhomogeneous data base integration systems
and the structure of individual program processors.

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibsrnetiki, 1981.

8831
C50: 1863/123

61
FOR OFT1CJA1.USEI)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.06:519.768.2
COLLECTIVE-USE commas cm 30mm, USE 01' NATURAL LANGUAGES

Kiev HATEHATICHESKOY! 0323mm Wen: mm YBSTBSTVENNYH YAZYKOV. 1
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 22 Hay 81) pp 2. 17

[Annotation and table of contents from preprint "Collective-Use Computer Center Soft-
ware: Use of Natural Languages. 1", edited by Doctor of Technical Sciences Pro-
fessor A.I. Nikitin, Ukrainian 583 Academy of Sciences Institute of Cybernetics
Preprint No 81-25. 300 copies, 19 pages]

[text] This preprint is devoted to collective-use computer center software. In
the articles contained in it are discussed facilities oriented toward use in
collective-use computer centers and designed to improve the effectiveness of inter-
action betueen the user and computer. i.e.. the creation of language facilities for
human communication with a computer and the training of collective-use computer
center users.

CONTENTS Page

Sushchanskaya, NJ. "Implementation of One Phase of Automatic Syntactical
Analysis of Russian Language Sentences" 3

Grigorishin, LA. "Pormslized Structure and Implementation of Training
Courses in Programing Languages" 8

COPYRIGHT: Inatitut kibernetiki. 1981.

8831
CSO: 1863/123

(02
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
UDC 519.3.62-50

ANALYSIS 01’ SPACE 0P RANK ESTIMATES AND SYNTHESIS 01' smcmm ANALYTICAL WES
FOR AU'MATING mm DECISIW MAKING

Kiev ANALIZ PROSTRANSTVA mam o'rsmox I sm'rsz SWANALITICHESKM
mom DLYA AVTO‘HATIZATSII PRINYATIYA 352mm sssmrr in Russian 1981
(signed to press 23 Jul 81) p 2

[Annotation from preprint “Analysis of a Space of Rank Estimates and Synthesis of
Structural Analytical Models for Automating Expert Decision Making". by Kirill
Yevgen'yevich Volkovitsltiy. Yevgeniy Hikhaylovich Krylov and Igor' Borisovich
Sirodzha, Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Cybernetics Preprint No
81-103, 300 copies]

[Text] The new results. which are both of theoretical and practical importance,

of a mthematical combinatorial analysis of a multidimensional space of expert

rank estimates are discussed. A classification of coalitions of expert opinons

on the basis of their dianetric opposition is presented. A procedure is suggested
for automating expert decision making on the basis of a structural analytical method
of classification processing of data. A description of the system implementation

of this procedure is given in the form of the K00 30 package of applied programs

for the Yes [Unified Series] computer operating system. The results of the experi-
aental use of this package in simulation and practical problems are discussed.

For specialists working on questions of automating scientific and technical fore-
casting, processing expert estimates and pattern recognition.

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibernetiki, 1981.

8831
CSO: 1863/1223

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.31.06.51

CREATION . APPLICATION OP ANTED DIALOGUE TRAINUG $73M

Kiev VOPROSY SOZDANIYA I PWIYA AWTIZIROVANW 0W ONCHAYUSHCHIKB
SISTEH in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Mar 81) p 67

[Abstract from preprint "Questions Relating to the Creation and Application of
Automated Dialogue Training Systens", by Yevgeniy Anatol'yevich Alekseyenko,

Vadin Pavlovich Snirnw, Tat'yana Ivanovna Strizhak, Vladinir Ivanovich
Branovitskiy, Lyudnila Nikolayevna Getsko, Svetlana Pavlovna Kudryavtaeva, Valentina
Vladinirovna Seraya, Boris Alekseyevich Platonov, Koatadinka Nikolayeva Kit-ova,
Aleksandr Andreyevich Sakhno, Yevgeniy Petrovich Strizhak. Aleksey Yevgen'yevich
Strizhsk and Tat'yana Nikolayevna Topchiy, Ukrainian SSR Acadeny of Sciences Insti-
tute of Cybernetics Preprint No 814, 300 copies, 1.9 pages]

[Text] The key requirenents for dialogue systems are formlated. 0n the basis of
this some statements are given on their further development. Information is given
on the PROLOG instrument systen. designed for solving problems of artificial in-
telligence. Major trends in the use of 9301.06 are indicated. Hark performed at the
Ukrainian 888 Institute of Cybernetics is singled out.

Considerable attention is paid to questions relating to the use of the SPQK dia-
logue instrument system in various subject areas. Questions of integrating the
SP0! package of applied programs with packages of applied programs for various
purposes are discussed.

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibernetiki. 1981.

8831
C50: 1863/123

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HULTICRITBRIW OHMZATION PROBLDS

Kiev VOPROSY ISSLEDOVANIYA ZADACH WRITERIAL'NOY OPTIMIZATSII in Russian 1981
(signed to press 31 Dec 80) pp 2. 52

[Annotation and table of contents from preprint "Questions Relating to Studying
Hulticriterion Optimization Problems", edited by LN. Tverdova, Ukrainian 883
Academy of Sciences Institute of Cybernetics Preprint No 81-22, 300 copies]

{Text} Questions relating to studying problems of multicriterion optimization in
the determinate and stochastic farmlations are discussed. The problem of studying
irregular systems is formulated in a class of discrete progressing problems and

is then reduced to a separable discrete programming model.

A description is given of a method of solving a multicriterion separable discrete
programing problem based on the method of constraints. An approach is suggested
to organizing a dialogue system of programs for solving multicriterion problems

in the interaction mode. A description is given of models of multicriterion sto-
chastic optimization problems. for which the definition of an effective solution is
introduced and an analogue of Karlin's lemlm is formulated.

These data are intended for specialists working in the field of vector optimization.
com-Ems ' Page

Dsrgeyko, L.P., Redkovskaya. ILN. and Yaremchuk, LG. "Method of Constraints
in Multicriterion Problems of Discrete Separable Programming" 3

Voloshin, A.P. and Zsslevskiy. V.A. "Discrete Hodels of Designing Irregular
Systems and Questions of Optimizing Them" 19

Voynslovich. v.n. and bush, 0.N. "Dialogue System for Solving a Hulticriterion
Linear Programing Problem Based on a Han-Hachine Procedure" 33

Lavrinenko. Ye.P. "Pareto Optimum Solutions in Vector Stochastic Optimization
Problems" 60

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibernetiki, 1981.

8831
050: 1863/123

(05
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.06
DEVEIDPHENT AND MODUCTION 0P PERM-338 0! APPLE PROGRMS

Kiev VOPROSY W I WHA rm “W W in Russian 1981
(signed to press 19 liar 81) p 2

[Annotation from preprint "Questions Relating to the Developmt and Introduction
of Packages of Applied Programs". by v.11. Yurkov, V.Ya. Burdyuk, v.6. Deyneka
and A.I. Koronkevich. Ukrainian SSR Academy oi Sciences Institute of Cybernetics
Preprint No 81-19, 300 copies]

[Text] Studies devoted to questions of the developnent and introduction of packages
of applied program are presented in this preprint. In particular, the results are
discussed of the developnent of several packages of applied programs and program
complexes. such as system study of an enterprise. solution of some conhinatorial
optimization problem and the analysis of oriented graphs. The first package vill
be of considerable help to a systems analyst involved in studying enterprises.

The second package represents a system of algorithms and programs for solving prob-
lems regarding the appointments of a traveling salesman and many traveling salesmen
when their nuaber has an upper limit. The third program complex is convenient to
use for analyzing abstract systems as the model of whose intrasystem link structure
it is convenient to use an oriented graph.

Intended for systems analysts, developers and users of computer software.
COPYRIGHT: matitut kibernetiki, 1981.

8831
C50: 1863/123

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SELECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'ALGORITBMS AND PROGRAMS', SEPTEMBER 1981: BURROS

Moscow ALGORITHY I PROGRAM in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 89-90

[Following is s listing or selected entries iron ALGORIM I Pnocnnm,
a bibliographic publication of GPN‘I’B]

[Excerpts]

M06. Zelenskiy. V. B. “Realization of medical analysis in s conpilator with the
algorithmic language sum-67 for for the mltiprrocessor computer couple: "Bl'bms—
1". In the book. "Not vieniye" (Control Methods/ﬂostov/na/Donu/Leninmd
State University. Rostov onu, pp 29-30. Biblical-am: 6 titles. An internal
concept of the lexicm is described. one which penits a syntactic analyser to reduce
the number of selections of alternatives and rapidly issue 3 disaosis of the error.
To obtain adjustment tasks it is proposed to introduce dynamic control of those
tasks from the text of the compiling program.

1500?. Zotov, 3. IL. and Sonenikhin, S. V. “Interaction of Processors and the Multi-
processor Colputer Complex 'El'brus'." Moscow, 1981, 20 p. (Institute of Precision
Mechanics and Computer Technology. Academy of Sciences ussn Preprint No 1). Biblio-
graphy. ? items.

W08. Ivanov’ A. Pt, and ShthaR'OV. VI Se cmtmdmuenm of the mt1m0“
cessor Vychislitel'nogo konpleksa. 'El'brus-l'.” Moscow, 1981. (Institute of Pre-

cision Hechanics and Computer Technology. USSR Acadew of Sciences No 3). Biblio-
graphy, 15. General comments are made on the structure of the memory. as is an al-

trol system are selected.

1:009. Sukhoslin. V. A. "Operating Principles of the Multiprogran couputer complex
'El'brus," Educational Aid. Hoscow. 1981. 120 p. Before the Title: ICU. Biblio-
graphy: 7 items.

1:010. Shevarov, V. S. "fables of Evacuated Pages in the Multiprocessor Couples:
'El'brus-l.’ hoscow. 1981. 19 p. (Institute of Precision Mechanics and Couputer
Technology. ussn Academy of Sciences rreprint No 2). Bibliography; 9 itese. Con-
tinuation of the boooki A. l. Ivanov and V. S. Shevyskov, ”Honor-y Control in the

Hultiprocessor Computer Coupler 'ﬂ'bms-l'”): for annotation see bibliograprv No
uooe.

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uon. Shevyakov, V. C. "Tables of Empty Page: ..1 the Multiprocessor Computer Con-
plex '81'brus-1'.“ Hoscow. 1981, 19 p. (Institute of Precision Mechanics
and Computer Technology, USSR Acadew of Sciences Preprint No 2). Biblio-
graphy: 9 items. Continuation of the book of A. P. Ivanov and V. 8. She-

Vyakov: “Control of the Henory in the Multiprocessor Conputer Complex 'E1'-
brus-l": for annotation see bibliographic record No 18008.

COPYRIGRI‘: Gosudaretvenneva publichnaya nauchno-
tekhnicheslcaya biblioteka. 3353 (cm sssn). 1981

2171.
C80: 1863/108

158
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MORE SELECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'AMORITHHS AND PROGRAHS', SEPTEMBER 1981

Hoscou ALCORITHY I PROGRAM in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp 1-122

[Following is a listing of selected entries from ALGORITHY I Pnocmv,
a bibliographic publication of GPNTB]

[Excerpts]

3697. Nosovs'. G. IL; and Chorqshev; P. V. ”Algorithm 1 program rascheta dlya'
nekotorykh kmrakteristik rasprostraneniya korotkikh radiovoln" ('Design algorithm
and Program for Some Characteristics of Short-Radio Haves.") Institute of Territor-
ial Hagnetisn. the Ionosphere and Radio-Have Propagagstion. Bibliograptm 7 itens.
A design program is presented in the languages “£01. and me for any tine of day
and any level of solar activity of the frequency range. the method of propagation of

each working frequency, the tins of propagation. the angle of altitude and intensity
of the field. of the radio wave at the point of reception.

3707. Aleksandrov. V. V.. Alekseyev. A. 1., and Gordtiy. II. 1). ”Sisters. obrabotki
raznotipnikh data SITO. 2. Instruktsiys dlyo. pol'zovatelya: hterialy po H0"
[System for Processing Various SITO ta. 2. Instructions for the User: Materials
for the User. Haterials on Software' . Leningrad. 1981, 91 pages. Leningrad Scien-
tific Research Computer Center. Bibliograplw: 10 items. The systen for solving vari-
ous tasks of classiﬁcation (including selection of an infomtional system of char-
acteristics. the recognition of examples in the initial statistical processing of ex—
perimental data (construction of a cor-relational distogrsm and a factorial analysis)
represents a. set of A1501. programs.

3732. "Data Bank for Storage of a System of Network Models.” Moscow, 1981. 36 P.
(Programs for Solving Problens of Road Construction on on an M/SOYUZ‘DORNII [Union
Road Construction Scientific Research Institute). Description of the OSHA software
and data bank for storing the parameters of network models. The ted: is assigned
for accomplishment of the BANKHEAD progran for disposition of the data base file.

37u7o 081M111, So Ac. me. Vs Yao' m limo. To Va "Slate”. OIIYMSI In“
struktsiya“ (The OLYMPUS System Inetructions‘ . Moscow, 1981 62 p. Institute of
Problems of Hechanics, USSR Acedeny of Sciences. Bibliogrspmn 5 items. A version
of the OLYMPUS system is described, one adapted for the DESK-6 computer. for the de-
velopment, debugging and operation of programs in the FORTRAN language and the solu-
tion of tasks of the evolutionary type.

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

376?. Prigoryan. F. A.. and Ambaryan, A. Sh. "Estimtion of the Technical and Boo-
nonic Level of Articles." VOPROSY RADIOELBCTRQIEI. SERIYA INT. 1980. No 1%. pp
108-112. Bibliography: 15 items. - Greater precision of solution is obtained by
selecting a standard subgroup of articles by the criterion of the zero eigenvalue of
the matrices. A FORTRAN prowl! is described for estimting by the cathode-bean
oscillographic method is described.

3775. Korbatov, P. A.. and Lunin. V. P. ”Progral for Calculating the Distribution
of Magnetization within a Ferment Hegnet Over Its Memal Field.” MTRGINAYA
Tammi I. mmcmnm svch, 1981. No 3 (32?). p 63. Bibliograpron 1 item. The
program is written in FORTRAN and the-time'of-calculatim of magnetization is in ac-
cordance with the volune of the mgnet divided by N elementary volumes (Ii/2)2 s.

381:9. Ignatochkin, A. Ye.. and Hatiyek, Ye. A. ”Basic Concepts of Retrieval for
the Library use-meow km. IN TsAYaD onus sssa (ussn State Committee for Use
of Atomic Anergy-—not mrther identiﬁed). noecou. 1981. 52 p. (Institute of Atomic
Energy Preprint No 358u/16). nihiiogrepw. '-- items.

3855. Shukuryan. Yu. G., and Yeshamryan. V. V. "Mu-~the Language of Simulating
Hicroprogram Processors on the Level of Register Transmissions With Temporary Para-
meters.“ VOPRwY RADIMTRONIKI. SERIYA EVT. 1980, No ll», pp 59-70. Biblio-
graphy: 10 items. A language is described which has a nodular structure reflecting
the structural connections of the blocks of processors, which permits effectively
introducing changes and refinements in the descriptions of models.

3891. Vinogradov. V. 1.. Karavicheva, T. I... and Prokhvetilov, H. A. "Resident-
noye programmoye obespechenie malykh modul'nykh sistem real'nogo vremeni na osnove
KAHAC and mm klassa PUP-II" [“Resident Software of Small Real-Tine Modular Systems
Based on Game and Computers of Class PDP-ii']. Moscow. 1981 28 p. (Nuclear Re-
search Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences Preprint No P-Ol92 . Description of the
developed HONIKA CAHAC for modular real-time systems based on the "-1100 and Elektron-
ika—60 computers and a package of SPECTR-l programs for processing a unidimensional
amplitude spectrum, accumlated in the buffer of the 1mm monitor.

3893. Oganyan. G. A.. Conchoyan, V. G. Graclwan. G. 0.. and Martirosyan. K. Ye.
"Use of a System of Sit-3 Coputer Software in Computers of the ‘NAIRI-h' Series."
VOPROS‘! RADIDEIECI‘RORBCI. SERIYA EVT, 1980, No 11:... pp 3-6. Bibliography: 2 items.
Methods of assuring program compatibility of computers of the 'NAIRI-h' series with
the H—hOO and MTRONIKA-6O computers. on apparatus-microprogram EMILATOR assuring
that compatibility and a structural diagram of passage of Sit-3 instructions through
the MATOR are described.

3905. Buttseva. G. L.. Mircheva. D., Naphed'yeva, L. 8.. et a1. "0r satsiya
vvoda-Vyvoda chislovykh nassivov v sisteme obrabotki spektrov (306)” 'Or iza-
tion of Input-Output Digital Files in a Spectrum processing System (305) . Dubna,
1981. 12 p. (Joint Nuclear Research Institute Report No P-lO-81-56). Bibliography:
9 items. The $03, created within the framework of the Message Center Dubna on the
basis of the 83814-6 computer. is a component part of the software of a single system
for the processing of spectrometric informtion and serves for the processing of in-

formation received on other computers. The system assures the input of information

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

about various carriers: punched cards and magnetic tapes of the types Yes-5012.
CDC—608 and BEBE-6 over cable lines of commnication. Questions of the conversion
of information into the structure of numbers of the DESK-6. its recordings. com-
pression and the formulations of files in the form of files in the 508 system.

3921+. Crigoryan. R. Kh., and Astvatsaturyan. L. A. ”Algorithm for Synthesis of
Hicroprograms of Centralized Control of a Set of Processes.” VGPROSY RADIOﬂﬂCTRON-
NIKL. . SERIYA EV’I‘. 1980, No 1“, p 83-88. Bibliography: 3 items. A procedure and
an algorithm for synthesis of a graphic-diagram of ....micrcgraas of a centralized
real-time equation in Yes Assembler language has a length. of llﬂ instructions.

The couzitirg time of the control example is about 53 s (without translation and
editing .

3929. KaleChin, v0 Yea, LObOdin. No It] and ShUkin, A. Ya. The Elektrmka‘6o
Cross-System in a Yes Computer." In book: 'Hetody translyatsii" (Translation
Methods ). Rostov-na—Donu State University. Bostov-na-Donu, 1981. pp 52-59. Biblio-
graphy: 8 items. The paper describes a programing cross-system for the "Elektron-
ika-60." realized in the Yes Assembler language. its purpOses. composition. distinc-
tive features of the input language and the main components of the cross-assembler
emulator. adjustor and set of service programs. The temporary characteristic of the
cross-assembler in the emulator were given. For the cross-assembler versions to
work more than 5b Kbytes of main memory. on the construction of a model of the mem-
ory of the 'Elektronika-éO" computer 6‘} K bytes are necessary. The speed of trans—
lation in work with libraries is about 600 operators of a language per minute for a
Yes-1022 computer.

3931. Lazaryan, E. A. and Shukuryan. Yu. G. ”System of Generation and Analysis of
Tests for Diagnosis of Third-Generation Computer Units." VOPROSY RADIOELHTRMI.
SERIYA EVT, 1980, No 11», pp 29-36. Bibliography: 10 items. The paper describes an
automated system in the form of a complex of programs on Yes computers of automatic
construction of verifying tests. diagnostic tables and tables of states for deter-
mination of error in interchangeable computer units.

3933. Harzepa, Ye. Yu. “Cross-assembler for the Intel-8080 on the Yes-1010."
Dubna. 1981, 7 p. (Joint Nuclear Research Institute Report No 11-81-9.) . Biblio-
graphy: 6 items. Cross-assembler in the A882 language produces a translation of

programs of the microprocessors Intel 8085A on the Yes-1010 and serves for coupling
the YeS-lOlO with the CDC-6900.

39153. Gcolepyan, C. 0. "Algorithm for Disposition of the Cards on Computer Panels."
VOPROSY RADIOEIEXTRONIKI. SERIYA EVT, 1980. No ll». pp 168-50. Bibliography: 3 items.
The paper describes a program in the Assembler language for Yes computers. For a
panel with about 70 elements the working time is about 30 minutes.

3975. Kapanov. S. P., and Shemyakin. I. V. "Analysis of the Organizational Con—
trol of Transport Processes at Autotransport Enterprises." VOPROSY RADIOBLHI‘RMI.
SERIYA ASU. 1980. No 2. pp 53-58. Bibliograptm It items. The procedure of organ-

izing a flexible automated package of a simulating model capable of being adjusted
to simulation of various working conditions of transport flows.

5].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3976. "Simulation and Investigation of an Arbitrary Type of Geological Construc-
tion on Yes computers." In book: "Sovershenstvovaniye program i skheu postro-
yeniya opornykh geologicheskikh setey na territoriyakh gorodov.” Haterialy Vsesoyus-
noy nauchno-tekhnichesknoy konferentsii/Ch 2 (Improvement of the Program and Scheme
for Construction of Reference Geological Networks on the Territories of Cities. lb.-
terials of the All-Union Scientific Technical Conference. Part 2). Novosibirsk.
1980. pp “9-55. Bibliography: 5 items. A mltiplicative algorithm for the genera-
tion of pseudo-random numbers on a Yes computer requires 15-20 words of mchine mem—
ory. The generation time for access with a volume of 10.000 numbers is about 3-1;
sec.

W03. Zobov, A. A.. and Chuprynin. A. F. ”System of Preparation of Controlling
Programs for Machine Tools Hith Numerical Control on an 'Elektronika-éO' micro-com-
puter." ELEXTRONNAYA 111mm“. SERIYA 1. mmoumA svcn. L(*L. No 3 (327). p
62. Bibliography: 1 item. A system has been compiled for geometric calculations
of the formation and issuance of a control program for processing parts for the
electrnika-79H electro-erosion complex. The time of calculation and issuance of the
control program for a control part. the contour of which contains about 30 elements.
is 3.5 min.

13011;. "Hork Hith Terminal on a Seiver-l72 Computer. Instructions on Operations in
Interactive Conditions." Vcrob'yev, V. 1.. Kolesnikova, 0. S.. Troyan, A. 1.. and
Fedorochenko. 1.. I. Leningrad, 1981. 1&3 pages. Scientific Research Computer Cen-
ter. Bibliography: 8 items. Barking procedure withtthe NOSI system in interactive
conditions for terminals of the teletype sort: information about file organization;
tables and alphabetic index of terminal instructions.

M2]. Zasenko, V. A.. Ivkin, V. 6.. and Morin, I. V. "System for Control of Large
Electrophysical Plants. Survey GEM." Leningrad. bl pages. Scientific Research
Institute of Electrophysical Apparatus. Bibliography: 29 titles. The following
are examined: systems for control of charged-particle accelerators on type Sign-2
in FOCAL and BASIC languages into control systems of experimental thermonuclear in-
stallations of the Tolkamk type on PDP and HP computers.

I

h022. Karpov. Yu. 6.. and Tolstyakcv. A. V. "Programming Parallel Processes in an
Automated System for Control of Technological Processes." TEDDY/Leningrad Polytech-
nic Institute, 1980. No 372. PROTECTIROVANIYE I POSTROYENIYE SISTEH UPRAVLENIY C
PRIENENIYE'H EVH, pp 52-55. Bibliography: 5 items. The paper discusses: develop-
ment of an operating system nucleus on the basis of a PDP-ll; the reaction time on
a higher level in the range of 10 ms and in the following range from 50 to 100 ms.
In the method of distribution of memory of the processes the folume of the operating
system is about 300 words.

1:023. "Problem-oriented Complex of Processing Socihl Infomtion on the Basis of a.
Mini-computer (Tasks and Algorithms)." Bakayev. A. A., Petukhov, V. 8.. Revenko, V.
L.. et a1. Kiev, 1980. M es. (Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences Preprint No 80-70 . Bibliography: h items. Three problem tasks of auto-
mation of the main production hmctions of services of motor-vehicle-paseenger ves-
sels are described, realized on the basis of the PUP-BE mini-computer.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvemaya mblictmaya‘naucmo-
tekhnicheskaya biblioteka 33312 (am 33512). 1981

21“
C50: 1863/108

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SELECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'ALGORITHHS AND PROGRAMS'. OC'IDBBR 1981
Korean mom I PRGRAM.1nRussian no 10. Oct 81 pp 1-120

[Following is a listing of selected entries from mm I PRmRAm .
a bibliographic publication of GPNTB]

[Excerpts]

M63. “Distribution of infomtion and computer work in subscriber networks."
Kanonykhin, V. H., and Hikhaylov, V. V. ELEXTRONNAYA TEXHNIKA. SERRA 9. M-
TRONIKA I SISTM U'PRAVIMIYA, 1981, No 1 (38)» PP 50-52. Bibliography: 2 items.

#117. "The Question of Automating the Process of Describing Radio Echoes of Meteo-
poles.” Parshuto, T. P. In book: "Radiolokatsionnaya Heteorologiya" [Radar Hete-
orology-l. Materials of the Radar Meteorological Center of the Socialist Countries,
lain Geophysical Laboratory. Leningrad. 1981. PP 4148. Bibliography: 9 items. A
program in the language AIGOL-GDR is described for solution of the problem of non-
local analysis of radio echo with use of an operator from the process of analysis
and increase of reliability of analysis of a meteorological situation.

1&118. "Calculation of spectral characteristics on latgs'yorth Atlantic Hater Areas." Po-
khil, A. E. TRUDY SWIM! NAUCMO-ISSIWAM'SCIY TSEN‘I‘R SSSR.
1981. No 2'41. MRSCIYE CIDROWICWIYE RASCHE’I'Y I PRGNOZY. PP 77-73. Biblio-
graphy: 6 items. An algorithm is presented for calculation of swell on the water
area over an area of 20 x 106 ka with an error not exceeding 20 percent, and a
nomogram for calculating the passage of time on a lam-6 computer during calcula-

tion of fields of swelling of any dimensions in any calculated period over its
length.

l$152. "Method of compact representation of an interval Boolean mnnction and its
estimation." Voronin. D. F. VOPROSY RADIOELEXTRMIKI. SERIYA M. 1981, No 1, pp
80-90. Bibliography: 3 items. The program of an optimum algorithm in the language
71/1 for the cover of an interval Boolean function is presented. There are 90 in-
tervals, the main memory is about 2 Kbytes; the time of realization of the program
in the DOS Yes-1020 is about 100-1600 lls and in the OS Yes-101w is about 15-50 ms.

#155. 'Hultimicroprocessor architecture of computer systems with direct interpreta-
tion of high-level languages." Danna” K. -L.'.‘ and‘Kisilhoh'V. 85" UPRAVLYAYUSHCKIIYE
SISTEHY I HASHINY, 1981, No 1, pp 32-36. Two processors have been designed on the .
basis of the proposed architecture. The former consists of six Motorola 6800 micro-
processors. the latter of 11 Intel 3000. YaVUNI (a high-level language based on an

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arithmetic with direct interpretation) is described on the basis of arithmetic with
a fixed period. representing a version of the PL/l language. On the basis of calcu-
lation of polynomials. search in the lists and mltiplication of matrices, a compar-
ison Ins been made of designed processors and the Yd; computer and IBM 360 and 370
processors. Comparison showed tint for the selected emmples the former is about

1.5 times greater than the Yes-1020 and the latter about 1.3 times greater than the
ID! 370 model 155.

l+160. "Problems in automating problem solution.” Glapun. V. P., Vashenko, N. D.,
Bibs, I. 6.. et a1. PROBLM BIONIKI. Republican Interdepartmental Scientific-Tech-
nical Collection. Khar'kov Institute of Radioeletrmics. 1981. No 26. pp 89-90:.
Bibliograpr 5 items. The APROS system for the solution of practical problems in
the planning of actions (in particular. tasks in planning the betevior or robots) and
the performance of experimental investigations of processes in problem solution. The

system is described in the PL/l language, and the input language is the task—descrip-
tion language SI'I'PMN.

l$16”. "Modeling stand for problem-oriented simlation system.“ Hassarskiy, L. V.,
and Shub. 1.. L. ELECTRONNAYA TERI-MIA, No 9. MTRONIKAISISTBH! UPRAVLENIYA.
1981, No 1 (38), pp 30-35, Bibliograpmn 2 items. A package of applied proglems is
described in the languages PL/l Assembler and GPSS mm Yes and a control system

produced by a. simulation complex of interaction of an ASU with a production model of
an object of control.

4177. "Automated system of preparation of control programs for electric-spark machin-
ing with numerical programmed control.” Koslov. N. C... Peretyaka. Yu. P., and Radion-
ov, I. S. ELEXTRGJNAYA MINIMS‘ER 7, TEKHNCIAIJIYA. OmANIZATSIYA PROIZVODSTVA I
anonunovmu. 1981, No 2 (105). pp 60-63. Bibliography: 8 items. The system was con-
structed according to the preprocessor-processor-postprocessor principle, realized in
FORTRAN-1+ for the design of parts whose contour is described by a set of mnctions.
preliminarily introduced into the control program according to definite rules and
approximate tabular-task curves by a spline approximation method.

#192. "Method of variable parameter of penalty to solve tasks of nonlinear program-
ming with set precision.“ Rapaport. L. B. In book: “Hetdd'y, issledovaniya slozhnykh
sistem" [Methods of Investigating Complex Systems]. Proceedings of Graduate and Young
Specialists. All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Systems Research. Hescow,
1981. pp 50-58. Bibliography: 6 items.

1202. "Relaxation of systems in tasks of multidimensional numerical‘analysis of ”semi-
conductor instruments.” Abra-0v. I. 1.. and Hulyarchik, S. G. IZVMPIYAWUZOV'.‘ RADIO-
ELFXTRONIKA, 1981. No 6. pp 59-67. Bibliography: 23 items. A new method is de-
scribed. one based on a WAN-program of two-dimensional numerical analysis of di-
polar RELAX-2 resistors and a memory volume of about 200 Kbytes. The Seidman-Chu
method has been realized in a COI’DABSE program.

1:209. ”ATLAS-B on a 33811-6 comter.’ Gal'dikas. A. K. TRUDY/KAZAN'SCAYA CORNAYA
As'mononsmn osssmronrn. 1980, we 10. pp 96-97. Bibliography: 2 items. An
ATLAS-B program for calculation of models of stellar atmospheres has been compiled in
FORTRAN-h for the CDC-61800. Changes connected with its copying for the BEBE-6 are de-
scribed. The calculation time. with deviation from the thermodynamic equilibrium and

during use of 78 points of frequency for 10 iterations with respect to temperature
taken into consideration. is 2 hrs 30 min on the 33811-6.

51.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4231. ”Analytical calculation of the optimal working point of the mtrix on ferrite
cores.“ Kuz'nin. V. P.. Levshin. V. I.. and Surin, R. V. VOPROSY RADIOELEH‘RONIKI.
SERIYA EVT, 1981. No 1, pp 3846. Bilbiognphy: 7 items. A FORTRAN program has been

compiled to calculate the region of stable work at coordinates of tlows of excitation
for three temperature points: -20. +20 and +60°C.

#256. ”Preliminary processing of the results of diffractometric experiments on ob-
jects with large elementary cell parameters." Shal'meyster. V. H. APPARATURA I
END! RENPCENMICWCXIO ANALIZA. Collection of Articles. Leningrad "Burevestnik"
Scientific-Production Association, 1981, no 25, pp luv-153. Bibliography: ? items.
The paper describes the program complexes REFLEX H (with a memory volume of 214K words)
for processing the results of experiments on an automatic coordinate diffractometer--
DARK 2.0. and RFARH in FORTRAN for statistin analysis and presentation of the re-
sults of diffraction experiments per unit of scale (memory volume of about 32x words).

16261. "Determination of the optimal variant of grading of articles with defects."
Shevtsov, V. N.. and Kozhin. A. V. ELECTRAWAYA TERI-NRA. SERIYA 8. Quality Con-
trol. Standardization, Hetrology. Tests. 1981. No 2 (88). pp 7-10. Algorithm in the
language FCRTRAN-hK for the grading of articles minimizing the mean manufacturing ex-
penditures per article.

#263. "Investigation of a1 orithms of adaptation for an automtic system for control
of technological processes ?ASUTP).” Zadorozhnyy. S. S., Prilipko, V. I., and Shevy-
rev. Yu. Ye. ELBKTRONNAYA TEXHNIKA, SERIYA 9. Economics and Control Systems. 1981,
No 2 (39). pp 33-31;. Bibliography: 5 items. For adaptation of ASUTP models a Kach-
mazh algorithm is described. and also a program in the Hacroassembler language for the
ELEXTRONIKA-lOO/I minicomputer with use of numbers with a floating point. The program
has a memory volume of about 16K.

h270. ”Predicting production requirements on the basis of a dynamic model." Shurgin,
Kh. R. ELEXTRWNAYA TEXHNHA. SERIYA 9. Economics and System Controol. 1981, No 1
(38). pp 7-10. Bibliography: 12 items. The paper describes a dynamic model, an
identification algorithm. the prediction and distribution of production among enter-
prises of a branch. A complex of programs is composed in the FORTRAN language. one
which includes programs for providing infomation. calculating parameters and the
structure of a model. and prediction of requirements.

u289. "Yasyk opisaniya mnktsionsl'nw atkhitdttury vychielitel‘nykh 313nm" [Lan-
guage for dessribing the functional architecture of computer systems]. Lel'chuk. T.
I., and Harchuk. A. G. Computer Center. Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Scien-
ces Preprint No 285. Novasibirsk. 1981, 10 pages. Bibliography: 7 items. The lan—

guage is based on a parallel asynchronout model of computations and is a concretiza-
tion of the Modular Asynchronous System to be Developed (MARS). Syntactic elements

of the APL. SETL and Basic language are used.

#312. "Interaction with a computer in tasks of planning electronic circuits."
Kucherov. V. Ya... Sokolova. L. F., and Yurevich, S. A. EILEXTRONNAYA TEXHNIKA.
SERIYA 9. Economics and Control Systems. 1981. No 2 (39). pp 22-2!» Bibliography:
3 items. A set of complexes of interaction with a computer is described, one assur-
ing effective connection of a systems engineer for evaluation of the results of de-
' signs of electronic circuits and decision making. For interactive conditions a com-
plex of service programs has been developed in the Assembler language DOS Yes-4030.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.31.0. "Automation of selection of an optimal data processing circuit.” Korinev-
skiy. L. V.. Kul'ba, V. V.. Nul'. I. A.. an [Whom V. P. mama TREND“.
SERIYA 9. Economics and Control Systems. 1981, No 1 (38). pp 23-25. The paper pre-
sents a method of formalised description and construction of an optiul mthematical
model of a data processing system with the detection and correction of errors by means
of a complex of progress for Yes computers.

#3151. “Combining the 'Elektronika-lOO/I' with Yes computers." Anishkevich. N. IL,
Zhelezko, B. A.. and Pikhun. V. N. MTRGINAYA mmm.:anna 9. Economics and
Control Systems, 1981. No 1 (38), pp 22-23. Bibliography: 5 items. The paper de-
scribes construction of a multimchine hierarchic system of scientiﬁc investigations
based on the combining of computers within the f‘ralnework of Yes disk operating system
computers while preserving initiative on the part of the mini-computers.

1&370. "Modification of a. translator from the Bin language to the "on" data bank
language." Petrov. A. Ye. ELECTRCNNAYA TEXHNIKA. SERIYA 9. Economics and Control
Systems. 1981. No l (38). pp 18-21. Bibliography: 15 items. The paper describes the
development of a second version of a translator from the BIYsZ language for work with
the information fund using sensible relations between elements of intonation
machines nachines without turning to logical and physical data storage structures.

11.381. "Engineering subsystem for automation of circuitry planning of microelectronic
apparatus.“ Gridin, V. N.. and Nukin. c. N. voraosr RADIOEHCTRONIKI. SERIYA EVT.
1981. No I, pp 31-37. Bibliography: 6 items. The paper describes a subsystem for
circuitry and planning of microelectronic apparatus within the framework of the gener-

al systemrfrom complexes of programs for Yes computers. A single input language is
described.

#385. "Automation of varicap acquisition.“ Lubyanyy, V. 2., Lebedenko. A. P., and

Gorshenko, G. F. ”MAYA THHNIKA. SERIYA 7. Technology, Organization of Pro-
duction and Equipment. 1981. No 2 (105). pp 6-11. Bibliography: 6 items. The paper
presents an algorittm for making up complete sets of varicaps ntched in capacity for
the Yes-1020, analysis of existing systems for selecting complete sets. a description

of a. system with the application of minicomputera and a robot-manipulator and the way
to improve its qualitative indicators.

l$1521. ”Complex of algorithms for detection of astronomical objects and dtemination
of their coordinates." Kaganov. S. 11.. Levchenko. V. D.. Hatyagin, V. 3.. et al. In
book: "Avtomatizatsiya astronomicheskikh nablyudeniy [Automation of Astronomical
Observations]. Astrophysical Institute. Kazakh 83R Academy of‘Soiences.‘ Alma-Ate,
1981, pp ltl-56. Bibliography: 9 items. The paper describes main algorithms realized
in the form of programs for a universal computer. To optimize the proprocedure of
filtering itages from the noise the leimnn-Pierson criterion was used. an estisate

made of the parameters of mobile objects to select images of them and images of stars
by the method of mximum probability.

l“$22. "Peculiarities of the processing of seismic body waves capable of D-transforma-
tion.” Kondrat'yev, 0. K., and Orlov, V. P. MAYA GEOF'IZIKI. ' Allgllnion Scien-
tific Research Institute of GeophysichQBl. No 100. pp 11-22. Bibliography: 5 items.
An algoritrm is described for the D-transformation of x-components: the method of
transmitted body waves in the depiction of a deep section on the BESH-lb computer. In
the reduction of heterogeneous media it is advisable to introduce an algorithm for
automatic regulation of the base of sumtion.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M23. 'Photogrammetric dterminations of the release of allowed soils." Ivanova,

L. 1.. Novikov. ll. F.. Derek. 2. D., and Takovskiy, L. F‘. INZHENERNAYA CEODEZIYA:
KEZHVEDMSKYY NAUCHRO-TEXRNICMIY SBORNIK, 1981. No 21+, pp 26-28. Bibliography:

2 items. A program has been completed for the H-222 computer for determining the co-
ordination of points of angles of a. network of squares and determining volumes based
on bassistic course photographs.

M25. "Complex of automted .‘factographic infer-ration retrieval systems has

been created by depOsits and geological maps (method of creating and experimentally
sampling a model)." Unksova, H. V. Systems have been described for automating the
sampling. storage and analysis of large volumes of infomtion on the mask-32 and
DESK-ll computers.

W2. "Language and translator of test task for micro-computer module diagnosis."
Arzhenovdtaya. o. no. “Ritalin, Be "a. ReshOtOV. "a Be, and cmkm' 0. a MTRW'
RAYA TEXHNIRA. SERIYA 7. Technology. Organization of Production and Technology,
1981, No 2 (105), pp 56-59. Bibliography: 2 items. A test task language which is a
modification of the HEKI‘EST language is described. as is a translator on the ELECTRON-
ICS-60 computer, coded in the language MOVIE AW. consisting of 26 3:1erng
with a total volume of 5400 words, including a 15.000-word table of vectors and other
service files.

MM. "Some questions of the organization of information and mathemtical software

of automated solution of tasks according to plan." Dolozhkina. N. P., Lavrent'yev,

V. V.. and Pechelin, A. A. In book: "Ubespechivayushiye podsistemy lanovykh raschet-
of (ASPR) gospisns nsrsn [Subsystems for Planning calculations (ASPR Under the Gos-
plan RSF‘SR |, Collection of Scientific Works, Central Scientific Research Economic In-
stitute, Scientific Research Institute of Automted Control Systems. Moscow. 1980, pp
uz-sl. Bibliography: h items. The paper described the organization of the storage.
retrieval and correction of information on the example of a fragment of the subsystem
“Material and Equipment Supply” ASPR on the Hang 2200 uni-computer in interactive
conditions. The min memory Ins a volume of about 32'Kbytes.

W6. “Automted system for processing space observations." Burmkov, Yu. A.. Stay-
kov, p. 9.. Hinkova‘kiy, x..s.. et al. A system is described for the complex IBM 370/
1155 and Command 20 and it is concluded that space observations increase the reliabil-
ity of generation of refracted waves on account of collection of the energy of waves
in space.

Ma. “Compton effect on a particle with the spin 3/2 without polarization focus."
Cuenn. N. I. In book: "Kovariantnyye metody teoreticheakoy fiziki. Fizika ele-
mentamykh chastits i teoriya otnositel'nosti" [CovaRIant Methods of Theoretical my-
sics. Physics of Elementary Particles and Theor of Relativity]. Collection of Sci-
entific Works. Institute of Physics. Belorussian SSR Academy of Sciences, Minsk.
1981, pp 113-119. Bibliography: 11 items.

M53. "Procedure and results of processing by means of the evaluation—measurement
system ‘BPS-75-EMXTRMA-lOO-I' of calibrated measurements of wide-gap space cham-
bers." Averin. S. A.. Veselova. G. V., and Ravaaardyan. T. V. Hoscow. 1981, 2? p.
Space Research Insitutut USSR Acadeiv of Sciences Reprint No 630. Bibliography: 9
items. The paper presents a procedure for measurement of film intonation from the
space chambers of a gum—telescope. The results of processing photographs obtained

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

during graducation of space chambers on the DEY accelerator are presented. The pro-
cedure for imitating the volume of informtion from the space cranbers by leans of the
digitizer of the PIP-9820 calculator, vidicons and P28 matrices is described.

M9}. "Interface for progranmble instruments in experiment automtion systeas.”
Gorelikov. N. N... Domntskiy. A. IL. Donaratskiy, S. 11., et a1. Institute of
Oceanology. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow. Ranks. 1981, 262 pages. Bibliograpl'o':

9 items. Interfaces assuring orderly exchange of infomtion between autonosous lea-
suring instruments. peripherals and computers are described. The IECBUS interface.
which the HP-lB interfaces are mde the basis of, the IDELA (Interface DEsign language)
and algorithms of exchange between instruments along the 130305 main line are described.

1:455. "Some results of oalmlations of circulation of waters of the world ocean on a
singleodegree network.” Sarkisyan, A. 6., Demin. T. 2., and Brzakhovskikh. A. L.
TRUDY. Gidrometeorologicheskiy Nauchno-Issledovatel'skiy Tsentr SSSR. 1981. No 211-1.
Hoscow. 'florskiye gidrologichedtiye raschety 1 prognozy'EHaz-ine Hydrologin Computa-
tions and Predictions], pp 65-67. Bibliography: 3 items. Computations were made on

an PIP-3000 computer on a grid with a spacing nth - 1° per herison on 31 horisons at
depths of 0 t- 6000 I.

3057. "Numerical experiment with imitation lultuproduct nodel of international trade.”
Zamkov, A. V. In book: "Trudy sininara aspirantov i nolodovoykh spetsialietov” Trudy
of the Seminar of Graduate Students and Young Specialists]. All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute ofSystems Research). Moscow, 1981. pp 22-30. Bibliography: 7 items.

Calculations of world prices for excl'nngeable commodities on a PDP-ll/70 computer are
described.

COPYRIGHT: Gosuderstvennaya publichnsys muchno-tekhnichesksye biblioceka
sssn (GPNTB sssn), 1981

217a
cso: 1863/108

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPLICATIOIIS

UDC 6%.ﬂu-012e011sﬁi 631.31
“4.29.29.16.1136OJJ?

AUTOMATED SUPERVISORY CONTROL SYSTEM IN 111‘“ FIVE-YEAR PLAN

Hoscow mm I MTRIFD‘ATSIYM SEEIYA "SREDSTVA I SISTEMY UPRAVLENIYA V
WERGETIKE" in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript. received 10 Nov 81) pp 1-6

[Article by v. c. Ornov and v. A. Selenov]

[Text] In the Tenth Five-Year Plan work continued on the creation of A811 and the
wide use of computer technology in power engineering.

There was considerable development of autonted supervisory control systems, which
are based on mltinachine information-computer complexes. These complexes assure:

«further improvement of the planning of regimes'of energy systems and energy asso-
' ciaticns:

--the organization of minicomputers to solve problems of operating and automated
control;

--the organization of regimes of intermchine and inter-local exchange of inform-
tion and regimes of teleprocessing.

Problems of planning the regimes are solved on the general-purpose computers Yes-

1033. Yes-10b0, Yes-1055 and H-hOOO in all unified supervisory controls and in more
than 60 energ systems.

Further ilprovement of the algorithm and programs for planning regimes on the basis
of an operational DOS Yes system and still wider use of interactive systems was con-
tinued. The interactive systems are used to solve problems in planning solutions on
the USSR Unified Power System central supervisory controls. the unified supervisory
controls and 11 energy systems.

A new area of application of generalvpurpose computers is being actively developed
--operational control.

One- and two-machine complexes are working with a mini-computer intended for opera-
tive monitoring and control of the regimes of energy systens and energy associations.

At the start of the 11th Five-Year Plan the number of telemeterings arriving at load
dispatching centers and introduced into mini-computers increased greatly. In indi-
vidual branch supervisor controls the telemeterings have reached 380. and in energy
systems 250-300 telemeterings. Side by side with telemeterings of the active power,

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

telemeterings of the reactive power and voltage are finding ever wider application.
In individual cases telemeterings of the coal of the mjor intersystem of electrical
transmission lines and transits are used.

In a number of energy systems and branch supervisory control systems through integra-

tion of active power measurements the electric energy values are formed with high
enough precision.

Mini-computer reliability increased substantially. their full operating time in some
cases reaches 1000-2000 hours. and that of a two-nohine complex 6000-8000 hours.

With each year the number of tasks of operational control solvable by means of mini-
computers increases. Side by side with the basic complex of tasks accouplishable on
all objects (the collection, processing. display and documentation of infomtion.
retrospective analysis. monitoring of the cumnt regime parameters, formation of the
current balance of power by energy system and association and their parts. etc), in
the branch supervisory control of the North-West and the Urals. Latglavnepro. Irkutsk-
ergnepro, Hosenepro. Chelyabenepro. etc, a number of original tadts of operational
control have been developed and are being used. They include;

«operative forecast of loading;

«automatic estiIates of the coefficients of statis- of regionsby frequency;
«automatic identification and replacement of incorrect teleneterings;
«monitoring of disconnections and limitations of loading by users;

«monitoring the adjustment of accident prevention systems of automatic machinery:
«operational adjustment of losses in main networks;

«estimtes of the state of the min network;

«estimates of the amounts of flowe in electric transmission lines on the basis of
telemeterings of active and reactive power;

«estimate of the balance of the region in reactive power;
«formation of the daily news data on the basis of the telemeterings;
«histograms of the monitorable regime parameters:

«monitoring and calculation of the technical and economic indicators of the work of
energy systems and energy associations. etc.

a supervisor, including:

«frequency control in the USSR Unified Power System and foreign transfers;
--0pomtlve calculation of the optimum regime for active power;
«optimization of power losses in the main network of the power systems, etc.

Together with solving tasks of operative control, mini-computers installed at. load-
dispatching centers of energy systems and oblast superVisory controls are used all

the more in automted control systems. Two groups of functions should be noted in
tint connection;

«automatic regulation of frequency and active power of oblast supervisor controls
of the North-Rest, the Urals. Siberia and the South, and the USSR uniﬁed Power
System Central Supervisory .Conimll.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--automatic coordination of the action of local systems and automtic safety equip-
ment--the USSR Uniﬁed Power System Supervisory Control and the branch supervisory
control of the Urals.

lork is being expanded on organization of intermachine and interlevel objects. In
:he USSR Uniﬁed Power System Supervisory Control and in most oblast supervisory
:ontrols. exchange of informtion Ins been organized between mini- and general pur-
pose computers, exchange accomplished through standard (adapters or mltiplexors) or
special contact devices.

iork is being done on interlevel information exchan e between mini-computers. Those
systems are redized on the upper level of control central and oblast supervisory
controls) by means of a programmble multiplexor based on a complex of type RPT micro-
computers.

Low-velocity interlevel exchange between mini-computers in a number of oblast su r-
visory control and energy systems is organized by means of telemetry of the UI'K not
further identified] type.

In part of organizing the regime of teleprocessing using general-purpose computers;
only the first steps have been taken: simplex data transmission systems have been
tested through teleprocessing systems. The organization of these systems is held
back mainly due to a lack of the necessary software.

In the 11th Five-Year Plan work is being continued on the development of the auto-
mated supervisory control system on all levels of supervisory control.

By 1985 it is planned to equip with mini-computers a number of energy systems. and
also to replace obsolete models. The Yes-1011 (or the central supervisory control

of the USSR Unified Power System and a number of oblast supervisory controls). the
33-1 and the SH—lt.have been designated as new mini-computers.

Since these can have large main memories, higher speed and a developed standard soft-
"are. it appears possible to solve on them tadcs of operational control more complex

in an algorithmic respect.

It is proposed in l983-l98h to complete the creation of a” low-velocity network of
interlevel exchanges on the central-oblast supervisory control levels with complete
replacement of traditional telemetric devices. In that case by means of RPI‘ repro-
grammable microprocessor mltiplexors exchange of operating information (including
the number of telemeterings and TS [nor further identified J). between the oblast and
central supervisory controols. reception in the oblast supervism'y‘ controls of tele-
meterinas and TS from the telemetry transmitters installed in energy systems and at
energy objects. Simultaneously with tint starts the introduction of similar devices
in an energy system (the UV'l‘K—SOl. the AIS‘I‘. multiplexors based on the micro-computer

sn-1800. etc).

A mrther increase of computer resources and mnctional possibilities of general-
purpose computers begins to appear through:

«the use of the more powerful computers Yes-10W. Yes-1M5 and Yes-1055;

"expansion of the volume of the min memory of the used computers to 512-2000 kby-tes;

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--thc use of magnetic disk storages with volumes of 29. 100 and 200 ”bytes:

--mass application of means of teleprocessing and in: interactive systems and means
of multi-computer organization.

By the end of the five-year plan it is expected to complete the transition of the
special-purpose computer system: to the Yes operating stem, with the use as organ-
izing systems of SURE and SUIBD [not further identified complexes and VINIE-VTs GTU
[not further identiﬁed] being developed.

Further development and improvement of the automated supervisory control system tasks
are envisaged.

In the area of regime planning. two complexes are being developed: the computer and
data-processing system-electro to solve electrical engineering problems and the com-
puter and data—processing-energo to solve power engineering problems. The complexes
are characterized by the use of an information base, the wide use of interactive

modes. automation of information exchange by means of a medium-velocity network of
exchange between levels.

The range of tasks of operational control being accomplished both on mini— and on
general-purpose computers connected with them is being considerably expanded. The
volume of monitorable regime parameters will be substantially increased (to about
500-1000 telemeterings on the oblast supervisory control level). In combination with

programs for estimtes of the state this will permit creating models to solve tasks
of operational controli

--operational prediction of load;
"operational estimtion of regime reliability;
—-operationa.l intra-day and intra-hocr optimization of the regime in active power.

,-

The model for operational estimation of reliability in the first stage must permit
the supervisor or technologist to nuke operational calculations of the allowability
of a regime during allowance of requests. estimation of the balance of power. regime
variations not provided for by the plan. etc. That model must be mrther supplemen—
ted by a model of automatic accident prevention equith and assure cyclic regime
estimation "ith respect to reliability with automtic formation of recommendations
to the supervisor on the regime optimal from the point of view of reliability.

The model for operative optimization of a regime in active power must cyclically
(from several times a day to several times an hour) calculate the optimum regime of
a region in active power with prescribed anticipation and automatically transmit the
planning tasks to the corresponding level of control. At the present time in the
oblast suvervisory control of the North-West an Emmi [not further identified] pro-

gram developed for that purpose with the VNIIE VTs 611] [not further identified]. is
being operated experimentally.

In the area of automatic control it is planned to further develop digital automtic
regulation of frequency and active power systems. create a hierarchic system of fre-
quency and overcurrent regulation (central-branch supervisory control are the regions

of regulation), and also the Joining programs of operative optimization with the
automatic regulation of frequency and active power.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the 11th Five-Year Plan intensive automtion of the lower levels of control is
planned. The wide introduction of automted supervisory control systems of enter-
prises and regions of electric networks is proposed, in particular the creation of
om [not further identified] based on nicro- and mini-computers. The application of
micro-computers for operative and automated control is being developed at substations
and electric power plants. in automatic accident prevention equipment and relay pro-
tection. From 1982-1983 on, series production of various micro-processor means of
display is expected: graphic and pseudographic displays (STGI-H, IPG‘I‘s. SODI 4+),
collective means of display (SOPI, matrix information boards), etc.

Address for questions: 103071;. Moscow. Kitayskiy proyezd. 7. Tall! YeES SSSR
COPYRIGHT: INFORHENERGO, 1982.

2174
C30: 1863/106

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 68l.39:801.3

SURVEY OF WORK ON SYNTACTICAL COMPONENT OF MACHINE TRANSLATION SYSTEMS

Moscow PEREVOD NAUCHNO-TEKHNICHBSKOY LITERATURY, SERIYA 2: HASHINNYY PEREVOD l

AVTOMATIZATSIYA INFORMATSIONNYKH PROTSBSSOV in Russian No 5, 1981 (signed to
press 2 Nov 81) pp 1-2, 22-24. 131

(Preface, appendix, and table of contents of book "Translation of Scientific-
Technical Literature, Series 2: Machine Translation and Automation of Infor-
mation Processes" by candidates of philological sciences Nina Nikolayevna

Leont'yeva, Zoya Hikhaylovna Shalyapina. Yevgeniy Yevgen'yevich Lovtakiy and
Ol'ga Arsen’yevna Gulyga, and Mira Borisovna Bergel'son. Aleksandr Stepanovich
Yczhov, Irina Hikhaylovna Kudryashova, Yelena Yur'yevna Marten'yanova. Yelena

Grigor'yevna Sokolova and Mariya Sergeyevna Sukhanova. Vsesoyuznyv tsentr
perevodov, 1000 copies. 132 pages]

[Excerpt] Preface

The syntactical component refers to that part of mchine translation systems
which is responsible for construction of a certain syntactical structure or
syntactical notation for each phrase of the text during analysis and for expand-
ing the syntactical notation into a linearly organized sequence of lexemes with
their morphological characteristics during synthesis.

This survey reviews only those systems in which the syntactical component is
present as a separate cowonent defined by the type of syntactical notation and
the rules of construction of syntactical notation for sentences in natural
language and/or the rules of generation of natural language sentences on the
basis of the syntactical notation, that is. the rules of analysis and/or syn-
thesis. Translation in such systems is done by phrases employing a series of
conversions of the syntactical notation itself.

The book does not consider system in which syntactical analysis is represented
in "eroded" fore. These are, for exalple, the so-called comercial or indus-
trial machine translation systens (a survey entitled "Operating Machine Transla-
tion and Automatic Vocabulary Systems" [9] was devoted to then), in which
syntactical information ‘1 used as context conditions for authorizing hononymy and
the choice of the translation equivalent. It also refers to system in which the
leading role is played by the semantic component which constructs the semantic

notation, while syntactical information is involved only as auxiliary filters dur-
ing semantic analysis.

6h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experience with the design and development of machine translation systems shows
that the development of the syntactical component is very labor-intensive (it
takes 3-10 years). For precisely this reason it is important to have evaluation
criteria from the standpoint of its adequacy for translation and its semantic
power and to be able to evaluate the expected effect from the work of the syn—
tactical component. Section 2 of chapter 1 gives a brief description¢3fthe main
constituent parts of the syntactical component of various systems.

In practically all machine translation systems the syntactical component either
includes "semantic elements" or interacts in a significant way with the semantic
component. Section 2 of Chapter 1 raises the question of the relationship be-
tween the syntactical and senantie components. A separate survey work will be
devoted to consideration of the semantic component in machine translation systems.
In this survey we are dealing with the construction of the semantic component of
several systemsonlyto the extent that it is necessary to explain the syntactical
model adopted. Section 3 lists several characteristic "tight spots" in systems
with syntactical components. Section 6 presents the ideas of leading investi-
gators on the prospects for development of machine translation (in particular

the syntactical component) in the near future.

Appendix 1. List of Machine Translation Systems with Syntactical Components

System Name
Used in Country, Organization, Start, Stage of

_jg§ Book Director Development Purpose of sttem
sttema Under Development at the VTsP [All Union Translation Center]
1. AHPAR-Z USSR, VTsP, Yu. N. 1980, initial stage English-Russian HI
Marchuk [machine transla-
tion]
2. SPAR USSR, VTsP, Ye. Ye. 1975, development English Analysis
Lovtskiy halted
3. PRAP USSR, VTaP. N. N. 1976, turned over French—Russian MT
Leont'yeva for experimental
use
6. PLOS USSR, VTsp, Yu. S. 1975, contract de- Russian Synthesis
Martem'yanov sign stage
Other Systems Developed in the USSR
5. FR—II USSR, Institute of 1967, experiments French-Russian MT

Problems of Mechanics.
O. S. Kulsgina

6. LCD USSR, Leningrad State 1960, work halted English-Russian HT
System University. 6. S.
Tseypin
7. ARAP USSR, First Moscow State 1969, work halted English-Russian HT

Pedagogical Institute of
Foreign Languages, 2. H.
Shalyapina
[List continued, next page]

65
FIN!!!FFIC1AI.|£SEI(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[List continued]

System Name
Used in Country, Organization, Start, Stage of

No. Book Director Develgmgt Pumse of System
Other mtems Develgped in the USSR

8. YAMP USSR, Institute of Orio 1978, contract Japanese-Russian n
entology. Z. 11. design stage
Shalyapina

9. INF-EL USSR, INFORMBKTRO, 1974, turned over French-Russian Kr
Yu. I). Aprcsyan for experimental

use
Systems Being Built Abroad

10. (PETA France. Grenoble, 1961, experimental Russian-French Mr
B. Vauquois use

11. KY Czechoslovakia, 1961, experiments English Analysis.
Charles University, Czech Analysis
P. Sgall

12. SUSY Heat Germany, 1967, teaching Russian-German
Saarhruecken. experiments and
Saar University, English-German HT
C. Eggers and
H. D. Haas

13. TAUM Canada, Montreal 1971, industrial English-French H'r
University, R. use
Kitteridge

16. Talk Bast Gemny, 1971, individual Gemn Analysis
TsIYa, Ju. experiments
Kunze

Machine Translation Systens in Japan

15. Kyoto University. 1978, initial Japanese-English Kl
H. Nagao stage

16. Osaka Prefecture, 1978, initial English-Japanese Kr
University, P. stage
Niehida

17. Khuasski. Fujitsu 1978. initial Japanese-English HT
Coqany Labora- stage

tory, B . Ushida

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFﬂﬂAl.USEZONLY

Table of Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.1. Constituent Parts of the Syntactic Components . . . . .
1.2. Degree of Semantic Quality of Syntactic Component . . .
1.3. "Tight Spots" in NT Systems with Syntactical Coqonents
1.6. Basic Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

o o s o 0

Appendix 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1. English-Russian HT System, Second Version (AHPR-Z) .
2.2. SPAR System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. 3. French-Russian HT System . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4. "Formal Linguistic Synthesis" System (PLUS) . . . .

5. Experimental French-Russian HT System (PR-2) . . ..

6

.7-

. LGU System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8. System of Automatic English-Russian Translation (ADA!) and

Automatic Japanese-Russian Translation (YsEAP) . . . . . .
2.9. Experimental System for Machine Translation of Electrical

NNNN
s s s

oases-s

Engineering Texts from French to Russian (INF-EL) . . . . . .
2.10. Automatic Translation Group GETA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.11. Algebraic and Computer Linguistics Group of Charles University
2.12. SUSY System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.13. TAUH System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.16. Central Institute of Linguistics of the East German Academy

of Sciences. Division of Automatic Text Processing . . .
2.15-17.HT Systems Under Development in Japan . . . . . . . . . .

Appendix 2. Questions of Syntax at the 8th International Conference on
Computer Linguistics in Tokyo (COLINC 80) . . . . . . . .

List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy tsentr perevodov, 1981

11,176
C80: 1863/103

67
FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

o

s

11
16
19

22

25
25
26
31
62
54
S7

62
70
77
84
90
92
98
102
107
116

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARALLEL CGIPUTING

PARALLEL COMPUTER All) PROGMING SYS‘I‘B‘S

Novosibirsk PARALLEL'NYYE WCIIISLI'I'EL'NYYE I WWW SISTHIY in masian
1981 (signed to press 3 Sep 81) pp 2, 4. 163-167

[Annotatiom Preface and abstracts from the collection "Parallel Oonputer and
Programming system", edited by Vadim Yevgen'yevich Rotov, Computer Center,
Siberian Deparhent, USSR Academy of. Sciences, Vychislitel'nyy tsentr SO AN
SSSR, 500 copies, 168 pages]

[next] The collection is published within the framemrk of the series "Systems
and Theoretical Programing," published by the Computer Center, Siberian De-
partment, USSR Academy of Sciences, and devoted to problems of parallel pro-
gramming theory. automation of developing mltiprocessor computer systems and
their software.

Preface

The collection is a topical selection of scientific papers devoted to problems
of developing multiprocessor computer conplexes (Wit) and the software for
them. Most papers were written within the framework of the scientific research
topic MARS [Intersectorial Automated Republic System]. The papers of v. A.
Val'kovskiy, L. A. Cherkasova, V. A. Val'kovskiy and v. 1.. randratskiy and

Ye. V. Trishina are de\' :ted to various aspects of parallel programing theory.
The papers of A. G. Harchuk, ‘l'. I. ul'chuk, G. I. Alekseyev, S. P'. Hyl'nikov
and also the paper of V. E. Helyshkin suggest sou approaches and language
facilities for describing the configuration and also simulation modelling of
multiprocessor cowuter conpleacas. The papers of N. N. Dudorov, D. A. Kasper-
ovich and L. V. Gorodnyaya touch on a nunber of problems that occurred during
development of the basic language of the ms project. The Novosibirsk Branch,
rm 1 W [Institute of Precision Hechanics and Computer Engineering]. USSR
Academy of Sciences, is represented in the collection by the articles of I. N.
Skopin that suggest one approach to organization of parallel symbolic process-
ing and of the articles of a group of authors (A. F. bondarenko et al) that
describe the organization of an operating system for a multiprocessor computer
complex from special processors of the El'brus-l system. A lexical analyzer
that carries out undetermined analysis of the input word is described in 'l‘. H.
Yakhno's paper. A new element in the flow of scientific papers of the Computer
Center, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, is access to the topic
of parallel numerical methods represented by V. A. Vasilenko's paper.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.142.2
CALCULATIONS WITH ASYNCHRONOUS INPUT 0? INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
(Abstract of article by Val‘kovskiy. V. A.)

[Text] The problem of organizing synchronous parallel calculations with
asynchronous input of independent variables is considered. The solution is
given with some simple premises in the case of parallel realization of arith-
metic expressions and cycles on files.

UDC 519.47
RATIO OF PAPALLBLLISH AND KA-DBNSITY IN ACYCLIC mars
[Abstract of article by Cherkasov. L. A.)

[Text] Conditions in which the system of parallel processes is complete ex-
pension of an acyclic network are established for a subclass of acyclic net-
works. The relationship of the ratios of parallsllism, x—dansity in an acyc-
lic network and the processes comprising it is investigated. The concept of
A-density, which is inherent only to systems and which is trivial in the case
of processes, is introduced and its properties are discussed.

' one 681.142.2
MAXIMUM PARALLELLING 0? SIMPLE CYCLES
[Abstract of article by Val'kovskiy, V. A. and Kondratskiy, V. L.]
[Text] Estimates of the degree of parallellism of simple cycles that in

some special cases yield a non-sorting maximum parallelling algorithm are
presented and substantiated.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 681.3.06.519.95
MODEL 0? CAICULATIONS IN LANGUAGE 0P WIGURATIOM DESCRIPTION
[Abstract of article by Harchuk, A. 6.]

[Text] An unformalised model of calculations for the language of configura-
tion description is suggested in the paper. The characteristic features of
this model is parallellism and asynchronisn of calculations, hierarchic nature
of the modular structure and implicit control of data flows. General problus
of interpretation are considered, including asynchronous generation and com-
pletion of processes and also their interaction. A definition of deadlock is .
given and a scheme for working with this and other exceptional situations is
proposed.

UDC 681.3.06
WORKING WITH DATA IN LANGUAGE OP WMIONAL COWIGJRATION DESZ‘RIPTION
[Abstract of article by Lel'chuk. ‘l‘. I. and Msrchuk, A. G.)

[Text] The basic principles and designs of displaying data and working with
it in the language of functional description of configuration, based on the

parallel asynchronous model of calculations and being a concrete definition

of the basic language of the MARS project, are outlined in the paper.

UDC 681.142.2

REALIZATION OP ASWNOUS WI. IN LANGJAGE OP CONFIGURATION DESCRIPTION
0? MRS Pm

[Abstract of article by Alekseyev, G. 1., Dele‘chuk, T. I. and Myl'nikov,
s. 9.]

[Text] A machine-independent model for achieving asynchronous control in the
language of functional configuration description of the MARS project is pre-
sented in the paper in the form of a set of structures and their processing
proecdures.

UDC 681.3.06.519.9S
SIMULATION ”KLEIN OF DIGITAL SYSTDIS MS. ON COMPUER IDDBLS
[Abstract of Article by Halyshkin, V. 8.]

[Text] A method of automating the design of simulation models of digital sys-
tems, based on formalized description of a class of these systems in terms of
computer models, is considered. The concept of the circuitry of the simula-
tion model and of the simulation mdel itself is defined. Three types of mod-
elling are determined, the requirements on the simulation modelling language
are discussed and the basic features of the system that realizes the suggested
method are discussed briefly.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.06

REALIZA'I‘ION OF ONE 1002!. 01’ PARALLEL OPERATIONS (RI mm DATA
[Abstract of article by Dudorov, N. N. and Kasperovick, 0. AJ

[Text] Problems of realizing dialogue language of working with structural
data. which is a version of a sublanguage of expressions of the Basic language
of the nuns system. are considered. The syntax and semantics of the language.

representation of its facilities in some abstract language and program realiz-
ation in Pascal are described.

UDC 519.688

INTRODUCTION OF PARALLBLLISM IMO SWIG CAMUIA'I‘IWS

[Abstract of article by Skopin, I. N.)

[Text] The possibilities of recruiting parallellism of calculations to solu-
tion of systolic processing problems are considered. Low-level parallellisn
oriented toward increasing the efficiency of direct associative retrieval in
line. is investigated. The need to combine this parallellisn with high-level

parallellism, which is related to the use of the structure of the material to
be processed, is shown in the paper.

UDC 519.688
PARALLEL LEXICAL ANALYZER IN BUMP Pm

[Abstract of article by Yakhno, T. H.]

[Text] Organization of a parallel lexical analyzer leade within the BUHP pro-
ject and operating with indeterminate grammar, is described.

UDC 519.6
PARALLEL CALCULATIONS IN MIDDLE! 0? SHOOT“ WIMN'I' 0? NET“)!!! PMION

[Abstract of article by Vasilenko, V. 5.]

[Text] The possibilities of parallelling calculations in solving a multidi-
mensional problem of plotting a spline function of arbitrary exponent in a
parallellepiped grid are discussed in the paper.

UDC 681 . 142

wLVABILI‘l‘Y OF FMIONAL WUIVALEMS roe NORDIC PLOW DIAGRAHS WITH ONE-TIME
ENTRY G‘ PUMIONAL SYMBOLS

[Abstract of article by Trishina, Ye. V.)

[Text] The solvability of the equivalence problem for free data flow dia-
grams, which are one of the formalisms that describe parallel calculations,

7 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is investigated in the article. First, solvsbility is proved for a subclass
of these diagrams interesting in the theoretical sense and more extensive in
some meaning than those considered earlier. Second, a method is developed
that is apparently also applicable to other interesting mbclasses of tree
diagrams and that is based on comparison of the logic-thermal history of only
a pair of the last cyclic identifiers of these diagrams.

UDC 681.3.06
CALCULATING NETWORKS FOR DESCRIBING A BASIC IMAGE
[Abstract of article by Gorodnyaya, L. v.1

[Text] A model of parallel calculations. which is a generalization of Petri
networks, is described. It is shown how it can be used to describe the asyn-
chronous order of using operations in tormulas of the basic language.

UDC 681.1423

REALIZATION OF OPERATING SYSTEM FOR MTIPROCESSOR CWLBX OF SPRIAI.
PROCESSORS OF EL'BRUS-l MULTIPMBSSOR cm COMPLEX

[Abstract of article by Bondarenko, A. P.. Nakonechnyy, V. N.. Ostashov. N. P.,
Pas'ko, V. N. and Tsang, F. 11.]

[Text] The characteristic features of realizing an operating system for a
multiprocessor couples, consisting of the special processors of the El'brus-l
multiprocessor computer couples, are discussed in the given paper. The real-
ized operating system permits one to significantly accelerate solution of
large problems and to utilize equipment more efficiently.

COPYRIGHT: WCHISLITEL'RY‘! TSBI'I‘R 50 AN SSSR

6521
C50: 1863/67

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REALIZATION OP OPERATIM SYS‘I’B! POI! HULTIMBSSOR CMPLBX 0P SUPWSOS
O? EL'BRUS-l HULTIPIOCESSOR coupons COMPLEX

Novosibirsk PARALLBL'NY‘IE WCBISLIM'NYYE I PROGRAMYYB 51m in Russian
1981 (signed to press 3 Sep 81) pp 152-162

[Article by A. P. Bondarsnko, V. N. Nakonechnyy, N. P. Ostashov. v. I. Pas'ko
and F. R. Tsang from the collection I'Parallel Computer and Programming Systems“,
edited by Vsdill Yevgen'yevich Kotov, Computer Center, Siberian Deparbsent, USSR
Academy of sciences. Vychislitel'nyy tssntr so an 5383, 500 copies, 168

pages]

{Text} Hardware Capabilities of Bl'brus-l Multiprocessor Computer Complex

The hardware of the Bl'brus-l multiprocessor computer coupler offers the user
the capability of constructing different configurations of computer systems.

All the functional assesblies of the complex are realized in the form of au-
tonomous modules having standard interface for integration of them into the
system. 'Ihe integrating assewlies of the hardware are 'comutators and in-
ternal storage modules. Up to 10 central processors (1‘s?) and up to four in-
put-output processors (PW) can be connected to the cannon field of the in-
ternal storage (OP) by commutators. mo types of central processors. differing
by the instruction system and having standard interface with the countators,
are possible in the coupler. Gig of the types of central processors, called
a special processor (SP) , is cospatible by the instruction system with the
BBSH-G computer. We will stbsequently be interested in the multiprocessor
configuration, consisting of several special processors of the El'brus-l mul-
tiprocessor computer complex, which we shall subsequently call processors for
simplicity.

During operation of a multiprocessor coupler, the processors and input-output
processors have the capability of interacting with each other both through the
internal storage and through the interrupt system. The required hardware sup-
port, mich includes processor configuration and internal storage registers.
interrupt output and reception registers. emergency interrupt registers and
the capability of synchronization access to internal storage. is realised in
each processor to support the operation of the complex.

All exchanges with external devices are made by the input-output processors.

73
roe omcm. use ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OS SP Operating System

The operating system for the multiprocessor couple: is realized on the basis
of the 05 SP [Special processor operating system] [1] . which is written in
high-level Yarns-2 machine-oriented language [2]. The 08 SP has a Indular-
hierarchical structure and provides fulfillment of the following functions:

multiprogram operating mode:

autonomous entry and storage of entered flow of tasks:

storage of output information and autonomous output of it to real devices:
dynamic distribution of resources)

automatic distribution of external devices;

gathering and processing of statistical intonation on tasks to be
admitted:

interaction with operator.

The distinguishing feature of the 05 SP is that it stores and transfers the
software stored on the DISPAK operating system of the BESM-G computer due to
the functional coupatibility of both operating systems.

Any work of the 08 SP proceeds within the framework of some process. Processes
are divided into systems and user. Examples of systems processes are autono-
mous entry, problem planner, automatic identification of volumes of plug-in
carriers, problem terminator, autonomous output and so on. The tasks and pro-
grams of the operating system directly caused by the task are fulfilled within
the framework of user processes. Access to programs of the operating system
on the part of the task can be voluntary through oxtracodes or forced through
the internal interrupt mechanism. In any case the set of programs of the op-
erating system that realize given actions should be regarded as program expan-
sion of the hardware capabilities and fulfillment of the given set of programs
should be regarded as a continuation of the task.

Each process is described by the process information field (IPP) containing
the. values of all registers of the process, resourCes required by the process,
the address of entry to the process and so on. Stitching from process to pro-
cess is a rather laborious operation requiring concealment and readjustment of
all registers of the processor.

The following problems were solved in realizing the operating system for a
multiprocessor muter coupler:

interaction of processes and synchronization in access to common
facilities:

parallel execution of procedures:

710
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

offering the user facilities for simultaneous fulfillment of his task on
several processors;

initiallization of the system
“viability" of the couples.
Control of Processes

Realization of an operating system that ensures the operation of a multipro-
cessor coupler required that special attention be allocated to problems of
synchronization, working with common facilities and development of effective.
parallel-executed procedures for these purposes.

The distribution of a connon internal storage along processors is dynamic in
a multiprocessor system. Exchanges are made by the multiprocessor configura-
tion of the input-output processors operating on a common field of internal
devices under the control of a unified program. All processors are symtri-
cal with respect to each other and service a unified mixture of tasks. Bach
process can be perfomd on any processor. At the same time several processes
can be performed simultaneously in the name of any of the tasks (and also in
the name of the operating system).

The following types of status of processes are possible: active, ready and
wait. An active process is one which is executed on a processor, a ready pro-
cess is one awaiting selection to I 920603301“ ‘34 e'wait P1000“ 180” “Ii-€109
release of a resource or some event. All ready and wait processes are located
in the corresponding units. The systems procedure SWIM PROM PROCESS '10
PROCESS changes the status of the process. If there are no ready processes,

a test process which tests the system and in case of some changes of status of
the system initiates the action of corresponding processes, is loaded ‘nto the
processor. .

The hardware of each processor determines the two independent virtual address
spaces--systems menory in which the operating system program is fulfilled and
the mathematical muory available to the task. The readdressing mechanism is
program-controllable and permits arbitrary conformity to be established between
systems and mathematical sheets on the one hand and real physical sheets of
the internal storage on the other.

The area of the systems memory of each processor, corresponding to the codes
of the resident part of the operating system and to cosmos global data. is
transformed to a cannon physical mesory. A unified copy of the operating sys-
tem is achieved by this. local data of the procedures of the resident part
of the rating system belonging to the processor are concentrated in the
appropriate systems regions, which is readdressed for each processor to its
own physical local region. Thus. resident procedures of a multiprocessor op-
erating system are capable of being executed in parallel on different
processors.

75
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mechanization of Synchronization

'Ihe event and sesaphore synchronization circuits used in the OS SP are conver-
ted to a multiprocessor operating system with retention of their functions in
the system. Only the procedures theuelves were changed. 'l'he information
structures that realize these circuits are mite whose heads are the events
and semaphores themselves. Since all processors in a multiprocessor system
operate on the field of a m internal storage and since processes are ex-
ecuted in parallel and work with season facilities, one must additionally syn-
chronize for access to the cannon facilities of internal storage (to tables.
queues. lists, global variables and so on). The com-on facilities of the in- '
ternal storage for a multiprocessor operating system become resources.

The events mechanism is used to organize interaction of processes. An event
can be in two states: OCCURRED and DID NO: OCCUR. men executing WAIT oper-
ation on an event. the current process is taken from the processor and included
in the queue to the event if the event was in the DID WI OCCUR state. A pro-
cess from the queue of ready processes is loaded into the processor. If the
operation DECLARE is executed, all the processes from the queue to the given
event are included in the queue of ready processes and the event is set to the
OCCURRED state. Ihe event can be interrogated and reset.

Exclusion of simultaneous access of processors to comn facilities is achieved
by using two pairs of operations on semaphores: WAIT WITH 101.0 and DECLARE
and WAIT BRIEFLY and DECLARE BRIEFLY. The given operations are similar to P
and v operations on Diekstra's binary semaphores [3]. The first pair of oper-
ations is used to hold the resource when resoval of the process from the pro-
cessor for an indefinite time is possible when working on it. The last pair
of operations is used to hold the resource for a short time and we will call
the semaphore related to a given resource a brief semaphore.

A semaphore may be in two . ates: OCCUPIED and UNOOCUPIED. 'lhe status of the
semaphore is checked when executing a WAIT WITH BOLD operation. If it is unoc-
CUPIED. the semaphore is held; the nutter of the process that held the sema-
phore is assigned to the semaphore and the prOcess begins to operate in the
critical interval. Upon emerging from the critical interval. the current
process perform the operation DECLARE. after which the process first in the
queue to the semaphore becomes ready. If the statu of the semaphore is OCCU-
PIED, the current process is removed from the processor and is included in the
queue to the given semaphore. After the semaphore held by its process has been
freed, the wait process is selected to the processor and enters the critical
interval.

A brief semaphore, like an ordinary seupahore, may be in two states: OCCUPIED
and UNOCCUPIED. If a WAIT BRIEFLY operation is being executed, the status of
the semaphore is checked. If it is WOCCUPIBD, the brief semaphore is set to
OCCUPIED by a special privileged instruction and the number of the process
that held the semaphore is assigned to the brief semaphore and the process

continues to work in the critical interval. Upon emerging from the critical
interval, the current process executes the operation DECUsu'. BRIEFLY: VIM-Ch
sets the status of the brief semaphore to UNOCCUPIBD. If the status is

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r-CCUPIBD, the current process is not remved from the processor and enters the
critical interval only after the status of the brief sespahore has been chan-
ged to UNOCCUPItD. Brief synchronization is used only for working on resources
held for a short time that does not exceed the operating time of the procedure
SHITCH FROM PROCESS TO PROCESS.

A separate semaphore is allocated for each general-purpose resource and working
with this resource is stipulated by a critical interval. In some situations a
continuous critical interval should be set for working with several resources.
For exanple, this situation occurs upon access to a sheet located in the ex-
change when the continuous critical interval is set to work with a table of
sheets of the internal storage and the queue of processes awaiting completion
of the exchange.

Capabilities Offered to the User

The operating system for multiprocessor configuration offers to the user fa-
cilities for developing processes within a task and a mechanism of synchroniz-
ation between then. The user has the capability of dividing the problem into
low-dependent parts, formulating them with processes and simultaneously execut-
ing them on different processors. If the low-dependent parts are selected
according to the time of execution by significant parts (exceeding the time of
switching from process to process). than the solution of the problem can be
accelerated considerably.

Each process is offered its own mathematical mesory up to 32 x words and thus
the task as a whole is offered a memory exceeding 32 1: words of the internal
storage. The sheets of the physical usury can be divided anong different
processes, which is achieved by reeddressing the mathematical memory to the
physical memory. Interaction of processes and synchronization in access to
common data of the task are acccnplished by means of events and semphores
arranged on common physical sheets.

The user is offered the following capabilities to create and organize inter-
action of processes of the operating system task:

form a new process:

initiallize an event:

interrogate an event;

wait for an event:

declare an event;

establish agreement for canon data and programs.

The user is offered the following capabilities for working on the semaphore
to synchronize access to cannon data:

77
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hold the senuphorea
release the semaphore.

The processes of one task can share physical sheets containing both the pro-
gram code and data.

Parallel use of programs is realized for processes of different tasks in the
form of code files, writing protection to which is provided by hardware. A
specific mathematical mmry is allocated to the code file within the frame-
work of each task. Utilizing the sechmism of readdressing mathematical sheet:
to common physical sheets, one can see that one copy of a given program for a1:
tasks working with this code file will be stored in the internal storage. A
single restriction is placed on the program that it provide multientry capac-
ity. The code file medianism ensures a considerable saving of internal stor
age; therefore, it is desirable to develop frequently used programs (transla-
tors, monitors, editors and so on) as multientry.

Initiallization of a System

The multiprocessor nature of a complex required changes and supplements in
initiallization of the system.

Initiallization is accomplished in two phases. The variables and tables of
the operating system are formed, systems processes are created and the start
of the dynamic initiallization process is prepared in the static initialliza-
tica phase. After static initiallization has been completed, the programing
code of the operating system is placed by the operator on the systems disk.

Operator is understood in the given paper not only as the operator in the -
traditional meaning, but as both the engineer and administrator that service

the conputer complex.

The operating system is itself loaded by means of a special service program
which the input-output processor initiated by the operator places from the
drum to the internal storage by mans of hot loading. The service program
receives a description of the configuration which can be given either on
punch cards or in a specific ligation of the external memory as the input data
The nunber and numbers of the central processor and input-output processor.
the volume and numbers of internal storage nodules, the number and types of
external devices and other parameters of the operating system are indicated in
description of the configuration. The service program places the resident
operating system to the corresponding position of the internal storage and
initiates the dynamic initiallization process.

The tables of the perating system whose size depends on the real configura-
tion are formulate... the segmnts of the external memry are checked and re-
jected and the corresponding tables are constructed in the dynamic initialliz-
ation phase. After astronomical time, the date and number of the shift of
operators has been entered. the operating system is ready to work. The pro-
cessor on which dynamic initialliration of the operating system occurred can
be selected arbitrarily.

78
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New processes are introduced into the operating system by the operator by as-
signing a special directive which, based on the current status of the configur—
ation of the complex and the operating system, prepares the required infome-
tion structures for the new processor. Executive of the directive on one of
the operating processors ensures hardware accessibility of the processor to be
entered to the internal storage, input-output processor and central processor
of current configuration, loads the local region for the processor to be in-
troduced to some physical region and establishes the conformity of the systems
memory of the processor to be introduced in it. Direct initiation of the pro-
cessor to be introduced into the operating system is accomplished by a special
ENTER IN OPERATING SYSTEM program started by the operator from the engineer's
console of the processor to be introduced, which establishes the status of the

hardware of this processor according to the information structures prepared by
the operating system.

Reconfiguration of the Complex

The con figuration of a multiprocessor complex is rather complicated and it
contains several special processors and input-output processors operating on a
common internal storage field and a large number of external devices, access
to which can be gained through one or several input-output processors. The
configuration of the complex can be changed dynamically during operation of
the operating system in it. Dynamic reconfiguration is carried out by the
operator's directives and automatically by the operating system upon break-
downs of processors, internal storage and input-output processors.

The con figuration can be dynamically changed completely by the operator's di-
rectives, by connecting or disconnecting external devices, input-output pro-
cessors and internal storage modules, which increases the viability and sta-
bility of the complex. It must be noted that connection or disconnection of
a system processor only increases or reduces the capacity of the complex.

If several processors are operating, an emergency of any one of them can be
detected automatically on an operating processor by emergency interruption.
The processor monitor signal occurring in each processor at specific frequency
is extinguished with the same frequency by the operating system and failure to
extinguish the monitor signal in it during an emergency leads to transmission
of emergency interruption to the other processors. The first operating pro-
cessor that received the emergency interruption excites a special systems emer-
gency process. The emergency process excludes the emergency processor from
the configuration and determines the state in which the system was at the mo-
ment of the emergency. If a user program was being fulfilled on an emergency
processor, the emergency process forms an emergency printout for a given task,
freeze the resources occupied by it and completes the task on its own compu-
ter. If a program in operating system mode was being fulfilled on the emer-
gency processor, the emergency process prints out a complete diagnosis of the
emergency and the possible methods of coming out of it. Based on this infor-
nation, the operator makes a decision for further continuation of the operat-
ing system or on restarting it. If the breakdown of the processor was acci-
dental, connection of it to a system is similar to how a new processor was
initiated.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, an operating system for a mltiproceseor couple): consisting of special
processors of the Bl'brus-l MVK, cclpared to a couple): of single-processor
systems, has the following advantages:

solution of large tasks is accelerated considerably due to their
parellelling:

the efficiency of equipment utilization is enhanced by balanced loading
of the processors and external equipmnt:

a saving of internal storage is achieved due to the use of code files:

the stability of the system is enhanced with respect to equipment
failures.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Tsang, P. R., "The Operating SYsteu of Special Processors of the El'brus-l
Multiprocessor Couplex," Proprint No 15. Moscow, 1980.

2. Gololobov, V. 1.. B. G. daeblakov and I. D. Chinin, “Machine-Oriented
High-Level Language for BESM-G Computer," in "mvitiye programmgo
obespecheniya dlya EVM 88834-6" [Developing the Software for BESM-é
Computers], Moscow, 1975.

3. Diekstra, 3.. "Interaction of Serial Precesses,” in "Yazyki programin-
vaniya" [Programing Languages], edited by P. zhenyuk, Moscow, Mir, 1972.

COPYRIGHT: WCRISLITEL'NYY TSBNTR 80 AN SSSR

6521
C50: 1863/67

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

unc 519.95

PARALLEL PROCESSING IN ESTONIA

Tallinn PARALLEL’NAYA OBRABOTKA INFOMATSII I PARALLEL'NYYE “ROBIN in Russian
1981 (signed to press 7 Jul 81) pp 2-7, 297

[innotation, foreword and table of contents from book “Parallel Information
Processing and Parallel Algorithms", edited by Viktor Alad'yev, Izdatel'stvo
“Valgus”, 800 copies, 298 pages?

[Thxﬁ7 This collection contains papers devoted to parallel processing of
information, parallel algorithms and modeling in homogeneous structures, which
form the theoretical basis of computer technology of parallel operations. This
collection should be of great interest to a wide circle of specialists in com-
puter technology, software, infonmation processing and cybernetics who are in-
terested in topics related to parallel processing of information. 23 figures,
16h title bibliography.

Foreword

Computer technology penetrates more and more deeply into the nation's economy
aiding in the solution to its important problems. The Estonian 88R is one of
the leading republics in the nation in the use of computer technology. Several
dozen design-technological and research institutes of the republic are working
on problems involving the use of contemporary computer technology in the
economy.

The sphere of application of automated information processing systems has been
broadening rapidly, requirements for productivity of computer technology
utilized are increasing. Any increase in the speed of operation of a com-
puter is associated with huge expenses, which cannot avoid influencing the
cost effectiveness of the development and utilization of information processing
systems. Today's needs demand the creation of an information processing

system which produces economic savings directly and this means that we must
search for new principles of construction for computer systems (VS's).

Such a principle for constructing VS's was first suggested and theoretically
justified in the 60's by Professor 3. Yevreinov and was further developed
in the subsequent work of the scientific school he founded. Time has demon-

strated that this was the right scientific approach, since, even within the

81
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE GIL!

framework of the sequential principle of information processing, the necessity
has arisen to renove the constraint of the VS's operating speed, the imple-
mentation of which has led to the computer collective. Thus, the V8 in this
sense, is made up of individual computers, autonaomously solving problems,

but capable of combining their computational resources.

At present, the greatest successes in the practical implementation of models
of computer collectives have been attained in the assaubly of homogeneous
computer systems (OVS's), representing a concatenation of similar computers
linked together and adapted for systems operation. Here, one distinguishes
between distributed and centralized OVS's. A centralized homogeneous computer
system plays a major role in providing the necessary computational resources
for complexes for integrated processing of accounting/economic and statistical
information in collective use computer centers (VTsKP's).

The organization of computers into a system increases the efficiency of computer
technology utilization and, in a number of cases, makes it possible to create

an information processing system which leads directly to economic savings.

In the VGPTI/TsSU SSR (All-union State Design Technological Institute for

the Hecnanization of Accounting and Computers, USSR Central Statistical
Administration), under the leadership of Lenin prize winner, professor E. Yev'reinov,
intensive work was undertaken to create centralized, as well as distributed OVS's
for the economy.

The Estonian branch of the VGTTI TsSU SSR, within the framework of its general
program, is conducting work on the creation of software (P0) for OVS's based on
the Yes EVH (Unified Systems Computer). This work has important significance.
First of all, in the process of software development for homogeneous computer
systems and the use of software, the fundmnental principles and approaches to

the creation of the homogeneous systems themselves become clear, their effective-
ness gets evaluated and a methodology for solving problems with OVS's gets
developed. Secondly, the gradual saturation of the economy by third generation
computers leads to a situation where there are a number of organizations and
computers centers of the nation having two or more Yes M's, and means for inter-
facing them. This makes it possible to create information processing systens
which lead to large economic savings and also to increase the reliability of this
processing itself.

In connection with this, in 1980 the Estonian affiliate expanded its work on
parallel information processing and parallel algorithms, which had begun in
March, 1979. In the process of developing this topic, the affiliate maintains
close ties with a number of scientific centers in our nation (Moscow, Minsk,
Voronezh, Kiev, Novosibirsk), as well as abroad (Bulgaria, CSSR, Hungary, GDR,
ERG, United States, Japan), involving questions of mathematical theory of
homogeneous structures and their application. Thus, the material offered in
this collection which contains fundamental results on parallel information
processing and applied aspects of the theory of homogeneous structures, has
been created collectively. However, the editor takes responsibility for all
shortcomings of this material. The material offered can be characterized

briefly as follows.

82
P01 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-10M. USE ONLY

The first paper describes a parallel system of information processing (P601)
whose implementation is based on already existing hardware and basic software
for models of the Yes BVH. The PSOI is implemented in the form of a parallel
processing package (PTO), which broadens the capabilities of the Yes EVM
operating system for controlling the functioning of homogeneous computer systems
consisting of any number of Yes EVM models. The paper discusses prerequisites
for the creation of a PSOI, the functional structure of the package, the basic
device of intermachine communication in homogeneous computer systems (OVS's),
systems operations of parallel processing in OVS's and the system for package
interchange. In conclusion, the paper considers the task of parallel sorting

in an OVS under control of a P801 and the organization of a parallel search in
an OVS. Theoretical evaluations are given of the time gained through parallel
search in an information parallel mode, as a function of the organization and
mode of use of the data. The information parallel mode is discussed in detail,
as is the creation of highly efficient information processing systems based

on this mode. The set of mass information processing tasks which are efficiently
implemented in this mode are defined.

A popular account of the ideas of information paralell operation and the pos-
sibilitiesfbr using it to create highly effective information processing systems
can be found in the Hungarian journal COMPUTER SCIENCE for June, 1981. This
account is aimed at a wide circle of specialists in computer technology and

programming .

This paper contains a detailed description of the structure and functioning

of the PSOI which allows the creation of similar OVS-based processing systems
consisting of non-Yes computer models. The present paper represents a signifi-
cantly expanded version of a report given at the All-Union school-seminar

"The Distributed Computer System and Parallel Computing", which took place in
June, 1981 in the city of Voronezh.

The second paper discusses the problem of adopting parallel information process-
ing technology for solving accounting problems. It is well known that, at
present, problems of this class are not implemented effectively on computers.
Analysis of the major problems in this class shows that more than half the
solution time must be spent on operations of sorting and information search,
which can be implemented in the parallel operation mode on an 0V8, under control
of a PSOI with great savings of time. This makes it possible to hope for
significant increase in the efficiency of solution of accounting problems on the
whole. The problem considered in the paper was offered for discussion at the All-
Union Scientific-Practical Conference "Accounting Under Improved Economic
Mechanisms" (October, 1981, city of Tbilisi).

The third paper discusses future prospects for the development of the theory of
homogeneous structures (OS) with regard to using them in the computer technology
of parallel operations. The OS is considered as the basis for a non-Neumann
approach to computation and computer technology. The paper defines the most
important trends in the theory of the 06 as a formal model of homogeneous com-
putational media, structures and systems. The paper represents an expanded
versionof material presented at the third Hungarian conference on computer science
(January, 1981, city of Budapest).

83
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

past decade, theoretical and mathematical biology has been characterized by

much penetration of the methods from the theory of abstract automate and formal
grammars. As a basis for modeling developmental processes on a cellular level,
we have proposed the techniques from the theory of homogeneous structures, which
are presently being widely adopted. In order to eliminate certain shortcomings
inherent in the use of the OS for modeling, a number of biological phenomena,
Lindemnayer has introduced his, now widely lmown, L-systems, which, at present,
are being intensively studied (like the 06) form the point of view of parallel
information processing and parallel programing, in spite of the fact that
initially both systems were introduced for the purposes of biological modeling.
The study of a whole series of models of develoment implemented on the basis of
the OS and L-systems revealed in a number of cases an extremely close connection
between the mechanisms underlying the processes of development and the process

biology with computer sciences. This opens up broad possibilities for mutual
enrichment and development. In our view, this connection will expand steadily and,
with time, may lead to more benefit for computer technology than vice versa. This
is why the topics of biological modeling using 08 and L-systems, which are also
the reSearch techniques in parallel information processing, are of interest for

a non-Neumann approach to computing. The paper begins by characterizing the basic

of developmental processes in detail and discusses future prospects for further
development of the techniques for modeling biological development. This work is
a significantly expanded version of material written as a chapter titled I'Regula-
tion and Control” for the book "The Mathematical Biology of Development,"
published in 1982 by 'Nauka.‘

The fifth paper investigates the types of parallelism in homogeneous computer
systems consisting of micro-computers. A comparative analysis is performed of
the efficiency of functional parallel operation and data paralleling. This
analysis forms the basis for the conclusion that the data paralleling realized
in the OVS mode is preferrable. Issu' ' related to the realization of the basic
software of the (NS, which supports data mode are discussed.

This collection should be of interest to a wide range of specialists in computer
technology and software for parallel computer systans, specialists in information

development.

A number of the issues considered in this collection were discussed at the
Institute of Computer Technology (city of Sophia, 7-21; July, 1980) and the
regional computer center of Prague University (city of Prague, 21; November-
6 December, 1980). Thus, we are also grateful to all the participants from

these research centers for their useful discussion.

8h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion, we wish to express gratitude to V.I. Hazurenko, senior engineer
of the division of design of the VTsKP (Collective Use Computer Center) for his
substantial work in preparing this manuscript.

PleaSe address all questions related to the material in this collection to:

200001, city of Tallinn, Haakri 15, RF VGPTI, telephone 132-313-611.

Fore

1.

2.

3.

b.
5.

Contents

word cooooeeeoeeeeaeeceeloooeeoioe-Oeoeooeeeeooooeoso...oeeooaoeool

v.2. Alad'yev, ILA. Lukaeh, v.1. Mazurenko, 0.8. Osipov. Problems
of Implementing an 0V5 Based on the Yes m oeoooeooeeeeoeeeoeeeeee

V. Z. Alad 'yev, 0. B. Osipov, VJ. Vaganov. Problems Involved in
Adopting Parallel Processing Technology and the Formation of
Accounting hoblems OOOOOOOOOVOOIOOOOOCUIOCOOOOOOCOIO'...0.00.00...

v.2. Alad'yev. Certain Nture Prospects in the Development of the
Theory of Homogeneous Structures as a Formal Technique for Studying
the Computer Technology of Parallel Operations ....................

V. Z. Alad'yev. Cybernetic Modeling of Biological Development .....

S. N. Bushev. Investigation of the Poms of Parallelism in Homo-
geneous Computer Systens Based on Micro-Computers .................

COPYRIGHT: Estonskiy filial VGPTI, 1981.

9285
CSO:

1863/68

85
won omcm. use ONLY

167

177
211

281
INJI10FFIC1AI.IISEZ(MVLY

OPTICAL CHARACTER READERS

GENERAL REVIEW OF OPTICAL CHARACTER READERS

Kiev OPTICHESKIYB CHITAYUSHCHIYB AVTGMATY in Russian 1980 (signed to press
22 Nov 79) PP 2-4. 206-208

[Annotation, preface, bibliography, and table of contents of book "Optical
Character Readers". by Doctor of Technical Sciences Vladimir Antonovich
Kovalevskiy. Candidate of Technical Sciences Georgiy L'vovich Gimel'ferb and
Candidate of Technical Sciences Anatoliy Pedorovich Voziyanov, Izdatel'stvo
"Tekhnika". 4,000 copies. 208 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book describes the methods of designing optical character readers for
reading and inputting alphanumeric texts to computing, information retrieval,
and automatic control systems. It sets forth the theory of image recognition
relevant to automatic text reading and models the work of a character reader

on a general-purpose electronic digital computer. Special attention is devoted
to experience with development of the domestically produced ChARs correlation
character reader. The authors review the distinctive features of the organi-
zation of document circulation under conditions of automatic reading.

The book is intended for engineering-technical employees who specialize in the
field of automatic reading equipment and the hardware of automatic control and
computing systems. It may also be useful to upper-division and graduate stu-
dents in the appropriate specializations.

Preface

The challenges posed by the 25th CPSU Congress with respect to automation of
various sectors of the national economy demand rapid development of computer
technology. The document "Basic Directions of Development of the USSR National
Economy for 1976-1980" points to the need to develop the production of general-
purpose and control computing complexes, peripheral equipment, and data re-
cording and transmission units for automated systems to control industrial
processes and optimal control in sectors of the national economy.

High-speed character readers are used to increase the efficiency of functioning
of automated and computing systems. These machines eliminate the unproductive
manual labor of encoding data and significantly reduce the disproportion be-
tween the speed of feeding data to the computing system and the speed of its

86
FINItHﬂﬂCIAl.lEIE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processing. To judge by foreign estimates, in the late 1970's from 25 to 50
percent of all expenditures for data processing went for encoding and feeding
the raw data. Character readers greatly reduce these expenditures and are
thus one of the most promising types of input equipment.

work on character readers in the USSR began in the late 1950's. By the early
1960's many Soviet and foreign organizations were actively developing optical
character readers. Despite the great complexity of the problem and the
theoretical and engineering difficulties that arose during the process of de-
velopment and operation of the first models of character readers, definite
progress has been made in recent years in building and using these machines.
This progress depends significantly on the technological advances of contempor-
ary computer equipment, precision mechanics, optical electronics, and laser
engineering (in particular on the appearance of reliable and inexpensive digital
and analog integrated circuits, high-speed small computers, microprocessors,
and the like).

Many things in the field of automatic character reading are still disputed and
problematical, so a summary and systematization of experience with planning

and designing character readers should be of tangible use not only to beginning
developers but also to those specialists who have made their own contribution
to solving this problem. It is relevant to note here that the problems that
arise in building character readers have only been touched on very slightly
(and that has only been on a general level) in domestic literature on image
recognition.

The bulk of this book is made up of results of work done over the space of
more than 15 years at the Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences and the Special Design Bureau of the HHS [possibly Mathematics
Council] of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. During this work an experi-
mental model of the ChARS correlation character reader was built. It success-
fully underwent testing and was accepted by the State Commission. During
development of the ChARS modern methods of design based on computer modeling
of the work of the character reader, in particular the recognition process,
were used. The design of the ChARS contains a number of original assemblies
that are protected by author's certificates.

We ask that comments and requests be sent to the following address: 252601,
Kiev, 1, GSP, Kreshchatik, 5, Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika."

Bibliography

1. "Avtomatizatsiya Vvoda Pis'mennykh Znakov v EVM" [Automation of Input of
Written Characters to the Computer]. 2nd edition, Vilnius, RINTIP, 1968.

2. "Avtomatizatsiya Vvoda Pis'mennykh Znakov v EVM" [Automation of Input of
written Characters to the Computer], Vol 1, Vol 2, Vilnius, RINTIP. 1969.

3. "Avtomatizatsiya Vvoda Pis'mcnnykh Znakov v TsVM“ [Automation of Input of

Written Characters to the Digital Computer], Vol I, Kaunas , NIINTIiTEP,
197].

87
FOR 0F1HC1A1.USEGDNLN
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USE(MNLY

"Avtomatizateiya Vvoda Pie'mennykh Znakov v TaVH" [Automation of Input of
written Characters to the Digital Computer], Vol I, Kaunaua, Kaunaua
Polytechnic Institute, 1977.

Author's certificate 181169 (USSR).

Author's certificate 206901 (USSR).

Author's certificate 367634 (USSR).

Author's certificate £13503 (USSR).

Author's certificate 496576 (USSR).

Belobragina, L. 8., and Yeliaeyev, V. K. KIBBRNETIKA. 1967, No 6.
Kallykov, V. 6. 12V . AN SSR. SER. TEKHN. KIBERNBTIKA, 1973, No 3.

Kiyko, V. H., In "kaepoznavaniye Obtazov" [Image Recognition], Kiev,
IK AN USSR, 1978.

Kovalevakiy, V. A., "Kibernetika i Vychialitel'naya Tekhnika. Reap.
Mezhved. Nauch.-Tekhn. Sb." [Cybernetics and Computer Technology. Republic
Interdept. Scientific-Technical Collection of Articles], 1969, Vyp 3.

Kovalevekiy, V. A., "Hetody Optimal'nykh Reeheniy v Raapoznavanii
Izobrazheniy" [Optimal Deciaion Techniques in Image Recognition], Moscow.
"Nauka," 1976.

Kovalevakiy, V. A., Sibirteev, V. 6., and Tretyak, 0.0., KIBERNETIKA, 1976,
No 5.

Baraehko. A. 8., Kovalevskiy, V. A., Mazyra, Yu. S., et al. "The ChARS
Correlation Character Reader with Shift Register," in "Chitayuehchiye
Avtomaty" [Character Readers], Kiev, "Nauk. Dunks", 1965,

Lenan, E., "Proverka Statioticheekikh Gipotez" [Testing Statistical
Hypotheses], Moscow, “Nauka”, 1964.

Shlezinger, H. 1., and Svyatogor, L. A., in "Trudy III Vaeeoyuznoy
Koferentaii po Informataionno-Poiakovyn Siatemam" [Proceedings of the 3rd

All-Union Conference on Information Retrieval Systems], Vol 3, Moscow,
VINITI, 1967.

Shlezinger, H. 1., KIBBRNBTIKA, 1976, No b.
Hueckel, H. H., JOURN. ACH. 18, 1971, No 1.

Roeenfeld, A., and Kak, A. C., "Digital Picture Processing," New York,
Academic Preaa, 197$.

88
FOR!0FFKJAJ.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 1.
1.10
1.2.

1.3.
1.6.

Chapter 2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.b.
2.5.

Chapter 3.
3.1.
3.2.

3.3.

Chapter a.

Chapter 5.
5.1.
5.2.

Appendix.

Automation of Text Input to Computing Systems . .
Operating Principle and Layout of Character Reader
Comparison of Manual and Automatic Text Coding . .
Text Documents and Their Characteristics . . . . .
Classification of Character Readers . . . . . . .

e e e e u
o

a e e o a

e o o e I

e a e e c
0

Image Recognition Theory Applied to Automatic Text Reading
Fundamentals of Recognition Theory . . . . . . . . . .
Mathematical Models of Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Recognition Techniques Based on Simple Models . . . . . . .
Recognition by Signs and Structural Analysis . . . . .
Preliminary Image Processing . . . . . . . . . . . .

Modeling the Character Reader on the Computer . . . . . . .
Modeling Complexes for Designing Character Readers . . . . .
Physical and Simulation Modeling of the Process of

Obtaining Discretized Inmges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Selection of the Parameters of a Correlation Character
Reader Using a Modeling Complex . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Design of Contemporary Character Readers . .
The Blank-Two Character Reader . . . . . . .
The IBM 1287 Character Reader . . . . . . .
Pleasey 4200A and 42003 Character Readers
The Ruta-701 Character Reader . . . . . .
The Sever-3 Character Reader . . . . . .
The IBM 1975 Character Reader . . . . . .
The Hitachi H-8959 Character Reader . . .
The General-Purpose Scan-Date 2250/3 Modular System

s

.eoeo

ea.-
ace-sees

e-eoeaee

one...

o
e
o
o
o
0

Designing the ChARS Character Reader . . . . . . . . . . .
Characteristics of the ChARS Character Reader- . . . . . .
Primary Stages and Development of the ChARs Character Reader

(1972).. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Operating Principle and Layout of the ChARS Character Reader
(1972) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Document Reading Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Recognition and Buffer Memory Units . . . . . . . . . . . .

Evaluation of the Economic Efficiency of Character Readers .

Bibliography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT:

11.176

Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika", 1980

C80: 1863/67

IKNICMHHCJAI.IEHE(HVLY

causes...

75
86

95

95
101
108
115
123
131
138
141

146
166

152

166
173
185

191

206
FOR OFﬁClAL USE ONLY

MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF SOVIET CHARACTER READERS

Kiev OPTICHESKIYE CHITAYUSHCHIYB AVTOHATY in Russian 1980 (signed to press
22 Nov 79) pp 5-37

[Chapter 1 of book "Optical Character Readers", by Doctor of Technical Sciences
Vladimir Antonovich Kovalevskiy, candidate of Technical Sciences Georgiy
L'vovich Gimel'farb and Candidate of Technical Sciences Anatoliy Fedorovich
Voziyanov, Tzdatel'stvo "Tekhnika", 4,000 copies. 208 pages]

[Excerpts] Many developers of character readers have proposed different kinds of
stylized type faces. In the late 1960's the ISO [International Organization
for Standardization] selected two stylized machine type faces from the many
which existed at that time and recommended them as international standards,
called ISO-A and ISO-B. The ISO-A type (also called OCR-A) was developed by
the American Institute for Standards and is used for many foreign-made char-
acter readers. This type face has been adopted as the national standard in the
United States, Rest Germany. and numerous other countries. ISO-B (also called
OCR-B), which was proposed by the European Association of Computer Producers
(ECHA). is more widespread in Hestern Europe. The designs of the characters of
this type face are more familiar to people than those of ISO-A. character
readers that read ISO-B were initially developed by Western European companies
or European branches of American companies. In rscent years American character
readers have also made provision for reading ISO-B type face.

Our country adopted COST [State Standard] 16330-70 for optical reading type
faces ROS-A (see Figure la below) and ROS-B (Figure lb), which use the type
standards of ISO-A and ISO-B supplemented by the Russian letters they do not
contain. The results of studies of different methods of stylizing the charac-
ters were taken into account. This research was done at the Institute of
Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences and the Special Design
Bureau of Computer Technology in Vil'nyus.

Tables 1 [below] and 2 [not reproduced] give the basic domestically produced
and some foreign models of character readers, classified by types of documents
that they process. This is the classification most often used in the litera-
ture. All character readers are divided into four classes:

1. for documents of a few lines;

90
FtﬂlfﬂﬂﬂCIAl.lEﬂi(ﬂ‘LY

IN)!‘0F1U(1AI.[EHECNULY

Table 1.
Description of Initial
Document Speed
Number and
Model Kind of Characters Documents
(Year of Type Paces per per
Production) Class* Size, mm (Alphabetz** Second Minute
VINITI-Z (1971) 2 200 x 297 lNSh "Optima" *** , Up to 20
(Tabs)
ChARs (1972) 2 210 x 297 lNSh "Optima" 200 Up to 60
(TsBS)
Sever-3 (1969) 2 150 x 180- Several printing 35-100 Up to 60

280 X 355 and typewriter
nonstylized type
faces (TeBbS)

YeS (1977) 2 210 x 297 ISSh ROS-B (TstS)Up to 500 Up to 50
Blank-2 (1969) 1 105 x 105- ISSh ROS—A (TsS) N/A To 400
210 X 297 -
Blank-3 Ye86031 l 105 X 105- ISSh ROS-A (T85) N/A Up to 600
(1976) 210 x 297
Blank-4 (1977) 1 110 X 75 lNSh Printing T-8 Up to 60 Up to 400
(TsS)
Rats-701 (1968) 2 210 x 150- INSh "Optima" Up to 180 Up to 20
210 x 297 (Tss), R2 (133)
R711 1 65 x 105- ZSSh Ros-A, Up to 1000 Up to 580
105 X 210 ROS-B. (T688),
82 (T35)

* According to the classification in subchapter 1.4.

** Numeral - number of type face; ssh - stylized type face; NSh - nonstylized
type face; 32 - manuscript characters. In the alphabet of character
readers for these types of type faces: Ts - numerals; B - capital letters;
b - small letters; 5 - other symbols (punctuation marks and the like).

*** [Russian text obscured, probably "50"]

[Table continued, next page]

92
FOR OFEKJA1.USE(M‘LY
(Table continued]

 

Block for

Feeding and

Moving
Documents

VINITI-Z rod with

(1971)

ChARS
(1972)

Sever-3
(1969)

Yes
(1977)

Blank-2
(1969)

Blank-3
Yes6031
(1976)

Blank-4
(1977)

Ruta-
701
(1968)

R711

vacuum suc-

INJR‘OFIHCIAL UEIICHVLY

tion devices, with CRT

roller con-
veyor

rod with
vacuum suc-

tion devices,

vacuum drum

manual feed,
roller con-
veyor

vacuum feed,
belt con-
veyor

vacuum feed,
roller con-
veyor

vacuum feed,
roller con-
veyor

vacuum feed,
belt con-
veyor

rod with
vacuum suc-
tion de-

vices,
roller con-

veyor

vacuum drum

 

Reliability of Approximate
Description of Primary Blocks Recognition Cost, rubles
Frequency
Frequency of Failures
Recognition of Air. To Recog-
Read Block Block X nire 1
"running correlation 0.02-0.“ 0.1-0.3 N/A
beam" system
photodiode correlation 0.01 0.1 140
line
"running correlation 0.01-l 0.1-l 300
beam" system and analysis
with CRT of struc-
tural fea-
tures of
characters
"running correlation 0.001- 0.005- 150-200
beam" system 0.01 0.05
with CRT
photodiode analysis of 0.001 0.01 30
line structural
features of
characters
photodiode analysis of 0.001 0.01 30-40
line structural
features of
characters
LI-601 analysis of 0.01 0.1 N/A
dissector structural
features of
characters
"running correlation 0.001, 0.02 65-90
beam" system (analysis or 0.14
with CRT of features manu-
for manu- script
script charac-
characters) ters
photodiode analysis of 0.001- 0.01- N/A
line structural 0.01 0.1
features of
characters [Table continued. next page]
93

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050042-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Table continued]
* According to the classification in euhchapter 1.1.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo '"l‘ekhnikn", 1980

11,176
CSO: 1863/47

91:
. own!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050042-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DESIGN, OPERATION OF RUTA-701, SEVER-J CHARACTER READERS

Kiev OPTICBESKIYE CHITAYUSHCHIYB AVTOHATY in Russian 1980 (signed to press
22 Nov 79) pp 95-146

[Chapter 4 of book "Optical Character Readers", by Doctor of Technical Sciences
Vladimir Antonovich Kovalevskiy, candidate of Technical Sciences Georgiy
L'vovich Gimel'farb and Candidate of Technical Sciences Anatoliy Pedorovich
Voziyanov, Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika", 6,000 copies. 208 pages]

[Excerpts] Chapter 4. Designs of Contemporary Character Readers
1. The Blank-2 Character Reader

The domestically produced Blank-2 character reader for reading forms with a few
lines was developed in 1968-1969 as a further development of the Blank-P label
reader. In addition to labels the Blank-2 reads a line of numbers and service
characters in the stylized type face HOS-A on blank forms in four formats:

210 X 297, 105 x 297, 148 x 210, and 105 x 148 millimeters. The charaCter reader
is set manually for the format of the blanks and position of the line of text be-
fore reading begins.

The character reader has a speed of 350-600 documents per minute for contin-
ous reading of a package and 100-125 documents per minute if each document is
fed following a request by an external computer to which the reader is con-
nected.

The block for feeding and moving documents has an input pocket with a capacity
of 1.000 forms and three output pockets that hold 750 forms apiece (one for
documents with unrecognized characters and two for sorting documents according

to signals from the external computer). The input pocket rises as the package

is read so that the top sheet is presented to the feed assembly. A special
electromechanical tracking system with optical electric sensors which monitor

the position of the top of the package and correct feeding of the top sheet

(to see that it does not become crumpled and that no more than one sheet at a
time is taken) controls this rising motion. The top sheet is separated from the
package by a revolving disk arm. Then a small vacuum roller transfers the docu-
ment to a roller conveyor. The conveyor which moves the document is divided into
two parts between which there is a vacuum drum. The drum holds the document while
it is read, making it possible to repeat the reading of a line of text if

95
can omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

necessary. In addition to the vacuum auction the sheet is held in the drum by
spring-activated rollers. When the sheet is being moved on the conveyor it is
straightened out by its leading edge: the residual misalignment of the sheet
in the drum does not exceed 0.3 millimeters for a length of 297 millimeters.

The read block of the character reader has two separate heads: for reading
labels and for reading a line of text. They are located along the generating
line of the drum; the text reading head can be moved manually to adjust it ac-
cording to the position of the line on the sheet. This head contains an il—
luminstor consisting of two mirror lights, a lens, and a line of 32 photo-
diodes with photocurrent amplifiers. The line of photodiodes is arranged
across the line being read and is approximately twice the height of a character
on the line: the image of a character projected on the line covers a height of
13-16 photodiodes. This makes it possible to perform the reading operation
despite possible misalignments of the line being read with respect to the direc-
tion of movement of the document and vertical displacement of characters on the
line. After amplification the signals of the photodiodes are quantized on two
levels (black-white) and interpreted as binary variables (1-0 respectively).

The recognition block employs the structural logical method of recognition ac-
cording to which there is a given boolean decision function from the binary
structural features of the character being recognized for each character of

the alphabet. The presence of a certain vertical or horizontal lines (hachures)
is considered to be a feature. A total of 10 vertical lines and three hori-
zontal lines located in five columns and three lines of the field of vision are
analyzed (see Figure 13). The choice of these features is dictated by the
characteristics of the design of the numbers and special characters of the ROS-A
type face. In the figure the upper vertical lines are designated BBl-BBS,

while the lower vertical lines are BHl-BHS and the horizontal lines are r1- r3.

 
   

   

$2

\\\\\\

    
     
 

\\\\\\

 

 

\\\‘&\\\

  

\\\

        

\\\\\\
\\\\

   
 

y/Illllll
4%99zannof

Figure 13. Arrangement of the Main Lines (Hachures) for
the Numbers and Special Characters of the ROS—A Type Face
Recognized by the BlankoZ Character Reader.

96
I!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂB(MﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To compensate for possible Incomplete printing of the lines, the read zone

is divided on the vertical into 16 discretization elements (cells). Correv
spending to each element are two adjacent photodiodes of the read line whose
signals are logically summed, that is, the element is read as black if at
least one of the photodiodes has at its output the corresponding signal. The
shortest vertical line should consist of at least three black discretization
elements, while the widest horizontal line should not be wider than two ele—
ments.

The read head scans characters from right to left. The process of measuring
the features of the character begins when the first vertical line of the char-
acter is detected and continues for five scanning cycles (each cycle corre-
sponds to scanning one of the columns shown in Figure 13 above). Each cycle
tests whether there is a vertical line and how it is positioned relative to the
first line found: higher, lower, or on the same level. Horizontal lines are

detecteduhanthelength of the "black" signal for the corresponding discretization
elements is greater than for the widest vertical line.

The boolean decision ’unctionsfrom the features discovered take into account
several of the possible distortions of characters during printing and reading.
Specifically. if we put a line over an expression to signify the feature of
absence of the line and use a dot to indicate logical multiplication. the de-
cision functions for the numbers 1 and 2 used in the Blank-2 character reader
are written in the following form:

|_.(B—133-FITs-Bss.sﬂs-Eﬁ-sm)v
V(m.sss.m.sm);

2+(m-BH5.FBTt-m.m-Fm.r1.r2.r3)v
V(F£Ts.sﬂs.m.m.m.sat.377-r1.r2)v
v(§B‘5-BH5.W.m-m-BBI.FH7-r3).

Several additional features are used to distinguish certain similar characters.
In terms of hardware the circuits to identify vertical features are constructed
on three-input logical AND circuits, each of which tests the existence of a
vertical line of minimum length in one of the three possible adjacent discreti-
zation elements. This circuit includes two shift registers which make it
possible to evaluate the position of the vertical line found in each scanning
cycle relative to the first line detected for the character. The output signals
of the AND circuits are accumulated in the firsc register during the cycle, after
which they are transmitted with a shift to the second register. This shift in
the first cycle is done so that the first (initial) trigger of the second
register is set in state "1." The number of steps of this shift is stored, and
in later cycles the shift is done on the same principle (by the beginning of the
register), but not for more than the stored number of steps. The number of shift
steps obtained in each cycle and the state of the first register trigger (”0" or

"1") indicates the position of the vertical line relative to the first line de-
tected in the character.

97
FINICNﬂﬂCIAI.U§E¢NV[N
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Controlled delay circuits which form a unitary output signal only when a

"black" signal of a definite length. is fed to their input are used to find

the horizontal lines. The output signals of the delay- circuits are copied into
the shift register and in the last (fifth) scanning cycle are moved to the be.-
ginning of the register for the same number of steps as signals for the vertical
features in this cycle. The horizontal features are then identified using
three double-input OR circuits which are connected to pairs of adjacent trig-
gers in the first six bit positions \f the register. The 10 vertical and

three horizontal features obtained are transferred to the trigger register of

features. to which a decoder is connected. This decoder carries out the se-
lected decision functions.

Where there is an unambiguous answer at the output of the decoder the recog-
nition block forms the code of the character recognized. If the answer is not
unambiguous (signals are received from two or more outputs of the decoder), it
issues a signal of failure to recognize.

The control block of the Blank-2 character reader establishes the read regime
based on commands from an external Minsk—32 or Minsk-23 computer to which the
reader is connected. Specifically. the computer may issue cox-sands to begin
or stop input. for continuous input of an entire package of forms, for indi-
vidual input of the next document upon request. for document sorting, and so
on. The control block of the character reader independently monitors emergency
situations and stops the feeding process when two or more sheets are taken from
the package simultaneously, when it is not possible to grip the next sheet.
when the receiving pockets are overflowing, when there are no more sheets in
the feed pocket, and so on. when a signal of failure to recognize is given the
docmnent is thrown into a separate receiving pocket. A document also goes into
this pocket if a ma.1 function signal is received from the external computer.

The control block is also capable of sorting documents into two pockets (by con-
tent) in an autonomous work regime.

Reliability of recognition. The factory specification for the error rate of

the Blank-2 character reader is 0.001 percent. with a rate of 0.01 percent for
failure to recognize. Experiments have shown that these factory ratings are
attained only when the quality of printing meets the ISO standard (see Chapter 1).
This quality can be achieved when the text is printed using

electric typewriters that have inked ribbons that are used just one time. As er
periments have shown, the only domestically produced inked ribbon that is suit-
able for this purpose is the “KL-l ribbon on an acetobutyrate base. This ribbon
was originally developed to print docments for magnetic character readers.

With a carbon inked ribbon for one-time use the frequency of e'. tors and unrecog-
nized characrers increases to 0.6-0.7 percent. A reusable silk ribbon raises
the frequency of errors and failures to recognize to 3—4 percent in the initial
stage of wear (first eight times through the typewriter). As the ribbon becomes
heavily worn (45—55 times) this figure reaches 40 percent.

Documents to be fed to the Blank-3’ character reader are printed on special paper
which was described in Chapter 1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comparative analysis of the working characteristics of the Blank—2 character
reader shows that in terms of speed and cost it competes successfully with
some foreignvmade character readers of the same class such as the Data
Recognition 700 (United States) and the ICL 8201/1 and ICL 8401/1 (England),
but is inferior to such models as the Univsc 2703 and Honeywell 253 (United
States). All these character readers were produced at approximately the same
time (1969-1970). The Univac 2703, unlike the other models mentioned, reads

numbers and special characters in three stylized type faces OCR-A, OCR-B, and
Univac “-14.

If we consider current trends in automatic reading of documents with few lines,
the Blank-2 has a number of shortcomings: obsolete basic elements; small
alphabet of characters (only numbersand four special characters of the only type
face ROS-A), the impossibility of reading manuscript characters, small caps-
bility for document sorting, and so on.

The experimental model of the Blank-2 character reader was accepted by the inter-
departmental commission. At the present time, a new character reader for small
forms. the Blank-3. has been built for Yes computers (the Yes-6031) on the basis
of this development. The Blank-3 differs from the Blank-2 only in design

(new basic elements of electronic circuits, modernized mechanisms for feeding
and moving documents). -

4. The nuts-701 Character Reader

The domestically produced Ruta-70l character reader, which reads pages of text
with dimensions from 148 x 210 to 297 x 210 millimeters was developed at the
Special Design Bureau of Computer Technology in Vilnius in 1967-1968, and pro-
duced in a series of 20 units. The Rota-701 was successfully used for a
number of years in several organizations, among them the Scientific Research
Institute of the USSR Central Statistical Administration, the Computing Center
of Estonian Radio, and the All-Union Geological Institute. The character
reader makes it possible to read numbers, two letters (8. X). and the symbol
"l" in the typewritten nonstylized typeface "Optima" or the same alphabet of
manuscript characters. Guide rectangles with two dots inside are printed typo-
graphically on the page for manuscript characters. The factory rated speed of
the character readers is up to 200 characters a second or between 12 documents
per minute (for a page length of 297 millimeters) and 20 documents per minute
(for a length of 148 millimeters). The maximum length of a readable line on a
document is 160 millimeters with a page width of 210 millimeters.

The block for feeding and moving documents is designed in the form of a roller
conveyor that works in a start-stop or continuous regime. The capacity of the
block's input pocket is 1,000 sheets. The next sheet is fed to the conveyor

by a moving arm with vacuum suction that operates on the principle of the auto-
matic feed in printing machines. A special photoelectric sensor that measures
the transparency of the sheet being fed monitors whether the auctions have mis-
takenly taken two or more sheets at once. When the next sheet enters the field
of vision of the read block, the document feed block switches to a start-stop
regime. The sheet does not move while the line is read. Then it is moved until
the next line appears in the field of vision. An electromagnetic coupling

99
FOB OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE‘DNLY

included between the drive and the roller of the conveyor is used for start-
stop work.

The read block in the Butae701 character reader is a "running beam" system on a
protection CRT which.can work in two modes: search and line scanning. To simv
plify and speed up the search for the line to he read a tag is used. a black
rectangle printed in the margin of the page opposite the start of each line.
The maximum length of a readable line is 140 millimeters, which is determined
by the capabilities of the character reader's read block.

During scanning the rectangular area of the field of vision corresponding to one
character is expanded into 24 x 20 discretization elements. The read signals.
which are received in the line search regine. are used to control the block for
feeding and moving documents. A compensation PEU [amplifier for photoelectric
cell] directed at the screen of the tube is used to reduce the unevenness of

the brightness of the scanning spot on the CRT screen. The feedback signal

from this P30 is fed to the modulator of the CRT. Read signals from the working
FEU directed to the surface of the sheet being scanned are quantized on two
levels ("black"-"white") and transmitted to the recognition block. Special
feedback to stabilize the level of "white" in the videoaignal and adjust the
threshold of quantization are introduced to reduce the effect of fluctuation in
the reflective capability of the paper and the contrast of printed characters.

The recognition block of the nuts-701 consists of two assemblies. The first
realizes an elementary variation of the correlation method of recognizing type-
written characters. The second assembly performs structural logical recogni—
tion of typewritten and manuscript characters. The two assemblies can work to-
gether or isolated from one another. The correlation recognition assembly
completes the resemblance between the character being identified and standards
for each character of the alphabet. The criterion of similarity used in the
character reader is an approximation to the simple linear criterion

24 a
EU!) - EEOUIOSPMI - ilk) + (1—0") 1°8P(0u - 0|“).

which is easy to derive, assuming that the components of the signal v1 are sta-
tistically independent. quantized on two levels (v13 - l is the "black signal
v13 - 0 is the "white" signal), and appear for character k of the alphabet

with probabilities of p(v15 - llk) and p(v1J - Ofk) - l-p(v13 - llk). The com-
ponents of the signal are measured for elements (i, j) of the 24 X 20 discreti-
zation network into which the field of vision is broken when scanning a char-
actor.

The approximation used in the Ruta-70l character reader is based on the fact
that the probabilities p(v13 - ltk) and p(v1 - alk) quantize on three levels
which correspond to the interval [0; 0.25], 10.25; 0.75], [0.75; l] of proba-
bility values and set each element (i, j) in correspondence to a component of
the three-fold standard of the character:

5, I ‘For Pal" I: ”k)El03 0.25];
e} - 2 ‘0'” NW1“U’*)EIO.25: 0.751:
3 For M911" ”000-752 H.

100
FOHlOFFﬂJAl.USE(lVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

When probabilities are quantized in this manner the similarity between the

character being identified and the standard of the characters is evaluated by
the quantity - -

20 ”
3(k) =- ‘2' g. ”(0"! 9,7,):

where the elenentary similarity ‘ICVIJ- egg between signal v1 and the canon-
ent of the standard with the coded value e15 ) is given in Table 7 below.

 

Table 7.

,m

U
I.”- rﬁh ' | l 2 l a
0 I l mus 0

The character being recognized is assigned to class if if for this character the
similarity is maximal g(k°) - ms“: 30:), and two conditions are net:

3(k')>9::
g(k°>—ww)>o..

where the set thresholds e] and 92 can be adjusted during the work of the char-
acter reader.

If the conditions are not met, a failure to recognize signal is formed and the
unrecognized character is scanned again several times. If after these repeti-
tions the character remains unrecognized. line reading is stopped and an image
of the character is projected on the screen of the CRT monitor on the console

of the control block of the character reader so that the correct answer can be
fed from the console keyboard manually. The method of centering the character
being identified. that is, the mutual arrangement of the corresponding components
of the signal and the standard, is not presented in detail in descriptions of the
nuts-701 character reader. To judge by the published structural diagram. auto-
matic centering is done before scanning signals that compute similarity with
standards are transmitted. The criterion for this kind of centering is how the
black points of the character are arranged relative to the boundaries of the

raster. If the centering conditions are not met, the character is scanned again
(the number of possible repetitions is limited).

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In hardware terms, the correlation recognition assembly is constructed of
several binary counters. The sums of elementary similarities for points in
the middle interval of probabilities [0.25; 0.75]. that is, for points where
eff) - 2, do not depend on the signals v1: and therefore are written into
their counters in advance for each standard. Thus, computation of the simi-

l ty g(k) amounts to conventional "1" addition in the situations v15 - 0 and
21% - l or Vij - l and sf?) - 3.

The standards of the characters of the alphabet are shaped on the computer

which has a nuts-701 read block. The discretized images of the characters of
one class are automatically centered within the boundaries of the 24 x 20 raster,
after which the frequencies of "l" for each cell of the raster are determined.
These frequencies serve as estimzies of probabilities P(Vij - llk), and then the
the components of the standard e ) are computed.

To switch to reading 16 characters of a new type face it is necessary to re-
place the standards of the characters in the memory of the recognition as-
sembly. The design of the assembly makes it possible to copy the standards
written on punched cards in a few hours. Judging by publications, the problem
of optimizing the selection of standards for characters has not been solved.

In the second recognition assembly of the nuts-701, the structural logical as-
sembly, the features which indicate the continuity or discontinuity of the
lines at certain points of the character being recognized are determined.

This recognition technique has been patented by character reader developers in
England, the United States, France, and elsewhere.

The raster is divided into vertical zones for identification of features. The
boundaries of the zones coincide with the columns in which the number of inter-
sections of the vertical column of the raster with the lines of the sign
changes. An intersection with a line is noted when the number of sequen-
tially arranged adjacent black points in a column exceedsa set threshold, and
two adjacent lines (that is, adjacent groups of such black points) are separ-
ated from one another by at least a given number of white points. To avoid
random distortions of the signal, the places of transition from one number of
intersections to the next are recorded only when the new number of inter—
sections is consistently repeated a given number of times in adjacent columns
of the raster.

The columns of the raster included in the identified zone are joined into one
column by logical summing of the scanning signals (yij - O or 1) located in
the some positions of these columns on the vertical. It is considered that
a line in this zone is continuous if in the combined column between the indi-
cated points of intersection there is no sequence of zero (white) positions

longer than the given threshold. Otherwise the line is considered discon-
tinuous.

Two types of features are introduced: for zones in which the number of inter-
sections is two, and for zones in which the number of intersections is three.
For features of the first type continuity or discontinuity of the line is
checked between the points of intersection. For features of the second type

102
FIHI(HUHCIAI.UBE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a separate check is made of the nature of the line between the first and
second intersection starting from the top down in the raster column, and
between the second and third.

Features of the first type are conventionally designated “An, Ila, Ilcn, nun
(n - l, 2. 3) and can have three values: continuity (n - l), discontinuity
(n - 2), and absence of a zone of the feature in the character (n - 3).

The zone that joins the raster columns for the feature "An extends free the

initial column of the raster to the first column with two intersections (in-
clusively). The feature 1'3“ is forned in two cases:

1. if after the first group of calm-1s detected with two
intersections, no more such columns are fond until the
end of the raster;

2. if after the first group of calms with two intersections
there are columns with one intersection, and then again a

group with two intersections (that is, with a sequence of
transfers 2-1-2).

In the first case the zone for feature ‘II'Bn is formed by the columns beginning
with the last one that has two intersections and going to the end of the ras-
ter. In the second case the zone includes all the column with one inter-
section and both enclosing calms with two intersections.

The feature "Cu is formed if the second case for nu repeats again. that is.
for all repeated transfers.... 2-1-2,

Finally. the feature non is formed in the last repetition of this situation;
in this case the zone of the feature, as in the first case for IT'Bn, begins
from the last column with two intersections and extends to the end of the
raster.

Features of the second type IBnJI‘Pn, nan, Ill l‘(n - l, 2) assume only two values:
continuity (n - l) and discontinuity (n - 2). The zone for features ‘3“. WP“
begins from the first column of the raster and ends at the first column with
three intersections. The zone for features “G“, Van extends from the last
column with three intersections to the end of the raster. The features TIE“ and
110,, are characterized by a line located between the first and second inter-
sections in the colum fran the tap; the features "31 and II!“ are identified

by a line between the second and third intersections.

Recognition by the resulting features takes place in two stages. In the first
stage the characters are divided into two groups by a maximum number of inter—
sections of the raster colums with lines of the characters -— two or three.
In the second stage the measured features of the character are substituted into
logical decision functions that describe the characters of the alphabet of the
particular group. The numeral 0 is an example of a character of the first
81‘0"?

(nu . ”Bl .ncs-HMV(ﬂAl-”B2-”C3'"W’ V

V ("Al - ”B2 - ﬂCl ~ ”01):

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the numeral 2 is an example of the character of the second group

([152 . ”Fl - ”GI - IN”) V (”E2 . HF] . ”G2 . (7”?) V
V (”.42 - ”£2 ~ ”Fl - I761- ”112) V (HA2 ~ ”E2 x
x ”F! - ”G2 - UH?)

Figure 17 below shows examples of the characters 0 and 2 obtained from

scanning real printed characters. For the numeral 0 the Boundaries of the

zones are the columns 7 and 16: in zone 1-7 feature "A1 forms, while in zone
16-20 feature n31 forms. For the numeral 2 the Boundaries of the zones are

the columns 3, 7, and 15: featurelﬂAZ forms in the zone 1-3,featuresﬂ82 and
IYlform in the zone 1-7, andfeatures001 and "32 form in the zone 15-20. In
these examples the new number of intersections was recorded if it repeated at
least two times, and the feature of discontinuity was formed when more than two
zeroes were repeated in order in the combined column in the sequence of ones be-
tween the intersection points.

The control block of the huts-701 controls the interaction of all the other
blocks of the character reader. Information that has been read is either
transmitted directly to the Ruta-llO computer to which the reader is connected,
or to punched cards or punched tape (in an autonomous work regime).

Reliability of recognition. The factory rated frequency of error for manuscript
and typewritten characters is 0.01 percent, while the frequency of failure to
recognize is 0.1 percent. Interdepartmental testing of the character reader in-
volved multiple readings of 350 typewritten pages done on 20 standard Optima
typewriters with simple cotton inked ribbons (a total of 202.420 characters) and
300 manuscript pages filled in by 14 trained persons at the Scientific Research
Institutes of the USSR Central Statistical Administration (a total of 100,800
characters) and produced the following results:

Frequency of Errors:
For Typewritten Characters . . . . . .
For Manuscript Characters . . . . . .

. 0.0032
. 0.0012

o
o
o
o
o
e
e
o

o
a
e
o
a
a
a
0

Frequency of Failure To Recognize: _
For Typewritten Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.0152
For Manuscript Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.00b2

Frequency of Skips (During a Search in a Document):
Character. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.00022
Line. 0 O Q I O O I O O O O Q Q 3 D Q 5 0 O I O O A Q C 0 O 0018:

It should he noted that careful preparation of personnel and training them to
fill out manuscript documents correctly played a decisive role here. When manu-
script documents filled out by 13 persons at the All-Union Geological Insti-
tute who did not have adequate preliminary training were read the sum frequency
of error and unrecognized characters rose immediately to 2-3 percent.

Comparative analysis of the working characteristics of the Ruta-701 character
reader shows that in 1968, the first year of its production, it was able to

10%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics axhasalphabct of characters, number of type spaces, and speed the
Ruta-70l is inferior to all other well-known models. Specifically, the laser

This leads to a low reliability of recognition of characters that have similar
outlines (for exasple the Russian "sh" and "shch"). The second drawback of this
recognition technique is that the centering of the characters is almost unre-
lated to subsequent recognition. This imposes too—rigid requirements on the

The Ruta—701 remains in the history of domestic computer technology as the first

series-produced automatic machine for reading pages of typewritten and manu-
script character text.

5. The Sever-3 Character Reader

The domestically produced Sever-J character reader permits reading printed and

typewritten pages written in various Russian or Latin typefaces. The proto-
type of this character reader was produced in 1971.

The set of recognizable type faces is determined by the customer. Each type face
can have up to 150 characters in its alphabet: printed and cursive small and
capital letters, Arabic and Roman numerals, marks of punctuation, and special

symbols. The vertical dimensions of the printed characters can vary from 1.35
to 2.5 millimeters (type sizes 8, 9, and 10), while typewritten characters range

The text being read may be on one or both sides of a page and may consist of one,
two. or three columns with headings, figures, and formulas.

not to be read (figures. formulas, and the like) and places for reading to stop
automatically so that essential additional information can be fed from the

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

console of the character reader or from punched tape. Journals and hooks are
torn apart into separate pages before automatic reading. One column on a sheet
being read should not be wider than 130 millimeters. During reading the lines
may be misaligned relative to the left edge of the page, but no more than the
height of a small letter for a line length of 180 millimeters. It is also per-

missible for characters to "drop" Out of the line, but not more than one-third
of the height of a small letter.

Each successive page to be read is fed to the character reader manually. Pages
with text on both sides are also turned manually. A page that has been fed
goes to a roller conveyor with clamp and feed rollers and a guide rule. The
rollers are set at a slight angle to the direction of movement of the sheet so
that the sheet is pressed against the rule. During the reading process the
rollers are raised by means of an electromagnet. This prevents the next page
from being fed until this page has been read.

For line reading the sheet is moved in the field of vision of the read block in
steps of 5.] millimeters. The page automatically returns to the initial posi-
tion for reading a new column or turning the page. When being returned and
brought up to the read zone the sheet is moved at a speed of 0.3 meters per
second. In the field of vision of the read block the sheet is held by means of
a vacuum tray with two pairs of clamp rollers at the beginning and end of the
tray. The lower rollers are the guide rollers and are driven by a step motor.

The passing of the beginning and end of the sheet in the field of vision of the
read block is monitored by photoelectric cells which consist of an illuminator
and a photodiods. The dimensions of the field of vision of the read block are
50 millimeters in length and 160 millimeters in width.

After the sheet has been read it is ejected into the receiving pocket by two
rollers joined by an electromagnet. The work of all the mechanisms and as—
semblies of the block for feeding and moving documents in the Sever-3 character
reader is coordinated in time with the length of reading pages.

The read block of the character reader is a "running beam" system on a CRT with

igh resolution. A rectangular point raster with dimensions of 28 x 90 milli—
meters (up to 800 x 2.600 raster points) is formed on the screen of the tube.
The diameter of the scanning spot on the screen is 70-100 microns. The step of
the raster may range from 35 to 270 microns. The raster is projected on the
surface of the sheet being read with s 1.8 times magnification. To reduce the
unevenness of illumination of the screen of the tube,part of the scanning beam
of light is diverted by a semitransluscent mirror to a compensation PEU whose
signal goes to the modulator of the tube. The light reflected from the surface
of the sheet is received by six working PEU's connected in parallel to the total
load and installed so that they reduce the unevenness of the output scanning sig-
nal caused by the position of the scanning spot on the sheet. Dynamic focusing
of the CRT beam on the field of the raster is used to compensate for changes in
the dimensions of the scanning spot. Geometrical distortions of the raster are
reduced to one percent by means of special correcting circuits whose signals are
"mixed" into the signals of the generators of the CRT seen.

106
itﬂBCHﬂﬂClA1.USEIMNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The video signals received from the working PEU'a are quantized on two levels
(black-white). If the value of the video signal does not exceed 0.15 of the
standard maximum level "black" the signal for the raster point is considered

to be white. 1f the value of the video signal is greater than 0.70 of the

same standard level the signal is considered black. For intermediate values of
the video signal (between 0.15 and 0.70 of the standard level) an additional
circular scan is engaged with the center at the raster point being quantized.
The video signals for the resulting circular environment are averaged and the
average signal is cansidered the threshold of quantization for this point. The
lens of the read block can be automatically moved across the page and occupy

one of three possible positions (according to the number of columns in the text)
for scanning the entire area of the page.

The recognition block of the Sever-3 character reader uses a two-stage recogni-
tion algorithm. In the first stage the structural features are identified and
measurements are made according to which the character is classified in one

of several groups of characters of the alphabet (up to a total of 15 such groups).
In the second stage the character is finally recognized by computing the minimum
Hemming distance between the quantized signals for the character and the binary
standards for characters of the alphabet from the particular group. The algo-
rithm that is used takes account of the variable width of printed characters
across the line and possible contact between characters in the line because of
printing or reading error. For each successive character in the line the sig-
nals are read in a segment whose beginning is determined by the result of recog-
nition of the preceding character (that is, by the width of the preceding
recognized character) or by a clear space appearing in the field of vision after-
recognition of the preceding character. The horizontal dimension of the segment
read (width of a recognized character) is selected to correspond to the greatest
width of a standard character or is limited to the following clear space if the
distance to it from the beginning of the segment does not exceed the width of

the widest standard.

In the first stage of recognition the standards are centered relative to the
character being identified. Two types of structural features are used for this:
primary and auxiliary. The primary feature describes what is called the basic
line of the character. The basic line is the first (reading from left to right)
vertical rectangular segment or convex (to the left) are, with the length of the
line equal to the height of the character. The auxiliary feature characterizes
the presence of an outside element, that is, the first line from the left that

is below the line level (as in the letter "p") or above it (as in the letter "d").

The primary feature 'Wl assumes three values:
0 if the primary line is absent;
“1= 1 if a rectangular segment is found;

2 if a convex (to the left) arc is found.

107
IN)R 0F11C1A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The auxiliary feature represents the set of two measurements "2 and "3, each
of which assumes three values:

0 if there is no outside element;
“2 = 1 if an above-the-line element is found;
2 if a belov-the-line eleunt is found;
0 if there is no outside element;
”-3 "' 1 if the outside element is located to the right;
L2 if the outside element is located to the left.

At the same time as the features for the recognized character are being formu-
lated measurements are made of its width L (the width of the sepent read),
the horizontal coordinate x] of the middle of the prisary line relative to the
beginning of the character, and the horizontal coordinate except tvo of the
beginning of the outside element relative to that same beginning of the charac-

ter (the width of the segment and coordinates are measured by number of columns
of the scanning raster).

Each of the binary standards for characters of the alphabet e(_k) is character-
ized by the same features and measurements: '17.... .7“, :17”. x._.. x". L,.

The first stage of recognition begins by checking the coincidence of primary fea-
tures and the correspondence between dimensions of the character and the standard:

’1‘: "Li'-
L>L..

If this condition is not met for the given group of standards, the next group is
selected. If the condition is met, the character is centered relative to each
of the standards in the group. The method of centering depends on the values of
the features found. -

If there 13 no Frill“? 11“ (V1 '“1 k -0), in the second stage of recogni-
tion the beginning of the standard ed‘) in combined uith. the beginning of the
character, after which the standard is "stretched out" over the segment of the
line being identified. Hith "stretching" the given number of relative positions
of the character and standard on the vertical and horizontal are checked and for
each such position the Beaming distance between the character and the standard is
computed. Centering is done to minimize this distance.

If a primary line is found ("1 “Tl, k ,6 0), for centering the midpoints of the
primary lines, the character and standard are matched (the knovn horizontal
coordinates x1 and :1, here used for this purpose). With this kind of centering
the standard e00 covers a segment Lk wide of the character. This sag-ant is
"aligned" on the horizontal to the prinary line of the character which has been
found (the beginning of this segment is shifted on the horizontal by 6.- :1 -
x1, krelative to the beginning of the character). ?or the isolatedisegt'lent of
length Lt its own values are determined for the auxiliary featureauz, 113. They

108
POI OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

depend on earlier measurements N}, H} for the outside element of the character
being recognized:

a. 1T} . ﬂ} - 0 if'ﬂé - 0 or U} I 0, but the existing
outside element of the character does not fall with-
in the isolated segnent

x: I“ 5. "' LL:

b. ”'2 -W2 and W3 - 1 if 7'2 f 0 and the existing out-
side element of the character falls in the right half
of the isolated segment

a. .5- I.‘ > .\'_. a 5. + l-u'2-

c. H} - W2 and ﬂ; - 2 if H; i 0 and the outside elenent
falls in the left half of the segment

g<ﬂ+Lﬂf

of random distortions, the comparison in the second stage is done with both
standards in which the primary line is straight and standards in which this
line is curving. In hardware terms. the Hemming distance between the char-
acter and the standard is computed sequentially as the standard is read from

speed of 430,000 ops per second. The internal memory on magnetic cores con-
tains 4,096 45-bit words. In addition, there is a small high-speed memory

and the standard. This assembly consists of four 65-bit trigger registers and
an adder, connected by special logical control circuits, and makes it possible
to compute the Hamming distance inmediately for 12 relative positions of the
standard and the character. The character standards for different type faces

type face, that is. the possibility of constructing standards and their struc-

tural features and storing this information on magnetic tape during the process
of using the character reader.

Another recognition technique in which the characters are recognized by parts
may be used to reduce computations and increase the speed of the character
reader and recognition block. The part of the character is composed of several
adjacent scanning columns. The full standards of the characters are constructed
from parts ordered in the form of a tree, as shown in abstract form in Figure 18

below. For each unit of the tree the internal memory of the recognition block

109
FOR¢0FFHJAL.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[3 III'I Ili IE!

Baanmmmmnnmmmmm
Em
EDIE]!

Biff!!! (Ull’llll-

Figure 18. Tree to Shape the Full Standards of Characters of
the Alphabet by Their Parts in the Sever-3 Character Reader.

stores a standard for the corresponding pert of the character of the alphabet,
the characteristics of this standard (structural features and width), and re-
lations to the preceding and following units of the tree. The standards for
parts of characters are divided into initial, intermediate. and final standards.
The initial standards recognize the left part of the character, and the final
standards complete recognition of the character. The code of the corresponding
character of the alphabet is included in the characteristics of the final
standards.

The procedure for recognition by parts largely resemblesthe procedure described
earlier for two-stage recognition of characters as a whole. with the exception
of the fact that in each step of recognition we are dealing not with the en-
tire character but with a particular part of it.

To find the structural features of the next part of a character a definite number
of columns of the scanning raster are analyzed. This number is selected based on
the results of the preceding step of recognition or by a clear space in the field
of vision.

After the left edge of the next character in the line is found, the group of
initial standards whose features coincide with the features of the character is
selected. A minimum of 24 Kenning distances obtained when this standard is
"stretched" over the character are computed for each standard. The decision is
made according to the minimum resulting distance. Then the next group of stand-
ards necessary to recognize the next intermediate part of the character is se-
lected on the tree and the process continues until an answer is obtained for the
final standard. At this point recognition is complete.

110
ltﬂl1)FllC1Al.lEI!(ﬂilY
FOR.0FTHCJAL USEICNNLY

If the difference between the minimum Hemming distance and the one of the 26
computed distances that is closest to it is less than an assigned threshold,
both answers are considered permissible and both groups of standards indicated
by transfers on the tree are selected for recognition of the next part of the
character. If the least distance exceeds the given threshold or the structural
features of the nearest standard and the recognizedpertsof the character do
not coincide. the answer obtained is rejected and the standard is removed from
consideration. If the answers for all standards in the group selected are re-
jected. the recognition block returns to the preceding step of recognition on
the tree. This step is repeated for all standards of the preceding group with
the exception of those for which recognition answers were received the first
time.

If a double answer is received for the final standard or if when returning on
the tree the process again arrives at the stage of preliminary recognition but
all permissible variations of features of the initial part of the characters
have been exhausted, the line segment being recognized is scanned again.

After a given number of repeated scans a signal of failure to recognize is
formed. the unrecognized character is projected on the CRT screen located on
the control console of the character reader. and the character can be put in
manually using the keyboard of the console.

Control of the Sever-3 character reader is decentralized. Autonomous control
units are installed:

1. in the read block - to scan any area of the field of
vision with horizontal or vertical point tasters;

2. in the recognition block - to organize the computation

of the Hemming distance between standards and the char-
acter being recognized;

3. in data input/output units when working with magnetic
tape or punched tape, and so on.

General control of the character reader which coordinates the work of all its
blocks and assemblies is accomplished by the program control unit of the com—
puter included in the composition of the character reader. The combination of
hardware and software control makes it possible to realize complex algorithms
for recognition and editing of information read and makes it easier to adapt
the character reader quickly to solving new problems.

The information that has been read is transmitted to the external computer to
which the character reader is connected or outputted to punched tape.

Reliability of recognition. The factory rating for frequency of errors for the
Sever-3 character reader is one percent for an alphanumeric text and 0.01 per-
cent for numeric typewritten text. These indicators should be achieved with
fluctuations in the thickness of character lines from 0.1 to 0.6 millimeters

in printed text and from 0.2 to 0.56 millimeters in typewritten text with a line
contrast of at least 30 percent.

111
FORtoFFﬂJAl.USE(HVLY
FINICHHHCJAI.USE¢DNLY

An experimental model of the character reader was tested on typewritten pages
and printed sheets in different formats with different numbers of text columns
(1—3) written on one and both sides of the paper.

The average reading speed (converted per sheet) was 69 characters per second for
printed text. 38 characters per second for alphanumeric typewritten text. and
56 characters per second for numeric typewritten text. The average time re-
quired to change the set of standards when switching to reading a new type face
did not average more than 20 seconds. During the reading of 40 printed book
and journal pages (106,000 characters) the frequency of error was 0.6.0.7 per-
cent with a frequency of failure to recognize of 0.1—0.2 percent. For alpha-
numeric typewritten text (13 pages, 21,000 characters) the frequency of error
was 0.9 percent (with a frequency of failure to recognize of 0.04 percent). For
typewritten numbers (66 pages. 119,000 characters). the frequency of error was
0.02 percent, and the frequency of failure to recognize was 0.002 percent.

Comparative sna1ysis of the working characteristics of the Sever-3 character
reader is made difficult by the fact that the well-known contemporary models are
rarely designed for reading full sets of printing type faces.

Nonetheless, it should be noted that the speed of the Sever—3 machine is about
an order lower than the speed of foreign-made character readers for reading
pages of text and general-purpose character readers of equivalent cost. The
prototype of the Sever-3 character reader has been used successfully for several
years to printed texts to an information service system.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika", 1980

11.176
CSO: 1863/57

112
FOR‘OFFICLAI.US£‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DESIGN, OPERATION OF CHARS CHARACTER READER

Kiev OPTICHESKIYE CBITAYUSHCHIYE ANTOHATY in Russian 1980 (signed to press
22 Nov 79) pp 146-190

[Chapter 5 of book "Optical Character Readers", by Doctor of Technical sciences
Vladimir Antonovich Kovalevskiy. candidate of Technical Sciences Georgiy L’vovich
Gimel'farb and Candidate of Technical Sciences Anatoliy Pedorovich Voziyanov,
lzdatel'stvo "Tekhnika", 6,000 copies, 208 pages]

[Excerpt] Chapter 5. The Design of the ChARS Character Reader
1. Features of the ChARS character reader

The Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences has de-
veloped several modifications of character readers carrying the name ChARS
(character reader with shift register) and designed to read multiline typewritten
documents. In 1965 a model of a character reader for 10 numerals using the corre-
lation method of recognition [16] with grid dimensions of 8 x 11 was built. The
model worked at a low speed of 25 characters per second. The reading unit used

a "running beam" type of scan on a cathode ray tube. The brightness of the ele-
ments of the image was quantized on four levels. The probability of error was
not more than 0.01 percent. Based on this model a prototype character reader for
the full alphabet of the Optima typewriter was built in 1969 [1. 2]. The grid in
this reader was slightly enlarged (10 x 18). But unlike the earlier modification,
3 column of photodiodes was used to scan the image. The masks for this machine
were constructed with due regard for the spatial discretiaation of the image

[18]. The machine has a read mechanism that allows automatic scanning of an en-
tire package of documents.

Tests of the prototype showed that with a 10 x 18 grid a probability of error
lower than 0.1 percent could not be achieved, even reducing the alphabet to 08
characters instead of 53 (the Russian letters 3, V. I, H. and N were eliminated).
The average speed of the reader was 240 characters per second with a maximum
speed of 500 characters per second.

Because the results obtained with this prototype were unsatisfactory; the 1969
ChARS was modernized. The new 1972 modification appeared, and is the one
described in detail below.

113
F0l10i11ClAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
FINICNHWCIAL.US£I0NLN

The most important characteristic of a character reader is the requirement that
it imposes on the document being read. The 1972 ChARS was designed to read
typewritten pages printed on white writing paper in a format of 210 x 297 milli-
meters by an Optima typewriter. A black cotton inked ribbon of medium thickness
for typewriters and calculators should be used for printing.

The alphabet of the machine contains 53 characters, including 10 numerals (0-9).
the 29 capital letters of the Russian alphabet, five signs of arithmetic opera-
tions (+-XI-), three marks of punctuation (., 2). five service characters
[()Z§»], and a "space" character.

Up to 30 lines can be printed on a page, with up to 62 characters on each line.
in other words a total of up to 1,860 characters per document. The lines are
printed across the short side of the sheet. At the beginning of each line sub-
ject to reading a special character is put at a certain point in the margin of
the page. This is a marker in the form of a horizontal line formed by four'
consecutively written "-" signs (-—). The marker should begin not more than 13
millimeters from the left edge of the sheet and end at a distance of 20—25 milli—
meters from it. The machine does not read lines that are not marked by the
marker. This makes it possible to put additional information on the document
such as headings, notes, explanations. and the like. which can be printed ar—
bitrarily or entered by hand. The minimum permissible distance between lines
depends on the permissible misalignment of lines relative to the edge of the
sheet and should be at least 8.5 millimeters (two intervals) if a line mis-
alignment of up to 2 millimeters is permitted on the length of a line. Spaces
between words (1etters)in the line with a maximum misalignment do not exceed 50
millimeters). The distance from the top edge of the sheet to the top marker
should be at least 25 millimeters, and from the bottom edge of the sheet to the
lowest marker at least 18 millimeters. The thickness of the lines of the charac«
ters is in the range 0.2-0.5 millimeters. The coefficient of reflection of a
character line should correspond to the condition [(D¢ - D.)/D,] ; 0-5

where pa is the reflection factor of the background paper.

There should not be tears. contrasting fibers and inpregnations, or very dirty
places on the sheets of paper.

At the start of development the goal was set of achieving the following indi-
cators of reliability of recognition given compliance with the above requirements
for printing quality:

Type of Array Frequency, 2
Failure To
Errors Recognize
Numerical . . . . . . . . . . . 0.005 0.01
Alphabetic . . . . . . . . . . 0.05 0.1
Mixed (all 53 characters) . . . 0.04 0.07
11h

FIH!("HHC1AI.IEHE(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The average reading speed counting time losses searching for lines and replacing
documents is 170 characters per second. The GEARS as well as the stand equip-
mant and measuring instruments are arranged in an area of 25 square-meters.

The ChARS receives power from a three-phase 220/380 volt current at 50 hertz.
Its power usage is not more than 4.5 kilowatt-amperee.

The character reader set includes the following units:

a. document reader. which consists of a block to feed and move
documents with a control assembly and read head;

b. recognition unit, which.includes the recognition block
with its control assembly;

c. .buffer memory unit, which coordinates the work of the
character reader with the colputer and punch and insures
manual encoding of unrecognized characters.

As can be seen from these technical specifications. the ChARs differs from
other domestically produced character readers such as the nuts-701 and Blank—2
considered in Chapter 4 in the following ways.

Ordinary writing paper and ordinary multiple-use inked ribbon are used to prepare -
documents. The documents are typed on typewriters with standard nonstylized type-
face and a fairly large alphabet (53 characters). No special requirements are
made for printing quality: all that is necessary is to avoid the use of an

inked ribbon that is too thick or too worn out.

Requirements for arrangement of the information on the document come down to
maintaining a minimum distance between lines and the need to identify lines with
markers.

In the first modifications of the ChARS a correlation recognition algorithm was
used which had been derived from the method of permissible conversion (see sub-
chapter 2.3) on the basis of a mathematical model of a set of images taking into
account optical conversions. image carryover in the field of vision, and noise.
The 1965 model of the ChARS was built following this method and demonstrated high
recognition reliability for an alphabet consisting only of numbers. Clearly
printed images of the numbers were chosen as initial standards for this model.

The same method was the basis for the next, 1969 modification of the ChARs. The
dimensions of the grid of this modification of the machine (10 x 18) were chosen
on the basis of positive results obtained from the earlier model.

Because the image in this machine is represented on a comparatively crude grid,
a methodology was developed to construct masks and took account of distortions
occurring during discretization. This methodology is described in [8]. which
demonstrates that the set of images occurring during discretization of a certain
fixed image shifted relative to the raster within the limits of a step of
diacretization is a convex polyhedron whose apexes are the so-called nodal
images. For example, four nodal images distinguished by a shift of exactly one

115
roe omcm. we ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

elementofthe grid are sufficient to describe each of the classes such as the
Russian letters N, P, and Te, whereas the description of the set of images for
letters such as the Russian letters I, V, and the soft sign is s polyhedron with
nine apexes. Optical conversions-were also taken into account in constructing
these sets.

The methodology involved constructing the difference masks necessary to dis—
tinguish similar classes, and isolated masks to characterize a class taken
separately. To construct a difference mask the problem of dividing two convex
polyhedrons by a hyperplane which maximizes the distance to the polyhedrons was
solved. The isolated mask was selected so that the least correlation with the
images belonging to the particular convex polyhedron was maximized. It should
be noted that in order to simplify the technical realization of the algorithm.
convex polyhedrona characterizing the set of images were constructed only for
one fixed thickness of the lines of the character. This decision was made on
the assumption that the convex sets constructed would also include images with
line thicknesses differing from that for which they were constructed. It would
evidently have been better to construct sacks for different thicknesses and
during the recognition process search for the maximum similarity not only by
classes and different positions of the image, but also by different thicknesses.

As pointed out above, during testing of the 1969 ChARS unsatisfactory values
were received for the parameters of recognition reliability. The basic reasons

for this were the following.

The masks in the machine were constructed for one fixed thickness of lines.
But with actual printing quality line thickness varies in a wide range.

The machine did not have adequate resolution capability. Even if the masks taking
into account discretization had been constructed for the full range of variation-
of thicknesses, the raster adopted for the machine would still have been a crude
one. The dimensions of elements of the grid (0.27 x 0.30 millineters) exceeded
the minimum thickness of lines of a character by 50 percent. This led to such
serious distortions of images with thin lines that the images of similar classes
could hardly be distinguished from one another after discretization.

So-called crude displacements of alien (competing) masks were not taken into ac-
count in constructing the masks. As research showed, because of the distor-
tions caused by discretization. the maximum similarity in the correct and an
alien mask may be attained for different crude displacements, that is displace-
ments corresponding to carryover of images for an entire cell of the grid.

In this case it may prove that similarity with an alien mask in an adjacent dis-
placement is greater than similarity with the correct mask. Because the answer
is taken for maximum similarity, in this case an error will be recorded. There-
fore. when constructing the masks it is necessary to consider the different
positions of the alien mask. The positions of masks which differ by a displace-
ment of one cell are especially critical.

The algorithm used in the machine to divide lines into characters had low noise
resistance because it was based on the assumption that false maximums of simi-
larity at the intersections of two characters do not occur. Given real printing

quality using conventional type faces this assumption is not justified.

116
INJI‘OFFICIAI.IISE1(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prototype was developed on the basis of testing a model which had dif-
ferent parameters, without preliminary computer modeling of the new modifica-
tion. Before this model was built the correlation method of recognition was
modeled and studies were made of its effectiveness for an alphabet of 10
numerals with a grid of 8 x 16 cells and brightness quantization on 16 levels.
In addition, to improve the precision of centering halfeetep shifts of the
image were done during modeling. that is, shifts equal to half a discretization
step. When the parameters of the machine were (expanded alphabet.
quantization on four levels, absence of halfvstep shifts, and the like), it was
also necessary to make a detailed study of the recognition algorithm.

The method used to construct the mask does not permit an estimate of the proba-
bility of recognition error for any given masks. Although the masks constructed
on this methodology insure minimum probability of error given the assumptions
made. the value of this minimum was unknown.

The shortcomings of earlier modifications were taken into account in develop-
ment of the 1972 ChARS and the following improvements were made. The grid was
doubled in size by reducing the discretization step on the horizontal (20 x 18)
with a cell size of 0.135 x 0.31 millimeters. But then it was necessary, for
purposes of equipment economy, to reject the four levels of quantization and,
consequently. use of the correlation method of recognition in the form con-
sidered in Chapter 2. To avoid a situation where the results of quantization
of the image on two levels would depend strongly on changes in the contrast
and darkening of the background. a quantization procedure with a variable
threshold depending on the brightness of adjacent cells was employed.

A new methodology of constructing masks was developed, based on representing
a set of images ditinguished by thickness of lines and position relative to
the raster in the form of multidimensional distributions. The magnitude of
the independent variable (argument) of probability of error was used as the
optimization criterion.

COPYRIGHT Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika", 1980

11,176
cso: 1863/47

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUIPMENT COSTS, URGES FOR CHARACTER READERS

Kiev OPTICHBSKIYE CHITAYUSHCIIYE AVTOHATY in Rnisian 1980 (signed to preaa
22 Nov 79) p 191-205

[Appendix from Book "Optical Character leaders", by Doctor of Technical Sci-
encea Vladimir Antonovich Kovalevakiy, Candidate of Technical Sciences Georgiy
L'vovich Ginel'farb and candidate of Technical Sciencea Anatoliy Pedorovich

Voziyanov, Izdatel'atvo "Tekhnika", 4,000 copies, 208 pagea]

 

 

Table P1 Noninal Speed
of Text Coding,
Characters
Unit . Coat, rubles per Second
Yes 9015 Punched Card Data Entry Unit 8,000 5
Yes 9018 Punched Card Verifier 7,000 5
Yes 9001 Hagnetic Tape Data Preparation Unit 20,000 _ 5
SPD-9000 ﬂagnetic Tape Data Preparation 120,000 Plus 5
System with Keyboard Consolea coat of All
Conaolea
(5,000 rublea
apiece)
ChARS Character Reader 140,000 150
Table P2
Service Personnel MonthlzlAnnual Hagea, rubles
Operator 100/1,200
Senior Operator 12011.660
Dispatcher-Operator 150/1,800
Technician 90/1,080
Mechanic Ibo/1,680
Engineer 120/1,660
Group Leader 160/l,920

COPYRTCHT: Izdatel'atvo "Tekhnika", 1980

11,176
cso: 1863/47

118
FOI1OFFNJA1.UBB(N€LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONFERENCES

INTERNATIONAL 'DIAGNOSTIC FACILITIES FOR DIGITAL SYSTEHS' CONFERENCE
Kiev ELEKTRONNOYE MODELIRDVANIYE in Russian Vol 6, No l, Jan-Feb 82 pp 105-107
[Article by V.A. Gulyayev]

[Text] The international "Diagnostic Facilities for Digital Systems" conference,
organized by the Czech commuxtee of the Electrical Engineering Scientific and
Engineering Society, the Czechoslovak IHEKO [expansion unknown] national committee
and the Diagnostics in Electronics Central Trade Group, was held on 28-30 September
1981 in Brno (CSSR).

Diagnostic facilities for digital systems represent part of the program for improv-
ing the quality and reliability of digital electronics products. Questions relat-
ing to the area of the testing and reliability of digital systems from the view-
point of their design. production and servicing were discussed in individual sec-
tions. Fifty-one reports from 14 countries, including the USA, France, PEG, Italy,
GDR, Polish People's Republic and Hungarian People's Republic, were presented at
the conference.

The following sections were at work at the conference: 1) designing of systems
insensitive to failures; 2) simulation and evaluation of high-reliability systems;
3) software reliability; 4) test generation; 5) test simulation; 6) designing for
easy testability; 7) self-testing systems; 8) system diagnosis; 9) self-verifying
check circuits; 10) diagnostic instruments and systems.

At the morning plenary session Professor (E. Dzh. ﬂak. Klaski) (USA) delivered the
paper "Survey of Methods of Designing for Testability," in which difficulties
originating in testing were pointed out-.the inadequacy of models, the low-per-
centage of the disclosure of malfunctions. greet input of time, complexity and
the considerable amount of documentation. An alternative is guaranteeing test-
ability at the design stage. Three approaches to guaranteeing testability are
discussed in the paper. Among them is the technique of installing and observing
the state of circuits. A rather general approach is discussed, based on dividing
a circuit into a combination circuit and one with a memory. A great number of
specific examples are presented. Also discussed in the report are questions re-
lating to guaranteeing the testability of programmed logic arrays and questions

relating to the generation of input sets for testing by means of shift registers
with feedback.

”2
FOR OFTWCLA lEﬂE€NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a paper by Belorussian SSR Academy of Sciences Corresponding Member A.D.
Zakrevskiy (USSR), “Diagnosis of Malfunctions of Regular Technological Structures,"
theoretical and practical questions were discussed relating to testing of a new
class of large-scale integrated circuits-programmed logic arrays (PLM's). A
distinctive feature of these structures is the presence of a special class of
malfunctions, viz., of modifying functions performed by a combination circuit.

A tabular representation of functions implemented with programmed logic arrays

is used for the purpose of analyzing circuits and constructing tests.

At the evening session a paper by (I. Siray) (Hungarian People's Republic) was
heard, "Survey of Methods of Generating Punctional Level Tests," in which existing
approaches to constructing tests at the functional level were discussed, including
methods developed on the basis of the modular approach, Boolean differences, and
development of a certain d-algorithm. The speaker presented an algorithm developed
by him and based on the development of a d-algorithm and which takes into account
repeated malfunctions, and he also compared two methods of simulating units with
malfunctions-the parallel and concurrent.

In his paper "Evaluating the Reliability of Computing Systems" (Zh.-K. Lapri)
(Toulouse, France) presented information on the percentage of errors of various

types for individual design stages and on the life of elements of computing sys-
tems.

A classification was given of models for describing the state of systems and their
behavior. The possibilities of using methods of Markov and semi-Markov processes
and of simulation for the purpose of studying the reliability of computing systems
were discussed. Various methods of simplifying analysia--consolidation of states
and the like--were discussed. Information on the use of these methods for estimat-
ing the reliability of several classes of systems was presented.

In a paper titled "Methods of Reducing Diagnostic Data" V.P. Chipulis (USSR)
presented a method of compressing source data obtained by simulation on a digital
computer, by using so—called masks. Two variants of reducing the amount of source
data were suggested: minimizing the amount of information (defined in a O, 1, x
alphabet) with the required search resolution, and reducing the amount of informa—
tion with an acceptable reduction in degree of resolution.

The following papers were presented in section 1: (M. Kateyama) (Japan), "High-
Reliability Digital Signal Processor with Insensitivity to Pailures;" (P. Cardini)
(Italy), "Mechanisms for Protection Against Failures in the (MyuTIM) Multipro-
cessor" and (P. Biardi) (Italy), "Protection and Limitation of Errors in an In—
formation Transfer Medium: the Nucleus of the (MyuTIM) System;“ and (L. Simoncini)
(Italy). "Integrated Procedure for Designing Systems Insensitive to Pailures."

The following papers were discussed in section 2: (P. Belardi) (Italy), "Compari-
son of Four Modular Redundant Circuits in a Computing System:" (L. Saloriutta)
(Finland), "Hierarchical Model of the Productivity of a Multimicroprocessor In-
sensitive to Pailures;" (P. Kaspi) (France), "Methods of Evaluating Systems Re—
sistant to Failuresg" A. Babak (Polish People's Republic), "Functional Reliability
Model of the Hard Copy Log of a Computer Network," and (M. Tutoveanu) (Rumania).
"Improvement of the Readout of Information from a Magnetic Disk Storage by Means
of Redundancy."

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following papers were discussed in section 3: (A. Levins'ki) (Polish People's
Republic). "Method of Creating Arithmetic Microprogramsg" (L. Saloriutta) (Finland),
"Evaluation by Means of Petri Nets of a Symmetric Operating System Insensitive to
Failures;" and B. Korel (Polish People's Republic), "Stream of Data in Testing

of Programs."

The following reports were read in section b: (Sh. Varsegi) (Hungarian People's
Republic). "Functional d-Algorithmz" (Ya. Rada) (CSSR), "Adaptive Pseudorandom
Test Generator for Logic Circuits;" and V.A. Gulyayeva (USSR), "Adaptive Method
of Simulating Digital Equipment with Malfunctions."

The following papers were presented in section 5: (P. Marshal) (France), "Simula-
tion of the Time for Detecting Malfunctions of the Integrated Circuit of a Pro-
cessor;" (D. Raynerta) (GDR), "Two-Hay Simulation--a New Approach to Test Genera-
tion;" (K. Valchak) (Polish People's Republic), "Deductive Simulation of Repeated
Malfunctions in Logic Circuits;" (Ya. Piotrowski) (Polish People's Republic),
"Graphic Language for a Functional Description of Logic Circuits." In section 6

a paper by (V. Koy) (FRO) was read, "Distribution of Test Points for Simple Genera-
tion of Tests."

Two papers were read in section 7: (G. Kravchik) (Polish People's Republic),
"Algorithm for Steady Self-Testing of a Multiprocessor System" and (B. Mikhta)
(Polish People's Republic), "Self-Testing Microprocessor Devices."

Section 8 was represented by the following papers: (Ya. Zeleny) (CSSR), "LMDS
[expansion unknown]--a Microdiagnostic System for Localizing Malfunctions;"
(A. Plugachek) (CSSR), "Structure and Properties of Tests of the LMDS Systen;”
(P. Zhak) (CSSR), "Testing the Tesla TsNTs [expansion unknown] System;" and

I. Smishek, "Use of Diagnostics in Graphic Systems."

The following papers were read in seetion 9: (V. Rabira) (CSSR), "Designing a
Self-Verifying Check Circuit for l-of—n Code;" (M. Kotochova) (CSSR). "Designing
Self-Verifying Check Circuits for Some l-of-n Codes;" and (P. Golan)(CSSR), "New
Self-Verifying Check Circuit for l-of-3 Code."

The following papers were presented in section 10: (P. Shtolle) (CSSR), "The
ADT/ZKD [expansion unknown] Automatic Testing System;" (V. Shkvor) (CSSR), "Local-
ization of Malfunctions by Means of the ADT/ZKD System;" (Ya. Revitski) (Hungarian
People's Republic), "Classification of Integrated Circuits in TEZ's [Thermocouple
Probes];" (B. Chaban) (Hungarian People's Republic). "Strategy for Testing TEZ's
and Facilities for Designing Technical Equipment;" (K. Shviyeru) (Polish People's
Republic), "The 'ANISS-ZO' Logical Analyzer;" and (A. Khlavichka) (Polish People's
Repuinc), "Improving the Reliability of Error Detection by the Analysis of
Control Characters."

During the conference opinons were exchanged on various questions relating to

the design of diagnostic facilities. The organizing committee has published a
collection of the conference's proceedings.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", "Blektronnoye nodelirovaniye". 1982

8831
cso: 1863/95

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UTIHIZATION OF CONTROL SYSTEMS

Vilnius OPTIHATIZATSTTA SISTER WLYA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 13 Jan 81)
pp 4, 240-241

[Foreword and table of contents from collection "Optimization of Control Systems",
edited by Professor A. Bikyalis (Bikelis), Lithuanian SS! Ministry of Higher and
Specialized Secondary Education, 500 copies, 247 pages]

[Text] Foreword

The "Application of Probability Theory and Mathematical Statistics" republic con-
ference dedicated to the 600th anniversary of Vilnius University was held at the
start of 1979 at the mathematics department of Vilnius State University. The con-
ference made it possible to make an evaluation of the state of applications of
mathematical methods in the republic's enterprises, to exchange knouhhow and to
hold a discussion on questions relating to problems, as well as to determine the
most promising trends in the development of methods and applications of probability
theory and mathematical statistics, taking into account the opportunities for the
extensive employment of computers. The active participation of representatives of
enterprises and design bureaus, who delivered half of the papers, made it possible
to ascertain the requirements of industry in cooperation with mathematicians and

to specify the framework of this cooperation. The majority of the papers ‘elivered
at the conference are printed in this collection.

CONTENTS Page
Foreword 6
Vaitkus, P. and Kruopis, J. "Mathematical Methods of Optimizing Quality
Control Systems" 5
Kruopis. J. "Minimization of Quality Control System Loss Functions" 12
BarceviEius, R. "Intelligent Selection of Product Output Control" 28
Kepeiinskas, A. "Structure of an Effective Plan for Selective Output
Quality Control of Consumer Electronics Products" 35
Kalnius, R. "Optimum Ranges of Acceptance of Products in a Hultistage
Control System" 66
Adomenas, V. "finding the Limits of Channel Selector failure Rate Function
Parameters" 55
Adomenas, V. "Hethods of Choosing a Plan for Testing the Reliability of
Channel Selectors" 61

122

son omcm. use ONLY 9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kruopis, J. and Nemanis. P.-A. "Statistical Method of Controlling the Pre-
cision of Technological Measurements"

BagdonaviEius, V. "Evaluation of Longevity in Past Tests"

Vaitkus, P. "Optimum Design of Quality Control Charts"

Purtulis. R. "Use of Methods of Mathematical Statistics for Controlling

a Technological Process"

Gaigalas, 3.. Kaminskis. V. and Kukuraitie, M. "Prediction of the Emission
Current of Black-and-Nhite Picture Tubes"

Blkoninas, V.I. and Barauskas, 5. "Study of Empirical Models of Technolo-
gical Systems for the Purpose of Optimization"

Mi3eikis, P. "Mathematical Experimental Design Methods"

Mi§eikis. P. "Simulation Methods in Design Problems"

Sabaliauskas, R. "Models of Queueing in Production"

Baublys. A. "Stochastic Models in an Automated Control System for a
Machinebuilding Enterprise"

Skakauskas, 7., Maknys, M. and Jasinaviaius, R. ”Mathematical Analysis of
Narrovly Localized Fields of Magnetic Beads"

Kruopis. J. and LekeviEius, 3. "Estimating Parameters of Cell Cycles in
Asynchronous Cell Populations"

Bagdonavizius, V., Pauliukonis, A. and Jusas, J. "Analysis of Diffusion
Effects of an Innobilieed Polyenzyme System"

LukoEeviEiene. 0. "Mathematical Model of Dynamics of a Number of Highway
Accidents"

Garﬁva. .1. "Problem of Forming a Production Program for the Republic
Ministry of Construction"

Gorbunov, NJ. "Bayes Statistical Inference Procedures When It Is Possible
to Refuse to Make a Decision"

Bistrickas, V. "Method of Studying Discrete Control Processes"
Skaksuskas. V. "Pbtion of a Flexible Nonstretchable Thread Along a Plane
Curve"

Rup's'ys, P. "The Basis Maximum Principle"

Jusas, J., Bagdonavicius. V. and Dienys, G. "Method of Determining Reaction
Rates of Coupled Chemical Reactions"

Bikelis, A. and Kininius. J. "Probability Distributions Concentrated in
Several Lattices"

Mila‘éevi‘c’ius, J. "Asymptotic Expansions for Probabilities of Great Devia-
tions in the Poisson Approximation Case"

COPYRIGHT: Ministerstvo vysshego i srednego spetsial'nogo obrazovaniya
Litovskoy 5511, 1981

8831
050: 1863/123

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

76

89

98
107
110
1110
123
127
130
136
138
162
156
163
181

186
201

205
216

220
227
260
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIORS

1100 551. 509 . 313

METHODS OF WRICAL SW11“! 0? AWSPHERIC PROCESSES

Leningrad HETCDY CHISLENNOGO ”EMANIYA amosnmmul PMSBSSOV in Russian
1981 (signed to press 20 Aug 81) pp 2-10

[Annotation, foreword and introduction from book "Methods of Numerical Simulation
of Atmospheric Processes", by Vladimir Viktorovich Penenko. Gidrometeoizdat. 1350

copies, 352 pages]

[Text] This book contains a systematic presentation of methods of numerical simu-
lation of the hydrothermodynamics of atmospheric processes. Major attention is
devoted to the structural algorithmic aspects of this problem. Discrete models
are constructed on the basis of the variational principle and the splitting-up
method. Finite-difference and spectral—difference models are discussed. as well
as methods of studying the sensitivity of discrete mddels to variations in input
data and of identifying the parameters of models. assimilating and adjusting mea-
surement data, etc.

This book is intended for specialists in the fields of computing and applied mathe-
matics, meteorology and geophysics, as well as for students at universities and
hydrometeorological VUZ's specializing in methods of numerical simulation of the
atmosphere and ocean.

Foreword

This book is devoted to methods of numerical simulation. It is intended as a
description of the structure of and of the principles of the structure of a
complex of mathematical models and computing algorithms forming the basis of a
package of applied programs for solving problems in atmospheric physics and
physics of the ocean and environmental protection. Its main goal is a systematic
discussion of the structural algorithmic aspects of this problem. Therefore
general questions relating to the theory and physical fundamentals of mathematical
simulation are touched upon only in part in it. The central place in the book's
logical system is occupied by the fourth chapter, in which methods of studying
the sensitivity of discrete models and their application are described, and the
mathematics needed to implement these methods are discussed in the first three.

Know—how in solving applied problems gained at the USSR Academy of Sciences Siberian
Division Computing Center was used in writing this book.

121.
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A considerable part of the algorithms presented here has been implemented on
computers by A.Ye. Aloyan. N.N. Obraztsov and A.V. Protaaov. They have also
completed a long cycle of methodological studies and numerical experiments on
solving specific problems of atmospheric physics and physics of the ocean.

The author considers it his pleasant duty to express his profound gratitude to
his teacher. Academician G.I. Harchuk, who exerted a great influence on formation
of the author's scientific interests.

At individual stages in this work considerable assistance in the form of advice
and comments was rendered by N.N. Yanenko, N.I. Buleyev. L.T. Hatveyev, Sh.A.
Husaelyan. H.I. Yudin, L.S. Gandin.'V.P. Il'in. A.N. Konovalov, V.P. Kochergin.
G.P. Kurbatkin, V.P. Dymnikov, Ye.Ye. Kalenkovich, V.P. Kin. 6.3. Kontarev, 0.8.
Rivin and especially A.Ye. Aloyan, N.N. Obraztsov, A.V. Protaaov and Ye.A.
Tsvetova. for which the author expresses his sincere gratitude to them all.

The author is deeply grateful to S.L. Belousov, 5.“. Yermakov and L.V. Rukhovets,
who read the book in manuscript and made a number of important comments. as well
as to 6.1. Ivanova, N.I. Kolker and 2.x. Urazalina for their great help in pre-
paring the manuscript.

Introduction

The problem of mathematical simulation of the dynamics of the atmosphere and ocean
has attracted the attention of scientists of various countries for a long time.
This is due to the fact that studies of processes taking place in the atmosphere
and ocean are closely allied to solving problems in the theory of climate and wea-
ther forecasting which are of direct practical importance. In recent years interest
in this has increased more and more in connection with the problem of the inter-
action of man with his environment. Taking into account the complexity of arrang-
ing full-scale experiments under real conditions, the most natural approach to
studying and evaluating the ‘H'lnence of man's activdties on the atmosphcrn and
ocean is the creation of mathematical models and methods of mathematical simulation
making it possible by means of numerical experiments on high-efficiency computers
to evaluate perturbations of key parameters and functionals characterizing the
state and conditions of the atmosphere and ocean.

For solving this class of problems the following are first necessary:

Physically complete mathematical models of climate, general circulation of the
atmosphere and ocean and local atmospheric and oceanic processes.

A theory for the transfer of aerosols and other impurities in the atmosphere and
methods of evaluating the influence of transformation of these impurities on the

composition of the atmosphere and on changes in hydrometeorological conditions on
the local and global scales.

Methods of numerical simulation of meteorological and oceanic processes and prin-

ciples of their use in estimating the influence of man's activities on hydrometeoro-
logical conditions.

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(HW1C1AL.USEIONLY

Perturbation theory methods for estimating variations of major functionala in
problems of attospheric and oceanic physics. for studying the sensitivity of
models to variations in input data and for estimating climatic anomalies.

Models of following the state of a climatic system and of methods of assimilating
data from measuring complexes.

This book is devoted to the development of the last three of the trends enumerated
above. Obviously success in solving the problems posed depends to a considerable
extent on the physical models used as a basis and on their mathematical formulation.
But since the main goal of this book is the development of the algorithmic aspects
of the problem of numerical simulation, the theoretical fundamentals and the
physical meaning of the formulation of hydrothermodynamics problems are practically
nowhere discussed in it. These questions are represented sufficiently completely
in studies by I.A. Kibel'; Ye.N. Lorents: S. Hanabe and K. Brayen; 6.1. Harchuk;
L.T. Hatveyev; A. Arakavs: A.s. Monin; “.1. Yudin; in a collective monograph; etc.
Ideawise the book is closest to the studies by 6.1. Harchuk; therefore in the
discussion the author relied on the definitions and terminology used in his mono-
graphs.

The variational-difference method of constructing energy-balanced discrete models
of hydrothermodynamics of the atmucphere and ocean is discussed in the first
chapter. Its main idea and applications to equations of mathematical physics

are described very well in ch 6 of 0.A. Ladyzhenskaya's book. In order to use this
method, the mathematical model must be written by means of an integral identity
corresponding to the initial system of equations and boundary and initial condi-
tions. This double description of the model by means of systems of equations and
integral identities has a number of advantages for numerical simulation.

After derivation of the identity, further operations are accomplished formally
and in principle can be run on a computer. First a discrete, i.e.. a summer,
analog of the identity is constructed and then the conditions are written for
stationarity of the sunset functional with random and independent variations in
trial functions at the nodes of a net region. Systems of basic and conjugate
equations in discrete form are thus obtained. It was found that by special con-
struction of approximations of the identity over time it is possible to obtain
automatically from it splitting diagrams, also.

The integral identity is so constructed to be able to introduce different net re-
gions. to combine regular and irregular nets. to approximate integrals and inte-
grands differently, to use diagrams with an enhanced order of accuracy, etc., al-
ways keeping invariant for discrete analogs the energy balance property.

The atmosphere-ocean-continent system is unified in the energy sense. Therefore,
if an energy functional is introduced for it and an integral identity is con-
structed on its basis, some conditions at interfaces are shown to be natural for
a variational functional. Because of this. in obtaining discrete approximations
a number of questions involving matching scales and approximating boundary condi-
tions are done away with and the possibility appears of automatically monitoring
energy and mass exchange at interfaces. However. let us note that the problem of

126
INJR 0511C1A1.USEZCHHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parametrizing processes of interaction of the atmosphere with the ocean and the
surface of dry land must even with this approach be considered separately.

The second chapter contains a description of methods of constructing bases for
the representation of multidimensional fields and spectral-difference models of
atmospheric hydrothermodynamics.

The problem of constructing informative bases is of independent significance in
hydrometeorology. A number of approaches to solving it are described in the
literature. Only some of them are discussed here. The most promising for appli-
cations is the method based on combining an approximate solution to the particular
spectral problem for linearized bydrothermodynamics operators with the isolation of
the natural orthogonal components of the fields of meteorological elements ("pri-
mary components" in terms of factor analysis and mathematical statistics). Opera-
tors are linearized in the neighborhood of a certain assigned primary state. which
is introduced as one of the input parameters.

with the existence of bases discrete models are derived from the integral identity
or its summer analogs by an approach standard for variational difference methods.
This results in closed energy-balanced systems of basic and conjugate equations in
spectral—difference form. If the basis is sufficiently informative, i.e., the
fields of unknown functions can be represented approximately by a truncated Fourier
series with a small number of terms. then a model of this sort is customarily
called few-component or few-parameter. In particular. the basis can be made up of
a group of functions with finite carriers.

In view of the nonlinearity of the initial model the equations for Pourier coeffi-
cients are also nonlinear. And since in constructing the basis an approximate
solution to the spectral problem is used for the operator obtained from the same
initial system. then there is present in them also a linear part with a diagonal
matrix made up of approximate eigenvalues of this operator, which has been shown to
be convenient to take into account analytically when integrating in terms of time.
This approach makes possible the integration of all equations simultaneously with
the same time interval in spite of the difference in eigenvalues. Finally, for
reconstructing unknown fields from Fourier coefficients A.N. Tikhonov's method for
the generalized summation of series, based on the regularization idea, is used.

It must be emphasized that in spectral models Fourier coefficients represent
generalized characteristics of the entity being simulated and with the successful
choice of basis functions, even with a small amount of them. it is possible to
carry a considerable share of useful information. Eigenvalues of the problem's
linearized operator also come under the heading of generalized characteristics.
From eigenvalues it is possible to judge the time scales of processes being simu-

lated and from the sign of their real half the stability of these processes in the
neighborhood of the primary state.

In the third chapter the principles of the practical implementation of numerical
models based on the splitting-up method are discussed. The basic tenets of this
method are widely familiar at the present time because of studies by the Soviet
mathematicians Ye.c. D‘yakonov. G.I. Marchuk. A.A. Samarskiy, N.N. Yanenko, etc.
The splitting-up method is of fundamental importance in constructing mathematical

127
FOR 0FF1CJAL USEZCNﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

models of complicated physical processes. This has heen convincingly demonstrated
in 6.I. narchuk's books for problems of dynamics of the atmosphere and ocean.

The development of numerical simulation methods is closely allied with the tech-
nology of their practical implementation. which is being steadily improved together
with progress in the field of computer technology. Already at this time it has
become generally accepted that it is most fitting to employ the nodular principle
of programming and to create packages of applied programs. The modular structure
of algorithms and programs makes it possible to approach a solution to entire
classes of problems and the existence of facilities for adapting packages to spe-
cific conditions makes it possible to make active use of accumulated experience.

The practical implementation of numerical models is organized according to the
following system. First a "modular" analysis is made of the entire complex of
problems. Then a certain basis set of general-purpose algorithms is singled_out,
which are implemented in the form of program modules in algorithmic language.
From these modules a special library is constructed. comprising the basis of the
package of applied programs. '

Of course, it is impossible within the scope of a single book to describe the
entire set of basis algorithms; therefore, it was decided to limit ourselves to

a presentation of only those of them which in our opinion are most interesting

for the class of problems discussed. These are direct algorithms for solving
transport equations and the problem of the dynamic matching of the fields of
meteorological elements. Preference was not given to direct algorithms accidental-
ly. They are fairly economical in terms of the number of arithmetic operations

and as compared with iteration algorithms-they reduce the degree of uncertainty

in solving a problem. The advantages of direct algorithms are evidenced especially
clearly in constructing perturbation theory methods, where it is a question of
estimating slight variations in the solution depending on variations in the model's
parameters and where it is necessary to filter out fictitious perturbations and
noise caused by errors in the method of solving the problem.

The fourth chapter is devoted to methods of studying the sensitivity of discrete
models of dynamics of the atmosphere and ocean. The idea basis of these methods

is the perturbation theory. the principles of whose structure for the class of
problems considered were developed by 6.1. Harchuk. Functionally they are designed
for studying the behavior of models in a space of parameters and for identifying
models in terms of measurement data.

The concept of state functions and of parameters can be introduced for each mathe-
matical model. A model essentially specifies the transformation which places

a group of values of state functions in correspondence with a group of values of
parameters. The difference between parameters and state functions is in many in—
stances purely hypothetical and depends on the specific formulation of the prob-
lem. An example of this can be the interrelationship between altitude and pressure
in a Cartesian and isobar system of coordinates. For the purpose of describing
the behavior of the model, in addition to state functions it is possible to use

a certain set of functionals determined in sets of values of state functions and
parameters. An analysis of current approaches in numerical simulation has demon-
strated that models constructed on the basis of just the basic system of equations

28
FOR OFFICIXL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of atmospheric and oceanic hydrothermodynamics are pearly suited to studying

their behavior in a space of parameters. In practice the number of parameters

is shown to be too great and the organization of numerical experiments according
to the traditional system of direct simulation, which reduces to a multiple solu-
tion to the problem with different input data, is poorly effective even when using
very high-ouput computers. The numerical model structure described in this mono-
graph proposes the introduction of at least three more elements-—s system of con-
jugate equations, a system of variational equations, and a block for the calcula-
tion of sensitivity functions, for estimates of variations in functionals and for
identifying the parameters of models. All elements of the model are distinguished
in terms of their functional purpose. For example, by solving the basic system of
equations or variational problem, it is possible to predict how the influence of
perturbations of any factor will be spread in space and over time. By solving the
conjugate problem and calculating sensitivity functions with a specific choice of
functional it is possible to estimate whence perturbations will arrive in a spe-
cific region and to reveal regions of heightened sensitivity of the model to vari-
ations in parameters. It is especially important to have an opportunity to obtain

such quantitative estimates in problems of controlling the quality of the environ-
ment.

The theory of sensitivity represents a new and actively developing scientific
trend in cybernetics. An analysis of its key ideas and state-of-the-art can be
found in R.H. Yusupov's review article. At the present time it is developing as
a set of methods and approaches for studying the influence of the properties of
operators and their perturbations on the quality of the functioning of various
automatic control systems; but the range of application of sensitivity theory me-

thods is considerably broader—~it includes also various trends in mathematical
simulation.

Three types of problems arise in studying the sensitivity of models. To the first
type belong direct problems, when variations in parameters are known and it is
necessary to estimate variations in state functions or functionals, and to the
second inverse problems, when from known variations in functionals or state func-
tions it is necessary to estimate variations in certain parameters. Problems of
the mixed type, including elements of direct and inverse problems, are also known.
In relation to the computing aspects of the sensitivity theory it should be men-
tioned that at the present time the solution of inverse problems is encountering

great. and in certain cases insurmountable, difficulties (cf., for example, R.P.
Fedorenko's monograph).

Sensitivity functions are introduced from physical considerations and implement

a relationship between variations in unknown and input quantities. Formally they
can be defined as derivatives of some characteristic of the model in terms of para-
meters of the same model and can be computed by solving basic and conjugate prob-
lems and variational problems. Although in nonlinear models the use of perturba-
tion theory methods involves limitations on the magnitude of variations, neverthe-
less sensitivity functions play a major role in the numerical simulation process.
By their means it is possible to estimate a trend in the influence of perturbations
of parameters. to plan an observation experiment for estimating functionals, and

in estimating variations of functionals to reduce the influence of fictitious noise
produced by a discrete model.

FOI.0FTWC%§Z USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pomlization of the individual steps in constructing discrete appromtions and
computing algorittms makes possible mtual compatibility of various parts of the
model and facilitates the simulation process, but in no case substitutes for the
intuition and experience of investigators in creation of the model itself. The
more apriori information and physical meaning which are put into the model. the
greater the hope of a successful solution to the problem. for a long time now
the problem has been posed of introducing a two-way relationship between models and
measurements of the characteristics of entities to be simulated. How is this to
be done? Especially if it is taken into account that measurements are made by
many measuring systems distributed unevenly in space and having various precision
tolerances. The direct inclusion of measurement data in the model results in the
so-called "shock" effect, the reason for which is the mismatch between the scales
of perturbations contained in observation data and in simulated fields.

Here one way is suggested for implementing feedback through the minimization of
functionals determining the degree of devia’ions between fields counted by means
of the model and measured under actual conditions, by using models as space-time
interpolstors on the basis of the variational principle. Hodern models are very
complex and fitting them to actual data generally can prove to be too expensive,
and the measurement data themselves are insufficient for identifying all the para-
meters of models. But if the cost of these studies is compared with ”the cost of
full-scale, then it becomes clear that the development and use of methods of solv-
ing inverse problems are justified, since even for the most ideal models there will

always be the problem of estimating the degree of their correspondence to real
physical systems and of the intelligent use of measurement data. Combining complete

models with few-component ones represents a reasonable compromise in solving this
problem. Pew—parameter models are simpler to identify and they are economical to
implement. The spectral structure of these models makes it possible to separate
perturbations in terms of scale and to take into account primarily the part of them
most full of interest. At the same time complete models are more convenient for

a local description and parametrization of various factors and it is advisable to
use them for refining solutions obtained by means of few-parameter models.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1981

8831
C50: 1863/118

130
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SELECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'INSTRUHBNTS, HEARS 0P AUTOMATION AND MTROL SYSTEHS',
FEBRUARY, 1981

Moscow rumour. snmsrvs AVTOHATIZATSII I storm UPRAVLENIYA. 'rs-z. sums-m wom—
SLIMLNOY mm: I 0mm: (mum 5mm) inﬁussian lo 2, Feb 81
pp 1-1

[Excerpts]

a. 15332. "The conplex 'Elekon-D-ZH' for Ieeeuring and :1th integrated digital
dynamic pars-store of nicrocircuits.” Bondarevskiy. A. 8.. Pankov. Ye. 1).. Ostapenko,
A. A.. Kozlov. A. A., and Mistake. 1.. V. MTRGUNAYA TEXHNIKA. smnm UPRAVNENIYE
KACHESTVGI. mm, srmmmsms. 1980. No 2-3 (80-81). p 272 (Central Scien-
tific Research Institute "Blektronika"). .The urgency of development of the complex
"Elekon-D-ZH" is substantiated. Its main technical characteristics are compared with
the Soviet and foreign analogues. The working principles. composition and aetrologi-
cal specifications of the complex are described. (Input by cm 3333. 103031, Hos-
cow. K-31. ulitsa Kuznetekiy most. 12].

5. 15338. "Arrangement of components on cellputer structures by the method of branch-
es and bonds." Lebedev. B. K.. and Kalashnikov. V. A. MTRQ'NAYA TEXHNDKA. SERIYA
NEWTRONNYYE USTROYS‘I'VA, 1980. No 1 (19), pp 58-67. Central Scientiﬁc Research
Institute ”Elektronika”. An algorithm is proposed for the arrangement of conponents
of celputer structures, taking into consideration the real conditions of layout by
channel algorithms. In parallel with the arrange-ems, a forest of very short. ortho-

gonal, connecting trees is constructed. (Input by GPNTB 58811, 103031, Moscow, K-31,
ulitsa Kuznetskiy lost. 12].

8. 15386. "Control and correction of a single error during cyclic shifts on the
basis of Lagrangian codes." Karpukhin. A. 1., and Nugnanov. a. N. WORM“ TEXH-
NIKA. SERIYA KIKROBIHTRQINYYE US’I'ROYSTVA. 1980, No 2 (20). pp 13-19. (Central Sci-
entific Research Institute "Elektroniks"). It is shown that a single packet of errors
can be detected and corrected on the basis of Lagrangian codes during cyclic shifts.
Selection of the nodes of interpolation and the systentic character of the Lagrangian
codes permit leaving the code word coded for the indicated operations. In that case

the necessary equipment for conversion of the certifying synbols is not complex and
the time is approximately .the tins of shift of the information port. A Bilple decoding
algorithm is presented for detecting and correcting a single error with consideration

of thee operations. (Input by ems sssn. 103031, Moscow. x-31, ulna Kuznetskiy
most .2 e

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

20. 15388. "Integrated logical nicrocircuits noise stability criteria.” Urel'
skiy, Yu. A. momma MMA. SRIYA momma USI‘ROISTVA. 1960, No
l (19), pp 3—16 (Central Scientiﬁc Research Institute "Elektrmika'. Various noise
stability criteria of logical integrated nicrocircuits are emined for static and
dynnic working conditions. Shortcomings of the presently adopted noise-intensity
criteria are shown. An estimte of noise stability according to instantaneous power
is proposed, scattered by the noise generator on resistances of a logical section
constructed in the given system of elements. Circuits are presented. An analytical
expression is obtained for the amplitude-time characteristic, which deter-mes the
noise stability under dynamic conditions. (Input by GPM‘B SSSR, 103031, Moscow, K-31,
ulitsa Kuznetekiy'most. 12].

21. 15389. “Planning operating storages on the basis of supplementary NDP-transis-
tor large—scale integrated circuit storages." Zheney'tsev, A. 6., Goslavskiy, A. V.,
Kabanov, I. 11., and Petrova. F. Sh. MWAYA 'rncmmu. SERIYA MERCEIHTRQINYYE
us'mors'm. 1980, No 1 (19), pp 17-22. Central Scientific Research Institute ”Blok-
tronika". Q1 the basis of analyais and systenatisation of experience in the develop-
nent of semiconducting operating storage with [PD integrated nenory circuits with
capacities of 156 and 1021; bits are famed the require-outs for elements for the con-
trol circuits and organization of the operating storages file. A number of struc-
tural and ciruitry solutions of large-scale integ'ated circuit storages is examined.
the solution of which will permit improving the cmracteristics and simplifying the
development of storage devices on the whole. (Input by GPNTB SSSR. 003031. Moscow.
K-31. ulitsa Kuznetskiy meet, 12].

23. 15b00. “Questions of nodeling and analysis of tests of digital devices." Feti-
sov. N. S. Preprint No 1 (1980). Moscow. 1980, 23 pages. The author emines ques-
tions about increasing the precision of logical modeling and calculation of the states
of memory elements of sequential circuits duri test analysis. (Input by GPM‘B SSSR.
103031. "031:0“, K'Bl. “lit“ Kuzﬂotakly fast, 12 e

COPYRIIEHI‘: Tsentral'nyy naucl'mo-issledovatel'skiy institut infomtsii i tekhniko-
ekonomichedcikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya, sredstv avtomtizatsii
i sisten upravleniya (TsNIITMpriborostroyeniya), 1981

217a
cso: 1863/99

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁLECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'INSTFUNENTS, MEANS OF AUTOMATION AND CONTROL SYSTﬂiS',
RIL. 1981

Moscow PRIBORY. SREDSI'VA AVTOHATIZATSII I SISTM UPRAVIBNIYA, TS-Z: SREDSTVA VYCHI-

SLIEEgiNOY WWI I WWWI (REFERNPIVNYY SBORNIK) in Russian No b, Apr 81
PP '

[Excerpts]

16. 15805. "Development of fifth-generation conputers." BYULLE'I‘EN’ INOSTRANNOY
mucrmo-mcmcmcor INFORMATSII TASS, 1980. No 29. P 19. The Japanese Ministry
of Foreign Wade and Industry has decided to develop a computer of the fifth genera-
tion, which is regarded as the couputer of the 1990s and whose Motions more resel-
ble those of the human brain than those of contelponry computers. The development
of the new computer will be started in the 1981 fiscal year and completed in the
1990 fiscal year. The new couputer will be able to mks associations and analogies
and reason. [Inputby GPN'I‘B SSSR (USSR Pain ”ublic Scientific-Technical Library),
103031, Hoscou. K-31. ulitsa Kuznetskiy lost, 12].

17. 15806. "Reduction of noises created by key pressure stabilizers." Skegirev.

Yu. N.. and Tomigas. O. A. 03m OPYTOH V RADIOPROHYSMNOSTI, 1980. No 6. pp #3416
Some methods are suggested for reduci noises created by key pressure stabilizers ir
apparatus obtaining power fro- them. Input by GM SSSR (USSR Main Public Scien- -
uric—Technical Library). 103031. Hoscow, K-31. ulitss Kuznetskiyfmost, 12].

29. 158184. “The mus-system of nicroprograming microcomputers constructed on the
basis of series K 589 large-scale integrated circuits." Bekasov. A. A. In book:
"Amoan'm" (Algorithls). Tashkent. 1980. pp 9-18. 0258!! Academy of Sciences. Col-
lection of Scientific works. No 1&0. A system is described for nicroprogralming con-
puters construected on the basis of series K589 large-scale in ated circuits. [In-
put by GPN’I'B SSSR (USSR Main Public Scientific-Technical Library . 103031, Moscow.
x-31. ulitsa Kuznetskiy lost, 12].

COPYRIGHI‘: Tsentral'nyy nsuchno-issledovatel'skiy institut infomtsii i tekhniko-
ekonomicheskikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya, sredetv svtomtizatsii
i sisten upravleniya (TsNIITEIpriborostroyeniya). 1981

2171.
cso: 1863/99

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SELECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'INSTRUMENTS, MEANS OF AUTOMATIC” AND CONTROL SYSTEMS',
MAY. 1981

Moscow- PRIBORY. SREDSTVA AVTOHATIZATSIII SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA. TS-2: SREDSI‘VA VYCHI-
SLITBL'NOY THWI I GEMHNIKI (RWATIVNYY SBORNIK) in Russian No 5. May 81
pp 1-11

[Excerpts]

9. 158%. ”Organization of storage of data files on magnetic carriers." Caganov.
P. G. OBHEN OPYTOH V RADIOPROHYSIEENNCBTI. 1980. No 7. pp 3-5. The author analyzes
the reasons for distortion of data on magnetic carriers d lengthy storage and
use. Methods of increasing data storage time are examined. Input by NIIUVH (Scien-
tific Research Institute of Control Celputers). 3599110. Voroshilovgradskaya Oblast,
Severodonetsk. p1 Pobely, 2].

22. 16005. "Installation for monitoring commutation plates on the basis of micro-
computers." Nikulin, G. V. MTRONNAYA MWA. SERIYA 9. Economics and Control
Systems, 1980, No 2 (35). p 114. The paper presents the results of the development
and introduction of an installation for monitoring thin-film commutation plates of
hybrid integrated circuits. created on the basis of the microcomputer "Elektronika-
38-01" and an Ant-l automatic program contacting machine. [Input by GPNTB SSSR (USSR
Main Pubﬁic Scientific-Technical Library), 103031. Moscow, K-3l. ulitsa Kuznetskiy
most, 12

23. 16006. "Video terminal connector to computer." Cromov. Yu. K., Kekrasov, L.
T.. and Tselyapin. A. N. ELEX'I'RONNAYA TEXHNDCA. SERIYA 9. Econoucs and Control
Systems. 1980. No 2 (35). p 128. The paper describes the 030-5. a device intended
for the organization of connection of the ”Elektronika lOO-I" computer with Yes com-
puters and various video terninals. particularly with the ”Blektronika T1000". Ex-
amples of the accomplishment of such a connection in automated control systems of
various configurations are presented. (Input by cm sssn (11333 Main Public Scien-
tific-Technical Library), 103031, Moscow. K-31, ulitsa Kuznetskiy most. 12].

2h. 16009. ”Structural organization of large-scale integrated-circuit multichannel
commtators.‘ Zolotarevskiy. V. 1.. and Nekrasov, V. H. WOMAN TEKHNIKA.
sauna 9. Economics and Control System. 1980, No 2 (35). p 133. The paper examines

13h
son 0mm]. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structural circuits of multichannel commtetors constructed on the basis of HOS
structures and intended for use in measurement systems and systems of commieation
with an object in an automated system for control of technologlcal processes. (In-
put by GPNI‘B SSSR (USSR Main Public Sdentiﬁc-Teohnioal Library). 103031, Moscow.
x-31, ulitea Kumetddy most, 12].

COPYRIGHT: Tsentml'nyy naucrmodssledovstel'skiy institut infomtsii 1 tekhniko—
ekononicheskikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya. sredstv avtoutizatsii
1 siscen upravlentya (“rsNIITBIpriborostroyeniya). 1981

217a
cso. 1863/99

135
son OFFICIAL use onu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SELECTED ITEMS FROM JOURNAL 'INSTRUHENTS. MEANS OF AUTOMATION AND CONTROL SYSTEMS',
NOVEMBER, 1981

Hoscow PRI‘BORY. SREDSTVA AVTGKATIZATSII I SIS'I'EHY UPRAVLENIYA. '1'3-2: SREDSI'VA V'ch-
SLITEL'NOY TEXHNIKI I ORGTHHNRI (REFERA'I'IVNYY SBORNIK) in Russian No 11. Nov 81
pp 1-12

[Excerpts]

21. 28936. "Complex technological line for nanufacturing fragments of fields of
circular ferrite cores.“ Bolunov, V. V., Dnitriyev. A. F.. and Ssniulina. A. A.

In book: "Razvitiye teorii i tekhniki sredstv khraneniya infomtsi i” (Developnent
of the Theory and Technology of Means of Data. Storage): "l‘esisy ddcladov Vsesoyuznoy
nauchno-tekhnicheskoy konferentsii Hoakva (Abstracts' of Reports of Scientific-Techni-
cal Conference, Hoscow), Riga. 1980. pp 68-70 (Scientific and Technical Society of
Radio Engineering. Electronics and Communication ineni A. S. Popov). The introduction
of a. complete set of technological equipment and instruments into production of frag-
ments of fields of circular ferrite cores permits reducing by two-thirds the labor
intensity of mnufacturing fragments, improving their quality and reducing expendi-
tures of materials. [Input by OMB 8883 (USSR thin Public Sdentiﬁc-Teclmical Li-
brary). 103031, Moscow. K-3l, ulitsa Kusnetskiy nost, 12].

UDC 681.3272

32. 28703. "Static storage unit with series All-9131 random access." In book:
'Kratkiye tekhnicheskiye kharakteristiki na pechstayushchiye ustroystva. nakopiteli"
(Brief Tecmioal Characteristics of Printers and Files). Severodonetsk, .1980. p 27.
NIIUVH [not further identiﬁed]. A brief technical characterization is presented of
a. static storage unit with series Ail-9131 random access. [Input by NIIUVH. 3499‘“),
Voroshilovg‘edskays Oblast, Severofmdetsk. pl. Pobeli. 2].

UDC 68l.327.2
33. 28701;. “Static storage unit with series Ali-911m randos access." In book:
”Kratkiye tekhnichedciye khankteristiki na pechatayushchiye ustroystvs. nakopiteli"
(Brief Technical cruncteristics of Printers and Files). Severodonetsk. 1980, p 32.
NIIUVH. A brief characteristizatiou is presented of a static storage unit with ser-
ies Ali-9142 random access. [Input by Hum- 389%, Voroshilovgradekayaﬂblast.
Severnvodsk, p1 Pobeli, 2].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

34. 28705. "Static storage unit with series Ari-911w random access." In books
”kratkiye tekhnicheskiye kharakteristiki na pechatayushchiye ustroystva. nakopiteli"
(Brief Technical Characteristics of Printers and Files). Severodonetsk. 1980. p 27.
NIIUVH. A brief characterization is presented of a static storage unit with series
All-91180 tendon access. [Input by NIIUVH. $99180, Voroshilovgredskaya Oblast, Severa-
vodsk. p1 Pobeli. 2].

35. 28706. "Static storage unit with series All-9150 random access.” In book:
"Kratkiye tekhnicheskiye kharekteristiki na. pechatayuahchiye ustroystva. nakopitali”
(Brief Technical Characteristics of Printers and Files). Severodonetsk, 1980. p 27.
NIIUVM. A brief characterizatim is presented of a static storage unit with series
Ali-9130 randon access. [Input by NIIUVH. 3169940. Voroshilovgradskaya Oblast. Severe-
vodak, p1 Pobeli, 2].

2+3. 28920. "Sone results of the development of a eeaicondnctorrgaserzpermanent
holographic aeaory.“ Yelkhov. V. A.. Klinov. I. I.. and Shidlovskiy, P. P.. In
book: 'Razvitiye teorii i tekhniki sredstv khraneniya infomtsii" (Development of
the theory and technology of means of data storage); Tezisy dokladov Vseeoyuznoy
nauchno-tekhnicheskoy konferentsii Hoskva (Abstracts of Reports of Scientificv'rechni-
cal Conference, Hoscow). Riga. 1980. pp 102-103 (Scientific-Technical Society of Radio
Engineering. Electronics and Commioations imeni A. S. Popov). The paper describes
prototype realizations of a module of a permanent holographic memory and device for
recording holograms with use of semiconducting lasers. [Input by am 35312 (ussn
main Publlic Scientific-Technical Library). 103031, Hosccw. K-3l, ulitsa. Kumetskiy
moat. 12 .

1&9. 28935. ”Semiconductor large-capacity memory unit based on K565RUl dynamic inte-
grated circuit.“ Nozik, I. R., and Vasilishin. S. H. In books 'Razvitiye teorii i
tekhniki sredstv khraneniya informatsii"; Tezisy dokladov Vseaoyuznoy nauchno-tekhni-
cheskoy konferentsii Hoskva. Riga, 1980. pp 63-65 (Scientific-Tecrmical Society of
Radio engineering. Electronics and Communications ineni A. s. Popov). A sendcorductor
main storage based on K 565301 integrated nicrocircuits has been developed and intro-
duced into the composition of a OOI)“iter. [Input by cm 5888].

52. 289W. "Improvement of the elementary base of optical storage based on inte-
grated optical devices.” Pokrovskiy. Yu. A., Hakaretskiy. Ye. A., and Khurkhulu.

Yu. S. In book: "Razvitiye teorii i tekhniki sredstv khraneniya informatsii"; Tezisy
dokladov Vsesoyuanoy nauchno-tekhnichedcoy konferentsii Hoskva, Riga, 1980, pp 53-55
(Scientific-Technical Society of Radio Engineering, Electronics and Conmnications
ineni A. S. Popov). Some questions of inprwement of the elementary base of optical
storage based on integrated optical devices are discussed. [Input by ems 3353].

53. 289:5. ”Unused possibilities of computer ferrite norires.” Burkin. Yu. A. In
book: 'Razvitiye teorii i tekhniki sredstv khraneniya inforIatsii”; Tezisy dokladov
Vsesoyuznoy nauctmo-tekhnicheskoy konferentsii Hoskva. Riga. 1980, pp 52-53. (Scien-
tific-Technical Society of Radio Engineering, Electronics and Coimmications ineni A.
S. Popov). A new technology is described for the production of ferrite storages. one
developed by the Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences. [Input by cm 8851!}

COPYRIGHT: Tsentral'nyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut informatsii i tekhniko-
ekonomicheskikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya, sredstv avtomtizatsii
i sisten upravleniya ('renrrmpriboroetroyeniye). 1981
217';
cso. 1863/99

137
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

SELECTED ITDIS FROM JOURNAL 'INSTRWTS, MEANS OF AUTOMATION AND CONTROL SYSTEMS',
DECEMBER, 1.981

Moscow PRIBORX. SEEDSI'VA AVTOHATIZATSII I 8131?!!! UPRAV'IB'IYA. 18-2: 811806?“ VICKI-
SLITEL'NOY THMIKI I WWI (REFERA‘I'IVNYY swam) in Russian No 12. Dec 81
pp 1-12

[Excerpts]

UDc 681.325.65.06
33. 306154. ”Software for the MON-SF system." Borisovs. Yo. 1.. Vasil'yev. Ye.
P., Lyshenko. V. 1.. Orlov. Ye. $1.. Popel', L. M” and Tmskovs. S. H. MTRWAYA
Pmsmmos'r'. 1981, No 2 (98). pp 28-33. The paper presents software developed
for the series-produced system for monitoring large-scale integrated-cirwit nos-cry
units and microprocessors MON-SP. including the high-level monitoring language
MOI! F, a complete set of programs for statistical processing of the results of
monitoring the large-scale integrated circuit and programs for monitoring working
capacity. diagnosis of defects and astrological certification of the system. [Input
by cm 3353 (USSR Kain Pﬁhlic Scientific-Technical Library). 103031, Hoscow. K-31,
ulitsa Kuznetskiy lost. 12 .

UDc 621.3.009.77:681.2
34. 30605. “The KSWPAI infra-analog converter.“ Abraytis. V. 3., and Klimhsu-
skas. mama mmsmnos'r'. 1981. No 2 (98). pp u9-50. The paper presents
the Iain characteristics of an infra-analog omverter, intended for conversion of a,
12-bit code into analog current with an error of 0.012 percent. [Input by GPNTB SSSR].

UDC 621.3.0b9.77:681.327.67
35. 306166. "Kl70AP3 and K1700“ integrated semiconducting nicrocircuits for metal-
lic-oxide semiconductor storage control." Sansonov. V. 5., and thel'nitskiy. 8. L.
ELEX'I‘RONNAYA PRMSIEMOST'. 1981. No 2 (98), pp #849. The paper presents the min
electronic clnrscteristics of K170”) and K1700“ nicrocircuits intended for metallic-
oxide seniconductor storage. [Input by GPNTB 8553].

um 621.3.on9.771.1h
Sh. 30602. "Installation for mnctionsl monitoring of a large-scale integrated cir-

cuit main storage." Donilin, N. 11.. and Popel'. L. H. ELECTRWNAYA PRGHSHLENNM'.
I

138
' DR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1931. No 2 (98), pp 15—18. A brief technical characterization is given of an in-

stallation for ﬂmctional monitoring of the ELEXON F-ZUM large-scale integrated-
circuit main storage. [Input by GPN'I‘B SSSR].

UDC 621.382.619.3

55. 306153. ”Statistical analysis of pametric reliability of a 256-bit large-scale
integrated-circuit min memory.“ Gorovoy, V. V., and Savotin, Yu. I. EIEXTRONNAYA
PROMYSMENNOST', 1981. No 2(98), pp 153-16; Bibliography: h items. The paper presents
the results of investigation of the parametric reliability of a static min memory
with a capacity of 256 bits on ESL-structures and deterlination of possible ways to
increase main mory reliability. Used for analysis was the physical-statistin
approach, based on consideration of the interrelation of the statistical laws of

distribution of the parameters of an article with the character of their variation
in time. [Input by mm; 5553].

WC 621.3.0Q9.?71681.3
56. 306W. ”Data file KRSjSiyeLt with a 16K capacity for a symbol generator." -

Nazar'yan, A. R.. Neklyudov. V. A” and Shchetinin. Yu. I. MTRONNAYA PROHYSM-
NOST'. 1981. No 2(98). pp z$6458. The paper examines the purpose. compositions and
ﬁmctions of a KRSSSRYeh data file for a. symbol generator. The Iain electrical para-
meters of the file are presented. [Input by GPN'I'B 8883].

COPYRIGHT: Tsentral'nyy nauchno-issledovatel‘skiy institut inforntsii i tekhniko-
ekononicheskikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya. sredstv avtomtizateii
1 sisten upravleniya (TsNIITEIpriborostroyeniya), 1981

217a
cso: 1863/99 END

139
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY