l-‘OR ()Fl-‘lflr'ﬁ. 158}: ONLY

JPRS L/10340
19 February 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcrihed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/I

1 9 Pebn

WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(POUO 3/82)

CONTENTS

UORLWI DE AFFAIRS

Pan-European Satellite Broadcasting Planned
(Kenneth Golsing; 111E TIMES, 18 Jan 82).

USSR

Automatic lbnitoring of SVPc-ZPG Equipment
(I. G. Gasin, et a1.; VBSTNIK SWAZI, Aug 81)..............

Briefs
Large-Scale Integrated Circuits

WEST EUROPE

NATIONAL AFFAIRS
Briefs
. French Help Australians Hith Satellite

British Participate in German Satellite
French-German Satellite Delayed

-a-- un-ww-uo

L'ﬂﬂ Am" a I IIGI.‘ I‘M. ‘1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.\

HORLDHIDE AFFAIRS

PAN-EUROPEAN SATELLITE BROADCASTING PLANNED
PHl8l607 London THE TIMES in English 18 Jan 82 p 3
[Kenneth Golsing report: "European Satellite TV Trial To Start in Spring")

[Text] The first Pan-European experiment to prepare for direct broadcasting by
satellite is likely to begin this Spring, when Britain, Austria, West Germany and
Italy. will in turn present a week's programmes, the best of their cutout, on
closed-circuit television.

An assessment of the experiment will follow; but experts believe that there is an
extremely strong chance of success. Hany difficulties have to be solved but a
full service could be possible by the end of the decade.

Representatives of the four countries will meet in Geneva on Thursday and Friday
to make arrangements. The first week of the experiment will probably be in the
Spring, the second in the Summer and the others in the Autumn and Winter.

Five other countries are interested in providing programmes for the service:
Holland, the Irish Republic, Portugal, Switzerland and Belgium (Flemish). Those
interested in receiving the service are Malta, Tunisia, Spain, Algeria and Belgium
(French).

The first of many conferences on broadcasting by satellite was held in Dublin 5
years ago. In 1980 European Broadcasting Union representatives met in Venice to
discuss an offer from the European Space Agency of free use for television experi-
ments of the two broadcasting channels planned for their L-SAT (large satellite)

project.

The meeting resulted in the formation of a group of experts from the broadcasting
organizations of Britain (Independent Broadcasting Authority/Independent Television
Companies Association), France (TF1), Germany (ARD), Italy, Austria, Holland, Por-
tugal and Sweden.

The L—SAT project is planned to begin in 1986. The British Government has announced
that it will subscribe one-third of the cost (77m pounds); the other big partner
is Italy, also one-third, and participants include Canada, Holland, Switzerland,

Austria, Belgium. Spain and Denmark.

This year's experiment will attempt to come to terms with such difficulties as copy-
right, and the provision of a multi-sound signal allowing viewers in different

countrks to tune to their own language.

cso: 5500/2102 1
son omcw. us: ONLY
I'UK WHLIAL USE ONLY

USSR

AUTOMATIC MONITORING OF SVVG-ZPG EQUIPMENT
Moscow VBSTNIK SVYAZI in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 29-32
[Article by I. G. Gasin, c. B. zlotnik. and S. P. Ivanitskiy, engineers of TTsUHs-7]

[Text] The progressive method of operating repeater stations (U?) with maintenance
by an emergency call which is being introduced widely in the network provides for
automatic monitoring of the equipment of repeater stations and line channels and
transmission of a fault signal when they are damaged to the residence of a techni-
cian (or, if necessary, to other services). The article "How Repeater Stations Are
Serviced 'by Call'" ("Vestnik avyazi", 1976, No 11) examines the designs of circuits
for monitoring line channels of transmission systems via balanced and coaxial cables
and the delivery of a "Fault" signal when the line channel is damaged in the section

served by the repeater station.

However, besides the line channel equipment, many UP also have group equipment whose
work must also be monitored. The Territorial Monitoring Center of Intercity Tele-
phone Communications and Television No 7 (TTsUHS-7) developed and introduced a de-
vice which makes it possible to monitor the SVPG-ZPG separation equipment used wide-
ly in the network.

The SVPG-ZPG bay separates two primary groups from the spectrum of the line channel
of the transmission system K-60: instead of the two groups separated in the trans-
mission, two other primary groups are introduced in the same spectrum. The sepa-
rated four groups (two of one direction and two of the other) are monitored by al-
ternate connection to the pilot channel receiver PKK of 84.14 kHz with the aid of
the scanning circuit of the equipment; however, the groups introduced to transmis-
sion are not monitored. The device developed by TTsUHS-7 automatically monitors the
primary groups introduced into the trmsnission; if there is a fault, it determines
the section of the damage (in a monitored or in a nonmonitored equipment) and forms
“Damage" signal when there is a fault in the monitored equipment. This makes it pos-
sible, firstly, to monitor the entire equipment of the SVPG-ZPG bay, including its
transmitting part and, secondly, to prevent unjustified calls to the technical pre-
sonnel when another (transmitting) UP is damaged.

For monitoring the condition of the transmitting part of the SVPC-ZPG equipment,
group KCh are isolated from the line channel on transmission. when their level de-
viates beyond the triggering limits of the "emergency" relay, a signal about the
malfunctioning of the transmitting part of the equipment of the given UP forms in

IND! OIIWCIAI.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the PKK (12.61 dB) (it is understood here and hereafter that the groups introduced
into transmission are formed at the given station, and are not transitory). Then,
in order to determine whether or not the receiving part of the separation equipment
is in good order, the KCh level of this group in the line channel is monitored. If
this level is normal, it can be said that the monitored equipment is damaged; if the
deviation from the norm at this point exceeds 2.61 dB, then the damage is beyond the
limits of that UP.

Thus, instead of four monitoring points provided for by the SVPG-ZPG equipment, 12
points are monitored (additionally, four points in the line channel in reception and
four in transmission).

All points are monitored in succession by the PKK 84.14 which is located in the
SVPG-ZPG equipment (Figure l). The interrogation cycle begins with the position in
which the scanning circuit is set by pressing the button "Start" in the PU [control
panel] of the ARU [automatic level control]. The PKK 84.14 monitors the first group
being separated and delivers one of the three signals: "Normal”, "Emergency", or
"Adjustment". If the Kch level is normal in the group, when the cadence pulse ar-
rives, PKK is switched to contrvl of the same group on transmission in the line chan-
nel. If the "Adjustment" signal arrives, scanning stops and the amplification of
the PPR of the PC of the group is changed in the direction of the normal level of
KCh. When the norm is reached (or when a pulse arrives from the time relay RV), PKK
switches to monitoring this group on transmission in the line channel.

It PKK delivers the signal "Emergency", the device interrogates the memory cell

which stored information on whether or not the Kch level of the given primary group
in the spectrum of the line channel is normal. At the time of the initial connec-
tion, there is no such information in the memory cell (state "0"), and PKK is switch-
ed to monitoring the KCh level of the damaged group in the line channel. If the

KCh level is not within normal limits at that point too. the scanning continues and
the receiver is connected for monitoring the same group on transmission -- the dam-
age is not in the monitored equipment. If there is no emergency signal from PKK
during the interrogation of the damaged group in the line channel (this corresponds
to a damage in the monitored equipment), the memory cell is switched to the state

"1" and PKK is connected again to the damaged group. At that time (as a result of
"1" state of the memory cell), the scanning stops; the pointer indicator of PKK

shows the Kch level of the damaged group; a signal is switched on which can be trans-
mitted to the residence of the maintenance personnel and to other services.

When the group is monitored on transmission, and when there is no "Emergency" sig-
nal from PKK, the scanning continues, PKK is connected for monitoring the second
isolated group. However, if the KCh level in the group on transmission is not with~
in normal limits and PKK delivered an "Emergency" signal, then the scanning stops
and the emergency signaling is switched on: a damage in the transmitting part of

the monitored equipment; at that time, the pointer indicator of PKK shows the group
KCh level of the damaged group. The monitoring of the three remaining groups is
done in the same way.

The four separated Pc are connected to PKK with the aid of diode relays HP -1 --

HP -4 contained in the SVPG-ZPG equipment which are controlled from the automatic
control unit (Figure 2). The primary groups monitored in the line channel are

FOIiHNﬂClALI£NE¢MNLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030049-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ ﬂmulun-pmlmm no 2pm.: (1)

”lulu "om ,ayra'
mm It nu
pa rum". (3)

     

Key

   
   
  

 
  
  
    

luau”
“killing.
tpynru I

A no hm
Mme: I _
trawl £57.?!

[HI-(Ivan

       
   
  

  

Mank- : I non-pun-
I’luﬂ’l lair-cc.
gun-rut
man nun:

   

l6)Muilllll A: I
ll'lll'alz -
my m, u:

        
  

   

"mun I up!!! n Radar.
Bummer ma unuw

    

(17)

All," (I‘)

   
   
   

   

- (4) u .mwlzn 18 .
#75551: «a: #4735. )l

fut-um“: n: In:

19) Juan.” Imynu
u an":

Figure 1. Algorithm of Automatic Monitoring of SVPG-
2P6
13. Monitoring of damaged group in the line channel
16. Emergency in group I. Indication of group I. Sca
delivered to residence

15. Damage in monitored equipment. Memory cell switch
16. Damage is not in the monitored equipment

17. Monitoring of group I on transmission. Memory cal
18. Emergency in group I on transmission. Scanning at

residence
19. Monitoring of group II on reception

4
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NULY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500030049-0
connected to PKK with the aid of diode relays HP -5 and ‘EP -6. Since group IV.
in the line channel is in the spectrum of 60-108 kHz (group Kch 84.14 kHz), it is
not required to convert it for monitoring PKK 84.10, and it is only amplified in the
unit YC 60-108. Group v in the line channel is in the spectrum of 12-60 kHz (erup
KCh 35.86 kHz), therefore, for monitoring its PKK 8é.14, group V is subjected to
conversion with the aid of a carrier frequency Of 120 kHz. having first passed the
FNCh [low-pass filter] A -60 which filters signals of other groups. The filtra-
tion, conversion and amplification are performed in the standard ﬂﬂp UI‘- 5
unit.

(1)140- 5'”-

  

Pigure 2. Diagram of Connections of PKK 86.14 kHz to Primary
GrOups and Line Channels

Key: 1. Line channels 4. Separated primary groups
2. Transmission 5. Group
3. Reception 6, kHz
7. PKK

Diode relays ﬂP-6 and AP -6 pass signals only during the interrogation of the
line channels and work alternately: AP-S switches on during the interrogation of
group IV. and nP-o during the interrOgation of group V.

Connection to the line channels on a transmission is acc0mplished through line
diode relays ﬂP-7, ﬂ? -8 and high-resistance resistors Rl-Rh. Relay HP -7
is switched on during the monitoring of the groupaii the direction 8 -A; relay

n? -8 -- during the monitoring of the group of the direction A - 8. Since
the monitoring of the group KCh in the line channel on reception is done rarely. in
order to increase the cross talk attenuationfnﬂltransmissionto reception,connection
to the line channel on reception is done with the aid of electromagnetic relays of
the RES-9 type and high-resistance resistors RS-Rs. Relay P2 is switched on when
it is necessary to monitor the groups of the Ac E direction; relay P3 -- B -A
direction. Resistors R9 and R10 serve for matching the output resistances of the
diode relays 11P-7 and ZIP -8 with the input resistances of units YC 60-108 and
“Up HP ‘5.

5

FOR OiIUCJAl.USE¢NNLY
I‘M Ul'fll Ill. UM. UNI.‘

The number of monitored points is increased by using an additional shift register
consisting of three R-S triggers (Figure 3). The additional shift register together
with the main shift register consisting of four triggers which are in the scanning
circuit of SVPG-ZPG make it possible to obtain 12 states of the registers which cor-
respond to 12 required points of monitoring.

 

Figure 3. Circuit Diagram of Shift Registers
Key: 1. Multivibrator
2. Contacts 21-22 of relay Pl...Pa
of PU ARU
3. Additional shift register
a. Main shift register
5. Biased multivihrator

The outputs of the triggers, through the logic circuits (not shown in Figure 3),
control the switching of the diode relays 11? 1-111" 8. In each of the registers,
one trigger is always in the "1" position, and the remaining are in the "Zero" po-
sition. For example, when the “Start" button is pressed, triggers T'll and T's 2
are set to the "1" position. In the mode of normal functioning, i.e., when there
is no "Emergency" signal from PKK, Tr‘2 is bypassed by the contacts of relay Pl.
Moreover, there is an auxiliary trigger T¢v0 with a counting input (upper left in
Figure 3).

The monitoring of the groups in the mode of normal functioning progesses in the
following manner. The auxiliary trigger Taro passes each second pulse from the
plate of the multivibrator in the PU ARU unit to the input of the additional shift
register. With each positive pulse passing to the input of the register, its trig-

gers Tdrl and T 4‘3 change their states, the states of these triggers being oppo-
site to one another.

If T'Ll is in the "I" state. then one of the separated groups is monitored; if To 3
is in the "I" state, then one of the groups on transmission is monitored. When T-u3
changes from the "1" state to the "0" state, the differentiated positive pulse from
its output goes to the input of the main shift register in the PU ARU unit, at which
time the next trigger of the main register changes to the "1" state.

6

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on which of the triggers of the main register is in the "1" state, one of
the four separated (introduced) groups is switched to PKK.

When there is a failure in a separated grOup, signals from PKK are delivered and at
that time the relay P1 is switched on, shunting with its contacts the contacts of
the group relays in PU ARU and restoring the passage circuit of cadence pulses.
Other contacts of Pl switch the output of T’tl to the input of T’tz. preparing its
switching to the "1" state, which corresponds to the monitoring of the damaged group
on reception in the line channel. At that time one of the line relays P2 or P3 is
switched on.

During the switching of one control group to another, it is possible that the con-
tacts of the relay "Emergency" in PR! touch each other instantaneously, which could
lead to errors in the evaluation of the state of the channels. Therefore, the re-
ception of information about the state of the channels is done in the second half

of the time unit when the "Emergency" relay of PR! has already assumed the establish-
ed position. For this, with the aid of trigger T'LO, each time unit (the time be-
tween two consecutive pulses at the input of the additional register) is divided
into two half cycles and interrogation of the "Emergency“ relay of YKK is done dur-
ing the second half cycle, when T1—0 is in the "1" state.

The location of the damaged section is determined during the monitoring of damaged
group in the spectrum of the line channel. If no damage signal is received in this
case from PKK, then it is taken as a damage of the monitored equipment, the memory
cell switches to the "l" state, the biased multivibrator generates a single positive
pulse which sets the additional shift register to the initial position, and PKK re-
turns to monitoring the separated damaged group. A damage signal arrives again from
PKK, however, since the memory cell is now in the "1" state, the logic device pro-
duces a signal about a damage in the monitored equipment; at the same time, relay

P1 in the automatic control unit switches offzthe cadence pulse circuit breaks, and
scanning stops. When the damage is corrected, the group relay in the PU ARU unit

is switched off, the cadence pulse circuit is restored and scanning of the monitored
points starts again. If during the monitoring of the damaged grOup there is a dam-
age signal from PKX in the spectrum of the line channel (damage is not in the moni-
tored equipment), then, with the arrival of the next cadence pulse, trigger Tlr3 of
the additional register is set into the "1" position, which corresponds to the mon-
itoring of the damaged group on transmission; the contents of the memory cell are
erased.

if a damage signal arrives from PKK during the monitoring of a grOup on transmis-
sion, then, firstly, there forms a signal about a damage of the group in the trans~
mitting part of the monitored equipment and, secondly, relay P6 switches on whose
contacts break the cadence pulse circuit and stop scanning. At a normal group KCh
level in the line channel on transmission, the arrival of the next cadence pulse
returns the additional register to the initial state, and the shift register T1.II
in the main shift register assumes the "1" state, which corresponds to the monitor-
ing of the second group on reception. The algorithms of the monitoring of all four
separated groups is analogous. ignaling about damages of a group are performed
with the aid of a special relay whose contacts deliver "ground" into the signaling
circuit.

FINI<IFFICIAL.U§HE(H§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The device is designed in the form of three blocksarranged in free areas of the
SVPG-ZPG bay, an automatic control unit, and two standard units YC 60-108 and ﬂﬁp
nt‘-5. The circuit of the automatic control unit is arranged on three plates; it
has four plates of the diode relays [1? 5-11? 8.

An automatic control unit was installed and has been operating steadily at one of
the repeater stations maintained "on call". There were instances of damages in the
transmitting part of the monitored equipment which were determined by the device
described here and were effectively corrected.

The same principle can be used to organize monitoring of other equipment of repeater
stations. for example, the bay for separating secondary groups SWG and the group
conversion hay SGP.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio i svyas'", 1981

10,233
cso: 5500/1009

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

LARGE-SCALE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS -- Microelectronics and optical electronics pro-

ducts of high level of integration which ensure high technical and economic indexes
are used widely in the latest comunications equipment, particularly in the equip-
ment for local networks. Specialized large-scale integrated circuits (BIS) are be-

the USSR Ministry of Comunicstions, mus presented a report on "Specialised BIS as
the Basis of the Development of Digital Communication Syetems" which dealt with the

subscribers' digital optoelectronic data transmission systems and showed that the
majority of BIS for these systems can be produced on the basis of the series-produc-

"Radio 1 avyaz'", I98l7 10,233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

FRENCH HELP AUSTRALIANS WITH SATELLITE--The French company Hatra has just signed
with the Australian National University a protocol of agreement providing for the
transfer of technology for carrying out the "Starlab" project, in the eventuality
of selection of the French firm and its associate British Aerospace for construc-
tion of the future AUSSAT Australian telecosuunications satellites. Starlab is a
joint project among Australia, the United States and Canada for building a large
space telescope to be put into orbit by the American Space Shuttle in 1989. Aus-
tralia is participating in this project with the supplying of a considerable part
of the future telescope's instrumentation--in partiCular, s photon-counter system.
The Australian participation in the Starlab project is reported to total about

SA 2’4 million. Prof Don Mathewson, director of the Mt Stromlo-Siding Springs ob-
servatory, is responsible for Starlab's Australian instrumentation. The signing of
the agreement between Hatra and the Australian university follows the information
visits by Hatra engineers to Australia and by representatives of the Mt Stromlo ob-
servatory to Hatra in recent months. This compensation agreement places the com-
pany Satcom International, in which Matra and British Aerospace are associated, in
a good position in relation to its competitors in the AUSSAT project. The Austra-
lian government desires to obtain from the future contractors about one-feurth of
the amount of the AUSSAT program contract in the form of space-technology transfer.
This would be a means for Australia to train its industry in space techniques, with
a View to future projects. [Text] [Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 12 Dec Bl p 43]

H267

BRITISH PARTICIPATE IN GERMAN SATELLITE--Great Britain has decided to collaborate
in the PRC project for the ROSAT scientific satellite, which is to be launched at
the beginning of l987 for study of X-rays. The British Science and Engineering Re—
search Council (SERC) will participate to the extent of 5 percent, or 8.75 million
pounds, in this project that totals nearly Fr 2 billion! The SERC will furnish an
0.5-m telescope making it possible to detect X-rays of longer wavelength and over a
wider field than the satellite's British 0.8-1: satellite. ROSAT will seek in par-
ticular X-ray sources 100 times weaker than those discovered to date, notably by
the American READ, the British Ariel 6, and the Japanes Hskucho satellites. It is
thought that it should thus discover 100,000 new X-ray sources, of which it will
study :everal thousand in detail. The specialists are expecting a lot from ROSAT,
which will be three times more sensitive than the American HEAD 2 satellite, alias
"Einstein Laboratory." The ROSA'I‘ satellite will go into service after the European
EXOSAT satellite, which will be launched in 1982, and before the future AXA“ satel-
lite of NASA, which should be launched in the aid-1990's. [Text] [Paris AIR ET
COSMOS in French 19 Dec 8l p 60] 11267

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRENCH-GERMAN SATELLITE DELAYED-launching of the first two experimental di-
rect television satellites, TDF 1 for France and TV SAT for Germany, has
been postponed for about 6 months due to delay in setting up industrial fa-
cilities for the program, official sources state. Delivery of the satel-
lites is now planned for 5 February 1985 in the case of TV SAT, and 5 May

1985 for TDF 1, which will postpone launching until May 1985 for the German
satellite and September 1985 for the French. The firm Telediffusion de

France, which will use TDF 1, would have preferred its satellite to be orbi-
ted in July 1985, but that launching slot is now reserved on a priority ba-
sis for the ESA [European Space Agency? Giotto comet probe, whose launching
on 10 July 1985 is imperative so that it may overfly Halley's Comet when

the latter next appears. The experimental satellites TDF 1 and TV SAT will
be built by the Franco-Germ group Eurosatellite Gmbﬁ, which includes the
French firms Aerospatiale and Thomson-(SF, and the German firms HEB and ma-
Telefunken. An initial contract for DH 100 million has already been signed
this year for the preliminary phase of the work. The builders are now await-
ing the major contract, which in principle is to be 31 ed in March 1982.
[5er [Eerie AIR m cosmos in French 2 Jan 82 p t+§7 Article by Pierre
Langereug] ﬁomxomr: A. a c. 19837 6145

C80: 5500/ 2081 END

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY