FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10448

13 April 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 15/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained .

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
IRAN

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 15/82)

CONTENTS

Destruction of Baha'i Community Seen as 'Pinal Solution'
(mrcel Peju; JEINB APRIQUE. 20 Jan 82)....................

Kurdish Leader Explains Inti-Khomyni Struggle
(Edvard Pbrtimer; THE TIPBS, 27 Mar 82)....................

)bjehedin-e Khelq leader Rajavi Interviewed
(Mas'ud Rejevi Interview; AWATAN AL-‘ARABI.
19-25 Feb 82)OIIOCOOIIOCCOIOC00....0.....OOOIOOOQOOIOIIDD.O

Tudeh Said 1b Be Assisting Government Against Opposition
(AL‘HAW “0"MI, 19-25 Feb 82).!IIIOOIDOOOIIIO00.0.0...

Revolution Guard Terror Seen Creating lhny Enemies
(Batman Nirumnd;s13lm, 11 Mar 82)........................

Briefs
Oomist Leader's Government ties
Agricultural bums

15

21
21
DESTRUCTION 0F BAEA'I COMMUNITY SEEN-AS 'HNAL SOLWION'
Paris J'EUNE AFRIQUB in French No 1098, 20 Jan 82 pp 58-59
[Article by Marcel Peju: "The Final Solution")

[Text] The young woman went to Evin Prison in Tehran on 25 December, on a

night that for others was Christmas. "I went lay husband," she said. "He was
arrested." "What for?" "Because he is Baha'i." "Hint was he doing?" "Noth-
ing except on 13 December, he went to the Spiritual Assenbly of our connunity.

There were eight of then and they took them all away." “Then it is useless
to come back. He will be hanged tonight."

At first, the woman refused to believe what she had heard. She made more ap-
peals. did everything possible. On 29 December, a runor spread that five men-
bers of the assembly (the community's highest body) had been executed without
a trial. 0n the 31st, it was reported that they were all dead and had been
secretly buried in the "cemetery of the infidels." 0n 3 January, the Ayatollah
Houssavi Ardebili, chief magistrate of the Islamic Supreme Court, made the
strange reply that "while this information was recent, it was groundless."

_ Three days later, the same ayatollah nevertheless confirmed the execution of
eight leaders for "spying on behalf of foreign powers." The next day, the
announcement was made of the murder of six more Baha'i arrested at a meeting
on 2 November by an "unidentified armed group" and of the wman at whose hone
they had been meeting. 0f nine more Baha'i who "disappeared" on 22 August
1980, there is still no word.

out this tragic episode is only the last in a series of 'nurders, kidnapings,
destruction and persecution whose systeeatic nature leads one to fear that
the islanic government today wants nothing sore than the extermination (or
forced conversion) of the entire Baha'i enmity, a couunity of over 300,000
members, represented in all ethnic groups and all classes of Iran, but parti-
cularly in the intelligentsia: The eight leaders assassinated included a
doctor, lawyer, economist, writer, and so on. And yet, it is an accursed
comunity because in less than a century and a half of existence, it has been
persecuted by every regile in Tehran, which seem all the paradoxical because
it preaches religious tolerance and forbids its members from practicing any
kind of political nilitancy.

Who are the Baha'i, after all? In short, they are the followers of a religion
first preached in Persia by a 25-yearbold Shiite nerchant, Seyyed Ali when-ad.

”WWW?
On 22 Hay 1844 in Chiraz, proclaiming the end of the prophetic times of Islam,
Seyyed Ali Mohamed announced that he was the Bab, the "doorway" to truth and
entrusted with the task of setting forth new laws to replace those of the
Koran, now outdated. his message found such a response in all strata of
society, including the Islamic clergy and the royal family, that fierce re-
pression was unleashed by the shah. Over 20,000 Baha‘i would be exterminated.
The Bab himself was arrested, tortured and finally shot in Tabriz in 1850, at
the age of 31.

Thirteen years later, one of the survivors of the massacre, Bossein Ali ﬂouri,
called Baha'U'llah, was recognized as the continuator, while clarifying and
developing his doctrine, whence the name of Baha'i taken from then on by his

disciples, who would swarm all over the world. There are now over 3 million
in some 130 countries, with more in India than in Iran.

The central theme of the Baha'i doctrine is that of the unity of an inacces-
sible god, who is manifested by successive revelations. Abraham, Moses,
Buddha, Zoroaster, Jesus, Hunts-ad and finally, the Bab, are the messengers
through whom he addressed himself to men, adapting his."language" to their
intellectual development and to their historic, geographic and social condi-
tions. Today, the Bab proclaims, the time has come for human unity. It is
therefore necessary to go beyond religious oppositions, ban any kind of clergy,
drastically reduce rituals and reject political parties, a factor of division.
At the same time, Baha'ima affirms the equality of the sexes and the primacy
of science over faith, condemns extreme poverty and extreme wealth and finally,
preaches a new world order with free access of peoples to all natural resources.

The fact that this acmenical and nonviolent doctrine should have given rise
to such hatred might seem surprising. Actually, it suffered first of all from
spring from Islam and then splitting off from it. In all religions, heretics
are more disgraced than institutional adversaries. It has also suffered from
its modernism, which has opened the doors of the intellectual elite and some—
times, of material success, to its members. Finally, it has been reproachsd
for its solidarity in the face of persecution itself. In many ways, the

fate of the Baha'i in Iran resembles that of the Jews in Europe: the eternal

scapegoats of the most primitive "em. ;ions" of the people and of governments
in difficulty.

Actually, with times of paroxysm interspersed with calmer periods, the perse-
cution of the Baha'i has never ceased. From the time of the monarchic consti-
tution of 1906-1907, worsened under the Pahlavi (1925-1979), they have been
outlawed. Only four religions are in fact recognized: malim, Christian,
Jewish and Zoroastrian.

The result is that the Baha'i are excluded from the administration, driven
of the army and of education, financially strangled by special taxes, and
pogroms are regularly launched against them by the masses with the complicity
of the police. The year 1955 was particularly harsh, marked by murders,

rapes, arson, looting, the destruction of spiritual centers and the profane-
tion of cemeteries.

POIOFFIGALIJSEONLY
Far from improving since the fall of the Shah and the Islamic revolution, the
situation has worsened. And if a tragic parallel exists here, it is once more
with the Nazi policy on the Jews. Initially, the government tried to gradually
wipe out the Baha'i community by depriving its meters of resources, seizing
their businesses and their religious holdings and paralyzing their institutions.
This was followed by the physical elimination of the lenders of the comnity
(the elected members of its spiritual assemblies) end its intellectual elite.
The third phase meant that the Baha'i, divided and damoralized, would no longer
have any choice except between forced conversion and disappearance.

In this persecution, one must undoubtedly make room for all the fantasies of
the sexual obsession. Because they proclaim the equality of the sexes and
refuse to veil their women, the Baha'i are deliberately accused of libertinage.
how can this be established? Very simply. According to the law, only mar-
riages celebrated according to the rites of one of the four legal religions can
be officially recorded. Consequently, the Baha'i are not legally married. The
certificates issued by their community are likened to an invitation to debauch-
ery. Their relations are labeled as concubinage or prostitution. Their chil-
dren are illegitimate. All crimes are punishable by death based on "earthly
corruption."

A very bitter humor is not out of place here. Among the property seized from
the rich Baha'i, one serious opponent tells, is a small palace, an imitation
of the Trianon at Versailles. The Islamic Republic turned it into a bordelLo.
But morals are safe: At the entrance. while collecting his tax, a mullah pro-
ceeds to effect a "temporary marriage" (sigheh) -— provided for by Islamic
law - which he will dissolve at the exit.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11,566
cso: 4619/67

MWLIBEONLY
KURDISII LEADER EXPLAINS ANTI-WI STRUCXILB
M91707 London ms TIMES in English 27 Her 82 p 9
[Report by Edward Hortiler: "Relaxed Guerrilla 's Tight Grip"]

[Text] "He were fighting Khonsyni before the Iraqis, and I have the iapression
we'll be fighting bin after them too."

Dr Abdulrahnan Qasenlou, leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran,
does not conform to the Western ilage of a Kurdish guerrilla leader. he is
a relaxed, humorous middleaged man who used to teach economic planning at
the University of Prague. But Kurdish Pesh Merge under his comand have

been holding Ayatollah Khomeyni's forces at bay in the Kurdish mountains
for nearly two years.

"We still control more than [figure indistinct] square kilometres and all
the main roads from the Soviet frontier to Kemnshah" (the main city of
southern Kurdistan). he declares.

"We have 12,000 regular fresh merge (guerrilla forces) and between
50,000 and 60,000 armed peasants who are ready to help when called out.

"Against us the Iranian Government has mobilized 40,000 regular troops and
45,000 revolutionary guards and bassij~teenagers who are called up and sent
straight to the front after only three days' training."

Dr Qasemlou has been in Europe for the last six weeks or so, mainly holding
discussions with other leaderr of the National Resistance Council, led by
former President Bani-Sadr and Mr Masud Rajavi, leader of the people's
bbjahedin guerrilla organization.

Dr Qasanlou hopes to return to Kurdistan (by an undisclosed route) within
the next two weeks.

In an interview with THE TIHBS, Dr Qasenlou described his relations with
the Iraqi Governnent as those of "good neighbours." They shared a canon
ens-y, but the Iranian Kurds were not dependent on Iraqi support, he said.
Their supplies reached than partly through Iraq, but they were snuggled

in, not sent officially. "Contraband has always been an important branch
of the economy in Kurdistan."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
His relations with Iraqi Kurdish groups fighting the Bath regine were also
good. he said, with the exception of the group led by the sons of

General Barxsni, vhich had been obliged to participate in an Iranian
Government offensive against the Iranian Kurds last sumr as a condition

of being allowed to retain its bases and refugee camps in Iran.

COPYRIGl-l’rz‘ Times Newspapers Limited 1982

cso: 4600/369

FOR OFFICI'AL USE ONLY
HOJAHEDIN-B KHALQ LEADER RAJAVI INTERVIEW!)
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 262, 19-25 Feb 82 pp 62-“

[Interview with Haa'ud Rajavi by AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘ARABI in Paris: Washington-
Tehran-Tel Aviv: A Standing Alliance, and Relations Are a Mere Formality";
date not specified]

lgexgl ‘rhrae full years after Khomeyni‘s return to Iran. all illusions have been
dispelled and the smoke has drawn away, showing the scene in its dreadful reality:
the people who exalted at the fall of the Shah are now colliding with their most
cherished hopes. Indeed, they are starting to ask God's mercy over the dictator-
ship of the recent past!

The Iranian Liberation Movement is today in political abeyance and the alliance
between the Hojshedin-e Khalq and former President Abel llasan Bani-Sadr seems to
be the only possible alternative to the post-Khomeyni stage, now that the new
regime has lost every social, economic and political justification for its exist-
ence.

AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘ARABI is going back to the Iranian file through a meeting with
Mas'ud Bajavi, the leader of the Mojahedin-e Khalq, who exiled himself to France,
and a review of the latest developments in the domestic situation following the
incident which ended the life of Ashraf kajavi and lo people in the Mojahedin's
central connittee last week.

A few days before the death of Hes'ud Rajavi's wife and 10 other matters of the
Mojahedin-e Khalq central connittee, we met for a conversation that lasted about
3 hours in his headquarters in Paris. Meetings with Rajavi are not always easy.
On top of the exceptional security measures that the trench police and the young
leader‘s aides have isposed on his headquarters, there is another "obstacle,"

which is the personality of Rajavi himself. lie has become well versed in the

"profession" of meeting with journalists, following his departure from Iran, and
it is not easy to entice him to say what he does not want to say. Noreover. he
has become well versed in dealing with the Iranian political arena, since he is
aware of the weight and the influence of every word he says. ‘rhen he is shrewd.
and there is nothing harder than to conduct a press interview with a shrewd man.

I asked lajavi: "Do you intend to open your heart and speak freely? lie replied
smiling, "I always speak freely."

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l uked hin. "They sey thet there is s dispute between you end Beni-Sedr. whet is
the truth on‘thet?"

[Answer] Listen, President beni-Sedr does not belong to the Hojehsdin orgenitetion;
why should he be expected to egree with us over everything? Of course there ere
sons disputes, since he hes his prenisee end we heve ours. however, the progre-

of the council to which we jointly belong end which we proposed to the teworery
government delinits the egree-ent between us. I cen reessure you thet there ere

no disputes over the progren. President Beni-Sedr hes signed it, es heve I. the
utter required some concessions on one side end the other, but thet is the lew of
ell elliences. he tell: shalt disputes is just rte-or whose intent is to cest doubts
on the feet thet we ere the only denocretic elternetive to Khonsyni's regine.

lguestiog7 At e meeting, President Beni-Sedr eddressed hiuelf to the stetus of the
three Areb islends thet Irsn occupied in the ere of the Shsh. He seid "These
islsnds would be converted into Anericen beses if we returned then to the Arebs.
Therefore he in turn refuses to return then. elthough he does ed-it thet the in-
hebitents of these islends ere Arebs. When I told hie thet his wey of thinking
nekes it lewful for Iren to violets internetionel lew end even occupy Areb Gulf
countries for reesons relsted to these countries' policies towerd the United Stetes,
he replied, in brief, Why not?“ You ere en elly of Beni-Sedr's; how would you
consent on this position?

/_A_nswe_g/ I would like to drew your ettention to the feet thet the issue of export-
ing the revolution or going beyond Iren'e borders is not one thet hes been rsised
enong us here in Peris. I believe thet revolution is not e consodity thet cen be
exported. God, in his glorious book, seid "God does not chenge s people's lot un-
less they chenge whet is in their own spirits." Chenge therefore comes from with-
in people end one therefore cennot eey thet the Leniens should chenge froe outside
whet is going on in e Gulf country, for exeeple. As regerds the Areb islends, 1
uk you to try to understend our politicel problems. I do not went to tell: ebout
this issue now, for enything I sey will be misinterpreted end Khoneyni any use it
in his propsgsnde egeinst ne. he is sitting there, weiting for me to telk, end I
do not went to provide him with enything thet will benefit hin.

lguestiog/ However, the issue of Iren's reletions with its neighbors still needs
e freak stetenent on the pert of the opposition, end clarity here is the only
proper position to teke, especielly since this issue hes not been deelt with by
itself, in spite of its isportence, in your most recent progren which wes issued
ebout 3 nonths ego.

IZnswegl The progress, like ell programs, stipuletes the generel bsses thet ere to
be epplied in eech cese. we heve seid thet we ere e noneligned country striving

for internetionel peece end cooperetion end I will describe whet I new to you in
more deteiled stetements. In the wer with Ireq, for exemle, the issue is not one
of weter, islends or lend; it is e netter of the survivel or diseppeerence of the
Irenien regime. If Khaneyni stops the wer, the Irenien regins will collspse right
efterwerd. If he egress to stop interfering in the effeirs of other countries, he
will fell eerly the neat nothing. In- Khoneyni hes hed more then one fevoreble

opportunity to stop the wer but he does not went to do so. Without wsr, he cennot

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from, or the incessant executions and the constant repression. So what does
Khmyni want to export? Hhet does he want to give the Arabs or others? Bxecu-
tions? Banging innocent [0-year olds? Killing wounded people? Chaos? Further
schisms and disputes? What can Khoneyni export?

linen}; We have information that lhomeyni has established cause on the eastern
shore of the Gulf to train some Arabs and Iranians to stir up coamotion in the

Gulf, above and beyond the broadcast bulletin we have received tron Iranian Radio's
Arabic broadcast asserting the blatant provocative approach the Iranian goverment
is pursuing toward the Arab governments in the Gulf. Do you have any special in-
formation on this subject?

[Answeg/ The fact is that I do not have any more information than you do. how-
ever, what I do know in general is that there is a reactionary policy that makes a
show of progressivism, but they are liars (he said that in Arabic). They try to
justify repression in Iran by talking about exporting revolution. Khonayni's for-
eign policy is part of his domestic policy. Not only thatc-his foreign policy, as
I stated, is necessary for the regime's survival. Otherwise, nomeyni would not
have used napalm in Kordestan. He would not have dealt with Israel. By the way,

a few days ago hafsanjani made a statement which the official news agency PARS
transmitted, in which he frankly said "He bought arms with Israel through contracts
signed in the days of the Shah." The odd thing here is that PARS translated
Rsfsanjani's statement, including his nention of Israel, verbatim into English, and
when the news agency broadcast this statement in Iran in Persian it neglected to
mention Israel but instead used the phrase "foreign countries." They are afraid of
the wrath of theIranian people and perhaps for this reason are setting up gallows
for them.

On the Halls in Tehran

I§uestio§7 what about the blocs inside Iran?

IZnsweg Listen, as long as lhouneyni reasins these blocs will be of no importance.
It is he who is managing the country'.‘ actual policy. Seventy percent of the re-
gime's staffs have been liquidated while Khomeyni has been saying that Iran is the
most stable country in the world. the aain bloc is that of the Iranian people

themselves. The phrase "death to Khomeyni" is written on walls in Tehran. Go to
the south of the capital and you will see that for yourself.

l§uestiog7 I do not believe I can.
IZnswe57 Nor can I. At least not now. (he laughed.)

l§uestiog7 But you cannot get at Khonayni himself?

answer-i He can, I assure you of that. But we have a better solution: we do not
want to kill Khoneyni physically, we want to kill his politically.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I§uestiog7 But you have not applied the same rule in the other cases.

lgnswe57 Because those people, in people‘s minds, were not Khomeyni. Khomeyni
gives people the illusion that he is the "source," the nufti, the religious jurist.

/§uestio_n7 however, you say that the phrase "death to Khomeyni" is written on
walls. That means that people know the truth about what Khomeyni is doing, and
therefore his “political" death has already taken place.

[Answer] Listen, when Khomeyni went back to Tehran 6 million people eat him. That
was a historic event. now, however, people ask me "Why don't you kill momeyni?”
My answer is "Thanks, I wanted to get to this point precisely, the point where you
would ask me this question."

10 Percent

l§uestion7 In last October's consign, the camaign of armed denonstrations that
the Mojahedin started, hundreds of people died. Do you believe that this tactic
was a mistake?

[Amway He previously told Khaneyni that ge were ready to hand over our arms if
he would stop retreating from stifling lgig/ the re Lative freedoms that prevailed
at that time. However, he refused and accused us LE being agents of Zionism, of
Saddam Husayn, of the United States, of Cmnism, of everything. Then don't for-
get that we stood in the ranks of the opposition the second week after Khomyni's
return. Hy nane was kept off the list of candidates for the presidency, then off
the list of candidates for the Hajles. Our policy was to exercise our opposition
role by criticising the substance of Khoneyni's policies, whose reactionary side we
discovered at the beginning. It was his policy to direct criticisms against us in
an indirect manner.

After that, the dispute flared up and passed through the stages you are aware of.
One of these was the tactic of armed demonstrations. To state that one tactic or
another will lead directly to the overthrow of the regime is to fail to realize
the facts of the situation. All these tactics are successive steps toward the
ultimate goal.

lguestion/ However, some of the Mojahedin's adversaries in the detachments of the
opposition say that the tactics were based on the erroneous assusption that the
people would gather erased the armed demonstrations that the Mahedin started and
that everyone would move to bring down the regime.

Ignswegl The matter cannot be sivplified in such a naive manner. Nonetheless,
the assusptions that Khomeyni’s regine is lacking in any popularity are correct.
The latest reports which have reached me from Iran state that school administra-
tions have appointed special supervisors for students when they go to the bathroom,
now that the phrase "death to Khomeyni" that they suite in these bathrooms has be-
come widespread. In fact, it is certain that people are going to msquea not just
to pray but to obtain the special cards that allow their bearer to obtain specific

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
foodstuffs it is not easy to find in the market. I can tell you that the number
of Khomeyni’s supporters does not exceed 10 percent of the whole Iranian population.

/§uestiot_l7 So what is the social base on which the regime of the ayatollahs is con-
centrated nosﬂ

lgnswey The regime is not concentrated on anything except the policy of wholesale
executions. The talk about a social base is talk that would have been valid 3 years
ago. Now there are collective resignations from the reactionary guards (he means
the Revolutionary Guards, in Iranian official language), and the social classes
that supported Khonsyni's regime are now looking for an alternative. They know
that if Khenneyni dies now the regine will cone to a tragic end and therefore they
cannot gamble on the regime. You know the nature of "business." Eusiness seeks
out a secure climate, but what is secure in Iran? Only idiots are gasbling on the
current Iranian regime, because that will be a losing gamble.

The Gallows Are the Solution

/§uestio_n7 Does this remind you of Ayatollah Kashani and his supporters in the
early fifties?

[Enswe57 It does, with one difference, which is that Kinneyni is 1.000 tines more
reactionary than Kashani. Kashani opposed Mosaddeq. but Ayatollah Khouyni re-
cently made a speech in which he said "With God's grace Hoseddeq was a liar and
fell."

/§uestiog7 However, broad segsents of the Iranian people still consider Hoseddeq
a national hero. Doesn't that provoke than?

linens] what if it does? If anybody speaks, the reactionary guard's minions will
hand him over to be sent to the gallows.

I§uestiog7 But what is the alternative?

lénswegl None as one detachunt in the opposition that is offering a coherent
alternative to the regime except the council that includes President Bani-Sadr and
the Mojahedin. Hill the Tudeh offer such an alternative, or the opposition figures
in Europe, in the form of the royalists and the like. who are planning to bring
Iran back to the era of the Shah? we are quietly broadening our base in Iran.

We have 500,000 copies of our paper being distributed inside Iran, we have a radio
station that is broadcasting four tines a day, and our voice is heard over it, in
spite of the government jamming of the broadcasts.

l§uestiog7 What if other groups ask to join the council you have drawn up with
Bani-Sadr--the rudeh. for exawle, or Peykar’l

Iznswegj I'm sorry, I'n sorry, I'm sorry. The Meh is a group of traitors. we
do not make alliances with traitors. Can you nention to as one way in which I can
be made sure of their sinceritﬂ

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IQuestiogl Are you suggesting that they go to you and swear that they are sincere?
The issue seens purely political. If they declare their positions on the council
program, agree to execute the agreements the council reaches, once they become
represented in it, the council demands that broad denonstrations start, and they
carry then out, will you continue to oppose their inclusion?

lgnswegl First they rust regain people's trust. The Iranians know that the ”Id
of the Tudeh are traitors; if the Tudeh is able to eliminate this image we will
think about dealing with them. However, I an confident that it will not be able
to. Treason is one of the basic conponents of the party leadership. That was a
constant during the past 40 years. Can you inagine that it is possible to renounce
a legacy as heavy as the one the Tudeh left during this period in a few days, even
if the party leadership wanted to forego treason, which naturally believe are, it
cannot?

Relations with Israel

[Question-I. Do you believe that Iranian-American relations will be openly restored
to the level they were at in the days of the Shah? Do you believe that Tehran will
establish diplomatic relations with Israel?

/_A_nswe_g/ It is a question of time. It will start 9 .th the release of the remaining
Iranian funds frozen in Hashington, to finance the gurchase of arms to continue the
war. Then, after that, the issue of diplonatic relations will be e foreality.

Even as regards Israel, diplonatic relations from the official standpoint, in their
turn, will be a fomelity. The men declares Jemsalen Day, demands the execution
of 'Arafat, buys arms from Israel and pays it my that it puts into bullets for
the Arabs and the Palestinians. This is the picture; in the light of that, don't
diplonatic relations become a formality?

najsvi was still briming with vitality. I said, "Let us talk about you a little,
your reneubrances of the Shah's prisons, secret work, flight from Iran." He
pointed to the tape recorder and said "Shut that off first. I do not like to have
anything circulated about me personally. You are just one person, one brother in
the Mojahedin." He shut off the tape recorder. Rejavi talked to me about
Khisbani, "my brother," as he called him. Rajavi did not know that Khisbani would
be killed in a few days, bloodied by the bullets of the "reactionary guard." The
sacrifices the Hojahedin are offering are continuous. Hill they see the day when
they realize their rose-colored dream of a society of "unification?"

COPYRIGlT: 1982 AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI

11887
cso: hook/23

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOB}! SAID TO BE ASSISTING GOVERNMENT AGAINST OPPOSITION
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 262, 19—25 Feb 82 pp 64, 65
lgrticle: "mdeh Members: Unseleried Informers in the Service of the Ayatollahsﬂ

liext/ In the case of the ‘l‘udeh Party, one can talk at length about the coqlex of
"self-loathing" which some Jews accuse the chancellor of Austria, Bruno Kreisky
(of Jewish origin), of having. The col-non factor, perhaps the only one, that links
all the Iranian leftist organizations is hostility, toward the ‘l‘udeh, to the point
sometimes of combat. It is odd that the ‘l‘udeh does not just bring the left to-
gether with its various detachments; it also brings these detachments together with
ones on the right as well. Everyone, left and right, accuses the party of being a
school in its own right for an education in political opportunisn.

The fact is that the history of the “rudeh is the history of its fiascoes. It
gambled on Stalin, and Stalin abandoned it when he ordered the withdrawal of the
Soviet forces from northern Iran in 1947, once the British had guaranteed the
Soviet leader an acceptable share of Iranian oil. The Socialist Republic of
Azerbayjan the Couwnists had established collapsed, as their first republic,
which Kuchek Khan had proclaimed, also in the north, under the title of the
Socialist Republic of Gilan, had collapsed 26 years before.

The party then took part in the cabinet of stanossoltaneh, in the regime of the
late Shah, in 1946. Then the Shah‘s cabinets departed in l951 and Mohamed
Nosaddeq's cabinet came in. The party refused to support Hosaddeq, and the new
premier swept the political stage clean, drawing millions of Iranians about the
policy of oil nationalisation he declared. When the party started to think of
supporting Mosaddeq, his cabinet was on the road to collapse in the August 1953
coup. When the party tried to court the American mania, allegedly deepening
the contradictions between then and the British, raising the slogan of nationalis-
ing the oil in the south only, the Americans furnished it with the coup by Kermit
Roosevelt, which the Shah carried out, opening the doors of the dungeons wide and
full to the party's leaders and its base.

When the party nenbers gambled on their leaders in the hard circumstances Iran
went through, which raged about the party after the coup, they were surprised to
see Dr Bahrani, the party secretary, sending a long letter from his cell to the
royal presence, asking forgiveness because he had "slipped beyond the bounds of
weywardness."

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Befou and after the Storm

When the store passed and the party restated the attapt to get its frepsnted
parties together, it gambled on a group of revolutionary slogans to regain the
trust of the masses and was surprised to find the Shah presenting slogans that
were more "revolutionary” than those of the party in l963--apportioning land to
peasants, eliminating the system of lenilords and subjects, and starting the
"white” revolution.

After the upheaval against the dictatorship of the Shah started in the late
seventies, the Tudeh took a middle-of-the-roed position, keeping in line with
Moscow; then the two, the Tudeh and hoccow, were surprised to find that the
Pahlavi citadel, packed with arms, hid collapsed and the Ayatollahs had leaped

onto the boat of the revolution, smelling everyone from it, one group after the
other.

The Tudeh experimented with triming its seils to the wind, but the wind did not
show it mercy. At the end of last year, hoseyn Husavi, the prime minister, started
to swoop down on party members working in ministries and govern-ant departments,
starting by distributing forms showing the political affiliations of all enployees
and ending by expelling the col-mists from their jobs, in an attespt to bind up
the severed relations with the "crest Satan,“ the U nited States.

In spite of intervention by Vladimir Vinogradov, Moscow's ambassador to Tehran, to
put a stop to the Ayatollehs' anger at their Tudeh Party aides, and in spite of
Breshnev's offer to give massive economic and food aid to Iran in exchange for
"pardoning" the Tudeh mesbers for their cola-mien, the lines of eaployees departing
from the Hinistries of Finance, Oil, and foreign .’.££airs were incessant, each one
of them holding in his right hand his party meste. ship card and in his left hand
his letter of dismissal.

Nonetheless, the bitter feelings of "ardor" that the Met: members harbored toward
the Ayatollahs did not abate; it even reached the point where they turned their
party into a branch of SAVAHA (the Iranian govermsent's secret political police).
In a report the party's central coamittee sent to the Iranian Ministry of the In-
terior, the following appeared, verbatim: "There is a lady called Yadollah, re-
cently resigned from the Ministry of the Interior, who has been pursuing special
activities in the recent events the country has experienced. This lady has special
relationships with Bakhtiar, the bazaar, the Mojahedin (Mojahedin-e Khalq) and
Beni-Ssdr's synpethisers. This lady is not at all religious, has a sweet tongue,
is most energetic, and says that she is iqlicated in every demonstration!

"The latest mission she performed was to get in touch with Mrs Man Shari'ati,
the wife of Dr Sheri'eti, to get her to cancel her trip to Syria to celebrate the
anniversary of her husband's trip out of the country and to convince her to hold
the celebration in her home, in order to get people to gather together and link
the celebration to the country's current problems. The party will- be held on 19
June." Then the signature and seal of the central connittee of the Mob Party.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Inforaers without Salaries

This, one examle of dozens of reports, shows that the party leadership has turned
its tubers into unsalaried Iranian government infer-era. [lot just that, the party
continues to play a political role in confronting other opposition groups. For
sample, in the face of the Hojahedin-e xhalq, the newspaper stream-s mm, the
party organ, denended the mention of the leader of the Bojahedin organisation,
Has'ud Rajavi, publishing an article which began with the statement "This murderer.
who has killed other, innocent people, umst be handed over to the revolutionary
execution teens."

Therefore it was not strange that the opposition groups should, in their own ways,
take part in the party's celebrations of the 60th anniversary of its birth the
middle of last Met in the British capital, London. the party chose to celebrate
the anniversary in the hall of the American youth organization. the m. whose
connection with American Central Intelligence has become generally known.

'l‘udeh members cans to the hall in droves in their fine clothing to celebrate the
anniversary of ”loo years with the toilets.” A masher of members of other opposition
groups had infiltrated the people who attended, and, when the celebration began,

the rudeh members were surprised by slogans of condensation of the ‘l‘udeh's stands,
and Khoneyni's policies, end the British police intervened to break up the meeting.
What happened in London was a picture in miniature of what is happening in Iran.

COPYRIGlT: 1982 AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI

11887
CSO: 6604/23

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REVOLUTION GUARD TERROR SEEN CREATING MANY RNEMIBS
Hamburg STERN in German 11 Mar 82 pp 27-28, 202. 205
[Report by Dr Bahman Nirumand]

[Text] The 46-year-old Dr Nirumand studied philosophy and
German philology in Munich and Tuebingen. In 1964 this ac-
tive opponent of the shah was forced to flee to the PRC from
the feared secret service Savak. Now he has returned to his
homeland secretly and has lived for half 4 year in Teheran'e
underground. Here is his report.

Among the most shocking pieces of news which I have obtained in recent days in
the Teheran underground was that of the shooting of Shokrollah Paknejad. He
was a symbol of the resistance to the tyranny of the shah regime. Condemned
to life in prison he had passed 12 years in the dungeons of the shah while an-
during the worst tortures until it was possible L0 free him in an assault on
the prisons shortly before the fall of the monarchy.

Three months ago Paknejad was arrested on the street by Pasdaran. the Khomeini-
loyal "guardians of the revolution." when his brother a couple of days ago
sought information about his whereabouts he was told in reply that Paknajad
had already been shot 2 weeks before and lay buried in a cemetery outside Te-
heran. He. like all relatives of the executed man. was even called upon to
pay for the bullets with which his brother had been shot. No trial in court.
not even a few words of farewell to his family and friends: all that remained
of him-a forged "will" and a grave among a thousand other graves bearing not
even Shokrollah Paknejsd‘s name but only a number. Even a cemetery visit is
extremely risky for his family. For in that area there are troops of bullies
paid by the mullahs who spit upon surviving next of kin. insult them and
strike them.

When 3 years ago Ayatollah Khomeini came to Teheran out of French exile he had
practically the entire populace behind him. At that time the Iranians were
happy and ready for any sacrifice because they had finally overthrown the dic-
tatorial regime of the shah and now believed that they were free. But at the
and of these 3 years Khomeini. his mullahs and his 10.000 heavily armed "revo-
lutionary guards" are conducting a relentless war against the people.

15

FOR 0F11CJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY
I V“ V. I .\-Af‘~ UJL Us‘I-I

In a short period of time the successors to the shah have been able to destroy
almost all the industry of the country and to ruin agriculture. In addition.
they are entangled in a grinding war with their neighbor Iraq. which up to now
has claimed almost 100.000 dead and produced over 2 million refugees.

In the name of Islam the self-styled "disciples of God" have thus far bestowed
upon the country 6 million unemployed. Most of those wealthy who failed to
flee promptly abroad have in the interim lost their wealth; the poor have be-
come poorer and prices. especially for foodstuffs. climb higher daily. The
black market enlarges steadily. the treasuries of the state are empty. foreign
exchange is completely usrd up and total collapse and catastrophe have become
unavoidable.

Khomeini's apparatus of power has hounded trained personnel. the most important
possession of the country. out of their jobs. Tens of thousands have fled out
of the country. tens of thousands are jobless and hundreds of them have already
been executed as unbelievers and enemies of the state.

Any enjoyment of life is looked upon as blasphemy. Anyone who reads material
other than the sacred Koran and the religious and propaganda writings peddled
by the state is considered to be a potential criminal. If the reading matter
is opposition literature or even just modern entertainment literature he is
threatened with the death penalty.

Leaflets of an opposition organization were found in the car belonging to
three friends of mine. All three were immediately apprehended and after 2
months' imprisonment they were condemned to death last September without a
trial and were executed. The regime is even proud of the fact that within the
last 6 months it has executed around 4.500 people. aostly young people from 14
to 18 years old. Of course. this figure is just for the executions which have
been officially announced.

In addition. there are the arbitrary murders. Thus. for example. I witnessed
an episode in which a group of from 20 to 25 young girls. students whose ages
were from 12 to 16. were chased throngh a Teheran street by 10 Pasdaran armed
with machine guns. When the girls tried to run away the revolutionary guards
opened fire. The schoolgirls fell to the ground and rolled in their blood.
Before the Pasdaran trod under their boots the heads of these girls they
shouted "Long Live Freedom." Their bodies were shortly thereafter thrown onto
a truck and carted off.

The highest judge of the capital. a religious named Gilani. was once asked
during a television interview how it happened that his courts in numerous
cases had condemned accused persons to death without at least knowing their
names? The judge replied that names were of no importance to Islamic courts.
whether these people were called Hassan or Hossein. were born in Teheran or
Kerman or were workers or officials was. he said. of no interest whatever.
"what is important is that they are figures. bodies. who have opposed the Is-
lamic state. in other words the will of God."

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The arbitrary arrests carried out not only at demonstrations and during house
searches but also during nightly police raids through entire streets and resi-
dential quarters have had the consequence that all the prisons of the country
are filled to overflowing. In the cells of the Teheran Win prison. already
infamous under the shah. so asny people are kept that there is not enough
space for lying down. I‘m-thirds of the prisoners therefore have to stand up
so that one-third of them can sleep. They alternate this way during the night
at 3-hour intervals. At the sane time it is considered a privilege for a
prisoner to be in a cell at all. neny of the confined mat stay in the court-
yard of the jail and. especially in winter. must additionally suffer from
cold. snow and rain. The torture instruments of the shah regime are again in
full Operation. Prisoners who are not ready to shout "Khmini is our leader"
have those words branded upon their breasts and backs.

The enormous hatred animating this dictatorship is directed not only against
its political foes but also against those who have adapted themelves to cer-
tain nannerisns and customs of a partially bourgeois society and who are not
ready to return to medieval nodes of living. Thus the mass purges at state
offices and operations have also apprehended woaen and man who had absolutely
no political involvenents. If a man dresses as a "normal" citizen. shaves
daily or even wears a tie and if a woaan dresses nicely. uses nakeup and does
not hide her hair. hands and legs beneath a veil .hen they are living danger-
ously. Such citizens have no prospects in Khoneisi's state.

There is boundless hostility to every form of civilization. The development
of Iranian society is to be made retrograde. Above all. in order to abso-
lutely silence the young people opposing such a regression Khoaeini 2 years
ago closed all the universities and advanced schools of the country. Hundreds
of thousands were no longer able to continue their studies.

The closing of the universities is. of course. minly for political reasons.
The political involvement of the advanced schools has a long tradition among
us Iranians and the reopening of the schools would undoubtedly present the re-
gine with additional difficulties.

They would also like to close the elementary schools. But since this is'
scarcely possible the mullahs temporarily content themselves with the dis-
charge of thousands of teachers. For political reasons 20 percent of all stu-
dents are denied access to these schools. In the schools there prevails an
atmosphere of terror and anxiety. The governnent tries to keep students under
control by eneaplary and brutal punishments and even shootings.

In order to get an idea of the pedagogic notions of the aullahs it is not even
necessary to obtain an inside look at the operation of these schools. Enough
evidence is provided by television broadcasts which relay instructions to par-
ante and students. For exaaple. in one such transnission parents of boys at
the age of puberty were advised to keep their sons out of bed in the evening
until they were fully tired. Then when they were lying in bed it was recon-
aended that the parents keep an eye on then. If the parents found the boy
nasturbating it was race-leaded that they should punish him with lashings.

17»

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Uﬂ Ufl’ﬂ-‘AL UM VIVLI

Anyone who Plays chess Risks Being Lashed

The repression of women is among the most obvious features of the Khomeini re-
gime. Recently an order was sent to all state offices requiring all unmarried
women to supply medical proof of their virginity! The number of female em-
ployees has moreover been substantially reduced in recent years.

Since the mullahs consider women to be intellectually weak they are no longer
allowed to become legal attorneys or judges. They would like to put all pro-
fessionally active women back in the home. Not infrequently one hears in ser-
mona delivered by the religious leaders that the brave women of our country
have the sacred duty to bear children and nurture them. in addition to being
active domestically. so that their husbands may be contented at home and free
from domestic obligations and anxieties may go about their social tasks.

Nevertheless. even Khomeini has not been able to avoid accepting a couple of
women in the [elastic parliament. The absurd aspect of this was the fact that
before their election it was not possible to hear any statements by these
women candidates nor even see their faces. 0:: the election placards one could
only see a veiled object from which a single eye peered out. Just how these
women were able nevertheless to obtain hundreds of thousands of votes is like-
wise shrouded in mystery.

Since. especially in Teheran. there continue to be women who refuse the veil
the government has forbidden the entrance of unveiled women into government
offices. restaurants. cafes. department stores and even into the mountain hik-
ing paths. And frequently bands organized by mullahs move through the streets
knocking about unveiled women and throwing acid in their face and other por-
tions of their bodies.

Music-whether Persian or forsign--is prohibited. An exception are the so—
called revolutionary songs with religious content or songs in honor of Kho-
meini. It is reckoned to be very courageous or imprudent to listen to music
even inside one's own house. One must turn the music low in order not to be
detected. If one is caught neverthe‘css one's apparatus is seized and the
punishment for the aim connitted lies at the discretion of the judge. If he
is merciful he contents himself with 50 lashes.

Lashes are the punishment in many situations: if one is detected drinking al-
cohol (naturally. homemade. since it is impossible to purchase): if women
bathe in the sea or sit on the beach in a bathing suit and not in the pre-
scribed long dresses; if men and women swim together in the sea—even when
they are married; when festivals are kept and dancing takes place. music is
heard and people are altogether too happy. Friends of mine were even lashed
when during a house search in their own dwelling they were surprised while
playing chess.

The only pleasures which Lord Bishop Khomeini allows to his 35 million Iranian
sheep are participation in cannon prayers and in funeral obsequies and proces-
sions which take place almost daily for the most various reasons. Con-unity

public weeping for the dead. especially for those fallen in the war with Iraq.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fully suffices according to Khomeini to satisfy human needs. In an address to
the nation the old imam said: "Heep. weep. for weeping brings you closer to
God!"

At the present time in Teheran alone more than 20.000 people are living in the
underground. They have hardly any trouble at all aubmerging themselves among
friends. relatives or acquaintances although the latter can also be condemned
to death for harboring political refugees. I myself have lived in the under-
ground for the past 6 months. During that time I changed my residence every
other day and only once was I sent away. I could move about rather freely in
the city and meet anyone I wanted to see.

Anyone Who Is a Mullah Ia Hated by the People Like the Plague

The underground scene demonstrates at the same time how weak Khomeini's basis
has become and how little the government organizations are in a position to
keep the opposition under control or even to liquidate them. Barely an esti-
mated 10 percent of the population supports Khomeini. The solidarity of the
masses with the opposition is so great and obviOua that one hardly needs to
fear denunciations.

In comparison to us the representatives of the regime. especially the mullahs.
are in a much worse position. They no longer ever dare to appear in public.
When unavoidable. they are driven in armored vehicles. protected by weapon-
carrying groups to the desired destination. The Islamic parliament building
looks like a fortress. The allegedly elected representatives of the people
must protect themselves from their own people with gun-carrying armored vehi-
cles and with machine guns. Khomeini himself who upon his return from Paris
could move about without fear among millions of people has now not left his
residence for 2 years. All surrounding streets have been closed off; several
hundred Pasdaran guard him day and night. There has rarely been a regime hav-
ing such fear of its own people and which had to so thoroughly hide itself
from them.

Undoubtedly Khomeini'e era will not last much longer. No one can predict how
many children and adults will still lose their lives in the last agony of this
regime. or how much suffering people will still have to bear until the most
brutal regime in Iranian history finally and irrevocably vanishes. One thing
is sure: this regime is hated by the preponderant majority of the population.
For too long Khomeini has given free reign to violence and crime. In disputes
between the moderates and the radical fundamentalists he has always sided with
the latter. In my view it is already too late for a change of course favoring
the moderates. Too much blood has flawed and too much has been destroyed.
Before a real change of course it would first be necessary to eliminate the
radical Islamic fundamentalists who have armed force at their disposal and who
in particular set the tone among the Pasdaran. At the same time it would be
necessary to end the war with Iraq. The revolutionary courts would have to be
dissolved. the political prisoners liberated and the daily executions brought
to an and. In addition. there would have to be a guarantee of a minimum of
political liberties.

19

FOR OFFHJAL.USE(MVLY
I‘UK UI'I‘ILIAI. UDI'. UNLI

But this is precisely what Khmini does not dare to do. Becsune the ayatol-
lah knove from the most recent Persian history the: such s step-hy-etcp lib-

eraliution is not an unqualified psnscse. His predecessor. Rue Pshluvi. et-
tcnpted in the last months of his rule to placate the noses with more liber-

ties-and thereby suffered shipwreck.
COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner 8 Jshr AG 8 Co.

8008
(:80: 4620/ 29

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

COMMUNIST LEADBR'S GOVERNMENT TIESnGOd has created all kinds of things [i.e.,
Strange things can happen in this world]; Moscow has control over its subjects.
Nureddin Kianuri is one of God's servants and one of the Soviets' subjects.
Therefore anyone looking into his eyes, hidden behind his thick glasses, will

find that one of them is looking tr Qon and the other is

looking to Moscow! Political power is an old ailment. it appeared when govern-
ments appeared, along with parties, theor ': and slogans. Its sole disease is a
microbe which everyone knows but no one can cure. Modern science has not discov-
ered .1 drug for political opportunisu; therefore, perhaps its priests stand in
amazement before the difficult case of Nureddin Kianuri. He has been a member of
the party since it was founded 1.0 years ago. He has looked with one eye toward
"Ctzcow and Moscow has locked with two, one at him and the other at his brother
Kambakhsh. The "two moms" shone in the mid-forties, because Moscow's sun had sud-
denly paused in the skis: of northern Iran. When the sun went far away in 1947,
the "two moons" became extinguished and it 1949 the Shah handed the:- over to reserve
by a decree dissolving the party. Then one Khomeyni, and Halinah term-net! to her
old habits, the only difference being the: Kambakhah went to meet his maker in l971
and one moon remained. Jt shone briefly md went out rapidly. The can sailed on
him, then frowned, and Kianuri fled, brin.:ing with him the chronic disease of
change, and his special appearance, Bhsan Tabari. to Moscow. There the weather is
always sunny, though humble party numbers contime to face their honorable destiny
at the hands of the emecutioners of Hoseyx Husavi, uuttering "eyes that have a_ __
squint in than: they killed us but those of us who died were not revived." /_'l_'e8_t_/
[Paris AL—WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 26!. 19-25 Feb 82 p 105] [COPYRIGliTz 1982 M.-

HAT/\N {Hr 'Muun] 11887

AGRICULTURAL LOANS—Pros the beginning of 1981 to Noveiyer of the sale year,

the cooperative agricultural bank in Iraq granted loans amounting to 175 mil-
lion diners for various agricultural actirities to organizations, the private
sector and cooperative societies. This a-ount represents a record in the bank's
history and compares with 98 million diners granted in loans in 1980. These
loans have been granted for all agricultural activities in both farning and

animal husbandry. [Text] [Paris Ala-HATE! AL-‘ARABI in Arabic “0 266, 19-25
Mar 83 p 55] [COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-WATAN Hr'ARABI]

cs: '
0 «606/387 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY