FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10663
16 July 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 24/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and uterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornation was
processed. mm no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was sunnsrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nsnes rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion nsrk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ites originate with the source. ‘rines within itens are as

given by source .

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Govern-eat.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OP
HTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINA‘IION
OF TRIS PURICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLV

JPRB L/I
16 July

USSR REPORT
Pouncu. mu SOCIOLOBlCAL AFFAIRS

(£000 2‘/82)

Cameras

M‘l’lm

Oootdiutiu co-iuloao in Iliniotty of Intoml “to!" Doocribod
(I. II. mu"; mm mm 1 PM“), ﬂay 82) ...

Prob]... in Codification of Boviot uv Outlined
(A. 8. P1101310, I. I. lu'nin; mm mm
um “W11; rumm, lo 2, 1981) ............
Stafﬁng. 0th“ Problou in has]. mutton Doocﬂbod
(I4. I. Kalashnikov. ct 01.; 1mm "um um
um“: Pum.'°2. 19.1) nooooooooo-ooooooooo

mum. Motif. meaning in Mot lint:
(Eaton col'dohcoia; menu m'. 6 My 82) ...........

Conform. on loft of Motion Language Hold
(3088!!!! YA!!! I 3mm V m 0881, JW’CB 32)..

-I- [III-0883-351‘0‘

mo 0W“, US! My
namuoaouu

narrow.

WWII!” CW!“ 1' mm! or man. nuns 08863130
boo“ son-ram “m0 1 MVO in Bunion lo 5. It! 82 pp 33-62

[Articlo by 3. ll. Laaarov. doctorbfj‘urioprudanco: "typo of Intarrolation
of Organo of Soviot Govormnt")

[Incorpt] Coordinating co-oiooiona aro ofton croatod alongoido niniotrioo
with authority ovar dopart-anto. ‘l'huo alongaido tho 088! IND thoro oxioto a
Co-iooion for onouring traffic oofoty. It io undor tho diroction of tho
11888 Miniotar of lntarnal Affairo. Ito unborn aloo includa doputy chair-on
of tho Councilo of Hiniatoro of tho union ropublico. doputy loadora of a
aorioo of gmrn-ont co-ittooa, ainiotrioo and dapart-nto of tho 088R. whooo
ontorpriaoo, inotitutoa and organiaationo Ionufacturo aoono of tranoporta-
tion, build roado, proyaro cadroo of loodoro, and roprooontativao of oocial
organization. Tho individual coupoaition of tho Co-iaaion io confirnd by
tho 088! liiniotar of Intornal Affairo in agrooaont with tho Councila of
liiniatoro of tho union rapublica. concornod organo and tho indicatod oocial
organisation. 'l'ho docioiona of tho Main comoctod with tho coordin-
ation of tho activitioo of tho ainiotrioo, dopartaanto and organicationo for
tho aoouronco of traffic oofoty aro binding on thoao ornnicationo. Dociaiona
ara roachod by a oiqlo njority vota. thoro boing no loco than half tho
unborohip of tho Co-iooion praoont at tho looting. ‘l'hat tho Co-iaoion ia
attochod to tho 1883 191D and io hoadod by tho Miniator of Intornal Affairo io
uplainod by tho fact that at tho mien lavol tho roaponaibility for the ao-
ouranco of traffic oafoty in tho country rooto diroctly with tho 088)! mu.
whilo tho oolution of tho took aloo involvaa nany othor organo whoao activ-
itioo nuot ho coordinatod and intorooto conaidorod. At tho Iona tiao tho
Co-iooion cauot ho oubjoct to tho lliniotar of Intornol Affairo. With roprd
to all thio. tho “nation of an ”organ booido an organ" woo accoptod in thia
caoo.

For a long ti-o tho ”organ booido an organ" ochono woo adaptod in tho pact to
the oblaat and lay officoo of intornal affaironthoy oppoorad ao officoo of
tho 1M) olongoido tho oucutivo co-ittooo of tho oblaot and kray Councilo.
‘l‘horo waa a clooo and working contact bounan thooo organa. 'rho docioiono of
tho ohlaot and kray Councilo and thoir anocutiwo co-ittooo in roaponao to a
oorioo of quootiono woro binding on tho indicatod officoo. but thoy did not
apply to a lat-bar of oucutiwo co-ittoo officoo, thoir Iain lino of

'l
mammal“
mmmmv

subordination being a vertical one. In 1956 o rotor: woo carried out;

the eforeoontionod officoa ao coll ao rayon and city organo of internal of-
fairo were trenaierred to "double" subordination and boca. orpno of correc-
pondin: executive co-itteoo of local Councila, i.e., their relatiooehip io
non built on the nodol of "organ within an organ” and not "organ booido an
organ." ‘l'hio vao dono for tho purpooo of rotting tho role of local com-
cile and their roeponoibility for oocial otdor in doportnootal territory.

the reinforce-cot of control of tho roprooentativo oruoo over the organ.

of internal affair-o. It io true that notrall local Councils and their
executive comittoeo are yet fully uaing thia plan of interrelation and

none of the. do not eurt the noceoeary influence on the work of local
organe of internal affairo.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatol‘atvo "Nauka", "Sovotakoye ooaudarotvo i pravo", 1982.

993 l
080: 1800/6103

”WI-0880M?
momaumouu

mum

PM Ill cooxnanon 0? smu- t» om

uningfdd IZVIBI'IYA WW mm um. 9mm in Mien NO 2. 1981
pp 13.20 7

[Article by Doctor of legel Sciencee h. 8. Pigolhin ad Cendidate of Legal Sciencee
I. P. 338'an

luxtl l. Codification ie the higteet for: of organising legieletion. It nkee it
poeeible to eilulteneouely updete previouely p‘bliehed legieleticn. to eupplenent

it with iqortent new etetutee end to treneforl innerm- ieoleted nor- thet ere

not elweye coordinated eufficiently with one enother into e eingle hernonioue eyeten—
that in, it ie en effective neene of eyeteuic develop-wt of the content of law.

Greet ie the politicel eignificance of codificeticn eleo. On one hand it eervee en
en irrepleoeeble neene of neking Iejor trmforeetione in verioue epheree of legal
reguletion. or even of creeting the fmdnentale of eoch regulation (ee wee done in
the firet yeere of Soviet rule): on the other hend it reieee the etehility of legie-
letion. bringing it into e etete which ie intended for exietence over a long period
of tin. mdificetion pro-otee growth in the role of law in the eociety’e eociel

end politicel life, it etrengthene legality, and it eervee en e reetreining factor

in relation to poeeihle ebueee on the pert of certein officiele. lneemch ee the
nein for. of codification ie lewe—thet ie, ecte adopted by higher legielative organe
of the 0881! end of the union end eutono-oue remblice, codification ie ueuelly eieed
et eugenting the role end authority of lewe within the eyeten of exieting lew end

of elected higher organs of govern-eat, end at inroving the ect‘.vitiee of police
organe. It elininetee caieeione. outdeted etetutee end ccntredictione in legielation.
end it fecilitetee eeiection of none eubject to neohent end the one of the lure.

2. Moption of the new 0888 Genetitntion end of the conetitutione of the union and
eutono-me remblice wee en inortent etep in etrengthening the legel ﬂoundetion of
the etete and eociel life of developed eocieliet eociety. fro- the legal etandpoint
thie etep repreeente a new effort et codifying Soviet constitutional legieletion.

It poeeeeeee ell of the earnerke of me codification, which hae enjoyed wide accep-

tance in recent yeere. In the come of codificeticn, .the veet neteriel of e perti-
culer aree of legieletion (conetituticnel in thie ceee) ie undated end emerieed

in e eingle docuent. (beolete nor-e ere deleted, the wordinge of a nuwer of
toner norm are reworked. and e eignifioent nwer of new etenderde eetiefying

preeent neede end conditione ere introduced. lbreover the new unified docuent
combinee (often in trenetorled eppeerence) aeny none ecettered previouly along
different legieletive docuente.

“WWW?
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The result of codification of an area of legislation (with a consideration for its
federal structure) is. as a rule, publication of not sons single document but rather
an entire systss of mutually slbordinated docuents. sons of which codify mionwide
legislation while others codify reptblic legislation. Iihis is precisely the situa-
tion observed with the recent codification of Soviet constitutional law: the 0883
Constitution brought together unionide notes. while the constitutions of the union
and autonoeous republics correspondingly brought together reptblic constitutional
legislation.

Its nain differences fro. codifications of other areas of legislation lie in the
fore and legal force of the cedifying docmt. In tern of seat (though not ell)
other areas of legislation, the fen observed today is the uniomide mdansntal
Principles and repualic ccdesmhich are uberdineted correspondingly to all-union
and republic constitutions. But in application to constitutional legislation, the
form of codification observed is the all-union and republic constitutions. which
occupy the highest position in the hierarchy of existing acts of all-union and
republic legislation. Codification of constitutional legislation is also unique in
that it «braces not only the constitutional legislation of the USSR and the union
republics, but also the appropriate legislation of the sateen-one rspiblics. which
had not been the case before, in the codifications of other areas of legislation.

mo hmdasental Law 'domnts only the Iain, fwdenental premises which, though
they may have a direct legal force, are at the seas tine expanded and discussed sore

concretely in other acts of law."1 1his require-ant pertains to all areas of law,
to include state law. which is not smject to all-eiarscing codification by consti-

tutions. Thus the need for coqrehensively regulating the legal basis of state and
social life requires that following codification of constitutional legislation.
other wertant areas of law are organised in sisilar fashion as well. he any stats
confidently that renewal of constitutional legislation was not only a major step in
improving legislation, but also a powerful motive for its further development.

3. Codification can proceed only on a semdly planned femdation. This principle

is enjoying increasingly greater confir-atien in law-axing practice. lhat is typical
of the content of existing plans for codification and other law-axing efforts is that
two najor directions in the developnent of modern legislation have urged within
them preparation and adoption of acts based directly upon the (888 Constitution
and the constitutions of the union republics, and of acts to be included in union-
wide and republic codes of laws mdergoing preparation. me plan of codificational
effort based on the (381! Constitution was formlated and approved by a decree of

the Presidiun of the (5511 Supreme Soviet dated 12 new: 1977.2 m. decree fors-
saw development of more than 20 codificational drafts of laws. Similar plans were

also approved by the union repmalics. On 23 March 1913 the CPS!) Central Co-ittee.
the Presidiun of the {£88 Supreme Soviet and the men Council of ninisters adopted

a joint decree ”Problem of the uses Code of l.sevs.'3 In addition to solving in-
portant problems associated with preparing the code. this doouent also approved a
plan for deveIOping more than loo new acts for the I888 Code of Laws. 'lhe plan con-
tained within the 12 neceber 1977 decree became its nest iQortant part. ibus we
now have a single su-ary plan for the nest inortent law-sting efforts (of pre-
dominantly codificational nature).

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
siailor sues-y plus were also approved by joint decrees of the central co-ittooo
or the union mlic co-nist parties and by tho preoidius o: the oar-e ooviets
and the govern-ate or the union repdalics. thus a decreo=pdaliohed by the Utah
awn-e Soviet and the norm Oomcil o! lﬂnistors on 13 rebruary 1979" foresees
developnnt of ever 70 new najor acts subject to inclusion into the la!” ads of
Laws. Il‘he bulk of then are coditicationol in nature. -

e: such codes not proceed on the basis or the men Constitution and the‘constitutions
or the union repualico. Thus all plans today are legally and practically sﬂaordinated

to the new constitutional legislation. and they are eiaed at developing this legis-
lotion and eating it acre concrete.

Codification“ acts presently in the planning stage my be conditionally divided

into three groups depending on the degree of their relationship to the new constitu-
tional legislation. Acts of the first grow (such as tho laws on tho ussn aware-e
court and on tho more. courts of the union ropdalics, and tho regulations of tho
men awre- Soviet and the swreno oovioto of the union‘repuhlics) are directly
foreseen by tho IBSR Constitution and by tho constitutions of tho mien republics.

‘lhe second grow includes acts which, though they nay not be foreseen in tho consti-
tutiens. are a develop-ant of certain articles of these constitutions. and provide
legislative support to then (for examle tho legislative act on tho rights of labor
collectives). ‘l‘ho third grow includes acts that do not derive directly or indirectly
iron constitutional legislation but which consider its letter and its spirit, as well
as its orientation and principles (in particular, tho law on Protection of htneophoric
Air and the new on Protection and Utilisation o! tho Anilal World).

a. Prograne of codificational etterts approved in tho mien republics are closely
associated with tho plan for imreving unionwido legislation. These programs deal
with a large nuor of acts corresponding to all union acts dealing with sinilar
topics. thus the draft mdanontal Principles o: (353. and mien upmlic Legiala-
tier. on Ahinistrative Law Violations were developed in accordance with the all-
unien plan. this act, which in now in force. codified, updated and organised the
scattered legislation on this issue. A ainilar task is to be porter-ed in the
1818!! by neans of adopting a code of laws corresponding to these hmdauntal
Principles. ‘lho all-union legislative act on the legal profession has its center-
part in the loan—a reptblic legislative act on the legal profession.5 Bewevor,
sudl a relationship is not always present.

‘lhero are many acts contained within the reptblic plans or coditicational ottorto
which do not have analogues in unionwido legislation. this is quite neroal. since
acne unionwide acts resolve problem that are solely within the erotoncy of the

(8811 (for examle the law on the Order of signing. Executing and Donomcing Inter-
national Treaties of the $81!, adopted 6 July 19789), while en the other hand sons

republic acts are only within the cowotency of the appropriate upwlic (for crawls
laws on electing local sevieto). the codiﬁcation plans ot the union republics
theuelves differ significantly free one another on well. this can be explained by
a meter of reasons. rirst of all the natural and other objective features of the

MWCIALUSIONLY
POIOI'I'ICIALUSIONLY

mion reptblics have significance. this can be seen especially clearly, in parti-
cular. in bills having to do with agriculture (the acts of sens repttlics deal

with irrigation. those of others deal with land drainage. those of others are
concerned with grape growing and so on). Second, such depenb on the degree to which
the law regulates a given issue. For eagle sons republics esy just be starting to
draw up new acts on honorary titles. mile in other repwuoe these acts eey already

exist. here are other reasons as well. for exalple a new on hutcnoeous (blasts
must be punished in enscution of the 8818!! Constitution, while my other union

republics do not require such a law because they do not have the appropriate shini-
strative territories. .

0n the whole. analysis of the codificationel efforts presently under way would show
that the union repwlics, being cowetent sovereign states. are displaying broad

initiative in iaproving their own legislation. and their lawnaking plans exhibit
the necessary degree of both unity and eutuel association with unionwide laws. and

independence reflecting specific features of the repwlice. ‘lhis is a clear anewle
of the democracy of soviet law-axing.

5. Presence of legislation isproveesnt plans approved by higter lawnaking organs
sharply raises the effectiveness of lawneking efforts. f‘hie hes an especially fruit-
ful effect on reducing the tin required to prepare the drafts of esjor codifica-
tional acts, in ccqarison with the tine it took before. mreover, planning helps

to improve the coordination and eutual fit of different bodies of legislation. am
this basis, the principle of planning the soot inortnt- lawseking (and primarily
oodificationel) efforts should be put into legal fore. lbreover such plans would
best be drawn to for a five-year period. Shorter periods would be undesirable in
connection with the great laboriousness of eejor codificationel efforts. while on

the other hand longer periods eay seen a need for asking adjustnsnts later on. 1hese
plans would best be approved by decrees of the Presidiu of the 088k Supre-s Soviet
and the governeent of the USSR (and. correspondingly, of the union and eutonoeom
republics) . and when necessary, they my be approved by the CPS!) Central Oc-ittee
(the central co-ittee of the union republic).

In such a eyeten ninietries, depertnents and other lawneking organs acting in enecu-
tion of state plans of lawn-axing efforts could approve their own plans, decanting
within then the concrete forss of activity, the interasdiate stages and the dead-
lines of work on specific hills which they help prepare. noreover these plans can
contain provisions associated with preparing acts applicable to a given departnnt.
and eo-called initiatives. which ones froe sources other than the govern-em:
plan.

6. we are presently successfully iapleeenting a progree of legislative effort of
unprecedented value. we have already adopted codificational acts such as the

Lot on election of the 1881! Supreme Soviet,7 the w on the 0883 Council of lini-
stars!8 the regulations of the ussn more-Is Soviet.9 the Law on the 0553 Supra-e
Court ° and some others. he mion republics are also ispleeenting their legis-
lative plane. Held in August 1979, the «nth Session, ninth Convocation of the
(8811 Swrene Soviet adopted the La on the R3183 council of Ministers11 and the Law
on election of local nsrsn Soviets of People's Deputies.”

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ful in preparing new acts associated with buiness, civil, labor, holhhos and sons
other areas of legislation, while consideration of arbitration practice would be
appropriate in the corresponding cases. Many inortant provisions of legislation
were worked out first in court and arbitration practice. thl necessary. this should
be accounted for in codification efforts.

disputes in holkhos law similar to the disputes experienced by laborers and white
collar workers. lbs courts are experiencing considerable difficulties in emining
such disputes in view of the absence of legislation in this area. The tine has

cone to publish a special Statute on the Order of Mining the labor Disputes of
Kolkhor farnors and a Statute on listerial Liability of Iolkhos Parlors. As we

know such acts have alread; been adopted in relation to laborers and white collar
workers. 'l‘heir develop-ht should pro-ate further reinforce-ant of legality in tho
countryside. and it should satisfy tho require-outs of new constitutional legislation
on strengthening court protection of the rights and legal interests of Soviet citi-
zens. as well as of kolkhoses.

7. before, acts published by the comtry's aprons legislative organs were subjected
to codification-«hose of the aprons soviets of the was mien replblics, and

their prooidilm. (no of the mique features of the present stage of codification

is that it is now extending more and more broadly to secondary legislative acts,
particularly to decrees of the govennont of the was and the union republics. This
is especially typical of business legislation, in which the role played by govern-ant
acts is extrunoly significant.

lxpansion of the sphere of codification is also responsible for causing diversity in
its legal for-x lhat we have now are not only the hands-ontal Principles of legis-

lotion and codes, but also diverse statutes. regulations, rules and other acts. Ito
can expect that as codification efforts are extended further to the sphere of second-

ary legislative acts. new force will arise as well. And this will require generalisa-
tion of the corresponding experience, anddevolopnent of the most suitable procedures
and fares of codification of secondary legislative acts.

Another iQortant positive trend in nodern codification is its extension beyond the
boma of the traditional areas of law. to the sphere of social relations. which
are regulated by different areas of Soviet law, as is especially typical of laws

pertaining to the national econoq. Highly iqaortant codificational acts such as
the open Central (b-ittoe and man Council of Ministers 12 July 1979 decree “a:

7
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
POIOFII'ICIALUSEONLY

Iqroving and in Strengthening the Influence of the Sconuic bchmiaa on Increaeing
Production Efficiency and Nor): Quality."13 and the 'etatute on the Droduction Meo-

ciation in agriculture“ 1“ are cowlex ecte by nature—that ie, they apply to differ-
ent areae of lav. me taa): of raieing the level of codification of bueineee legie-

lation reguiree further expaneion of the practice of ccqlex codification.

a. If the volue of codification efforte ie to be dranaticaily increaeed and if the
role played by codification-wne of the eoet effective Ieane of iqroving soviet
legielation--ie to be enhanced. the effectiveneee of the ecientific eupport offered
to euch efforte mt be raised ae well. 'i'hie ie directly foreeeen by mionvide and
repwlic decreee on preparation of codee of lava. Ihile at the mionvide level
broad participation of echolare in codification efforte hae long been the one. in

a nmer of caeee the union repmlice are experiencing difficultiee in thie regard.
inaeuuch an the lam-axing organe do not an a rule have their own legal reeearch
centere. what ve obviously need here ie broader utilisation: of ecientiete froe other
departuente, prinarily from the acadeniee of eciencee of the mion republice. and of
inetructore at legal inetitutee and law echoole. All-mic: ecientific inetitutione
could aleo broaden their aeeietance to republic law-axing crgane.

Practice ehove that the moat typical tonne of participation of ecientiete in codi-
fication activitiee include preparing propoeale for bille. developing the etructun
and baeic principlee of future lave, participating in working groupe and co—ieeione
formed with the purpoee of preparing bille, providing advice to lanaking organe on
ieeuee arieing in the couree of a bill'e writing. offering conclueicne on prepared
bille and an on. Preliminary sociological reeearch and experinente, conducted with
the purpoee of finding the noet effective eoluticne to particular ieeuee aeeociated
with the content of future lave. could be extremely important. It ehould be recog-
nized that euch reeearch hae not yet enjoyed broad developnent in legielative acti-
vitiee, though given proper organization of the effort. it could becone an important
neane of iqroving the ecientific grounde and effectiveneee of adopted ecte.

Scholare preparing propoeale for bilie ueually limit the-elvee today to general
diecueeion of the euitability of a particular eolution and to criticien of certain

provisione of a bill. The effectiveneee of the participation of ecience in codifi-
cation efforte would riee eignificantly if ecientiete working on a particular ieeue
were to einultaneouely euggeet the concrete wording for the article or eubdivieicn
of the act in queetion.

Alec effective ie preparation of a concrete bill in ite entirety-dro- the prelini-
nary reeearch to eubnieeion of the final bill--by individual ecientific inetitntione.

Bills: could be developed both in reepcnee to direct requeete fron lavnaking organe
and on the initiative of the ecientific inetitution or individual ecientiete. It
would be deeirable in thie caee for euch initiative to be directed at realizing the
plane of legislative work, ae approved by the appropriate lavnaking organe. leach
experience hae been acct-ulated in thie aepect by, for exasple, ecientiete of the
Wilsz [All-mien Scientific beearch Inetitute of Soviet Legieiation). heponding
to. requeete by intereeted lawnaking organe. and in a Inner of caeee ueing their

oun initiative, theee ecientiete prepared a nutter of nodal all-union and rep1l>lic
codification ecte in recent years. Thus the mrsz once appeared before legielative

crgane with a propoeal to publieh the mdanental Principlee of negielation on
Abinietrative Liability. nae inetitute'e ecientiete developed. and eubnitted to
the lawnaking organe, a draft of the propoeed act, which an then included in the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOWMONLY

plan for drafting legislation. on law was recently approved by the (.838 Supreme
Soviet as the midnental Principles of (55!! and mien Bpublic legislation on Amin-
istrative Lav violations. 15

The participation of scientists in preparing codification acts is met effective

when the problem men which a collective is working is included beforehand in the
plan for its scientific research. and if enough personnel, eaterials and equipment
are provided to do the job. its effectiveness of scientific research depends also
in my ways on the degree to which it is coordinated with the content of legisla-
tion plane approved by the appropriate lawsaking organs.

9. In terns of their scale, the codification efforts of today surpass all similar
efforts of the past. But nevertheless they still ewrace only a few areas of the
legislation. the problem is that codification is usually defined as publication of

a single codification act reigning suprene over a particular area of legislation.
In the best case the efforts to codify a certain area of legislation result in

publication of not just a single act but a systen of acts: all-union fmdseental
principles, republic codes and some other acts derived fro. the former (as is true.
for emle. with codification of land law). But even in the latter case codifica-
tion usually wraces only the nost ilportant norms of the area of legislation.
Ihnsrous other acts previously published in that area rennin outside the codification
efforts as a rule.

Soviet lawnsking practice and legal science have achieved a level in their develop-
nent at which they could adequately face and gradually cleete the task of blanket
codification of normative esterials in each area of Soviet legislation. ‘i'his task
could be cowleted in the following way. It would be suitable to develop, for

each of these areas. and gradually punish a nutually associated systee of codifica-
tion acts esbracing all of the nornative material of the given area of legislation.
or at least those prescriptions which are intended to be pernanent. In cases where
the content of noreativs material is in keeping with the tasks at hand but is dis-
tinguished by fragentation and excessive volue, it nay be generalized by publishing
not codification acts but consolidated (codained) acts.

mis should be the long-range strategic task of legal science and lawnaking practice.
Publication of codification and consolidated acts would best be done according to

a single plan and a system corresponding to the internal systen of the given area

of legislation. Large codification and consolidated acts could serve. later on,

as the basis for future all-union and remblic law superies. In contrast to

sue-arise being prepared today, in the more renots future they could become a
single and ell-edracing forts of blanket codification of legislation. and the present

stage of this effort could beccee one of the stages on the road to gradual cospletion
ofthe tasks of blanket codification. Of course, cleetion of this task would re-

quire a great deal of tine. but we nut begin work on it today, so that the law-
.king efforts of today would be tied in with cowleting the task of blanket codifi-

cation tceorrow.

If this long-range plan is to be inlenented. it would also be iQortant to prevent

'disintegration" of the areas of legislation that have already been codified. Sons-
tines it happens that over a period of a number of years, an adopted codification

act inherits mnerous anenhents and suppleeents which are not directly associated
with its text. thus significantly reducing the codification effect. we need to

9
FOR OMCMI. [5! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

adhere strictly to the rule that all subsequent ananhanto and auppleeonto associ-
ated with a codification act should be inediatoly fomlatod by the legislature as
new articles, clause: or aubclauoeo. AI annbonta-and applet-ants accumlate, the

act may be otticially republiahed. This practice, vhich hao already gained a .fin
foothold in relation to hmdaoental Principles and codoo, should beccno tho miwreal
rule.

m

l. Brezhnev. L. 1.. 'uninokin kurcon. Rechi i etat'i' [Following Lenin's-
Course. Speeches and Articles]. Vol 6. Ibocov, 1978, p 524.

2. See WM?! WW 80V!“ 8888, No 51, 1977, Article 764.

3. See 11:16., No 15, 1978, Article 239.

4. See SP EPSR. No 7, 1979, Article 35.

5. See the decree of the Preoidiu of. the 18183 Supra-o Soviet 'm Organizing the
Work of Bringing RSPSR legislation Into Comnpondmco With the USSR Conotitution

and the E988 Cbnltitution' (VIM?! WW 80V!” 135R, lb 28, 1978,

Article 752) and the Statute on the Legal Protection in the RBPSR (Ibid., lb 48,
1980, Article 1596).

6. See VmeS'I'I VBRKBOWOQ SOVBTA 8838, Ito 28, 1975, Article 439.
‘I. See lbid., Article 441.

8. See Ibid. , Article 436.

9. See Ibid., No 17, 1979. Article 272.

10. See lbid., No 49, Article 842.

11. See WW1?! VENOM SOVB’I'A BISR, No 32, 1979. Article 783.
12. See 11316., Article 784.

13. See SP 8858, No 18, 1979, Article 118.

14. See Ibid.. No 3. Article 15.

15. See VENIOSTI VBRKBOVNOQ‘.) SOVB'BA $8811, No 44, 1980. Article 909.
COPYRIGH: Not Available.

11004
GO: 1800/663

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USS ONLY

“known.

sumac. MR PM!“ Ill LEGAL EMT!“ mscmro

uningrad :zvrsnu wsssm mun zavmn: sum in union no 2,
1931 pp 99-102

[Article by doctors of legal sciences In. N. mlashnikov and v. A. Rshevskiy. and
Candidate of Legal and Bistoricel Sciences 3. v. Lisnevskiy: 'Probleas in Develop-

ment of Legal Science and Iegal Education in the Northern Caucasus")

[next] 1he north Caucasus Scientific Center consists of a significant meter of
higher legal educational institutions (predo-inantly miversity law schools) which
train highly skilled persomel for the national econony and for legal organs, and
which conduct scientific research.

A regional scientific conference, sponsored by the jurisprudence section of the
north caucasus Scientific Center of the higher School and by the university of

lbstov aid held 21-22 March 1960 in lbstov-on-Don. vas avoted to the tasks posed
by the new £888 Constitution to legal science and legal education. Its partici-
pants included scientists and practicing lawyers fral nostov-on-non, xhar'kov,
Krasnodar. ordshonikidse and lhkhachkala.

The conference was opened by Prof P. A. Sadinenko, deputy chair-an of the Presidim
of the Council of the north Caucasus Scientific Center of the ligher School.

During the plenary session 3. V. Penyagin. deputy director of the Division of Ad-
ninistrative Organs, Rostovskaya (blast CPSU Oo-ittoe, gave a report titled
"Principles of the Integrated Approach and Its Application to nplauentation of

the cpsu Central Oouittee Decree 'On Innoving the lork of Protecting new and Order
and Intensifying the Fight Against Orient" Be esphasised that iaportant neasurss
aimed at iqaroving legislation and the activities of police organs and encouraging
the public to play a greater role in protection of law and order, now being inle-
unted in the country in accordance with decisions of the 25th C980 Congress and
the [55R Constitution. are creating the necessary conditions for eliminating all
violations of the law. cries and its causes. however this process is not proceeding
spontaneously. auto-stically.

Prof v. A. azhevskiy. dean of the lav school at the aliversity of mstov, devoted
his report to development of legal science and legal education at the university.

He noted than: the school's scholars have enjoyed certain successes in developing
a nmer of scientific problens (the political systen of socialist society, lav and
other social now, legal education etc.). In thelast few years they punished

l).
MWUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

850 scientific works and defended five doctorate and 15 candidate dissertations.

But there are unsolved problese as well. associated with the inortance of the
scientific research, the extent of its integration and so on. “gel science is
closely associated with education. We can no longer isagine preparing students

for the legal profession without requiring the- to participate in scientific research,

something which met be pursued sore aggressively. 'me training sethodology of the
edtool is based on problematic training. '

Prof A. 1.. letifov, dean of the law school at the University of Degeetan, described
the work of the school. And even though the instructor staff dose in general
possess the required qualifications, so percent of the instructors have not as yet

earned academic degrees. for this reason instructors Iustbe recruited fro- other
cities. Acadenic achievensnt in the school is relatively high, and work is being
conducted on the teaching methods. In the opinion of the speaker it would be un-
suitable to send graduates of the school outside the reptblic. inrovaeents also
need to be made in the rules of adaission to legal instimtions of higher education.

Special courses given in law schools require unification, and students should begin
receiving a specialised education right from the first year. The training plans used

by the correspondence training departnent, and particularly the ties allocated to
training in attendance, nust be reviewed. ‘lhe school's colleagues have punished
one monograph, four textbooks and 4? scientific articles, surveys. reviews etc.

Assistant Prof '1'. 'D. Chepiga. assistant dean of the law school at the University of
Kuban‘ reported on the state of affairs at the school. Scientific research is pro-
ceeding actively at the school: During the tine of its existence 778 scientific

works were published, to include 13 sonographs, 7 textbooks (coauthored) and 23
training aids. in the last 4 years four candidate dissertations were defended and

work was cleeted on three doctorate dissertations. New special courses were intro-
duced. All depart-ants have signed contracts for creative cooperation with practi-
cing legal organs. ‘me school offers three specialties, and the latest technical
resources are used in the training process. 'nzis raises the issue of centralised
supply of training files and teaching saterials through the mas and urns [not
further identified). It would be suitable to coebine the effort of instructors of
Northern Caucasian legal schools to develop training saterials, to teach special
courses and so on. The planned graduate placement systea requires inrovenent.
Specialization in economic law must be broadened so that personnel could be pre-
pared for work in the national scone-y.

Law school dean Assistant Prof A. I. Nosenko gave a report titled 'Developnent of
Legal Science and Legal Bducation.in the North Ossetian state miversity.‘ His
is tne youngest school in the North Caucasus. Nevertheless its collective is con-

ducting research: It has published several monographs and pamphlets, lOS scientific
articles and four collections, the latter in cooperation with other institutions of

higher education. The school is experiencing sons difficulties. thus its insigni-
ficant student capacity (50 persons) lakes specialized instruction imossible, and alnost

every instructor is coqelled to offer two or three training disciplines that are
not always within a related specialty, which unavoidably affects both the quality of
the teaching and the organisation of scientific research. It would be no less

important to change the structure of the school. At the assent two departments
offer a large quantity of unrelated disciplines. mus ls study subjects in crininal

and civil law are concentrated in the depart-ant of legal disciplines. The depart-
ments should be nede smaller, and experienced lecturers should be placed in charge

of them.

12
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe plenary session was concluded with a report fru Prof s. A. Asto-irov (mivoreity
of nogostan) 'm the Professional ibdol of tho Luyer-Bpocialist,‘ in which he justi-
ties the need for instituting specialisation in state law, civil lav and crininal
lav.

no conference then broke down into sections for further work.

he section on the theory and history of the state and la: and the history of politi-
cal and legal doctrines gave audience to an analysis. by Prof I. V. wabko (NW!-
sity of hoetov). of V. I. Lenin's viewpoints on the problees of the state and law

in his prorovoluticnary works.

A report by Prof h. u. Kulashnikov (university of bstov) "mo (88]! Constitution and
the aneral ‘l‘hoory of Soviet Lav" era-ined some problems of the general theory of
Soviet law associated with reinforcing the legal foundation of state and social

life, grovth in the organising end controlling role of legal and other social nora-
eaking .up the system of rules governing socialist co-Inity, end their interaction

in the course of regulation of socialist social relations.

Assistant Prof B. V. Lisnovskiy university of nostov) attoqtod to explain the
grounds for the specific features of citisonship in the NA in 1870-1917. ‘

v. A. Rrhevskiy gave a report titled "lho Constitutional lloaents of the Political
Systes of Developed Socialiss in the user in a meeting o: the section for state.

edninistretive, financial and international law. In the speaker's opinion tho
political systo- of developed socialise is a unified, organisationelly cowloto

system of political relations regulated by certain standards.

Prof x. D. Kcrknasovo (mivorsity of lbstov) described national citizenship in the
(888.

”to need for fining both legal persons and their executives in special cases was the
topic of a report given by Assistant Prof I. I. Soeenonko university of lbstcv).

Assistant Prof Yu. M. Prusakov (motov Higher Party School) analysed the relation-

ship between institutions of nodern international law such as ”nonproliferation of
nuclear weapons” and I'nucloar-free zones.“

Assistant Prof Ye. M. Akopova university of lbstov) gave a report titled ”Must is
hissing Pros: Labor Lav' in the meeting of the section for civil, family, labor,
kolkhos and land lav and the civil process. shoofforod an interpretation of the
Interial and procedural shortcomings of labor law. which are especially tangible
in cases where do faato relationships that are domtlessly within the sphere of
legal regulation are not stbjectod to the latter.

Assistant Prof Yo. I. Pilippov (University of lbstov) devoted his report to the
constitutional principles of the organization and activities of conrades' courts.

Assistant Prof 8. I. Zel'dov (North Ossetian miversity) gave a report titled

"rho Moments of Crieinal Law as a tor- of Realising Criminal Liability" in the
section for crininal lav. criminology, cri-inol court procedures and crininalistico.

l3
FOIOIHCIALWONLY
POIOFFICIAIJJSEONLY

The speaker argued the need for introducing. into Soviet cri-inal law. the institu-
tion of crininal punishment on a unified couple: of state neasuren foreaeen by

criminal law and applied in the realization of crininal responsibility, but only by
thecourt, and in the established order.

Prof u. h. We (University of tuban') illuinated the prnhlen of court eurveillanoe
over the legality of proceedinge in criminal casee. Se suggeste that only the court
can reeolve a disagreeuent between an examining nagistrate and a procurator in re-
gard to whether or not a case should he closed if the defendant goes into hiding

etc .

A report titled ’unin'e Inquirenents on Personnel and Iqrovenent of Legal Training
of Party and Soviet lorkers' was given by Yu. :2. Doﬁdaylo (betov-ligher Party
School) in a neeting of the section for legal training of pereonnel and i‘te'iQrove-
nent in Iodern conditions. He pointed out that the party‘s requirement 'to know and
reepect the law" can and nut be inlenented within the syeten of higher party-

political education in the forn of mheneive and deep aesinilation of the entire
mechanism of legal regulation of social relations. Not only the epecific eleunts

of the nechanisa but also the conditions under which it on operate euccesefully
in the control of state and public affaire today nust he studied.

6. A. Pilinonov, chairman of the Rostovskaya Oblast Court, gave a report titled
“Doing the Materials of Court Crime Prevention Practice in the Training of legal
Personnel,“ in which he turned attention to the fact that studying the experience of
cri-e prevention is a mandatory aepect of iqroving the legal training of pereonnel.

Other interesting reports and meagee were heard in the section neetings as well.
In all, 74 persons participated in the conference.

The conference adopted recon-endatione which recognize the following to he neceesery
in particular:

1. Work on problem neeociated with the basic directione of scientific reeearch
conducted by the region's W2 departments and schools mat be intensified, with

special attention being turned to the end reeulte.

2. A bibliographic index of works written by legal scholars of the North Caucasus
nuet he prepared and publist in 1981-1985.

3. Preparation and publication of continuing north Caucasue interowz oollectione
dealing with epecific problens and eubjecte in three legal sciences series (etate
law, civil law. crininalistics) lust be initiated.

4. Support nuet be provided to the propoeal by the law echool of the north
Oeaetian univereity for reducing the site of nultidisciplinary legal education

departnents in the region and for increasing the nuber of students adnitted to
the region'e vuz law schools.

5. The Presidiun of the North Caucasus Scientific Center of the higher School must
he petitioned to create intraschool departments offering instruction on the funda-

snntals of Soviet govern-ant and law in the region's VUZs.

16
MWUBEONLY
FOIOI‘FICIALUSEONLY

6. a propoeel net be emitted to the eppropriete perty orgene on introducihq e
come on the principlee of Soviet govern-eat end lev in ell mlvereity depertnente
of atria-minim (et Rom-Don, Krasnodar, Ordxhonikidu end Mekhechkele).

Pennant advanced training comes for instructore et peoplee’ univenitiee o!
lcqel knowledge luet be creeted within the depert-ent o! the principles of Soviet

govern-ant end law in the luv echool of the annuity of. new. end e pertinent
.dvieory office "t be created {or inetructore teeching counee on the principles

of Soviet govern-eat end lev in city and obleet edmtioael inetitutione. Sinner
coureee and edvieory otticce ehould he creeted in other low echoole or the region'-
V020.

cannon: Nothveileble

11004
GO: 1800/664

15
”MUSIOMJ
. -.. -..._...- ve-rO- vet-s

NATIONAL

RELIGIOUS MIFS INCREASING IN SOVIET MUSIC
Psris RUSSKAYA HYSL' in Rueaian 6 Key 82 p 12

[Article by hikhail Gol‘dahtein: "A haw trend in Soviet maic: M Appeal to
Church Helodiea"!

[Text] It would be untrue to aay that the intereet in religioua feelings. which
are expreaaed by nuaical leana. ia iaolated iron the general tune of n'ind.

“thia general true of aind haa already been diaplayad in Soviet literature and

in painting. It ia alao rather clear in a nunber of Soviet iilea. There in no
need to recall thia; the exanplea are any and rather convincing. ‘rhere ta no
doubt thbt theae trende ahould have found their pluein meeian maical culture
also. Are they accidental? It aeeaa to no that it ia a naniieatation of the
natural need of conpoaera to look for a connection between the tiaea and their
feelinga. to peer at the peat and to obaerve ita wiedoe. It ia no accident that
Tikhon Khrennihov, the leader of the Union of USSR Gonoeera, in directing atten-
tion toward thia trend. he apeaka about it openly in the prose and during
congreaeea of the conpoeere. trying to guard the nuaiciana againat auch "a teap-
tation". Thus. ‘l'ikhon Khrennikov openly announced in his 26 Ocotober 1981
speech: "He have recently obaerved a new and atranga craze - worha baaed on
canonical religioue Latin texta. which are uaed for vocal ayIphoniea. requiena
and vocal and organ concerto, are appearing one after the other. It would be
untrue to eee in thia only the influence of -- no to epeak -- a retroapective
febhion; in theae caaea. we can undoubtly talk about a clear departure from life,
iron the take o.‘ a Soviet artiat, and iron the eoat important for-a and aubjecte
of our Iodern life" (the “saline SOVE'ISKAIA mm. No 1. 1982. p 15). In the
peat, Khrennikov hae repeatedly "warned" againet enthuaiaan for the old Ruaaian
aonga which have begun to penetrate into the worka of Soviet conoaera. Thia
"enthuaiaan". however has its on hiatory. First of all, let ua turn to the
creativity of Alekaander Vaeil'yevich Alekaandrov, the well know Soviet coqoaer
and author of the USSR national anthea. Perhaps. ny announce-ant will be received
aa a aenaation. however. I want to announce that in 1921 the coqoaer A. V.
Alekaandrov wrote in Hoacow a "pool” for aoloiate, choir. orcheatra. ad organ
under the title "Chriat Ia Moon". I do not know how often it wee perforled at
the tine, but it waa not publiehed. I nyaelf have not heard thia work; however

I know tron the worda of my acquaintancea - old maiciana and aingere -- that

it waa a brilliant piece. true. one can aay to me that thia ia an unverified
runor and even viah to expraaa doubt in the exiatence of thia work of the Soviet

16
MWUSEONLY
coqooor. thia io why I wioh to amouco to thooo who doubt thot it roally
ariata'and that thia baa boon cootirood in a ouaicol bibliogrophical rotorooco
book which waa out out in )bacow in 1980 by tho "Sovotohiy hoopooitor" Publiohing
Iouoo. thia roiaronoo wort io collod "A. V. Alohoondrov" ondwoa coopilod by

hio aoo. tho coqooor Iuriy Alotoondrovich mum. rho rotorouco wort
undonoot oll oanaorahip obatocloa boforo it woo oaut to tho typo-oottor on 20
Daoanbor 1978. It wao oipod to prooo on 5 binary 1900. A. V. Alohatdrov'a
work "alriot to non" io autionod in black ud whito on pogo 15. It would :
ooon that it ohould ho nooooaory to publioh and pOtIOtl‘.1t in concorto. You ooo.
Protoooor Alohoandr Vooil'yovich io not juot onyono. but an outatndiog Soyiot
cowooor who hoa boon awotdod oyory ouatins titlo ad honor. ovon tho rank of
ganoral. rho lod honor (twico) Son. and Danco inaoIbIo of tho Soviot Any
wooro hia naool rho vory iirat ooh; about Stolin. which woo croatod in 1933.

io alao in tho liat oi ilohaaodrov‘o worto. thou. thoro io tho oong "Living

nu loco-o bottor" uoing tho vorooo o! Lowdown-och (cowoood in 1935). tho
oocond ”Song About Stalin" (1937). "Cantata About Stalin" (1938). ”Tho Antho-

oi the holohovih Party" (1939). "Glory to tho Soviot noiou" (19oz), "Hootm with
tho Loador" (19‘3). "tho Song of Harahal nokoooovokiy“ (19%). otc. It would
not that all tho moaor logacy of Alohomdrov ohould bo aopociolly voluad in
tho USSR and pornioaion givon for tho publication of tho pooh ”Chriot 1a liaoo".
Bowovor, who will ponit it? thonho aro duo that thoy «on coniirnod tho oxio-
tonco of thio comation.

Doitriy Shootohmtich'o ooog "rho hothoruod lo Liotoning. tho hothorlnd Knowa".
which haa booono tho coll oign of tho Soviot ”Latoot hawa" radio broodcaata. ia
widoly know. But you ooa, tho boginning of thio oong'a oolody io tho rhytl-ically
altorad nolody of tho hy-l "mar Lord to Glorioua". which woo already roportod in
tin (irot ioouo of WA“ RUSSIA“ W'MYA WA.

It io not tho giro: tioo that hodion Shchodrin turna to o church thono whoa ho
conbinoa it with tho croation of tho oratorio "Donn in tho ﬂoort of tho Poopla".
In 1968. on ordar of tho how York Philhar-onio Orchootra ond in honor of tho

125th annivoroary of ita founding. Rodion Shchodrin wroto hio aooond concort for

o oylphonic orchaotra which boara tho titlo "China". So that thoro would bo

no doubt‘about what tho coqoaor had in nind. Shahodrin wrota right out in hio
outhor'a annototioo to ”China": "3ovorol chi-ing principloa -- of course. troatod
oxtroooly frooly -- havo boon uood in thio work juot ao aovoral olononta of tho

old tuaoion non-linoor ouoicol writing - tho oo-callod oinglo 'hooko' or 'banor
wan-up'. Sovorol pogoa oi 'chinoo' woro inopirod by tho painting of tho groat
Bunion artiot udroy lublow" (quotod fro- “. Tarakanov'a book "Mrchootvo
Bodiona Shchodrina" (Indian Shchodrin'o Croativity). "Sovotohiy koopooitor"
Publiohing houao. Hoacow. 1980. p 122). That oooo Hihhoil ‘l‘arakonov, a doctor of
art criticiao. roportod in tho nowapapor sovnsuu m'rm (9 April 1982) tho
firot portornnoo in Hoaoow of lodion Shchodrin‘a now work ”Tho Dionyoiuo Froaoooo).
It I on not niatahoh. thio work wao firot porforood in tho Root and haa only now
oarnod tho honor of oppoaring boforo a Soviot audionco. So that thoro will bo no
doubt about thio work of Shchodrin belonging to roligiouo than, Torokonov
oxploina: ”Tho wory naoo of thia work tootitioa to ita coonactioo with old Bunion
traditioua. Ito 'opparont' oxproaoion ia inooporably unitod with on 'audiblo‘
Iuaical obeOl which tho oalodioo of tho faooua warn-up bocono. Bowovor. oattango-
we 05"le USE ONLY

neat and fondneea for antiquity are leeet of all preeent in the auaic of the
'Preacoea' -- the ancient eonga are preeented in the penetrating light of a Iodarn
reading. The eoepoaer painta the eevere and at the one tine mlticolored
aubjecte of the aurale uains nueical none." What can he added to theae worda?
Piret of all. an ilportant niaprint haa elipped in here. Re are talking not about
"feaoua" warn-upe but about "banner" warn-upa. The gra-ariane of WMYA
KUL'TUBA have atill not quite neatered thia tetainology. 0t oourae. one cannot
talk only about a fondneaa for antiquity, the conpoeer quite conecioualy perceivee
the outatandin; Dionyaiua Freacoea and retella the old aonsa for the Iodern
audience. creating bridgea for their underatending. Coneerin; the "multicolored
aubjecta of the mrald'which are perneeted with a deep religioua feeling, they
provide the conpoeer with an occaaion for a spiritual notional axperienee end
reflection. The conpoeer skill of lodion Shchedrin ie widely known; it haa re-
ceived world-wide recognition. It ie poaaible to auppoee that an encounter with
thie new work of Indian Shchedrin can provide the liatenera not only aatiaiaction
but also an occaaion for reflection.

What can explein the new craze of Soviet coupoaere who are appealing to reliaioua
theaee in their creationa‘! It ia possible to evaluate thie in different waye.
However, here there ia firat of all a conacioue departure iron the unattractive
eubjecte of nodern times and the deaire to cleenae their ainful aoule and find
norel eatiafaction in religioua feelinse.

8802
C80: 1800/ 693

l8
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
manner. on ROLE OF RUSSIA! W60”! HELD

Kiev RUSSKI‘I'! “Z?! I LI‘IBRATURA V mun! USSR in Rueeien No l. Jen-Feb 82
pp 79-80

[Articles ”Preblene in Studying the Rueeien Laguege ee e lleene of International
Intercouree”]

[Text] The grovth in the eociel functione of the Rueeien language ie placing
before linguiete inportent teeka in etudying the linguietic prohlene of national-
Rueeien hilinguelien and the urgent queetione involved in ite teaching in the
country'e achoole end V112. A conference of linguiete. which took place 19-22
October 1981 in the Rueeien nguege Inetitute of the USSR Acadeny of Sciencee.

vae devoted to theoretical problene in the etudy of the Rueoian language eeenane
for the USSR peoplee' international intercouree. unity and cooperation. Scientiete
free ecientific reeearch inetitutee and inetructore free the univereitiee and
pedagogical inetitutee of all the union republice participated in the work of the
conference.

V. V. Ivenov, the deputy director of the Ruaeim Language matitute of the USSR
Acadeny of Sciences. opened the conference. The two beeic eepecte of the diac-
cueeion, which define the theoretical and practical inportence of the problem
the functioning of the Rueeien Language in the varioue ereee of ite epreed in the
national rephblice end the level of developnent of Rueeien epeech under the con-
ditione of netional-Rueeien bilingualien. were propoeed to the conference perti-

cipente.

In hie report, a. I. Ieeyev (the Linguietice Inetitute of the USSR Acadeny of
Sciencea) defined the four functional ereee of the Rueeien language which require
their own nethode of etudy: the language of the Rueeien nation, the language of
the USSR peoplee' international intercouree, the language of intercourae in the
comtriee of eocielin. end one of the vorld'e lenguegee. Reeeerch on the func-
tiona of the Rueeien language ee a neene of international intercourse nuet he
conducted egeinet the broad hackgrouad of Soviet eociety'e eociel developnent,
coneidering the opti-un conditioua for the uee of native and the Rueaien lenguagee.
the epecific epeech nediu, and the nutual influence of the Rueeien lad national
lenguegee.

.vge .

FOR OFFICIAL lg! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acadenician h. H. Shmskiy of the USSR Acadany of Pedagogical Scianco dwelt on
lingustic instruction questions and on raising the quality of Russian language
instruction in the national schools. Thanks to the joint research of linguists,
teachers, psychologists, and sociologists, the fundnentals for non-Russians to
study the Russian language have been successfully developed and s training nodal
of the Russian language has been created in our country. The linguistic aspect
of teaching sssunes a description of the Russian language which confona to the
conditions of each national republic. an analysis of the interaction of the
Russian and national languages. End a study of the distinctive features of the
Russian language under the conditions of hilingualiss.

N. G. Hilthaylovskaya (the Russian Language Institute of the USSR Acadeny of
Sciences) described the major functional spheres of the Russian language as sums
of international intercourse and justified the need for research in the area of
the Russian language's practical use under the different conditions of its spread.

The distinctive features in the functioning of the Russian language in foreign
language surroundings, the results of the interaction of the Russian and national
languages -- especially on the lexical level. and the influence of the native
language (interference) on Russian speech were analysed in the reports of I. U.
Aafandiyarov (Tashkent). E. M. Akhunsyanov (Kasan'). R. I. Garshva (Vilnius),

H. H. Kopylenho (Alas-Ate), K. S. Chonhashev (Prunes). R. I. Khashinov (Dushanbe),
and other linguists. Many of the scientists esphasised that, although the

Russian speech of non-Russians reflects to sone degree or other the specific nature
of the native tongue in the area of orthoepy and greener, this influence does not
lead to the forlation of national variants or varieties of the Russian literary
language.

1‘. K. Chertorizhskaya (the Linguistics Institute ineni A. A. Potehsn' of the
Ukrainian SSR Acadeny of Sciences) enhasised the progressive nature of Ukrainian-
Russian bilingualisn and its broad spread in the different areas and terri-
torial and social groups of the republic'a population. At the present tins, the
scientists of the Ukrainﬂare perforning a great deal of work in studying the

scope and spheres of bilingualism. the factors which are stisulating its spread,
and the degree of sastery of the Russian language considering the closely related
nature of the bilingualism.

The discussion of the prohless of Russian speech stndards under the conditions

of national-Russian hilingualiss touched upon the ascertainment of the relations
between usage (use) and literary language none. the determination of literary
nor- variants, and the searches for concrete ways to isprove the correctness of
oral and written speech. Methods for studying the degree of nastery of the Russian
language, the distinctive features of inter-language synonym, and the task of
overconing interference under the conditions of a different language surroundings
were treated in the reports of A. A. Abdullayev (Hathachkala). A. K. Alekperov
(Baku). A. S. Barkar' and Ye. K. Kolets (Kishinev). A. Ye. Hikhnevich (Minsk),

and 0. N. Nararov (Ashkhahad).

of“

20
won OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Penieedhle end leper-tenth word-building ad word-cheating veriente of the
Rueeien literery lenguege end eeverel trende in the develop-eat of none were
defined in the report of L. K. Greudineye end I. V. Toletoy (the heeien lneti-
tute). V. I. lononenko (the Kiyevekiy Pedqosicel Inetitute ineu A. H. Gor'hiy)
dwelt on the dietinctive feeturee in vein; verilnte of eyntecticel none under
the conditione of heelen-Okreinien bilingual. nd the hetero which bring to-
gether the verietione of two cloeely releted leagues”. L. H. Grnovekeye (mu)
hed reeeerched the peculieritiee tn the etylhtic Iodificetione in the heeien
lame ertietic texte which had been publiehed in Aeerheijn.

The reperte of the conference perticipente evoked e lively diecueeion. In my
preeentetione (in perticuler thoee of ‘r. A. Bohroveye. V. H. Pen'hin, V. A.
lvnoveye (the Ionian League” Inetitute), M. A. lerpenho (Kiyevekiy Univereity).
end V. II. rurkin (Dnepropetrovekiy Univereity)), the tell: concerned the need

for forth“ thorough etudy of the different eepecte of bilingual”. for coordin-
etin; the etforte of the ecientiete in the eree of reeeerchin; the Rueeien
language neleene of internetionel intercouree, end for reidn; the level of
Bueeien leaguege inetruction in the netionel echoole end WI. The renge of Nor
queetione. which it ie teen-ended be included in the reeeerch work plene of
ocieotiete in eceduic inetitutee end republic W2. wee detined' in the reeolution
which wee edoptedhy the conference.

ummx "Ruukiy yeeyk i litereture v ehkolekh 0883”. 1982

8802
080: 1800/ 685 END

21
”OFFICIAL USEONLY