I‘UK Ul'flk IAL Ubr. UNLY

JPRS L/10294
1 February 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/102
1 February

NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 5/82)

Conreurs

MARK PORGS

FRANG

General Gsllois Interviewed, Says Nuclear Her Possible
(Gallois Interview; LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI. Nov 31)......... ..

EMOMIC

BEUSIUH

Troubles Continue for Oockerill-Subre Steel Firm
(Paul (Jolson; POURQUOI PAS?, 10 Dec 81).....................

POLITICAL

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

3mm: Soviet Peace Ebvelnnt Ties; Disinfomtion
Activities
(Philippe Kresnopolski; VALEURS ACTUBLIES, 13-25 Oct 81)....

-e- [III-WE-ISOI

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCES FRANCE

GENERAL GALLOIS INTERVIEW). SAYS NUCLEAR WAR POSSIBLE
Paris LATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI in French Nov 81 pp 19-22
[Interview with General Gallois. by Patrice Galand; date and place not given]

[Text] we wanted to have a talk with a world-famous specialist
on the development of the nuclear era techniques and strategies.
we reached the conclusion that today a nuclear war is within
the realm of possibility. General Gallois. disputed at times.
expounds in the most prestigious hemicycles. Author of about
ten works, of several hundred articles translated into a number
of languages, including Russian. he gave us the results of 30
years of reflection.

[Question] What great changes have taken place during this century?

[Answer] At least two in the field of my professional branch. The first one is
political and social: the 1917 Revolution.

The second revolution is the advent of weapons of massive destruction.

[Question] Before discussing the strategic aspects. can you explain to us what
weapons of massive destruction are. in fact?

[Answer] It is a question of weapons that have a great destruction power per "unit
of fire." Possibilitiesthnt thcydonot always have have been attributed to them
and the dividends that they may bring in are often overlooked. There can be no
thought of having recourse to them except in extreme situations. They have signifi-
cance only for protecting the territory of the country holding them and if that
country were as if held by the throat.

0n the other hand. it has not been sufficiently realized that the atom could turn
war into an absurd act. at least between countries equipped with them. even in

unequal amounts.

[Question] That idea is based on the principle that the final objective of war

for an aggressor is to profit from it. If everything is destroyed, there is no
longer any advantage in waging war. How have we reached thisstatusquo of forced

nonwar?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFK3AI.USE10NLX

[Answer] Over the ages, men have confronted each other under different conditions.
In a first phase, combat took place hand-to-hand. usually at some distance from
cities and. when one party won over the other. he took possession of the human

and material goods remaining intact. A second period was entered with bombards

at first and then heavy artillery. The combatants not only exterminated each other.
but they also partially destroyed their respective property. During World War II.
we entered a third period with the combination of the bombing plane and the atom
bomb. At that time. they sought not only to destroy the combatant. but they also
razed material property in the interior. Thus, a period was reached in which war
had become so absurd (because what was supposed to be conquered was destroyed)

that the status quo of forced nonwar became imperative.

[Question] Does not the development of techniques throw that status quo open to
question?

[Answer] Unfortunately, it seems that it does. For several years now, we have

been in a fourth period characterized by the accuracy of long«range missiles. These
weapons can destroy traditional armed forces at their stations without having the
civilian population and the material goods of the attacked country suffer from

them. We have returned to a period in which nuclear war is again becoming con-
ceivable. because the coveted goods would be spared.

[Question] You present the Soviet Union as an expanding social system. Hhat ma-
terial means has that country given itself?

[Answer] The Soviets have realized what the political and military implications
of the two revolutionary changes were. They were the instigators of the first
one. They were going to strive to master the second one rapidly. In 1969. they
tested their first nuclear explosive. From 19149 to 1960. they modernized the ve-
hicles. During the decade of the 1960's, they deployed those weapons, and, start-
ing in 1965. contrary to what is said everywhere. "parity" was achieved between
Russia and America, because. with nuclear weapons. "parity" is not numerical. The
Soviets had "parity" as soon as they were potentially capable of making the terri-
tory of the United States undergo intolerable devastation; that is to say. capable
of wiping a number of cities from the map and of causing human losses that would
be counted by the millions. Starting at that time, with regard to America, the
USSR knew that it was unattackable on its territory and this resulted in a great
freedom of action for it.

[Question] How does Soviet expansion occur?

[Answer] It is the result of two processes: by means of territorial contiguity
and by means of discontinuity. When the Soviets expand by means of territorial
contiguity. the Red Army usually goes into action after a political preparation
adapted to local circumstances. Thus. that was the case in Eastern Europe between
1939 and l9h7. That was the case in Hungary in 1956. in Czechoslovakia in 1968

and in Afghanistan in 1980. It was a 12-year cycle. Political preparation enables
the Red Army to intervene without encountering organized military forces in oppo-
sition. The Hungarian Army stayed in its barracks. The Czech Army did likewise
and the Afghan Army was on the side of the invader.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the time of the dispute between Vietnam--allied with Moscow--end China, the

Red Army. which occupies a 6.000-kilometer border with China in the north, could
have created a diversion to alleviate pressure by the Chinese on the Vietnamese.
The Red Army did not move. because it would have had to go as far as Peiping. This
was not conceivable. Therefore, there was no diversion.

0

[Question] Why such precautions?

[Answer] Because the Soviets cannot allow a defeat of their Red Army. It has

a reputation of invincibility. It is the guarantor of the regime and if it should
suffer a serious setback. it is not sure that the system would hold out. The large
number of non-Russian ethnic groups peopling that immense empire might make it
break up. Some seven centuries of patient imperialist buildup would disappear.

The Soviet leaders are very aware of the value of the heritage given to them and
also what they have done themselves to expand still more the space under Russian
control. They will not engage the Red Army. if they are not sure of winning.

[Question] Do you think that as soon as the Soviets invade a country by means
of contiguity they no longer abandon it that is why they do not take that risk
before being certain of winning?

[Answer] The irreversible nature of the operations engaged in by the Russians

by means of territorial contiguity is not understood by many Hestern leaders. In
Europe. for example. it is not conceivable that the Soviets will bring their gi-
gantic armament into action and that. in the face of a miraculous resistance. they
will do an about-face. Consequently. strategies consisting in resisting with purely
traditional means in the belief that, in the face of that resistance. Moscow would
not use its weapons of massive destruction. seem to me illusory and dangerous.

[Question] Is not the asymmetry of intiative of the conflict a determining factor
in case of a conflict?

[Answer] The East has the initiative. The corollary of initiative is surprise.
If the accuracy of the long-range missiles that it has is added to this. the USSR
has the means of disarming western countries. provided only with traditional wea-
pons. at a distance by means of a preventive attack. For the Soviets. war initia-
tive is in itself sufficient to create a total situation asymmetry. becauseywioh
today's weapons. the one who strikes first wins. Therefore. let us not talk of
numerical "balance." That makes no sense.

[Question] what means do the Hesterners have to prevent all their armament from.
being destroyed by a surprise attack?

[Answer] In order to avoid the crushing effects of surprise aggression. there

is hardly anything but constant mobility of the counterattack armament. But the
geographical situation asymmetry. added to the preceding ones. comes into play
here. If the Soviets can deploy 88-20 missiles on their territory whose population
density i8. at times, from two to three inhabitants per square kilometer. the same
is not true for the Dutch and their 406 inhabitants per square kilometer. If the
Soviets can deploy nuclear weapons with their warheads installed in the empty
spaces east of Moscow. where there can be no protesters, the same does not apply
to the urban or rural complex in Western Europe.

3

F09 (WI-1r!" new nm v
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Are not strategic nuclear submarines the last deterrence factor for
the Westerners?

[Answer] As a matter of fact. one of the means of avoiding destruction of the
West's defense weapons is to put them in constant mobility. But, when there is
not much territorial space. when the urban complex is very dense and also when

it is a question of democracies in which each one expresses his opinions and in
which each one puts up with protest, the sea offers a large-sized sure refuge with-
out protesters. In the West. this solution is not generally agreed to. It is

true that it is not practicable for countries that have only traditional forces.
They can merely deplore the vulnerability of their military apparatus to the op-
posing accurate weapons.

It is true that. since I959. France has succeeded in building five nuclear sub—
marines (the Soviets launch as many every year) and the Defense budget has not
favored the nuclear forces. with expenditures on the order of 15 percent of the
total military appropriations.

[Question] Are you not defeatist? President Carter wanted to meet the Soviet
88-20 missiles with Pershing missiles or "cruise missiles."

[Answer] when President Carter tried to meet the 88-20 missiles with Pershing
missiles and "cruise aissiles." he did not take into account the situation asym-
metry existing between the two opposing blocs. This asymmetry is political, social
military, strategic. geographic. Until the west realises all the iaplications

of this asymmetry, it will put itself in a situation of inferiority and will pay
tribute to expressions like "detente." "balance of forces." "parity." and so on.
which have little significance in the end of the 20th century, if they had any

30 years ago.

Carter, by proposing his new weapons. and European politiciansby accepting them,
did not realize the political risks that they were running. To take an extreme
example. they forgot that it is not easy to shift cruise missiles on Dutch terri-
tory with their warheads installed.

[Question] what is the advantage for the Soviets to have 88-20 missiles?

[Answer] Those SS-ZO missiles will. perhaps one day. be combat weapons, but they
are already formidable political weapons. They work to the benefit of the Soviets
owing to the divisions that they are creating within the Alliance. The deployment
of 88-20 missiles led Carter to propose "cruise missiles" and Pershing missiles

to the European allies. This is already mobilizing Dutch and Ger-an public opinion
against installation of the American missiles in Europe. th would the Soviets
abandon an armament that gives them that great a political advantage? Hilitarily
speaking. the 83-20 is said to have. at present. an accuracy on the order of 250
meters at a range of 6.400 kilometers. Therefore. it might carry only extremely
small explosive charges.

[Question] Can the neutron weapon be effective against those weapons?

{Answer} There is no obvious connection between enhanced radiation warheads and
missiles of the 88-20. 2! and 22 series. Of course, if we had had the neutron

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

weapon against Hitler's Panzers. it might have worked wonders. Bitler invaded
Europe with tanks. That was 60 years ago. Today, according to the doctrine that
it flaunts, the Red Army still thinks of the tank more as an occupation weapon
than as a front-breaking weapon, as was true of it 40 years ago. It might be pos-
sible that, in our age, the breaking weapon is also and even more so the ballistic
missile used with the benefit of surprise. Once the enemy has been disarmad. the
tanks intervene to occupy the terrain.

[Question] Are our politicians aware of the evolution of these techniques?

[Answer] Not all. The error--normal, noreover--is to proceed by analogy with
the past. For centuries, war was the opposition of chests to chests. cannons to
cannons, tanks to tanks, aircraft to aircraft, ships to ships. Today. and all
the more so tomorrow, technology is making other instruments available to staffs
and those new weapons are fashioning new strategies.

when we talk of establishing a strategic balance between the East and the Heat,

in Europe, which is something current, we disregard the present-day strategic situa-
tion. Because the West can only be on the defensive, it must have weapons capable
oi being kept out of reach of an initial attack by the enemy. Those weapons may

be very different from the opposing weapons. That is why there can be no nuaarical
or even qualitative equivalence between the two bodies of opposing forces.

[Question] Does your whole theory reject a traditional war in Europe?

[Answer] A traditional war implies a large number of personnel. In assembling
than, the Soviets would lose the surprise effect. A salvo of 88-20 missiles can
be fired without any indication of aggression. The Soviets know what the effect
of surprise is. They were victims of it in 1961. And then, they would be en-
gaged in a war of attrition, prolonged in time, that would enable NATO's mechanism
to operate. This is not to their advantage. Finally. if some 15,000 Russian tanks
were to face 7,000 or 8.000 NATO tanks with their corresponding artillery in the
Central European sector, in 68 hours no stone of the German habitat would be left
standing. The conqueror would reign over a desert and over traumatised and rebel-
lious populations. They are too shrewd in the East not to take such prospects
into account.

[Question] What weapons can they use against Europe?

[Answer] You can best be answered by a quotation from Soviet works on strategy:
"The principle of simultaneous action on the entire depth of the enemy's disposition
and on the most distant targets in the rear is now, owing to nuclear weapons, esta-
blished on realistic, solid bases.“ ("Tactical and Operational Art").

in a book entitled "The Offensive," the following is read:

"...Because nuclear weapons are the principal means of destruction, they should
be used in every case to annihilate the most important targets. There targets

are. primarily, the enemy's means for nuclear attack. his troop concentrations
andespec1a11yhis armored vehicles, his reserves, particularly tank reserves and
depots, artillery on firing position, bridges, points of passage, communication

5 .

FOR (II-TIN“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centers, control and command posts, in short every target in the rear zone. defensive
structures and still other targets."

[Question] In your assumtion, you seem to forget our American allies.

[Answer] In view of the fact that the American defense forces in Europe are de-
ployed in very specific area in Germany, the Soviets could destroy the critical
military facilities of the other NATO countries without heavy losses suffered by
the American forces in Europe.

[Question] If such a selective nuclear attack were conceivable, how do you view
negotiation? '

[Answer] It is conceivable, if not politically capable of being carried out. If
negotiation took place, which is hardly likely, the Soviets would negotiate directly
on the preventive disamnent of the European NATO countries. And by evoking selec-
tivity of an action that would probably spare the Uoited States contingents.

[Question] with what means have the Soviets provided themselves for their expansion
by means of discontinuity?

[Anmr] That form of intervention required the addition of two new cosponents

to their imposing armed forces. They were left a powerful land army by tin 1965
war. It supported ti: change of political regimes in Central Europe. Then. at the
end of the decade of the 1950's. Admiral Gorshchkov was made responsible for setting
up a high seas fleet. A quarter of a century later. Admiral Gorshchkov finished
his work, because he is still in service today. lie was able to design and inle-
sent an isposing, modern fleet. The second component was an air transport armada.
It consists itself of two cowonents: nilitary transport and consercial transport.
Aeroflot, which is the largest airline in the world with some 500,000 agents. This
civilian fleet uses a large number of the same aircraft as the silitary air trans-
port. Horeover. it is cot-ended by an air marshal.

[Question] Is there not a basic difference in strategy between expansion by means
of contiguity and expansion by means of discontinuity?

[Answer] when the Soviet Union expands by means of territorial discontinuity,

the Red Army never intervenes in combat with its component units. The ground is
prepared by a political action. The "sister" parties are mobilised. Organised
revolt or rebellion movements create internal agitation and, if it is necessary

to support those movements by force, Czech. Cuban or other volunteers are the ones
who intervene. Depending on the circmstances. "Soviet advisers." or even snail
staffs are contributed. but no Soviet division, brigade or air squadron goes into

action. Why?

Undoubtedly, because the success of those distant operations cannot be guaranteed.
The Soviet leaders know that. those undertakings are risky, that they may win. but
that they may also lose. They lost in Sudan, in Egypt. They have withdrawn fros
Soealia. Well before the Indonesia affair turned out badly. 0n the other hand,
for the present, they have the upper hand in Ethiopia. Angola. Mozambique and even
indirectly in Libya, Rhodesia and still elsewhere in Africa.

5 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] In view of what you have just told us. is no: the defense of the Rest
maladjusted to the circumstances?

[Answer] Not entirely adjusted. it seems. For over 30 years now, within the frame-
work of RAID, the European countries have been invited to stand guard with tradi-
tional armed forces, especially vulnerable. on the places where they are stationed.
to the new ballistic weapons deployed by the Soviet Army. The RAID countries al-
locate considerable amounts of money to this form of traditional defense. very
similar to what it was a quarter of a century ago. At the same time. these Western
European countries. which depend on the outside world in matters of energy and

raw materials. are politically, economically and militarily absent fromthose regions
of the world in which. however. their destiny is at stake every day. Moreover.

it is likely that if the Soviet Union had not taken on. since 1917. the imposing
stature recognized in it today. the western countries that depend on Middle East

oil would not have accepted so easily the increase in the price of oil. It is

true that they now know that. if they rose up against the behavior of the oil-
producing countries, the Soviet Union would immediately reap the benefit of that

way of acting and the producing countries would turn toward the Soviet Union to

ask it for protection.

[Question] What do you adivse for the defense-of France?

[Answer] It has already adopted, since 1959. a more sensible military policy than
the military policies of most of its neighbors. First of all, it has to immunize
itself against war. turn its territory into a sanctuary. in order to have. more-
over. a certain degree of freedom of action. That was General de Gaulle's idea.
Then it would have to mobilize its friends. its sllies--with siailar interests-—
in the practice of a policy of presence outside Europe. in order to contend there
politically. financially. technically and. in the last resort, nuclearly with the
countries of Asia and Africa that have not yet aligned themselves in the Soviet
camp. Or even, in the manner of what has been done by the East. 'Hestabilize"
the political and social systems that prove to be hostile.

[Question] Are you opposed to military service as it is at present?

[Answer] The country seems to be attached to it--if not the young persons who
perform it--and. therefore, it is a holdover in a military world in which the number
of personnel no longer plays the same part as formerly. Of course. it justifies

a structure to which the Command is attached. I note that Great Britain. which
hasmore inhabitants than France. has given it up and that. instead of maintaining
550,000 men. it now keeps less than 350.000 men. The new weapons. without which
there can be no territorial immunity. do not need large battalions. With regard

to operations abroad. which can be carried out only with traditional forces. the
draftess cannot participate in them. Those operations can be conducted only by
career men.

It is agreed that a professional army costs less than a conscript army. This would
be true with an equal number of personnel. It is certainly less true with, like

Great Britain, a smaller total personnel force. Neither nuclear protection. nor
possible distant operations require more than half a million men under the colors.

.7.

me nmnu “Cl? ON! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Can France's nuclear power rival with the nuclear power of the two
great powers.

[Anser The term rival is not appropriate. "hat is involved is the amount of
damage that we would be capable of inflicting in case of a total threat against

us. What is needed is for this "amount of damage" to be consistent with the value
of France's stake. At least. as estimated by an aggressor. It is true that. dif-
ferently from what is often stated by politicians. France's reprisal weapons do

not apply only to their threat to large Soviet cities. but also to a number of
military and econonic targets. That is true of the Kola Peninsula. a USSR critical
military bastion. and also of a nutter of industrial zones. like, naturally. force
transportation networks and energy irrigation [sicg possibly should read diatribu- .
tion] networks (oil and natural gas). in cowarison with an intact America. it

is obvious that loss of those facilities would be a severe punislmlent. a punishment
to which a medium-sized power like France is. undoubtedly. not "entitled."

[Question] We have a credible nuclear force that mat. of course, be modernized
constantly. Did we not demonstrate our capability of operating at a distance with
the Kolwezi operation?

[Answer] It is true that the desire to intervene was evident. But. in spite of
our sizable personnel force, and without doubt because of it. it was necessary to
"borrow" American and Zairian transport aircraft (the Zairian aircraft of American
origin) and that operation was successful only owing to the spirit of initiative.
to the courage and to the training of our men. But it is a question of a very
small nunber of personnel, with no comaon measurement with the forces that we main-
tain for similar operations. Actually, we lacked. and still lack. the technical
means: long-range transport and support aircraft.

[Question] In conclusion. what future do you see for the Heat?

[Answer] It is rather gloomy, for lack of a great plan and the canon will to
carry it out. That is necessarily true of a political body with a large number
of decision-mung centers and with a mnber of internal rivalries and opposition
kept alive by divergent interests. That is not the case confronting us. where

a lasting government authority. a complete independence from a public opinion that
has no expression, enable the leaders to nave their pawns on the world chessboard
without being hindered by the contingencies making up the normal activity of truly
democratic countries. we need an overall reflection. if an analysis of Soviet
behavior. especially since the end of World War II. shows that. on the contrary.
Moscow is devoting its activity abroad to the implementation of a great political
and social plan. And not without considerable success. it seems.

COPYRIGHT: LATITUDE SARL, DEPOT LEGAL. A. triustre 1981

[0.062
C80: 3100/204

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RONOHIC mam

TROL'EES CONTINUE NR COCmEL-SAHBRE 8m FIRM
Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 10 Dec 81 pp 19-20

[Article by Paul Celson: "Headed for Bankruptcy?" J

[Text] As a case of decomposition. Cookerill-Sambre is arousing
a great deal of anxiety these days. Some of it is Justified, some
less so. A not very encouraging example of what awaits a Hallonia
given over to its demons and its own forces. Long live public ma-
nagement and the politicisation of the economic dossiers!

Catastrophe! A few months following the marriage of convenience between Liege and
Charleroi. there is a running battle going on. Catastrophe! Under pressure of one
or the other of our partners of the Ten. the European Community is frowning upon it
more. And what if it were to cut off our resources? Catastrophe! ‘Ihe Cockerill-
Sanbre mammoth is losing 1 billion francs a month. which means that an uncontrol-
lable outflow is being added to the permanent deficiency of the enterprise. And,
lacking any settlement. time presses.

Package of Bill ions

And yet. everything in the dossier is not equally black. At the beginning of the
week. the Department of Finance authorised the Steel Industry Financing Company and
Belfin to borrow sums which should provide several breaths of fresh air to
Cookerill—Sambre. Thus. it is not only a question of covering the losses of the
company's accounts department. but also of meeting the needs for investments or the
repayment of advances for the first 3 months of 1982. This is good news inasauch
as. alas. the Walloon steel men are living from reprieve to reprieve. but it cannot
under any circumstances feed longer term hopes.

This week. Hilly Class. who deals with day to day matters at the Square de Heeus in
Brussels (Ministry of Economic Affairs). was to convey the Belgian government's
response to the questions from the Commission of the European Communities. The
granting of a package of billions of francs. of which the Balloon steel industry
has the most vital need. depends on it. Citizen Class has sometimes been accused
of a certain slowness in hurrying. and this has led to all kinds of suppositions
of a political nature. It is true that community distrust has poisoned the sim-
plest relationships in Belgium between the people in the North and the people in
the South.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whatever the case. the European mortgage could be temporarily lifted. But nothing
would be settled for all that. It is from the inside that the dossier is most sure
to not. In the two just merged basins. there are rumors of "unmerging." a mole-
gism in the form of a. euphemism which saves the partners from openly talking about
divorce. But. isn't that what it is all about?

Cordial Disagreement '

Between Liege and Charleroi. distrust has taken a firm hold at all the levels of
responsibility and management. Nothing works any longer. not even around the union
table, and the most recent figures do not help matters.

As a matter of fact, the October results show much heavier losses in Liege than in
Charleroix #65 million francs. before depreciation and financial costs, for
Cockerill and only 8 million francs for the people of Charleroi. For November. the
Triangle triumphantly showed a profit of about 10 million francs while the monthly
balance sheet for the people of Liege dragged in the red. Liege has taken advan-
tage of this to accuse the people of Charloroi of being too numerous in management
positions. which would explain why the 15:1er comes out ahead in the confronta-
tion. Because henceforth it is a question of confrontation. and no longer simply
one of cordial disagreement.

Once the idea of a possible unmerging has been launched. there will be no lack of
fuel for the fire. They are sure to recall in Charleroi that even the experts of
Nippon Steel expressed the strongest reservations about the very short term chances
of an operation like the one being considered between Cocksrill and the 'I‘riangle.

"In our country. a merger takes years." they are supposed to have stated.

And to add imaediately that. in addition. the matter had been handled contrary to
all good sense, as the legal act of merging preceded the clarification of the ar-
rangements in the technical area.

Henceforth. some people stated aloud what had only been whispered in the fall:
that the act of merging was first and foremost a political operation intended to
drain money more easily from the treasury to enterprises where the social (and
electoral) argument carries weight. And Andre Cools -- wasn't he one of the "god-
fathers" of the merger? -- will not contradict us.

Political Creature

Another remark from those who advocate divorce is directed at the administration
and management of the business. It is no longer a secret that Jacques Vandebosch.
the president of the new entity. is being challenged within the Liege clan itself.
And by the representatives of the rank and file. which is the last straw for a man
of whom it is said straight out that he is first of all a political creature in
charge of implementing "the socialist peace" at Cookerill-Sambre. Isn't it true
that last Monday he had to cancel a meeting between the executive committee and
union representatives from Liege and Charleroi, because the latter had, without
further ado.- refused to accept the invitation?

It is also true that the merged enterprise still does not have a full time managing

director and could in the near future no longer even have an acting managing direc-
tor.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a matter of fact. last week Thursday, during a meeting of the Socialist Party.
Albert Prere. who has been filling this position until the appointment of a perma-
nent replacement. announced that he would like to resign as soon as possible. No-
body is unaware of the fact that the former boss of the 'h'iangle and President
Vandebosch are not on the best of terms. that the latter has on occasion encroached
upon the prerogatives of the acting managing director, and that the incompatibility
of temperament between the two men is not simply superficial. or even ideological.
In short. they are not two of a kind.

Why is it taking so long to appoint a permanent incumbent to the position which
Albert Frere agreed to hold on a temporary basis? The question has been asked and
could get a rapid response. Apparently Hilly Class has three candidates up his
sleeve. but cannot make up his mind to make a decision. Which once again seems to
prove that. through an excess of caution. the little socialist man is delaying the
final solution to the difficulties of the balloon steel industry. From there, it
only takes one step to see it as a political-community maneuver. a step which was
quickly taken.

All of this tends to prove that the state of decomposition of the dossier is much

more advanced than is sometimes imagined. It is likely that the idea of unmerging.
or of divorce if one prefers. will make more headway in the days ahead.

Fanagement in Public

Getting back to the overall conditions of the operation. Certain people do not he-
sitate to criticize one or more provisions of the merger. Has it reasonable. for
example, to include the mechanical engineering division in the overall package?
Has it worthwhile to include "Cookerill Engineering" in the merger? wouldn't it
have been better to hold aside the cold-roll sector as a unit separate from the
group. as was done for Phoenix works. or as Carla: and the Ruau rolling mills were
left in Charleroi? On the other hand, there should be no question of turning
Seraing and Chertal into subsidiaries.

As the situation has deteriorated over the last few months. it is no longer far
from being admitted that the pL-liticization of the dossier has devilishly complica-
ted matters to the point of making certain solutions difficult. if not impossible.

Hell placed accusers have challenged "the management in public" from which the
whole business is suffering. There is not a single decision which can remain se-
cret long enough to be implemented. but is passed on to the party headquarters
where it becomes integrated into a tactic. For which the survival of the unit,
with its tens of thousands of workers. is not the main objective.

Collapse

These days, the word "bankruptcy" has been used. and it is true that the climate
between the two Halloon basins has become more difficult. If. ultimately. this
bank'uptcy does take place. it will not be for several months. maybe a year. or a
year and a half. enough time so that the responsibility for the collapse cannot be-

attributed to politics. Wouldn't it be better if only the management were to
blame?

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fact mains that a collapse of the steel industry would be a tragedy for
Hallonia. a tragedy the scope of which would exceed the figure of Job losses above.
And yet. an additional 30,000 people unemployed. that is quite scathing!

Before the irreparable happens in Liege and in Charlemi. shouldn't those respon-

sible -— as they should be called by name -- leditate on Nietzsche's words: “Do

not accuse the other. the defeat is in you." Evidently, the father of "Zarathustrd‘
is certainly not well read by our steelmrkere ...

COPYRIGHT: 1981 POURQUOI PAS?

au63
cs0: 3100/18?

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ERRATUH: The following is a corrected version
of an article originally published in JPRS
L/10158 of 3 December 1981, (F000 63/81) PP 7-9
of this series.

SOVIET PEACE MOVEMENT TIES; DISINFORHATION ACTIVITIES
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 19-25 Oct 81 pp 54-55

[Article by Philippe Krasnopolski: "The KGB's Doves. How the Soviets Are Operat-
ing in Disguise in Europe. By Manipulating the Reapectable Peace Movements Ani-
mated by Christian or Youth Organizations"]

[Text] "The pacifist movement...is regaining strength and spreading especially in
the countries of Western Europe. What are the reasons for this? On one hand, peo-
ple are greatly preoccupied with American policy; on the other hand, the pacifist
initiatives of the socialist countries have had their effect. Diverse political
forces have joined the pacifist movement: communist parties, major sectors of so-
cial democracy and of the ecology movement."

Mr Doris Ponomarev, member of the Soviet Communist Party Politburo and head of the
"international relations" section, makes this observation in the October issue of

the "New International Review," one of the coammnist movement's theoretical publi-
cations. It is also a balance sheet. A year ago, on 28 September 1980, the World
Peace Council decided to organize a widespread campaign against rearmament of NATO
members and against the emplacement of the American Pershing 2 missiles in Europe.

This World Council has its headquarters in Sofia, Bulgaria. It is an organization
of obedience to the Soviet Union. In France. it is represented by the Movement
for Peace, whose secretary general, Mr Michel Langignon, is a member of the Commu-
nist Party.

Mr Ponomarev can appreciate the work it has accomplished: Three hundred thousand
demonstrators "for peace and disarmament" in Bonn on 10 October. Last April,
there had been only 25,000 protesting against the NATO sessions in the capital of

the Federal Republic.

Other demonstrations are planned: in London on 26 October; in Brussels and Paris
on the 25th; a month later at the Hague.

"The struggles waged by the pacifist forces of western Europe are converging,"
affirms the daily L'HUHANITE.

The culmination of the campaign will be a great international demonstration in
Brussels on 6 December, the eve of the NATO council meeting.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
C‘Vﬂ Ul‘l‘lyll‘h Unf— UI‘LI

In Germany. the agents of the Soviet Union are moving forward in disguise. At the
origin of the rally are two pacifist organizations with Christian tendencies: the
"Action for Expiation" and the "Movement for Action in the Service of Peace." In
reality. the idea for this demonstration belongs to a Dutch organization, "End the
N Bomb," created in 1977 at the Netherlands CP's initiative and directed by the
International Relations office of the Soviet Co-nunist Party's Central Comittee.

The decision for this was, nevertheless, made in Hamburg on 20 June during the
Church Conference, the synod of the German Evangelical Church, after an initial
demonstration had brought together 80,000 people in the city streets.

On 24 August, the plan received the blessing of the central committee of the World
Council of Churches, which met in Dresden in the CDR, and that of Mr Erich Honecker,
East Germany's head of state.

The small cosmmnist party [DKP] of the Federal Republic of Germany thus placed its
men.

One of the organizers of the 10 October demonstration is a certain Fritz Teppich.
he had already been at the forefront of the disturbances against General Haig's
visit to Berlin on 13 September. In the sixties. Hr Teppich was a militant within
the APO. extra-parliamentary opposition. the German leftist movement.

Previously, he lived in East Berlin, where he was working for the western section
of the central committee of the $31), the Comnist Party of East Germany, before
becoming correspondent for ADN, the CDR's news agency, in the city's western sector.
There he joined SEN, the SED's western branch. But he soon left this movement
(after a falling out with its head) to join the pacifists.

Another communist infiltrator is Mr Achim Haske, presently the secretary general
of the Comittee for Peace, Disarmament and Detente. lie is a former leader of the
communist group, Spartakus.

A report of the Bundesverfassungsschutz, the Federal Office for the Protection of
the Constitution (the PRC DST [Directorate of Territorial Surveillancel), was for-
warded to Mr Schmidt. It reveals this communist infiltration of the pacifist move-

ments. According to this report, the European communists are supposed to have
drawn up a 3-year plan of action against NATO rearmament, with 1981 being the first

phase.

For the first 6 months of 1982, this plan is said to provide for direct action
against military installations in the NATO countries, such as taking over barracks.
On 5 August 1982 (the eve of the anniversary of Hiroshima), demonstrations are to
take place in all of western Europe, accompanied by hunger strikes. At Christmas,
the churches are to be occupied.

In January 1983, the pacifists are to call for civil disobedience (refusal to pay
taxes, etc.); strikes against industry are to be launched. Finally, again in
August, on the 6th, there are to be new mass demonstrations. The Pershing missiles
are due to be installed in Europe in 1983.

14
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
The report likewise sheds new light on last February's publication in the weekly
STERN of a map showing the site of American nuclear missile installations in the
Federal Republic of Germany. This document had been furnished to the journal by
the BBU (Citizen Initiative for Environmental Protection Federal Association). an
ecology movement, which in turn obtained it from the Communist Party of the PRC.

These documents were furnished by Section A of the KGB, the famous "disinformation"
department. Thus, in June 1980, a "Pentagon document" began circulating in Great
Britain. showing the American atomic weapon targets in the Soviet Union and the
Warsaw Pact countries. But it also included the ones in the neutral countries and
even NATO members (in the case of Russian occupation). This document arrived in
the Netherlands the following December. Today it is being circulated among the
Scandinavian countries. A "pacifist" majority was elected to the Hague last May.

PBOTO CAPTIONS

l. p 54. Mr Egon Bahr. One of the only German political figures, along with
Mr Hilly Brandt, to receive praise from PRAVDA.

2. p 55. The arguments of German pacifism are summarized in the text of this
poster: "Bill for the PRC. Items delivered: packages of food.
Marshall Plan. Starfighters. Paid to date: loyalty to the alliance.
military bases. Balance due: battlefield."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs actuelles"

9475
cs0: 3100/67 END

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY