FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10576
10 June 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 775

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”Rs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief indicate how the original informtion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
amtion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body 3f an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUN-ICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10576
10 June 1982

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT '

rouo 'No. 775

CONTENTS
Anoou
Briefs
BBC Food Grant
Pbrtuguese Missionary Assassinated
CAPE VERDE
Briefs

OPEC Grant

CMRAL AFRICAN RBPIBLIC

Kolinga Gives Priority to Economic Deve10pment
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET DEDITERRANEBIS, 30 Apr 82).

CHAD
Real Conﬂict Said To Be Between Far Northern Factions
(Jacques Latremoliere; MARCHB TROPICAUX ET MEDl'l'ERRAlIEENS,
12 m &)IIDOOIIOIOOOOOQOOIIODDODODOD...IAOODOIOOIUIIOIOOOOIO
Briefs
Refugee Repatriation
CONGO

Briefs
Algerian Draft Agreement
Firth URFC Congress

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Results of Meeting of Money Lenders in Geneva
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANBHS, 30 Apr 82)..............

Briefs
French Investment Pact
C-HAIIA

Voluntary 3.131: December Movement of Great Britain Formed
(GM, lom82)OOOIIOOOIOOOOOOIOOIOU‘OOOOOOIO'OOOOOOOCOOIOOOO

GUINEA

Economic Shortcomings of Socialism Noted
(Bemrd Cuengg; NAMES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRMEBIB,

30 Apr 82) aaaooelooooolotoo-loo...-cocoa-00000000000000.00000

GUINEA-3188M]

Briers
World Bank, Arab Port Financing

MADAGASCAR

Briefs
Military Promotions

WMIQUE

Briefs
GDR Agri cultural Cooperation

NAMIBIA

Officials Argue Over Territory's Economic State
(David Reid; REUI'ER, 31 Mar 82)

NIGER

Journal Reports on BDﬂl'a Aid to Development
(MARCEES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRMEEIS, 19 Mar 82)

Briers
Youth Festival
Agricultural, Stocxraising Training Centers

SAO TOME MD PRINCIPE

Briefs
EEC Palm Plantation Financing

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SEXEGAL

Rural Development Project To Increase Food Production
(MARCEES TROPICAUX ET mums, 30 Apr 82) . ..

Briefs
French-Senegalese Cooperation Agreement
HUEIPSENELEC Cooperation
Loan to I08
31)? Gun Plantations Loan
Munich Senegalese week
. University Opening Delayed
Eidaer Bread Prices
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

EEC FOOD GRANT-~11» BBC has granted two emergency food grants to Angola. Their
total amount comes to 2.6 million new. [European Currency Unit]. The first
(3.150 tons of grain, 350 tons of powdered milk and 200 tons of butterfat) is
for the country's southern residents, who have had to flee fron South African
attacks. The second (2,695 tons of grain and 500 .ons of butterfat) is for
the 60,000 Namibian refugees who have been given shelter in camps in Angola
and will be distributed through a charitable organization. [Text] [Paris
MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET mums in French No 1896, 26 Feb 82 p 638]
(COPYRIGHT: tune Horeux et Cie, Paris 1982] 11915

PORTUGUESE MISSIONARY ASSASSINA'rm-dn an action described by the authorities
as "pure banditisn," a Portuguese nissionary. Father Mantel Line, and 3 other
persons of Angolan nationality. including a mm. were assassinated by Iachine
gun fire on 3 February on a road on the outskirts of the capital. Fmerals
for the missionaries were held the following weekend in the presence of

Mgr D. Eduardo Andre Muses. archbishop of Luanda. [Text] (Paris HARCEBS
TROPICAUX B‘l‘ HBDITERRANEBNS in French No 1894, 26 Feb 82 p 638] momma:
Rene Horeux et he, Paris 1982] 11915

C50: 6719/726

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPE VERDE

BRIEFS

OPEC GRANT-Jim Organization of Peircleun Exporting Countries (OPEC) will grant
a $l-nillion subsidy to Cape Verde. it Has learned in Praia on 23 February.

An agreement to this effect should be signed in Vienna amtine in March. [Text]
[Paris MARCEBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1895. 5 Mar 82 p 680]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Harem: et Cie. Paris 1982] 11915

CSO: 6719/726

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

KOLINGA GIVES PRIORITY T0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1158

[Text] According to a recent bulletin from the AP? in Bangui, President
Kolingba has decided to take up the development battle in his country, closely

linking the rural world into his economic recovery project.

Actually, in order to meet the challenge. the chief of state is first of all
betting on the rural world, whose production is the basis of the Central

"African economy and represents the main resources of over 80 percent of the
active population. Furthermore. they provide most Central African exports.
from 60 to 77 percent between 1971 and 1977 and 56 percent in 1978.

This policy. the AP? notes. is in contrast with that of the preceding govern-

ments, which gave up specific actions in favor of developing rural regions.
failing to maintain roads and trails. whence the impossibility of marketing

local agricultural products. Moreover. the peasants were overwhelmed by
many taxes. charges and various levies.

Eight months after he came to power. General Kolingba is determined to
gradually reverse the trend. The imminent establishment of an agricultural
credit fund and the increase in the price of cottonseed per kilogram (70 CPA
francs instead of 60) illustrate the chief of state's determination to bring
the peasant world into the recovery effort and improve the living conditions
of a large part of the population.

On 16 April, the Central African chief of state launched the 1982-1983 economic

campaign. speaking to over 20,000 persons gathered together in Bambari (see
MARCHES TROPICAUX. 23 April 1982. p 1101). Furthermore. since 20 April. the

ministers have been touring prefectures in order to make the people aware of
the need to develop agriculture, which should make it possible to halt the

rural exodus.

General Kolingba also believes that it is indispensable to proceed to a
policy of decentralization and bring peasants into the decision-making process.

For the chief of state, the first goal of the economic recovery program con-
sists of producing 30.000 tons of cottonseed during the 1982-1983 season, which,
according to observers. is an ambitious objective.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Hbreux Paris 1982

11.465
C80: 6719/898 3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1AL USE ONLY

CHAD

REAL CONFLICT SAID TO BE amt-1m PAR mum PACIIONS
Paris WES TROPICAUX ET HEDITWS in French 30 1896, 12 Her 82 pp 717-718
[Article by Jacques Latrenoliere: "Glinners of Reconciliation in Chad?"]

[Text] The recent visit of the GUN! (transitional Rational Union Government of
Chad) foreign affairs minister to Paris has been mentioned only briefly despite
his improvised press conference. Mr Acyl Ouled Aheat was received at the offices
on Rue Honsieur, but he also had other contacts with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs outside its designated preniaes. It appears that the uncertainty of

the tines prompted both parties to exercise discretion. indeed to not allow
the-selves to be conpronised.

This is regrettable, since many interesting questions could have been clarified
with a less furtive visit. questions concerning the related problems created
by the advance of the FAN (Northern Arned Forces) toward the west and GIM'e
attitude. still firm or possibly softening. toward a possible agree-ant, in
one form or another, with Mr ﬂiesein Bebre and his followers.

With regard to the first question. it is known that Ou-Bajer. on the so-called
l3th-parallel road linking Njuena with Abeche via Ati. after being taken by
government forces, has been recaptured by Mr Biasein Sabre, who is still holding
it at the present tine. Located on the southern bank of a river whose waters
flow only from July to Septeaber. it is the heart of the great Arab transhusance
of the red and black Hasiriyah, actually descendants of Amer and Azrouk. vhose
sympathies have been acquired as a result of blood ties with Hr Acyl Ouled Ahnat.
It is not a city, just a village of less than 1,000 inhabitants. whose only
permanent buildings are those of the governnent. It is also the crossroads

of the l3th-paralle1 road and the trail which descends from the traditional
grazing areas of Ouaddi Enn and Ouaddi Haddad to the more southerly region of
Costs. The strategic value which it could have at first glance is reduced by
the use of military lo-wheel-drive vehicles.

GUM troops, all united under the couand of an FAT (Chadian Armed Forces)
officer, Alaffi, hold Hangalne, a small calamity about 100 km south of Ou-Hajer
and the intersection of trails leading northeast to Abecha, southwest to Aboudeia.
west to the provincial capital of Guera, Mango. and beyond to Njanena via Bokoro.
If it is possible to speak of a front on such shifting terrain, it would be
located between OuI-llajer and Hangalme at present.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to reports from Njamena. PAN forces number about 4.000 sen with
abundant automotive materiel and weapons. including recoilless guns and heavy
machine guns in addition to individual arms. The supply of munitions appears
to be no problem. A small number of foreign technicians have been reported
among Hissein Habre's associates.

GUNT troops umber more than 10.000 men. They have benefited from the recent
logistic support provided by France in the form of vehicles. fuel. light and
saniheavy arms. but the circtnstances under which such support was dispensed.
at a time when Mr Acyl Ouled Almat was falsely accused of attempting a coup
d'etat against Mr Goukouni Oueddei. resulted in a large part of it being
diverted to Kanem and Tibesti. What could be called the central army. the only
one active. has thus unfortunately been deprived of fuel and munitions. Its
cohesion. despite the single comaad established. is not comparable to that

of its enemy either.

To complete this quick survey of battle lines. finally. we should remember the
occupation. which is to end soon. of the three conunities of Ati. Mongo and
Houssoro by the inter-African armed forces. whose general staffs are located
in Njamena.

For the time being. the problem is one of knowing whether FAN's advance toward
the west has been checked by the effective opposition of cm troops based at
Mangalme or whether their temporary halt is only because of the presence. with
very political significance. of inter-African forces at Mango and Ati. Njnena
naturally defends the first interpretation. If the second one is correct.
Hissein Habre's advance should resume shortly.

Concerning the second question mentioned above. i.e. . the determination of cm,
and particularly of its minister of foreign affairs. to reject any form of
reconciliation with Eissein Eabre and his supporters, a distinction should
perhaps be made between the official version and the nore realistic and less
personalized remarks of Njamena officials.

The official version is that Hissein Habre and his two close associates, Adom
Heskin and Michel Proud? have been sentenced to death by a people's court. But
GUNT has also granted full and complete amnesty to all Chadian opponents and
exiles. In the eyes of GUNT members. sitting down with Mr Hissein Habre around
a negotiating table would mean a denial of justice for the Chadian people.

It would contain the seed of a possible third civil war. On the other hand,

it would be legally conceivable for Mr Hissein llabre and his two associates,
after laying down their arms. to claim an amnesty from which they could benefit
just like any other Chadian citizen. It is obvious that. presented in this
blunt form. the hypothesis can only be popular. Hr Acyl Ouled Almat himself
agrees.

But in Njamena it is believed that since the ultimate goal of all parties. with-
out exception. is to bring about free elections asking it possible to form a

*Concerning Mr Michel Proud. cf. MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS of 16 Hay
1980. p 1158.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

government in accord with the real wishes of the Chadian people, there would be
no obstacle. if the status of Messrs liissein aabre, Aden Heskin and Michel

Proud could be settled, even temporarily. to the PM entering the election
contest. which would provide a sovereign response to their possible participation
in a per-anent government. However precarious and delicate this solution appears
to be to negotiate, the very fact that it has been nentioned constitutes a new

factor. which the good offices of friendly nations and the 0m could perhaps
strive to reinforce.

But there is another, deeper obstacle to real reconciliation. No one likes

to talk about it except in private. although it is at the bottom of most Chadian
hearts. As is too cmonly thought abroad. it is not to be fomd in a religious
conflict between the two Chade. that of the north and that of the south. Born

in Hansel-e in 1964. the social phenomenon initially called rebellion is explained
by the failure, which had gone on for 50 years and which independence made it
iepoasible to tolerate any longer, to recognize the legal and linguistic identity
of the northern peoples. No one today is willing to pursue the war for fiscal
or administrative reasons, since con-on suffering long ago led to an understand-
ing of the need for inprovanents in this regard. Nothing beyond remedy separates
the chad of the 13th parallel from the Chad of cotton. To recall an example
which has often been ignored, we should remember that in 1979 Mr Acyl Ouled
Marat joined with Colonel Kamougue against the combined forces of Mr Hissein
Habre and Mr Goukouni and that the intervention of his small any was decisive

in the victory of Pala.

The real conflict today is no longer between the north and south, but between
the factions of the far north, fron which have emerged two military leaders
whose customs. history and ethnic background make them more different from
other Chadians than the average henclnan is from the gypsies of Saintes-Haries-
de-la—Her The fact that the real conflict is limited to" these two brother
enemies does not mean that its settlement will be any easier. 0n the contrary.
it is what constitutes its inexpiable nature.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11915
CSO: 6719/730

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

BRIEFS

REFUGEE REPATRIAIION-—On 12 March in Geneva, a spokesman from the UN High
Comission on Refugees (30!!) announced that the operation for repatriation of
Chadian refugees organized by this organisation will be completed by the end
of this month. Two hundred thousand Chadians who fled to Cameroon have already
returned to their country. According to BCR estimates. between 30,000 and
40,000 Chadian refugees escaped by their own means to Nigeria where the
chances of finding work are better than in the other countries bordering on
Chad, and have been assembled in Camp Poli. situated 500 km south of the

Chari River which marks the boundary between Chad and Cameroon. Camp
Kousseri. where nost refugees had been gathered on the Cameroonian bank of

the Chari. will be closed at the end of the month. Starting on 1 April. only
a small HCR team will remain in Ndjamena for several weeks in order to
distribute $5 million worth of food and tools to recently repatriated refugees.
[Text] [Paris means TROPICAUX E1? “Elms in French No 1897 p 799]
[00?YRIGHT: Rene Harem: et Cie Paris 1981] 9380

C50: 4719/75

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

BRIEFS

ALGERIAN DRAFT AGREEMENT-d protocol concerning cooperation in the field of
education. training and scientific research was signed on 12 March between
Congo and Algeria. The protocol involved inter-university exchanges.
scientific research. the equivalence of diploma between the two countries'
universities and institutes. and the awarding of scholarships and training
grants. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1897.
19 Mar 82 p 801] [COPYRIGBTz Rene Horeux st Cie Paris 1981] 9380

FIFTH URFC CONGRESS-JIM fifth congress of the Revolutionary Union of
Congolese Women (URFC) terminated its work on 13 March in Brazzaville. with
the head of state. Colonel Sassou Nguesso. presiding. In a speech Colonel
Nguesso expressed hope that the union "would tap all the energies of the
women" by rallying the greatest possible number of women to it. including
expatriates who so desire. According to a communique, Elise Therese Gamassa
was reelected national president of the union. [Text] [Paris HARCHES

TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1897. 19 Mar 82 p 801] [COPYRIGBTz
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9380

C80: 6719/755

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

RESULTS OF MEETING OF HONEY LENDERS IN GENEVA
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET storms in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1158

[Text] The conference of financial backers organised in Geneva by the UNDP on
behalf of the reconstruction of Equatorial Guinu ended on 21 April, after

3 days of work. The conference was opened by President Obiang Nguena (see
HARC'HBS TROPICAUX, 23 April 1982, p 1101).

According to a bulletin frm the United Nations, the level of financing that
may be attained will not be known until the end of the consultations begun
between the organizations participating in the conference, donor countries and
Equatorial Guinea.

The Halabo government had in fact drafted a reconstruction program spread out
over 3 years and whose estimated cost was $161 million. However, semi-official
sources in Geneva indicated on 21 April that the figure might be around $90 In
$90 million.

Twenty-nine countries participated in the conference: 12 industrialized coun-
tries, five Latin American and five Atab nations, two from East Europe and
India. For their part, the United Nations was represented by seven of its
specialized institutions: _the 110 (International Labor Organization), the FAO
(Food and Agriculture Organization), UNESCO. the WHO (World Health Organiza-
tion), the International Telecomunicationa Union (ITU), UNCTAD (UN Conference
on Trade and Development) and UNIDO (UN Industrial Development Organization).

The conference held five plenary sessions, in the course of which it examined
documents submitted by the goverment of Equatorial Guinea. It also set up
a technical emission in charge of studying more in detail the integration
of aid announced by countries and organizations invited so as to ensure com-
pletion of the government's reconstruction and development program. whose cost
is an estimated $141 million, including $91 million for top priority projects.

The reconstruction and development program was unanimously approved for its
quality by all countries and organizations participating in the conference,
according to the official comnique. Two delegations nevertheless thought
that it was somewhat ambitious, given the current weakness of the country's
administrative structures. which limit the ability to absorb foreign aid.
The heads of the delegations from the Federal Republic of Germany, Egypt, the
United States, France and Switzerland indicated the contributions which their

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

governments could make to the program. Other delegation heads from partici-
pating countries indicated their support for the program. without thereby
furnishing details on their future contributions to its execution. The head

of the delegation from the Holy See also described measures taken so that
Catholic assistance organizations might take responsibility, in their respec-
tive domains and in keeping with their possibilities, for overall development
projects in pquatorial Guinea. For their part, delegation heads from the ADB
[African Development Bank], BADEA [Arab Bank for African Economic Development],
the World Bank, the EEC. FAD [International Fund for Agricultural Development],
the IMF and the UNDP agreed to finance certain parts of the program corres-
ponding to the mandates and priorities of their respective organizations.
Finally, the specialized organizations and institutions in the UN system pro~
mised their technical aid in the implementation of projects for which they
would serve as agencies of execution. -

In the light of the promises made by the participating countries and organiza-
tions, chances of ensuring the financing of a large part of the program seem.
very high. However, one must await the end of consultations begun between the
government of Equatorial Guinea and the countries and organizations participat-
ing in the conference in order to be able to advance with certainty the level
of financing that might be attained. Some of these consultations will not be
completed until the coming months.

So that the program for the reconstruction and development of Equatorial Guinea
might benefit from the broadest possible support on the part of the interna-

tional community and so that its implementation might be as effective and rapid
as possible, the conference chose three mechanisms for coordination and follow-
up. The first consists of holding a meeting of financial backers every month
or every two months in Halabo. under the aegis of the government, particu-
larly those backers represented locally. The purpose would be to have a regu-
lar review of financing and implementation of the program, whose results would
be sent to all money lenders who pledged to contribute to completion of the
program. The second mechanism deals with the evaluation of results obtained

in the main sectors of the program and an examination of these results during
special meetings of all backers active in the sector under study. Finally.

it is planned to organize an overall conference.toward the end of l98b or be-
ginning of 1985, for the purpose of evaluating the program in a way and place
to be specified later. based on experience acquired during execution of the

program. For its part, the government of Equatorial Guinea has pledged to
rationalize and strengthen its structures of economic coordination and manage-

ment so as to ensure completion of the program with the maximum effectiveness.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982
11,464

CSO: 4719/898

10

FOI10FFKJAI,USE(NNLY
BRIEFS

FRENCH 1mm PACT-An agreement. concerning reciprocal encouragement and
protection of investnents use signed betveax France and Guinea on

3 March 1982 in Paris. This agreement. which will enable the French Govern-
ment to guarantee French industrial, agricultural and comercial investments
in Equatorial Guinea. will create the conditions for increased French partic-
ipation in the development of this country. which has been sorely tried by 11
years of dictatorship and which has major economic potential. especially in
the fields .of mining, forestry and shipping. The delegation free the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea to the signing of the agreements was headed by Lucian
ijang Mbo. commissioner of state for public works. housing, transport and
urban affairs. The French delegation was headed by Jean-Claude Trichet,
deputy secretary at Treasury headquarters. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX
ET MBDITERRANBENS in French No 1897, 19 liar 82 p 799] (comma: Rene Horeux
et Cie Paris 1981] 9380

cs0: 4719/755

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ETHIOPIA

BRIEFS

SOVIET HELICOPTER minim-Beirut, 22 Hay (“UMP-Gunilla fighting the
Ethiopian Governnent for the independence of Eritrea Province today said

they had killed 100 government troops and vomded 200 in fighting this week.
A statement issued here by the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (BPLF)

said the fighting was aromd the northern town of Keren, an i-portant
crossroads between the provincial capital of Asmara and the BPLP stronghold
of Nakfa. The statement did not give EPLF casualties. 3n the road to Nakfa
the guerrillas shot down a Soviet-made HI-Zlo helicopter gunship on 18 Hey,

the EFL? said. [Text] [m222037 London REUTER in English 2030 GMT 22 May 82]

080: 6700/1559

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

BRIEFS

PREMIER ADDRESSES NATIONAL ASSDIBLY-Jl'he first regular session of the Gabonese
National Assembly was opened on 20 April by Prime Minister Leon Hebiame. In
his address. following that of Assembly President Augustin Boumah. the prime
minister said that despite many accomplishments. the most diverse complaints
were still legion. He promised rapid measures and asked mmbera of the govern-
ment to prepare for the 1983 Budget starting now. Hebiame warned the Gabonese
people against tribalistic tendencies that have been discerned recently and
also warned foreigner. "He Gabonese know better than anyone else our own
problems and our own demons. If we deliberately refrain from interfering in
the affairs of others. we disapprove of others interfering in ours and assuming
an attitude of distrust and commiseration regarding us that we find unaccep-
table. as if we were not yet capable of handling our own destiny. Are we then
incompetents, ready to be recolonized'!" [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1159] [COPYRIGsz Rene Moreux et
Cie Paris 1982] 11.1061;

PROGRESS ON TRANS-GABONESE RAILROAD--The Trans-Gabonese Railroad Office (OCTRA)
predicts that by 31 December. the Trans-Gabonese will reach the like junction.

11. kilometers from Booue (kilometer marker 232). On 30 October. the Owendo-
Ndjole-Aymn-La Lope artery will be open, with the La Lope station finished

by 1 October and the Ayem station scheduled to go into service on 1 September.
[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1903. 30 Apr
82 p 1159] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cic Paris 1982] 11,666

080: 6719/898

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VOLUNTARY 3181‘ DECEMBER MM” 0? GREAT BRITAIN FORMED
“101358 London (21A to GRA Accra in English 1365 GMT 10 Kay 82

[Text] London, 10 Hay (GRID—The formation of a new voluntary organization--
3lst Deceder Movement of Crest Britain—to support the current Ghana
revolution has been announced here.

According to the organisers, the nain objectives of the move-nt are to
propagate to Ghanaians resident here and the British public the sins of the
revolution and draw attention to the lip-service democracy preached and
practised by Ghanaian politicians since independence.

It will also draw attention to the appalling living conditions and social
deprivation suffered by ordinary Ghanaians before the 31 Deoenber revolution
led by Plight-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, chairman of the ruling Provisional
National Defence Comcil (PNDC).

Officers of the new movemnt are Dr S.N. Ababio. chairnan; Baffour Kwame
Ohemeng-Anpofi, general secretary; Hrs Nana Anoba Yeboah, welfare officer
and Mr Chris Sash and S. Donkor, executive Ineliaers.

Addressing its inaugural meeting, Baffour Oheneng-Anpofi urged the esters
to regard themselves as centres of organisation and information to dispel
the wicked rumours circulating about Ghana in Britain.

He pointed out that before the 31 Deceuber revolution, Ghana needed a

leader and not an administrator who would speak about jobs, privileges,
education, housing, inequalities between the rich and the poor, and the PNDC
had come to fulfill that role.

Mr Ohemeng-Anpofi wondered how Ghanaians were expected to be content with
their way of life when the country's riches were shared by the few in
positions of power while the poor were reduced to sub-human beings.

Dr Ababio also promised to do everything possible to help achieve the aims
of the movement so that our children will never suffer the sane fate again.

080: 4700/1252

11‘

MOMMIJSEONLY
BCONGIIC SHORTCGCINGS 0F SOCIALISM NOTED

Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITBRMRBENS in French No 1903. 30 Apr 82
pp 1135-1136

[Article by Bernard Cazelles]

[Excerpt] Since President Giscard d‘Bstaing's official visit

to Conakry in December 1978. Guinea has in principle been an-
barking upon a period of openness, causing nany French business-
men to go to Conakry at a very tine when laborious negotiations
have been going forward between the Guinean Government, on the
one hand. and, on the other, the French Government and a umber
of Prench industrial and conercial coapanies.

Some of those now visiting Guinea knew it before 1958 and one
of then, back from a brief trip to Conakry at the beginning of
the year, has given us his ilpressions and reflections on the
situation in Guinea.

One also finds here, and this is characteristic of the peeple of Guinea. a
sense of hospitality. a kindness, casualness and spontaneity that are def inite-
ly the expression of a real joie de vivre. One can take a stroll without being
accosted by beggars and other down-bnd-outs. although there are nany street
vendors on the corners. whether out of forgetfulness or indulgence, the gar-
dens of the future Conakry nuseun. still boast the statue of Governor Ballay.

in office in 1897. Except for the grandiose Palace of the People (built by
the Chinese) and a few very rare projects of the same type, Conakry is the
calm city of the 1950's, but with, in addition. the ravages of time, and they
are countless.

Revolu t ion

Also part of the decor of Conakry today are the signs posted at the intersec-
tions informing one. in their messages, that Conakry is still in the revolution:
"Revolution is s definitive choice"; "Learn to make revolution by asking revo-
lution and not by diacoursing on revolution"; "Real develowent begins with

the discovery and use of the basic resource: awareness“; "No econoaic revolu-
tion without a cultural revolution"; and "The P136 (Democratic Party of Guinea):
Energy and compass of the people's Revolution."

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abortive Experiment

The system of staffing and organizing production, a system commonly called
"socialisa," does not seem to have succeeded anywhere in Guinea. In rural
areas, peasants have gone back to their subsistence economy. What else are
they to do whenfarm prices are so low that they camot by consumer goods on
the parallel market and when there is nothing to buy on the official distribu-
tion circuit controlled by the government? The factories have no spare parts
as a result of the lack of money and also of preventive maintenance. Produc-
tion is disorganized, if not totally halted. One cannot find local beer in
Conakry, but there is, on the other hand. a rather large choice of imported
beers, at about $4 a bottle! The poorly paid civil servants do put on a good
front. declaring at all times - especially when'they answer the phone - that
they are "Ready for the revolution!_" But most of that have grown unaccustomed
to working. usually for lack of the slightest office equipment.

Failing to get the Guinean economy going, despite its enormaus potential, the
USSR has probably missed "the chance of its life." Soviet cooperation is now
harshly denounced for having failed to keep its comitnants and in addition,
for havingwondered what it could get out of. Guinea rather than what it could
contribute to it (the only thing for which the average person generally gives
it credit is having marketed refrigerators that are the only ones able to
withstand the variations in tension of the public electrical distribution sys-
tem). The much greater effectiveness of Cuban cooperation has not been
enough to take the tarnish off the shield of Eastern countries in Guinea.

Guinean-type socialism has not been successful in getting a foothold, either
through the very merits of the production system it tried to set up or through
the evidence of the virtues of cooperation with friendly countries coming to

preach its example .

As in neighboring Liberia, Guinea's economy can only exist through the conces-
sions, mainly in mining, granted to foreign interests, concessions that consti-

tute extraterritorial enclaves on national soil. Guinea‘s economy also owes
a great deal to business mixed with politics.

Triumph of utairisme

Behind the official facade of the goverment organization, affairisme is the
multitude of undeclared activities. what elsewhere is called "the unstructured
sector." First‘of all; there are the minor trades that continue to make up
the constant spectacle of the streets: tailors, mechanics. artisans, shop-
keepers and, naturally. at night, bars and night clubs. Affairisme is also,
one step higher, services rendered, the intervention that allows one to obtain
an authorization or waiver, foreign exchange trafficking (U.S. $1.00 now goes
for 100 sylis on the parallel market, while the official exchange rate is

20. or about .26 French francs). And finally, affairisae is the exploitation
of the official economy off which it lives as a parasite; goods diverted
from the official circuit or stolen at the Conakry port for resale, at a
greater profit, on the black market.

16

won OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The monthly wage of an average civil servant varies from 1.200 to 1,500 sylis.
a sum that does not allow one to live decently in Conakry.. A_recent survey
showed that in order to make ends meet. a household budget-had to be at least
9,000 sylis a month. It is definitely business_dealings that make up the
difference. It is affairisme that is responsible for the rather large'number
of private cars in the streets of Conakry.' The government shuts its eyes to
then: Economic misdeeds and misappropriations sre not severely punished,
moreover, if they are at all. Affairisma also eliminates a certain amount of
political pressure. which would be even more difficult to stand without-it.

Furthermore, it helps too many people to be done away with! Unless the rise
of that affairisme marks 3 transition to something new?

Signs of Opening

Are we witnessing a certain lessening of government control over the economy?

One could believe this if one considers the convergence of a number of new
elements which, in the opinion of all observers living in Conakry. are all'
"signs of an opening."

First of all. there is the right'of private trade to establish itself. There
is also the Investment Code promulgated in March 1980, through which the
government wants to entice foreign capital to come develop the enormous poten-
tial of natural resources with which nature has endowed the country.

More than in the past. the official criticism of government companies seems to
be oriented toward the questioning of the system. This was seen at the tenth
session of the National Economic Conference,.which began its work in July. One
has but to read the reports.on it published in the government newspaper

HOROYA ("Freedom" in Halinke), which attributes the following remarks to the
chief of state himself: "All units whose profitability is hot assured will
therefore simply be done away with." "Every unit will henceforth be solely
responsible for its own results. Instead of having 1,000 workers. 500 of

whom contribute nothing to the nation and are, on the contrary, supported by
the nation, we should have only 500.‘but paid double. That is the principle
we should follow: To each according to his worth." "Now then, if, by some
magical decision; the Guinean Government should proclaim that you have instant-
ly become the real owners of the units you head, you know that your very first '
reaction would be to get rid of all the unproductive workers and to immediately
weigh all the useless burdens in order to assure your enterprise of profits

in keeping with the means available to it." Without actually giving up the
objectives of the revolution. does the statement not go so far as to ask the
directors of the units in question to "act as if they were the real owners"?
There has also been an "opening" in the direction of the _circu1ation of ideas.
The recent establishment of CEDUST (University Scientific and Technical Docu-
mentation Center) would have been inconceivable only a few years ago. At the
Center. French assistance has. since March 1981. made available to Guineans
periodicals. monographs, basic reference works. encyclopedias. yearbooks,
tables and documents of all kinds constituting veritable windows open onto a
world of ideas long forbidden to them. The opening also means a better recep-
tion now given to foreign aid, when technical assistance was recently denounced
in Conakry as an inadmissible form of paternalism. Finally, to come back to

17
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

daily life. what a surprise to see at the airport a prominent Guinean photo-
grapher and his children waiting for their plane to depart. all under the
indifferent eye of the policeman on duty! It is true that Guinea now says
that it is anxious to promote tourism, but how far will that openness go?

Proper Choice

The dream of the chief of statewas to replace the bonds of clan solidarity
existing in precolonial Guinea with-the cohesion of a people having discovered
the meaning of goverI-ent and to escape the seduction of individualism recom-
mended by the colonial system. By being a "Jack of all trades," trying to
control everything. the government ended up controlling only the nothingness

of a planned economy that tried to be too ambitious, and the meaning of govern-
ment now exists only in the fear still inspired by the very mention of a

repressive system that long dealt very harshly with any political deviation.
that is certainly not what Ahmed Sekou Toure wanted.

In 1958, he probably had no other choice: A new policy required an economy

totally detached from the old system. Even the. national businessmen were
then deprived of the little economic power they had.

Some 23 years after. the government's economic power has not succeeded in
fighting poverty everywhere and has not even truly put the country to work.
while freedom knocks at thefdoor once again. will the man of 1958 know how

to impose on those around him (and on himself) the right choice, the choice
of an economy that allows profit for a large number but rejects the profiteer-
ing of a few, the choice of a goverment machine that would no longer be en-
cumbered by an ineffective bureaucracy. the choice of concerted, harmonious
action of private and public. national and foreign interests. for an economic
development that offers immense prospects? '

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeuz'r et Ci. Paris 1982

11,664
CSO: (019/895

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-3183A!)

he respective financial backers.
projects is estimated at $48 million. The financing ob-
tained is from the World Bank ($14 million). the Arab Bank for Economic Develop-

ment in Africa ($10 lillion). the Kuwaiti Fund (810 million) and the OPEC m
($3 million). Guinea-Bissau's own participation will be $2.5 million. The
cost of the new port of Bissau. $23 million, will be covered by the Arab insti-

tutions. whereas the other works (secondary ports. sisnsls. fishing wharf) and
technical assistance for these projects will be financed by the Horld Bank.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

MILITARY “MOTIONS-33! virtue of Decree dated 23 April, 1982, colonele Bdouard
Rabeong, chairmen of the Military Co-ittee for Development, and Jean
Ralwtoeriaon. Army Chief of Staff, were pronoted to the rank of brigadier gene-
ral; Captain Gay Sibon. defense minister. was pronoted to the rank of vice
admiral. ﬂow, along with the inspector general of the armed forces. General
Roland Rabetafika. there are four general officers. [Text] [Parie MARC‘
TROPICAUX B'l' HEDIT’ERRANBENS inherit}: 7 May 82 p 1226] [COPYRIGll‘h Rene Morena:
et Cie Paris 1982]

080: 6719/987

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WMIQUE

BRIEFS

GDR AGRICULTURAL COOPERATION-ﬁnder the agreements aimed in 1979 between
Mozambique and the GDR. an agricultural improvement project, involving 120,000
hectares. will be implemented: 80,000 hectares in the province of Hanice.
20,000 hectares in the province of Niaasa and 20,000 hectares in the province
of Zambezia. These areas will be used to grow wheat, corn and soybeans. At
present. 6,500 hectares have been cleared in the province of Manica and 8 East
German engineers are making soil studies. The project will be started later,
based on the results of the feasibility study. vith Mozambique providing the
space and labor and the GDR the technicians and machinery and also providing
the training of Mozambican managers. The project's practical implementation
involves the creation of about 15 mixed companies between Mozambique and the
6011. [Text] [Paris WEBB TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French 80 1894,

26 Feb 82 p 6381 (COPYRIGHT: Rene Koren: et Cie, Paris 1982] 11915

080: 4719/7210

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAMIBIA

OFFICIALS ARGUE OVER TERRI'NRY'S ECONOMIC STATE
“319038 London REUTER in English 0853 GE 31 May 82
[By David Reid]

[Text] Windhoek, Nadbia, 31 Hay mum-4 major talkingpoint in Namibia is

a controversial speech by millionaire farmer Brio Lang accusing South Africa
of using this disputed territory as a slave economy and paralysing its develop-
mt.

Dirk Nudge, chairman of Namibia's ruling Ministerial Council. and also a mil-
lionaire farmer. has introduced a budget which reveals that South Africa will
contribute 1050 trillion rand ("418 million dollars) for Namibia's battered

economy.

"Few other governments in the world would have granted budgetary aid to this
extent to another comtry while experiencing economic problems themselves,"
Hr Nudge said.

The contrasting statements by the two white Namibian leaders spotliyxt the
ambivalent attitude to South Africa, which has ruled the former German colony
for 62 years, the last 35 in defiance of most international opinion.

They also show the dilem of internal leaders struggling with grave economic
and political problems at a delicate phase of international efforts to work
out an independence ssttlemnt which would end the 16-year-old bush war be-
tween South African-led troops and the black guerrillas of the South West
Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO).

Hr Nudge told the National Asseably that the slurp in the diamond industry—
from which Namibia earns 60 per cent of its tax revenue-was the main reason
for the territory's economic woes.

Last year diamonds yielded only 38 million rand (35 million dollars), 86 mil-
lion rand (80 million dollars) below the figure expected. Diamond revenue
this year wu estimated at 35 million rand (32 million dollars).

Mr Mudge's budget included tax increases of five per cent on oomanies, ex-
cluding mining, and a 10 per cent increase in personal income tax to be paid
through levies.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Mudge responded to attacks on his ruling multi-racial Democratic Turn-
halle Alliance (DTA) administration by saying his budget showed parity had
been achieved amng Namibia's white, coloured (mixed race) and black popula-
tion groups in the fields of education, health and social security.

"We have encountered a bad stretch of road," he told the asseﬂly "but we
should not despair."

In his speech to the influential German business interests group (Deutsche
Interessengemeinschaft) here, Mr Land—described by one high administration
official as a self-appointed odmdsman—blamed South Africa, some of the

major mining companies and "home-grown politicians" for Namibia's current
problems.

"The South African Govern-ant, certain Iulti-national interests, the United
Nations, as well as local incompetence, inefficiency and-or corruption have

either knowingly or unwittingly conspired to deprive us of a healthy econony
and political stability," Mr Land add.

"South Africa has saddled us with an enormously colplicated, bloated, in-
efficient and hideously expensive government system devoid of all sanity,
has institutionalised tribaliam and effectively led to the semi-paralysis of
the political and economic development of the territory."

He condemned the current provisional internal govern-ant as a sham because,
he said, South Africa's Administrator-General Danie Bough could abolish the
Ministerial Council and the National Asselbly at the stroke of a pen.

In his references to a "slave economy," Mr Lang cited the ailing fishing in-
dustry, preferential tax treatment for the giant Rossing Uranium Mine and
lack of support for farming.

Mr Lang urged that Namibia should declare itself a neutral state after in-
dependence on the model of Switzerland, Austria or Sweden. "Opt out of the
East-West conflict andescape the conflicts of Southern Africa."

Many politicians and businessmen privately agree that Mr Lang produced some
telling arguments. Mr Mudge himself has been a frequent critic of Administra-
tor-General Rough and some aspects of South African policy towards its neigh-
bor.

Since Mr Lang's speech Mr Mudge's arch-rival Kosie Pretorius, leader of the
National Party, has renewed his call for Mr Rough to take over the government
and dissolve the Ministerial Council and the asseably pending the drafting
of a new constitution.

Dr Johan Jones, Namibia's secretary for finance, rejected charges that Rossing
Unanium Mines, a wholly-owned stbsidiary of Britain's Rio Tinto Zinc, had
evaded tax. He said Rossing had been allowed tax enenption until it had co-
vered its investment costs and would start paying tax by the end of this year
or early next year.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0le

Bug: Ibrtiner, director of Namibia's biggest local company with najor inter-
' cats in breweries, fisheries, cattle, hotels and supermarkets, said the
ailing fishing industry was picking up thanks to a conservation progra-se to
counter over-fishing.

He said one problem was that Soviet and European trawlers had been plunder-
ing the deep seas off Namibia, where fish were spurned. without observing
any quotas. ,

Hr Mortimer said his ooapsny was showing confidence in the future by building
a new brewery at a cost of 18 million rand (17 million dollars).

Harold Pupkewitz, outgoing president of the member of Conerce and Indmtries
in Namibia, said in his annual report that the econonic position was not
nearly as bad as the prophets of docs naintsined.

He said: "Higher productivity and greater liquidity are the two keys to sur-
vival and progress. Do not be put off by the ongoing political wrangle over
the independence issue. which may be a process of years or mnths.

"Prepare to adapt to whatever may cone either way is my advice. Watch the

world econonic trend and look carefully at the South Africa business scene.
They are our Southern Cross in the economic heaven."

cso: 4700/ 1296

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

JOURNAL REPORTS ON BDRN'S AID TO DEVELOPMENT
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French “0 1897. 19 Her 82 p 793

[Text] At the time the Development Bank of the Republic of Niger (30R!) was
created in 1961, the country had only the services of a single commercial
bank. Since then three new foreign banks have been established in Niger.

BDRN's original CPA 150 million in capital has gradually risen to CPA 2.5
billion through successive increases over the years.

Independently of local resources. which consist of client deposits. the bank
has resorted to foreign aid in the form of long-term loans and lines of credit
from different specialized financial institutions (Central Fund for Economic
Cooperation. USAID, the African-Development Bank. the French Bank of Foreign
Trade. 3“? [National Bank of Paris]. Midland Bank, Inter-Union. and so on).
which had risen to CPA 6.7 billion by the end of September 1980. Por fiscal
year 1980, BDRN's turnover totaled CPA 8.3 billion. The volume of client
deposits. accounts payable at sight. deposit accounts and fixed deposit
receipts represented CPA 36.6 billion as of 30 September 1980.

In comparison. the total amount of credits to the economy amounted to CPA $8.6
billion. The Nigerien state also benefited from CPA 10.1 billion in advances.

Moreover. the bank holds a portfolio of shares in the capital of 32 local
enterprises. totaling CPA 1.1 billion.

BDRR has participated actively in the financing of industrial-type inveatments
in major projects. This is how large medium- and long-term competitions were
opened to uranium ore mining companies (Somaire. Cominak. SHTT [expansion
unknownl). the concessionary company of the Tahoua-Arlit uranium road. and

the Nigerien Coal Company (Conichar).

Financing was also granted for establishment of the Nigerien Brewery and a
dry cell manufacturing plant for construction of hotels.

The state's actions were supported by prefinancing from the bank. especially
with respect to agricultural and hydroponic development. road and airport
infrastructures. modernization and expansion of the telecommmunications
network and water drilling programs, etc.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some 63.2 percent of BDRN's capital is distributed among the state (37
percent). public organizations (22 percent), and Nigerian private shareholders
(6.2 percent), and 36.8 percent among financial institutions (Central Bank of
the West African States, Central Fund for Economic Cooperation. German

Development Company. Credit Lyonnais, the French Foreign Trade Bank. Tunisian
Banking Company. the Tunisian Banking Union and so on) and foreign private
shareholders, who represent 1.5 percent.

The board of directors is presided over by Minister of Finance Mousse Iondi,
a senior officer of the Quartermaster General's staff. It includes repre-

sentatives of the Nigerien Treasury, public organizations and shareholding
financial institutions. Anadou Nouhou handles the general management of
the bank.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9380
C80: “719/755

26
won OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

YOUTH FESTIVAL--The seventh artistic, cultural and sports festival of Nigerian
youth was held from 7 to 14 April in Agadez. Some 6,000 young people from the
country's seven departments vied with one another for a weak in music, sports

and theater competition (in French and the national languages). The festival,
like those that preceded it. Oumarou Hamane, Nigerien minister of youth.
sports and culture, is a “render-vans of brotherhood, solidarity and national
unity." It is the opportunity. created by the Supreme Military Council

(CNS). in power since 1976. for young people of all social conditions and

all ethnic and linguistic origins to come together._learn to know one another
and "forge a common national conscience." [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX
ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1152] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11.466

AGRICULTURAL, STOCKRAISING TRAINING CENTBRs--0n 18 February the Nigerien
Council of Ministers adopted two bills. providing for the creation in Kola of
a state public institution named the Practical Institute of Rural Development
(IPDR) and a state public institution named the School for Stockraising

Personnel (ECE). These two texts aim at improving structures for welcoming.
recruiting and training rural development personnel. [Text] [Paris HARCHES

TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French N0 1897. 19 Her 82 p 793] [COPYRIGll'l‘:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9380

(:80: 4719/75

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI". ONLY

8A0 m AND PRINCIPE

BRIEFS

BBC PALM PLANTATION FINANCING-411““ Crops (5th EDP [European Development Fund]
subsidy of 2.108 aillion 860's [European Currency Unit) and 4th DP subsidy

of 52.000 3611's). The purpose of the project is, on one hand. to develop a
loOOohectare plantation of selected oil pal-a and. on the other. to continue

an experimental program intended aainly to produce seeds of highly productive
hybrid coconut palms. The sites reserved are in the southeast and east coastal
area of the island of Sao Tome. During a period of full yield, the plantation
would provide annual production of about 1,360 tons of palm oil and 270 tons

of palmetto palms. The production of vegetable material fron coconut palms
would make it possible to consider developing high-yield plantations in the

near future. However. the first phase of the current project covers only the
plantation and social measures for its workers; an oil mill will be built during
the second phase while the social impact of the operation will be developed.

The project will make possible a significant "import substitution" for the
govern-eat and improved supply for coast-era. [Excerpts] [Paris HARCIIES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 18910. 26 Feb 82 p 606] [OOPYBIGH'R
Rene Horeux at Cie. Paris 1982) 11915

C50: 4719/726

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT TO INCREASE P000 Paooucrmu
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX 31' HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1168

[Text] amen resources are at the heart of a project which specialists at
Michigan State University expect to carry out in cooperation with the govern-

ment of Senegal. The project, which is ready to he launched. should lake it
possible to increase food production in Senegal over the nut 3 to 5 years.

Cost of the project will be $106.1 million and it will involve a program in
five parts in the field of agriculture and livestock raising. Several multi-
disciplinary teans will engage in research on the six priority crops. long-term
iaprovenent of the economy, marketing and hunan resources, the evaluation of
new technologies and more effective relations with extension services. improve-
ments in relations with world technical assistance services and the reorganiza-

tion and strengthening of the Senegalese Agricultural Research Institute
(IGRA) .

Credits will be supplied by the American Agency for International Developnent

(U. S. AID). the International Developnent Association (IDA), subsidiary of
the World Bank. the Senegalese and French goverments, the Inter-State Col-it-

tee To Fight the brought in the Sahel (CILSS). the International Institute
for Research into Crops in Semi-Arid Tropical Regions and the Heat African
Association for the Development of Rice Growing of the UN Interim Fund on
Science and the Technology of Developnent.

Twenty-four Senegalese students will go to American universities to complete
their master's degrees over a period of 2 1/2 years. They will return to

Senegal to do research there and study problems encountered by their own
farmers.

According to Bicher, the researchers trained through the project will have a
high potential of effectiveness because their efforts will be ained at studying
problems encountered at the village levels and in decision-making. "Food
production in itself cannot solve all problems," he noted. adding that every
country should also try to increase the income of farmers. These two aspects

are necessary in order to feed the population and engage in international
trade.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Specialists from the university have already gone to Senegal for preparatory
visits and the team of research workers who will be involved in the project

full time under Bingen will leave Michigan at the end of April for about
4 years.

Out of the 26 Senegalese students expected in_the United States, 11 have al—

ready begun their work at Michigan State UniVersity and other institutions
participating in the project.

Finally, it should be noted that the research workers will use a ninicooputer
to analyze data gathered in research at the village level.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Noreux et Cie Paris 1982

11.46é
C50: 6719/898

3O
F0!‘0FFNJAI.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

FRENCH-SENECALBSE COOPERATION AGREEMENT-Jean-Pierre Cot, Prench minister of
cooperation. and Hamsdou Tour. Senegalese minister of planning and cooperation,
signed an agreement on 26 April. following the sixth meeting of the ministerial
conmittee of French-Senegalese cooperation. This agreement defines the Iain
cooperation operations for 1982. giving priority to actions that night lend
support to the Senegalese recovery plan. Financial cousitments are on the
order of 4 billion CPA francs from the PAC (Aid and Cooperation Fund) and

20 billion CPA francs from the Central Fund for Economic Cooperation, Cot said.
Development projects chosen essentially concern: the rural sector (food and
grain production in the Senegal River Valley, livestock raising and fishing

in Cass-sacs). the mining and industrial sector (phosphate and lignite re-
search, feasibility studies for working of the iron and pest deposits) and the
training and public health sectors. According to Cot, "Senegal is a partner
with which we intend to establish particularly intense bonds." This applies
to the aid to development and economic and financial solidarity. but also to
general relations between the two nations in the political and cultural do-
mains, Cot said, before emphasizing that "it is this whole ensemble of rela-
tions which President Hitterrand will have the opportunity to illustrate at
the time of the trip he will make to Senegal in a month." In addition to the
historical considerations. the French minister enumerated three additional
reasons explaining France's predeliction for Senegal: its experience as a
pluralistic democracy. its "courageous economic recovery neasures" and the
fight against corruption. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBOITERRANEENS
in French No 1903. 30 Apr 82 p 1167] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris
1982] 11,b65

ENEL-SENELEC COOPERATION-~An agreement protocol was signed in Dakar on 17 April
between the National Electric Power Agency of Italy (BNEL). represented by
Marcello Inghilesi, its vice president, and the Senegalese Electric Power
Distribution Company (SENELEC). represented by Louis Alexandrenne. chairman of
the board. The signing was witnessed by Claudio Moreno, Italian ambassador to
Senegal. The purpose of the protocol is to define areas in which cooperation
between the two parties might come about. This cooperation will essentially
consist of the supplying of services, technical advice in the fields of produc-
tion, transport and the distribution of electric power, and the completion of
studies concerning projects, the construction of new facilities and research.
[Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1903, 30 Apr

82 p 1147] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11.464

FOI‘OIFKJMI.USE(NULV
FINI(MWN(]AI.USE¢DNLY

[DAN T0 ICS--A bank loan of 10.5 billion CFA francs was recently granted to the
Chemical Industries of Senegal (108). The loan. granted on advantageous condi-
tions (duration: 13 years; rate of interest: 7.75 percent), will serve to
finance the purchase'of French equipment in order to complete an important
phosphoric acid and fertilizer manufacturing project. This credit represents
some 15 percent of the overall cost of the project. The consortium which
grants the loan includes the French Foreign Trade Bank, the International Bank
for West Africa and the National Bank of Paris. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPI-
CAUX ET HEDTERRANEENS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p llh7] [COFYRIGET: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11.664

EDF GUM FLANTKTIONS IDAN-eThe European Development Fund (EDP) is going to grant
2.4 million ecus for the 2.500-hectare gum plantation in the Senegalese region
of Fodor. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1903.
30 Apr 82 p 1147] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,466

MUNICH SENEGALESE HEEK--As part of its policy of promoting trade and. more
particularly. of diversifying its trading partners. the Senegalese Foreign
Trade Center (0503) is organizing a Senegalese Trade Week in Munich from 20
to 20 April 1982. In taking this initiative CSCE hopes to develop commercial
exchanges between Senegal and the PRC by improving the balance of trade,
which shows a chronic deficit to Senegal's detriment (more than CFA 7 billion
in 1980). According to studies performed by 0868, the German market has
interesting prospects for many Senegalese products: small live birds. fresh
and canned fish. fruit and vegetables. honey, animal feed. cashew nuts,
peanut oil and byproducts. cotton, manure, calcium phosphates. clothing. gum
arabic and fish meal. The week will include an exposition. an economic forum.
fashion parties, tourist information. ballets. a food tasting and sale and a
gastronomy week. A Senegalese mission will visit the FRO from 21 to 28 March
to complete preparations for this week. [Text] [Paris HARCﬂBS TROPICAUX ET

HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1897. 19 Mar 82 p 788] [CDPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux
Vet Cie Paris 1981] 9380

UNIVERSITY OPENING DELAYED--Gaston Berger University in Saint Louis will

begin operations in 1983 and not in October 1982, Djibril Sene, the Senegalese
minister of higher education pointed out on 6 March. He explained that this
postponement is due to the delays in completing construction of the university.
.[Text] [Paris MARCBES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1897. 19 Mar

82 p 788] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1981] 9380

HIGHER BREAD PRICEs--The price of bread in Cape Verde increased on 8 March.

A small loaf went from CFA 60 to CPA 70 and a large loaf from CFA 90 to CPA
110. Several coatined factors explain this increase: first, the rise in
international wheat prices and the reduction in the rate of EEC subsidy (from
which Senegal imports almost all of this cereal). To these external factors
are added the rise in freight rates. in customs duties from 0 to 15 percent.
increasing production costs (salary. energy. sacks, maintenance equipment.
and so on). And as a consequence of all these factors. there has been an

approximately 62 percent rise in the cost of bread flour. As for bread itself.
readjustment of the costs of other raw materials that go into breadmaking

(yeast, salt. and so on) has been instituted. “heat. however. is subject to
price equalization. The Price Equalization and Stabilization Fund had been

paying close to CFA 1 billion annually to subsidise this cereal. In order

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In: this equalization not to become oppressive. the state was obliged to
accept this increase as part of the economic and financial recovery plan.

These new prices affect Cape Verde. For the other regions, prices will have

Lu make allowances for transport; they will be slightly higher than Cape
Verde prices. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX E'l' MEDITERRANEHS in French

No 1897, 19 Mar 82 p 788] [COPYRIGl-‘ﬂ': Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9380

C80: 4719/755 ED

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY