FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10438

6 April 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 22/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. .Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND RECULATIORS GOVERNING DUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFfICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORTI

(rouo 22/82)

CONTENTS

mouc

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Effects of Inﬂation, Interest Rates on mird Horld Debt
(Philippe Simonnot; mm, 19-25 Feb 82) ...........

BELGIUM

Union Leader Proposes Economic Solutions
(Robert D'Hondt; WI PAS?, 11 Feb 82) .............

nnmrnnm
mnsnm

Progress, Setbacks of am Party
(Jacques Schepuans; P0030001 PAS 11 Feb 82) ...........

FRANCE

Glazing Nature of P3P Creates Dissatisfaction
(Michel Bosquet; LEW 098mm, 6 Feb 82) ......

mum: Opposition to BTA's 'Revolutionary Taxss' Stiffens

om
FRANCE

Training, Mission of Joint Space Flight ﬂith Soviets Outlined
(Pierre ““8””; mum, wt 81) OOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Future Space Projects With Soviets

-s- [III-WB-IE

Fan nun—.M-v '04-— A... 00
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

ECONOMIC INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

EFFECTS OF INFLATION. INTEREST RATES 0N THIRD WORLD DEBT
Paris L'BXPRBSS in French 19-25 Feb 82 pp 1000-106
[Article by Philippe Sinannot: "Debt: The World Crash Will Not Take Place"]

[Text] What is at stake for the bankers in the Polish situation? Avoiding a
suspension of payments. because if one link in the chain of international
credit crudales. everything crumbles. Everything? Sons 600 billion dollars
in bank credits: at the end of 1981, 520 billion for the Third World and
over 80 billion for Soviet bloc countries. With a little coeposure. however.
the worldwide crash which sons defeatists are promising can be avoided.

Until the Polish crisis. bankers' attention had been focused on the Third
World. This was strange. and even upsetting. because the bankers. who are

anything but philanthropists, had in fact considerably increased their aid to
the Third World.

This expanded role by the bankers is only the logical countereffect of the
twofold oil ilpsct (1973 and 1979). The Gulf states accu-alated financial
surpluses. Since they had no banking systen adequate for their sudden and
innense fortune. Western banks. primarily American and British. were the
principal beneficiaries of this eenna of petrodollars. But in order to pay
interest rates to their clients. these banks had to nske this noney work.
how do do it other than by granting loans? An outlet was found—Third World
countries, which had been jarred by the sudden increase in their oil bills.

Of course. bankers' participation in "aid" to the Third World increased its
cost, because bankers charge ears for their services than governments do.
But contrary to appearances, the situation that has resulted is not a
drastic one.

We not be careful here not to be influenced by the figures: the Third
World's total debt has gone from 87 billion dollars in 1971 to 526 billion
dollars in 1981. increasing an average of 20 percent in face value. But in

real terns. once the effects of inflation are taken into account, the annual
increase is on the order of 8 to 10 percent. which is the sane rate for

the export of goods and services froe these countries. In other words. the
debt-«port ratio of the Third World has. on the average, renined constant.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 10 Largest borrowers

The debt service—that is. the payment of interest and reimburse-eat of
capital-has certainly increased more quickly than the debt itself. It has
gone from 10.9 billion dollars in 1971 to 112 billion dollars in 1981 (26
percent per year). But here again. we must pay attention to monetary
illusions! The debt and the debt service are concentrated on a relatively
small number of debtor countries: primarily petulant-exporting countries
(including the richest were of OPEC) and the so-called newly industrialized
countries. The latter. which aka up only 16 percent of the population of the
Third World. accounted for 60 percent of the outstanding total of the debt and

for about 50 percent of the debt service. The category of so-called low income .

countries-the poorest of the pot—which account for 55 percent of the Third
World's population, is responsible for only 17 percent of the outstanding
debt and 7 percent of the debt service.

It is therefore not difficult to identify the major debtors. The threesome
of Brazil. Mexico and Venezuela pay almost one-third of the total debt
service. In Algeria. Spain. Saudi Arabia. South Korea. Argentina and Indo-
nesia are added to those three. you have the list of the 10 largest borrowers.
accounting for 56 percent of the debt service. These are certainly not the
met deprived. Even in the Third world the adage holds true: only the rich
can borrow. Are these loans for life? It is rather a race between growth
and indebtedness. A report by the 0201) showed that a large number of Third
World countries are able to efficiently utilize funds borrowed abroad to fuel
increased growth which. in turn. causes a nev request for foreign capital.
The major debtors are good risks.

Moreover. the cost of this debt is not as high as a dramatic view of things
would make it seem. Over half of the loans were granted at fixed rates quite
lower than the inflation rate; in real terms, these rates are therefore
negative. For the Third world as a whole. the average interest rate today

is about 10 percent in face value. That is, in real terms it is barely
positive. The spectacular increase in the price of money on the financial
markets has had an impact only on that part of the debt which was lent at
floating rates. particularly for the "big debtors" (Brazil. Mexico. etc.).

This has resulted in the paradox of certain of the poorest countries, who are
least exposed because their debts are at fixed rates. profiting from the

soaring rates. Since their short-tern credits are greater than their short-
term debt. they have been able to invest funds on the international markets.

Finally. during the last two decades there has not been one suspension of
payment. Although 0361) states that the nuwer of countries asking for debt
refinancing (Peru. Turkey, Zaire etc.) has increased during the seventies.
the amounts in question have not increased "significantly." As paradoxical
as this may seen. loans to the Third World have remained a good deal for
financiers these last few years. at least as profitable as loans to private
firns in industrialized countries.

Poland um Fall Into Line

He must not be overly pessimistic about the Third world's debt. But what about
The Soviet bloc countries? Their debt raises even less worry. Until now. the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socialist countries have always been good payers. with the exception of

Poland. Hester-n financiers can count on the leaders in the Kremlin and their
allies to maintain order and. if needed. ration the people in order to honor
the debt. '

With this perspective. Poland should fall back into line, no matter how
gloomily. But the Polish debt will have to continue to be refinanced. Rest
German bankers. who are the most heavily involved. are already working on this
while Chancellor. significantly. is taking sore gestures of appeasement.

At first glance. refinancing sounds like a miracle. But this is no accident
and it is not due to chance. The reasons are that. first of all. no bank can
expect to escape alone. If a smell bank declares a state to be in suspension
of payment. overlapping responsibility clauses. which are included in most
financial agree-ants. call for redistributing the assets of the insolvent
debtor among the creditors on a prorsta basis according to their credits. Even
without such clauses. a banker will hesitate to go it alone. In the long run.
his colleagues. upon whom he depends because of the overlapping of intonation-
al financial relations, will make his: pay for it in one way or another.

And the value of the assets liable to be seised--in Poland's case, for

example. coal arriving in Western ports. boats and planes outside of Polish
territory. a few buildings. etc.--is nowhere near the amount of the debt.

This is a problem which. after all. is not dissimilar to that of the "German
reparations." Horgenthau. Roosevelt's secretary of the treasury. summed it
up nicely: "A creditor can seize what the debtor already has; but he needs
the cooperation of the debtor to obtain the products of his future labor."

A failing state is. in any case. always ready to cooperate. It knows that
the governments of rich countries will not accept a refinancing of their
credit unless an agreenent is reached with private bankers. It also knows
that it will be practically impossible to trade with other countries. because
this requires short-term bank credits.

Finally. another reason is that a country with problems is not stripped of
arguments during negotiations. Employment. already shaky in the North. will
be threatened ever further if new credits are not granted to the East. and
even more so to the South. Here again the problem of the German reparations
comes up. Young Keynes gained celebrity by pointing out that the war debts

of the vanquished Germany could be railiaursed once and for all only by
products made in Geraany, which would be to the detriment of the victors'
production and. consequently. to their employment rate. A monunental lesson
that is particularly applicable now: reiabursement of the 600 billion dollars
must necessarily be through increased imports coming from the debtor countries
of the South and Bast. And this is coming at the precise time when unemploy-
ment in the North is tending towards the dramatic levels between World Wars I
and II. and when everyone wants to ilport less and export more.

In reality. the prime danger threatening world finances is the slowdown in
economic growth. which can be seen in the "set as well as the East. the north
as well as the South. A general bankruptcy can be avoided only by new

3
‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
international progress. The current lethargy is all the more dangerous today
because. for 9 countries in the Third World. the service of the debt is greater

than one-third of the value of exports. whereas there was only one such country
(Brazil) 10 years ago.

In addition. faced with the increasing dangers. fewer and fewer bankers are
willing to hecone involved in international activities without state guaran-
tees. which will lead to an increasing state involvement in international
loans. This will increase the risk that financed inveatnsnts will be less
sensible than in the past.

A gigantic bank crash will be avoided. but at the price of increasing world
inflation. the costs of which will be borne by the poorest (peasants in the
Sahel or in Northeast Brazil) or those nost deprived of political rights
(Polish miners).

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groups Express

9720
050: 3100/1016

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
UNION LEADER PROPOSIS WONDER: SOLUTIOIIS
Brussels POUBQDDI PAS? in Hench 11 Feb 82 p 12

[Article by Robert D'Hondt, secretary general of the csc. "To Find a Hay Out
of the Crisis..."]

[Text] In order to find a way out of the crisis, we will have to fully re-
think our way of analyzing things. lie cannot subscribe to the backmd look-
ing concept which herdline liberalism which dreans of reducing Europe and
Belgiun to the pathetic diaension of vassals of the United States and of re-
producing the standards of a society of inequality. of solitude and of vio-
lence, wants to impose. We do not want any part of it.

The establishment of a different nodel aseunes a break with capitolisn. He
have to stop thinking of this in terns of the intellectual categories of the
past: the 19th century provided a definition of capitalism which is anachro-
nistic and outaoded today: that period could not imagine what the power re-
lationships announced by the technological wave of the future would be like.
even as it could not anticipate the field of possibilities which the crisis

opens up.

However. to nuke believe that it will be possible to establish a new nodal in-
nediately. without transition. would be a hoax. Any break starts with sea—
sures which prepare it. In Belgium. the labor novenent is aware of this and
so are the Christian unions. Henceforth. the nyth of the "great evening"

has become a museum piece to'then and, in the face of the crisis. they talk
in a sore responsihle nanner than the aedia would have the public at large
Nieves '

what does the csc [Confederation of Christian Trade Unions (vmoonn propose
in order to break with the hardline aanageaent of the crisis. and to develop
the links to that othecr.~ model of society which is more conpatihle with our
thirst for freedom and our concern for what is hunan?

Briefly. let us say that it proposes four nain lines. for the short and ne-
diun term.

1) A coherent industrial policy. determined under the aegis of the public
authorities. inconsultation with the private sector. and within the framework
of the overall plan which would have its own version in each enterprise;
strict criteria for any state aid to enterprises. with social control over

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
then: an effort toward industrial diversiﬁcation which takes the doaestic
uarket into account. This industrial policy would be financed by a conpulsory
"loan for industrial expansion” to tap the fresh capital which is eta-neatly

lacking.

2) The creation. spread over a a year period. of 100.000 decent jobs throng:
the ilpleaentation of a real third labor network. financed by part of a spe-
cial crisis tax.

3) To safeguard social security will require -- end we have foreseen it ~-

effortstobeagreedtobytheworkersthenselvee. Butforitspertinthe

financing of it. we cannot allow society as a whole to shirk its responsibi-
lities.

Rather than sons solidarity contribution ilposed on the workers alone. we pro-
pose thatpartoftheproceedsfronthespecial crisistaxbeusedtofinance
state subsidies to the social security sectors. It should be noted in-passing
that there cannot be any question of retln'ning to a needs test. even if it is
introduced "at the top" and "within the fanny." which would in terns of its
principle undermine what social aecm'ity basically represents in Belgium.

h) A distribution of labor and of the availahle incoae through an accelerated
reduction of working hours on the order of 10 percent. with coapulsory and
controlled coapensatory recruitnent and. for lack of it. the proportionate fi-
nancing of an intersectoral regional or sub-regional fund for the creation of
new jobs or the maintenance of existing Jobs. In this order. and taking into
account the inpact of the new technological flux to be controlled within the
framework of a real dialogue with the private and the political sector. The
maintenance and developnent of jobs in the public services lust be guaranteed,
thanks to internal shifts and the developnent of new services.

What we basically want is to regenerate an industrial fabric.‘ which is cur-
rently breaking down. and to return the resources for its developnent to the

people-

In order to carry through such an orientation, there will have to be, if not
at the level of the country. at the very least in Hallonia. a true and new as-
jority which feels the desire for it. On the side of the "Christian left" it
will also be necessary to get any fro. the conflicts which weaken it politi-
cally. The mc [Christian Labor Hovenent (Hallocn)] is cmently working on
this through wide consultations with its rank and file.

The CSC. which wants to promote the unity of the workers, must fit in the
social dynaaic which is characteristic of the southern part of the country.
This does not nean a break with our meniah friends. but an adaptation to the
difference in context experienced by the Ualloons.

we also need a new trade unionism, sore interprofessional. sore centered
around local activities and economic and social experimentation. which accepts

novel alliances with the shopkeepers and faraers who are associated with its
actions.

6
POE OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A new strategy is emerging for the 080 in Hallonia. It is specifically dined
at globalizing certain aspirations of the workers and at pronouns sethods
and forms of action which Join then and theirs. the actively employed and the
non-actively esployed. together. both as producers in enterpnses and as con-
sumers and savers. To strengthen the position of the writers. New practices
should lead to a. wider: selectivity in the traditional nethods of trade union
action.

Finally and especially, it is necessary for the political debate in this coun-
try to becone more subtle and intelligent. outside its traditional and out-
dated portrayal ae between heaven and hell, as if there were no other alterna-
tive today than between a savage liberalisn and a soulless collectivisa.

CPYRIGHT: 1982 POURQIDI PAS?

3‘63
C80: 3100/3153

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROGRESS. smcxs or UDRT mm
Brussels POMI PAS? in French 11 Feb 82 pp 10-11
[Article by Jacques Schepnansi "mm: A Second Uind?"]

[Text] In this south of October 1%1. and as soon as every-
one began 'to anticipate the inevitable elections. public
opinion was convinced that a strong novenent would cone out
for the um [Denouatic Union for Respect for work (walloonﬂ

Its seetinge enjoy great success and the aedia which up to
now had maintained a disdaini‘ul silence. opened their calm
to the unique representative. Robert Hendrick.

Sign of the tines: Christian Dunon. the nany-sided sident
of the Brussels PSC [Social Christian Party (Halloon ]. al-
ways in quest of s nndate as illusive as the holy Grail.
even attended a UDRT meeting. If he went there to gather
information before. perhaps. going out to eat. that is be-
causetherewassuccessintheair. Andthen. barelwaeeks
before the elections. the machinery suddenly Jaunted up. The
spring was broken and while they expected at least double.
the UIBT was left with only three representatives and one
senator. that happened?

Today. it would be a lie to claim to have seen caln and serenity return within
the party. In December. and then in January. four very stony and a little
disillusioned internal meetings were held and. when it case to voting. the
required quorus could not even be found.

Unquestionably. with the municipal elections only a few months any. the party
feels a tiny bit deucbdlized. and all the more so as Robert Hendrick. loyal to
his principles. once again refuses to follow the traditional taotic. namely
alliances. advance agree-eats and the future distribution of governsent nan-
dates.

This is adsirahle. it is reassuring. it is everything one would want it to be.
but apparently this seems to stromly displease many activists who. for years.
have been pasting posters and licking envelopes. forever hanging about while
being used as nonials. and who today would like to draw the fruits of their

8
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
efforts. This could indeed play curious tricks on this party of purists as
was already the case on the eve of the legislative elections.

At that tile, the leaders of the BURT had pushed aside "good positions" held
by old activists, who were a little pedestrian and too pragnatic. to replace
them with brilliant jurists of the Thom Delahaye style. A party of purist
jurists. ifonenysay so... ‘

This has aroused a good bit of bitterness and the president of the Federation
of Small and Medium Sise mterprises. Hr Byckeraan -- who was thus put out of
thermming» did not wait to take his revengebyleadinga solidcanpaignin
favor of all the anti-tax people except for those. of course, who clained nem-
bership in the WM. Similar rifts have obviously left scars, and even today
awindofrevoltfrontherankandfile is blowingasainatthepartyleader-
ship.

According to the statutes of the UDRT. the political nndats should be the sole
occupation of those elected during the period of their term of office. Conse-
quently. sons candidates. for example shall coapany managers, ave up their
ambitions. But today. while Mr Hendrick fulfills his contract perfectly. Re-
presentative Delahaye has kept his very flourishing lawyer's practice and
Senator De Clippele sore than ever wants to be a notary public. having even
hired one of his clerks as parliamentary secretary.

Now this does not bother us very much, as we are convinced that a sound per-
sonal incone strengthens the independence and honesty of nenbers of parliament.

but how would you explain this to a rank and file. sons of whose were frustra-
ted 1n their hope for vainglory?

As for us. we believe -- but our opinion is not important at all -- that the
UDRT was right in chosing quality for its parliamentary representation rather
than wanting to associate itself with old activists who. once at the rue de
la Loi, would rapidly nake themselves look ridiculous if not worse.

A certain character in the mm. ohligingly exhibited by the am [Belgian
Radio Broadcasting and Television Systen -- French Service] during a "‘Do Be
Followﬂ" broadcast, which could have cone out of a propaganda office and
showed as much fair play as an ambush in the Bondy forest. will have persuaded
many people that Representative Hendrick was not wrong.

Now. what is going to happen and how are they going to find the second wind
which would transform the UDRT into sonething other than this ten rary lock
for future renegades from the Pm. [Liberal Reform Party (Halloon) ?

Pros Convention to Conventions

As early as the beginning of spring. the party is going to organise conventions
which,by early 1983. should lead to a large congress aimed at redefining the
identity of the UDRT.

The prinary themes will revolve around the dualit : "Life and Libert " t
two major poles: “Life and Econoaic Liberty.” "Life ens PoliticJ’Ligrxt'yr

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For Robert Hendrick. the direction of his inediate action is to fight aainst
the monopolies, against the m [Telegraph and Telephone Administration] which
will soon. with the excuse of technology. control the data tanks. and also
against the pressure groups which are found in the state nanagenent bodies,
thus playing the role of policeman policing hinself.

Here we have once again a reappearance of the libertarian philosophy so well
defended by the new president of the PW [Party for Freedo- and Progress
(me-11311)]. Guy Verhofstsdt. Consequently. is the m still necessary with
this liberal renewal?

This makes Robert Hendrick hopping and. First of all. the 0131‘ must remin
the radical spur destined to sting the liberals as soon as they are tempted to
fall back into their customary conservative rut. born out of a taste for con-
pronise. Between language and actions .. . Besides, the UDRT questions quite
a nuabsr of aspects of the govern-ant policy, for example its aabiguity and
its lack of courage. if not its selfishness.

"The liberals have promised a great deal. but what did they do when it case
down to imposing a legal personality on the unions, which is within the deno-
cratic logic? Nothing. Uhat laws they done to resolve the prohlen of the
private radio stations? Nothing. Finally. unlike then. the (1081‘ wants to re-
duce social charges in order to asks a cost reduction possible and not to re-
duce labor income. It is true that we want to follow the straight line of the
progressive ideology of the liberation of nan. which is quite the opposite of
the dogsatic ossification of the socialists or the cool selfishness of the
liberals. As for the PSC. what's that?"

For a long time yet, the founder of the UDRT will pursue his idea. obsessed
by an anxiety in the form of a question: the UDR'I', what for?

Could it be that this is what the voters on tint cold November Sunday had not
very well understood?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 POURQIDI PAS?

8463
cso: 3100/32

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHANGING “All“!!! 0? P5P camss DISSATISFACTION
Paris LB mum OBSERVATEUR in French 6 Feb 82 pp 26-27 .
[Article by Michel Bosquet: "The PS No Longer kists"]

[Text] "In nany respects, we were more free under Giscard or under Poupidou."
At least that is what many high-level intellectuals and politically on the
left. what is sore, are cosing to think at tines. Not, of :course, that the
conservative governance in the past have paid more attention to their ideas
or that there was more roon in institutions, before 10 Hay. where those ideas
could spread. 0n the contrary, renenber Marcellin and Bonnet. Laceth and
Peyrefutte. Saunier-Seite and the haughty supervision that Giecard hinself
exercised on the press.

If a nuder of intellectuals (of the left) feel that they are less free at
present, it is for an entirely different reason. They no longer find anyone
with whoa to talk. They no longer find any space where it is possible to
work out a p.“nt of view and to establish the shape of the future that should
be built. This space existed before 10 Kay. It was provided by that large
opposition party whose faults the intelligentfsia measures without any illu-
sion but some :of whose very rare qualities it appreciated.

In fact the P8 was everything except a monolithic party. regardless of how
nonarchical its structure night be and how bureaucratic its nechanisn. Every
socialist trend coexisted in it in some way or another: Ianinists and liber-
tarians. Marxists and Christians, partisans of state control and those in
favor of self-adninistration. Alongside the habitual spparatchika and profes-
sional politicians. the PS--and the P8 alone—had anong its neabers capable
of becoming a minister nen and sense with new. original thinking: the Attali
and Delora. Pieani and Badinter. Jeannette Laot and Bvelyne Sullerot. and

so on. No other party had asmh gray matter and exercised so strong an at-
traction on the university. technical, scientific. artistic, literary intelli-
gentsia.

Owing to the P8, this intelligentsia was able. in all its conponents and on
every level, to believe for 5 years that it was not useless to invent. to
reflect. to discuss. The socialist oppostion was the ready-to-hand outlet
for this production of ideas. Owing even to the multiplicity of its trends,
the Ps,- in sure one or another of its cowonents. renained open to proposals

11
me OFFICIAL lSE ONLY
e Um‘ v. e eves-m4 vom- V4 ‘54.

and to the new forces: to nationalitarian, feminist consumer movements; to
groups or clubs representing the school. medicine. the city, the press, labor,
free time, and so on.

There no longer is much left of that abundance of militant ideas and energy.
The leftist intelligentsia is now an orphan. Because as soon as the government
was installed in office. the Ps--decapitated-sla-ad in door shut in its
face. The often innovative and imaginative policies that the party's cos-it-
tees had worked out on planning. enterprise, health, agriculture, energy.
industry. consumtion, and so on have almost all been shelved indefinitely.

The party no longer reflects, proposes or works out. Its best brains. the
ones who had ensured its opening to new ideas. are almost all in government
office. Debate no longer takes place except in closed meetings of a few "big
brains." The party has become the conveyor belt of the executive branch or.

as its top leaders tell it constantly. "the intermediary of government action."
Realize that it is responsible for ”explaining" goverusent action. that is

to say for justifying it and for "mobilizing opinion" in favor of it.

Because the PS has thus becom an instrument of power, the intelligentsia

is left to one side. reduced to unemployment. if not to silence. "here. when,
with whoa can it still reflect and discuss on the construction of a new so-
ciety? Today. just like yesterday. the government. and the governunt alone.
works out and inlelents its policies. It has a monopoly of conception. of
decision and, of course, of expertise. When it is pressed. it refuses to
have debates arranged in the country or between experts with contrary opin-
ions. It prefers to consult experts of its own choosing in the secrecy of
its offices, and then decide on its line in accordance with criteria known
to no one. The party. constantly violated and short-circuited, has been red
duced to making its existence known by means of demonstrations of ill humor
that often are demagogic. In the absence of public debates (for which Par-
liament is not necessarily the best place). the stakes or the nature of the
various possible options are never clarified. The government‘s choices are
still unexplainable with regard to the overall plan underlying them.

Where are we going? What society, what manner of living, what kind of civili-
zation does the government intend to set up under cover of its reference to
socialism? Does it only know? Does it see beyond its short-tern objectives?
Does it sometimes sacrifice strategy to tactics. settle problems in terms

of secret struggles between cliques, rather than in terms of basic stakes?

These questions float around in every private conversation. Suspicion is
setting in: what is being concealed from us? Is not refusal to engage in
any debate motivated basically by a concern for removing the differences be-
tween Ps and PC. or for preventing then from coming out into broad daylight?
Are not the first statement by Cheysson on Poland, Hauroy's statement at Cam-
brai on Siberian gas. Jospin's extreme discretion on his meeting with Harchais
explained by this?

But if that is the gale, who wins in it? By dint of wanting to "occupy's
the Pc's ground," is not the P8 in the process of losing what made its spe-
cificity and its characteristic image? It is not certain that the govern-
ment itself is served, in its action. by a lack of major debates and an abun-
dance of initiatives in enterprises, schools, regions, col-unes. By setting

12
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aside everything that does not come by itself. by behaving as if the "change"
could only come from on high. the leftist government finds itself settled

in that same situation that its best representatives. when they were in the
opposition. asserted that they wanted to avoid at all costs: a situation

in which the people are led to expect everything from the state and from the
state alone. A situation in which. consequently. the people will beprompt

in recriminating against the state with regard to everything that does not
change. sufficiently or fast enough.

In order to avoid feeding this recrimination and the "claim on the state"

that it expresses. it would be necessary for the Keynesian reforms, essentially
quantitative and slow in producing their effect. to be acconpanied by qualita-
tive reforms that will transform living conditions. social relationahips.
perception of the future into appreciable areas without delay.

For example. mere ministerial circular letters can give state employees the
right to free self-determination of their work time (annual. monthly. weekly)
and their hours. a right that will increase employment and will open up to
labor union assemlies vary ample room for self-management of time. working
conditions and distribution of tasks. without costing anyone anything.

Here circular letters can specify new quality standards for products in general
use. standards specified in collaboration with consumer associations. finally
called on to participate in determining products.

Here circular letters also can create--especially in building and particularly
in public buildings and the ELM [Low-cost Housing Progrem]--sizable markets
for materials that economize energy. among others. markets with regard to
which hundreds of enterprises will be encouraged to equip themselves. to hire.
to conclude contracts and programs. and so on. There is no use in urging
industry to hire personnel and to invest. if , first of all. objectives for

further growth. the nature and quanties of the products to be provided are
not planned.

As long as the plane of quantitative. that is to say burdensome. measures

is remained on. the limits of possibility are quickly reached. while the expec-
tations and possibilities of outbidding tactics are limitless. It will be
impossible ever to make enough.. if the principle that "more" is "better"

is used as a basis. The PCP is well aware of who has set a date by inediately
demanding more nationalizations. more ,nuclear powsrplants. more estate taxes.
and so on. With regard to this quantitative dispute. the PS will continue

to be embarrassed. torn between demagogic outbidding by some and the moder-
ating "realism" of others. if it does not show concretely that "better" is

not merely more. "Better living" is also and especially "living and working
otherwise." In order to be successful in this demonstration. the party will.

however, have to exist by itself. carried by a great movement whose carrier
it will also know how to be.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "la Nouvel Observateur"

10.062
680: 3100/3723

13
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

POLIT ICAL SPAIN

BRRATUH: The following is a corrected version
of an article originally published on pages 18-

26 in JPRS L/10420 of 29 Hsrch 1982, P000 20/82
of this series.

OPPOSITION T0 BTA'S 'REVOLUTIONAK! rms' STIFPENS
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 1 Feb 82 pp 18-21

[Text] After enduring the most spectacular process of economic ruin in the
recent history of Western Europe, the Basque nationalist leaders, under pressure
by a large part of their party menbere and sympathizers. and especially by the
10.000 victims of extortion by ETA terrorists, who will have to pay, in France,

a total amount greater than 15 billion pesetas, have started open warfare
against the terrorist organization. Town by town, village by village. It

is the rebellion of the victims that on 26 January. when 20 days had elapsed
since his kidnaping, they had their most dramatic synbol in industrialist Jose
Lipperheide.

In a desperate attempt, the ETA military terrorists replied with new assaults.
with explosives and gunfire against the brave persons ready to challenge then
and not to pay a cent. Bravery against extortion. But the fact that histori-
cal dynamics is working against the assassins disguised as revolutionary poli-
ticians is demonstrated by the fact of a lack of support among the Basque society.
as Mario Fernandez himself, new vice president of the autonomous government

of Vitoria analyzed in his interview granted to CAMBIO 16: "In order to or-
ganize a proamesty demonstration or one on behalf of a specific hunger strike,
they have to stand with a poster in front of those of us who came out of the
Athletic-Royal Society soccer gene 2 weeks ago in Bilbao. and organize a demon-
stration in this way. Otherwise, 200 or 300 persons in the duty shift go on
demonstrations that weekend."

In sumary, Xavier Arzallus himself answered E'I‘A's challenge With a categori-
cal: lf ETA wants fear, there will be fear for all!

The declaration of total war made by the Basque Nationalist Party (PIN) and
the autonomous government of Vitorie against ETA. mobilizing the population
against the acts of eco'nonic extortion. brought to the surface the real back-
ground of the Basque problem: the existence of a hard class struggle with
the force of arms.

ETA's nuder one objective is. and has been. the impoverishlsent of the Basque
Country. Over 3 million citizens in that comunity have undergone, 'directly
or indirectly. as personal witnesses of history, the most spectacular process
of economic ruin in Western Europe in the last few decades.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.wu v---v--— -_— --—-_

Pour thousand professional sen, businessmen, zimciera,.sma11 merchants, civil
servants all over the Basque country have been intimidated into paying a total
amount- greater than 15 billion pesetas.

Each demand ranged between 3 and 20 I111.1 ion: "If you do not deliver it within
the specified time, we shall seek you out to execute you," the message from
the terrorists concludes.

The request for the so-called revolutionary tax includes another sentence that
extends the arm of terrorism to other continents: "If you notify th. police,

or any kind of setback whatsoever occurs in delivery, you will also be executed -
wherever you may be. even if you leave Europe."

In recent years. the terrorized victims went in person or sent intermediaries
to the French Basque towns of St. Jean de Luz. Biarritz or Bayonne to pay the
tribute of fear to "Senor Otxia" in used banknotes with unconnected serial
matters. This was the lost tangible proof of the impunity with which ETA ter-
rorism operates in the south of Prsnce. Billions in illicit money that is
"laundered" later in French agencies or other foreign centers.

But this extortion has touched bottom. In view of the internal and public
rebellion by the victims. the PIN and Basque government :laaders have said enough!
to this economic bloodletting by facing up to the reign of terror by weapons.

With the call by lendakari [president] Carlo Gataikoetaea"nbt to -be intim-
idated or give in to extortion" and a unanimous reaction by the people who
gathered in their districts. places of work. associations and public opinion
media. two victims of the "revolutonary tax."tthe mayors of Guecho and Santur—
ce. put out the watchword: ”He shall not pay."

"It would be a morale boost for me." Jose Antonio Loidi. mayor of Senturte.
said. while his colleague from Guecho. Dr Urretxua, stated: "I believe that
in that way my stand can serve as an example to encourage the others."

Indignation in the batzokis (PNV houses) of the towns was evident. "If some-
thing happens to our mayor. we shall respond." These reactions aloud were

repeated in a number of public establishments in Algorta. as a watchword that
"he who wants to be informed, take note."

In this atmosphere, the PIN municipal boards all over the area met in the par-
ty's building in Algorta. Over 100 representivu of the party approved unani-
mously a note representing. because of its harshness. a definite war cosmunique
against ETA. Finally. the Basques werestaking a hard stand.

In this communique. after asking the extortion victims to wake their name known.
the municipaliboards of the eight towns stated that "social Justice travels
on paths other than assassination. extortion and terror."

Nevertheless. the last point in the cat-nations was the most definite one. be-
cause the threst- became a counterthreat against ETA and its collaborators:

"He point out. the eighth point stated. "that we all know each othery-‘in the
Basque Country and very especially in the towns. and we know who is who. who

15
I-‘OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
are in agreement with those methods and who abstain when there is a proposal
to reject this reprehensible recourse."

Herri Batasuna [Popular Unity]

In view of these words. those who live in the Basque Country or who are famil-
iar with the reality of the problem know that the warning was addressed to the
members of the ﬁerri Batasuna extrem left nationalist coalition and to it"
spokesmen, who, on many occasions, refused to tandem this kind of action by
ETA terrorism. And that it is not‘ merely going to be words. There will

be something more.

This was realized by Mario Fernandez himself. who stated, in an interview
granted to CANDID 16: "I have the feeling that there is an overwhelming ma-
jority absolutely in agreement (not to pay). Soﬁe of them even. with that
voluntarism typical of our party, will probably be ready to put the last sen-
tence in that statement by the municipal boards into practice."

This firm stand ran through the Basque Country like powder. In some towns,
like Orozco. the threat. al-though verbal. was transmitted directly to persons
sympathizing with B‘l‘A. Persons who up to now had kept silent about the threat-
ening messages were now counting to their friends and were revealing them.

in :spite of family annoyance. 0f the 6,000 persons affected by the tax, not
all were industrial magnates or Neguri businessmen.

Thus. in Algorta. it was learned that a former dentist, a gudaris (Basque
fighters) captain during the [civil] war. a foreman. an industrialist. two
physicians. several merchants. and so on. had been victims of extortion by

the terrorist organization. Pour physicians in the Portugalete clinic were
affected. The surprise was great in nationalist circles. "Hhat, he too? But
he has been a party member all his life!

With its veto on the revolutinary tax and its severe condemnation of ETA, the
party presided by 'Xabier Arzallus and the Basque government have declared open
war against ETA members. playing the host severe and most difficult game in
its recent history. A war that does not evade many risks. including physical
risks. that PNV is ready to assme. Attacks with explosives on Guipuzcoa in-
dustrialists or the shooting of a San Sebastian businessman within the space
of a few hours. in connection with failure to pay the revolutionary tax, were
proof of the nature of these risks.

"We cannot leave the mayor alone now." a well-known attorney in Guecho said.
"His stand mat be extended to the whole Basque Country. Those who are brave
enohgh to make their rejection public merit the support of all the people.
Public support and with names."

In this connection. the PNV will have to have its own party members who still
are paying the tax decide bravely to refuse. It must be condemned, as the
mayors of Guecho and Santurce have done and the furtive border passages must
be used only for traditional tourism.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Meanwhile. a new slogan has emerged in the Basque Country using the statement
by a businessman. Jose Maria Visceino, president of the Guipuscoa ewloyers
association Megui. The slogan "Not to pay is more abertsale" (nationalistic,
patriotic] has begun to spread around.

For a long time, the PIN was accused of ambiguous respect for the point of
view of ETA, in spite of some sporadic condemnatory statements. Suddenly,

it has launched forth in an open war against terrorism. It is increaing its
statements. It is organizing its members and it is criticising both branches
of ETA severely and openly. What has happened?

The reply comes from attorney Mario Fernandez. the new vice president of the
autonomous Basque government: "In recent times, terrorism. and particularly
the revolutionary tax, have been contributing considerably to the deteriora-
tion of the economic situation of the Basque Country.

“Therefore." Mario Fernandez adds, "the revolutionary tax not only does not
protect the interests of the Basque working people. as is said customarily

in those cyclostyle comniques that ETA is accustomed to issuing, but, rather,
it directly harns the Basque Country workers."

For the right arm of Garaikoetxea, the challenge hurled against the ETA now

by the Basque government cannot serve for seeking, in this attitude, an indivi-
dual physical protection of all the recipients of a threat or coercion by the
ETA terrorist organisation.

"I believe that what the Basque government has taken on the conitment to lead
must be a reaction of public opinion." Mario Fernandez states, mentioning the
assassination of engineer Ryan as the people's Eirst massive reaction. This
event served both to weaken the terrorist organization and the political
groups that may be more or less defending their stands."

That is true. The murder of the Lemonizengineer Jose'llar'ia Ryan. that oc-
curred on 6 February--a year ago now—gave rise to a general strike and large-
scale demonstrations by the people-dike the one at the portal--against ERA
terrorism in the Basque Country.

During that day. 9 February 1981, 300,000 persons demonstrated in the three
Basque capitals, in a meeting held by political and labor union forces like
the PIN. P803 [Spanish Socialist Horkers Party]. PC, Buskadiko Bakerra [Basque
Left], ccoo [workers emissions]. 061' [General Union of workers, BIA-SW
[Basque Workers Solidarity] and with the support of HUD [Democratic Center
Union] and AP [Popular Alliance]. Nationalist leaders. like Xahier Arsallus
himself, socialists Nicolas Bedondo and mu Benegas. or cosmunists Mario
Onaindia, Roberto Iaerchundi and Harcelino Camacho. were in the large demonstra-

tion on that day in Bilbao. under the umbrellas that covered the crowd from
the rain.

The Buskadiko szerrs denuty stated categorically. in the capital of Guipus-
coa: "Today I say without any samples that they are few. but with fascist ms-
thods. Fascism has been in the streets of San Sebastian. without uniform.
shielded by the acronym BB (Kerri Batasuna)."

FOR OFFER]. USE ONLY
Twelve months later, a Vizcaya industrialist, Jose Lipperheide, lived minutes
and seconds in the clutches of BRA between life, and death, because he refused
to pay the revolutionary tax.

In that lengthy situation of dramatists, in which sectors close to P1“! and Bus-
kadiko Ezkerra maintained, sadly, until Wednesday that ETA military would
finally kill Lipperheide "regardlessof how much negoatiation," the family was
still awaiting proof that he was alive, while the kidnapers revealed 'that solu
tion of this kidnaping presented more problems 'than the kidnaping of Dr Iglesias
Pugs.

The senseless action by ETA political-military in the kidnaping of the father
of the world famous singer Julio Iglesias, as well as the subsequent discovery
of a sizable arsenal of weapons by the police in the Viscaya town of Brandio.
gave rise to conflicting reactions.

In spite of the fact that the political-military organization of ETA announced
in its cone-unique. after the freeing of Dr Iglesias by the police, that the
kidnaping did not imply a breaking of the truce and that they had perpetrated

it only for economic purposes. fear that the terrorist organisation is returning
to its old tricks has alarmed the Basque Country and the Madrid authorities.

The statements by Mario Onaindia. leader of Euskadiko szerra, who. is playing
a key role in the process of pacification, who made a statement with an opti-
mistic note after his interview with the minister of the Interior. Juan' Jose
Roson in Madrid last week. were not entirely shared in Basque circles.

"I believe that there is a political desire by the ETA p-m [political-military]
and by the goverment to maintain the positive dynamics originated by the truce
and acts like the return of political prisoners to the Basque Country night

be the basis for continuing on that course toward normalization." Mario Onain-
dia said.

Masters of Terror

The ETA members have graduated as professors of terrorism, training
other European groups that are part of the staff of "international terrorism."
An INTERPOL official inforned CAMBIO 16 that last December the strategic lead--

ership of what constitutes the International of terrorism met in the Swiss
city of Lausanne:

The Italian Red Brigades. the Fraction of the German Red Army, the Irish IRA,
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and ETA.

INTERPOI. is sure that the wave of attacks on United States diplomats and senior
military officers was discussed in the meeting.

At the same time, it is obvious that the terrorist assembly was the result
of public invitations drawn up by several of the attendingforgsnizations to
coordinate their activity against the European democratic governments.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
One of the inediate results of this collaboration was the arrest by the Ital-
ian police of a Syrian citizen who was transporting detonators and explosives
intended for the Red Brigades.

Apparently, the connection with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Pales-
tine extremists 1’s what ensures- the supply of Soviet-sade rocket launchers
and grenades. used by the leading guerrilla groups in Europe.

The increasing part being played by ETA in the terrorist’ International was
also revealed with the state-ents by a "repentant" [terrorist], Fernando Va-
liche. leader of the First Line organization.

The historic trial of the conander of this organization, taking place in Hilan.
made it possible to become acquainted with a neuorandu from Veliche in which

he revealed that Gianantonio Zanetti was aade responsible for establishing
connections with STA.

In June 1978. Gianantonio Zanctti went to Spain and nade an agreement with
ETA on the holding of training courses for nenhers of Firat‘Line, the Conu-
nist Fighters Formations and other terrorist groups in what is known. as a

whole. as "amd party" of Italy, that is to say, organizations basically in
agreement on confronting the democratic state violently.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Infomcion y Revistas. s.A.

10.0102
680: 3110/81

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRAINING, MISSION OF JOINT SPACE FLIGHT WITH SOVIBTS OUTLINE!)
Paris AIR B'i' COSMOS in French Oct 81 pp 37-38
[Article by Pierre Langereux: I'i’irst French Astronaut to Ply at and of June 1982']

[Text] The first French astronaut will fly aboard a Soviet spacecraft about the
middle of next year, between June and August. most probably toward the end of June
1982. he will be launched together with two Soviets, aboard a Soyuz T spacecraft
which will rendezvous with the orbital station in which they will stay for 1 week
in orbit at about 250 kn above the earth. The station will be either the Salyut 6
now in orbit, or more probably a new Salyut 7 which is scheduled to be launched
at the start of 1982.

The station will be manned initially by a 'primary crew“ who are tentatively
scheduled to be launched around February 1982. This crew will consist of two
soviet cosmonauts who will effect a flight of long duration, but of less than 6
months, according to Vladimir Chatalov. head of the cosmonauts. The duration of
the flight will be set before their departure by officials of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. as is custonary. V. Chatalov disclosed. But in the case of flights

of long duration, it is only after 1 month in orbit that the actual duration of
the mission is finally decided, with a lead time of 5 to 10 days approximately.

This primary crew will be joined near the end of June 1982 by a “visiting crew'
consisting of two Soviet cosmonauts and the first French astronaut. At this point
and for the first time. there will be five persons aboard a Salyut spacecraft.
Until now, the Soviet Balyut 6 station has been occupied by no more than four
persons at any one time.

The two Franco-Soviet crews, who have been in training since 6 September 1981.

are now training at City of the Stars, where we set then at the official introduc-
tion on 19 October organized by the C888 [National Center for Space Studies] and
Intercosmos (see AIR ET oosms No 878).

The 'titular crew.“ who have been designated as the first to lift off, consists
of Aviation Con-under Yuri Halychev, 4 [as published], flight commander; angin-
eer Alexandre Ivantchenkov, 41, flight engineer: and Jean-Mop Chretien, 43.

20
FOB OFFICIAL USE ONLY
astronaut-experimenter. We recall that Y. Halychev piloted Soyuz T2. the first
of the new spacecraft to be launched with crew. and that A. Ivantchenkov, passen-
ger aboard Soyuz 29 [as published]. flew aboard Salyut s for a period of 140 days.

The "standby crew.“ who will replace the titular crew in case of failure of the
latter, consists of Col Leonid Kisim, 40, flight commander: Vladimir Soloviov. 35,
flight engineer: and Patrick Baudry. 35, astronaut-experimenter. L. Kisim took
part aboard Soyuz T3 in the new spacecraft's first three-man flight. V. Soloviov
is a new astronaut selected in 1971. Upon graduation in 1970 from the Bauman
Advanced Technical School in Moscow, he worked first in the Space Studies Bureau
headed by Academician Sergei Korolev, then returned to the Space Operations Cen-
ter as a rocket propulsion specialist. Be is married and the father of two chil-
dren. His father was an aeronautical test engineer.

The detailed mission plan will be set up tentatively at the end of 80er 1981.
The two Franco-Soviet crews will undergo an initial flight-readiness examination
at the end of January 1982 administered by the Control Committee of the USSR Aca-
demy of Sciences. A second examination will take place 1 month before the flight
to designate the crew to be sent into space.

The piesent designation of one as the titular crew and the other as the standby
crew notwithstanding, the chances of flying of each of the Franco-Soviet crews are
about equal. In case of failure or accident on the part of one of the members of
the titular crew, the entire crew would, in principle, be changed. But, accord-
ing to Gen Georgi Beregovoi, con-lander of City of the Stars, it is entirely possi-
ble that only one of the members may be replaced. It has already happened once
that an entire crew has had to be replaced, and several times that one of the
members of a primary crew has had to be, because of illness or accident. Thus,
Soviet Cosmonaut Valeri Rioumine, holder of the world's space flight record (362
days) had to be sent into space a second time in the place of Valentin Lebediev,
who had suffered a knee injury.

For the mment, the two Franco-Soviet crews are pursuing their practical training
which began l and 1/2 months ago with a l-week survival exercise in the North Sea
off the coast of Peodossia, tofamiliarize themselves with the procedure for a
forced landing at sea. Unlike previous Soyuz's. the new Soyuz spacecraft is de-
signed to be able to put down on land as well as at sea. The landing point can
thus be displaced by some 1,000 km from the planned one in case of necessity.

The two French astronauts have also taken part in weightless-simulation exercises
aboard the new IL76 laboratory plane, which enables the effecting of some

15 simulations (by way of power dives followed by climbs). whereas the previous
Tu—104 provided only up to five simulations and for shorter durations. During
these flights, the astronauts train to move about inside a full-scale model of
the Soyuz T cabin installed in the fuselage of the plane. Further such flights
are scheduled for the spring of 1902.

This training was supplemented by other exercises in survival on land, simulating

landings in swamps and on lakes. with recovery by helicopter. The crews will also
undergo winter training near Moscow, and not in Siberia as is customary. Actually.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the flight of the Franco-Soviet crew is scheduled to take place in sun-er and,
theoretically. survival training under mountain or extrese cold conditions is not
necessary. Throughout their training. the Prench astronauts are monitored by an:
appointed military physician. Dr Sergei Pononariov, a specialist in the training
of astronauts, who has worked at the City of the Stars over the pastﬂll. years.

But to date,.the training of the French astronauts has been highly satisfactory.
Chretien and Baudry are very good candidates, self-disciplined, seticulous,
punctual and hard-working, according to the officials of City of the Stars.
Horeover. their qualification as military pilots and their training as test pilots
enable the: to rapidly assimilate knowledge of the Soyuz '1' spacecraft and its
handling. In principle. however. the French astronaut will not be called upon to
pilot the Soyuz '1'; that is the function of the flight comander. Nevertheless.

in case of difficulties, each of the passengers aboard the Soyuz '1' mt be capable
of manually piloting the spacecraft. designed, though it is, to be flown nor-ally
in the autonatic node with the help of the on-hoard computer.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1981

9238
C80: 3100/29?

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

FUTURE SPACE 9mm HITS 80WBT8--French officials are desirous of having French
astronauts participate in further space flights after the first one, which is
scheduled to take place in mid-1982 with, in principle, Jean-boup Chretien aboard.
This would make it possible for 'standby' astronaut Patrick Baudry to take part
in a space flight and would, above all. enable a continuation of Franco-Soviet
space cooperation at a very interesting level. The head of the CNBS,E1ational Cen-
ter for Space Studies] expressed his interest officially in continuing joint space
flights during the recent Franco-Soviet talks at Rode: (France). Soviet officials
have not yet replied officially to this French proposal. .In fact, they probably
will not do so until after the completion of the first joint flight. But those
when we met during our visit to Moscow are rather favorable to the idea. Gen
Georgi Beregovoi, consander of City of the Stars, thinks “the cooperation that has
begun in this domain cannot be stopped.” Professor Eugene Choulgenko, director
of space biomedicine in the Ministry of Public Health. also thinks that “future
joint flights would represent a consolidation of Franco-Soviet cooperation.‘
France can indeed provide support to the USSR in the field of biomedical instru-
sentation for manned space flights. This is already the case with the blood-
echography equipment, which will be used for the first tine in space an the first
Franco-Soviet flight. This equipoent has elicited a great deal of interest on the
part of Soviet officials who are desirous of using it for further experisents on
flights of long duration. [By Pierre Langereux [Text] [Paris AIR 8T cosmos in
French 31 Oct 81 p 39] [cosmos-r: A. a c. 1981 9238

cso: 3100/297 m,

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY