FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10151

1 December 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 62/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SPAIN

FRANQ'.

UNITED

Ma;

WEST EUROPE REPORT

(P000 62/ 8].)

CONTENTS

ECGMC

Some Europeans See No Linkage Between Entry to NATO, BBC
(Peruazurbik; M1016, 5 mt 81)....0.0IOOIOOOOOOOOOO0.0... 1

POLITIQL

Economy. mdia, Government: Potential Benefits. Ihngero
(Alain Peyrefitte; L’mmss. 20-26 0c: 81)ooooooooooooooooouoo 7

Causes of cm-cc'r‘ 'Pernanent' Rivalry Reviewed

(Frederic Pans; VALBUIS AMLISS. 26 Oct 81).................. 17

KINGNH

Labor Party leader's Performance kvieved

(Editorh13m “ms. 10 NOV 81)....000000-00000000.00.00.00. 19

GENERAL
Credit Bank's leveque Sees Nationalization u 'Trngedy'
(Jean Maxim leveque Interview; PARIS HATCH, 6 Sep 81)....... 21
Writer Show: CG'l' Aims To Dominate in Industries to Be
Nationalized
(Jean Francois Jaequier; L'EXPESS. 25 Sep 81)............... 210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[III - WE - 150 P000]
HMR¢NWUCJA1.USEIONLX

ECONOMIC SPAIN

SOME EUROPBARS 533 NO LINKAGE BETWEEN ENTRY IO “AID. BBC
Hadrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 5 Oct 81 pp 58. $9. 61
[Article by Peru Egurbide (Brussels); "Headfirat Into Europe."]

[Text] The government considers that joining NAIO is already an accomplished fact.
Its objective now is the plunge into the European Economic Community. that group of
interests which is much more closed and select than the Atlantic military alliance,
and against which Spain appears determined to smash itself once and again. No one,
starting with the Spanish leaders themselves. is interested in joining the EEC
under pressure, and the urgency of the government arises almost exclusively from
its wanting to protect its back in view of the parliamentary debate on NATO.

But the only backs the French are inclined to protect are those of their farmers.
who are unable to compete in quality. price and even terms of payment. They con-
sider Spanish interests to be an internal affair of Spain; while they try to prove
that French interests are the same as those of the European Economic Community.
And so they use the veto on Spain as they please.

The secretary of state for relations with the Communities. Raimundo Bassols.
returned from the recent meeting of the EEC in Brussels with the conviction that
France had finally tilted toward the side of Spain. "France has definitely under-
gone s favorable change in attitude. although later on in the negotiations they
defended their interests." But the former Spanish ambassador to the EEC did not
take into account the voluble preachlenperament and only hours after his optimis-
tic statements the French minister of agriculture. Edith Cresaon, was announcing
that the socialist majority would veto the entrance of Spain into the EEC.

A French Government spokesman would later tone down her statements. but the gsllic
Ministry of Agriculture left it very clear at the same time that admission was
linked to the protection of French agricultural products.

This was repeated almost word for word by the French president in his first presi-
dential statements regarding Spain last 24 September. "1 am in favor of the
negotiations." stated Hittersnd. "But Spain must realize that as far as France

is concerned this negotiation is based on a certain number of economic. agricul-
tural. industrial and regional realities; and that it is not possible for the
problem to be resolved by the simple decision of the other nine members of the
Community." with these words the French president throws out a warning to Spain.
and at the same time deauthorizes the support which the Spanish cause has received
recently from countries such as England and Germany.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In any case. the positive results for Spain coming out of the Council of Hinisters
of the European Economic Community which took place on the 1kth and 15th of last
month in Brussels could come to be transformed into a new "spirit." more healthy
than the one that ravaged Spanish political life in the early days of the transi»
tion.

what was characterized in Brussels as a "formal unblocking," a "moderate opening."
or a "tactical gesture" gave rise in Madrid to lofty statements like the one that
said, "France has lifted the veto that it held over Spain."

Not that the Spanish negotiators have lost their heads. because it is a known fact
that political "spirits" only circulate in relation to public opinion. Raimundo
Bassols reverted to diplomatic language last 21 September when he made a stopover
in Brussels on the way to London.

His statements were along the line of "the negotiation has become unblocked as

far as principles go," or "the fact is that in principle the BBC has cancelled
some mortgages."

After meeting with the president of the European Commission, the liberal Luxem-
bourger Gaston Thorn, and with Vice President Lorenzo Natali, the Italian Christian
Democrat who is directly in charge of the negotiation with Spain, Bassols admitted,
"I myself was not sure. and am not sure now how far this opening goes."

It seems clear that we are faced with an "opening in principle." "moderate." which
has no other result than a "formal unblocking" of the Spanish negotiation.

Domestic Politicizing

Any emphatic assertion about the importance of the September Council, and the
perspectives which it opens for Spain. will have to be weighed. meanwhile. in the
balance of the campaign which the government is carrying on with a view to the
parliamentary debate on Spain's joining NATO. The inclusion of the topic of the
EEC in this campaign can not be a simple supposition at the point, and even less
if one takes into account that it was Bassols himself who was in charge of placing
it on the table.

During the morning following the meeting of the Community ministers it was the
secretary of state who established the sound relationship between the negotiations
with the SEC and the decision of the government to enter NATO. His first genuinely
affinmative response to the question of a journalist was later reduced to the level
of this official version: "The negotiations with NATO and the EEC are parallel

and separate topics, but theymutuallyinfluence each other."

The secretary said, at another point. that although the news had not been published
in any newspaper or mentioned in any speech. "it evidently is floating around in
the atmosphere," that the project of joining NATO had had an influence on the
Community's opening. He added. "A Western decision. like the one the Spanish
Government is proposing and will submit to Parliament, evidently has an influence
on the decisions which the Western world must take towards us, for example, on the
topic of the BBC."

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Bassols statements were atypical. because they contradict both the doctrine
officially maintained by the Community. which Ireland belongs to. although it is
not a member of NATO; and the ones which the Spanish authorities themselves had
been upholding. Indeed. Community circles very closely linked to the negotiations
with Spain were caught by surprise.

what the secretary of state said. however. tallies perfectly with the political
project which Calvo Sotelo suggested. rather than formulated. during the visit which
he made to Bonn last spring. on the occasion of his first appearance as president

of the government. The stress on German support for Spain's joining the alliance.
and the conviction expressed by Schmidt that the agricultural negotiations with
Spain could be unblocked even before the reform of the Cmmaunity was completed.

made it clear that the new cabinet was reversing the order of the foreign policy
priorities held by Adolfo Suarez and his minister Oreja: join NATO. yes. but from
the EEC. For Calvo Sotelo. the road to the BBC lies through NATO.

The new project was shaped into a plan of attack during the Hagnerian party and
the Mediterranean cruise that served as a pretext for Calvo Sotelo's meeting this
summer with the German minister of foreign affairs. Hans Dietrich Genscher. and
with President Thorn. both liberals. who took leading roles in this new scenario.
It was, in fact. the Germans who were the best defenders of the Spanish cause on
the 16th. and they even introduced a document to unblock the agricultural negotia-
tions. Thorn. on his part. has announced that next November he will make an
official visit to Spain.

Community Opening

It seems clear that there has been an opening. and even that it has been brought
about through a change of opinion promoted by the countries most interested in
Spain's joining NATO. Great Britain is also supporting the Spanish cause. although
its actions are less visible because Gibraltar requires them to keep their dis-
tance. But it is more difficult to evaluate what the consequences of these circum-
stances could be.

The inclusion of the Spanish dossier on the agenda of the first meeting which the
Council held after the summer-~together with topics as important to the BBC as

that of its own reform--was already a notable event. The negotiations with Spain
were blocked on the 14th by what was called the double lock: the one Giscard
brandished during the French elections. and the one which Andre Chandernagor.
Hitterand's new secretary for Community affairs. presented in a none too friendly
way to Perez Llorca when the Spanish minister visited Brussels in July of this year.

The "Giscard blow," as is known. prevents the SEC and Spain from talking about
the agricultural subject and about the budget-the most important topics of the
negotiation, which have hardly been touched upon-until the Community has cleared
up the internal disorder which Thatcher produced when. in the Council of Europa
meeting which took place in Dublin in 1979. she declared herself almost in sus—
pension of payments.

It was an election weapon which the former French president used in confronting
his farmers, but it was based on a real problem, upon which the majority of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICJAI.USE(DNLY

countries of the Community were in agreement. The agricultural and budgetary
negotiations with Spain, as Britain’s Lord Carrington said when he acceded to the
presidency of the Council of Ministers in July for 6 months, would not be able to
be completed until the uncertain process of the internal reform of the EEC was

well on the track.

"hat Chandernagor did was more serious. because he put up a barrier against the
present Spanish tax system. which began by blocking the negotiations on the subject
of the customs union. and ended. in successive statements by the Frenchman, in
becoming a brake on any possibilities of conversation--in short, the door was
slammed shut. But. as in the case of the reform of agricultural policy, the com-
plaints about the Spanish tax system do not come only from the French. and there
is substantial agreement on the subject among all Europeans. These are complaints
which have developed as Community unrest has grown because of the tax adjustments
which the Spanish authorities make at the frontier on products which cross the
Pyrenees, with the investment of the commercial consequences of the 1970 frame-
work agreement favorable to Spain.

This unrest resulted in a demand. which is a firm position of the Community: Spain
must apply a Value Added Tax on the very same day that it is admitted to the EEC.
It is a point on which the Community will allow no concessions. and which the
Spanish authorities are refraining from confronting as non-negotiable for two
reasons: the rejection which tax reform encounters among the managers. and the
advantages which Spain can extract from the present situation if the final negotia-

tions are dealt with in a comprehensive way.

Differences of Opinion

It is known that the Spanish side upholds the official position that the period of
transition--or of gradual application of the contents of the agreement-—should be
the same for all the subjects and sectors (dismantling of industrial and agricul-
tural tariffs. common foreign tariffs, free movement of workers. etc.); but there
are suspicions that the EEC. which still has not expressed an explicit position.
would like to adjust the transition by subjects. and probably to allot 5 or perhaps
3 years for the free movement of industrial products. 10 for that of agricultural
products. and 7 for that of workers. besidee other regulations.

In contrast to this focus on sectors. which favors Community products. Hadrid pro-

poses the final negotiation of one single package of major questions. in which.
obviously. any concession on the IVA [Value Added Tax] could be used to balance

other subjects.

The next in-depth "round" in the BBC is set for 26 October. but the Spaniards want
to postpone it until November. for tactical reasons. As seen from here, the

Spanish appointment with the BBC appears irrevocably linked to the imprecise
calendar of Cormunity reform itself. whose next milestone will be the December

Council of Europe.

Vice President Natali said recently that the BBC is still maintaining that
1 January 198a is the day set for the admission of Spain. It is not a bad omen,
because they were already beginning to talk about January 1985.

0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

EEC and NATO Are Separate Topics

"If you want to see them as parallel. well. that's one view. But parallels are
lines which do not touch each other, and the fact is that Spain's negotiations with
the BBC and RAID do not influence each other. and will not influence each other."
This was the comment frnn a Community source who is very directly linked to the
negotiations with Spain. when he heard about the statement in which Raimundo Bassols
established a relationship between the two subjects.

Game of Interests

It was not a denial. and to the extent to which it reflects the official position
of the BBC. the comment in no way proves that that influence does not exist. In-
deed. it probably did exist in the case of the September decision, but the experi-
ence of Spain over the last few years demonstrates up to what point national
interests--especially economic ones-~inf1uence other types of considerations in
Community negotiations.

Francois Hitterand. for example. would like Spain to join NATO. as did Giscard
d'Estaing; however he only consents reluctantly to the lowering of some'barriers.
Then. his minister of agriculture. Edith Craisson. apparently thought it advisable
to use the case of Spain to put pressure on the Commission in approving the three
new agricultural regulations; she must have also confused the European Parliament
with the French Assembly. and she definitely kicked up a fuss. Looking at it from
more purely economic perspectives. there is the case of England. who. while it
supports the negotiations with Spain. wants to freeze our textiles in the Customs
Union basket.

To Each His Own

Even the great German mentor has its weaknesses: the PRC has kept the social topic
blocked. because it has to do with the movement of emigrants. It. together with
Great Britain. is the country which is most opposed to the new regulation on fats
and oils. which would facilitate Spanish integration to the degree that it would
contribute toward reducing the almost structural surpluses of olive oil. It is
true. on the other hand. that the regulation would harm the soybean multinationals.
for that is the oil the Germans use for cooking.

The Points of Disagreement

Agriculture: Pending negotiation

Fishing: Pending negotiation.

Special Resources: Pending negotiation.

Tax Coordination: IVA. taxes on tobacco, tax monopolies.

Customs Union: Textiles. steel. Canary Islands.

European Coal and Steel Community (UCSC): Steel and scrap iron.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EURATOH: Spanish guarantee of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.

Foreign Relations: Transition in generalized preferences.

Social: Free movement of labor force.

Transportation: Combined railroad-highway transportation.

Legislative Coordination: Chemical and pharmaceutical patents.

Institutional: Final Negotiation.

Regional Policy: Spanish statement lacking

Movement of Capital: Closed

Freedom of Establishment: Closed

Note: The first two points have hardly been dealt with. and depend respectively
on reforms of the common agricultural policy and on the Community budget. Spain
has presented a document on fishing. but the subject is still awaiting the 380's
resolution of the internal conflict which was created by the admission of Great

Britain.

COPYRIGHT: 1981. Informacion y Revistas. S.A.

8131
C50: 3110/22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMY, MEDIA, GOVERNMENT: POTENTIAL BENEFITS, DANCERS
Paris L'BXPRESS in French 20-26 Oct 81 pp 152-166
[Article by Alain Feyrefitte: "Benefits and Dangers in the Change of Government"]

[Text] "as Francois Mitterrand elected to establish a socialist
society or to manage the same society with other leaders and
another style? Is he going to follow the social-democratic path
carefully or break with capitalise in an irreversible way? Which
of the two scenarios is the more probable? What could the con-
sequences be of these two hypotheses for the Left, for the oppo-
sition. and above all for France and the French people? Here is
the answer by Alain Peyrefitte.

The Chances of a Consensus

In a classical democracy a change in government puts the ideas of the former oppo—
sition to the test of the facts: it purges the fantasies entertained by a group
of the voters who had remained on the sidelines of power. Honesty requires us to
recognize that when men so long in the opposition take the levers of command into
their hands, this could have positive aspects.

1. The democratic character of the Fifth Republic is established. Beyond a doubt,
democracy is defined by the renewal of authority at regular intervals. Since 1958
our voters have developed habits which have become a kind of collective second na-
ture. The voters would not easily allow interference to the rules of the game.
Customs count for more than the laws. The best criterion of a democratic regime
is the uncertainty about the results of an election. Francois Hitterrand had
tirelessly denounced the previous government as "Caesarian" or "Bonapartist." In
fact, the results of the 1958 elections were somewhat overwhelming in character.
However. uncertainty made its appearance. beginning with the elections of 1962.
This increased in 1965, 1967. 1968, and 1969. In 1973 the Union of the Left
seemed about to win. In 1974 Valery Giscard d'Estaing was only elected by e nar-
row margin. In 1978 most forecasts predicted the defeat of the government in
power. On 10 May, until 8:00 pm more than half of the French believed that the

president in office was going to be re-elected.

We live in a true democracy. On the electoral scales the people as sovereign have
the power to place weights whose size no one knows in advance. The balance is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even so sensitive that one cannot play with it: with 1 percent of the vote shift-
ed, the government changes hands.

As sovereign judges, the French people are not bound by anything: not by recogniv
tion for services rendered or even by their recent decisions. Their ability to
forget should inspire some feelings of fear among those who hold power and some
hope among those who aspire to it.

The majority of the voters thought that most French, having become "legitimists,"
would vote again for the man who possessed legitimacy. However. at the end of his
term of office, he no longer possessed legitimacy. This was an initial error on
the nature of the regime, believing in the "advantage of the government in power."
The advantage exists for local elections. For the presidential election, on the
contrary, it is necessary to speak of the "handicap of the government in power."
A terrible handicap! The French people respect the legitimacy of their elected
representative for the duration of his term of office. However. they do not give
him power; they lend it to him.

Many supporters of Jacques Chirac believed, inversely. that if the president was
defeated. the French people would turn to Chirac in the legislative elections. out
of fear of the Left. This was a second error regarding the spirit of our institu-
tions. The voters admirably accepted their own logic: it was necessary to give
the new president a National Assembly which would make it possible for him to
govern.

2. The solidity of the system was put to the test. It came out of it strength-
ened: a posthumous victory by its founder. The change of administrations took
place in an atmosphere of exemplary calm. We live in a country of laws. Francois
Hitterrand was elected in a regular fashion. The continuity of the state was as—
sured. This government. which its opponents of yesterday depicted as unable to
change democratically, lent itself to the change easily.

A half-presidential, half-parliamentary system, it seemed to the Left that it had
a vague. evil spell about it, which was an obstacle to the opposition's coming to
power. In reality, there are two ways for the opposition to take power. The
first way is to win the legislative elections: the president is then obliged to
call on a government which conforms to the wishes of the voters. However, he
retains the possibility either to dissolve the new Assembly or to put his own
position up for election. In either case, if he loses again. he must retire from
the scene for good. This experiment has not yet been attempted. It is desirable
that this happen some day, and it is in no way impossible that it will happen in
the next 5 years. The second way, and the most decisive, is to win the presi-
dential election. The legislative elections, which take place following the
presidential elections, amplify the success achieved. The voters offer the new

president the majority he needs.

It was unhealthy, over the long term, that half of the population should feel
eternally excluded from power; that a majority of the workers, the salaried em-
ployees, the government officials, the young people should imagine themselves
camped out at the gates of the city; that three-quarters of the teachers, research-
ers, artists, and other intellectuals should become embittered in a kind of ill-
tempered opposition. A climate of dull revolt resulted from this, as well as the

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
complete rejection of almost everything which the administration in office did or
said. He can hope that at least some of those who have the task of molding public
sentiment will stop questioning the legitimacy of the government, the state, and
even the nation.

3. The Left opposition, by becoming the majority in the country, has joined com-
pany with our institutions. The Fifth Republic was born in 1958: it went through
its baptism by fire in 1981; it is now recognized by everyone.

Francois Hitterrand seems at ease as guarantor of this Constitution which he fought
against with such tenacity. He seems to wish to respect its spirit. The prime
minister contents himself with playing the music whose score the president writes.
It is impossible to see how a future president, after four predecessors who all
will have carefully made the preeminence of their position prevail, could again
become a nonentity. Some people had predicted that, if Francois Hitterrand was
elected, that would be the end of the Fifth Republic. However, 5 months after

his election everything leads one to think that the new president will decline to
deprive himself of so efficient an instrument provided him by a Constitution
adopted despite him.

He have therefore just observed an event of primary importance. Until 1958 France
had /never/ [in italics] known a regime which was both strong and democratic at
the same time. The victory of Francois Mitterrand can sanctity and strengthen the
first regime which has given France stability, while respecting public freedoms.

A. The president, who has become responsible for all the French, has the duty and
the means to tear himself free from the pressure of his supporters, from the dogma
of the "class struggle," even from his own promises, in order to take into account
the interests of the nation and to unite it. That was the wager of General de
Gaulle on the presidential function. Will this bet win?

After the struggle over the institutions of the country, what were the other great
battles waged by the opposition? There you see that the thermonuclear experiments
have been resumed, the "anti-city" strategy has been confirmed. a new atomic sub—
marine has been launched with fanfare, the development of the neutron bomb has
been continued. For a supranational Europe and against French ambitions, charged
with "narrow nationalism," with using a veto right for the protection of our essen-
tial interests? Thus former practices were perpetuated. Against the policy of
independence regarding the two power blocs? Against our withdrawal from NATO,
following which Francois Hitterrand carried on the assault, moving a motion of
censure against the government? And here he is concurring with it. Against the
ambitious program of construction of nuclear plants to generate electricity? To
the anger of the ecologists, whom the PS [Socialist Party] had promised to block
the program, the new government has accepted the program, by a two-thirds majority.
Did the opposition denounce the impotence of the previous government in dealing
with unemployment and the increase in prices and attack the bad excuse offered of
the present world crises? Now these two plagues are rapidly getting worse, and

the government blames...the world crisis.

of course, the new government. out of fear that its acceptance of the positions
of the previous government will no considered denials of its previous stands, must

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mask these changes of position by the use of spectacular symbols, which are re-
assuring for the make-believe world of its militant supporters: the halting of
construction at the Plogoff center, the abandonment of construction of the Larzac
center. However, reality imposes its implacable kind of logic, which they had
hardly thought of in the idle conversation in the opposition comittees.

There is where the principal virtue of the change of goverment lies. Only the
Left has the capacity, either by its conversion to the real world or by its fail-
ure, to detoxicate its own supporters from the poisons which they had swallowed,
whose results were little by little contaminating the entire body of the French
nation.

If the various acts of acceptance of the policy followed since 1958 increase in
the coming months (without covering them up by Insane of a few, expiatory sacri—

f ices as props), it would not be impossible for France to come to resemble a soci-
ety where the extremes are reduced to nearly nothing and where the majority of the
French are in agreement on everything that counts. He could then see in the fu-
ture a periodic change in government between a "center left" and a "center right."
A very slight difference in the votes, as in the stable democracies, would be
enough to make the majority turn toward one or the ether of the two large polit-
ical formations which converged on the essentials, beginning with the kind of
regime and society. 15 this plausible or hopeless?

The Temptations of the Irreversible

What can favor, today, the establishment of a national consensus. which has been
tragically lacking? It would be sufficient that the new government would choose
to be "socialist," as, for example, the Bonn government is, and not like the coun-
tries which have "broken with capitalism," that is, up to now, the comunist coun-
tries and only them. All the polls suggest that two-thirds of the French people
would like to see capitalism of production (market economy, private initiative,
freedom to enter into contracts), moderated by a socialism of redistribution (in-
tervention by the government, highly progressive taxation).

That is the orientation which General de Gaulle, as well as his successors, had
chosen: that is, the "third way," between uncontrolled capitalism, which the
French people would not like, and collectivisn, whose failure no longer needs to
be demonstrated. France, under a regime where the "socialists" were in the oppo-
sition, thus became clearly more "socialist" than a country like the Federal Re-
public of Germany, where the "socialists" are in power. In our country the vari-
ous forms of taxes amount to 43 percent of Gross National Product, while they
remain below 36 percent on the other side of the Rhine River. The French social
budget is more than one-quarter of the general budget, while in the Federal Repub-
lic of Germany it is less than one-quarter. The social costs paid by companies
represent one-third of the salary structure in France, while in Germany they only
amount to one-fourth. In France the productive public sector, at the beginning
of 1981, accounted for 13 percent of gross domestic product, while in Germany it
only provided 6 percent.

We can therefore say that the Fifth Republic completed a social-democratic pro-
gram, but without deriving the psychological benefit from it, and in the midst of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
great political difficulties. In effect, these reforms collided with 3 Left which
rejected them. because it saw in them so many "alibis" protecting capitalism.

The Left could therefore march boldly along the very road where the first three
presidents only moved uneasily, because of the fact that the Left was the obstacle.
It wOuld be enough for the Left to convert to capitalism without a second thought
in production and trade; for it to content itself with introducing socialism in
the distribution of revenue; for it to renounce the dogmas of the "class struggle"
and the "break with capitalism."

Is this dreaming? Hell, it is the turnabout to which the German Socialist Party
comitted itself at the Bad-Codesberg Congress in 1959. The German socialists
understood that they would have no call to lead a Germany deeply integrated with
the capitalist Rest and whose "miracle"--capitalist—-was the object of admiration
of the world, if they did not repudiate the Marxist catechism. In France the
activists and nany of the leaders of the PCP [Communist Party], the PS [Socialist
Party], the car [General Confederation of Labor], and of the CFDT [French Demo-
cratic Confederation of Labor] remain prisoners of an archaic and dangerously un—
real system of thought. Only the exercise of the responsibilities and the peda—
gogy which the president of the Republic could use with them might make the scales
fall from their eyes. In this respect two possibilities open themselves to analy—
sis.

In the first scenario Francois Mitterrand would espouse capitalism and wOuld move
along the "social-democratic" path. he would do this either on his own initiative
or under the pressure of events.

In the case of a voluntary conversion: Francois Hitterrand w0uld have secretly
chosen the "social-democratic" path. However, he would be under the tactical ob-
ligation to assume responsibility for the various Marxist obsessions. How could
he make his allies accept the laws of a liberal economy? He c0uld do this by
ostensibly making a sacrifice to some of their myths, by gestures appropriate

to maintaining appearances.

In the case of an involuntary conversion: Francois Mitterrand has not made this
choice; events will choose for him. He will quickly understand that reality is
not in accordance with his dreams. One cannot at the same time proclaim European
and Atlantic soh‘iarity and place oneself in complete contradiction to the letter
and spirit of the commitments made by France to the EEC, the European Monetary
System, the 0860 [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development]. It
will be impossible for France to remain in the Connon Market, if it is the only
member to "break with capitalism," when all the mechanisms of the Treaty of Rome
are the very mechanisms of capitalism. Many French who voted for Hitterrand did
not think of "breaking with capitalism." On 26 April 1981 the five candidates
of the "Left" together only receiVed 46.79 percent of the vote. And many among
them did not ask to "change society." Opposite them, the four candidates of the
government parties, quite determined to maintain a capitalist system, together
received 49.36 percent of the vote. The ecologists, who made up the difference,

were fighting against pollution. not against the mechanisms of a liberal economy.

Let us go farther along this line. When we compare the elections of 1978 and of
1981 (in the decisive round, when each deputy was elected), we note that those who

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

voted for the Left, in terms of [valid/ [in italics] votes, went up from 68.57
percent to 55.30 percent. From that it has been concluded that the wave which
elected Mitterrand by 51:75 percent of the votes was turned into a landslide,

5 weeks later.

However if, like Francois Goguel, you look at the percentages in terms of the
[registered/ {in italics] voters, you see that from March 1978 to June 1981 those
who voted for the Left only went up from 40.05 percent to 40.08 percent. In other
words, the socialist and communist votes did not change. "The spirit of the peo-
ple of the Left,“ which has been so much talked about, was not shown at all. It
was the votes of the moderates which were missing, falling from 62.10 percent of
the votes in 1978 to 32.18 percent in 1981. This abstentionism was the unique
factor in the great socialist victory in June. Here the moderate voters dis-
couraged by the divisions within the outgoing government coalition and equally

so by their sudden reconciliation? Did they prefer to abstain in order not to be
involved in committing an act which would block our institutions? The wave which,

since 1958, had carried the government majority on its crest had fallen away under
it and left it on the sands. The wave bearing the Left to power remained at exact-
ly the same point as in the past. The voters did not give the Left a mandate to
change society: no more in 1981 than in 1978. The voters only allowed the Left
the power to do so, by the silence of one-quarter of the moderate voters.

The new power was elected by means of numerous ambiguities which. knowingly main-
tained for a long time, resulted in a more and more unhealthy climate. They are
going to be dissipated little by little by the test of events, thanks to the
change in government.

Must it be ruled out that Francois Mitterrand will give up tampering with the deli-
cate capitalist mechanisms, when he understands that he was elected not to carry
out a Marxist program but to manage the same society with other leaders and another
style? Hasn‘t he given instructions, as soon as the constraints of our trade bal-
ance were explained to him. to continue the sales of arms, which he denounced with
indignation when he was in the opposition? Hasn't he stepped back from the pro-
posal to give the right to vote to the imigrants, when he has seen a poll in
which the French people massively rejected this proposal?

Certainly, it would have been better for the Socialists to find their own road to
DamaSCus before entering into power. Each new defeat had led them to question
their beliefs. if Francois Mitterrand had been defeated again in 1981, a party of
the Left w0u1d probably have abandoned Marxism, as it had successively foresworn
its other utopias. This adaptation to reality would have avoided a lot of damage.

But is it too late?

This first scenario would be the best for France-—and the worst for the opposition.
it would assure the Socialists a life span which could reach, as in Sweden or in
Norway, several decades. Hewever, over the long term, the first scenario would
permit the easy change in government of a "center right" and a "center left" in a

pacified democracy.

The second scenario presupposes that Francois Hitterrand persists in seeking to
"break with capitalism,“ and to "succeed where Allende failed." Won't he persevere
in his purpose of making France "the first country which will establish a socialist

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
regime in freedom," thus creating a unique model in the world? Only the idea he
has of himself is developing in View of this noble mission: until March he seemed
to place himself in position as the third great French Socialist of this century
after Jaures and Blum. After March. the messianic spirit went up one level.
Francois Mitterrand, catching a glimpse of and then savoring victory, renewed his
ties with 1789 and began a revolution as historic as the first one. although not
bloody. He would be "a de Gaulle of the Left"; de Gaulle would then be no more
than a Hitterrand of the Right.

If the president continues along this path, will he avoid the obstacles? France
is such that it cannot be governed for very long without a majority. If the real
country stops being confused with the legal cauntry. the president will feel his
legitimacy slip away from under him, like a rug suddenly pulled away. Once the
first serioas difficulties are encountered, a cleavage will develop within the
Left, between the supporters of the minimum program, who will probably protest:
"We are going too far; the voters did not want that; we are no longer inspiring
confidence in our European partners"; and the supporters of the maximum program,
who will probably clamor: "Things are going bad because we are not going far
enough."

It will be difficult for the president to stand still on the slopes. Thesocialist-
labor-communist movement will establish its fiefdoms everywhere. The neutrality
of the civil service, the impartial authority of the state, will be destroyed. To
explain this bound forward, the official propaganda will try to find scapegoats:
the incompetence of preceding governments, the dollar (concerning which it will be
asked if it is more pernicious when it goes up or when it goes down). the wall of

multinational firms, the Phi [small and medium-sized enterprises], the merchants,
the craftsmen, the high government officials, the Council of State, the Constitu-
tional Council. The powerful means which the Constitution gives to the state will
sometimes aggravate the damage done. That is, until the day when a strike either
by doctors or by police officers or by prison guards or by truck drivers (like in
Chile) will serve to reveal the nation's loss of confidence in the government.
Some ministers. some socialist and radical deputies will refuse to stand for an

This second scenario is the best for the opposition. It should prepare itself to
take over when the 3 or 6 percent of the French people who made the decision in

And their about face--perceptible even nowb-will cease to be Compensated (and even
beyond that point) by the "technical supporters of legitimacy" (older persons,
women living alone), who are led by instinct to vote for the government in office.
However, this is the worst scenario for France.

A series of disturbing measures taken, which go far beyond the secial-democratic
option, even when seasoned with symbolic gestures, seems to indicate that this
second scenario is being put in place.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. The nationalization of prosperous industrial enterprises has not always had
solid economic justification. It will constitute a heavier burden on public fi-
nances than in any other Hestern country. The nationalization of almost all the
credit institutions will estrange France from its partners in the Common Market
and will bring it several giant steps closer to the people's democracies. The
European countries where credit is nationalized are the countries of Eastern Europe,
including Albania and Yugoslavia. There is a single country like this in all of
the Americas, North, Central, and South: Cuba.

As a whole these nationalizations can lead in our economy to the leukemia of
bureaucratisation and irresponsibility, which for the decision-makers involves the
absence of economic sanctions. International confidence will be undermined. The
economy lives on anticipation: future nationalitatione, instead of favoring dyna-
mism, already seem to be paralyzing it. The "recovery plan" adopted by the new
government hasn't made anything recover since it was approved. 0n the contrary,
stagnation has appeared. It is unlikely that the establishment of new controls
(to watch over prices or search out gold) and devaluation (which, it is feared,
will soon be followed by further devaluation) will re-establish confidence.

2. The trade unions of the Left will use their power to support these nationali-
zations, of which they are no doubt the only real Justification. Already, they
are infiltrating everywhere. In the ranks of the police, the courts, among teach-
ers. the universities, the government ministries, they are taking the key posts;
perhaps they are waiting to do the same thing one day in the army. The govern-
ment is not really socialist; it is socialist-trade union-communist.

3. Four important ministries have been conceded to be the full property of the
PCF. The Party knows in detail the techniques of infiltration. Some 35 years
afterwards we are still suffering from the consequences of the passage of Maurice
Thorez through the civil service or of Marcel Paul through as? [French Electric
Company]. It is worrying, for example, that the president of the RAT? [Indepen-
dent Parisian Transport System] has been appointed with sovereign power by the
Political Bureau of the Communist Party. It is even more worrisome that this
practice. which was not even seen during the Fourth Republic, has not aroused any
protest. A long time after the socialist wave will have receded, the communist
mussels will remain attached to the rocks.

&. They have applied the American "spoils system" to an area in which it is never
applied in the United States, since there all the organs of information are inde-
pendent of the government. The witch hunt in the mass media, the taking of com-
mand by faithful henchman of the new government, the silence and terror imposed
on those who could provide another point of view are perhaps even more disquiet-
ing than the economic problems. The damage which bad management causes, good
management can make good. However, the lethargy in which the French people seem
to be in the course of being plunged can have serious consequences on our liber-

ties themselves.

Until 10 Hay, in the different radio and television networks, a balance had been
established. A majority of the journalists, producers, directors, cameraman, and
technicians felt themselves close to the Left. However. the management, appointed
by the government, had the role of creating, more or less, a "gentlemen's agree-
ment.“ Today, withOut any control by administrative councils or by any body

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
established by law, instructions to maintain silence or to amplify given stories
are transmitted by hidden channels. "One must not talk" about the worsening of
unemployment. of the attacks that have taken place in Corsica, nor of the repeated
refusal of the court in Pontoise to install Bidalou in office. "One must talk" at
length about the favorable reception of official statements-~or about crises over-
seas, etc. The minority of journalists who do not feel themselves to be and do
not claim to be "of the Left" are lying low or censor themselves. when they are
not censored. Disinformation is taking root.

Beyond even the television networks and the state radio, the fears about informa-
tion in France are legitimate. The radio stations in the area outside of Paris,
the NOUVELLES MESSAGERIBS in Paris, LE POINT. LES DERNIERES NOUVELLES D'ALSACE,
LE JOURNAL DU DIMANCHE, etc--will they fall under the influence of the government?

5. The assumption of control by the state of the media of culture worsens the
danger. The televised programs (serials, dramatic presentations, choices of films
"with a message") were often oriented in the direction of a philosophy "of the
Left." In the future this will be more and more the case. Here is the state, in
the process of controlling Hachette, Laffont, Nathan, Bordaa. Won't editors of
books be required to work through the Hachette distribution center? Georges
Harchais, whom a journalist asked if Solzhenitsyn could be published in France,
after a victory of the Union of the Left, made this remark from his heart: "Yes,
if he finds an editor." In a mood of general indifference French book publishing
risks resembling, little by little, book publishing in the Eastern European coun-
tries.

The logic of a socialism much more radical than social democracy is beginning, and
it wants to be irreversible. However, we must be on guard against two temptations.
One is believing that the failure of this experiment is inevitable "in 2 years.".
The other is to believe that the new government majority cannot be turned out of
office in less than several decades.

1f the previous government had not committed suicide by its divisions on 10 May,
it w0uld probably have been kept in office until 1988. That is, it would have
retained office for the previous 30 years (at least). The solidity of our insti-
tutions and the respect for “legitimacy" on the part of the French people could
permit a socialist government to carry out its experiments for a long time, if it
is clever enough not to impose on the French people a society which they do not
want. However. we should not rule out the possibility that the new government
majority "will make stupid mistakes," nor that the former majority will one day
be missed.

The change in power which has worked in one direction could work in the other,
and without waiting for so long a time. Warning signs-—jokes and rumors, depart-
mental. municipal. regional, and European elections--will make themselves heard
quickly. The euphoria of some, the bewilderment of others will come to an end.
The new majority should not think it is eternal. The new opposition should have
the courage to commit itself to the long process of regaining positions on the

periphery of government. However, a turnabout will take place inevitably. when
the new teams are worn out or quarrel among themselves. Of course, this is on
condition that the democratic game continues to be respected. however, we can

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

believe that two institutions not yet conquered by the socialist-trade union-
communist government, the Senate and the Constitutional Council, will be opposed
to changing the Constitution. And our people are sufficiently devoted to their
liberties as not to tolerate their being taken away.

Let the former government majority silence its quarrels. Let it know how to rec—
ognize its mistakes. Let it put the national interest before any personal ani-
mosity. Let it regain confidence in itself. Let it inspire new confidence. Let
it develop a doctrine and a strategy. Let it denounce any decision of the govern-
ment which is filled with threats for the future, with the vigilance and energy

of Cato and Elder who repeated, "Carthage must be destroyed." Above all, let it
find again and in depth the values which we expect to see it embody. Let it know
how to express them and to promote them. And the flowing tide which it missed
last spring, for the first time since 1958, will bring it again to the responsi-
bilities of power.

will the socialist experiment last for a long time, due to a clever correction of
its path, which will bring it toward social democracy? 0r, following on toward
the utopia of fundamental socialism, will it end by a sudden implosion, when it
encounters the shock of reality? In either case it will have had the great merit
of letting a good number of the French who put their trust in it to diasbuse them-
selves of their illusions.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 a. a. Groupe Express

5170
C50: 3100/83

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CAUSES OF CFDT-CGT 'PEWENT‘ RIVALRY REVIEUED
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 26 Oct 81 pp 35-36
LIrticle by Frederic Pens: “The Double Bidj'

Text] The left is marching ahead, united. the_band playing in front: the image
5 Pierre Maurgy‘s. But here we have the C67 Leeneral Confederation of Labor]
and the CFDT LFrench Democratic Labor Confederation? playing lots of wrong notes.
Two explanations: the internal difficulties of the two confederations and their
rivalry over the territory; the repercussions of a political game in which the
unions are playing the roles of both the relay and the outlet.

0n l5 October. at France-Inter. Edmnd Haire delivered a vigorous criticism of
the Hauroy government. A thnee-point disagreement: an energy policy that is
deemed too "productivist." and a dispute as to the recent government decisions
regarding nuclear energy; the system of adainistering nationalized corpanies.
which will lead to “nationalization"; and finally. the delay in working out the
“new rights of workers." Asking the government to “rectify the priorities“,
particularly on this last point, Edmond Maire stated: "The expression of trade
unionism, far from being an obstacle to government action, is one of the
conditions of change. I have sounded the alarm.“

'Edumnd Maire wants to walk faster than the music." replied Mr Naumy.

0n l9 October. the two men dined together at the Hotel Matignon. But scarcely
had he left the table. when lir Maire repeated. "He will not agree to march to the
prime minister's pace. no matter how good it is.“

By this move. the CFDT leadership intends to break away from its wholehearted
support of the government for the past 5 months. and to reappear in the eyes of
the rank-and-file as a fighting organization. At Renault. lately, unrest has
been evident amng the CFDT members. who have been "trapped" by the higher bids
made by the CGT. At the meeting of the national office of the CFDT on 8 October.
some members alerted their leaders to the feelings in the workshops. CFDT and
government reports were discussed again at the national council of the trade
union confederations which met at the end of the week.

The struggle for influence within the Socialist party. echoed in the Valence
congress of the past few days, also explains Mr Maire‘s outburst. liithin the CFDT

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Michel Rocard has many friends. Throughout the remarks of Mr Maire (who was
represented in Valence by Jacques Chereque, assistant secretary general of the
CFDT), one can find what could have been the motion for the Rocard faction, if
Mr itocard had chosen to present himself in an autonomous manner. One indication:
Mr Maire's sentence, wishing that in congress "they would discuss serious
matters, that is to say, in what situation the government will find itself a
year from now.“

Mr Maire's speech must also be analyzed in the light of the internal unrest in

the cal. The CGT's last confederal comittee meeting, at the beginning of the
month, was marked by the official announcement of the replacement of Georges Seguy
by Henri Krasucki at next June's congress, and by the display of disagreements
within the confederation.

In addition to the alarmist report by the treasurer, Ernest Beiss. on the fall in
membership in the last 4 years, the comittee heard two of its members, Jean-Louis
Hoinot and Mrs Christiane Gilles. both columnist members. speak out against the
policy of the CGT leaders, especially with regard to the refusal for union unity of
action. A refusal that was followed by their resignation on l5 October.

These troubles naturally lead to extravagant promises, in order to remobi'lize the
rank-and-file: thus the strike movements at Renault or at the SNCF E'rench

National Railroad Company. which also mean that the columnist party is holding

its union lever under pressure until the day it ceases to consider its collaboration
with the socialist govemment useful. These troubles are also leading Hr Maire

into raising his voice: in such a way as to remind people that the CFDT is a
welcoming structure for workers which could be rejected by a trade unionism that

is too closely linked to a political party.

COPYRIGHT : l98l “Valeurs actuelles"

11550
£50: 3100/102

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pourmu. UNITED rmcnou

LABOR PARTY LEADER'S PERFORMANCE REVIEWED

PM101257 London THE TIHES in English 10 Nov 81 p 11

[Editorial: “Hr Foot's Leadership")

[Text] The serious question concerning Mr Michael Foot today, the anniversary of
his election as leader of the labor party, is not sartorial but political. It is
not a matter of whether at the Cenotaph he looked like an out of work navvy, as
cruelly suggested by one of his backbenchers, but whether he begins to look like an
ex-psrty leader. Making every allowance for the horrendous difficulties which he
inherited, Mr Poot's record so far is disappointing to his supporters and his pros-
pects are bleak. While the prime minister and her government are less popular with
the electorate than any cabinet predecessors in polling history, Mr Foot and her
majecty's opposition are totally failing to capitalize on this opportunity; he is
personally even less popular than Hrs Thatcher.

During his brief reign-though with origins and causes long before it-the Labour
Party has begun to disintegrate electorally and internally. 30 recently a mighty
political force, having won four in the last six general elections and governed
Britain for 11 of the past 17 years, it now trails far behind the alliance, and in
some polls behind the conservatives, the flow of defections from labour shows no
sign of diminishing; were the left to triumph at next year's conference this flow
would become a flood. Throughout this cslamitous year, from his personal humilia-
tion at the "embley conference through the formation of the SDP to his party's
humiliation last month at Crydon, Hr Foot has never given any indication that be
grasped the true nature ofthe crisis facing him and the Labour Party. he seems to
believe that a leadership stance and rhetoric somewhat to the left of centre-a
weak mixture of George Lansbury and early Harold Wilson-~is sufficient to hold the
party together. This alone can explain why he recently used his casting vote to
defend the left'a control of the key committees covering home policy and party
organization with such predictable results last night; why he is positively promot-
ing Hr Benn's membership of the shadow cabinet, and why he has been so reluctant to
fight extremist organizations such as the militant tendency which operate indepen-
dently within and against the official party organization, presented as a strategy
for unifying the whole party, it is in fact mere appeasement of the left.

Hr Foot seems rooted in his own experience of 20 years ago when he led a minority

left wing which was firmly within the democratic socialist mainstream of labour

ideals. Now the left is sectarian, intolerant, anti-parliamentary. It would pre-

fer to drive out the moderates in order to control a smaller Marxist Party than to

share power in a bigger broad church party. It is well advanced in securing that

control changes in the rules for electing the leadership and for re-selecting HPs
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have shifted power to party activists on the left. These latter number no more

than 50,000 over the country as a whole and do not pretend to represent the views

of millions of moderate labour voters, but they have been able to take over the party's
organizatiOn because it is in fact rotten. Its individual membership has declined

Mr Foot is not young at 68 and if he does not feel the urgency he is unaware or if

to rescue his party and his reputation, he should hand over to another. Hr Hattersley,
Mr Healey, Mr Shore and Mr Varley (in alphabetical order) have each shown the necessary
courage.

If he is prepared to fight, he has perhaps one more year, until the next conference
at the latest, in which to r011 back the tide of extremism. He should launch and
vigorously pursue a full enquiry into the activity of the militant tendency. Prior

tary candidate of Mr Fatrick Hall or anyone else from that or similar organization.
He should campaign for greater participation by the membership in the affairs of
their constituency parties, including the operation of the principle of one man one
vote to which Mr Healey has become a belated supporter. He should openly join with
those in the party and especially in the trade unions who are working to secure a
moderate majority on the national exeCutive committee. He should aggressively defend
the parliamentary party from all its detractors on the left. He should announce now
his total support for Mr Denis Keeley as deputy leader and make it clear that if

Mr Benn successfully contests for this post next year he will himself resign.

COPYRIGHT: TIMES NER'SPAPERS LIMITED, 1981
C80: 3120/15

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CREDIT BANK'S LEVEQUE SHE'S NATIWALIZATION A3 'TBAGEDY'
Paris PARIS HATCH in French It Sep 81 p '67

[interview with Jean Maximo Leveque, president of Credit Commercial de
France, by Liliane Gallifet; date and place not specifie§7

guild-nation? What real change will nationalization bring to your bank,
since credit distribution and private banks are already largely controlled
by the state?

[Knsweg For us, nationalization is a tragedy. One must realize the dif-
ference between private and nationalized banks. Power is not one of our
trump cards. As a medium size bank, we must rank 110th in the world, 6th
in France. We are 10 times smaller than the Credit Agricole, 8 times smal-
ler than each of the nationalized banks. Our survival, and our prosperity,
we owe solely to the quality of service we offer.

[Questing would not a nationalized bank offer the same service?

[hovel-7 An innovative and competitive spirit is stimulated by the feeling
that you can rely only on yourself, and that no one will help you. That is
the key to our success. In recent years we have created jobs. Not so the
nationalized banks, which by contrast have reduced their personnel, and we
have brought in 890 million in receipts. A private bank must perform better
than a nationalized bank. If in the last few years the two systems have
behaved similarly, that is because private banks drove nationalized banks
to play the game of competition. To pour everyone into the same mold would
be most harmful. The day we are nationalized, we shall lose our soul, and
the day after, when the state--having nationalized 150 or 200 banks--amal-
gametes them, as is inevitable, the 001' will disappear. He are fighting
for our life.

[attesting Is it not too late? The principle of nationalization seems
definitively established.

[Knewej The principle has been announced, but oince then an ever growing
number of people in administration and, I hope, in government, have been

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

able to realize the faults in that principle. We are told, for example,
that better control of credit is desired. Why not then nationalize all
banks? th spare the Credit Agricola, mutual banks, local banks, and for-
eign banks? Have we a particular taint which makes our destruction neces-
sary? Credit control, money creation--nothing will be settled.

The problem is much more complex than is imagined by the authors of the
project.

The Present Nationalization Project is Incoherent and Inapplicable
zﬁuestion In what respects will your activities abroad be affected?

Zinewej? I do not ask myself that question, but rather anoth r: by what
right could the French government take control of our affiliates? Our ac-
tivities abroad are carried on by foreign personnel, in foreign currencies.
That has nothing to do with control of credit in France. To take them into
the project would risk ending up in litigious proceedings dangerous for
France.

Zﬁhestioé? You still hope to avoid nationalization?

[Ehaqu7 Yes. I must pay tribute to Messrs Mauroy and Delors for desig-
nating a representative before each private banking group to gather further
information on the nature of the problems. Today, the government is fully
aware of the realities concerning our bank, what we are. and what we have
achieved. I am hopeful that such understanding will lead it to modify the
project. There is no shame in retreating when a measure is ill-conceived,
and considering alternative solutions. The present project is so incoher-
ent that it is becoming inapplicable owing to the complications it entails.
1 wish to believe in the goodwill and objectivity of those who are working
on it.

[Questioﬁ7 Is nationalization of the banking system, in your View, a res-
ponse to technical, or to political considerations?

/Knsweﬁ7 Certainly not technical. Possibly political. In any case, there
is no justification whatever. The government has often cited the need for
alternatives. But that aim must be curbed the moment it incites the com-
mission of an irreparable blunder such as destroying an enterprise useful
to the country. Reference has also been made to the precedent of 19k5.
That was a very special time when the economy had been destroyed by the
war. There was no constitution, no balance of powers, no foreign trade.
Today, France is entegrated into a complex world economy, in which private
banks in no way constitute a political power. Let not our rulers in 1981
emulate the military who in 1939 were preparing for the 191k war.

Zﬁuestiqﬁ? Regarding compensation of your shareholders, do you fear they
will be robbed?

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ensues? There is great risk. You should be aware that for a number of
years France has developed principles of operation for the stock market.
If a group seeks to take control of another, it must offer a price much
higher than market quotations. and a method of payment acceptable to the
shareholders. The compensation plans now circulating do not respect these
principles. So the state would be the only entity not subject to the law
it imposes on others.

@uestiop? The trend seems to be towards a form of securities redeemable

in a maximum period of 15 years?

[A-nsweg That is unacceptable. It would be repaying the shareholders in
spurious coin.

[C—zuestiog Will you still be on the job 6 months from novﬂ

[Knswej Surely not. if the bank is nationalized. It is heartbreaking for
me to imagine that all we have built in 18 years could be annihilated.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

6145
cso: 3100/9

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL I FRANCE

NRITl-ln SHOWS COT AIMS 1'0 IDKINATE IN INDUSTRIES T0 38 NMIONALIED
Paris L'EG’RESS in French 25 Sep 81 p 106
ﬁrticle by Jean Francois Jacquier: "Jackpot Tactical?

[Text] With the pretext of putting its "mscle" at the
service of the government, the OGT is attempting son'-
quest of "nationalirable" firms.

"The Socialists' power comes from the ballot box. But since the election
they no longer have any force in the field. We, in the factories, have the
needed muscle to make change go forward." That reflection by Georges Gay,
CST leader in the Pechiney plant at Gardanne (Bouches-du-Rhone) and Commun-
ist town councillor as well as deputy mayor, tells much about the intentions
of Georges Seguy's union.

With the pretext of putting its strength at the service of the new govern-
ment, the massive CGT machine is starting up again. it its initiative,

most everywhere in France, we see an outbreak of localized conflicts with

no apparent connection except that they occur, essentially, in natioaalized
or nationaliaable firms. Though its leaders deny it, the GET pattern in
this sector appears systematic. Hatra, Renault, Alsthom-Atlantique (an af—
filiate of (BB [General Electric. Ciel), Dassault, MPH [expansion unknown].
Chnr‘oonnages de France, Rhone-Poulenc: on all fronts the battle is joined.

At Alsthom "the management's union-breaking plan" is denounced as "a real
provocation." At Metre, where the (XET is in the minority, the issue is to
obtain total nationalization of the group. At Dassnult, owner compensation
is refused. The miners, for their part, demand dismissal of General Manager
Jacques Petitmengin, accused of "sabotaging" the revival of coal production.
At Renault, semi-skilled workers at Sandouville (Seine-Maritime) harass the
management by work stoppages to obtain an assembly line slowdown. But they
also demand the right to participate in decision making, and an unprecedented
shop council has been elected.

The scenario is everywhere the same: a pretext, a mobilization of the base,
and an appeal to the minister concerned, to force him to take a stand.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All these actions, pursued with great fanfare, aim at a double objective:
to strengthen the position of the (ET, which is declining in the face of
CFDT inroads, and to occupy the terrain while awaiting final passage of the

nest .

Thus, while Georges Harchais and the PCP approve the government's policy
"without reservation" (see Jacques Roure article), the (ST offensive seeks
to expand the limits of nationalization.

The conflict which broke out 15 September at the Aluminium-Pechiney plant -
in Gardarme, Europe's largest aluminum oxide production center, is quite
revealing as to the tactics employed. "A few weeks before the launching of
the offensive," a worker relates, "(ET militants undertook a kind of indoc-
trination o! the personnel, by plying it with tracts on nationalization."

Then the news began to circulate of a 30,000 ton reduction in aluminum ox-
ide production decided on by the management of Pechiney-Ugine-Kuhlmann.

But the work force base hardly reacted, and nothing indicated a conflict.
On Monday 14 September the (ET, having the majority vote, asked the Force
0uvriere-which had a majority of seats on the worker-management committee--
for its agreement in organizing a meeting with management. The R) agreed.
But the very next day, entirely on its own initiative, without informing
the ZED-«and thus forestalling the Socialist group which was just then begin-
ing to learn of the production cut—the oer called a general workers’ meet-
ing for 10:30, during working hours and in violation of internal regulations.
Management's reaction was inevitable: it padlocked union premises. OGT
delegates, who had foreseen everything, then produced a motion calling for
token occupation of the plant and had it adopted by the 60—odd workers
present. In the hubbub, they carried a motion of no confidence in manage-
ment, which they accused of wishing to impede nationalization. They created
a provisional vigilance comittee composed exclusively of (XET members, all
of them also PCP members (a soviet?). They asked Jean Le Garrec, secretary
of state for public sector expansion, to create a commission to investigate
the machinations of Pechiney-Ugine-Kuhlmnn, and demanded a freeze on all "
decisions pending nationalization. And that in the presence of the region-
al press (HI 3, APP, LA MARSEILLAISE), which had been advised.

Taken by surprise, the Socialist group--not wishing to be left behind--won
the support or the Bouches-dumRhone Socialist Federation, and likewise ap-
pealed to Le Garrec, who in the end gave his backing. The noose was closed.
The OGT appeared the lone defender of workers' rights, and succeeded in
Waiting decisions by mnagement, though the latter is not yet nationalized
and can boast of having the government's support. It had hit the Jackpot.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"l'he Gardanne example has symbolic value." Georges Gay comments with satia-
faction. "In nationalizable time, there is e. power vacuum. He met occu-
py it." That, at least, is frank.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 e. a. Groupe Express

6111-5
080 : 3100/9 END

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY