FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10376

9 March 1982

japan Report
(FOUO 16/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclOsed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS l

9 Man

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 16/82)

CONTENTS

JLI TI CAL AND SOCIOLOGIC'AL

Caps Between Opposition Parties Continue 1b Widen
(Ten: Tsutsumi; THE JAPAN EwNOMIC JOURNAL. 16 Feb 82).......

lhsettled Political Situation Continues
(Kenji Kimhara; THE DAILY YONIURI. 12 Feb 82)................

'YOMIURI' Previews LDP Presidential Election
(YOHIURI SHIIBUN, 3-9 Dec 82, NIH“! KEIYAI SHIPBUN.

17 Jan 82)....................................................

Factions Rona
No Vice President of LIP

Anxiety Expressed Over JSP's New Executive Panel -
(Takehiko Takahashi; MAINIGII DAILY NEWS, 17 Feb 82)..........

Public Support of Defense Revisions Required
(Editorial; MAINIGiI DAILY NBIS, 17 Feb 82)

ooumuc

Trading Firms' Expectations Are High on Southeast Asia
(Jun Kusakn; JAPAN EWNOHIC JOURNAL, 16 Feb 82)...............

Opening khrket to Foreign Trade Discussed
(YONIURI sulmm. various dates)..............................

Japan, U.s. Trade Friction Increases Over Imports
(NIHCN KEIZAI SHIHBUN. 1 Feb 82)

Council lboomends Procedures on Improving Inport Inspection
(Editorial; JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL. 9 Feb 82) . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .

- a - [III - ASIA - 1.1.1 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

High 0.5. Import Tariff on Small Trucks liit
(YOMIURI SHIPBUN. 3 Feb 82)..........

ooooooooosoooooo-ooo

Isuzu To Supply Smll Passenger Cars to GM
(msaaki Sato; JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 9 Feb 82).. .......

Forecast for Small Car Battle: Long Term
(nmou KEIZAI SHINBUN, 4 Feb 82)

00....cos-ocucooooasalooo

Liberalized Naphtha Imports Run Into Difficulty
(NIKKAN KOCYO SNIMBUN, 29 Jam, 4 Feb 82)

Taxes Hit
Maction Against Demand

Concem Over Stagnation in Business Talks With USSR; Sanctions
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIDBLN, 21 Jan 82)............

ootooo-oooos

USSR Requests Bank loan Extension
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIDBLN, 4 Feb 82) .......

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDCY

U.S., Japan Nuclear Agreement Discussed
(Nlﬂw KEIZAI SHIPBLN, 8 Feb 82)

Canada Expected To Ease Nuclear Fuel Supp]
(YOMIURI SNIMBUN, 6 Feb 82).

mvelopment of Sea Bottom Resources Criticized
(NINON KEIZAISHIPBUN. 3 Feb 82)..........................

Lag Deplored
Protest To Be Lodged

Construction of New-Wpe (bnverter Reactor Pushed
(NIHm KEIZAI SHIMBUN. 22 Jan 82)........................

Hitachi Eyes Second Plant in America To Produce VISI's
(JAPAN ECGJOHIC JOURNAL, 16 Feb 82).

m1, Hestinghouse To Cooperate in Reactor Technology
(JAPAN EmNOMIC JOURNAL. 9 Feb 82).......................

Practical 1ypc 1.5 Micron Semiconductor laser Produced
(JAPAN EmNOMIC JOUINAL, 9 Feb 82).......................

Rapid Jump in 'Non-Weapon Certificates' Noted
(NIKKAN KOGYO SHIPBUN. 30 Jan 82)........................

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Problem of Small Information Processing Enterprises Noted
(Koichi Kobayashi; SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI, 9 Sep 81).......

Industrial Plant Exports Rapidly Increasing
(Kaizo Suzuki; JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 16 Feb 82)......

Hignly Efficient Photoelectronic Switch Developed
(JAPAN EmNOHIC JOURNAL, 16 Feb 82)....................

1,000-Hour Operation of PHD Generator Research To Continue
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 9 Feb 82)

Briefs
Servomotor for Robot
Uranium Enrichment (bnsortiun Studied

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SI’. 0VI.\

OLITICAL AND SOCIOLOG ICAL

PAPS BETWEEN OPPOSITIOR PARTIES CONTINUE TO HIM-2N

l'okyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 16 Feb 82 p 10

[Article by Tcruo Tsucsumi:

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO

1.1201155

The debut of the Japan's Socialist Party's
ni-iA leadership headed by Chairman lchio
Asukata who won his third term toward the
end at last year! seems to have further
indent-d the iiievitahle gaps among Oppon-
tion parties

The Socialists held a threetlay annual eon
\eiition from February 4 and selected nevi
leaders to work under ('hairman Asokatn As
I'\H'I'II'II. .t M'I'Illlh' rurkus developed met
the choice of the party‘s secretary-general
Lettists and middle-ot-thc-rtnders who
supported Asultata in last year's chow
ntanship election called for the selection of
Noboru Baba. a 56-year-old Virtual new lace
in party affairs Right-wing members put up
strong resistance to the choice on the
lollowmg three mapr reasons' ll The new
leadership should he of the lund which will
work [or the complete solidarity ol the party.
2- Selection “I llaha «all mean monopiiiiza-
tion at the party‘s leadership by the pro-Asu-
li.it;i groups as Masashi lshilushi has
already been chmvn for Vice presidency. Ill
llnlm is not an ItII‘JI chance for the party's
~i-i'ri-t.ir_i ni-iii-ralship. the wry sytiihol oi the
pain

The iiitt-rtu-ciiii- tuuorluar II‘IVN‘CII thi-
pru-Amtkalu groups and their ornaments
remained lllhnh‘t'd even by February G. the
LI‘I d.i_\ iil Ihi- .innual (’tan'lIIlﬂn. and the
right utimers refused to setMI any of their
memln-rs tn the new It'mIt‘l’hIllp The new
[\MIk-IIH It'iuIt‘lhItth. then-lore. comprises
‘uIt-l} (II the grout“ sumo" lulu III: t'lli'tlrtlltln

The debut III the "lap sidi-d" Socialist
haul-«ship has dealt a M'I’llllh “It!“ to the
.Litl't's rI'I.IIIHII\ \ulh Kimtrilii The two
Inﬁll" haw tor some now been to char
i iuiiu-i-.iti\~i- relations \klIII i-.ii Ii nlltt'r. hour“;
:uinllt tiit tiiul.ili1l a mun-pl Mr .I (‘ILIIIIIIIII
I'IiII'IlIlIII'III 'l'lu- tvm trtrlii-s .II\II lt.i\i-

1982 The Nihon Ketzat Shlmbunaha

"Gap Crows Among Opposition Part1es"]

u lwil .i‘ I link I\IIIL' up .III III!’ ”warm-iii

[Lil'll's I .ii.:I'.. ':-iIIi 'lli- .I.I|i.ttl| ultmili" I

Part) to the Democratic Socialist Party. the
New. Liberal Club and the Social Democratic
Federation

Fearing that the new Socialist leadership
\\ ill (humorously swerve tn the Mt. however.
Kiioieito inlornted the Socialists that II wmld
"keen" the regular Diet policy corsullation
meetings which it had held With the
Six-iahsts Kemeito’s action dealt a serious
blow to the joint struggle structure at the
tlpposnion parties in the Diet designed to
etlectwely cope with the (01an Liberal
Democratic Party.

At present. the Opposition parties control
only 212 seats in the House of Representative
as compared to the 187 seats controlled by
the Liberal Democratic Party. The debut at
the Socialist Party's new leadership
threatens to divide the Opposition camp.
already in an underdog position vis-a-vrs the
fUIlllK party. Into two separate groups - the
l'ottimunisl-Sncialtst group luving m lam-er
IIIIDN' seats and the muddle-ol-the-riuulers
Inn-mg 7‘) seats

As the LIII'I‘ilI Deiiiocratte I’arty 0M").\ a
clear mayirtty in the IIIIIISI.‘ til "(‘pﬁ‘hl'ﬂlil-
lives. it is inn pisitiim. at least theoretically.
to liirmulatir whatever legislatims it lilies In
practice. however. the ruling: party does not
usually risk courting the general puhlie‘s
Joni-r hy fillII‘lelIlm: Iculh'lnlltlﬂh strongly
opposed by mlltttrlly pat’ltes

The main point in the ruling party's lhet
mam-avenues is to somehow obtain the con-
sensus or taeit nod lrmn all or part of the
Uppiiisitiiiii camp The debut of the new
Iiwlc-rslitp ot the Stn'isilist Part? and the
N'MIIIJIII .whmts among the "mutton
p.iitir~ WI“ nuke it all the easier tor the
l.ilii-r.il “I'IIIII'I'JIIM' Party to suec-imlullt
ttt.itii5ilil.ili- Iltqunttiiin llll'lllIIl'l'\

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a... 2.2... .5... 5...... E... ........._o..:...
25...: 35. 3...... 2.... ..:.:.....c.. 3:85....
“35......

.23 «.52... :5... :32 3:25....
3:63.. .5 :5... :3. «2......» .3 32......
52.3.2. 52...... H255... r3552. .52.:
.2... .a 32...: .o a». 2.1.5:... :6... 5......
3...: <3: 5 =2... «3:.

9... 4253...... «2...... 5... :2 S... 2......
3.32.... 39.29... 23:39.5... .......:. £3...
2:... 3......5... a... z... . 3...... E z... 32......
2...: c. :8 2.... .2425... .E 1.1....
.51. :3: 2.5.3.5.... ===........ ....~.............
.8: E... ....:..:.7_«.: 2.3.... 2... cu.
........a.=... o: .35.... .c .335... :... 313:.
.............¢. >3. 0.. ES... 25...... 3.. .. .....
.............. r... ............. 35.3.... 9.6....

= .a 2.2.9... 5...... .. 5.. 52.5.2. 5....
72.3.; 3 .2.» 9:3....a....:.<.. 52...... 3...
E c<.........3.. . .. :.. 5...... ..:.......=..... .... s..."
3...... ..o 9...... =c....ﬁ.. ...;..x.....=a.=..<. 9...
3.3:... 52.... 3........=... ..................= .c 5......
2.7..

9:59.. a. .5........... 52:323.... 2.... 3...
5.... 15:5... 2... S... 5.2.3.. .5 S... 2..."...
an... 3:... a. S... 53...... 25.. 3...... a.
352...... .z 7.92.... ... 2... 0.. :53. r.
"5...... 5 ..... 425...... 5.2.3. .3 z... 7..

2:...
95...... 2.1.4.5.. 9.. 2...: .......m.........

 

 
 

 

 

r

.1" an"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'YOHIUKI' PREVIEHS LDP PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

Factions Form
Tokyo YOMIURI snmsun in Japanese 3-9 Jan 82
{hrticle: "LDP: Presidential Election Stirs FHCtiUnHI Campuig1"]
{3 Jan 82 p 37
[Iext7 l. A Dangerous Gamble

will it be the reelection of Suzuki or the election of a new party president? After
greeting the new year peacefully. the ruling LDP is expected to experience stormy
developments. for a change. focusing on the presidential election to be held in the
autumn. A fierce confrontation between the ruling party and the opposition parties
is expected in the Diet when it reconvenes on the 25th, but in its wake heated dis-
cussions will result from the involved intentions arising from among the various
LDP factions of Suzuki. Tanaka. Fukuda. Nakasone and Komoto in their struggle for
government leadership. Although "Suzuki's reelection“ is observed to be firmly
rooted, none of the factions possesses a decisive advantage. Furthermore. there is
the fluid element of the successive judgments in the Lockheed case, intimately
affecting the shifts in politics and depicting and undercurrent that is extremely
difficult to predict.

Strong Confidence in the Three-Faction Arrangement

”They call the Tanaka corps, but our number in the Lower House is just as large as
theirs. The Tanaka faction shouldn‘t be given any preferential treatment. Also,
weren't cabinet minister posts allotted to the Fukuda faction?“

Suzuki was speaking to Naganori Oyama, former director general of the Environment
Agency. and Iwazo Kaneko, former director general of the Science and Technology
Agency, both elders of the Koyu Kai of the Suzuki faction who were visiting the
prime minister at his private residence in Kyodo. Tokyo, at the close of the year.
Suzuki continued talking while being extremely disturbed about the rumors that

"the reshuffled cabinet of Suzuki is tantamount to government leadership by Tanaka.”

Because Kaneko. Suzuki's friend of more than 30 years' standing, had continually
cautioned him, "Don't think about your reelection. Actions revealing reelection
motives will only betray your vulnerability." Suzuki was indeed apologetic about
the reshuffle and party official selection. having ignored the restraints of
Kaneko and others in selecting Nikaido as secretary general-~an action symbolic of
entrusting the leadership of the party to the Tanaka corps--but on the other hand,
Suzuki has asserted that "as long as the three-faction arrangement of Suzuki,
Tanaka and Fukuda is firm, everything's fiane and there's no need to worry."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (ll-'FK'HI. l SF. UNIX

Both Nakasone. director general of the Administrative Management Agency, and
Komoto, director general of the Lcununic ?lanning Agency, ﬁfu interested in the
prime ministership, but their hands are tied with their containment in the cabinet.
On the basis of the past performance of the government. as long as the suppraparty
setup, called the three-faction arrangement. does not collapse, the proposition of
reelection during the presidentzai election in autumn is assured. Suzuki. who
showed his extraordinary confidence in his reelection by inference, committed an
uncalled for mistake during the compilation of the FY—82 budget right after that.

Successive Acts of lneptness During the Budget Compilation

When informed by Rokusuke Tanaka. chairman of the Policy Affairs Research CounCil,
that "Mr Doko is considering resigning,‘ Suzuki apparently did not grasp the
seriousness of the matter. Even after it was confidentially agreed between Tanaka
and Jinhachiro Hanamura, vice president of the Federation of Economic Organizations,
who had understood the position of Doko, the chairman of the Second Ad Hoc Commis-
sion on Administrative Reform, in refraining from tampering with the retirement
pension reserve fund from among the tax increases for industries, for some unknown
reason, Suzuki emphasized tax reinforcements and incurred rho wrath of the business
world. Although they were displeased with the breach of public promise of ”fiscal
reconstruction without tax increases,“ the added fuel to the fire was the addi-
tional issue of deficit-covering government bonds.

To the "rash act' of Suzuki trampling on his own cabinet's broad principle of
changing the structure of reliance on government bonds in order to seek fiscal
reconstruction, criticisms erupted within the party, even forcing Kiichi Miyazawa,
chief cabinet secretary, to apologize to the party headquarters.

“The fate of the cabinet was at stake with this problem. but everyone appears to
have forgotten it. Good to have a stable majority." 50 saying, close associates
of the prime minister heaved a sigh of relief at the abatement of the affair, but
there is no denying that a bitter aftertaste was left with the party and financial
world. As reflected in the remarks of Shosai Hyuga, president of the Kansai
Economic Federation, about “a freewheeling consistency,“ and Yoshihiro Inayama,
president of the Federation of Economic Organization, about “the posture of a
blundering government.‘ leaders of the financial world showed an unprecedentedly
cold reaction.

According to close assoc1ates of the prime minister: ”Former Prime Minister Tanaka

is saddled with the Judgment in the Lockheed case in the autumn, and he will support
the reelection of Suzuki. Nakasone in all likelihood will not be able to maneuver.

So it boils down to Remote and former Prime Minister Fukuda, who shows signs of a

comeback as head of the government, but as long as no Change occurs in the balance
of strength within the party. Suzuki‘s reelection is assured.”

with this analysis, the Suzuki faction will rely on the strategy. where possible. of

negotiating for the right number for his presidential reelection, but his successive
acts of ineptness have left his members in great shock. It has been reported that

Oyama remarked with a deep audible sigh at a gathering that "reelection is a
backbreaking task.“

Suzuki greeted his second New Year's Day as prime minister and now is pressed with
regrouping the forces for his reelection. Together mainly with Oyama and kuniyoshi

FOR OFFICIAL PSI-i ONLY
Saito. the former chief cabinet secretary, both of whom hold the leadership roles
within the faction since the cabinet reshuffle, Suzuki will begin immediately to
meet with the younger members to gain their cooperation by settling the frequently

recurring problems arising from the intrafactional squabbles. such as the rivalry
between Kiichi Miyazawa and Rokusuke Tanaka.

Suzuki has stated that to achieve reelection, above all, ”there must be unification

of the factions for the presidency.“ However, the approaches for Suzuki are by no
means easily accessible.

The denial of Mutsuki Kato for a cabinet post and the deep-seated grudge held
against government control by the Suzuki-Tanaka collaboration have led former
Prime Ministers Fukuda and Niki to promptly issue an ominous forecast “that

portends earth-shaking upheavals in 1982." And undeniably Komoto is secretly
hiding tin» to resign from his post.

now Will Judgment of the Lockheed Case Affect Politics

Even Nakasone. who believes that "Suzuki's reelection cannot be realized with Kakuei
Tanaka's support only" may have reasons to say so, and by hinting at his resignation
along with that of Doko and as a cabinet member indirectly criticizing the addi-
tional issue of deficit—covering government bonds, he has given the impression of
assuming an aloof position.

Even with government policies, there is no bright outlook for economic management.
which as a foundation for fiscal reconstruction is shaky, and there are no signs
that the foreign diplomatic relationships, such as the U.S.-Japan and South Korea-
Japan talks that have been tactlessly undertaken since last year. will improve
expeditiously. As for administrative reforms, on the eve of launching a full-scale
inquiry into the management structure of public corporations such as the National
Railways Corporation, one of the influential members remarked with extreme coldness:
"I do not have the courage to execute it for Suzuki.‘ The smoldering opinion even
among those close to Suzuki is that ”business considerations should be subtly sub-
stituted for the administrative reform line.“

Of course. the biggest hurdle is the series of judgments in the Lockheed case that
will continue starting in the latter part of January, and their effect on the

political situation. The eyes and ears within the party will be focused especially
on the swing of the Tanaka verdict, which is expected to be handed down in the
autumn, and pandemonium will occur in the political world if a verdict of "not
guilty“ is declared for former Prime Minister Tanaka. Although an opti‘istic View
prevails. such as that of an elder of the Suzuki faction who remarked: 'This is
not only Suzuki's problem; rather, a centripetal action will operate within the

party to solidify into a supraparty arrangement,’ but there is no guarantee that
Suzuki's gamble of entrusting the key to reelection totally to the number and
strength of the Tanaka faction will, in one stroke, not go against him.

{7| Jan 82 p g?

['n'nxi/ 2. A Concealed Plot

An Overflow of New Year's Day Well-Wishers

Throughout New Year's Day at the Mejiro residence of former Prime Minister Tanaka,
an overflow crowd of well-wishers from the political, business and official worlds
visited his office. which has been expanged during the latter part of the year.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIR ()H-H l\| l \I' “VLS

“ihe number of patrons paying respects to Tanaka did not drop. even this year.
Nay, the number increased!‘

with his left hand holding a highball. his right hand raised lightly at shoulder

height and shouting "Hi whiiq in his familiar pose, Tanaka swept his eyes over the
waves of New Year's Day well-dissers, and he was in 1 jovial mood all along.

This is finally the year that Tanaka will face the crucial moment as a politician.
It has been 6 years since his arrest on 27 July 1976. The sentence recommendation
by the prosecution for the Marubuhz-route defendants will be made this spring. and
the verdict for the first trial is expected this autumn. at which time the grilt 0r
innocence of defendant Tanaka will be known. On the other hand. in the LDP, with
the expiration of the presidential term in November and the issue of either the
reelection of the incumbent, Prime Minister Suzuki, ur the emergence of a new
president, furious infighting is expected to occur with the new leaders and
infuuehtial individuals within the party, pivoting around Tanaka and Fukuda, both
formerly prime ministers.

As pointed out by EiLchi Nishimuru, former party vice president. when he said
"Tanaka's mind is preoccupied with his trial," all of Tanaka's energies are directed
on how best :9 defend himself in the Lockheed trial and how to gain his acquittal.
Even the refutation of the "Enomoto alibi” was merely one of trial and error to
Tanaka.

“The Lockheed trial is a political plot. We will remain united and fight until chief
Tanaka is fully restored." close associate Tatsuo Ozawa. former minister of welfare.
boldly said in public.

with a following of 106 people from both the Upper and Lower Houses. "Tanaka's

Corps" has continued to grow like a living creature into a hugh force. with

strength in numbers a: a background. with Susumu Nikaido as secretary general.

Noboru Takeshita as deputy secretary general, Gen Tamura as chairman of the Diet
Policy Committee and YOShLO nayashi as director of the Finance and Accounting Bureau.

and even holding a firm grip on the nucleus of the LDP--"they are all there for the
sake of Tanaka," according to a leader of the Suzuki faction.

One night during the closing ﬂaw; of th: cabinet reshuffle which was set for

30 November last year, NiSJldh saietly gathered the trustworthy ”loyal retainers."
former Justice Miniseer Yuichi Gun. Takeshita, Ozawa and former Minister of Home
Affairs Masanaru Cotoda, at a downtown restaurant. Nikaido's selection as
secretary general had already been confirmed at that time.

Trusted Friends Promise Unity

"Next year will be crucial for us, with the Lockheed verdict and the presidential

election. We must see to it that the Tanaka faction and the party are not
rattled. I will do my best and 1 ask for your cooperation."

Nikaido spoke in behalf of Tanaka. and his request for the invaluable cooperation
of the trusted friends was made to strengthen the Tanaka faction. Tanaka also
agreed that “unity within the faction is of paramount importance.“ Tanaka and
Nikaido were busily occupied straightening out differences that had arisen as a

FOR Ul-‘Flf'Ml. USE ONLY
FUR ()H-K'l \l. l SI" "\l \

consequence of the cabinet reshuffle, such as when dissension arose between the
younger members of the faction and the group including Shin Kanemaru. former
director general of the Defense Agency who is related to Takeshita, on the cabinet
entry of Minister of Transportation Tokusaburo Kosaka.

Tanaka shook hands with Kanemaru when the latter visited the Nejiro residence on
20 December with a humble bow: "Mr Kanemaru, I fully understand your feelings. I
admire you for holding your temper in silence."

On one hand, at the year-end party of the secretary club of the Tanaka faction held
on 10 December. Nikaido lauded Takeshita with such remarks as: ”Unlike a dummy
like me, ﬁr Takeshita is one who fully comprehends the subtleties of affairs" and
"Mr 7axeshita is the de facto secretary general and I am his deputy." in reality
the bulk of party problems are assigned to Takeshita.

aegis With a Two-Pronged Operation

According to an explanation by a leader of the Tanaka faction: "The long-range
strategy of Mr Tanaka was concealed in the plan for the appointment of Secretary
General Nikaido and Deputy Secretary General Takeshita. Suzuki accepted the plan."

"if the first trial verdict in the Lockheed case is 'not guilty,‘ that's fine. In
the case of 'guilty.‘ the party will be confronted by Secretary General Nikaido. who
will make every effort to minimize the impact. He will hold his ground if Fukuda,
Director General of the Economic Planning Agency Komoto and others should issue a
challenge: at any rate. preparations will be made for both war and peace. Secure
Suzuki's reelection and then strike out at the double election of the Upper and
Lower Houses in the summer of 1983."

This sort of broad outline is being fashioned in Tanaka's mind, and it is reported
that placing election expert Takeshita as deputy secretary general and retaining

the post of the director of the Finance and Accounting Bureau were included in his
deliberations and foresight.

it was in July 1972 that Tanaka became prime minister at the young age of 54. and
this marks the 10th year since then. The gray on his head has increased. This is

the year of judgment, of acquittal or conviction. that will determine whether the
Tanaka residence will enjoy the same kind of festivity on New Year's Day next year.

/3 Jan 82 p 37

{iex57 3. Regimentation Like the Military

Patterned After Tanaka's Corps

Former Prime Minister Fukuda has been bursting with enthusiasm, since after the
cabinet reshuffle on 30 November last year up to the present. Pukuda's surprising
change to an energetic appearance was observed at the year-end party of the Pukuda
faction at a downtown restaurant on 16 December 1981.

it is reported that Fukuda made his declaration before close to 70 Diet members of

his faction: "Knotty problems will occur from month to month in 1982. it could be
a year of 'major upheavals in the country.‘ I ask one and all to do your utmost.“

7

FOR 0FFN1AI.USE‘)NLY
Because. for reasons of his own, Fukuda always pressed for party reforms, vehemently
remonstrated aqains; power action by large factions and was always composed at
gatherings of this sort in tne past. the younger Diet members were overjoyed and.
for a change, displayed their enthusiasm at the splendid party that night.

“Periodically, at least once a month. even if it is a strain, members of our faction
should gather as we have tonight and discuss matters for mutual understanding "

The members drew close to Fukuda, and it is reported that the decision to meet four
times a year was made that evening.

Prior to that gathering, Pukuda had strongly urged Deputy Chairman of the Executive
Council Shiokawa, a former minister of transportation, and others to strengthen

the structure of his faction. Patterned after the organization of the Tanaka
faction, he created the "Counselors Club.“ consisting of 10 Lower House and 8 Upper
House members, among orher activities. A ranking member of the Tanaka faction
welcomed the moves by remarking: “This shows that Mr Pukuda has finally acknowl-

edged the importance of factional actions. The Pukuda faction should not remain
idle while the Tanaka faction keeps growing."

why did Fukuda succumb to the idea of strengthening factional activities to which
he had strorgly objected in the past? It is not difficult to surmise that one of
the biggest reasons was the humiliation that he had to "yield to those having
decisive powers" which came after he had remarked that “power attained only
through sheer numbers is problematical' and after he had been strongly critical
of the "cabinet reshuffle" by the leadership of the Suzuki and Tanaka factions.

Focusing on Developments After August

The reason Prime Minister Suzuki insisted on the selection of Nikaido as secretary
general was "clearly in preparation for his reelection as party president,“ accord-
ing to Deputy Chairman of the Executive Council shiokawa. Not to be overlooked is
Fukuda's strong awareness and feeling of crisis that the main route of the Tanaka
faction is being secured by the present executive staff with Nikaido at the top.

Deputy Secretary General Takeshita and Chairman of the Diet Policy Committee
Tamura.“

And as Fukuda indicated, successively scheduled this year are such important events
as the verdict on individuals in All Japan Airways involved in the Lockheed case.
econsmic friction abroad, primarily with the United States, and the prosecution's
recommendation that former Prime Minister Tanaka be sentenced. which will surely
rock the national political scene. In the analysis of Fukuda's close associates.
during these developments. public opinion critical of Suzuki's government will
mount, dissatisfaction with government leadership will arise resulting in the
dissolution of the Diet and the resignation of the prime minister, and what will

happen after August is anybody's guess." Without doubt, this faction will act
swiftly in preparation for this turmoil.

Then how will Fukuda react when confronted by such a momentous situation? From the
standpoint of having been called “The Pair-Haired Boy of the Shows Era" and "The
Postwar Saionji.‘ following which as the "Genro," will he try to exert his influence
on the government in power? Or will he rely on his much-awaited theory that has

FOR OFFICIAL I'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!)

been consistently discussed as an “undercurrent" in the political world, and in one
stroke seek a comeback as the prime minister? Pukuda has asserted that ”there will
be no preliminary presidential election,” but in the event either the preliminary

election or the decisive presidential election is held in November, will he support

Director General of the Economic Planning Agency Komoto, whose friendship with him
has deepended?

As for the presidential election, it is only natural that interest will be focused
within the LDP on the many selective options open to Fukuda.

Mentor or Restored Leader

“Although he has openly stated he has no thought of grabbing the reins of govern-

ment, this is not altogether the truth. He has both the urge to withdraw to become
a mentor and the urge to be restored as the prime minister.‘

The fact is that intermediate Diet leaders who are close to Fukuda have not
disavowed these observations.

Again this year during the New Year's holiday, Pukuda leisurely enjoyed golfing at
the hotel in Miyazaki.

"I sank a 13-meter putt last year and so this year I will try to sink a 15—meter
putt."

Fukuda spoke of golf to express his bubbling political spirits, but from what he and
his close associates have said, from the circumstantial evidence of strengthening
his faction and from the appraisal of Fukuda by former prime minister Kishi that
"Fukuda is peerless in the political world for insight and capacity," the plain

fact is that he has the attributes required to enter the troubled political waters
and he should enter them.

Although Pukuda strongly demanded the cabinet entry of Nutsuki Kato, who was called
a "gray" official because of his Lockheed connection, and received a blow to his
prestige when a Suzuki faction leader caustically remarked, “It is not like Fukuda,
who has trumpeted for clean government," there is no change in the fact that Pukuda
is one of the pillars supporting the Suzuki government. Furthermore, considering
that Fukuda is the only strongman who is a match for former Prime Minister Tanaka,
from the standpoint of political capacity and career, and as commented by a young
member of the Fukuda faction that “Mr Fukuda is one who rides the portable
palanquin and not one who carries it into battle,“ Pukuda's movements which can
sway the stormy political situation have concealed elements that cannot be over-
looked .

{6 .Ian 32 p 2;
[Text/ 4. A Cartel
Pleased at Remaining in His Post

"Thankful for having him remain in the cabinet.” "Not a day passes without Mr
Kmoto's name being seen in the mass media.‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

A gathering or intermediate leaders and young nwmbers of the Komoto faction was

held at a restaurant in downtown Tokyo in late December of last year. Director
General of the EconomLC Planning Agency Komoto has invited them to dinner, which he
rarely did. so they couls meet and talk, but he did not show up at all because he
was busy attending successive meetings related to business and finance. Yet no one
complained and one attendant remarked on leaving: 'I had a good time at the expense
of hardworking Mr Komoto.”

it can be said, according to Komoto, that "the biggest government topics that must
be confronted“ are Japan's economy saddled with such problems abroad as trade
friction with the United States and Europe, at home with fiscal reconstruction and
business sluggishness, and :he response to the people's request for a reduction in
taxes--a cry which is heightened by the day.

in these circumstances. Komoto, who refused to retire from public service during the
cabinet reshuffle and remained as a statesman who understands living economics. left
a deep impression of his tremendous capabilities with his overseas economic poli-
cies, tne compilation of the FY—BZ budget, etc. According to the laudatory descrip~
tion by assocxates oi Komoto, in the final analysis, Prime Minister Suzuki, who

had been yielding to Finance Minister Watanabe, was forced to accept Komoto‘s
positive economic theory and the theory on the necessity of tax reductions, and

the same Watanabe. who had the prime minister in the clutch of his hands, dis—
patched Finance Ministry staff personnel to Komoto for explanations, and as a

result of these actiVLLSes, Komoto's reputation and his proposals carry a tremendous
amount of "weight" within the government and the LDP.

One Should Try uis Luck at Least Once

Concerning the post of prime minister sought by Komoto, this is the year he might
be faced with a do-or-die sitiiziss. At age 70, he should "try his luck at least
once," says former Prime Minister Miki. and the presidential election is his last
chance. He cannot help but "make a dash for it in the autumn." according to

Naozo Shibuya, former minister of home affairs. Even the consolidation of the
Komoto faction as a political body under the name of the “New Policy Research
Association” on the first of the year can be said to have been undertaken to remove
the ”KomOto private shop“ label pinned on by a leader of thw Suzuki faction. in
preparation for the unification of the faction.

Hut the path for the realization of Komoto as prime minister is “extremely difficult
considering the present conditions within the party," opined a leader of the Tanaka
faction. Although there was a clash with former Prime Minister Fukuda over the
refusal to select for the cabinet gray official Mutsuki Kato. chairman of the
party's National Organization Committee, during the cabinet reshuffle in November

of last year, the "Suzuki government“ is unshakeable for the present with its
alignment with the Tanaka and Fukuda factions. Having been bound to the dynamics
of large factionalism and having continued to take a cooperative stance with Prime
Minister Suzuki on his policies to protect the constitution, overall security
guarantee policy, etc, when and how will Komoto split from the “Suzuki government"

and challenge Suzuki's leadership?

Broadly speaking, two analyses prevail within the faction. One is the theory of

Suzuki's self-destruction. The other is the theory of policy differences among
Komoto. Suzuki and the rest of the candidates for prime minister. With a bit of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wishful thinking, a leader of the Komoto faction remarked that with the first theory,
"regardless of the intentions of Tanaka and Pukuda to support the Suzuki government.

Suzuki himself will come to realize the limits of his capacity as leader and with-
draw after this term.“

Regarding the second theor. with arguments on policy differences, Suzuki has drawn
the analysis that 'inevitably policy discussions on the people's level will be held

on the performance in the formal report of the regular session of the Diet, the
Second Ad Hoc Commission on Administrative Reiorm and the operations in the com-

pilation of the PY—BJ budget which is focused on tax reductions.

"In the event the problem of policy selection is submitted to the people, factional
strength will not be a consideration," according to factional leader Heisuke Hani.

Emphasize Differences By Actively Participating

Although called the "prince who never smiles" and the ”taciturn fellow,“ Komoto

has been seen conspicuously recently in active conversation at cabinet meetings
and at other related gatherings. This sort of more can be considered to be part

of tue strategy to contrast the rivalry and the differences in policies between
Komoto and Director General of the Administrative Management Agency Nakasone, as
well as others. For sure, there is reason to see why Suzuki's associates and the
Tanaka faction are so sensitive to the warning, 'Be cautious with Komoto's remarks."

Komoto is never deceptive when discussing the future of the present government. But
judging from the moves for rapport with Fukuda which is quietly underway, and the

close association with Ichiro Nakagawa, the director general of the Science and
Technology Agency, Minister of International lrade and Industry Shintaro Abe and

other new leaders, in the event the political world is shaken up at the time of
the first trial verdict of former Prime Minister Tanaka, unmistakably Komoto will
have the intention to stake his reputation in the political arena.

Hill the presidential election in November be decided by negotiations or by public
election? At this stage a conclusion cannot be drawn, but it is common knowledge
that Konoto will surely raise his banner.

As to the dying possibility of a preliminary presidential election, some within
the faction are hopeful that, as former Minister of Transportation Kinji Moriyama
asserted, "The possibility of a preliminary election exists.“

The 1982 political scene might possibly witness big waves when komoto breaks his
silence and starts moving.

{5 Jan 82 p 37

{'5er s. Troubled-Filled Spring

Number One Candidate of the Post—Suzuki Bra
"Do you have any good ideas?"

It was one evening in December last year, right after the cabinet reshuffle, that
Director General of the Administrative Management Agency Yasuhiro Nakasone asked
this of a friend whom he had not seen for awhile. The conversation naturally
shifted to Nakasone's strategy in taking over the reins of government.

11

FOR OFFICIAL IESF. ONLY
FOR UFFK1AI.F§E()ALY

His friend asked: “Isn't the Tanaka faction going to be allied with you?"
Nakasone replied: “Well. the.e‘s no guarantee.“

His friend continued: “Firsr of all, shouldn't you seriously tackle the issue of
administrative reforms? The cancer among these is the National Railways Corporation.
Conduct a searching inquiry into the National Railways and you will be credited with
the achievement. Other avenues will open up from there."

Although pointed out by ﬂasaharu Gotoda of the Tanaka faction as “the natural
number one candidate of the post-Suzuki era," Nakasone has not been able to take

a positive outlook. This uncertainty was evident in the conversation with his
friend. With his support of Ohira during the passage of the non-confidence motion
of the Ohira cabinet which led to the double election 2 years ago. the basic
strategy of tho Nakasone faction has been for coalition with the mainstream forces
of Ohira. which later became the Suzuki faction, and Tanaka.

Although some dissatisfaction has existed with the cabinet reshuffle and selection
of party officials last year, within the party the foundation of the Suzuki govern-
ment, which is supported by the two former prime ministers, Tanaka and Pukuda,

does not appear to be easily shaken. The Tanaka faction, which Nakasone is depen-

dent on, is fighting desperately to shake off the derogatory effects of the Lockheed
case in order to remain solidified, and winning over its consensus for 'Nakasone

after Suzuki" will surely take time.

At the Administrative Reform Committee of the Upper House in late November of last
year, Nakasone emphasized that "We must units as one body with Prime Minister Suzuki
as a matter of life and death, until the final report of the Ad Hoc Conmdssion on
Administrative Reform in March 1983." After that, in typical manner, he expressed
his inner feelings with the haiku roe: of Kairyo, pupil of Basho: “Go, go until you
fall flat on your face on the Plains of Ogi."

"That poem means that Suzuki's reelection is good. with the present state of affairs
within the party. we are in no position to force the issue." Associates of Nakasone
have their views. As long as the prospects of a short-term decisive battle aimed

at the presidential election this autumn does not unfold. one can foresee a position

of dealing with medium- and long-range strategies, based on the premise of Suzuki's
reelection.

“Absorbed in Administrative Reform" Again This Year

As to the move of Director General of the Economic Planning Agency Toshio Komoto,
who will compete in the post-Suzuki era. a Nakasone faction leader gave his inter-
pretation that ‘Komoto is a businessman who fully calculates the advantages and
disadvantages. He will not rashly appear before the public election for the presi-
dency and challenge Suzuki. There is every indication that the presidency will be
decided through negotiation.'

It seems Nakasone's thoughts are concentrated on ”being absorbed in administrative

reform" again this year. and although he might be criticized to some extent, admin-
istrative reform is the only means for him to pave the way.

The following views also prevail within the faction. "Poland is in a state of
internal war, and this depicts the severity of international affairs. Criticism

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. OS”

is mounting over whether allowing Japan to be the only country living in luxury

is right or not, and strong voices are being raised to seek an increase of the
defense strength. Even taking the single issue of the additional deficit-covering
government bonds in the FY-el supplementary budget, the cry within the party is
that Suzuki is not dependable. Then gradually the protest will be: 'Is Suzuki's
reelection necessary?'”

How will Nakasone react in the event the political situation changes because of an
upheaval? How will he cope with Suzuki's strategy of containing him in the cabinet,
and what about his entry in the presidential race? He may be forced into selecting
from complex options.

Study Group Consisting of Prominent Younger Members

”Government control is doubtful if the impression conveyed is intrafactional weak-"
ness. Let us gather at our headquarters to strengthen our unity.”

These rallying remarks were made by Sosuke Uno, former director general of the
Defense Agency. and Tadashi kuranari, former director general of the Economic Plan-

ning Agency. both of the Counselors Club, at the general meeting of the Nakasone
faction at year-end, which was also the last meeting for the year.

The bulk of the young Diet members of the Nakasone faction with a record of less
than five terms belong to the “Onchi kai,“ a policy group led by Finance Minister
Michio Hatanabe, whose political star has been rising as one of the new leaders,
and this move has conveyed the impression within and outside the party that
ﬂakasone's faction lacks unity. As a result, the young Diet members agreed to
exercise discretion when participating in the “Onchi Kai" and related study groups.
The faction will form its own study group, principally for the young members, this
spring.

A Nakasone faction leader who is a member of the “Onchi Kai" remarked that it should
be considered as a small organization and not as an intermediate-size organizational
force. Although participation in the regular meetings of the "Onchi Kai" study
group is expected to drop, some observers are doubtful of the effectiveness of the
pressure exerted on the members.

Whenever he finds time, Nakasone is seen painting. Right now he is painting
Mt Kamuro in Hakone. “When will it be finished? It will be like the unfinished
symphony," laughed Nakasone.

while eyeing Komoto, who is strengthening his alliance with Pukuda and the new
leaders, what sort of sketch will Nakasone draw of government leadership and
political power?

{E Jan 82 p 37
[iex5; 6. Signs of Sprouting
Successive Dilemma From Containment

Although this is the new year of the 1982 fluid political world. none of the new
leaders shows any sign of promise to ontsiders. At the time of the cabinet reshuffle

and selection of party officials in late November of last year, they were heralded
as "New leaders march abreast" and "One straight line sideways." and somewhat the

arrival of a new era was the feeling. 13
A new leader of junior rank offered this explanation. ”Contrary to the mood. thr
restoration and intensification of the LDP's dncientregime (reference to the old

system before the French revolution) took priority, and the individual was forced
to exert all his energies in the duties of his assigned post. and besides being
drawn away from engaging in 'actional functions. his exposure to the political
limelight was minimized. Some are well known but have no record of accomplishments.
while others have accomplished quite a bit for the party but have never been recog-
nized: at any rate, the new leaders are not of the caliber possessing both name and
career.‘

A month ago, just after completion of the cabinet reshuffle, Rokusuke Tanaka, chair-
man of the Policy Affairs Research Council. received an ultimatum two or three times
from Kuniyoshi Saito, former welfare minister and a leading counselor of the ‘Kochi

Kai" of the Suzuki faction.

"Rokusuke, you have finally been appointed to the important past that you coveted.
It's about time you had the bunch of capricious elders quit attending the meetings

of the disreputable New Generation Research Association."

The ﬂew Generation Research Association which Rokusuke Tanaka presides over is the
source of power that cleared the way for his rapid promotion to chairman of the
Policy Affairs Research Council. It was only natural for Tanaka to balk. However,
in light of the strong measures ordered by Prime Minister Suzuki utilizing Saito as
spokesman. the office of the New Generation Research Association in Takagi Cho has
remained locked since last year.

In a similar action, Rokusuke Tanaka's rival, Chief Cabinet Secretary Kiichi

Miyazawa, stepped down as head of the ﬂirakawa Kai at its general meeting held in
late December of last year.

As if staged in concert. the leading younger members of the Nakasone faction who had
formed the nucleus of the Onehi Kai, which was led by Finance Minister Michio
Hatanabe, pressured partly by the faction leaders, agreed to exercise discretion

in attending the Onehi Kai. Faction leaders believe that "the Onchi Kai will
practically cease operating after New Yearfs."

Admiration for the Prime Minister's Performance

Although differences in makeup exist. the various policy groups which give the
imprhssion of being factions of the new leaders are being forced to withdraw.

Amid these developments. having formed his small faction as an outgrowth of a policy
group and supposedly able to act independently, Director General of the Science and
Technology Agency Ichiro Nakagawa, although stating that he ”greeted the new year
without any change,“ in reality does not have peace of mind. According to an outside
source, at the time of the reshuffle, when Nakagawa was asked to remain at the post,
he was threatened that “if you do not remain in the cabinet. your factional repre-
sentation will be nil; a nonfaction individual will replace you.” All the new
leaders. who have been bottled up in the cabinet. are forced to be reserved in their
speech and conduct. "Had I retired from public service....' "Yet I must regard

Suzuki either as a wizard in personnel selection or a crafty person....'

The same holds true for Hiyazawa and senior ranking Shintaro Abe, minister of inter-
national trade and industry. and Noboru Takeshita, deputy secretary general.

14

FOR OFFICIAL (SSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'Sli ONLY

Abe's recommendation of his confidant Hutsuki Kato, chairman of the National

Organization Committee, for cabinet entry was rejected and although he was supported
by a”iu§ but bubbling Takeo Pukuda, former prime minister, the difficult post he
assumed can be damaging if errors are committed. he has confided that: ”It is a
devotion to public duty on a day-to—day basis.‘ 0n the other hand, Takeshita is
under close scrutiny by Secretary General Nikaido, who is said to be the alter ego
of former Prime Minister Tanaka. As for Ganri Yamashita, former chairman of the

Standing Committee for house Management, ”He is only a handyman for the faction,“
according to Tatsuo Ozawa, former welfare minister.

Trouble lf Fukuda and Komoto Should Act

The new leaders, who attracted the eyes and ears of the people as the 'changeover to

the new generation” during the double election of both Houses 1 and 1/2 years ago,
seemingly appear to be in a bottled-up situation. Under these restrictions, a

situation of political storm is not likely during the presidential election to be
held toward the end of the year.

But according to a new leader: "Nothing can be done right now, so slowly but surely

we are nurturing our basic strengths. such as organizing booster clubs and estab-
lishing fund raising routes, and we are just awaiting the first trial verdict of
former Prime Minister Tanaka.‘

Putting aside Takeshita, Yamashita, Rokusuke Tanaka and others who are allied with
the mainstream forces, many new leaders exist who are close to Fukuda and Toshio

Komoto. If Fukuda, who is biding his time for "signs of a major upheaval in the
country." or Komoto, who shows indications of making a challenge in the presidential
election in November, should create some action in the political cauldron as a
result of the Lockheed case...."

Then at that time the movements of the new leaders will unmistakably be one of the
focuses of the political situation. For sure, there are some young leaders who
have already focused their attention on this possibility.

Although they are said to be in a state of containment, in substance the new leaders

want to destroy the existing order and they have fluid aspirations. In that
respect, their movements this year can be said to be full of signs of sprouting.

1; Jan 82 p 2?
{_ext; 7. Outlook
Normally a Fluid Year

Public election of the party president in November; before that, a series of ver-
dicts in the Lockheed case; the full-scale study of administrative and fiscal

reforms/ perplexing economic operations; U.$.-Japan friction on defense and trade
issues.... The normal prediction without speculation is for a "fluid year" and
with "signs of a major upheaval" just as former Prime Minister Fukuda announced.

But Prime Minister Suzuki for some reason is extremely aggressive.

It is reported that he related his private thoughts to an LDP Diet member during a
New Year's Day visit.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"I am not extremely fond of having government power. Should someone appear to make
a challenge for the office, I will step down. I wonder if someone confident enough
to say he is 'destined to be the country's leader' will appear?"

This is the year that the president and the Suzuki government will be adjudged for
the first time. Parts of Suzuki's d clarations reveal the expedient strategy of
shipping the public election of the president, if possible, and of succeeding in
the reelection by proposing supraparty unanimitv through negotiations.

The following is believed to be the strategy for reelection drawn up by such leaders
as Kuniyoshi Saito, former secretary general, and close associates of Suzuki:

1. Pending problems of domestic and foreign affairs will be closely dealt with in

the spirit of total participation. The political scheduleyincluding foreign
diplomacy, will be tightly established and any action causing the government to be
jolted will not be tolerated.

2. Observe the movements of Pukuda, who has been hustling since the first of the

year, and presidential candidate Toshio Komoto, the director general of the Economic
Planning Agency, and contain them within the framework of u supraparty government.

J. Heighten the mood to support reelection within the party, centering around the
Tanaka and Nakasone factions, and a lot of votes will be decided with a vote by

Yasuhiro Nakasone, the director general of the Administrative Management Agency,
who has his sights on being the ”successor."

Shackled With Administrative Reforms

In other words, this is a clever plot to entrust operations within the party, in
reality, to Secretary General Susuw Nikaido of the Tanaka faction, which is the
largest faction, to have him defend against any impact from the verdict of the

Lockheed case and to reward Nakasone, who is the most likely candidate for the
post-Suzuki era, for his contribution to Suzuki's reelection.

Such being the case. although dissatisfied with the political developments main-

tained at the Suzuki-Tanaka pace but still confident of making a comeback, Pukuda
will be made immobile. Komoto alone is no match, and his position can be resolved
through negotiations.

These designs by the Suzuii camp are accurately grasped by ally Tanaka, the former
prime minister.

'Suzuki's reelection is firm. Nakasone is bound to administrative reforms and
cannot leave Suzuki. Komoto must want to prevail on Fukuda. The essential thing
is to prevent the party from becoming rattled.“

If the neutrals and nonfactional groups are added to the Suzuki, Tanaka and Nakasone
factions, the total count for both Houses should be close to 250 people. In the
circumstances, the most logical strategy is for the Suzuki-Tanaka alliance to make

reelection the priority issue and to avoid any lashback from troublesome occurrences
in the political world, beginning with the verdict of the Lockheed case.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IESI-I ONLY

heard from associates of Nakasone is the comment: ‘Suzuki's reelection is

inevitable." As for Pukuda's comeback. the doubtful view as expressed by a
nonfactional elder is that “it will occur only if Suzuki is taken ill and asks
Fukuda to substitute.“

Still. Suzuki's biggest rival is Komoto. who might throw in his hat this year. But
if Fukuda should seriously endorse Komoto and if the new leaders from the various
factions in a cross-section should join in. even if the Suzuki camp has a prepon-
derance in number, an unpredictable situation could occur in the operations of
government.

"Mr Komoto is a terrific person. Chun Doo Hwan, president of South Korea. came on
the scene suddenly and maybe the same thing can happen in Japan.‘

50 stated a leader of the Fukuda faction emphatically. As for intimacy between
Pukuda and Komoto. in the event the impact from the Lockheed verdict should be com-

pounded by such issues as the bungling in administrative management by Suzuki whose
past performance cannot be considered perfect, then the course of the presidential
election could, in one turn. assume a complex change.

"A climax will occur in the political situation in June," according to a leader of
the Komoto faction. It is not certain whether this is an early prediction of
“Komoto's resignation from his present post.” However. within the party “unpleasant
developments might occur in the government starting around the end of the Diet
session. after the prosecution's concluding speech and opinion on punishment regard-

ing Tanaka (believed to be in the spring),' according to the concurring analysis
of a mainstream faction leader.

Although unthinkable to occur at this time, if the government should be in a state
of confusion. there is no guarantee against the occurrence of such unsettling
possibilities as the ”threat of dissolution" by the mainstream forces. depending

on the moves by the opposition parties. and ”party secession” by opposing camps.
At such a time. how will the party plan to control the situation?

How about this supposition? Fukuda proposed the installation of a party vice
president late last year. Of course. his nominee was Hirokichi Nadao, former

speaker of the Lower House. Although in a concurring mood at one time, Suzuki only
said repeatedly: "After gathering the opinions within the party, I will try to

decide at the party convention on the let." and made no attempt to exercise his
leadership as president.

will “Vice President“ Issue Cause Rift?

It is not exactly clear whether Fukuda has his sights on ”being the antidote to
Nikaido, who is a gray ranking official“ or if he wants to project his image for
future political developments. Yet on reviewing the past, it is true that he has
become one of the buffers and in that capacity has exercised his conciliatory
talents.

Suzuki complied with the negative attitude of the Suzuki-Tanaka alliance on the vice
presidential issue. and in escaping (?) from making a decision he left a bad after-

taste in Fukuda's mouth. and it is possible that this can be seized on to come to
the fore as a sensitive undercurrent.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The moves have already begun confronting the 1982 political situation, which will
undergo a fluid change in the latter half of the year.

COPYRIGHT: YOMIURI SHIMBUN 1982

No Vice President of LDP

Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 17 Jan 82 p 2

{aexg7 Prime Minister Suzuki. president of the LDP, passed over the issue of
installing a party vice president, which had remained unsettled, and in its place

he decided to increase the membership in the party's Supreme Advisers Council.
Former Prime Minister Kishi is considered to be a likely addition.

The vice president's post has been vacant ever since the resignation of Eiichi
Nishimura at the expiration of his term in November 1980, and during the cabinet
reshuffle and selection of party official during the latter part of last year,
former Prime Minister Pukuda had proposed the installation of a vice president out
of dissatisfaction with the fact that the important posts in the party Executive
Council were filled with persons from the Tanaka faction. and the prime minister
had been studying the matter. However, (1) within the party, especially with the
Tanaka faction. the issue of installing a vice president is preponderantly negative.
and (2) members of the Upper House have asked for the installation of a vice
president, making settlement difficult. Because of these developments, the prime
minister passed over the issue of installing a vice president and as a counter-

proposal decided not only to increase the number of supreme advisers, but also to
have the council convene on a regular basis.

Based on the party rules that the Supreme Advisers Council will consist of the

president, vice president and former Upper House presidents and Lower House speakers
who are party affiliated and active Diet members, the present membership of the
Supreme Advisers Council consists of House Nadao and former President of the Upper
House Yasui. The prime minister intends to add "former party presidents who are not
Diet members" and hopes to include former Prime Minister Kishi.

COPYRIGHT: NIHON KBIZAI SHIMBUN 1982

9510
C50: 4105/44 and 4105/49

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!)

ANXIETY EXPRESSED OVER JSP'S NEH EXECUTIVE PANEL

Tokyo .‘tAIh‘ICHI DAILY NEWS in English 17 Feb 82 p 2

i'Sagacaclio Doings' column by Takehiko Takahashi:

Execu c 1vc Pane l "!

ETexc}

A new structure has been
created in the Japan Socialist
Party which has bewildered the
Liberal-Democratic Party.
Chairman lchio Asukata
retains his post so there is no
change here. Masashi
lsliibaslii. who has become rice
chairman. is a veteran who
served as steretari' general inr
many years under toriner
('hairinaii .\urita :niiw
deceaseiti and is well known by
the LDP. The problems are the
new secretary general. who will
be the central figure oi the JSP.
and the chairman oi the Diet
policy committee. who will be
the "window" tor Diet
operation.

Noboru Baba. who has been
elected tour times to the timtse
tit Representatives. became the
.lSt' secretary general in the
tom 01 desepnatinn by (‘lntir-
titan Asukiitai and despite rip-
positioii within the part}

in the case at the LDP. a Diet
member who has been elected
tour times is not yet entitled to
assume such an important post.
As a "junior the! member." he
is otten called upon to run
errands tor the execiitiVi-s.

JSi"s new Secretary General
iliiha ts kmwn to only a iew
l.i)l’ members and vice rersa.
The same thing holds true tor
new Chairman .‘ltirayania oi

the JSP's Diet policy coni-
niittee Since he has not been
concerned with Diet poliei up to
now. he ts practically unknown
to those within the LDP and
other parties related to Diet
policy.

Alter the new JSP executive
committee was tormed.
courtesy calls were made on
other political parties. At that
time. it was necessary tor Baba
to present his calling card and
say. "l‘m Baba. the new JSP
secretary amoral. \‘omshikuf'

in the past the .ls‘t’ had
Tantibe as chairman oi the Diet
policy committee and
\‘amaguchi as director oi the
Diet operation committee. Both
were well acquainted with those
of other parties concerned with
Diet policy. Moreover. the
JSP‘s director ot the Diet
management committee was
concurrently vice chairman oi
the Diet policy committee in the
past.

Post Refused

This is no longer so. Although
Yainaguehi is director at the
Diet operation committee. he Ls
not me chairman ot the JSP's
Diet policy committee This is
because aiiti-ltsukata and anti-
Baba members have reiiised to
become executives and

19

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

"Doubcs About JSP's New

\‘amapuchi did not take the
concurrent post.

What the LDI’ tintis
troublesome is the ititticulty oi
gauging as yet win-thei- "those
who have become chairman oi
the .lSP's Diet policy minin nice
and director oi llte Diet
management committee bare
the ability.“

hiemtiations bad proceeded
among the political parties tor
the tiscal l98l supplementary
budget draft to pass the House
at Representatives plenary
session on Feb. to. At the House
ot itepresentattves' Buditet
Committee meeting on that
day. Shun Oideot the .15? tooit
up the problem oi bombing
devuces on the i-‘-i Phantom and
grilled the government on this
matter.

The discussions were in-
terrupted because oi this. The
L0? accepted the JSP's
demand "to suspend the
execution oi the budget rdated
to bombing devices" so that the
Diet proceedings would go on
smoothly. its a consequence.
the LDP believed that the
supplementary budeet dratt
would pass the ltouse oi

Representatives saielv.
Voices rose [tom the JSP

side. however. that "even it the
budget committee approves the
supplementary hudeet di-ai'i.
23$ pomN
PUBLIC SUPPORT OF DEFENSE REVISIONS REQUIRED

Tokyo MAINICRI DAILY NEWS in English 17 Feb 82 p 2

lﬁditorial:

[Text]

"r—a Issue and Diet"l

Diet deliberations were stalled last week over the
Air Self-Defense l-‘orce's plan to install bombing
mechanism on F4 fighter bombers. In introducing
the r345in num.the Japanese governnienlrenioved
bombing devices from the aircraft which was claimed
to have a longer cruising range than necessary for
Japan's defense purposes. In fiscal I981. the govern-
ment appropriated 1.300 million yen for experimental
installation of the devices for an F-i. The Defense
Agency now plans to equip other F-ts with the devices
in fiscal 1982.

in implementing the plan. the agency said that
the money would be used for remodeling the aircraft
whose life would thus be extended. The agency's
explanation was not adequate as Prime Minister
Zenko Suzuki later said he had never heard a detailed
explanation on the installation of bombing
mechanisms. The agency has apparently placed
emphasis solely on the longer life of the aircraft.

The improvement of the defense capability
should not be put into practice by experts of their own
acCord. This must be implemented with the approval
of taxpayers who bear the financial burden. We do not
believe the government and the Defense Agency
officials are fully aware of this important fact. The
Self-Defense Force cannot function satisfactorily
without the full support of the Japanese people.

The people’s approval is gained through
deliberations in the Diet. In l968. opposition parties
raised a question on whether or not the said alrcraft
was more sophisticated than the Japanese demand.
Defense Agency Director General Kaneshlchi
Masuda pledged that the F43 had a long range and an
"offensive" character. Accordingly. bombing devices
would be removed from the aircraft, he said.

In 1978 when F-l5$ with bombing mechanisms
were introduced. the government reiterated that F-ts
were different from F-l55 which were interceptors. in
other words. the government reconfirmed that
Japan‘s Self-Defense Forces were solely for defense.

Since then. the government has made no revision
of its basic policy in the Diet sessions. Nevertheless.
the government appropriated a total of 9.800 million
yen for the restoration of the specific mechanism to
the aircraft in fiscal I98! and 1982. We hear that about
too F45 would be equipped with bombing devices at
the cost of 1.000 million yen each. According to the
Defense Agency's operational plan, the installation of
these devices is obscurely termed as "experimental
remodelling" of the aircraft for the improvement of
their capability.

Hitherto, the Self-Defense Forces have
established fait accompli behind the scenes. The
latest development indicates that such a charac-
teristic has not been removed from the Self-Defense
Forces. The attitude of the government. the Defense
Agency and the Self-Defense Forces following the
exposure of contradictory points have shown that the
civilian control system has been inadequate.

in a Diet session. Defense Agency Director
General Soichiro lto pledged suspension of spending
in the fiscal 1981 budget for the bombing devices.
Cabinet ministers criticized lto during their meeting
Friday. forcing him to make an excuse that the
pledge was made to pacify opposition parties. 0n the
same day. Gen. Osamu Namatame. chief of staff of
the Air Self-Defense Force. disclosed that the rein-
stallatior of the devices in question was the ASDF
officers“ original plan.

Prime Minister Suzuki said he had never heard of
such an explanation. This is a clear disregard on the
part of officers of the civilian control principle.
Namatame also said that he planned to replace F-ls
with Fats which must be equipped with bombing
devices. This is news for us.

We have noticed the high-handed attitude of
uniformed officers who seem to be taking advantage
of the recent trend of military expansion. The concept
of replacing Fats with other aircraft may overstep the
limit of Japan's self-defense definition.

In his policy speech last month. Prime Minister
Suzuki emphasized: “...Defense is an issue impinging
upon the state‘s very existence. so it is essential

22

FOR Ol-‘FlClAl. [SSE ONLY
above all that a popular consensus he achieved and
that defense be backed by popular support." His

speech and action are contradictory. We call for tull-

lledged discussion of the F4 issue in the current Diet
sessions.

ZOPYRIGH‘I‘: Mainichi Daily News 1982
ECONOMI C

TRADING PIRMS' EXPECTATIONS ARE HIGH ON SOUTHEAST ASIA

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Japanese Vol 20 No 993, 16 Feb 82 p 15

[Article by Jun Kusaka]

[Text]

Sago show will place extra
emphasis on deals with
Southeast Asian countries in
ten. according to survey of the
presidents of Japan's nine sore
shosha conducted by the .‘Jtnon
Ketzai Shimbun Prtsident
Toshto Takeuchi ol Toyo Menka
Katsha went so far as to cite
Indonesia as his company's top
priority market.

There are several reasons
why Japan's top trade execu-
tives are so enamores ol South-
east Asian markets. One is that
Southeast Asia is already one at
Japan's biggest trade partners.
In concrete ligures. the live
natiom comprising ASl-ZAS
t:\.\WCIJII00 0! Southeast Asian
\allons) alone accounted for
10.0 per cent ol all Japan's
exports and 15.1 per cent of Its
unpurts in 1930 The other is
that there is still much room
[or Japan's exports In South-
east Asian countries. while
sharp expmt increases are new
\‘Iﬂllﬂlly impisstblc to ad-
vanced countries at the West
because at growing trade lric-
mm and to Mideast countrits
because nl persistent political
instability In some oi the crun-
"11$

5mm shosha‘s trade wuth
Southeast Asian countries
usually takes the lorm ol pur-

chases ol such raw materials
as crude oil. gases. loodstulls
and nnn-lerrous metals and
sales at such manulactured
goods as machinery. steel
products and chemical goods. A
considerable part ol the exports
l3 being made in connection
with gigantic industrial and
other projects sponsored by
importing countries.

Although each at the nine
sogo shosha ls making subtly
dullerent approaches to the
Southeast Asian market, they
are in agreement that em-
phasis should be placed on
plants. equipment and‘ steel
structures. Btl..~ving that
"Southeast Asian countries are
.aIlII Ill strong need of
prodwer's goods necessary lor
Improving their social in-
lrastructures." in the worth at
Akihtto Mort. vicc chief ol the
Merseas Market Department
ol C ltoh 5. Co President
llideo Suzuki of Kanematsu
(:mho Co. has declared that his
company will heel up Its per-
sonnel to expand its exports of
lumber-processing machinery
to Southeast Asian countries

Mbﬁvlnp about Mideast and
Hull-Europe

Sogo shosha apparently have
considerable misgivuus about

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Mideast and East Burt
countries. The Asia Tea
Mitsubishi Corp. {or exit
states that the company
have to tighten its trade
lions with Southeast
countries now that shipme
the Mideast may lal
because ol the sluggish
actions in crude oil.
Ymhiaki Asano. chief 1
Asia Ollice ol Mltsui l
announces that the impot

ol the Southeast Asian m
is being recognized anew l
entire company in the it
the murky developments
Mideast and East Eur
countries These pron:
ments shw that sogo s
are quite eager to tur
Southeast Asian marke
their main theater of 1
lions now that not much 1
expected of virtually all
world markets.
Competition among sot.l
sha is bound to increase
the circumstances. Mit
Co. believes that comp
will not be limited to Jag
corporations alone but I
will also come lrorn U1
European companies. Tl
no guarantee. moreover
the Southeast Asian n
W!" semitwely rcspot
stepped-upupproacmhy
.89 2a 52. Se 2.3 £8
tan—w 332.2. 8 3 =5
‘6qu «3%.: 8:8... .35
«35? 19222.. 1252
”.23.. :35 3 5a.. 2580:
a: :3 >mm>z 32.82.
3:26 3. in: «3:5 Edam
35:6 :63 2.3 3.. 33 :2.
=5 3:52:02 23 «is. :2.
many—83. 8.. 3a.. :5 SE».
n32... 3:33-33 .3
3:33 8 a»; .33 .922. E
25825 35$

cum 2 .5» v2.35 3825

y ‘Lr‘lb h px>»rll.x
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500040022-8

COPYRIGHT:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 and say that they will watt and
‘. sec.

(‘hanxea in economic construc-
tion programs

There haw also been some
subtle changes in the economw
constructton programs of
ASE-IAN member nations. Up to
the 19705. such countries placed
extra emphasis on construction
of largeseale export-oriented
projects best represented by
the LNG tliquet ted natural gast
plants and the Asahan
Aluminum Refinery tn Indo-
nesia. taking advantage 0! the
raw materials abundantly
found in their territoria

Recently. however. priorities
have amarently been shilted to
ltlttertng small and medium-
stze businesses. The reason is
partly because heavy invest-
ments to gigantic projects have
ended. according to Hiroshi
Hashtmoto. chef at the
Regional Policy Section 0! the
Asian Allatrs Bureau 0! the
Ministry ot Foreign Allatrs

ASEAN member nations are
now strongly urging Japon.

CSO: 4120/157

26

through various dipl
channels. to provide eet
assistance and to invest i
territories to promote n
small and medium-sized
tries. one: Mac at th
Otfice of Mitsui 5- Co

aware ol the changtng si
in such countries and so
Japanese corporations

not devote themselves

major projects but pay ;
attention to their 5
counterparts. As 0
writing. however. smt
tramactions between J2
corporations and then
Minn counterparts a
very much limited

in order to greatly ll
their dealings with So
Aston countries. .ltt
corporations should try
understand the econom
cultures at such countrt
only after doing so tin
thl be able to really pi
into the Southeast
market by taking t
vantage 0! its geou
proximity to the area.

1982, the Nihon Keizat Shimbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

OPENING MARKET TO FOREIGN TRADE DISCUSSE)

Tokyo YOHIURI SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 Jan, 2, 3 Feb 82
[31 Jan 82 pp 9-10]

[Text]

The Government's "plan for the improvement of the import inspection
procedures, etc." has been drawn up. It consists of a total of 67 items,
which are all said by foreign countries to symbolize the closed market.
Therefore, we can place expectations on the effects thereof, for the time
being. However, when it comes to the question of whether the criticism
against Japan will subside with this, we are very uneasy. It seems better
to position this improvement plan rather as a “milepost" for the opening of
markets or one step toward eliminating the non-tariff barriers.

Marking in Pounds Removed in the Past

0n the 30th, when the improvement plan was decided, a leader of a
food import company, who looked at the list. expressed the following
impression: "I am surprisao that such a system, like a relic of :he last
century. has remained."

The frank impressions received by persons connected with imports
about the Government plan are generally unfavorable. Voices saying "At long
last ...," rather than "Hell done.“ are conspicuous. The elimination of the
non-tariff barriers made little progress on such occasions as Japan-US
negotiations in the past. This time, however, it has been decided that 67
out of the 99 items subjected to studies will be revised. The "physical
strength" of International Economic Measures Special Research Council
Chairman ESAKI, who succeeded in making that decision, was certainlyconSiderable-
Nevertheless, the evaluation by private circles is severe. This is because

the improvement items include many cases which "should have been revised
long ago."

As to errors in typing, which are-found in the case of collation
between an invoice and a permit, for example, an improvement was made so that

"simple errors will be dealt with flexibly." Upon reflection, however,
this is too natural. and it is even ridiculous. A document in which "L"

27

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOX Ul'l'lClAl. U3}. ONLY

was mis-typewritten for R." for example, used to be rejected, but it has been
decided that this has only to be corrected.

The same can be said of the "acceptance of the dual marking under the
yard-pound and metric systems." Imports of foreign canned goods were not
permitted when labels on which the amount of contents is marked in grams were only
paSted on, and the persons incharge took the trouble to paint the marking
in pounds. However. this has been revised so that the word pound does not have
to be painted in in the future. MITI says that “Measures were already taken
in :378 for the acceptance of the dual marking." In short, a notification
is only to be issued again as to items whose purport was not thoroughly

known. Even those who are not importers probably think that "It is
Strange that they should be taken up now."

What is more surprising is that the Ministries and Agencies concerned
severely resisted even such revisions. Hhen the Product Import Measures
Conference.which consists of private persons, submitted a request for
improving Sl items late last year. only MITI answered that "He are prepared
to improve them." Even in that case, improvement was limited to 12 items.
The Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries, Welfare, and Transportation Ministries
gave zero answers. They refused to revise thengunder the excuse of protect-
'mg consumers.

As to this, Prime Minister SUZUKI strongly ordered the Party to
improve such items. saying, "I do not want foreign countries to invent a
pretext for starting a quarrel." Behind the Government offices which stick
to authority, there are groups which support Diet members, as to various

items. The fact that he saw through this point and gave leadership to the
?arty is a'w1everpoint befitting Mr. Zenkc who is a party man" (member of
the Research Council). The initial 12 items increased to 58 items at the

" ' ‘ i ‘ "ke in the case of
nec:um stave and they finally .ncreased to 67 items, -1
a sacrifice sale of bananas. Here, the Prime Minister's "pressure" worked

greatly. \
Feeling of Earning "Batting Average." Too

0n the other han.. there is also an aspect in which they turned to
earning the "batting average," probably because they tackled it by an order
from the above. In the Government. there are many who explain that
"The number of items for which measures were taken amounts to 91," includ-
ing "the 15 cases based on miSunderstanding" and "9 cases which are to be
checked into continuously." This also shows one aspect of the idea of
sticking to the "batting average."

There is also "testimony" saying that "There were certainly eight items
based on misunderstanding, at first." what is meant by the fact that the

number of the items based on misunderstanding increased halfway?

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this situation, there are also voices of appreciation. saying that
"The physical strength of Research Council Chairman ESAKI is great"
(Hitsui Bussan tepartment Manager). They mean that although the

contents are poor, it would have been utterly impossible unless it had
been led by the Party.

However. even trading company people who regard it with good
intentions point out that "Whether or not it can really convince foreign
countries depends upon future implementation."

One example is that "One will be exempted from the obligation to kill
germs by heating mineral water, and one will be allowed to adopt a method
having the same effect as killing germs by heating." This is an answer to
the criticism that no problem has arisen in exports to various countries
without heating it. however. the problem is how to interpret the "same
effect as heating." It is said that the methods of killing germs other than by
heating include irradiation by ultra-violet rays. killing germs with chlorine,
and killing germs with ozone (Welfare Ministry Food Sanitation Division).
In the future. however, what method of killing germs should be recognized
as "eqivalent" will become a problem. If they are limited too strictly.

it will become the cause of a new dispute. in which they will say that "The
actual situation is the same as before."

Alec as to the simplification of procedures for the inspection of
automobiles, the same handling as before will continue. unless the purport is

made thoroughly known to the actual scenes. It may rather cause re-criticism
that "We have been deceived by honeyed words."

Government Offices and Industry Circles Readily Stick Past to Each Other

Chairman ESAKI also says as follows: "I want to follow what responses
are actually being made. by making on-the-spot inspections of the situation
of inspection of automobiles and the ways of testing medical supplies."
To make the series of measures thistimereally effectiveandanswer the requests
overseas, follow-up investigations in the future will be indispensable.
it has been decided that a kind of ombudsman system (headquarters for the
Fromotion of Settlement of Grievances Concerning Opening the Market)
will be established as a plan for guaranteeing surveillance for this purpose
and aeteptance of grievances. It is necessary to pay special attention so
that it will not become nominal.

In Japan. there is a habitual practice of Government offices and industry
circles and users organizations readily forming friendship clubs and shutting
at other parties. as can be seen from the fact thatuseof :etal bats for soft-
all and tennis balls is not permitted except those which have been "officially
33tr071d" ov the Sports Federation. This may have gotten by in the age hheﬁ
Japan was only an "island country in the Far East." However, at this time
when its GS? ranks second in the Free world. such a closed constitution is not
permissible. A change to a bold. positive posture toward complete opening
(of the market) will be sought, with the 67 items this time as an occasion.

a
4
\-
b

29

FOR‘OFFKJA1.U8510NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[2 Feb 82 pp 7-9]

[Text] U.$. Reactions Cold

hr. Dick YAMASHITA (President of Malcolm International), the US side's
representative of the "Japan—US Trade Research Association," which is
formed by business circles of Japan and the US and persons connected with
the Governments of the two countries. made the following severe remark:
"It is difficult to show in numerical figures the effects of the improvement
plan, including import procedures, but those connected with an increase
in exports from the US to Japanareprobably less than $100 million. It is
felt as if one is relieved after recovering from a headache, in spite of
the fact that one has actually developed cancer."

In the situation where Japan's trade surplus toward the US amounted to
$18 billion (according to statistics on the US side) in 1981. the US side's
reactions are generally cold. as can be seen from the following remark:
"The effects of improvementof(Japan's) non-tariff barriers (NTB) are only

a drop of water in a bucket" (Washington Post reporter).

The NTB's which were taken up this time are entwined with 9 Ministries
and Agencies and 2a laws. Research Council Chairman ESAKI repeated speedy
deliberations 22 times from the first general meeting on December 9 last
year, and formed a conclusion in only one month and a half.

The improvement measures include items on which imports have been thought
to be intentionally restricted, in the eyes of foreign countries.

They include the following items, for example: "In giving permission
to importers and sellers of medical supplies, cosmetics, etc., Directors
other than those in the sectors in charge will be exempted from submitting
medical certificates" (welfare Ministry); and "The international standards
will be accepted as to the thickness of sprays fcr cosmetics and aerosol"
(21?: .

In this sense. it mav be alright to evaluate as a success for the time
being the operations this time, in which "political power" was used to draw
up the improvement plan, without leaving matters to Government officials.

However, it is also true that there is a wide difference between
"evaluation" and "effects," even without seeing the reactions on the US
side.

Take, forexample, the improvement measure of accepting the analysis
tables prepared by the Government organs of exporting countries as to
additives to wine and champagne (sulfurous acid gas -- $02 -- salicylic
acid, and sorbic acid). So far. there have been cases where the submitting
of tables showing the results of tests by the inspection organ designated
by the Helfare EiniSter was scught, even when there were certificates and
analysis tables from the Government organs of exporting countries. fhnough

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tne iu;rovement this tine, no inspection is to be made in cases where

an analysis table from a reliable inspection organ, approved by the Government
of an expo ting country, is attached, and where it is fudged that the inspection
is reliahle. in the light of the cases in the past.

Words of Government Offices Not Understandable

xhat comes into question here is where 3 "reliable" line shOuld be
drawn. The Welfare hinistry says that “He will promptly prepare a
table showing the approval organs, through the Foreign Ministry" (Food
Sanitation Division). However, it is doubtful how far imports will increase,
even if that is realized.

New exporters will be checked strictly, as before. and inspection
or new products will be conducted strictly, too. As the things are additives
to food, it is dangerous to inspect them easily. However, the general view

is that "It will produce only the effect of increasing imports of champagne
at Christmas."

The same can be said of the "stamp showing the date of the manufacture
of canned goods," connected with the Agriculture-forestry-fisheries Hinistry.
Strict checking has so far been conducted when there are spaces among the
"year, month, and day" shown by the stamp. This is because there is the
fear that it may be re-written. In the improvement plan, it is mentioned
that "Written instructions will be given to the Agriculture and Forestry
Products Inspection Institute, etc., within this fiscal year." From this
alone, it is not clear how improvement is to be made. In short, however,

t is said that "Guidance will be given so that inspection will be conducted

flexibly" (Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries Ministry Consumption Economy
Division).

However, the Agricuiture-Forestry-Fisheries Ministry says that it is
difficult to prepare unified standards as to what spaces are approved, and

that there is no other way but to depend upon the eyes of inspectors,
in the end.

Such words as "flexible" and "forward-looking" are expressions peculiar
to the Japanese Government offices. In regard to these, too, various
Western nations say that they are NTB's in a broad sense. including cultural
practices.

Furthermore, the irony in the February 1 issue of Time magazine is
sharp.

Follow-up Investigations Will Be Conducted, But...

”He wonder if the inspectors at Yokohama Port, who have continued to
say 'This is not good' for so years, will immediately say "This is alright,"
for the reason that new rules have been laid down." Therefore. it is
likely that even if the measures to improve the "73's are described, to

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
publicize them in Europe and America, this alone will not cause variOus
Western nations to undersrand them well.

"We recognize the efforts which Japan is making for opening the
market. However, the real problem is how to put them into practice. Even
if itenumeratesthe 67 items and explains that it will simplify them. this
will not be readily understood by westerners who respect rationalism.
The problem is how they are to be actually changed" (Hr. Dick). Thus, he
emphasizes an "argument on effects," to the last.

Of course, Chairman ESAKI, too, gathering these circumstances,
expressed the following resolve: "I want to make efforts for opening the
market by conducting follow-up investigations to see whether or not the
items which are to be subjected to improvement measures this time will be
carried out pertinently."

Moreover, the Headquarters for the Promotion of Settlement of
Grievances Concerning Cpening the Market" (0T0). which is to be established
in the Government as a grievance procedures organ for the future, intends
to take perfect measures as to new grievances, etc., saying that "If there
are requests for grievance procedures, we will check into them in one week
to about 10 days and give answers."

Thus, a window, which has not so far existed, will be established, and
this is a step forward frontbefore. However, this does not mean that a
particularly new organization will be set up. A "signboard" is to be put
up in an existing Division of the Economic Planning Agency.

Eventually, grievances will be communicated to the Government offices
having authority, and they will be left to their handling with strong
sectionalism, which is inherent to Government officials. To prevent the
measures from being criticized as "being the same as before," there 18
probably no other way but to pile up actual records by handling problems
promptly and in a forward-looking way.

[3 Feb 82 pp 11-12]

[Text] Spearhead as to Unemployment Hill Soon Be Directed

At the USTR (US Trade Representative) Office, a cartoon which was
drawn in 1933 is being much talked about at present. The contents of the
cartoon are as follows: "Such 'Strong countries' as the us, Britain, France,
Germany, and Italy lie in beds in a hospital. and Japan in the guise of
Santa Claus appears there, carrying a bag filled with many textile, sundry
and other goods."

The year 1933 was immediately after the Great Depression in the world,
and various countries were still in a dark depression. Competition in

32

FOR 0FFKJAI.[EHECNQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the devaluation of currency occurred, tariff rates were lowered successively,
and protectionism gained strength simultaneously. This occurred 50

years ago. however, the thought th t they are "quite the same as at
presentﬂ'whenthe textile and sundry goods in the cartoon are replaced by
automobiles and electronics. invites sour smiles, and this is sent around
to read in succession.

Certainly. the depression in the US has gradually become serious.
ince august last year, production has continued to be minus almost
:onsistentl', compared with the preceding months, and the rate of unemployment
in December reached 8.9 percent. In the light of the fact that there was
fest one case in the past wnere the rate was 9 percent, that can be said to be
abnormally high, after all.

Xoreover. it has become ”common sense" that "The rate will certainly
reach the lO-percent level in April." The US Government does not as yet say
that "The cause of this lies wit. Japanese goods." however, the US Congress
and managers of medium and small enterprises clearly think so.

The SC also is under similar circumstances. The various countries have
in mind the problem of unemployment among young people, the rate of which
unemployment reaches “0 percent of all the unemployed persons. EC External

General Bureau Director DENMAN, who came to Japan recently, appealed for

the elimination of the trade friction, saying as follows: "I do not think
that such a situation has been created by Japanese goods, but it is true that
there are many who think so. It is at least certain that the influence of
protectionism has become something which cannot be ignored."

Second and Third Rounds of Strategy Toward Japan

"Such an atmosphere has been mounting further since the start of this
year." said Finance hinistry and MIT leaders who visited Europe and America
early this year. They say that the criticism is incomparable with that
about the fall of last year.

Why? Former Government Representative Saburo OKITA points out:
'Tne fact that future prospects have become darker in both Europe and
America since the start of this year can be taken up as a big reason."

Take, for example, the recent re-ralsing of the interest rates in the
US. Various reasons are being cited for this. As a result, however, thi
is linked to the sales of housing and automobiles and to the holding down
of facilities inveStments. Consequently, employment will not increase,
and the number of unemployed persons will increase further. Impatience
results in further impatience.

Looking around, however, we find that only Japanese goods are growing
smootnly, and that moreover, exports to Japan from the 85 cannot readily
got in. In the view of the Japanese side, this "proves the superiority of
Japanese goods.‘ In the eyes 0. the CS, however, it is reflected as inequalit

33
FI”!(HHH(JAL.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is also the prime mover of the spread to the US Congress, etc., of
protectionist mutuality with which they say that "If Japan is closed, this

side also ...,“ instead of forward-looking "mutuality" to talk about the
opening of the market with each other.

in this situation. the Government of Japan announced in December the
policy of carrying out the tariff-lowering schedule two years ahead of schedule.
and the policy of simplifying 67-item import procedures, at the end of January.
The Government can by no means be said to be negligent, compared with its
measures in the past to cope with the friction. However, when it comes to the
question of whether the friction will calm down to some extent with this, the
answer is negative, after all.

This is because, although there is also the factor that the way of
opening the market is still lukewarm, the actual effect of those measures
will be "hundreds of millions of dollars" (Foreign Ministry), which is like
throwing water on the thirSty soil of the surplus toward the US amounting
to $13 billion and toward the EC amounting to $10,300 million.

As a matter of fact, after Japan announced the series of measures,
US Senator DANFORTH, who came to Japan recently, stated that "A mutuality bill
will he presented soon." There is no doubt that it will have a strong
protectionst coloring in the way of saying that "As you do that, I too ..."

It is reported that in co-ordination with such moves of the Congress,
western countries are already ”preparing for the seond and third rounds of
strategy toward Japan." Aside from what the contents of such strategy will
he, a clue to this will not be lacking this year. At the end of this month,
a meeting of the Japan-ts Trade Sub-Committee (3rd meeting) will be held in

Tokyo. This will be followed by a visit to the US by Foreign hinister
SAKURAUCHI in March . .

Live Atmospheres in Europe and America Must Be Explored

French President MITTERRAND is scheduled to come to Japan in April.
As the said President is to be Chairman of the June Summit. Japan will be
pressed for a response to this, too. Furthermore, Japan-CS summit talks will
be held after the Summit. About that time, deliberations on the mutuality
bill will reach the peak. At least as a response to the trade friction,
the two kinds of measures which have so far been announced will be a "mere
entrance."

It is said that L0? Research Council Chairman ESAKI and others, who
arranged for the simplification of the import procedures, will make
"explanation trips" to Europe and America, carrying this "Japanese plan."

Actually, the following voice was strong within the Government at first:
l'h‘hy will you do such a thing? You will only meet with a sound thrashing, for

34

FOI.0FTW(JAI.US£IDNLY
the reason that it is insufficient." Recently, however,.such a voice has
disagpeared completely, and it has changed to a voice saying, “We want yOu to
go by all means."

The reason for this seems to be the following: "Meeting with a SOuﬁd
thrashing will rather lead to subsequent measures. It will be a serious
matter if ooliticians think that 'Things have been finished with this, for the
time being'." Mr. ESAKI and others are to play a thankless part. chever,

this also is a duty of politicians. It seems necessary for them to make
further efforts by fully inhaling the live atmOSpheres in Europe and America.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1982

C50: 4105/62

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

JAPAN, U.S. TRADE FRICTION INCREASES OVER IMPORTS
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SﬂIHBUN in Japanese 1 Feb 82 p 3

[Text]

US dissatisfaction toward Japan is increasing,against the background of
the increase in unemployment and the large-scale trade deficit with Japan.
It is the re-kindling of the Japan-US trade friction. The dissolving of the
friction is a big task for the SUZUKI Cabinet, together with the realization
of administrative and financial reforms. the Government has started to tackle
measures for surmounting this situation, such as to decide on measures for the
improving of the non-tariff barriers at the Hinisterial Conference on Economic
Measures, held on January 30. However, the US request for the liberalization
of the Japanese market is still strong, and its objects are also wide-spread.
What is the real aim of the US? what should Japan do in order to defend the
free trade structure, which has supported the expansion of the Japanese
economy? This paper had ITI Minister ABE, who attended the Tri-Polar Trade
Conference among Japan, the US-Canada and the EC, held in Key Biscayne in
Florida, on January lu and 15, and who also held talks with top US Government
and Congressional leaders, including President REAGAN, and this paper's
Economic News Section Chief Tetsuo 0H7A discuss the present state of Japan—
US relations and future measures to cope with the situation.

Eye on the Off-Year Elections

OHTA: Trade frictions arose several times in the past, too, with Japan
showing a surplus balance in trade and the US and Europe showing deficits.
It seems, however, that friction is once again becoming severe. Furthermore,
I think that the nature cf the friction has also changed, when compared with
those in the past. How do you regard the present trade friction?

ABE: It is unprecedentedly serious. The depression is continuing in the
US and the various European nations, and both the US and the EC nations
have more than lo million unemployed persons. respectively. Inflation is
also progressing. Despite these facts, Japan alone is developing smoothly.
As a result, they focus their attacks on Japan. The dissatisfaction over
the worsening of the economies of their own oeuntries is appearing, in
combination with their dissatisfaction toward the trade imbalance. In this
respect, it can be said to be a severe situation for Japan.

36
FORIOFFHJAI.USB|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OBTA: At the Tri-Polar Conference and at the talks with the top leaders
of the US Government and Congress, what views did the US side show? Did you
receive the impression that it is fairly rigid?

ABE: In the US, I explained Japan's position. I explained as follows:
You say that Japan's trade surplus with the US reached 18 billion dollars in
199; (US statistics). However, this is the result of the low yen, and the
US side's high interest policy is also partly responsible for this. The
Japanese economy is now in a good state because finances made great efforts
for tiding over the oil crisis. As evidence of this, the financial situation
in Japan is the worst in the world. for the correction of the trade imbalance
Japan is taking such measures as the package lowering of tariffs ahead of
schedule, and the abolition of non-tariff barriers. The US side should also
make efforts for exports. The US side, however. looks at Japan with severe
eyes. because unemployment has exceeded 10 million persons, even though it
understands Japan's assertions, as logic. Especially in the Congress, there
is the idea of mutuality. of a retaliatory nature.

OHTA: Friction arises from the attitude that "we understand the
reasons, but ..." From the Start, Congress has the tendency to succumb
to the lure of protectionism. The pattern in the US is for the Administra-
tion, which advocates thc firm maintenance of the principle of free trade,
to hol this down. However, partly due to the fact that the off-year
elections will be held in November, Congress is pressing more strongly
that usual. Do you think that it is becoming difficult for the Government
to put a curb on Congress? '

ABE: Frankly speaking, I received the impression that, if the present
situation continues, the US Government will also be unable to hold down the
Congress.

OHTA: US Ambassador to Japan MANSFIELD had so far shown the posture of
trying to convince his home country, in regard to groundless US criticism
against Japan, up until now. However, upon looking at the Ambassador's
recent speeches, the sense of defending Japan has lessened. He should take
this as evidence that dissatisfaction within the US has mounted to that
extent, should we not?

ABE: I do not think this is something tactical, such as to apply
pressure on Japan. When I met with the Ambassador before my visit to the
US this time, the Ambassador showed the judgment that "I have been taking
the pos:ure of curbing the moves of my country, up until now, but the
situation is no longer that way." Therefore, I deepened the impression
that the criticism against Japan this time is different from that in the
paSt.

OHTA: As for the measures to cope with this situation, the objects
up until now were fairly limited, such as textiles and automobiles. however,

recent criticisms are not focused on specific matters, and I receive the
impression that it is something like "chasing moles," because when you hold

37

FOI.0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
down this point, another problem crops up elsewhere. In this kind of case,
what basic posture do you think we should take?

ABE: If Japan were to continue its attitude of not doing anything and
watching the situation a litt; e further, the US Congress will incline to the
pOSture of abandoning it, saying that "if Jet is the case, that is that. and
if Japan takes such an attitude, the US will also measure the height of Japan's

barriers, in its own way, and create the same kind of barriers, based on
mutuality."

This kind of protectionist moves must be blocked, without fail. I think,
therefore, that Japan 3. .ould take various measures, anyway, and that it is
important for Japan to transmit such efforts to the other side, as quickly as
possible. The measure for the lowering of tariffs ahead of schedule, taken
by Japan, covers 1,653 items, and the financial burden entailing this amounts
to 200 million dollars. ?herefore, it is a fairly bold decision. However,

I have the feeling that this has not been fully understood. Even in that
meaning, I frankly felt, upon visiting the US, that Japan is n0t good at PR.

ExpeCtations Attached to ?ublic Projec-

OhTA: Let us assume that the US takes measures toward Japan, based on
mutuality. In that case, Europe, which has a protectionist tendency to begin
with,is likely to erect a higher barrier against the US, this time, using
that as an excuse. in the case of the US and Europe, the US is showing a

surrlu s of exports over imports. Therefore, in this case, the US will be
eversely placed in a disadva:tage0us position in relation to Europe. when
considered in that way, nutualit‘ has both merits and demerits for the US.
3i: it not be possible to consid er that, such being the situation, there
will naturally be limits t-) the measures the JS can take?
E: It is tru that there are also various problems between the EC
and t .e US. however, it is dangerous to thin nk that if the US were to adopt
n.t;ai ity toward Japan. the EC wil- also adopt mutuality toward the US, that
in that case, it will not be a les for the US, and that therefore, in con-
.l-sicn, the US is only talking show .it and will not actually take any Steps.

0‘

A
r

ChTA: The SUZUKI Cabinet makes the administrative and financial reforms
and the calming down of the trade friction it 5 big olitical tasks. When
they are viewed from a short-range standpoint, t..e simplification of import
inspections, etc., will become linked with adminiStrative reform. Cn the other
hand, however, the retcnstruttion of finances and the calming down of th
trade friction are somewhat in contradiction, and do they not contain elements
whit mutu lly re _ect each other? In other words, will there not appear,
once 3again, the way of thinking li<e the traction- -pouer argument, in the oaSt,

and will not Japan be asked [3 become the engine pul‘ing along the world
ecOncmy? This will mean the expar .ding of domestic demand and increasing i..-

SCI‘CS, but this wil. be contracictcry to tile severe :inancials;tuatio1.

38

FOR 0F1ﬁ€1Al.USEiONLY
ABE: They do have aspeCts which are contradictory as policies. however,
Japan's finances are in the worst condition, in the whole world. Therefore,
thev must be reconstructed. At the same time, domestic demand must be expanded,
even though our hands and feet are bound by the straitened finances, and they
must be led to an increase in imports, so that the trade friction can be dis-
solved. AlthOugh it is now becoming impossible to buoy up business with
finances, as in the past, it is not that there are no other measures at all,
and I think that if various efforts are mobilized, it will not be impossible
to attain an economic growth of 5.2 percent, in real terms, in fiscal 1982.
Especially, if public enterprises were to be carried out concentratedly in
the first half of the fiscal year, and if they were to act as a bridge to
the second half of the year, I think that the economy can be invigorated.
Therefore, I feel that the first half of this year will determine the out-
come of the expansion of domestic demand.

CETA: t is also important to lead the exchange market in the direction
of a higher yen, is it not? It will be a plus for improving Japan's trade
conditions, and it will also help to dissolve the trade imbalance. However,
the yen does not become higher, as desired, and there is rather a tendency
to a lower yen ...

ABE: This is because interestratesare high in the US. Viewed in the
light of the keynote of the Japanese economy, the yen should definitely not
be weak. (In order to return the yen to its real strength), it is necessary
to have the SS change its high interest rate policy.

OHTA: The OECD, for example, says that "if Japan were to lead its
interest rates in a somewhat higher direction, and if it were to make
efforts for the expansion of domestic demand, using finances a little more,
the high yen and the expansion of domestic demand, combined together, will
help to dissolve the trade imbalance." Is it not possible to take a com-
bination of measures which will lead to the correction of the imbalance,
without affecting monetary measures too much?

ABE: When I mentioned the expansion of domestic demand, during my visit
to the US this time, there were not a few persons in the US Government, who
expressed concern, saying that if Japan were to take measures for the expan-
sion of domestic demand, it will lmad to inflation, that this will lead to
a lower yen, in the end, and that as a result, exports (of Japanese manu-
factured products) will come to increase. Toward this, I emphasized that
that view is mistaken, and that, since Japan's commodity prices are extremely
Stabilized, even the taking of somewhat bold measures for the expansion of
domestic demand will not bring about inflation. As for the interes: rates,
even somewhat higherrateSwould become a drag on expanding domestic demand.
The official discount rate was finally lowered in December of last year. If
we were to raise the interestrates,once again, at this point, facilities
investments will decrease.

39

FOR¢OFTKJAI.USE!ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Sel f-Restraint" Is Unavoidnb] e

OHTA: President EEAGAN held talks with you, on the occasion of your
visit to the US this time. This is viewed as President REAGAN's attachin
cons- 'derable expecta ions on Shintaro ASE, the politician, who also has
t..e experience of having served as Agriculture- Forestry-Fisheries hiniSter,
and not only in your capacity as :71 hinister. as a result, will not the
responsibility for internal co-ordimat ion, in the direction of the improve:
...ent an abolition of the remaining import restriction items, among which the

tems concerning the Agricultu e-Forestry-Fisheries Miniatry account for a
ccnsiderabl y large part, fall rather Heav ly on your shoulders?

ABS: 2 suppose there may have been expectations on me, but I think
that expectations on Japan were bigger, as this was the first visit to the
US by a Cabinet :ember cf the reshuf f- d SJZCKI Cabinet. The improvement
of the non-tariff barriers will be carried out to a considerable extent.
Therefore, the remai..ing measures are how to handle the re...aining import
restriction items. centering or. agricultural products. nowever ,this problem
is far from easy, because it is intertwined with domestic circumStan .ces..
Ev n if it may be possible to ex;and the import framework for the remaining
resrriction items to some extent, 2 think i: will be difficult to go as tar
as their abolition.

OHTA: Is it unavoidable for Japan to consider the implementation of
one-sided curbs on exp crts for various items. as an emergency relief
measure, on a case-by-case basis,‘ in the future, too, in the same way as
for automobiles last spring, following those on textiles and iron and steel?

ABE: Viewed from the principle of free trade, voluntary restrictions
on exports arethe second best measure, but it is a realistic measure for the
prevention of protectionism. think it is unavoidable, to some extent, to

take emergency relief-type measures, such as the curbing of the exports of
automobiles, in order to defend free trade.

O”TA: It seems that the recent situation is that matters do nor
develop as set forth in an ideal sctnario. It seems that the task for
the moment is how to stop one Step short of being driven into the worst
situation. Do you think that. once the off-year elections this autumn

are over and US business starts to look up in the second half of this

year, the "steam" will be let out, or do think that the trade friction
between Japan and the US is fairly structural?

ABE: There is a full possibility that ,when the off-year elections
are over and if the economy starts to be re-act ivated, the friction may
disappear. The problem cannot be settled by trade measures alone, and the
basic problem is how to re-build the US economy. For that purpose, I
think that Japan should also offer co-operation where co-operation is due.

OH?A: Even so, co-ordination within the country, from now on, will be
a troublesome task. Unless measures are carried out quickly and dramatically,
there is the relationship with the US, and ...

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
532: Yes. it is important to produce an answer quickly. "hen I talked
with US Senate Finance Committee Chairman DOLE. he said that the US Congress
will also reach a conclusion as to what it will do, within the next one
month, while watching the moves of Japan. At any rate, we have come to
a stage where we must sensitively watch the moves of the US Congress, with
close attention. I think that the outcome will be determined in the next
two or three months. He should not stop with the improvement of the non-
tariff barriers this time. There are many difficult problems, but we must
check seriously into the US requests, including the red-ction of the import
restriction items. and reach a conclusion at an early date, as to "what we
can do, and what we cannot do."

COPYRIGHI‘: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

cs0: 4105/58

61

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

COUNCIL RECOMMENDS PROCEDURES 0N IMPROVING IMPORT INSPECTION
Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Japanese Vol 20 No 992, 9 Feb 82

[Editorial: "Non-Tariff Barriers"]

[Text] There seems to be always a gap in perception or
assessment between Japan and the US. or Western
Europe on steps taken by Japan is improve trade
relations. One may get the impression that a step by
Japan only leads to another demand by the West. leaving
no hope for solving the current trade frictions. Neverthe-
less. it is obvious that Japan cannot stop trying to make
its market as open as possible in order to maintain the
free trade system which is essential to its economic
survival.

The latest action taken by the Government was one on
improving import inspection procedures. This was
decided following recommendations by the Ad Hoe
Investigation Council on international Economic
Problems of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. which
acted in quick response to grievances among the other

- industrialized democracies on the various non-tariff

barriers restricting their exports to Japan.

The Government not only accepted one hundred per
cent the recommendations by the Council but decided to
establish a new headquarters (the so-called ombuds-
mam for resolving grievances pertaining to opening
Japan's market.

High marks should be given to the decision because it
covers correction of 67 out of 99 cases of foreign com-
plaints of non-tariff barriers against exports to Japan.
These included. among others. correction of restrictive
standards in such fields as autos. cosmetics. drugs and
sporting goods. which were of particular concern to the
0.8. and were cited on many occasions as blocking
billions of dollars of US. sales to Japan.

it is noteworthy that the Government could take this
action in a fairly short period of time after it decided on
advance implementation of tariff reductions for 1.653
items. it may help change the image of the Japanese
Government which has bc-.i internationally notorious for
its slowness in implementing its promise. Although there

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are still 9 cases to be studied further for correction (15
other cases being judged as based on misunderstanding
on the part of the Us. and Europe). Japan has done its
utmost at this stage to reduce the trade barriers, both in
tariff and non-tariff areas.

This does not mean. however. that the latest action will
be appreciated by the other side as much as Japan
wishes in view of the gap in perception as pointed out
earlier. As long as the huge trade imbalances between
Japan and the other industrialized nations remain un-
changed, their dissatisfaction with Japan's efforts will be
left unabated. Besides. any substantial improvement in
the imbalances cannot be expected without parallel
efforts by the other trade partners to penetrate the Japa-
nese market. in other words. it takes a formidably long
time before the latest action in reducing non-tariff
barriers can be reasonably effective in alleviating
criticism against Japan's trade policies.

Demands for a more open market will come one after
another. whether in the form of higher import quotas for
oranges and beef or more competitive opportunities in
banking and data service industries. Such demands by
the trade partners may sometimes look too high-handed
and unilateral to the eye of related industries. But. to be
fair. many of them are reasonable enough to expose their
weakness or inefficiency.

The important thing for Japan is to understand that
any action in reducing the non-tariff barriers is only one
step toward making the Japanese market completely
free and open. Japan should always be positive in
responding to such demands in full awareness that only
the free trade system can keep her alive.

the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HIGH 6.8. IMPORT TARIFF 0N SHALL TRUCKS HIT
Tokyo YOHIURI SHIHBUN in Japanese 3 Feb 82 p 1
[Text]

A Government source revealed on the 2nd that the Government will
lodge a protest with GATT against the US within this month, on the
grounds that it contravenes the GATT Convention that the US has raised
draStically the tariff rate for small trucks of Japanese make. It is
the first time that Japan is going to file a complaint with GATT in
connection with a trade problem. The Japanese side will contend that
"This case of tariff raise is an act of restricting imports, and
therefore contravenes the GATT rules." The US recently
has presented strong requests to Japan in succession, in connection with
the growing Japan-CS economic friction. The Japanese side says that it
wants to counter the unfair measures against Japan by carrying such
measures into international agencies.

The present case was taken up between the Governments of Japan and
the US at unofficial consultations in September, 1980. The contentions
of the two sides, however, continued to run along parallel lines. As a
result, it became necessary to secure the intervention of a third party
called GATT, which is an international organization. from July last
year, "official consultations" were held on this case according to
Article 22 of the GaTT Convention.

Even these consultations, however, could not bring the case to a
settlement. The Japanese Government then gave up hope for settlement
by negotiations, and decided to file a complaint with GATT in order to
make a settlement by GATT's decision. The GATT Council is scheduled
to meet in session in Geneva within this month, and the Government will
make a complaint on that occasion.

The step of filing a complaint with GATT is provided for in
Paragraph 2, Article 23 of the GATT Convention. Following the
acceptance of the complaint by the GATT Council, three sub-committee
members (hailing from neutral countries), who are equivalent to judges
in a judicial trial, will be appointed. The three-member sub-committee

44

FOR OFINCJAI.USEGDNLN
will listen to the opinions of the plaintiff (Japan) and the defendant
(CS). and hand down an arbitr tion award or recommer .dation which
corresponds to the ruling of a law court. Filing of a complaint, there-
for e, is a more vigorous step than "consultations," and may be regarded
as a kind of emergency measure. Therefore. Japan until now has avoided
takin: t. .is Step in connection with trade problems.

" J

If the arbitrat1on or recommendation is against the US,"h the US

must restore its abnormal1v . igh tariﬁ rate (25 per cent). mich has
been applied to snal 1 tr- Jcks of Japanese ma<e, to its original level
(four per cent . If the LS r fuses to take this step, the Japanese

chernnent will be justified, by international rules, to take retaliatory
a:tion (such as to raise tariffs). In many past instances, however,
saTT's trial of trade disputes took too long, and the disputes
iisappeared natural1y before the trial came to an end.

I

3etween Japan an the US, a complaint was once filed by the US
side in con: .ection with the case of import restrictions on leather.
ch .he US is showing a pOSture to make a complaint in pursuit of
the liberalization of farm products.

The present problem came to the fore in connection with the sudden
expansion of passenger car and small truck exports from Japan to the US.
in August. 1935, the US Government carried out a revision of its tariff
classification list, which revision involved the raising of the tariff on
cab chassis for small trucks from four per cent (rate for automobile parts)
to 25 per cent (rate for unfinished cars). As a result. the sales price
of a small truck of Japanese make in the US rose by $500 to $1,000, and
ther was a sharp decline in sales. from January through October last
year, 107,600 such trucks were sold in the US. This figure was 63 per

cent less than that recorded in the corresponding period of the preceding
year.

The Japanese side began to control passenger car exports to the US
(with a maximum limit fixed at 1,680,000 for the present fiscal year),
according to the Government-to-Government 1;reement reached in April last
year. On the other hand. the Us side raised the tariff on small trucks

unil teraliy, without any consultation in advance with the Japanese
scvernnent .

...e US Government notified the Japanese Government on the 2nd that
it appreciates the positive posture taken by Japan in correcting the
non- tariff barriers, but that the US Congress maintains a stern attitude
:c-ard Japan. because the extent, to which Japan has decided to open its
mar ket, is still probiemat ical. "he notification was conveyed to Director
General FUKAEA cf the Econcmic Affairs Bureau of the Foreign Ministry by
' I sister to Japan SARPACLOUGH the same day. This is the first official
react11n sh-Dwn t; the US side tc the efforts made by Japan for the correcti
of its non- -tariff barriers.

 

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By the same day, Canada and the EC, too, recognized the efforts made
y Japan, and at the same time, announced their intention to seek further
liberalization. In the US Congress. mutuality bills have been proposed
in succession, and there is a packed schedule to hold hearings on problems
with Japan. As a result, it has become necessary for Japan to take early
such additional measures as aoolition of the remaining import restrictions
and liberalization of trade in the field of service industries.

The reaction of the US side was revealed at the request of Director
General FUKADA. who onferred with Xinister BARRACLOUGH on the lst. A:
t.is conference, FUKADa said that he "wants to know the reaction of the
CS ide." The US hinister, who conveyed the reaction to EUKADA by tele-
phone on the 2nd, revealed that "I have made contac: with my home govern-
ment,“ and then said that the US Governnent appreciates the "earnes: and
positive" efforts made by the Japanese side to correCt its non- tari ‘f
barriers, but iudges that ”Some measures taken by the Japanese side to
one: its mar<et. Such a: the expansion of the import Framework, are still

‘len tical." Reportedly, the CS xini ter also touched upon the reaction

0.1.!

in the CS Congress, and revealed as follows: .ne reaction is severe, and
dissatisfaction is particularly noticeable in the Senate." It deserves
attention that n-ot or.ly the 13 Congress but also the US Government itseﬁ

have expressed dissatisfaction.

In the US -Congress, Chairman 63 CNS of the Trade Sub-Committee of
the house ways and "esns -cmnittee, who is known as an advocate c‘ :ree
trade, ;to;csed a "retaliation ill" d' irected against Japan, on the heels
o: Senator hEZHZ. I: is expected that many nutuai ity bills will be
trooosed in Suc session in Congress hereafter. Also, t. .e International
T. .e Sub-Ccrmittae (:ha i...an: CA“?CR?H) of the Senate Finance Committee
is scheduled to hold a hearing, on the llth, on the proposed revision or
article 301 of the Trade A t in c-crdance with the principle of t:t-sl-
‘7. .he US Congress is expected to see a rush of hearings related to
Jaoan.

Icl;

..

It can be thought tnat the US Government has emphasized the stern
posture of the US Congress, because it wants to exhort Japan to "further
efforts" by clarifying its crisis-feeling that the growth of protectionism
in the US Congress prior to the off-year elections this fall cannot be
halted, unless Japan announces additional measures to open its market.

On the other hand, the Canadian Government recognized the measures
taken by Japan for the correction of the non-tariff barriers as a "good
tap," at the fourth meeting of the Japan-Canada Joint Committee on
Economic Co-operation, which meeting was held in the Foreign Ministry on
the 2nd. At the same time, however, it again asked for such measures as
abolition of the remaining import restrictions. The EC Commission. too,
expressed dissatisfaction. when Director General DENHAN of the EC External

#6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Relations Committee stated, at the press conference he held after the
recent high administrative-level consultations between Japan and the EC.
that the measures are "far from meeting our expectation."

The Government had expected. to a certain extent, such reactions
from other nations. It admits. however, that it must step up further
the efforts to open the Japanese market hereafter. which efforts are
not to be limited to such publicity campaigns as the visit to the US
and Europe by Chairman Masumi ESAKI of the LDP International Economic
Measures Special Research Council, now that such reactions have been
shown actually.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1982

cso: 4105/58

47

FOR OFFHJAI.US£1ONLY
ECONOHI C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISUZU T0 SUPPLY SMALL PASSENGER CARS T0 GM

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Japanese Vol 20 No 992, 9 Feb

[Article by Masaaki Sato]

[Text]

Isuzu Motors Ltd. has agreed
to supply General Motors
Corp. which owns 34 per cent
at the Japanese automaker.
with about $0,000 subcompact
cats a year from the summer
at test when Japan's voluntary
ratraint on car exports to the
US expires. it wu revealed
last week.

Sources said the arrange-
ment will call for some Yloo
billion in capital investment tor
which lsuzu plans to obtain
about V4045 billion from GM
in the form ot GM's purchase at
convertible debentures to be
issued by isuzu. it GM converts
all the deventures into stock. its
equity ownership 0! lsuzu will
climb from the present 34.2 per
can to around to per cent.

lsuzu is now developing the
next generation subcompact
trout-wheel drive car. based on
its version at Our: T-Car series
(dubbed Gemini in Japan) and
combined with concepts of S-
Car. which also is now under
thvelopment.

Both T-Car and s-Car are so
called “world cars." which are
produced by GM-alliiiated
automakers based on the same
blueprint with a tew modifica-
tions. (Isuzu Gemini and
Chevrolet Chevette are conven-

COPYRIGHT:

CSO: 4120/157

tional rear-wheel drive cars
shoring basic mechanical con-
cepts. SCar is the next-genera-
tion world car of GM tamily,
and the development at the
FWD car is underway in
Detroit. Tokyo and Ruessels-
hcim aiming at a marketing
start in one or two years.)

The subcompacts to be
applied to GM are now called
"ST-Cars" within Isuzu. Maybe
a litue bigger than the SCar.
the FWD ST-Car will be
powered with a moo-cc
gasoline engine or a 1M
diesel engine. The power
sources {or the ST-Car are said
to be extremely light. compact.
and trugai in operation.

GM is planning to sell those
ST-Cars as their was model
lrom the tall oi tau throne) its
Chevrolet Division Beside
supplying 200.000 vehicle a
year to GM. lsusu also im
to sell sr-Cars in Japan and
abroad thereby bringing up
annual production to about
300.000 units. As soon as details
are worked out with GM. lsuzu
will start remodeling its
assembly plant at Fujisawa.
Kanagawa Pret.

At present. lsusu is imple
menting a tryear. V200 billion
investment program. under
witch it is scheduled to build an

1982. the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8

engine I
Hokkaido

to supply
to the to]

procurim
vestment
through
further It
interest;
cd to obi
needed ft.
The Mi
Trade a
policy a
matters
capacity
voluntar:
exporlat
remodell
saws pli
policy.
lsusu's
contribu
cooperat
cutlntrie.
be allow
it the
alizea. i
where a
increase
in a Jap
in am
llshed t
Isuzu. it
mentor:
"will r
owner-st
live ya
(Commentary) Isuzu Motors' furnishing of large numbers of small-size
automobiles to GM (General Motors) of the US. and the accompanying
raising of the rate of the Isuzu shares held by GM. are to be extremely
noted in t. .e sense of foretelli ng the whereabouts of the small-car battle
in the world and the Japan-US automobile problem.

The small-car battle in the 1980's, on which battle the world's auto-

moile manufacturers have staked their business existence, has already reached
the third year. On the US market. which is regarded as the front stage
for this battle. the Big Three are still unable to free themselves from their
lo..g-term sluggish .ness. Various Japanese manufacturers, too, who are
attacking them, are being hampered by the wall of self-imposed restrictions
on exports to the US. and they are intent on firming up their footholds in
preparation for a long-term battle. The merger between Toyota haters and
Toyota Auto Sales, which merger was made public recently. is also in
preparation for the long-term battle.

it is GM. the biggest automobile manufacturer in the world. that is
taking steps steadily in this situation. In August last year, it achieved
its capital participation inSuzuki Motors which is the top-level manu-

facturer at light autonobi -es, and itopeneda way for selling, in the CS.
:ini-sars wi h l.coo-cc exhaust From August this year. it will start
the product .on of' 5- cars" also in Spain. It is said that GM's plan for

products has already been drawn up for the period up to 1990, and both
Isuzu and Suzuki are incorporated in this plan.

it is with awareness of Japanese automobiles that GM is to receive the
suppl' of small cars from isuzu at the rate of 200,000 cars per annum.
The ”J-tars." which are the first world cars put on sale with fanfare
in .ay last year. are .n a slump, contrary to the prior evaluation.
.nere are some causes for t .is, but the biggest cause is that they are
stiii inferior in cua.it/ to japa. .ese automobiles. and have no competitive

tower in t.e :ie-d c.' cost. either.

49

FIHICNHUCJAI.IEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From a long-range point of view, there is no doubt that GM will directly
produce "7 -cars" and S- cars" which are still smaller than 'J-cars."
however. in View of its experience as to "J-cars." it is too dangerous to
develop the production of small cars in the US immediately and across the
board. It iso resumed t2.at it will import such cars from Isuzu and Suzuki
fir t. in the form of finished cars, nd form a judgment while watching the
Situation.

If the small- -car battle in the world intensifies, medium-~and low"
level manufacturer sw; ll drop out earliest. Isuzu is becoming such an
presence as to promote a ' no :e for world-wide trucks (large-size trucks
in the world)" in the 5! family, virtually replacing CE in regard to trucks.
In regard to passenger cars. how ever. it is still weak. Its production of
passenger cars last year amounted to a little more than 120,000 cars, and this
number is the smallest among the nine passenger car manufacturers.

'0

in l97l, Isuzu decided to co-operate with GM to have its passenger-
car sector continue to exist. however, in view of the amount of
produttion at present, it may possibly be: he a “burden" in the future.
ISu:u '1as accepted Gd's request for supplying small cars, at this time when
the problem of extending the self-imposed restrictions on the export of
Japanese altorobiles to the CS is smouldering, simply because it has judged
that "how is nor the time for re-constructing the passenger car sector."

however, Isuzu's fund power is too weak. In compensation for introducing
funds from GE, t..e rate of Sh's investment will be raised to about be per-
cent. However. this will not -ndernine Isuzu's management. Isuzu has
chosen a way for survive: w‘ in t".e GM structure, and it will rather move
in the direction ofexcludin ts "softness" toward GM.

 

w
..

On the other hand, effect n the Japan-US automobile problem cannot
be over looked eit..er. The self-imposed restrictions on automobile exports
the 23 will 2 inef:ect entil the e. .dof fiscal 1982. and as to exports in
. co:.s.ltetio. .s are to he held agai n between Japan and the CS

3
he matter is s:.ll rllld. as can be seen from the fact that on
e
i

(ll

' 'I. 11

I
1 L) I" u
a:
n5 U

“ 0|
..
u)
p

, Senator 3A3:G?‘h, who cane to Japan in January this year,

.e e/tens ion of the reatrittions until the end of fiscal 1983.

a taching import nce to 68's having requested Isuzu to supply (small
). It judges that the possibility has arisen that the US will seek

the thure that factors other than quantitative restrictions be incorporate
on the problem of exports of :atanese automobiles to the C

 

‘J
(J.
yam-ta.

'1! III

Pf-
, but:'

i i

q —|(
Ill I-e'lJ

i.- Minister ABE also is burning with enthusiasm for industrial
oer 'ion in Japan- -J3 automobile induStry circles. There is the
t:thatIsuzu' 5 supply of small cars to GM and the raising of the
f ;.s investment will becote timely help in this regard.

 

 
  

 

.. n ." L- - ""-—
never, also it the se.:- h
-l
..

: osed re. trictions end at the end
of £353. as called for :v ' 2

Cap anese manurac turers will not

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
necessarily be able to engage in exports in the open air, as before.

..1ey wil rather be forced .c engage in orderly exports. If GH imports Isuzu
cars in large n-nbers andseLLS tnen. Toyota and Nissan w- '11 be pressed

:3 revi e" t: .eir strategy towarc tne 35.

as to plan advance into tne is, only Nissan is constructing smali-trucs
the tao centazies 1av- not gassed the "stage of Study" in

to a“:assenge r car tlents, th: construction of which the US side is

I: actua; ex; rt noozs are put on Toyota and Nissan :rom

4-.

1. and- ; :snverse‘;.'se-;s Isuzu' s smal- cars -n large nu. thers, they
L -nevitabiy have to take some step or Otner.

0|

1|

'9
o

I'- ”I
n- '1
' 0 0- n. m

(I

D“
D
I!"

.o‘ n‘ I,

I" I0 II- II) I"
I— (‘1! .1": III

i I

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C30: 4105/58

51

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
LIBERALIZED NAPHTHA IMPORTS RUN INTO DIFFICULTY

Taxes Hit
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 29 Jan 82 p 1

[Text]

M171 and the Resources and Energy Agency have begun studying the
problems concerning the oil policy to be established in connection with
the measures for the petro-chemical industry, on which measures attention
is now focused, to draw up their views on these problems by Harch.
Petro-chemical industry circles are strongly arguing for the correction
of the internal oil policy of the Government, on the grounds that this
policy, which does not approve the liberalization of naphtha imports and
which levies a tax on home—produced naphtha, is the major factor for the
present plight of the petro-chemical industry. On the other hand, the
Energy Agency holds it problematical, above all, that there is "reverse
discrimination" between home products and imports in the case of naphtha,
contrary to the primary necessity of treating home products favorably.

It thinks that the liberalization of naphtha imports, if carried out
under such a situation, will hinder the stabilization of oil supply in

the country. The Energy Agency is prepared to oppose liberalization
stubbornly from this standpoint. It also thinks that the demand for
reduction or abolition of the tax on home-produced naphtha leaves room
for consideration. This step, however, has bearing on the revenue
sources of the Government's Energy Special Account as a whole. For its
implementation, therefore, it is necessary to co-ordinate opinions with
various circles concerned. Thus, the step of tax reduction, too, involves

Toward the end of last year, the Chemical Industry Department of
the Industrial Structure Deliberation Council (Director of Department:
Hiromi ARISAHA) pointed out, in its interim report on relief measures
for the petro-chemical industry, that the Japanese petro-chemical
industry has lost its international competitive power, because the
price of naphtha, a material for petro-chemical products, in Japan is

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
higher than in other countries. It revealed the view that the high

price of naphtha in Japan has its cause in the present oil policy

which maintains the prices of raw materials at a high level artificially,
or by such measures as the Oil Industry Law, which bans the importation
of naphtha except through the oil-refining companies, and the levying of
an oil tax on home-produced naphtha. Petro-chemical industry circles,
too, have been demanding the complete liberalization of naphtha imports
and the reduction or abolition of the tax on home-produced naphtha.

They are pressing the Government for a fundamental review of the internal
oil policy which has brought about such a situation, by June this year,
when the Industrial Structure Deliberation Council is scheduled to
present its final report.

Confronted with these moves, the Resources and Energy Agency has
decided to make an earnest study of the naphtha problem and establish
a definite view of its own on this problem. According to the results
of the surveys conducted by the Agency until now, maximum possible
measures under the existing system have already been taken for the

convenience of naphtha importation. This can be seen from the fact
that the ratio of imported naphtha to total supply in the country,
which ratio was 29.1 per cent in 1980, rose to 35.“ per cent in the
January-November period of last year. Especially, the ratio became as
high as HH.O per cent in September, uu.u per cent in October and uu.5
per cent in November, last year, to satisfy virtually the demand of
petro-chemicai industry circles. As a result, the ratio of naphtha to
total products of the oil-refining companies, which ratio was 9.5 per
cent in 1980, fell speedily, to 8.5 per cent in September, 8.l per cent
in October and 7.u per cent in November, 1981, to the screams of these
companies.

Furthermore, imported naphtha is free of duty, while home-produced
naphtha is subject to a 3.5-per cent oil tax. Also, home-produced
naphtha must be stockpiled to an amount equal to 90 days' supply, but
the amount is equal to only 70 days' supply in the case of imported
naphtha. It can be seen, therefore, that home products, which primarily
should be proteCted against imports, are subject to "reverse discrimina-
tion," as far as the oil tax and the amount for stockpiling are concerned.
The Energy Agency thinks that it is difficult to remove the restrictions
on naphtha imports under such a situation.

Besides, a sudden decline in the demand for some kinds of oil products
will affect the quantity of crude oil to be handled by the refining
companies and hinder the supply of other kinds of oil products as well,
because oil products are obtained from crude oil. It can be thought,
therefore, that the liberalization of naphtha imports under the present
nituation will widen the window for importation limitlessly, and, with the
decline of demand for home-produced naphtha, make it impossible to secure
the necessary supply of kerosene and other oil products needed by the people
at large, the demand for which products is firm.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On the other hand, criticism has been raised in such countries as the
US against Japan's oil policy which keeps naphtha prices at a high level.
In recent years, however, international controls have been strengthened
against oil purchases, in such ways as the establishment of import goals
and voluntary restraint of purchases at high prices. At present, Japan's
oil imports are controlled by the Energy Agency's administrative guidance
over individual importers. If this framework for control is removed, it
will become impossible for the Government to meet the situation with soft
measures. In the end, it will become unavoidable to resort to such hard
steps as the establis.ment of a licensing system for imports. The Agency
holds that liberalization is difficult to carry out for this reason as well.
Moreover, all countries today control cil imports in accordance with their
respective internal circumstances. The Agency contends that there is no
reason for a country like the US, which controls even the prices of natural
gas, to make a complaint against Japan.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

Reaction Against Demand
Tokyo NIKKAK KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 4 Feb 82 p 1

[Text]

Petro-chemical induStry circles. which are demanding the exemption
of indigenous naphtha from taxation. abolition of the system of compulsory
stockpiling of naphtha and complete liberalization of naphtha imports,
have decided to apply for the right to import naphtha (to start importing
oil on the basis of the Oil Industry Law), depending on circumstances.
MIT! and the Resources and Energy Agency, however, have shown a strong
reaction against this decision, saying as follows: "We cannot accept any
of their demands under the present framework for the stabilization of oil
supply. Depending on circumstances, we shall not hesitate to relinquish
our responsibility of supplying indigenous naphtha" (high-ranking official
of the 3i; Department of the Energy Agency). In this connection. the
Energy Agency has revealed its plan to set up an "association to study
the development of new uses of n phtha" within its Oil Department, for the
study of such questions as follows: (1) the limit for the reduction of the
ratio of naphtha to be obtained by the respective oil companies; (2) the
possibility of expanding drastically the uses of naphtha except as a
naterial for petro—chemical products, by such methods as the use of naphtha
mixed with heavy oil 2 and asphalt for fuel; and (3) the possibility of
decreasing draStically the supply of indigenous naphtha to the petro-chemical
industry under the oil supply plan for the period after fiscal 1992, which
plan will be drawn up by the end of March. Within hITI, there is the growing
view that it is necessary to review the energy policy in connection with the
meaSuras to be taken for the raw material industries. MIT: leaders doubt.
however. whether it is proper that petro-chemical industry circles are going

5h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to resort to vigorous steps hastily, at this time when the Chemical Industry
:epartment of the Industrial Structure Deliberation Council is scheduled to
draw up its final report covering the naphtha problem in June this year.

So, the possibility of devel pnent of fierce emotional confrontation involving

n-.. ctricials and induStrial circles concerned is growing.

Petro-chemical industry circles hold that the high cost of material
naphtha in Japan is the biggest factor for the loss of international
competitive power by the Japanese petro-chemical industry, nd that such
a situation has been created artificially by the energy policy which lays
major emphasis on the stabilization of energy supply. From this stand-
point, they contend that the Government should abolish the tax on indige-
nous naphtha (3.5 per cent) and the system of compulsory stockp ling of
naphtha, and carry out the liberalization of naphtha imports. They say
th t seven petro-chemical industry companies and a company, which is
importing naphtha jointly with petrc-chemical industry companies, will
apply .or the right to import naphtha according to the provisions of the
ii; Industry Law, unless their demands are accepted.

The Resources and Energy Agency, however, maintains the following

t‘on: "We can understand the circumstances in petro-chemical iniuStry
However, a drastic decline in the demand for naphtha will lead

I to a decline in the supply of kerosene and other major oil products.
: i.der the stabilization of oil suppl' in Japan, because all these oil
rcducts are obtained from : ude oil." ﬁne Agency also points out that
imported naphtha is free of duty, while indigenous naphtha is subject to
taxation, and that indigenous naphtha must be stockpiled to an amount enough
to meet demand for 90 days, as compared with 70 days in the case of imported
naphtha. 0n the basis of these facts, it contends that imported naphtha is
treated more favorably than indigenous naphtha. Besides, the Agency points
Cat that the ratio of inpcrted napntha to be used by the petro-chenicai
industry recently has risen to a little more than kn per cent, although
“htha must be imported solely through oil companies uncer the present

s-t;ati:n.

   

The Agency holds it particularly problematical that petro-chemical
industry circles are going to resort to such a vigorous step as to apply
for the importation of naphtha under the Oil Industry Law, at this time
when the Industrial Structure Deliberation Council is scheduled to
complete its Studies covering the naphtha problem by June, and when the
Energy Agency, too, is groping for various measures. It showed a strong
reaction, saying as follows: "It is strange that petro-chemical industry
circles are acting in such a way as to secure concessions from us by
threatening us with a dagger, because of their domestic circumstances.

He cannot accept but ignore their application under the present situation."
It went so far as to say that “He may relinquish our responsibility of
supplying indigenous naphtha, if they persist in their demands." A MITI
leader, too, revealed the view that "It is very problematical that petro-
chemical industry circles start such an action, at this time when MITI is
asking all those concerned to find a moderate solution through talks."

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8

tux OfflCLAL up: UNLY

 

Cn the other hand. the Energy Agency thinks that the demand for
indigenous naphtha will inevitably decrease. 50. 1t "111 33: up an
association to study how to develop uses of naphtha except as a raw
material for petro-chemical products, and to what extent the ratio of
naphtha to be cbtained by oil industry circles can be lowered. The
annual consumption of naphtha in Japan amounts to about 21 million
kiloliters, and about 33 per cent of this amount is used as material
for petro-chemical products. The remaining amount is used by such
industries as fertilizer, gas and electricity. The Resources and
Energy Agency, therefore, wants to decrease the supply to the petro-
chemical industry drastically, and increase instead the supply to the
electricity and other industries which use naphtha for fuel. Naphtha,
if mixed with heavy all C, can be used as a relatively clean fuel.

This use of naphtha will also lead to the development of new uses of
heavy oil C, which at present is in a state of oversupply. So, it is
possible to kill two birds with one stone. The ratio of naphtha
obtained by oil industry circles, which ratio was 9.5 per cent in 1980,
recently has fallen to 7.6 per cent. At present, the Energy Agency is
seeking the opinions of the oil companies on the extent to which it is
possible to lower thi ratio hereafter. 0n the basis of these opinions,
it will cut drastically the supply of naphtha to the petro-chemical
industry in its oil Supply plan.

Petro-Chemical Industry Circles to File Petition as Early as Next Week

Seven petro-chemical industry companies held a conference of their
Presidents at the Hotel Okura in Toranomon, Tokyo, on the 3rd, to discuss
the problem of material naphtha. In the end, it was agreed that the seven
companies should jointly file a petition with MITI next week, at the
earliest, to ask for the following: (1) exemption of indigenous naphtha
from the oil tax; (2) abolition of the system of compulsory stockpiling of
naphtha; and (3) liberalization of naphtha imports. Depending on the
result of the petitioning, the seven companies -- Showa Denko, Sumitcmo
Chemical, Mitsubishi ?etro-Chemical, Mitsubishi Chemical Industries. hitsui
?etro-Chemical Industries, Osaka Petra-Chemical Industries (affiliated with
hitsui Toatsu Chemicals), and Sanyo Petro-Chemical Industries (affiliated
with Asahi Chemical Industry), with the participation of Petro-Chemical
Material Joint import, will present to the Resources and Energy Agency a
report on the starting of oil import business, on the basis of Article 12
of the Si; Industry Law.

The problem of material naphtha has come to the fore, because the
Japanese petro-chemical industr', which uses the highest-priced naphtha

in the world, at this time when chemical industries are seriously
depressed, is in what is called triple distress. Petro-chemical industry

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
circles have been demanding, above all. the liberalization of naphtha
irsorts, which will enable them to obtain low-priced naphtha from abroad
an: recuce thek' product ion costs. However, they have gone into fierce
-;on:ron:ation with the Resources and Energy Agency and oil-refining
i..dustry circles which maintain their stand against liberalization
within the established framework 0. energy policy. It deserves attention,
:here: are what attitude the Resources and Energy Agency will take toward
petro- -cnemical industry circles' presentation of a report on their
starting of import business.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

f
n

CSO: 5105/58

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 21 Jan 82 p 7

[Text]

In connection with ITI MiniSter ABE's statement in the US hinting at
the strengthening of sanction measures against the Soviet Union, including
restrictions on new contracts, trading circles concerned are watching with
attention development of the Japanese Government's policy in the future,
fearing that "in case measures, such as the suspension of the extending
of export credit loans. are taken, exports to the Soviet Union may be af-
fected on a large scale."

The volume of exports from Japan to the Soviet Union last year was
about $3.2 billion (on the basis of customs Statistics S;ot reports).
the ratio of which to the total amount of exports carried out by Japan is
a little over 2%. which is by no means big. However, it showed a smooth
increase, that is, an increase of lh$ over that in the preceding year, while
the environment surrounding Japan-Soviet trade has been worsening, due to
the Polish situation. etc. Recently, too, "inquiries are being made active-
ly in the extensive fields of commodities, such as machinery, chemicals.
textiles, and iron and steel" (harubeni Soviet Office). Trading circles
have been watching the Soviet Union with attention as a promising export
market, when viewed from :edium- and 2:ng-range standpoints.

In case measures, such as the suspension of institutional financing.
including Export-Import Sank loans, are taken, there is the strong pos-
sibilitytafbusiness talks on the export of machinery plants, an item the
export of which is increasing, being actually discontinued. [Circles con-
cerned] are in accord on the view that "it is probably impossible to avoid
effects on exports to the Soviet Union” (Nissho-Iwai Executive Director
Sosaburo TSUJI).

In regard to the recent trendconcerningplant exports to the Soviet
Union. various trading companies had concluded [contracts for] exports,

with a rush. before the raising of interest rates concerning the export
credit guidelines by the OECD on November 16 of last year. As a result,

58

FOR OFTNCJAI.UBE!MNLY
"the situation where business talks are taking a brief rest" (Mitsui Bussan.
etc.) is continuing. For thi reason, there will not appear a situation where
effects will come to the fore immediately, even if measures to susoend

the extending of export credit loans are taken. However, it is viewed that

in case economic sanctions againSt the Soviet Union are protracted. there
will inevitably be effects on business talks.

In trading circles, there are many voices seeking the Government's
giving consideration to act in concert, at least. with the various European
nations. in regard to an attitude toward the policy of strengthening sanctions
agains: the Soviet Union,and notto place trading circles in a less ad-
vantageous position than European enterprises as to conditions for carry-
in; out competition.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon _Keza1 Shimbunsha 1982

C50: (4105/58

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USSR REQUESTS BANK LOAN EXTENSION

Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 4 Feb 82 p 3

[Text]

It came to light on February 3 that the Foreign Trade Bank of the
Soviet Union has been requesting private banking organizations in Japan
to extend a total of $70 million (about $16 billion) as loans. According
to a banking source. the Soviet side explained that it wants to use the
requested funds as down-payment for trade financing connected with the
inports of large-dimentional steel pipe,on which agreement was reached
toward the end of November of last year. It is unusual for the Soviet
Union to have directly sought of Japanese banks the extending of dollar-
basis loans. in the form of the procurement of temporary funds. The bank-
ing source views that this shows that the shortage of funds in the Soviet
Union has become more serious, with financial aid to Poland also becoming
an additional cause.

The Soviet Union proposed, in its request, seven years as the term
of the loans, and the Euro-dollar interest rate (l5% level at present for
loans of a three-month period) plus a floating interest rate of 0.5%,
as the interest rate. The Foreign Trade Bank of the Soviet Union reached
agreement with the Japan Export-Import Bank last year on the receiving of
:c-operation loans, from Japanese private banking organizations, amounting
to $99.3 billion (about Shoo million), equivalent to 85% of the funds neces-
sary for buporting 700,000 tons of large-dimentional steel pipe from Japan.
However, that country hurriedly sought of private banks alone the ex-
tending of loans, because it has not been able to obtain funds for the
remaining 15% of the down-payment.

The Soviet Union has so far supplemented. in many cases, deficits in
foreign capital by selling gold. However. it is said that that country
has recently changed this policy into the policy of holding down the sell-
ing of gold. which leads to a fall in the international prices of gold,
and of making up for a shortage of funds by obtaining loans from the West.
in coping with the situation where necessary funds have come to run up,
due to the stagnant grain production within its country and an increase in

60

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE¢DNLY

financial aid to the various East European nations. including Poland. A
leading magazine in the US reported earlier that the Soviet Union is
requesting Japan and Europe to extend a total of Suoo million as loans. In
banking circles in Japan. the view has started to appear that the $70 mil-
lion, [which the Soviet Union has requested] this time may be a part of
the reported Soviet request to Japan and Europe.

Japan has so far extended loans to the Soviet Union, mainly in the
form of co-operation loans from the Export-Import Bank and private banks.
Since around the second half of last year, however, the Soviet Union has
started to aim to approach banking circles in Japan, by eagerly urgin
private banking organizations to open branch offices in Moscow. All the
nore for this reason, if they are to comply with the Soviet request this
tine, there will be the possibility of the Soviet side's starting to cit in
loans frcm Jaganese private bankin organizations on a full scale, all at once.

Varicus private banks in Japan take the stand, for the present, that
“it is quite im;cssible to respond to it,in the light of the proposed ton-
i_.i:ns," because the interest rate, which the Soviet Union is seeking, is
l:»er than regular private-level loans extended to that country by a little
' 'nan 0.3% tc 0.5%. Also, there is the infornatlcn that the US is
:5 tne various nations of the Nest the suspension of :rivate-level
.0 th Soviet Snion, for the t-rpose of checking the Soviet U.ion from
vening in Poland. For this reason, private banks in Japan intend to
assume a careful attitude. for the time being, while watching moves to be
naie 3y banks in West Europe and ascertaining the Finance Ministry's judgment.

 

:- L"

l'~ I - t-a I
" 1: cu ch
II III I
.Ir :1 A m
'1 D‘-
:! r
I 0':

COPYRIGHT: Sihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C50: 4105/58

61

FOR,OFT1C1AI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SC 1 ENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

0.5.. JAPAN NUCLEAR AGREDﬁENT DISCUSSED

Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 8 Feb 82 p a

[Text]

(Hashington, February 7, Correspondent YAHAZAKI) The White Heuse
Office of Science and Technology Policy Director XEYHORTH, who is the
advisor to US President REAGAN on science and technology policies, granted
an interview recently with this Nihon Keizai reporter (Correspondent
YAHAZAKI). and clarified the basic points of the "REAGAN policy for tech-
nology.“ centering on relations with Japan. In this interview. Director
KSYHORTH mentioned a revision of the Japan-US Atomic Energy Agreement for
the first time. and also ciarified that a proposal for an "international
joint development project" with Japan and Europe, aiming at the adapting
of the fast breeder reactor to practical use will be formally made, in the
near future.

He also said that the establishment of a new "Hhite House Science
Conference" has been decided, for the formulation of comprehensive policies

for advanced technology. including the Strengthening of the United States'
most sophisticated and advarced technology.

Director KEIKORIH occupies the position of being in overall management
of the REAGAN Administration's science and technology policies. In the course
of this interview. Director KEYWORTR touched upon the problem of revising the
Japan-US Atomic Energy Agreement. and emphasizing that "an early revision is
indispensable." stated definitely that ”I wish to make it possible to conclude
a new agreement at the earliest possible time."

The intention of revising the Atomic Energy Agreement has been hinted
at by the US Government from before. but this was the first time for a
person. holding a responsible position in the White House. to make this

clear. and the Japanese side will also be pressed to formulate new measures
to cope with this.

As for the concept for international joint studies for the adaptation
of fast breeder reactors to practical use. he said that "talks will be pushed,
centering on Britain and West Germany. in Europe, but basically, it is joint

62

FOR OlTﬁCJAl.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

research between Japan and the US," and showed the intention of pushing full-
scale joint studies in the direction of adopting them for practical use.

In regard to the REAGAN Administration's science and technology policies.
Director KEYHORTH said that they will be given the position of "technological
security policies," with the strengthening of restrictions on the transfer of
highly advanced strategic technology to the Soviet Union and emphasis on the
strengthening of the United States' science and technology capability, as the
two pillars, and that they will be pushed in a positive way.

The main contents of the questions and answers exchanged with Director
KEYWORTH were as follcws:

Question: The problem of restricting the transfer of high technology
and strategic technology to the Soviet Union has come into the limelight.
I wish to hear the REAGAN Administration's basic policy on this.

Answer: Our basic principle is to restricts:ri:tlythe transfer of
any technology. which can he used for the improvement and Strengthening of
Soviet military power. The US has so far been able to maintain Superiority
over the Soviet Union in military power because it maintained superiority
over the Soviet Union in the technological field. The approving of free
transfer of technology to the Soviet Union will endanger the maintaining of
US superiority over the Soviet Union in technology.

Question: In the field of co-operatinn with the US on the strengthening
of restrictions on the exports of high technology to the SOViet Union, we near
that the REAGAN Administratlor is attaching big expectations on Japan . .

Answer: We are strongly requesting that all the Hestern allies,
including Japan, fall in pace with this. It is especially important
that (1) all nations strictly uphold the restriction standards of COCO“.
(2) they establish the common awareness that the transferring of high
technology to the Soviet Union will have grave effects on the security of
the Nest. and (3) they refrain from actions which will run counter to US
sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union.

Question: At the same time as blocking the transfer of technology
to the communiSt bloc, the REAGAX Administration is also laying emphasis
on the propping up of its own technology, standing on the basis of the
decline in the United States' advanced and strategic technology capability
in recent years. I connection with this, I heard that President REAGAN is
planning to establish a special task force for this ...

Answer: The new establishment of a science conference in the white
House has been decided. It will be made up of 13 most outstanding science

and technology experts of the US. and will be headed by Bell Research Institute
Deputy Eirector Solomon BUXBAUH (Ti: phonetic]. The announcement will be made
by the President. even during this week. This conference will check compre-

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hensively into the most advanced technology policies of the US, including the
application of advanced technology, the development of more advanced and
strategic technology. the development of technology, the purpose of which
will be for use for armaments and security, etc.

Question: Can those science and technology policies of the RiASAN
Administration be understood as technological security policy?

Answer: You are correct. The development, transfer and superiority
of technology are indispensably related to the security and stability of
the US and of the world. At the same time, strong competition from other
countries will be good material for the development of 05 technology.

Question: What are your concrete measures for the expanding of the
utilization of nuclear energy?

Answer: The REAGAN Administration places greatest emphasis on measures
for the handling of nuclear energy waste, the spreading of nuclear re-
processing and the application of faSt breeder reactors to practical use.
Especially. we will soon propose to Japan and our European allies joint
international research for the adaptation of fast breeder reactors to
practical use, on a long-range basis. The us has earmarked as much as
15 million dollars as the budget for this, in its fiscal 1983 budget.

As regards Europe, talks will be pushed. centering on Britain and west

Germany. However, we are basically aiming at joint research between Japan
and the US.

Japan-US nuclear energy relations. including the problem of the Tokai-
mura re-processing facilities, are coming to an important stage. Are you
thinking of a revision of the Japan-US Atomic Energy Agreement?

Answer: We consider that a revision, at an early date, is indispensable.
Japan-US nuclear energy relations should be based on not only a sense of mutual
trust in Japan-VS relations in general, but also on special trust relations
and co-operative relations in the fi id of nuclear energy, including safe-
guards and nuclear non-proliferation.

Question: what is the position of the REAGAN Administration toward
the nuclear non-proliferation policy, which had been advocated in a positive
way by the preceding CARTER Administration?

Answer: The nuclear non-nroliferation policy will be maintained
Ladieilly. However, nuclear nun-pzuliteration must be maintained and
strengthened through political negotiations. Our grand premise is that
nuclear non-proliferation will be realized in connection with diplomatic
policies arc by political methods. in that meaning, the REAGAN Administra-
tion's nuclear non-proliferation policy is extremely realistic.

COPYRTCIFT: Nlhon Keizai S'nim‘ounsha 1982

C50: 4106/66
64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

CANADA EXPECTED TO FASE NUCLEAR FUEL SUPPLY
Tokyo YOMIURI SHIMBUN in Japanese 6 Feb 82 p 1
[Text]

According to what was clarified by a Government source on the
5th, thevaernment of Canada, which is the biggest natural uranium-supplying
country for Japan, has formally announced that it will markedly ease its
restrictions on nuclear materials toward Japan and adopt a "long-term
comprehensive prior agreement system." This was proposed at the Japan-
Canada nuclear energy negotiations which were informally held late last
month. The policy of the the Governments of the two countries is to
sign a note of agreement by about June. The US Government also hinted, at
the Japan-US nuclear energy problem consultations held in Hashington early
this month, at the posture of starting negotiations for the "permanent
easing of restrictions" on the re-processing of nuclear fuelby the first half
of this year. Also, between Japan and Australia, the Nuclear Energy
Agreement was revised last month. Thus, the biggest natural uranium and
enriched uranium-supplying countries are all to ease their restrictions
toward Japan. As these measures are indispensable for the establishment
of the nuclear fuel cycle. the Government will do its utmost for
negotiations and work for the promotion of nuclear power generation. At
the same time, it is welcoming them as measures in accordance with INFCS
(International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation), which is aimed at making
peaceful uses of nuclear energy compatible with the prevention of nuclear
proliferation.

The nuclear energy team consisting of the Directors of the Divisions
in charge at the Foreign Ministry, MITI, and the Science and Technology
Agency held informal negotiations with the Canadian Government in Ottawa on
the 33th and the 26th of last month and with the US Government in Washington
on the ist and the 2nd of this month, successively, over the flexible
implementation of the Nuclear Energy Agreements.

The Japan-Canada Nuclear Energy Agreement imposes severe restrictions
on the movement of nuclear materials overseas and re-processing, for the
prevention of nuclear proliferation. and seeks that the supplier country
(Canada) consent to the re-processing of spent nuclear fuel and bringing it

65

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out from the country. in each case. This is called a "separate :rior
agreement system." Partly because 0. the complex administrative procedures,
the Japanese side has teen restricted as to the automony of uses of nuclear
energy and the degree of freedom of uses of nuclear materials.

Last year, the Canadian Government hinted that it is alright to
revise the separate prior agreement and inspection syStem. At the latest
informal consultations. however, it agreed to shift to a "long-term
comprehensive prior agreement system" which has a weak restriction coloring.
This system has a big advantage in that if the list and o pabilities (plan
for using nuclear energy) of various facilities in Japan (including nuclear
power plants an nuclear fuelre-processingplants). which use Canadian
3 tural uranium (to be imported after being re-processed to enriched uranium
'n the US) are reported to the Canadian side collectively, the "stream"
ear materials. including re-processing, will become free on the
Japan.

0'
'3
r
(I I)
s" D"

This formula is the sane as the contents incorporated in the revised

Japan-Aastralia Suclear Energy Agreement. Japan and Canada have decided

to pretare a "note of agreement concerning the new formula as soon as
possible." and it is expected to come into effect by about June. However,

as the the principle in terms of the "prior agreement system,’ which is

laid down in the present Japan-Canada Agreement. is nottochange. the Agreement
will not be revised. and a torn of changing the implementation will be

taxe..

At the informal negotiations on nuclear energy which were held in
Washington. on the other hand, the Japanese side asserted that the Japan-US
joint decision (liberalization or easing of the restrictions on re-processing).

which came into effect in November last year, should be eased further and
shifted to a "permanent measure."

In response to this, the US side pointed out that in the US Government
and Congress. voices atta;iing importance to nuclear non-proliferation and
opposing a ”permanent measure" are still strong. However, it is thought that

there are prospects forbeing able to start formal negotiations for permanent
casing. within half a year.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbuns‘na 1982

C50. 4106/66

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DEVELOPMENT 01" SEA BOT‘I‘G‘I RESOURCES CRITICIZED

Lag Deplored
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAISHIMBUN in Japanese 3 Feb 82 pp 1, 3

[Text]

The Governments of the US, Britain, West Germany and France have
notified Japan that they will sign, on February 19, a secret agreement
on the monopoly of development of the sea-bottom mineral resources in
the Pacific and other areas, which agreement will take effect simul-
taneously with the signing. This club of four nations will establish
zine lots for the early development of the sea-bottom strategic mineral
resources, such as cobalt and nickel, which resources are about no times
as plentiful as those on land. Japan, which is not a party to the agree-
ment, cannot take part in this project. So, the Government will file
protests with the Governments of these four countries by diplomatic notes
around the time of the going into force of the agreement. Japan did not
join the club of four nations, because it attached greater importance to
the UN Conference on the Law of the Sea, which Conference is to establish
international rules concerning the development of sea-bottom resources.
This Conference, however, is still unable to gain a prospect for its
arrival at a conclusion, because it is involved in the confrontation
between the US and the developing nations. If such a situation is left
as it is, Japan will be left behind the international race for the
development of sea-bottom resources. Moreover, it may lose the government
funds amounting to about ¥1o billion, which funds it has already poured
into the development of sea-bottom resources as a national project.

The sea-bottom mineral resources, the development of which is to be
started by the four nations according to the agreement among themselves,
are distributed mainly in the Pacific, especially at the bottom of the
sea between the ﬂaweiian Islands and the North American Continent, in the
form ofnodules consisting mainly of manganese. The nodule contains,
besides manganese, more than ten kinds of rare metals including cobalt,
which is used for military weapons and atomic reactors, nickel and copper.
It is expected that it will become possible to meet the total demand for

67

FOR OFFICIAL USEICNVLY
cobalt with the sea-bottom resources, with the progress of the develop-
ment of these resources.

according to a Government source, the four-nation agreement is called
the ”Agreement on Rutual hationei Systems" concerning the development of
sea-bottom mineral resources. This agreement provides for the following:
(l) SimultaneOusl' with the going into force of the agreement, the organ--
zations of the four countries, which organizations are to undertake the
development of resources, shall report t t.1eir respective Governments the
nine lots they have seleCted for prospeCt ing; (2) When the lots selected
by these organizations overlap eac‘. other and when organizations
concerned cannot make a oomcromise by negotiations between themselves, the
mat er will be settled by Government-to-Governmer .t consultan ons; (3} The
areas of the mine lots to be actuired by these organizations will not be
li.itei ,(U) Commercial development will not be permitted until January,
195 3, but prelirinary minin will not be restricted; {5) After the going
into f-orce o: the agree:.:t, only the countries, which have taken necessary
internal legislati".e stews. -.ill be admitted to this agreement, but no
country will be admitted until January 2“ next year, at the earliest; and
(5) the participants i1 the agrecnent and th ir Governments shall bear the
obligation to ken , SJCh matters as the ooeraticn of the agreement secret

A ﬁovernnent source p". C out
exclusive" as a: inter:=-i:.al a:
late Janlary next y-tar or lat er that

hat this agreement is "extremely

.
L
_..- .'- : -A- .‘--“
5-36 5
.
J

 

4-1..- -- -5 o-v~ Ol!\--

apan can take tart in the agreement,
even if tr .e relate i. -ternal laws are to be revised to. meet the require-
:.ents of this agr eer .eut. it can be expected that enterorises of such

1

countries as th 85 wil lacquire most of the excellent mine lots by that
tir.e. Since the start of the 1970's, five groups, which were formed as
international consortia for the development of resources under the leader-

ship of big Burt'ean and US non-ferrous metal enterprises, have been
endeavoring for the development of technology. Last year. a US major
(international ci lcapital) purchased Kennecott which is one of the leaders
of the consortia, to take tart in the project.

'I 1..

On the other hand, the deliberations on the proposed Treaty on the Law of
the See at the h 2:n:erer.cec:nthe Lawlotthe Sea, which Conference issusported
by Japan, have had hard sa-ling. In view of the fact that the sea-bottom
resources are distributed in the high seas. the proposed Treaty aims at
establishing common rules to be observed by all nations including the
Soviet Union and other communist countries and the developing nations as
well as the advanced nations of the West, and setting up a unified inter-
national organization with the right to control the development of these
resources. The REAGAH AdminiStration of the Us, however, is strongly
opposed to this Treaty, on the grounds that such a treaty will make it
impossible ‘or CS enterprises to grin profits from the investments they
have already made, and moreover, bring benefits to the Soviet Union.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The UN :onference on the Law of the Sea is scheduled to reopen on
March 7. It is certain that the Soviet Union and the developing nations
at this Conterence will raise a Strong voice of protest against thearbitrary
:s:"’:r. ma-ie :y the four .1aticns including theiJS. Unless the UN Conference.
however adopts aydreft of the new Treaty on the Law of the Sea,
the four nations will establish mine lots and start prospecting enter-
prises earlier than the establishment of a new aw of the ea. Japan
is scheduled to protest against the arbitrary step taken by the four
nation .5, but will be confronted w- 'th the necessity of groping for a
compromise with t. .ese nations.

    

Japan has already poured government funds, which amount to ¥9,3OO
..illion. into such projects as construction of prospecting ships. The
Government holds, however. that research and development will not be
completed until 1988 or 1989. Of private enterprises, the Mitsubishi
group and the Sumitono group have rade contributions to the international

cnscrtia formed by European and US enterprises. So, these two groups
alone are likely to enjoy the benefits of the four-nation agreement.
The Japanese Government, however, has maintained the policy oF relying
on indigenous technology and funds for the full-scale development of
sea-bottom resources.

Japan Lagging in Technology; Europe and US Give Priority to Security;
Monopoly Agreement on Development of Sea-Bottom Resources

(Commentary) -- The CS enacted an internal law for the development
of sea-bot tom resources in June, 1930. Britain, West Germany and :rance,
too, have enacted such laws until now. Japan, however, has been unable
to ta<e s-ach a legislative step, largely because it has been lagging
behind these nations in technological development. A prospecting ship,

the "hakurei-zars," has already gone into operation. This ship, however.
"lacks t21e ability to discover excellent mine lots" (Government source).

In such a si ion no decisive step can be taken for the early enactment
o: tn: neededJa inter .1al law.

Another reason is the delay in the establishment of rules conce.ning
t‘e development c: sea-bottom resources of the world by the UN Conference
on tre Lew of the Sea. It is expected that a sea law treat .y, even i: agreed
upor. .n t‘e next sessic. cf this L.l Conference, wi '11 act take effec: until
19 38 or later, because such proced-res as ratification must be taken by the
sianatories. So, Japan remained unprepared, thinking that it "wil 1 not miss

the :-:at," even if it foil lows t..e JN schedule in its eftorts for legislation
nd technological development.

”hile Japan remained idle, the RSAGAN Administration of the US
decided that the securing of sea- -b0ttom strategic resources will
guarantee the security of the western world, and embarked on conclusion
cf 3 :cur- nation agreement, with the consent of three European nations.

69

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2: is expected, however, that such an agreement will invite strong
obfeCtions from the deVeioping nations. It is said, therefore, that the

US Government is ccntempiating a modified drafto.‘ the Treaty or. t..e Law of
the Sea, 'A. ich dr.:t wili.. ‘12:; e‘tze :our-nation agreement with the -3 treaty
to be con:1uded,te make it possible for the US to make a compromise with
the developing nations at the UN Conference on the Law of the Sea.

   

Unless such a draft is adopted, however, the four nations will
establish mine lots and start prospecting enterprises ahead of other
nations. So, it is. .ecessary for Japan, which is scheduled to protest
to these four nations to grape for a compromise as well. It can be
said that it is necessary for Japan to make itseﬁ prepared, first of
all, to take part in the developtent 0: resources, so that it can gain
an advantageous position in Such a situation.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

Protest To Be Lodged
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 3 Feb 82 p 1

[Text]

The US, Britain, West Germany and France, four nations in all, have
agreed to conclude an a.'rceme::t for monopolizing deep sea-bottom mineral
:ezources development. Cancel-hing thi-;, the Foreign Mini stry, on Iebruary
¢izd tilt "the deveingrm-n ' n? :hu Ile:n sea bottom should be ax" .-vut-.-:. ha.--i
2:. a :c: .preh-.nsive ruin \I.|Q 3N Treaty on the Law of the Sea). “ Thus, thv
..i..i..try officially c- '-3rificd the [01 icy of lodinng protests with the four-

nu: ion; at t. .e stage when the nqrtemcnt takes effect in the near [Ulul'h

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

050: 4106/55

70

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECNNOLOGY

CONSTRUCTION OF NEH-TYPE CONVERTER REACTOR PUSHED
Tokyo NIHON KETZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 22 Jan 82 p 8

[Text]

The Atomic Energy Commission (Chairman: Science and Technology Agency
Director General ﬂAKhGAHA) as of the Qist firmed up the patio policy of
:ronnting the constrUCtion of a demonstration reactor for the new-type convex
reactor (AT3). using a mixture of plutonium and uranium as the fuel, Follow-l
-; centerciai reactors. The output capacity of the demonstration ruuClO? wi;
be 6C0.0CO KH, and as to the construction cost of ¥320 billion, the Governmc:
and private circles will pay ¥20 billion - ¥SC billion in aid, to push the
-cnctruction. The commercial reactors (output capacity: one million Kw eacl
will be materialized with the construction of 3 - S reactors in mind. In
regard to the main body for the construction of the reactors, it Ha. decided
that the Atomic Energy Comrintion will not decide on it, and that the formula
)5 deciding on it after re iiving recommendations from private circles.
'ncluding electric power unnianicc .nc reactor manufacturers, will be ado;ICI
This policy will be explained by Chairman NAKAGAHA to representatives of
the Federation of Electric ?owur Com anies, the Atomic Energy Industrial
forum, Hitachi. which i; a manufacturer, etc., at the AEC discussion muutins
20 30 held on the 27th, and private circles' positive co-operation will be
re:uested.

  
 

As to the construction of the ATR to be autonomously developed by
Japan, the New-Type Converter Demonsrration Reactor Evaluation and Study
Special Sub-Committee, which is a subordinate organization for the Atomic
Energy Commission, compiled the following recommendation in July last year:
"The development should be pushed with private circles as the main body,
with the support of the State.” The said Commission, receiving this
recommendation, has been pushing studies on such matters as the main body
for the carrying out of the construction, the wavs or rate of the share of
construction expenses between the Government and private circles.
and the number of commercial reactors to be constructed.

As a result, a policy was firmed up to the effect that it is necessary

for the Government and private circles to co-operate in tackling the
construction of the ATR, and the Commission's views were firmed up.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main ooihts of he Commission's views are as follows: (1) To

i F e n clear oower gener tion system in the future.
construction of a emonsttation reactor should be pushed, first of all;

(2) the :ain body or he conStruotion should be decided by receiving
reconnendations from nuclear power induStry circles including electric power
industry circles and nanuf tturers- (3) a part of the f'nd for th conStruct
of the demonstration reactor should be shared between the Government and grit

  

circles. the unit brice for newer generation should be established on the
l vel of lﬁG (liquefied natural gas) thermal power generation, which re""'
a .

the hi_hest cost £13" energies to be Substituted fo:-oil, and it a

take: :7 electric tower companies; and (u) in consideration of the risk on

the part of the nain body for the construction, the oOSt should be calculate:

by fi.ing the operation rate of the demonstration reactor at 5C percent. whit
e

is low

I
III

«I

Especially as to the conStructicn funds, the cosr for the construction
of a demonstration reactor amounts to some ¥320 billion, about -0 oercent as
high as that for a light-water reaCtor for commercial nuclear power generatic
For this reason. the Conmission has adopte: the idea of light ning the burder

of the main body for construction by tixing the unit orioe for power

gene ation at a relatively high level, an proposed that the Government and
:ri:ate circles cover the unprofitable ;art in the form of aid in ccnstructi:
: "5 3 er rte: saws that if the unit grioe for power generati

   
 
   
  
  

tor is fixed on the level of LNG thermal power
to some ¥20 billion will be necessary even when
7 the main body for the construction, and that i
‘ level of coal thermal ;ower generation, :hich
-r-, aid -rouhting to some V50 billion will be
level cf LNG oower generation will be

:I
4;

I)
'l
I
. r
m u

t rs too,:ushi:;the use of glutoniur
: “ta reactors will :2 he pful i:

 

      

iht‘ :: vie , - ' iven for the C:“StPJCtlor
" t-e negotiatiots Energy Commission and private 7'
in :"e future, hater elel . ;l n tcluding the “um.
of cotroroiai reaoto d, t- w he rate of the
szar— of :;:Str;otl:. the private circles.
-s exuectec to beocre

 

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kcizai Shinbunshn 1982

C50: 4106/55
72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SC IENCE AND TECllNOLOGY

HITACBI EYES SECOND PUNT IN AMERICA T0 PRODUCE VLSI'S

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL to .1808068: Vol 20 No 993. 16 Feb 82 p 9

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

C80:

Hitachi Ltd. is plarating to
start construction within this
year a second plant in the US.
to mass produce very large
scale Integrations tVLSls). it
was learned recently. The com-
saged US. plant. details d
which still are undecided. will
have integrated manufacturing
lines for Mkilobit random ac-
cess memory tRAM) chips.
The Tokyo electronics giant's
production subsidiary in
Dallas. Texas. now assembles
major components imported
from Japan for memory chips.
mostly 16K RAMs.

Hitachi's plan to set up more
production factlitia for VLSls
1.. the us. seems aimed at
forestallire a fresh Japan-0.5.
trade friction on semiconduc-
tors that now seems to be re
iundlim in the US. industry
and Congress.

Japanese manufacturers. in-
cluding llitachi. Fujitsu Ltd
and Nippon Electric Co.
tNi-ZCL are already taking
leadership in the market for
f‘riKs. Japanese-made “Ks are
said to be enjoying 70 per cent
share of the American market
for the first generation VLSls.

4120/157

These manufacturers are plan-
ning to boost production
capacities in Japan to as much
as some 1 million chips a month
around next March.
Faced with the aggressive
strategies of such Japanae
firms. some of the us com-
petitors eventually have been
forced to withdraw from the
market. Only the two giants —
Texas instruments inc. and
Motorola. Inc. — will be equi-
ly competitive with the Japa-
nese in the coming years. some
industry observers say.
So-called "reciprocity" leg-
- islation now regarded likely to
be enacted in the us. Congress
is aimed. among others. at the
Japanese semiconductor indus-
try. it is widely believed.
Testifying last week in a public
hearing in the C ingress. Secre-
tary of Commerce Malcolm
Baidrige charged that the
Japanese semiconductor pro
ducers are sharply increasing
exports to the U.S.. while pro
tecting themselves by non-tariff
barriers. and helped by govern-
mental assistance on research
and development His accusa-

1982, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion is in line with recent critic-
isms by the 0.8. Semiconductor
industry Association. and micro
chips appear likely to be
come a new source of trade
gigtion between Japan and the

Tariffs on “Is in the US. were
lowered from last year's 5.6 per
cent to 4.20 per cent in January.
and also in Japan will be slash-
ed from 10.! per cent to 4.20 per
cent next April. Prolonged
recession caused slowdown of
Japan's lC exports; its lC
trade surplus vis-a-vis the US.
in the first it months of leaf
narrowed to V500 million from
V 3.400 million a year earlier.

llmver. more Japanese
manufacturers. on their part.
will have to follow Hitachi in
"tramferring" production lines
from Japan to the U.S.. in order
to alleviate possible lriction
over semiconductors. analysts
here predict.

"We sincerely hope that our
colleagues in the American in-
dustry will succeed in a roll-
baclt of “Ks." says Atsuyoahi
giggi. senior vice president of
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MRI, WESTINGHOUSE TO COOPERATE IN REACTOR TECHNOLOGY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOCRXAL in Japanese Vol 20 iio 992, 9 Feb

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

C50:

4120/157

Fast breeder reactor will be
developed )ointly by Mitsubishi
Heavy industries. Ltd. and
Westinghouse Electric Corp.
subjeci toiinal approval by the
Ministry of international Trade
a industry.

The new international
cooperation at the indtstry
level stemmed from the pair's
FBR engineering service
contract. As the speciltc meat;
of cooperation. Mill and WH
agreed to swap technical know-

bow by holding engineers'

meetings. mutually award re

search contracts and develop a

program for joint development

ellorts
The two companies. both
world-scale pressurized water

reactor builders. reached a

basic FBR cooperation agree

ment at the end oi 191. They
worked out details, which are
being studied by him (or
approval. The Mttttstry tavored
the deal. which it believes will
help accelerate FBit develop
ment.

hittsubishi Heavy industries
is slated to play a Itey role in

74

construction oi Japa
prototype i-‘BR. Win
in the past included
tion M an experimc
called last llux test
and design of a protc
at Clinch River.

The know'hw WP
from those U.S. Ge
projects will be excl
the tieup programs
because Washingto
such data‘s transler
ers.

Despite that limit
major PWR malter
that there are a lot 0
problems to solve b
can be commerci
permits early in 2ist

The pair originally
December. tan (or
struction.

i-‘Bit is run by a lot
oi plutonium and
which is obtained
spent iuel ol iia
reactors. includit
Uranium. as contai
iuel. turns into pluto
making it possible L
to produce a larger
plutonium than it cor

1982, the Nilton Kcizai Shimbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040022-8
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PRACTICAL TYPE 1.5 MICRON SEMICONDUCTOR LASER PRODUCED

Tokyo JAPAN ECOXONIC JOURNAL

[Text]

Kokusai Denshin Denwa
Kaisha ”(00) of Tokyo.
Japan‘s solc international tele
t‘Illllnlunlci'HIOﬂS company has
«ti-iciiiped an ideal laser beam
liir fiber optics communica-
imm- The semiconductor laser
emits intro-red beams ol’ exact-
ly t .1 microns in wave length
“llllOU‘ trace at neighboring
“sue length hon ms

Representing the world's
tirst success 0! its kind. it
was announced in a recent
issue at the Electronics Letters.
a regular publimtion oi the
institute of Electrical
Engineers. an prestigious
British society, it was learned.
l-Zauiialent achievements have
been almost simultaneously
disclosed by the Musaslu'no
Electric Communication
Laboratory. in Tokyo. at
Nippon Telegraph and ‘t‘ele
phone Public Corp, tN1'l‘i and
the Tokyo Institute at Tech
tmlngy.

lntra~red beams of 1.5
microns in wave length have
long been known as the most
trammittable kind of light for
optical fiber quartz lines be
cause beams at that wave
length are least subject to
losses during transit through
suclilines

It had been extremely duh
cult tutti-whip a semiconductor
LIN‘r git-int: nit pure infra-red
lit-inns at that wave length.
l-‘urerunners M such a laser
ilvvelopm two or three years

FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

in Japanese Vol 20 .‘to 992. 9 Feb 82 p 13

Structure of t.$-mlcron Laser

—._

ago iud not worked well
because their t.$micron wave
length beams had been accom-
panied by slight trace at

neighboring beams ditterent in
wave length which had sait-
tcred and conﬂicted With the
desired central beam when
running through a long length
ot such fiber line.

Made of layers oi tour ditter-
cnt clemical crystals — in
dium. phosphorous. gallium
and arsenic. variously com-
pounded with each other or one
another — . KDD‘s new laser

   

 

 

 
 
  

P-lnP
lnGaAsP
n-tnGaAsP

 

completely pens up all an
wanted wave length beams and
lots on only the wanted one.

Though more troublesome to
produce than N't'r's equivalent.
it is stronger in light reﬂection
and shorter in pitch

Kat) plans to apply the new
laser to its current undersea
tiher plies communication test
line using a t.2-micron laser.
expecting a so per cent cutdown
in light loss. doubling ot inter-
repeater distance. and a much
greater economic feasibility.
RAPID JUMP IN 'NON-WEAPON CERTIFICATES' NOTED
Tokyo NIKKAN KOCYO SHIMBUR in Japanese 30 Jan 82 p 1
[Text]

The export of military weapons and technology has ccme to the fore as
a new prcblem to attract attention. At this time, applications for "non-
weacon certificates," whic' trove exports "not falling under the category
of military weapons," are being filed with NITI by industrial circles in
rapidly-increasing numbers. Such certificates enable exporters to go
easily through the customs procedures which often take time, and prevent
the occurrence of disputes, after export, over whether the exported items
are military weapons. So, many enterprises have begun to apply for such
certificates in comcetiticn. The sudden increase in the number of such
acclications ind'cates that exports 0. those general-purccse items. which
are not c1ear-y distinguishable frcm military weapons. are increasing, and
that many enterprises have :eg;n to fear that they may be regarded as
eztcrtcr; :5 military weaccns, because of the occurrence of the case of

Haiti Stee. and that of extort of a communications network by nippcn Electric

The system of such certificates is called the system of "non-weapon
certificates" or "certificates of non-requirement of atproval." It is a
system created on the basis of the Export Trade Control Ordinance.
Formerly there was a system which can be regarded as an origin of the
gresent system. This system, however, made a new departure. after it was
revised in accordance with the lessons given by the case of Hotta Steel
last year.

Under the revised system. the enterprises, which are to export items
not ciearly distinguishable from military weapons, can have such items
examined by MITI prior to the inspection at custom houses. If these items
are recognized not to be military weapons, they are given by EITI certifi-
cates proving that the items "do not fall under the category of military
weapons and therefore do not require approval.“ Such certificates give
the exporters such advantages as to go through the inspection at custom

houses easily.

76

FOR‘OFFKﬂAl.USE¢DNLY
=:ter the cccurrence :f the case of Hotta Steel. HIT: and other
levernment authorities :o:cer:ed revised the old system, with a view
:3 ccntrollihg exports of -i1itary weapons smoothly. The revised

:ystem. however, also reflect the "consideration" paid by administrative
authorities to make it clear in advance whether export items fall under
:he category of :ilitary weapons, so that industrial circles will not
:eccne less willing to export general-purpose items out of their anxiety
:ver the possible occurrence of disputes over weapons exports.

It is still less than a year since the revised system took effect.
In such a short period, however. the number of enterprises applying for
ex :‘nations by MIT: has increased suddenly. Under the old system,
- were few such applications. Since the new system was established,
' 500 applications have been filed until now. MIT! is busy
such applications, saying that "He may receive nearly 1,000

5 s.,:-- n

f. .5-6 e

       

l1

.—

0

3

III

If
:0

I

t ircles have become nervous abOut weapons exports,
'ertly becaus the controversies over such exports in the Biet.
:urthermore, a cc:pan-, which is a subsidiary of Nippon Electric.
re:ently was suspected of exporting weapons, for the reason that
.e parts for communications apparatuses it had delivered to an
anerican telephone company were used, in the end. for a military
:tmunications network of the US Defense Department. These circum-
ces seem to have give: n itpetus to the tendency to apply for
:n-weapcn certificates.

 

 

 

  

.2
S
.
l-

.1 ch certificates have been requested, include such
u:ttroversial it ts as special steel and IC's, the use of which for militar
nos has often eccme a problem. They also include. however, toy guns
izitationc of real guns. and the export of which will be approved
of course. WIT: thinks that it is indicative of the growing
many expert et' 'ses oler the problem of export of military
tificates h ve been sought for such a wide

    

ﬂat the sys: m of non-weapcn certificates aims not
the experts. '-t also at preventing enterprises

so
tr iv-n- up clans to ex:ort eneral-ourpcs: items
5 5.r . .
' orv of military weapons.

 

:UI‘YR (:l' ' Nikkan Kugyo Shimbunsha 1982

25!): 4106/55

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SC] Eu‘ICE AND TECHNOLOGY

PROBLEMS OF SMALL IN?ORMATION PROCESSING ENTERPRISES NOTED
Tokyo SHUKAN TcYO KEIZAI in Japanese 9 Sep 81 pp 92-95
[Article by Koichi Kohayashi]

:Text] Information processing service is an especially promis-
ing industry, which is expected to grow rapidly, at a rate of 20
percent a year, up to the 1990's. It is an intellectual group
that has a command of science and technology calculations. Yet
the majority of the companies are small or medium-size enter-
prises standing on a weak business foundation, and they face
various problems. There are some companies which have given up
the operation. An industrial reorganization has begun.

with the progress of computerization in Japan, the information processing industry,
which is responsible for its software sector, has developed dramatically in the
last 10 years or so. Already by iY-79 the market had grown to the level of 596.6
billion yen (specialty companies only; 800.7 billion yen level if combined with
companies that also engage in other lines of business-~investigation of actual con-
ditions of specific service industries by the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry). The average growth rate of the past 5 years is 19.5 percent, and 20-
percent level growth is also expected in the future. It is even estimated that
the industry will reach the 6-trillion—yen scale by the end of the eighties.

In spite of the super growth market of the eighties. the size of the enterprises
is small; for example, even Japan Business Consultant, at the top of the industry,
claims sales at only the 18.5-blllion-yen level (FY-80). There are only a few
"majors" that net sales above 10 billion yen. This industry consists of small and
medium-size enterprises. estimated to include 1,200 companies, and many of them
have less than 100 employees.

Super Computer Strong in Science Calculations

The forerunner of the information processing industry was the calculator, which
used a punch card system, in the latter half of the fifties. Later, centers
which were contracted for paycheck calculations, from software development to
input-outpur related work, rapidly increased with the incorporation of computers.
It was a time when even small and medium-size companies could have lucrative
operations as long as they rented their computers by the hour between operations.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unfortunately, as the cost of hardware was reduced, general users bought afford-
able computers and the demand for computer rental at an hourly rate was curtailed.

In contrast, contracts for the development of software and field service business
increased.

Nevertheless, office calculations claim a large part of the total business, ex-
ceeding 20 percent. The recent trend is the upcoming change from batch processing,
where data is brought from users and calculated collectively, to on-line process-
ing, where input and output are remote—controlled by using a communication line.

Comapnies such as Japan Business Consultant and Japan Electronic Computer (FY—80
sales, 10.8 billion yen) sell terminal equipment to users and locate them at branch
offices throughout Japan to form an on-line network with the company's own large
computers. The users utilize software developed by contract and can instantly
obtain information regarding sales and stock management, reservation system, etc,
using terminal equipment spread nationwide. Major general companies use this ser-
vice, and the demand is rising.

What is most promising in the calculation business is science and technology
calculations. Application programs prepared by dealers are operated and utilized
through the terminal equipment of the users.

Among the programs. the largest in number are the structural analytic simulat on
programs. Simulations for civil engineering and bridge building and simulations by
the finite elements method all make the most of the respective characteristics.
Other programs available are: electron circuit design programs, chemical calcula-
tion and rocket orbit tracking control programs, etc. There are many cases where
general use programs have been set up applying the technology used in the past
when the software was developed under contract.

Especially noteworthy for its contribution to the improvement of science and tech-
nology is the ultra-high-speed super computer on-line service for science and
technology calculations.

The super computer CRAY-1 of Cray of the United States features an arithmetic
processing capacity 20-40 times greater than other general super size computers
in vector and decimal calculations. There are only 20 some units like this in the
world, and two of them are installed in Japan, one at Mitsubishi General Research
institute and the other at the Century Research Center.

The computer at Mitsubishi General Research Institute is used for analyzing data
transmitted from resource-finding satellites. The computer made the practical use
of satallites possible by shortening the conventional picture processing time
of 20 hours/picture to 1 hour. Also, it helps to reduce research costs as it is
capable of handling simulation analyses by three-dimensional calculations in lieu
of large-scale wind tunnel experiments and water tank experiments.

in addition, the need has arisen for analyzing, for instance, a small motor down
to the nuts and bolts using a super computer in place of the analysis convention-
ally Iade by means of experiments. This is one example of the utility of a super
computer, where the accuracy is improved by detailed analysis which was pre-
viously considered impossible.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'Sl-Z ONLY

in the days to cunt, thv demand for the use of information in conjunction with
the expansion of the computer network will rise continuously and steadily. The
restrictions imposes by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation on com-
munication lines are :igiu, and the speedy liberalization of communication linfs
is desired by various sectors.

Field Services Suffer From Low Job Holding Kali

The demand for field service business has been growing recently in the information
processing industry. Field service businesses dispatch SEs (systems engineers)
and operators upon the request of the users. This service is often called for when
business is particularly heavy or when special technical knowhow is required.

Furthermere, there has been a surge in inquiries about FM (facilities management),
in which all information processing work is taken care of under a contract, i.e.,
from building the user's system and development of software to the daily input-
output related work.

Computer Service, one of the major companies of the industry. (estimated sales for
September 1951 term, 17 billion yen) tells a success story of raising sales almost
iOO fold in the past 10 years, with FM business as its leading sector. Many other
companies also have a hand in the FM business, and not a few companies have grown

up around this business.

It is certain that FM business will continue to grow extensively in the future,lnn
at the same than it is plagued by the problem of "low job holding rates."

The dispatch of personnel, af:er all, is a service business. The servicemen must

work closely with the use a hetause o! the nature of the work, i.e., development
of software. indeed. it takes 3-4 years to organize a large system, during which
tune the servicemen will be stationed at the work site.

incidentally, software vugineers maintain an artisan spirit. In some cases an
engineer's pride is oanaged when his program is reiected by the customer. In
addition, a service eng'1eer works every day in "somebody else's company," and
finds no desk of his own or u when L" returns to his own company. No wonder his
sense of belonging is diminished.

if an engineer suddenly quits his job, great damage is inflicted upon the company,
one also on the users. As a countermeasure to this, some comapnies even dispatch
four servicemen when actually only three are requiriﬂ. There are limitless

stories of the trouble companies go to in orce: to increase the job holding

rate. he companies come up with various countermeasures, for example, holding
regular parties and athletic meets and contracting all work including the manage—
ment oi the computer rooms of the users.

At any rate, it will he Very interesting to see how and where these engineers can

fit into Japanese society with a keen sense of belonging in keeping pace with the
future growth of the F. bu laces.

80

FOR ()FFIC MI. “SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISE ONLY

In any case, the biggest problem, the chronic shortage of personnel, will continue
in the future because the supply of engineers cannot catch up with the software
demand, which is rising steadily and rapidly.

Under the circumstances, jobs relating to software development and program prepara-
tions are plentiful. A man with any knowledge of computer technology will not
starve. Engineers confident of their ability do not hesitate to seek better oppor-
tunuics in other companies or spin off and become independent. On the other hand,
shnple work such as substituting machine language for program language can be
subcontracted from a subcontractor at any time.

However, in reality, the world is not full of sweet talk. Recently, there has been
an increase in cases where even companies which achieve an annual sales rate in-
crease of 30 percent do not necessarily improve their profits. That is, they
raise the salary scale to hold on to their engineers, and that outlay, in addition
to the investment put out to obtain and educate personnel, squeezes the profits.

Reality is not so sweet even for the small companies which became independent at
the first chance in order to grab overwhelming job Opportunities. The fact is
that many of them are suffering from insufficient funds and have difficulty in
meeting monthly expenses such as payrolls. They try desperately to survive by
working as subcontractors, since this brings in cash no matter how smal‘ the
profit, in order to procure operating funds.

However, the maker-affiliated and user-affiliated companies that claim one-quarter
of the total can rely on backing from a parent company, and that makes the situation
slightly different. Even an independent company considered a major organization
cannot truly and completely feel relaxed about the profits retained.

As explained above, the biggest problem of the industry is the weakness of the
business foundation of each company, which is why the industry is referred to as
"prosperity without profit."

Selection Rapidly in Progress

In fact, in some cases, small and medium-size companies were unable to survive
and went under the umbrella of other companies. The problem will get more serious
in the future from the aspect of compensation such as pay, etc. It is entirely
predictable that companies will announce the closing of their business Operations
one after another in the next several years.

Simultaneously, the selection of the surviving medium-size and small companies
will begin. Already, it is noted that some companies are formulating a survival
strategy in anticipation of the future.

iﬁar example, Central Computer Service (FY-80 sales, 1.3 billion yen) has a policy
of no: employing or increasing personnel in order to pursue a long-term plan of
balancing the makeup of personnel by age; instead. it utilizes outside orders and
field services whenever possible. Also, System Consultant (FY-80 sales, 1.1
billion yen) will not employ people with previous work experience and will not
scout for talent but will hire only new graduates above a certain level, in order
to prevent a drop in the technological level and to obtain stable growth.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Also, in some localities, local companies are grouping together with the backing
of the financial world. in parallel with this trend, tieups of central major
companies and local medium and small companies are in progress. Even now, calcula-
tion centers are grouping under makers and sharing software and national scale
work.

Thus, the reorganization and consolidation of the industry is proceeding, and the
current bipolar structure of "a handful of majors and numerous weak small business
groups" is expected to evolve into a bipolar structure of "a few majors and selec-
ted medium and small company groups." This crystallization started graduallv, and
many believe strongly that the general structure will be solidified in a few years

Increase in Software Development and Field Service

source: Investigation of Actual Conditions of Specific
Service Industries by Hill

 

v7rr-mtaﬁaﬁinn’mzn

“13::
I 1 ) “um 5|

.! (2)2i5;;E'§

 

  

:5 l. r
‘ \. .\
/"\ u I r” \
I - .
. '. I I
- l
\\_,/C‘ r

   

- i
. ' .—" .- 0.
. I "p'f' PM. .55J.I
‘7':U‘-:--\'
, I .‘..6 ,
\-..-/
A”.“t.l' "1"}..s“ |

Key:
i. FY-79 sales 596.6 billion yen 6. card punch
2. FY-BO sales 275 billion yen 7. machine time sale
3. office calculation 8. field service
&. other calculations 9. information service
5. software development program 10. various types of research
preparatiun 11. other

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acceleration Toward Specialization

What serves as the key to survival and the source of the acceleration of the bi-
polarization is the technological ability of each company.

Computers have penetrated into all fields of industry, and the object of software
development tends to be increasingly narrowed into specialty fields. However,
there are on the horizon some companies (engineers) which cannot catch up with

this, and the selection of companies is also proceeding from the area of develop-
mental ability.

Special technology entails many fields of specialization, such as the building of
on-line systems, safety maintenance systems for nuclear power plants, roll press
control programs for steel and iron and CAD (computer-aided design). It requires
deep knowledge of each field, which naturally creates a domain in which each
company is comfortable. A future strong trend will be that companies will trade
on their specialties and take on jobs to which their specialties can be applied.

It may be possible for major companies to expand the scope of their business by
leasing certain special engineers to other fields to make that technology avail-
able for application.

The problem here is the question of how to sublimate individual technical ability
to the corporate technical ability. If a company pays attention to asystematic
accumulation of skills through everyday education, the individual ability can be
useful as part of the corporate technical ability and it can work as insurance
against a possible apinoff.

Software engineers, SE, must possess sophisticated ability, which includes not
only computer knowledge but also knowledge of the objects of software. Further-
more, they must have the competence to grasp the essence of the matter from a
broad field of vision and to formulate a concept when organizing a system. The
applicational range of software has latent possibilities to expand endlessly.

Especially because of the possibilities, SE is a profession that encourages a man
to embrace a great romantic vision, and the market is expanding so dramatically
as to allow an engineer to do so.

Talented engineers will circulate around the business operators who can give

a "dream" to these exuberant engineers. The possibilities of information process—
ing will greatly expand when many such companies emerge and extensive and inten—
sive new needs are found. With the progress of specialization, we will enter

an era when not only quantitative expansion but also qualitative improvement are
pursued.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1981

8940
CSO: 8129/0654

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOLW

FOR OFFICIAL L‘SE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL PLANT EXPORTS RAPIDLY INCREASING

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 1n JapancSc Vol 2’0 No 903, 16 Feb 82 pp 1. 19

[Article by Kalzo Suzuki]

[Text]

billion.

This is becam- lhvrt is a
global boom in building out re
lining plants. cen- sure; on the
nil-producing nations. and ex-
ports ol plants lor steel. ter-
ntizer. cemt-nt and
needed {or the rust rage at in-
dustrialization also on- arive
to the Southeast Asian ("1'”-

tries

Factors uorxing snidedly in
lat-«r ol Japanese plant exports
.m- the wczlkeninn til the yen
.Iﬂillll?" the dollar and
con'mued Iowoess ol Japan's
interest rates as compared With

the rest ol the world

.\ll‘l‘l authorities thus teel
that Japan's exports of lnllllb"
trial plants llotal of approved
exports and those not renewing
approval) wit: reach an all-
t.me high in the current liscal

year

They constder it is certaun
that exports will attain "from
Stir-t6 btllton in value." and
sentiment is spreading within
the plant industry that such a

With the tempo of plant ex-
port expansion picking up
speed. the Ministr) oi Interna-
tional Trade l: industry has
come to leel that such exports
readily will reach a value ol
around as billion in fiscal lttal

According to a survey by the
.\Ihon Ketzai Shiloh-so. large
plant contracts tone case ex-
ceeding Y 20 billion. and includ-
irc. those prowstonally agreed
on) in the last hail ol (tscal
l9“. running [ruin Uctober
I'm-March. tins- year. reached
t-t casts tor a taluc at V 1.003

others

t-Jgh level of exports is going to
continue also in the out that
year.

The Ministry ot International
Trade 3. Industry up to now has
used only the value of ullicially
approved exports as the brats
for its plant export statistics.
However. since cash settlement
plant exports. includim thrse
on a yen loan basis. have begun
to Increase. the Ministry has
turned its attention to compil-
ing new statistics taking this
trend into account

Ml‘l‘t‘s torecast ol exports
ruarhuzg. SIS-t6 billion is
based on such new statistits.
and breaks down into about
3;: billion worth of approved
exports and $34 billion worth d
those not requiring olticial ap
proval.

The past record for approted
exports was Stt‘.‘ lull-on for
fiscal 1979 :nd tor thme not re
«wiring Approval $2 3 billion
to: “seal mo The statistics [or
the iatter type are available
only lrom Ill and alter liscal
ms

This means that the antici-
pated ligures tor tiscal 1901 are
higher tor both at these «ate
genes. The rate 0! growth over
thc preceding ﬁscal year ot the
estimate for fiscal Isa! reaches
around 27-35 per cent

Considering the sharp expan-
sion ol exports alter they had
scored a minus yowth in the
preceding tiscal year. it may be
send that plant exports loom as
a new lactor lur pulling ahead

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the business ot the domestic
machinery industry.

The first large contract in the
latter hall of fiscal tut was the
acceptance at an order [com
the Sowet Union by the Toyo
Engineering Corp-Minot a Co.
group in November. last year
tor buildirg a butadiene plant
worth about V25 billion. but.
ire, out inﬂuential Italian and
l-Tench matters.

In the same month. the Japa-
nese plant malters trot out to
their European counterparts in
a tender to supply the Russiars
with about V140 billion worth of
a natural gas booster plant.

Alter this. from the end of
last year to the beginning at
this year. however. the Japa-
nese received a 50le ot big
contracts two Mexican or-
ders lor steelmakim lacilttta
aggregating VlOl bullion. an
about V2l7 billion Kuwaiti
order for an oil refinery. an
about no billion East (ierrnan
ntdt‘r for residual oil cracking
lactlities. and anahout vzoo hil-
lioo New Zealand order tor an
o-lrelinery.

Plant makers ascribe the
favorable trend 0! exports to
such as the lollrmng points: It
The yen rate has continued
cheap at around V130 to the
dollar. 2) Japan's interest rates
are lower than thou in the
West. and are stable.

As compared with the dollar.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

European currencies actually
are cheaper than the yen.
meamng that the European
plant makers are in a more
favorable pmition than the
Japanese in winning export
orders. '

But a leader of the giant in
dustry explaits that the Japa-
nese are wimtng orders despite
such a situation as plant buyers
have begun to evaltnte the
Japanae higher as to quality
and delivery time. This means
that they have become now
able head on to some extent to
meet the low-priced oftemive
of the European makers.

The increase of the Japance
maiters' intentional competi
tivenass generally is rdlected
in the grueling ratio of con-
tracts concluded on a yen basis.
The share of yendemminated
contracts for the plant industry
uptonow hadbeenlowascom—
pared to that for the shipbuild

ill" industry whose tntermtion-
al competitivenss is strong.

Ml‘rl's recent checlnip. how-
ever. showed that in the April-
December period of Int year.
the yen-based contract ratio for
deferred payment plant exports
reached 10.x per cent. or roe
24.6 percentage points hioier
than the 45.7 per cent for fiscal
I979.

As for a director of Chiyoda
Chemical Engineertm a Con
su-uction Co. a major plant

builder. he says that over 90
per cent of his company‘s con
tracts are being concluded on a
mum-currency basis. indict-
ing that the plate mders are
switching to a contract formula
havirg less possibility of being
adversely affected by foreign
exchange fluctuations.

The export drives of the its
«initially-advanced nations ap-
pear (he to assume added in
tensity in the future as exem-
plified in British move lately
to offer a mixed loan of official
development assistance includ-
im gratis aid. and general ex-
port flnancim.

However. the Japanese plant
makdelrs do not believe thalt'ex-
pan 'ng exports of 9 me
directly will become a factor
for awavatiiu trade frictiom
sinceJapan‘ssliare in the world
plant exports still is low and
orders won by the Japanese on
the basis of participating in
international cotnortiums are
increasim.

Owing to such a situation. the
vice praident of lshiltawajima-
Harime Heavy lndustrla Co..
for instance. feels that while
notmuchhopecanbeunnedon
exports to the Communist Bloc
because of the U.S.-Soviet con-
frontation on the Polish [rob-
lem. plant exports in next fiscal
year can be maintained at a
level for the alrrent fiscal

year.

the Milton Ke1za1 Shimbun.1nc.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TECHNOLOGY

IEh'T PllOTOI-ZLECTRONTC SHITCH DEVELOPED

ECONOMIC JOURSAL in Japanese V01 20 No 993. 16 Feb 82 p 1]

An extremely sophisticated
photoelectromc switch for
luture question-answer in-
formation systems for pun-id
iru information in sounds and
images in resporse to button
push inquiries has been de
veloped by the Musashtno Elec-
tric Communication Labora-
tory of Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corp.

Believed to be without wece
dent It is for sending any 2r.-
tormaticn relieved from a tile
to a subscriber at an incom-
parably greater speed and ac-
curacy than the existing CATV
(cable televisronl servrce. Its
creation according to the
laboratory appuns to have
cleared the way for introdue
tion 0! such a futuristic in
(«irritation servtce now under
NTr's development

Very Wide doth-Lids tor such
sen-nee are visualrml such as
[or gull. language. and cooking
lessons as well as for more im-
portant purposes. but a big
technological problem in de
veloping such a switch had
been the very broad frequency
band needed for transmitting
high-quality color television
imagesigmls.

The laboratory said its latest
test of its switch involving
three kinds of information and

three assumed "subscribers"
has proved the switch to be
capable of handling any in
formation up to 30 megahertz in
band in less than one/billionth
of a second. The laboratory is
sure the switch's capacity may
be raised to at least to kinds of
information and to subscribers.
By using a plurality of such a
switch. a large number of sub
scribers could be covered.

The switch consists at one
semiconductor laser. three
photodiodes (the number in-
creasablei. and an electronic
Circuitry to impart a certain
fixed applied or impressed)
voltage to a given photodiode.
Electric signals representing a
given piece of information
picked out of the file are con-
verted into light signals by the
laser and sent to all the photo
diodes by a light-branching cir-
cuitry. But only a single diode
given the f rxed voltage accord-
ing to a given subscriber's
order responds to the signals
and transmits the information
to the subscriber. Bach diode is
a sophisticated avalanche
photudiodc. a chemical com-
pound semiconductor made up
at an helium-phosphorous sub
strate covered with layers ot
indidium-phosphorous. and in
dium-gallrum-arsenic.

1962, the .‘iinn 'xeizai. Shimbun. Inc.

l57

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

1,000-HOUR OPERATION 0? HBO GENERATOR RESEARCH TO CONTINUE

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Japanese Vol 20 No 992. 9 Feb 82 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

6120/157

Japan's IS-yearold research
product to develop MHD
cmagnetohydrodynamicr elec-
tric power generators to save
fuel and generate pomr more
etticiently through direct con-
version of heat to electricity
will be continued for another
year The decision was taken in
view of the latest promising
research findings.

The Agency at lndmtrlal
Science and Technology of the
Ministry of International Trade
I: lndustry reports that 'he
service lives at the electrons
before renewal of the expiri-
niental MHD generating moiel
were lound to average hum en
050and 1.000 hours.

The v 2.5 billion model. Mark
7. was completed by Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries. Ltd. or Tokyo
and iratalled at its Tsltssago
factory complex research

87

laboratory in Hyogo Prefecture
at the end of 1m.

Operated by the institute's
Electrotechnical Laboratory. it
had worked well through its
lirst trial run in July. last and
its second in October that year.

Follow-up continuots running
tests at last October and De-
cember resulted ins total at 22]
hours at continuous operation,
interrupted once. with a total
power output at 2.003 kilowatts
per hour More significantly.
onethird 0! Mart: "360 pairs ot
electrodes. made 0! platinum
and subjected tohotgas of more
than 2.000 degree C last only
I 323 grams of their structural
materials. while the remaining
stainless portion lost 6.0 grams.
Plans call [or redrcing the
nickel content oi the stainless
electrodes and replacing oil
with coal

1982, the Nthon Keizai Shinibun. Inc.

, FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

SERVOMOTOR FOR ROBOT-—Industrial robOts with an alternating-current seermotor
just developed by Fujitsu Fanuc Ltd. of lokyo cost less to produce and are freer
from functional and maintenance troubles than the now common direct-current
servomotor equivalents so far produced, it was recently learned. According to
the Japanese machine tool numerical control (NC) system maker, Japan's industrial
robot industry, already the world's largest, has been witnessing the domestic
market growing since 1980 at an annual rate of ac to 50 percent in value. it
promises to grow into Q 1,000 billion annually by 1990. Many local industrial
robot client enterprises have been calling for more reliable robots because the
current models often have functional and maintenance troubles requiring time-
cousuming repair. To be sold from April next year, the company's "S series"
industrial robots will answer the demand from users of direct-current servomotur
type. The alternating-current servomotor type is known to be superior, its com-
plex electronic circuitry and higher costs had been a problem. Beginning in
August, the company will switch its manufacture of such motors to the alternat-
ing current type. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOERNAL in Japanese Vol 20 No
993, in Feb 82 p 7] [COPYRlGHTz 1982, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.]

UKANlUﬂ ENRICHMENT CONSORTIUM STUDIED--The electric power industry will take up
the quescion of industry's uranium enrichment venture by promoting a unit at the
Federation of Electric Power Companies into one for preparing a consortium for-
mation. The uranium enrichment consortium concept will be studied by the nine
electric utilities, JapuL Atomic Power Co., heavy equipment makers and banks.
Tue existing FEPC unit was :Jcnched in March, 3981 by the nine utilities and
JAPCO. Its upgrading is aimed at forming a consortium in light of the enormous
cost requirement for constructing a commercial enrichment plant with annual
capacity of about 3,000 tons separative work units. An existing consortium

for spent fuel reprocessing. Japan Nuclear Fuel Service Co., is also a consor-
tium of 100 companies, including the utilities and heavy equipment vendors,
steel mills and shipbuilders. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Japanese
Vol 20 No 992, 9 Feb 82 p 6] (COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, inc.]

CSO: 4120/157 END

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY