FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10680
23 July 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 15/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

Jens publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the polio
cles, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGIT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS
23 .111

HORLDHIDE REPORT
TELecommunous Poucv, Rssemca mu stsLormuT

(FOUO 1 5/ 8 2)
Cutouts

NEST EUROPE
IN'I'ERNATIQML AFFAIRS

UNBSCO'e Role in North-South Information Mange Examined
(Herve Bourgee; mm: APRIQUB, 28 Apr 82

OOOOUIOOOCQOIOO

New Satellite To Detemine Future User Needs
(Pi-em mm; AIR ET cam, 8 Kay 82) eeeeoeeeeeeee

PM: To Be Main Financer of ms Remote Sensing Satellite
(Pi-Gm menu} AIR ET cm, 22 m 82) eeeoeeeeeeee

BSA Announces 2 Ariana Launches for 1982, Delay Penalties
(Pierre Langemx} AIR ET C(EWB, 22 Hay 82)....eeeeeeeee

Briefs
Horace 1 Operational
Thomson Studies High Frequency Payload:
Ariana Production Schedule
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Space Research, Satellite Plans for 1982-1985
(Pierre mere“; AIR ET CWCS, 15 May 82) eeeeeeeeeeee

New Radio Format Seeks To Increase African Coverage
' (Jm AFRIQUE, 5 m 82) ooeeeooooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

-3,- [III-W-I‘O!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

UNESCO'S IDLE IN mun-soon INFORMATION “m2 MIND
Paris Jam: AFRIQUE in Wench 28 Apr 82 pp 100, 101

[Article by Herve Sourges]

[Text] Comunication—to enable every individual, every comaunity to hear and

be heard, to promote true freedom of information, these are among UNBSOO's major
concerns. He must listen and see.

But the poor African peasanto-even if he has the slightest change of owning a
radio--hears a sales pitch in a language that is not his own from a consuer
society thousands of miles away from his daily problals: a constant challenge
to his poverty.

On another continent, the TD? 1 satellite will in 19814 begin infusing France
with its three television channels. There will be no more areas with a poor-
quality picture, no more shadow zones, but excellent reception everywhere.

The mass media explosion has precepitated decisive changes that should lead us
to a society of planetary dimensions in half a century.

The first shock wave was spreading while, in the seventies, the waves of com-
puterized comnications and data processing were surging forth. The capacity
to trans-it, store and use information multiplied at a dizzying pace. This
aggravated the problem of a balanced distribution of means of conunication
among nations.

When you consider that 2 million scientific and technological texts appear
every year--i.e., 6,000 to 7,000 articles, reports and papers every day—you
realize why new countries want to have access to this information and are very
interested in international information systems.

It is quite obvious that neither the revolutions in con-unications nor the grow-
ing awareness of its role have made this freedom of information available to all
people. but that it rmins the privilege of the Hestern World, unilateral free-
dom, a tool of dosination.

Now that it has become a worldwide industry, comnication constantly needs more
infrastructure and investment. Industrialization encourages concentration

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through the formation of monopolies in the areas of gathering, storing and cir-
culating infatuation. As a result, the number of users must increase so that
the operation is profitable, the financing of the facilities tends to be con-
trolled by the large firms, and poor countries are left without comnication
systns.

ﬂow can we conceive of a free, widespread, and balanced circulation of infor-
mation in an industry dominated by a small number of transnationals controlling
all aspects of production and distribution—large press, television, video, film,
rad to and publishing agencies and conglomerates?

The flow of information, messages, programs, and cultural products basically
goes fro: the rich to the poor countries, eterting an overwhelming influence on
ideas, values and life styles in the many communities of our "planetary village."

Although it say be anecdotal to say that Kojak, the American police officer, is
as well lawn and pOpular in Singapore or Guataala City as he is in New York
City, it is just as revealing to report that the Associated Press Agency sends
an average of 90,000 words a day through its international tale: service from
New York to Asia. In the other direction, 19,000 words arrive in the United
States for distribution throughout the world. A study made in Venezuela in 1977
showed that the country received 1,360 news stories a day from other countries,
including 278 from the United States and Canada. At the same time, Caracas ex-
ported 71 news stories, only 20 of which went to North America.

It would be wrong to put all the blame for this one-way circulation of the news
on the distributing agencies. Reporters in developing countries frequently opt
for pleasing the Ueaternized local elite. The content of messages, the choice
of subjects, value judgments, and the selection of news stories, books, and
music usually illustrate this onedwsy flow.

The version of world events transmitted to developim countries and vice versa,
and the life in these countries presented to western viewers suffers from a fre-
quently subconscious cultural bias that sometimes borders on denigrstion.

Thus, we should encourage the countries of the Third World to make their voices
heard thaselves. It is their own view of the situation in their countries and

in the world that they should be publicizing, without impeding the right of
others to obtain and publish other information. A diversity, an exchange and a
conflict of messages are needed if people are to be well informed and free.

Since UNESCO has become the main forum for taking concerted action to establish
a new information order, it has come under the fire of part of the Western
press—especially American, but also French-«hat accuse it of designing a
"world information censuring syatu," or even of covering up "totalitarian"
regimes, out of complicity or ignorance.

Totalitarianism? He have to take a closer look at this. Totalitarianism

brings about three types of changes-u-a manipulation of communications, a ten-
dency to treat information as merchandise, and a change from a receptive subject

MOIHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to a passive object. Although, at the present time, no regime openly says that
it is spreading propaganda, the correlation between information and merchandise

is increasingly accepted. In both cases, UNESCO intends to make a distinction
and point out the dangers.

It is a proven fact that dictatorships or even authoritarian regimes abolish
freedom of the press. And they do not stop at censure. Imprisor-ent, exile
and sometimes assassination of journalists are too often part of the govern-
ment's arsenal. This is why UNESCO. as an international organization, encour-
ages conflicting stories with a view to better protecting reporters throughout
the world, and why it offers its headquarters and working tools to professional
agencies to coordinate their ideas and activities to this end. Its director
general, Amadou-liahtar H'Bow, does not hesitate to intervent personally in favor
of journalists in danger.

The authoritarian control of infatuation and the tendency toward propaganda are
commonplace in developing countries. It is true that there are priorities, such
as literacy and promoting higher education. It is understandable that a reporter
would be asked to follow these priorities and use the modern technology of com-
munications to promote "national unity." But who could fail to see the danger
of slipping from this priority education into totalitarian obedience, from gov-
ernment regulation to confiscation of information?

When UNESCO participates in development and education programs. it always
stresses the democratic virtualities and finalities of any true education sys-

tem. "External" decolonisation of information cannot be accomplished without
"internal" decolonisation. In any case, a minimum sort of consensus by default

seems to have been reached today in all countries, and that is that no one dares
to openly profess that information is being reduced to propaganda.

Moreover, how could anyone accept information as merchandise? Because of a lack
of true reciprocity in comunications, news is produced as items for consumption.
This trend is strengthened and spread by the concentration of couunication
means, and by sensationalism and various ways of distorting the news. This type
of information system corresponds to a rich or poor consumer: for the rich, in-
creasingly sophisticated equipment and products; and, for the poor, secondary
products and outdated equipaent.

The totalitarianism of information as propaganda, the totalitarianimn of infor-

mation as merchandise. Part of the Western press believes there is only one
way to resolve this due-ma: have total confidence in "freedom of the press."

It is fine to mention the irrevocable principle of Hestern nations, provided
that it is extended to cover all nations and all communities.

Is it perpetrating true freedom to further discrimination and imbalances? To
be "free." the informer-whether an individual, a group or a nation—must have

the material, financial and political means to prove himself and declare himself
free.

As .1 value and a norm, freedom is indivisible and universal, but there are many
different ways to achieve it. as there are many different cultures. UNESCO has

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

become the platform, but also the laboratory. for confrontations between differ-
ent cultural and comunications nodels. True confrontation implies the accep-

tance of differences. International consensus can only be achieved at this
price. '

The stakes are clear. Conditions of domination have been rejected in the po-
litical arena. Inequality has been denounced in the econolic order. Can we
allow the. to exist or spread in the extr-Iely sensitive field of conunications?

During his recent trip to Africa. Pope John Paul I! stated in Lagos "that the
sovereignty of every country nust be protected by proper use of the neans of
comnication, which can become tools of ideological pressure. And this type
of pressure is more dangerous and insidious than many forceful means." Valu-
able support in this controversy.

Initially, it was thought that to correct the imbalances, the nost effective
solution would be to arrange for a transfer of technology and infomtion pro-
grams to the Third World. It is obvious that this is a deceptive solution. since
it only strengthens the current system: the implacable aarket law, concentration
of powers. sources and means.

The decision to set up a "new world order for intonation and conunications."
approved in Belgrade, is more an aspiration than an actual definition of a reg-
ulatory system. It reflects adherence to a few najor objectives agreed by the
international co-unity: elimination of imbalances and inequalities by promot-

ing the free circulation and a broader and better balanced distribution of in-
formation, and broader distribution of comnications facilities.

It is the African continent that is benefiting this year free the main action
agreed by the PIDC, nanely to assist the Pan-African Press Agency (PARA). The
Arab Gulf states, moreover. are going to contribute to the collunications devel-
opment program in Africa.

However, it was evident that the developed countries were reluctant to partici-
pate fully in the projects. The UNESCO Director General regretted that the con-
tributions of these countries amounted to only $6 nillion out of the 70 under
study. The American delegation explained that its country's aid would only go
to bilateral activities and specific projects and it asked for guarantees that
new infatuation exchange networks, particularly in Asia and the Pacific, would
not restrict the activities of international press agencies operating in the
sane region.

France for its part announced at the beginning of the nesting that it was plan-
ning to contribute $2 nillion over a nunber of years. $500,000 of which would
be disbursed in 1982. People should not be surprised. Did Francois Hitterrand
not declare last October in Huico that he was in favor of a new rold inforna-
tion order? ”The procedure whereby someone designs a product and then tries to
sell it does not meet a need of this sort, nor does it contribute to a co-uni-
cation. information and education policy in large territories which are some-
times sparsely populated."
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

This positive contribution by France is illustrative of the new attitude in
relations between the French Covet-meat and UNESCO. In this case, it is meant

to "help bring intonation flows between the North and the South into balance,"
under an open policy of exchange.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9805
080: 5500/5800

l-‘OIIOF'IICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IN!“ ”AIRS

nu m1?! 1'0 mamas P011133 0838 m
Paris All! 31' cosms in trench a may 02 p ‘2

:hrticle by Pierre Langereus: “Start of Satellite Mobile ‘i‘eleco-unicatione
Project 'nosxr' 1-inent'] .

:Text] ‘i'he beginning of next week. 11 any. will. in principle. m: the start
of the Ra‘s l'nuropean Space Agency's] new progras 'm‘r.‘ in which eight 88A
sesber countries will participate: France. Gerwny, Italy. United Kingdom Nor-
way. Sweden. helgim and Spain. The cost of the progras is eetinated at 54 sil-
lion [E's units of accounting] (1901 prices). or around 32 nillion francs, for
its initia phase (Phase l).

The was progras is an extension of the European nausea [saritise teleco-uni-
cations satellites] program which is to serve as a preparatory basis for partici-
pation by European industry and users in the future IMAM? second-generation
telecowunications systes. In particular. it will enable a deternination of the
specifications of the future satellite while teleco-unicatiom systes that is
to provide operational links with saritine tersinals, but also with aeronautical
and land tersinals (trucks) . as well as links with the 8M! [Search and Rescue]
channels of planes and ships in distress.

The was progras is divided into two successive phases. The first phase, which
has just been decided upon, comerns the developent of the new aaritine. aeronau-
tical. terrestrial and m tersinals by the eight participating countries. and the
testing of these various tersinals with the muses l and 2 satellites: transsis-
sions intended for wbile tersinals will be relayed via the Villafranca (Spain)
station, for the specific purpose of characterising the nultiple trajectories.
The tests will utilise various types of tersinals having a noise factor of -19 to
-24 cam for the three wbile applications. It is also planned to utilise
sisulators of the 1mm Standard C terninals that are to be built by Ger-any.
the United mm and the sea (ssrsc [Buropean Space ‘lechnology Center).

This first phase is to start at the beginning of 1983, with the while terminals
in place, by way of sultiple-trajectory neasureoents; sisulation tests are to be
cospleted by the end of 1983 or early 19“. This is to assure the availability
of the prototype tersinals by then, except for the airborne tersinals which are
to be ready by aid-1984.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A second phase, consisting of conclusive tests of the new prototype terminals
actually installed in the different mobile environ-ente. is to be implemented

betveen the beginning of 198‘ and the end of 1965, upon completion of which
work is to begin on the configuration of the future INMARSAT accord-generation

satellites that are to succeed the satellites currently in use (macs, MARISA?
and IMBLSAT S).

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

9399
650: 5500/ 22£6

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WTIM AFFAIRS

PRO 10 33 MAIN ”HANGER 0? 8128 am SENSING snmnm
Paris All! 31' cosmos in French 22 May 02 pp 34, 52

:Articleqby Pierre Langereux: "Startup of European Reaote Sensing Satellite 1138-1
Project“

[next] The mEzuropean Space Agency] has just obtained fron its aeaber govern-
aents the financial co-itnents necessary to start up the new European reaote
sensing satellite ass 1 project. The satellite is to be launched around the end
of 1901 by an hriane rocket. This announcenent was aade officially on 17 May at
lannover (Ger-any) by Mr Erik Quistgaard. director general of the BSA. and Dr
lennertr, head of the Agency's earth observation progran.

Ten neaber countries confined officially this week their participation in m l.
to a total extent of 00.22 percent. which thus exceeds the quota (00 percent)
required to get the project under way. Germany is contributing the largest share
(2‘ percent). followed by Prance (18.31 percent). Great Britain (13.30 percent).
Italy (10.61 percent). Canada (9.10 percent). Sweden (3.90 percent). Belgium
(3.72 percent), Spain (2 percent), Switzerland (1.70 percent) and liorway (1.50
percent. M other neaber countries also have yet to confirn their participation
in the project: Netherlands (5 percent) and Denmark (1.99 percent). This will
then assure better than 95 percent financing of the prograa.

The Ger-an decision to contribute the aajor share of the project and to accept
that the SSA aanagenent group renain partly installed in Mlouse (initially)

was what finally resolved the impasse. But. strictly speaking. the nether states
have not for the soaent couitted theaselves to finance beyond the definitional
phase (Phase s). in the aaount of 25 nillion uc's :unita of smut]. whereas
the total cost of the 388 1 project is estinated at 360 nillion OC‘s (1901
prices). or sore than 2 billion francs.

The sea officials also esphasized that the choice of prine contractor for the
ans 1 satellite will be made around the end of July. based on coqetitive bidding
between the Geraan fir-s Dornier and use [Hesserachnitt-Baldow-Blohn]. it now
being definitely settled that the prine contractor will be Ger-an. But the fact

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is that a real con-petition will be very hard, if not imssible, to come by for
the BSA. since the prelininary study of the project has up to now been conducted
solely by Do_r_nier, the platform will be that_of the SM LBarth (beervation _
Probe SystenJ satellite develop-ed by MIRA Jiechanics. Aviation and Traction.
and the principal instrument (microwaves) has been studied by Thomson-CS? [Gen-
eral Radio Company] and Marconi!

There can be no doubt therefore that Dornier, which will subait its proposal on

7 June. will be chosen as the prime contractor of the ans 1 satellite. The 885's
industrial policy mittee could hardly do otherwise without risking a cowlete
upset of the delicate industrial “balance” that has been worked out among the
European firms for their participation in the 385's new progress.

Thus. the definitional phase is to begin in August and be coupleted by the end of
1983, after which the plan calls for 4 years of developmental work on the satel-
lite and its instruments. which are to be integrated and ready for launching by
the end of 1987. Operation of the experimental satellite HRS 1 would thus begin
the following year. in 1988. m 1 will be essentially an oceanographic satel-
lite, positioned in a circular orbit at an altitude of 675 km and controlled via
the Kiruna (Sweden) gtation. The satellite will be equipped with an 'mr- [active
microwave instrumentJ and a radio altimeter that will operate in the Ku (13.7 632)
band to measure wave heights. The M1 will be a synthetic-aperture and 8m
[side-looking airborne radar] syste- operating in Band c (5.3 Ghz) in either of
two nodes: One radar node to provide a high-resolution (30 I) iaage of the sur-
faces of the earth and the oceans, and one scatteronetric mode to measure the
direction and speed of winds (between 4 and 24 meters/sec) on the surface of the

oceans 0

me European ans 1 satellite will be one of the rare oceanic satellites. other
than the American SBASA'r ] satellite (which operated only 90 days) and the future
Japanese H08 1 satellite, which is to be launched some years hence.

COPYRIGBT: A. E C. 1982

9399
C30: 5500/2205

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1mm“ ”PM”

88A announces 2 arm mans FOR 1982. m: PENALTIES

Paris Am 81' 008308 in Prench 22 Hay pp M. 52
:Article by Pierre Langereuxx 'Only M Ariane Launches in 1902']

:‘rextj 'l'he BSA [European Space Agency] has just announced that the next launch
(LS) of the European launcher Ariane. carrying the mace 2 and SIRIO 2. has now
been postponed to lo 8epteaber 1982 and will be followed by launch 1.6 during the
second half of Noveaber (probably around 25 Novenber) carrying the European
satellite moan-<1). This confirns then (see an :1- com, No 90‘) that there
will be no lore than two Ariane rocket launches this year. The European rocket
having been officially qualified since Decesber 1981. it could have carried out
three or four launchings this year. the first of which could have been in Febru-
ary 1982! Ariane's first payloads. however. consisted of European satellites
that ended up running behind the original schedule. leaving the Ariane rocket
without a payload. Despite the delay (of 1 year) experienced by the launcher
following the failure of its flight-test launching (£02). the Buropean satellites
still did not show up to nest it. The first operational launching had been set
for April 1982. which was already a delay but still an acceptable one. But the
technical problees encountered with the first names 1 satellite in orbit (spon-
taneous electrostatic discharges perturbing the operation of the satellite) have
caused successive delays in the launching of masses 2. until September. No
other satellite will be ready before then (except 81310 2). since the nodifica-
tions to be nade to name 2 will also have to be made to the ace satellites.
which use the sane platform. This has all resulted in delaying the putting of
the European launcher into operatin service at the crucial accent when
launchings of new payloads. particularly in the telecommunications satellite
sector. are being negotiated. These 7 nonths of inactivity for Ariane cannot
be retrieved! The available facilities at Kourouuhunan as well as hardware-—
are insufficient to enable an adequate speedup in the launching rate. at least
for another 3 years (when the second launching facility will be in service). The
BSA. as the responsible agency for the names prograa. and British Aerospace
(Great Britain). as prime contractor. bear a heavy burden in this situation.

The default on the part of the names satellites”) is all the more disturbing
for its inpact on other telecouunications satellites. a sector in which Europe
is trying to position itself alongside the big American builders.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Considering the duration of the launch windows (35 working days). it will not be
possible to carry out more than five launchings in 1983, as planned. The neces-
sary modifications to the interface between the launcher and its payloads (re-
configuration of wiring, etc). loreover. have yet to be done. The first of next
year's launchings (L7) is therefore now scheduled for the end of January 1983.
carrying the European sea 1 satellite (which normally was to have been launched
in 1982). Three sore launchings (b8. [.9 and L10), in principle, will orbit three
further INTELSAT 5 satellites for the intelsat organization (two of which were
nornally to have been launched in 1982). if the satellites are actually ready
on time (Pord Aerospace has already incurred delays in their deliveries); it
appears, however, that at least two INTELSAT 5 launchings are assured for 1983.
The last of next year's launchings (L11), scheduled for Novesber or Dece-ber.
will carry the ass 2 satellite or the French m M satellite, whichever is
available first.

For, once the series of operational launchings is under way. there will be no
further waiting for payloads. as this would coupletsly disrupt launching opera-
tions at Kourou. The rule will be simple and severe: The first to be ready will
be the first to be launched. And costly penalties will be levied against those
who are late (as is being done, after all, in the case of American rockets).
This should induce stricter observance on the part of the satellite builders
with respect to delivery schedules on the satellites for which they are the
contractors. The fact is that we have now entered an era of operational and
commercial exploitation of rockets. Thin narks the success of this activity,
but inevitably imposes a certain number of new constraints.

The use of satellite launchers has become a space transportation 'service,‘
with everything that concept involves (punctuality, costs, guarantees. etc.).
POOTNOTBS

1. This satellite must necessarily be launched between 9 October 1982 and
15 January 1983

2. Despite knowledge of 'prior experiences" with phenomena of this nature en-
countered in American satellites (MARISAT and PLEBTSATOGI).

COPYRIGBT: A. i C. 1982

9399
C80: 5500/2245

11
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
roe omrm. use ohm)

WIN”. AFFAIRS

m

“Aims l mum-m international space teleco-unicatione organisation
mums put into service a new teleco-unicatione satellite. m s. over
the Indian Ocean on 1 Hay 1982. Another mass:- 5 satellite will soon be
orbited in the sale vicinity to handle that region's traffic. 'l'he international
saritiee satellite telecc-unications organisation masses has just anmunced
the putting into service. also on 1 lay. of the first European naritiee telecon-
Isunications satellite names 1. which was launched on 19 Decedeer 1981 by Ariane
on the latter's fourth and final flight test launching. MA? states that
the satellite is operating nor-ally. The putting into operational service of
MARKS 1. it will he recalled. which was originally scheduled for 1 February
1982 (see All! 81‘ 008908. No 086). was scratched because of radioelectric distur-
bances affecting the satellite in geostationary orbit. This develop-out eoreover
coqaelled the ISA and British Aerospace. the satellite's prise contractor. to
Iodify the m 2 satellite and the scs satellites-which use the ease platforn
«to avoid the recurrence of such disturbances to future satellites. The BSA was
supposed to announce this week the new launching date for masses 2. confining
that this could not be before the first half of Septesher 1982 and that there-
fore there can only he two Ariane launchings this year. [Article Pierre
Langereux: 'maecs 1 and run-ensu- s Satellites in Service 1 Hay“) ”EParis an as
com in French a May 92 p .2] [common a. e c. 1992] 9399

um mores ems resonator ”mum sea [European Space Agency] has just
entrusted Roach-C8? [General Radio Coepanyj with a definitional study of future
high-capacity teleco—unications-satellite payloads utilising the new high fre-
quencies in the 20-30 on: hand. W! is to analyse different satellite
configurations and their inset on payloads. 8mm expansion unknown]. a
telecouunications and telesatics consultant coqaany. s associated with this
study to evaluate the potential sarket for widehand telecosnunications sen vices
(video—conferences. etc) during the 1990's. Three other European firesu‘I'ICRA

[expansion unknown] (Den-ark). BSA [Dutch Teleco-unicetiona Bguipeent] (Nether-
lands) and SAAB [Swedish Airlines Inc.] (Sweden)-are also participating in this
study ordered by the 28A. [Text] [Paris AIR 31' 00908 in French 8 May 82 p 62]
[COPYRIGﬂh A. h C. 1982] 9399

12

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARIANE: PRODUCTION SCHEDULE-~‘me new schedule of Ariane launchings published this
week by Arianespace shows practically a full booking to the end of 1966. Sixteen
European and American clients have already booked reservations on A:iane's launch
windows for the orbiting of 35 satellites (including the three already orbited
during the qualification launchings) and the future Brazilian satellites Las
published]. The BSA and Arianespace have put 19 Ariane rockets into production
for these launchings. which will use the Ariane 1 version of these rockets to the
end of this year, then the ilproved Ariane 2 and 3 versions beginning next year.
Provisions have also been made for the fabrication of seven additional rockets.
for a total of 26 Ariane rockets. to fulfill requirements to the beginning of
1986. Ariane rockets are currently being built at the rate of 4 to 5 rockets a
year; this rate will continue throughout next year. But it is planned that by
1985 the rate will be a rockets a vear. By then. Arianespace will have put the
second launching facility. ELA 2, at Kourou into service. enabling the rate of
Ariane launchings to be increased to 8 or ten launches per year and providing a
redundancy of launching facilities in case of accidental damage to one of the
launch pads. The new SLA 2 launching facility will also be compatible with the
new Ariane ‘ rocket. which will have double the performance ratings of the pres-
ent rocket and which will be the true competitor of the American shuttle during
the 128013. Article by Pierre Langereux: "Nenty-six Ariane Rockets in Produc-
tion"; L‘i'ext] Paris AIR s-r cosms in French 22 Hay 32 p «3 3092mm:

A. a c. 1982] 9399

C80: 5500/2245

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? my

space seem. snmmn puns m 1932-1905
Paris an: in coenoe in French 15 ﬂay 32 pp 51-53

:Artigle by Pierre Langereux: 'hew Objectives of Geraan ”ace Plan for 1982-
1985'

:1!th The new objectives of the Ger-an space plan for the period 1992-1985
were released recently by Dr Eersan Strub of the sun [ministry for Research
and Technology]. The new plan. which is now officially adopted by the m

and due to be published shortly. has already been debated and approved by the
entities concerned (govern-ental adninistrations and business organisations) on
the basis of the plan drawn up in June 1901 by the am [German Research and
Experisental Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics] and of the final recou-
Iasndation suhuitted to the ear? in October 1981.

The sajor objectives of the plan are: Pronotion of basic research, technologi-
cal innovations with a view to their application to public services. a holster-
ing of the Geraan aerospace industry‘s conpetitiveness particularly in the sar-
ket donain of co-ercial application of space systeas (launchers, satellites and
ground eguipeent), and developnent of international cooperation with Europe

and the United States.

The new 1902-1985 plan calls for a noderate growth in German space expenditures
within a ceiling of 800 million DUI by 1995, which is slightly higher than that
or 1982(1). It is to be noted however that to this direct subvention by the
an sust be added the additional credits granted by other organisations. such
as the ﬂax Planck Institute for space research. :he Bundespost tor donestic
direct-W satellite (TV-sari and telemunicatione satellite (038) projects.
and the Deutsche Hetterdienst (Meteorological Service) for Gersan participation
in the European network of operational weather satellites of the future emai-
[expansion unknown] organization.

The new German space progress are articulated along three main axes: Space re-
search. conercial applications (telecouunications, direct TV, seteorology,
navigation and renote sensing). and launchers and orbital systens of the future.

(1) The Barr's 1982 'research' budget totals 6,578.5 nillion DH, 0: which 945
million on are for aeronautical and space research.

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Space Research

Dr Strub underscored the nagnitude of the Gernan participation in scientific

projects concerned with aerono-y. astrophysics. geophysics. space bionedicine
and the new eaperiaents in siorogravity.

The most costly of the Gemn space projects. involving probe rockets. will be
its participation in the MP [Riddle Atnosphere Program] project and in its ex-
tension nae-wise [expansion unknown]. concerned with wintertise observations
over northern Europe byneansof atlospheric soundings at altitudes ranging tro-
10 to 100 ks carried out iron three sites: Andoya (Sweden). Lists (Norway) end
‘rhule (Greenland). Ger-any will also participate. this sun. in the iono-
spheric soundings project new and. in 1904. in the CAESAR project to study the
polar magnetosphere and ionosphere. During the st-er of 1904. Ger-any will
also participate in the 1m room project on Ieasuresents of solar radia-
tions at vacuus ultraviolet wavelengths and of' rodiacal light, by leans of
probe rockets launched from Natal (Brazil).

In addition, Gersany has furnished equip-ant (Am-type spectrometer and
trajectory-measuring systes) for the new Italian scientific satellite san MARCO
D, which is scheduled to be launched this year-end by an American 8000'! rocket
at the Italian test site in Kenya (Africa).

Germany will also furnish one or the three satellites for NASA's am: [Active
Magnetospheric Particle 'l‘racer Explorer] project, which will also involve a
British satellite. The German Oberpfatrenhoten Control Center will take part
in the aission for the tracking of the m satellites, which are to be
launched in 19”. Ger-an scientists are participating moreover in European
arm-m coast-probe and the news 189“ solar-probe projects: these probes are to
be launched. respectively, in 1985 and 1986 by Ariane and the Shuttle. They
are also participating in the new [11?th astronetry satellite due to be
launched in early 1987 by the SBA, and in the large astrormic telescope pro-
jectuNASA's SPACE TELESCOPE which is to be orbited in early 1985 by the
Shuttle. Ger-any's participation in the latter will consist or furnishing one
of Space Telescope's sain sensors: The NC [Paint Object Camera] devel by
Dornier with the aid of mm [Mechanism Aviation and Traction Coapany
(France). Germany is also sharing substantially in NASA's GALILEO probe pro-
ject: this probe is to be launched toward Jupiter in 1985. and the propulsion
godule that is to brake the robe upon its arrival is being built by Man
_Hesserschnitt-Boelkov-Blo . Germany also plans to participate in future Euro- -
pean scientific satellite projects (to be chosen in 1983) and Merican ones
(501' [expansion unknownJ). Germany, in particular, has studied a national
project o‘a large infrared observamry-GIRL--whioh could be launched and
retrieved by the Shuttle.

oornier is currently at work on a new Gen-an scientific satellite project:

The wear satellite for the study of x-rays, which is to be launched in early
1987. On the other hand. operation of the nelios 2 solar probe is to end this
sun-er after 7 and 1/2 years of operation.

15
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Microgravity

But the foremost German national scientific project is Germany's SPACE.” Dl
mission which has now been postponed to April 1985. This mission. in which the
SSA. France and Italy will also participate. will cost Germany ‘05 million w.
The cl mission will be oriented essentially toward metallurgy under microgravity.
The principal equipment used will be: The instruents already developed for
SPmaLAB‘s first payload (isothermal oven. temperature-gradient oven. reflector
oven and fluid-physics module). as well as an experimental chadaer for the study
of transfers and the wanna Lexpangion unknown) setup. This is an experimental
setup consisting of a new 'stu' Llano Ellipsoidal Reflector Furnace; oven. a
temerature-gradient oven with a quenching device and a high-tesperature thermo-
static shield. The ass will also furnish the '310mx-[expansion unknown: and
the 'ssss' Lexpansion unknown] vestibular sleigh (taken from the ‘BSLP' flight)
for biomedical experiments in weightleasness.

Space 'l'eledetection

Germany is also showing an active interest in earth observation, with optical and
microwave instruments aboard the shuttle and Spacelab.

An moms [Modular Optoelectronic Hultispectral Scanner; is to be used on the first
flight of the German SPAS 1 platform planned for the beginning of 1983 aboard the
seventh flight of-the Shuttle. A metric camera and an H383 [Microwave Remote
Sensing Equipmentd will also be part of the first payload aboard Spacelab. which
is due to fly in September 1983. The DPYLR has moreover undertaken the develop-
ment of an SAR Lsynthetic-aperture radarJ for remote-sensing satellites. This
project is already being carried in cooperation with Norway. and negotiations
are under way with Italy. who is also interested in this technique. But Ger-
many's biggest effort in the domain of space teledetection is its share. as the
majority participant. in the European ans 1 oceanic observation satelliteproject.
This project is to get under way within the next few weeks under the prime con-
tractorship of a German firm. Dornier. if Germany agrees that the project‘s
staff remain installed at Toulouse (France).

0n the other hand. the DPVLR is installing in Germany a National 'l‘eledetection
Center. which is to centralize all the remote sensing. meteorological and clima—
tological data. A climatic research program is to get under way in 1902. using
new space sensors.

TV-SA'I' and DPS Satellites

Significant developments are in progress in space telecommunications. Germany
and France have undertaken the joint construction of the German ‘l'V-Sh‘l' direct-TV
satellite and the French TD? 1. which are scheduled for delivery. respectively.
15 February and 15 April 1985 to be launched by Ariane 2. The building of these
satellites has been entrusted to the Franco-German group Burosatellite ma.
made up of ismspmm _8ational Industrial Aerospace Comp-nil. m :nesser-
schmitt-Boelkow-Blohgz Mon-CS? ,_General Radio Coqany] and-m-‘l‘elefunken.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

with participation by Belgian and Swedish industries. The price contract for
the building of the ‘i'V-Sh‘l‘ and TD? 1 antellites is due to be released to Euro-
satellite shortly by the French and Gan-an authorities.

The Ger-an m has also undertaken recently the study of a dosestic teleoomuni-
cations services satellite operating in the new 20-30 on: frequency band. This
DPS Lexpansion unknown] project of the Bundespost provides for the building of a
satellite to furnish conventional comunications services (telephone, facsiaile)
' and new services (teleaatics) inside the m. The DPS satellite is being tar-
gated for launching in 1906 (see Ala 21' cosms, Bio 901).

MA

Ger-any is also planning to maintain a certain level of activity in the domain
of launchers and orbital systens, notably by increasing its participation in the
developent of the new versions of the European launcher (Ariane 2, 3 and d).
Ger-any's participation in Ariane t is to be 20 percent. said Dr Strub. And
Gersany is also participating actively in the definitional studies on the “future
European launcher' of the 1990's, which is currently under way at the BSA and the
cues _(Prench) NatiOnal Center for Space Studies] (see an er cosms. Ros 891.
892 and 893). in particular with respect to the new loo-ton cryogenic actor that
has been entrusted to the 83? [European Propellant Comany] (Frame) in associa-
tion with HEB.

0n the other hand, commitments to future Spacelab developmnts are less evident.
particularly in view of the high cost of operation of the orbital laboratory.
Germany is participating, however. as main financer (40 percent), in the develop-
ment of a new self-powered. recoverable platform under the BSA's amen project
(see AIR E‘r cosms, No 905). The platform is currently being studied by BEND
[Development Association Northl-HBB and Dornier. The initial flight of this self-
povered satellite. with a payload dedicated to experiments under aicrogravity. is
targeted for the end of l986-beginning of 1987.

COPYRIGIIT: A. 6 C. 1982

9399
080: 5500/2251

17
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m RADIO NM? 3m 10 Im ”RIC-AN m
Paris Jm m” in french 5 “I! ‘2 p 71
[Article by c. 0.: 'Bcho from the Savannas']

Crest] kit the NAP. enter the urn Behind these barbarous acronynsufor
W some: 08 911385 and $130188 macs IWMnlies one of the lost
meaningful. aspects of the 8-?! [RADIO-Pm mm'f'IONAL refora um
armour, No 1106). The 'oooperation' sector will be one o the principal bene-
ficiaries of the aajor upheaval in R—Pl, which has as its goal nothing less than
to go the international services of the BBC and the mace: WELLS one better.
by way of a fivefold increase in its budget between now and 1981. and by playing
to its advantage the card of the new world intonation order.

Staffed by scale 10 persona (only two of when were journalists). the NAP expired
quietly on 31 narch. It had been supplying written press information on a daily
basis to some hundred African newspapers. The Iiinistry of Cooperation-which
had been paying for the subscriptions-wot an and to the experinent, taking thus
a backward step for a longer leap forward.

R—fl already operated a snail broadcast service that furnished audio eaterial to
the African media. Another service col-piled for the Quai d'Orsay ministry of
External Relations) bulletins for transnission to french embassies. A disper-
sion of effort that had to be ended! 'mese different services were nergad with
the erstwhile NAP. and so the MN cane into being, its name having been regis-
tered officially by lid-April.

Now operational with a staff of some 20 journalists. the new written- and spoken-
press agency had to have as its nanaging editor... none other than a for-er
editor of RUNS APRIOUB. It was in fact Philippe Gaillard who was approached by
nerve Bourges. general manager of 8-”. 'He will endeavor to do what the other
press agencies are not doing.‘ affirned the latter.

Reporting. docmentaries. ecomnic analyses, followups on the activities of the
international organisations: Up to this point the advance is over familiar ter-
rain. But HP! intends to go further. nerve Bourges. forner spokeslan for
Anadou-Hahtar H‘Bow, is not forgetting W's fight for a new infornation

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

ordor. In is not going to no content with sorely intoning Atrica. It is
going to try also to institute a inverse intonation nor: nu Wu and
rndio stations of that continant win bo onconragod to sand us their can
productions. 'lo ona opoakn of Africa until. a coup d‘otat takes piaco.‘ says
Horns lonrgoa. 1n. tisa has cone to nako know tbs other African roalitios.
'aho ayato- ot onchsngos will bo put in piaco gradually. But it viii on.
doubtodiy roquiro a great dos]. o: stoadfast persovoranoo to broak through tho
Ilastorn pnbiic’o «n o! indittorenco to any intonation that in not lacod vith

foikloro. '

mm: 1902 Jenna Mriquo own

9399 .
030: 5500/2266 END

19
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY