FOR OFFICIAL lJSl’, ONLY

JPRS L/10283
26 January 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN AMERICA REPORT

(POUO 1/82)

CONTENTS

COUNTRY SECTION
INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

Briefs
'PRELA', 'GNA' Sign Agreement

BAHAMAS

Disarray in Opposition Likely To Give Pin'lling Victory
(LATIN AMERICAN RI-XIIONAI. MEETS-CARIBBEAN, b Dec 81) ......

CUBA

ACC's Bustamnte Discusses Cooperation With USSR
(Jose Angel Bustamante; AMERICA LATINA, Oct 81) ............

EL SALVAIDR

Socialist International Supports 1-141)! on Elections
(PEELA, 25 me 8.1) 00.000.00.00..........-OOIIOOOIOOOOOOD0.0

GUATEMALA

ORPA Reports 98 Amy Casualties Iron 30 Sep to 5 Nov
(PRELA, '0 mc 81) I........I..Dll..........O...‘........O.I

GUY/UNA

Declining Econonw Factor in Government Personnel Changes
(LATIN AMERICAN RMIONAL REPORTS-CARIBBEAN, b Dec 81).......
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HONDURAS \

HPL Says Honduras To Be Staging Area for Aggression
(m, 9 Jan 82) 90.0.0.0...coco-ooooooooooooOIootooI...

f: I CARAGUA

D‘Escoto Demands End to U.S. 'Verbal Terrorism'
(John Rettie; THE GUARDIAN, 18 Dec 81) ..................

PANAMA

Briefs
Center of Sugarcane Technology

ST. VINCENT

Briers
Island Development Dispute

I ENEZUELA

Briefs
Conmunists Congratulate Cuban Assembly Leaders

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUhTRY SECI'ION INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

'PRELA'. 'CNA' SIGN AGREEMENT—-Georgetown, 13 Dec (PL)--The Latin American News
Agency PRENSA LATINA and the Guyanese News Agency GNA signed here an agreement
on collaboration and exchange of information between both news agencies. The
document was signed by Courtney Gibson, chief director of the GNA and by
Gustavo Robreno, managing director of PRENSA LATINA. in a ceremony held

in the premises of the recently created Guyanese agency. The agreement
stipulates the development and broadening of cooperation between GNA and
PRENSA LATINA. both in the bilateral field and within the framework of the
nonaligned movement news agencies pool. During his stay in Guyana, the

PL managing director met with lvon Harewood-Benn, minister in charge of the
information sector, and Frank Campbell, chief editor of the daily GUYANA
CHRONICLE and paid visits to different mass media. [Text] [PA130425 Havana
PRELA in English 1933 GMT 12 Dec 81]

C50: 302 5/1013

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DISARPAY IN OPPOSITION LIKELY TO GIVE PINDLING VICTORY
London lA'l‘IN AMERICAN REGIONAL REPORTS-CARIBBMN in English 4 Dec 81 pp 9, 10

[Text] The Bahama is gearing for an election next year that even the
government's worst critics admit the ruling Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) will
have a hard time losing. The problem is the two major opposition parties whose
mutual dislike has so far superseded their joint concern over the prospect of
another five years of 'stop and 30' government by the PLP.

Politically the Social Democratic Party (80?) and the
Free National Movement (FNM) represent a mix of
disenchanted PLPers and vestiges of the white
minority United Bahamian Party (UBP) which govern-
ed prior to 1967. Once united under the banner of
the FNM. the opposition was badly mauled in the
1972 general election and split just six months short
of the 1977 election. Many supporters are convinced
that action cost them a substantial number of seats if
not the government.

Philosophically the two parties are indistinguishable.
Both are committed to less rather than more govem-
merit. They blame the administration's expanding
involverrent in the pnvate sector plus a succession of
had policy decisions for the country's rising debt and
bouts of deep recession since 1970. Nevertheless
sporadic attempts at reunification have floundered
because neither the leadership of the FNM, con-
trolled mainly by former PLPers. nor that of the SDP.
led by former UBPers. have been able to bridge their
old party differences.

The opposition emerged from the 1977 election
with eight of 38 parliamentary seats. Since then there
has been one detection to the PLP, while the remain-
der have sub-diVided and re-grouped into the present
arrangement. Personal rivalries between and within
the various {actions have in the past four years pro-
voked a stream of recriminations totally divorced
from the mam issues.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

3025/95

Recently the balance has shifted to the PS.“
following the departure of several leading SDP
members. The SD? was further weakened last month
when one of its four parliamentary members
announced he would seek reelection as an FNM car:-
didate. The SD? has now said it will contest only five
seats. leaving the field clear for the FNM. The FNM
insists. however. that it intends to run candidates for
the three SDP seats. even at the risk of losing them all
to the PLP.

At a time of growing dissatisfaction With the
government's 14-year record. such dissension within
the opposition has left many voters in a political
no man's land. Addressing the PLP convention in
October. prime minister Lynden Pindling admitted
that the country is suffering from a general break-
down in discipline for which he was partly responsible.
He did not realise. he said. that by encouraging
Bahamians to better themselves. they would choose
unemployment over manual labour.

Police statistics show that major crime has doubled
in ten years. in many cases those responsible are
neither poor nor unemployed. Pindling said. Both
crime and unemployment are expected to worsen as
the deepening US recession makes itself felt on the
Bahamian economy. The tourist industry. in the
doldrums for the past year. is predicted to show a
USSSOm shortfall for 1981. The government has
reacted by increasmg public spend ing to provide more
jobs and social service benefits.

Although not obliged to call an election before
mid-1982. the prime minister is likely to do so early
in the year before the economic situation worsens.
The absence of an effective opposition could mean a
clear and overwhelming victory for the PLP. It could

also open the door to the much smaller but more
disciplined Vanguard Socialist Party.

Highly critical of the PLP. the ten-year-old
Vanguard still has no parliamentary representation
because of a general antipathy by Bahamians to
socialist philosophy. Its main support has come from
young people at the lower end of the economic scale.

Last month it announced that it would ﬁeld 20
candidates in the election. Four years ago it put up
four and won a total of 55 votes. Even if it fails to
wzn any seats this time. the degree of support given
the party could have far-reaching implications. :

IATIN AMERICAN REGIONAL REPORTS, 1981
FOR OFFII'IAI. USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

ACC'S BUSTAHANTE DISCUSSBS COOPERATION WITH USSR
Moscow AMERICA LATINA in Spanish Oct 81 pp 89-93

[Excerpt from speech by Jose Angel Bustamante on Soviet—Cuban scientific cooperation
at USSR Academy of Sciences Latin America Institute on 25 December 1980]

[Text] On 27 April 1981 a solemn session of the Scientific
Council and of the collective of the Latin America Institute
(IAL) of the USSR Academy of Sciences was held to award the
degree of doctor honoris cause of the IAL to the well-known
Cuban scientific and public figure, Jose Angel Bustamante
O'Leary. At this session Professor V. Vol'skiy, director of the
IAL, pointed out the great significance and deep symbolism of
this event, since the homage to the Cuban scientist was ac-
corded on an important date for the institute, which celebrated
its 20th anniversary the same day. The institute was created
under the direct inspiration of the Cuban Revolution, in which
one of the active participants was the present vice president
of the Cuban Academy of Sciences, J.A. Bustamante.

Recently. J.A. Bustamante was 70 years old. In recognition of
his services to science and for his great contribution to the
development of Soviet-Cuban scientific exchanges, the Scienti-
fic Council of the IAL decided on 25 December 1980 to confer on
him the title of doctor honoris cause of the institute.

In the name of all Soviet scientists and in particular of those
who work in the institute. the chief of the Cuban Section of
the IAL, Anatoliy Bekarevich, cordially congratulated J.A.
Bustamante on this occasion.

The charge d'affaires of the Republic of Cuba in the USSR,
Julio A. Puerta Quiroga, emphasized that the life of J.A.
Bustamante is a brilliant example of devoted, revolutionary
service to the people.

We publish below an extract of the address given by Dr J.A.
Bustamante.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICMI. [SSE 0N”

It is a source of great satisfaction for me to receive today the degree of doctor
honoris causa in sciences, since it is an honor whose value we can recognize.

Perhaps this award is justified in part by my deep interest in the history of medi-
cine and science in general, which has led me to concentrate on its study in a way
parallel to my real, professional interest: psychiatry.

However, without a doubt the affection of my Soviet colleagues and above all their
consideration for my fatherland. Cuba, has influenced it in a more definite way.
Cuba is the Island of Liberty, and in its name I think I am in a position to receive
the award, as vice president for social sciences in our Academy of Sciences.

In the course of this activity it was possible for us to confirm in practice the
fraternal and internationalist character of the relations between the USSR and our
fatherland.

If we find in this way a partial explanation for the honor, when we add the rela-
tions which our activity has involved with the social sciences branch, we are led
to the conclusion that it is in the name of our own academy and of Cuba that we
decided to accept such an honor.

However, returning to our relationships, in the framework of which the granting

of the degree is taking place, the following circumstances surround it--the great,
internationalist attitude of our Soviet brothers, since. as Fidel once said very
well: without the October Revolution the Cuban Revolution would not have been pos-
sible. Therefore. the Cuban Academy of Sciences could not have received the sup-
port of the USSR Academy of Sciences, so useful to the full achievement of its
aspirations.

However, we want to emphasize that in response to the help so offered we must add
that Cuba, for its part, knew enough to cheese the proper path to leave its state
of dependence and underdevelopment.

In the framework of scientific cooperation the role of the USSR Academy of Sciences
and its help for the scientific development of Cuba, through the Cuban Academy of
Sciences, is a manifest fact which we all recognize. The agreements reached between
the two academies of sciences have promoted a close relationship between the m'~ber
institutes of the two academies.

The Latin America Institute has played an important role in the development of these
relationships, as much with the Latin American countries as with Cuba in a special
way. He would like it take this opportunity to point out that the 20th anniversary
of the foundation of this institute is being celebrated this month. The IAL has
maintained praiseworthy relationships with our institutes of the Social Sciences
Section of the Cuban Academy of Sciences, offering great help in obtaining degrees
for a number of workers and scientists of the academy, maintaining an exchange of
scientific cadres and especially in the development of research on the Isle of Youth
in which the Latin American Institute, other institutes of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. and other Soviet organizations have participated. This research will

make it possible to provide appropriate recommendations for the development of the
isle of Youth, but at the same time it will provide economic and mathematical

models to study other territories in Cuba.

5
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

The work carried out jointly, such as "Las relaciones ruso-cubanas y sovietico-
Cubanas en los siglos XVIII-XX" [Russian-Cuban and Soviet-Cuban Relations in the
18th-20th Centuries] (Moscow, Nauka, 1980), and also the basic work, "Importancia
del Gran Octubre en la Revolution Cubans" [The Importance of the Great October Re—
volution for the Cuban Revolution] (Moscow, Nauka, 1977), have provided new elements
for the scientific explanation of the influence and importance of the October Revo-

Lution for the Cuban Revolution, as well as better understanding of Cuban-USSR
relations.

Also of great value is the analysis of the national liberation movements in Latin
werica, in which the institute has shown a marked interest. helping us to under—
stand the Latin American scene, as well as establishing practical conditions for the
process to unfold. The monthly magazine published by the institute reaches many
countries in Latin America; we also receive and use it.

The Social Sciences Section of the Cuban Academy of Sciences has received fraternal
rooperation from the corresponding Social Sciences Section of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. Comrade Fedoseyev, vice president of the USSR Section, together with the
directors of the different institutes in that branch, have offered the fullest co-
operation to our institutes. Based on the agreements tint have been reached. that
has permitted going into the problems which have been raised.

For obvious reasons our section was the most affected by the ideological struggle
which developed in our midst. as a natural consequence of the profound revolution

in which we have led the way. For this reason there was a consequent loss of ground
in its development. Therefore, we needed to make a more pronounced effort to

place ourselves on the appropriate level and which is essential for a socialist
country.

This cooperation has made it possible to guarantee the help necessary for the de-
velopment of the research plan in the social sciences, which covers seven fundamen-
tal problems and nine state problems, with their corresponding complex of themes
which constitute our thematic plan and which have served to develop the disciplines
and the training of the necessary cadres.

We must add that, if it is true that Cuba has received and continues to receive
fraternal and internationalist help, which has been of such assistance in the de-
velopment of its revolution as well as in the progress of science and technical
services in our country, for its part Cuba has known how and will continue to know
how to perform its consequent internationalist duty. For that purpose it has given
rconomic, cultural, and scientific helpI within the framework of its possibilities,
:0 countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, whose revolutionary processes de-
veloped after that of Cuba.

--')?YRICIIT: AMERICA LATINA 1981

5170
use: 3010/466

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SOCIALIST INTERNATIONAL SUPPORTS FMLN 0N ELECTIONS
PA252331 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2105 GMT 25 Dec 81

[Text] Mexico City. 25 Dec (PL)--The Socialist International will not give any
validity to the elections that the Salvadoran regime is planning. if the conditions
submitted by the FMLN are not taken into consideration.

Anselmo Sule. vice president of the Socialist International Commission for Latin
America, said that the government that results from those elections will not be
recognized by most democratic countries in the world.

This election, he said in an interview by SALPRESS NEWS AGENCY in this capital. are
not the solution to the problea and on the contrary they could make the situation
worse and increase repression against the people.

Sule. a leader of the Radical Party of Chile and vice president of the Permanent
Conference of Latin American Political Parties, COPPRAL, said on behalf of the
Socialist International, that this organization fully supports the French-Mexican
declaration which recognized the representativeness of the revolutionary forces
and urges a peaceful solution to the conflict.

Sule said that the u.s. opinion that the recognition of the Salvadoran rebel forces
by Mexico and France is an act of intervention "is a stupid argument which only
serves to strengthen the repressive forces of the Salvadoran regime.“

Sole added that the Socialist International has not made a categorical statement
regarding v.3. interventionian in El Salvador, but he said in his opinion if the
U.S. Government continues intervening in favor of the Christian Democratic Military
Junta. the massacre of the Salvadoran people will continue.

Referring to U.s. threats of aggression of all sorts against Cuba and Nicaragua,
Sule reiterated the Socialist International'a commitment to the principle of non-
intervention and self-determination of peoples.

ihe Socialist International has saio, he added, that a military intervention would
!iolnte those principles. seriously affecting Latin America's stability and world
peace also. That is why we have denounced it, Sule concluded.

CSO: 3010/626

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
URPA REPORTS 98 ARMY CASUALTIES FROM 30 SEP T0 5 NOV
PA102335 Havana PRELA in English 2025 GMT 10 Dec 81

[lext] San Jose, 1] Dee (PL)-—The Organization of the People in Arms (ORPA)
infliCted 98 casualties upon the Guatemalan regime army in actions conducted
between 30 September and 5 November.

An ORPA communique released here states that the most important action took place
on 5 November when it ambushed two regime units on La Marina Bridge in the village
of Chayen, San Rafael Pie de la Cuesta. In the attack, in which the insurgents
used automatic rifles. grenade launchers and land mines, 48 regime soldiers were
killed and 16 others wounded.

On 30 September ORPA fighters ambushed an army truck on the road from Ostuncalco
to Palestina de Los Altos in Quezaltenango Department. lVeive regime soldiers
were killed and 9 more wounded most of them due to the explosion of a home made
mine.

URPA charged that the survivors of the regime contingent assassinated four unarmed
farm people including a child.

An hour long battle took place on 4 October in the coffee groves of an estate
called Patio de Bolas in the department of Suchitepequez. with a toll of eight
dead and five wounded for the regime forces.

lhe previous day guerrillas and goVernment forces fought for close to an hour
near the village of Pala, in Santa Catarina lxtahuacan, Solola Department, with
the presence of ambulances believed to indicate regime casualties.

nRPA described as a publicity maneuver the reports spread by the regime of General
Romeo Lucas Garcia on purported desertlon by farmers belonging to the guerrillas.
Ir charged that the army forcibly carries off peasant young people, women, children
Ind old people. interns them in camps near their own most attacked bases to take
refuge behind them and thus stave off further attacks by the revolutionary forces.

unA points out that this method is a copy of the notirieus strategic hamlets
-reated by the ”.8. forces in Vietnam.

(:30: 3020/ 36

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DECLINING ECONOMY FACTOR IN GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL WES

London LATIN AMERICAN REGIONAL REPORTS-CARIBBEAN in English (6 Dec 81 p 7

[Text]

In a government reshufﬂe announced
this week. information minister Frank
Campbell m3 named editor-inchief
of National Newspapers: his ministry
was taken over by prime minister
Ptolemy Reid. Fitz Carmichael (loves.
try) and Joshua Chowritmootoo (en-
vironment and water supply) were
dismissed and their ministries absorbed
into others. The reshuffle followed the
resignation of the minister for mecha-
nical equipment. Kit Nascimento. to
live abroad. According to an official
statement. Nascimento is seeking an
international appointment. backed by
President Forbes Bumham: for the
time being. he will retain honorary
ministerial rank.

\Vhiie Nascimento is taking the
Ramphal road out of the country. a
prominent government official. Ossie
Baptiste. has joined the list of those
leavtng under less favourable circum-
stances. Baptiste. who was vice-president
of the Guyana State Corporation
tCuystac). the holding company for
state enterprises. was reported to have
resigned While out of the country in
September: however. a notice in ibe
()l/icirl Gazette stated last month that
he had been dismissed as from 21
September. He is to use up an appoint-
ment with the Barbados-based Carib-
bean Association of industry and
Commerce. the executive director of
which. Pat Thompson. formerly headed
t'iuyana's Bauxite Industry Develop-
ment Corporation.

9

The continued drain of top figure:
from the state sector matches the
relentless decline of the economy. The
rumour is prevalent in Georgetown that
the government's inability to meet IMF
targets will mean that the Fund will no
release the next tranche of funds undel
the 1980 facility - augmented a:
recently as July (RC-8106). Tht
consequence. according to the reports
could be a 15 per cent devaluation thi:
month. only six months after the Junt
devaluation which preceded the nev
IMF agreement.

With bauxite. rice and sugar pro
duction again running badly below
target lRC-Sl-OQ). labour unrest ha
re-emerged. Work stoppages on severa
sugar estates have been blamed io
production shortfalls. and bauxit
workers last month staged a_ two-daj
walk-out to force payment of back pa:
due to them. The Canadian-owner
Green Construction Company. originall;

contracted to carry out surface stril
ping. is now reported to he engaged c
mining. in a move to supplemei
output from the inefficient sta
operations.

While the government has still n4
honoured its 1979 undertaking to pay
minimum wage of 0514 a day (053
USSI). increases of more than 100 p
cent. backdated to 1 January. ha‘
been announced for the attorne
general. chief justice. members of ti
judiciary and top civil servants. Tl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
activities. The bureau was expected
to start functionmg in the New Year.
Roopnaraine said.

A group of Guyanese. Caribbean
and British citizens has meanwhile
announced the formation of a London-
based Rodney Campaign Committee.
to press for the appointment of an
independent international commission
of inquiry into the bomb death of WPA
leader Walter Rodney on 13June 1980:
the committee '5 also calling for the
suspens on of legal proceedings against
Rodney's brother Donald. who was
injured in the explosion. Magistrate
Norma Jackman. who was in charge
of the Donald Rodney hearings and
who has been noted for Judgements
favouring the government in political
cases. has been transferred to the petty
debt court. The transfer follows the
recent criticism by Chancellor Victor
Crane of some magistrates and Judges
for failing to maintain legal and moral
standards (RC-8109). in which he said
they ‘do not give a fair day's work for a
fair day's pay . . . preferring to spend
the time in liquor restaumnts.‘ :
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION GUYAM

BRIEFS

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS-ﬁn alarming record of human rights abuses in Guyana has
been asseubled in a 72-page report, covering the 18 months from January 1980 to
June 1981, recently published by the Guyana Human Rights Association. Introduced
by an outline of recent political and economic developments, the report lists the.
violations under the headings of articles of the international humn rights
agreements signed by the Guyana government. The violations recorded include
political murders; frequent use of firearms by police (resulting in the death

of 22 people in the period under review); an increasing incidence of police
brutality; political intervention in the legal process; arbitrary restrictions

on the freedom of travel, press and asseubly; dismissals and transfers of state
employees as a form of political coercion; and others including shortcomings in
social fields like health and education. The report contains 16 detailed accounts
alleging police brutality. It is obtainable from Guyana llumn Rights Association,
9.0. Box 528, Lot 1, Brickdam, Georgetown, Guyana. [Text] (London IATIN AMERICAN

REGIONAL REPORTS-OKRIBBPAN in English ‘0 Dec 81 p 7] COPYRIGHT: LATIN AMERICAN
REGIONAL REPORTS, 1981

cso: 3025/95

I 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HPL SAYS HONDURAS TO BE STAGING AREA FOR AGGRESSION
PA100220 Havana PREIA in Spanish 2215 GMT 9 Jan 82

[Text] San Jose, 9 Jan (PL)--The Honduran Cinchonero People's Liberation Movement
[NFL] has charged that this country is preparing to receive thousands of officers
and men of the Argentine, Chilean and Venezuelan armies.

A communique which this group released in Tegucigalpa today states that the first
detachments of these armies will be arriving in late February and early March, with
the complicity of the Honduran armed forces.

The NFL considers that the military movement is part of a broad intervention action

which will be launched from Honduras against the liberation processes in El Salva-
dor and Guatemala.

The organization cautioned that, in order to try to legalize the action, soce
governments guided by the Ronald Reagan Administration will invoke the Inter-
American Reciprocal Assistance Treaty [TIAR].

The group also asserts that in order to complement the aggression, new and false
accusations against Cuba and Nicaragua will be launched.

Simultaneously, the HPL Cinchoneros warned, the Honduran Government will try to
make the situation on the border with Nicaragua more tense.

To this effect, the organization said that the pretexts prepared by Tegucigalpa
are an alleged Nicaraguan occupation of Honduran territory and the presumed employ-
ment of Soviet planes and military armament by the Sandinist Army.

The NFL stressed that Foreign Secretary Cesar Elvir Sierra has already begun the
propaganda campaign with the official note in which he accused Managua of killing
200 Nicaraguan "refugees" on Honduran territory.

The charge was virtually denied by Government Secretary Oscar Mejia Arellano, who
termed the case of the "refugees" false.

Likewise, the Honduran Army and Government at this time are relocating dozens of
thousands of Salvadorans who have been in Honduras for over 3 years, the NFL
reported.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-'FK'I-U. USE ()Nl.\

The border area must be "cleaned up" of civilians in order to facilitate the Joint
military activities of the Honduran and Salvadoran troops against MN position in
Chalatcnango. Horazan and Cabanas. the comunique added.

"They (the refugees) are being taken at gunpoint to an area 50 km from the border,
thus creating a free zone in which the TIAR forces may operate,"the MPL maintains.

The Cinchoneros recalled that over 150 0.5. officers have been in Honduras for some

time now and maintained that the most reactionary Honduran officers have gotten
President-elect Roberto Suazo Cordoba to support the intervention plans.

C50: 3010/626

13
FOR OFFICIAL [58E ONLY
D'ESCOTO DEMANDS END T0 U.S. 'VERBAL TERRORISH'
PMlBllolJ London THE GUARDIAN in English 18 Dec 81 p 6
[Report by John Nettie: "Nicaragua Seeks European Influence for U.S. Approach"]

[Text] The Nicaraguan foreign minister, Father Miguel D'Escoto Brockmann, in
London on his way home from an official visit to Moscow, said yesterday that

relations with the Soviet Union were cordial because it had "respected our right
to self—determination."

Relations with the United States could be just as good, he added, if Washington
would show similar respect instead of the "verbal terrorism" that it had used
against Nicaragua. '

Asked whether he had secured more aid from the Soviet Union while in Moscow. Father
D'Escoto said "this was not the object of the visit." His talks with Mr Gromyko,
the Soviet foreign minister, had been concerned with the situation in Central
America and the Caribbean, as well as bilateral relations.

He said one of Nicaragua's major foreign policy objects was the "diversification
of our relations in the world“--something which was “synonymous with independence.“

Europe was particularly important to Nicaragua, Father D'Escoto said, because
"many European countries, allies of the United States, can influence Washington
and help them understand that we are not anti-American. but simply nationalist."

Europe had frequently suffered intervention and invasion and knew what they were
like, but the United States never had.

The foreign minister said it was important that he had had direct talks with the
0.5. secretary of state at the recent meeting of the Organisation of American
States in St Lucia in the Caribbean. There had been no previous response in
Washington to Nicaragua's appeals for such talks, but now "the door has been left
open for future ministerial meetings."

He said Mr Naig had put to him the "concept of reciprocity: If Nicaragua intervened
in any Central American country, the United States reserved the right to do the
name. But I told him the interventionist country was not Nicaragua.

1h
sou omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"We had a very, very frank talk. I told him that if the purpose of threats against
us was to make us go back on revolutionary changes, then he was wasting his time.
We are not about to betray ourselves."

Asked about the extent of Nicaragua's support for guerrilla movements in El SalVador
and elsewhere, Father D'Escoto said it was "important for any decent government to
support, or at least express sympathy for. people fighting for their freedom."
Support for oppreasora was intolerable, but Washington was "actively interfering"

in Salvadorean civil war.

He confirmed reports in Washington that talks had been held in August between the
U.S. assistant secretary of state, Mr Thomas Enders, himself and Commandante

Daniel Ortega, coordinator of the Nicaraguan junta. Nicaragua sought understanding
with Washington. But it would like to see the U.S. put into practice its proposal
that both sides should abjure the use of threats or force against the other, before
signing an agreement.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 18 Dec 81

C50: 3020/36

15
ma 0mm]. use onu
BRIEFS

CENTER OF SUGARCARE TECHNOLOGY--Panama City. 2 Jan (PL)-Panama will become the
center of an international network for research, training and transfer of tech-
nology on the sugarcane industry. This decision is the result of talks held
between Enrique Estremadoiro. secretary general of GEPLACEA (Group of Latin
American and Caribbean Sugar Exporting Countries), and Rodrigo Tarte, general
director of the Institute for Agricultural/Livestock Research (IDIAP). The
establishment of this technological network on sugarcane is one of the immediate
results of an agreement among KDIAP, GEPLACEA and La Victoria Sugar Corporation
regarding the promotion and transfer of technology on sugarcane. In view of this,
a Sugarcane Research Agency will be created here with the contribution of the
technological experiences of Brazil, Mexico, the Dominican Republic, Cuba and
Colombia. Panama will develop with these countries a coordinated program of
research and training on sugarcane. As the center of this network, Panama will
obtain substantial benefits which will represent an increase in its ability to
obtain foreign resources and to observe the most advanced technology. As part of
the mechanisms to implement this, a meeting of researchers from the previously
mentioned countries will be held here in the first months of the coming year.
[Text] [PA030218 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1523 GMT 2 Jan 82]

C50: 3010/600

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

ISLAND DBVELOPHEM‘ DISPUTE-A group of European investors based in Venezuela has
proposed to establish an international financial centre and tourist development
on the sparsely-populated Grenadine island of Canouan, 25 miles south of St.
Vincent. A lawyer for the group, Kenneth John, said in a letter to the Vincentian
‘ newspaper last month that he had submitted the proposal to the government, but
that no response had yet been received. Five opposition parties had expressed
concern at reports that the government was leasing part 3f the four-square-milc
island to foreign investors, and the Vincentian itse’F has condemned the govern-
ment's 'clandestine behaviour' as 'abhorrent.‘ [Text [London IATIN MERICAN
REGIONAL REPORTS-CARIBBEAN in English 4 Dec 81 p 10] COPYRIGHT: LATIN AMERICAN
REGIONAL REPORTS in English 1981

C80: 3025/95

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

COMMUNISTS CONGRATULATE CUBAN ASSDIBLY LEADERS~Caracas, 7 Jan (PL)--The Central
Committee of the Coununist Party of Venezuela (PCV) has congratulated the president
and vice president of Cuba's National Assembly, Flavio Bravo and Jorge Lezcano,
respectively. for their appointment to these posts. Eduardo Gallegos Mancera, PCV
international relations secretary, reiterated the Venezuelan communists' solidarity
with the people of Cuba in the face of threats of aggression from the U.S. Govern-
ment. The message states: "Dear Conpaneroa: The PCV Central Omnmittee fraternally
congratulates you on the occasion of your designation-and that of Secretary Jose
Aranaburo, who also has our congratulations--as the president and vice president

of the assembly. We take advantage of this opportunity to ask you to convey to

the Cuban people a reiteration of the Venezuelan commists' solidarity in the face
of imperialist threats." [Text] [PA072025 Caracas Prela in Spanish to Prela
Havana 1531 GMT 7 Jan 82]

080: 3010/61? END

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY