FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10055
16 October 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 48/81]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues
(r000 rs/sn

CONTENTS

ASIA
AUSTRALIA

HA Opposition Raps Drugs Bill, Calls for Inquiry
(m: "EST Awmm’ 28' Aug 81)....0OOOOOOOOOCOOOOIIIIO000...... 1

Probe of RM? Drug Ilse Spreads to Bases Nationwide
(m mmBR-WL. 5 Sep 81)OOOOCOOOOO00.0..OOOOOOOOIOOOIOOIIOOI. 2

Police Believe Phony Passport Ring Aided Sinclair Gang
(Jenny Cooke; m2 SYmBY MORNING HERALD, 29 Aug 81).............. 3

Police Plan Raid on Drug Growers 'Ihrrorizing North
(mud Brouben‘; m2 AGE. 28 A08 81,000....0000IOOOOOOOIOOICOOOC 5

Brief:

"A Drug Report 6
Heroin Arrests 6
Italian Drug Links 6
Victoria Drug Study 6
koord NSH Cocaine Haul 7
JAPAN
Drug Smuggling via APO Increasing
(RYmu suImo. 6 Get 81)....0IOOOOOOOOOIODOIIOOOOO0.00IUIOOUOOI. 8
PAKISTAN
Briefs
Beroin Seizure 10
Paddler Arrested 10
Heroin Seized 10
Heroin Haul 1o
Opium Seizure ll

- a - [III - WW - 138 P0001

PM ”WIN" "cl? “N'V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHILIPPINES

Country Second in Smuggling Harihuans Into Japan
(mdo Casayuran; BULLETIN 10W, 19 sep 81)....noooooooooooooo

Harihuana Seized in Hueva Vizcaya
(PHILIPPmBs MILY BRESS’ 17 SOP 81)....0000000000.0.0.000...

Briefs
Benguet Harihusna Seizure

11mm")

corruption Said To Be Major Factor in Failure of Opium
Suppression

(Wimsak Salayakanond; ms HIBLIH, 19 Jul 81)...................

Briefs
New Heroin Brand Seized
Heroin Seizure at Airport

Songkhla. Bangkok Heroin Raids
Opium Seizure in North

Opium Seizure in South
Airfares lbn in Drug Arrest

CANADA

Briefs
Growing Drug Trade Assessed

NEAR EAST AND mam AFRICA

IRAN
Briefs

Narcotics Officer
Belgian Ambassador
Opium Seized in Kazerun
Heroin Discovered in Borazjan
Drug Seizures

LEBANGI

Paper Reports 01 Hashish Planting
(“FNMAR’ 20 Sep 81)..oIO..OIOOOIIOIIIOODOIOOI.OOOOIOOOOOOOOOO.

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE OF-‘LY
WEST SURGE

AISTRIA

Opposition Spokesman Decrieo Light Sentences for Dealers
(DIE PRESSB. 17 m8 81)....0.0.0.0.0...OOOOOOQODIIIOOODDIOIOO'OO

I‘LALY
Arab Drug-[baring Bncroacheo on Mafia (bntrol
(”SA, 8 Oct 81)..0.0.00.00.DOC...OOOOOOIOOOOOIOIIOOIOIDIOOOOOOO
Large Drug Ring Broken Up in Bari
(Dionisio Ciccareae; LA GAZETIA m. BZZOGIORNO, 8 Sep 81).....
TURKH

Briefs
Heroin Seizure

INITBD KINGNH

Organization of Cannabis Smuggling Operation Detailed at Trial
(Ian Henry; 138 MLY TELEGRAPH, 29 Sep sneooaaaoaaoaoeooeooooo

Briefs
Heroin Snugglcr Sentenced

-c-

FOR (”PICIAL (BB (NIX
HA OPPOSITION RAPS DRUGS BILL, CALLS FOR INQUIRY

Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English 28 Aug 81 p 119

[Text]

The State Op sltion
terdoy called or a se-
ct committee layuiry

into drug abusein A.

The Opposition spokes.
man on police matters.
Mr T. H. Jones (Collie)
described the Misuse of
Drugs Bill as window-
dressing.

It should' he referred to
a I(tiop-level inquiry, he
as

Mr Jones ioreshadowed

the Opposition's move
for a select committee
during the second-read.
lng debate on the Bill In
are Legislatlve Assem-
y.

He said that the Bill
made no attempt to tacit-
le the problem 01 drug
abuse and would he op-
posed by the Opposition.

The masterminds or
“Mr Bl s" of the drug
trade. lving in luxury
tram the proiits or drug
trotiicking and dealin .
would continue to eve
police. .

"Instead. the police will
continue to catch more
at the little lish." he

said.

“There is no evidence to

support the Govern-
ment‘s reasoning that
raising penalties will de-
ter drug users or tralo
tickers.

"Some of the alties
aressharshaat oselor
murder."

[The Bill provides a
penalty or up _to

yes rs‘ imprisonment.
with no o tion oi a tine.
tor drug elers or trel-
tickers convicted or con-
slpiring to manuuctune.
supply or sell drugs.

Police are given more
powers to detect and deal
with drug offenders.

Introducing the Bill
earlier this month. the
Minister for Police and
ﬁll-attic. Mr Haasell. said
that the Bill allowed
police to seiu the assets
oi dealers].

Mr Jones said that the
penaltles would precipi-
tate more dru -relatad
crime in WA. 0 enders
would resort to deeper-
Inturder and tam ring
with witnesau «55.1m-
ies. to avoid heing
%"3' (1 Parker tun}
E‘remantle) said that
there should he more em-
hasis on education. re-
hilltatlon. counselling

and treatment.

Instead. the le atlon
prompted dracon an pen-
alties and civil-liberties
infringements.

There was no discrimi-
nation henNeen the more
serious drugs of addition
serious drugs of addict
tion and lesser drugs
such as marihuena.

Mr J. F. Grill (Labs Yll-

amDundaa) said .thet

Government had
ignored the best advice
available lrom numerous
royal commissions and
inquiries when drawing
up the Bill.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060032-6

PROBE 01" RM? DRUG USE SPREADS 1'0 BASES NATIONWIDE

Brisbane THE COURIER-MAIL in English 5 Sep 81 p 17

[Text] Canberra--A major investigation into alleged
drug abuse by members of the W has been
widened to include a number of MAP bases
around the country.

“m: 'lolloI-e'new- iii-1 n a m mm' 'm-
summoned-cull»; munyoummm
We School o! 'l'ecll-x are now unarJn-
nlcel Tnlnln‘ at We“. won. . '
In when New south An amulet-u
Vela. ' um‘mm po-
lloe on u . slur
8AA? hm IW‘W a.“ W
hen widened then: ln- m o! the {one
mm was; an ....... mm ,
vlaer_e_!a_m¢_r_ Ween _ 1"" W: ”9—2!"
personnel hove been vleud " M. -_
"1'30 undeulood the: “l MMM
Defence Department 111- The ‘m‘éwmg
magnum vent lo m- we! W‘ Mm
View an tome: mac, mmmdtuubue.
beneftheWembue onItletheeemmlume
rollovlne the new drug- thll the: . m
«new I ’WW." he: been
A Delence Department hunched u Ween. '
spokesman In (>an in m. :1 mm o!
conﬁrmed mm: the: the Teehnlul mum:
enewlmulrymm School-cedmnll
launched elter new alle- and 12. were dimmed
ntlomoMrueuIeulbe am they alum to
Ween been. m. mum
CSO: 5300/7503

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060032-6
POLICE BELIEVE PHONY PASSPORT RING AIDED SINCLAIR GANG
Sydney THE SYDNEY ﬁORNIh‘C ﬁERALD in English 29 Aug 81 p 1
[Article by Jenny Cooke]
[Text] Federal Police believe the drug syndicate leader,
Alexander James Sinclair, may have had the help of some-

one inside the Department of Foreign Affairs to get false
passports, an inquiry into the drug ring was told yesterday.

- Wt Into Pto.‘ m ‘ueitﬂo‘nte'deiths’of
matheFedeanolioemk. theNew mm-
latceintoomnieedaime. aid! ‘ndknbelWibon. bodice
that police knew or 20. ﬁctitinu were (quodjna shallow a
W—mwm RmemMayJ .
m. - Detectives: thvntttold
from the depnment ﬁles. ' \ the opening again“ the Inn!

Windividualsotbcrthnnin «mugging methods.”
tbedepmtnent.”bewd. _ Whtohcnmnnletlkpllypbtntnnd
MtJusticeDonnldStennol m m ..
nouswsapteun_ggmnm: They-‘m M van
mtheloynlOotnminioTt'into' mtmmmwm
mmmam, «twmwnmu
wmmot‘rmlotm. momentum”.
mw‘mhnmn'sn, “Mummeon-
ewtmnmmam 1"" °' "my
syndicnte nnd any oonnecuons '23P
mtnotbyhimolsmeorw _ .,
mwmolﬁm .mmmmm
mm murmm mmnm
noonvtctedolthenmderot byothupumnbonlobe
"W ”“7 a“ ”m themed mmmob
{Wm'i‘g‘j'mw tm'hom.‘ - '

CY- Lﬂer' "

mam” ”Mm? tWEmmt
Northern England. Johnstone't nun. of Meander 3m
mutilated body wet {and in Sinclair born Outward I943
Whmls‘lsw ' '- '

« mNSWJomdtheeedetaihtobe

Ann-Int for Sinclair/Clarke “completely W ad the

was: no Wannabe MeL,
mm.“ 3% Tam «puma
mmmwmm 3mm ».

Wm mam MW“ j

mmmh WWW Wmmwww MMWWWW
u “mu” Eammmmmm menm
mm“ . mammm m m WM
W Mm WM 3 Mam mm
mm“. mm mm wmmmuwﬁm WW.

m w

MWMMWMW mmmmmum
POLICE PLAN RAID 0N DRUG GROUERS TERRORIZING NORTH
Melbourne THE AGE in English 28 Aug 81 p 3
{Article by David Broadbenc]

[Text] BNSEANE - Queensland police are planning a

series of raids on suspected drug plantations along

yvhat MPs have called the "lawless far north coes .

The reids ere being plenned efter ellegetlons in Covent-
ment petty meetings that armed band: a drug power: end
users have terrorlsed residents in a wide eree from north of
Townsvllle to Cooktovm.

' ar'mumnuumh' 'm‘ra
Thee]! tiomvetemedebye
Nation! :0. Mt Nettie we ”mm“ ‘ '5" ”W" leeet en
noel. who seld mum end gm!” (“”WM'W' theme
visltouhedbmlntlmldﬂedby “grew-Mamet” mm
unedthuuwhohedshotet miom'kohledmh. y u
people to keep than out at m “‘4- ”m
madmeednetlonelpem OnWedneedeyMrTanltolde tloeeout
end Crown lead. 1:.“ W pales but? 4:8 M
Mr Teenl‘e eleiou followed l OM '03 on " a pet 1
seven! report: tron yedmmen ““4 W11 "'18! W53 W police ee
eodtourietemetehotehedbeeo Taupneeldpeoplewenmb- M
undetdeemmieoletedbeedlee mumeqmmema - 40‘
elongtheeoestlioe. Unludedlemmldeatlelm ‘MI
11» Police mama. Mr-mm. m" mm W M '50 4"
dlecueeed the cm“ with the - Report My.
m m "a 1.1;“ '° “.2;
I . f 6 ”~ - f I. ‘ (
end police engine wold not say 1- “ “£15m ”awn!“ Mr 1:111"
vheteztmmbeln plenned mini-report h” m
end e seniot Govenunegt spoke:- M ”WW la the W '3 All!
men an secrecy wee eeeemlel. mama .MM "a”, .3; mm
thrlﬂnueeldl-eeccm cenehmmhthedmhed “”3""
the allot-done Vote W. ")4 m “a“ of Mg. and. W i
33'“ .M a: "my- w 2"":
' ere no It I t eder
Mr Teael end e spokesmen for
the: ad is e $.33 ”'12.": the Premier. M: “elite-Petersen. 0‘ m
a: Hinze an, ’ eleo denied .kmhedh the upon aw”
”methanetethereoutve “m‘km' eeldhevee eeeelou
will not be eble to endicete the Welling to (beet-arm eneeted.
problem to e wetter at days.“ "cleen out the communes”. ”a pen
Police olﬂclele eeld the leteet The rumor: spam eeld police ll
coapleinte did not simply relete Mr Monte-Mme lied said it 41’0“”
gm:'&‘m ch": W yould teke en may at policemen which il
' M‘” to m the problem Inquiry
BRIEFS

HA DRUG REPORT--The crackdown on marijuana farms is creating a new problem for
police--hundreds of young people are growing cannabis in their backyards.
Police in Western Australia reported yesterday that in the past year they had
caught 260 people cultivating their own home supplies. The figures were 18 per
cent up on last year and showed a surge in drug use now affecting even younger
age groups. The police report, tabled in State Parliament, showed the number
of young people under 18 charged with drug offences almost doubled to 50. Police
also reported a sharp increase in the number of addicts obtaining or attempting
to obtain drugs by stealing. Usually they try to get supplies by breaking into
doctors' cars. More than 100 cases were reported during the year. Across all
age groups there was a 48 per cent rise in the number of arrests relating to
drug offences. A total of 1623 people faced drug charges during the year.
[Text] [Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 26 Aug 81 p l]

HEROIN ARRESTS--Heroin worth $50,000 was found in a woman's handbag when Drug
Squad detectives arrested a de facto couple in Rushcutters Bay park, the Central
Court of Petty_Seasions was told yesterday. Lynette Pay Haldron, 29, and Grant
Purchase, 30, both unemployed, of Birkley Road, Manly, were charged with possess-
ing and supplying heroin and possessing Indian hemp. No pleas were entered.
Sergeant Wayne Evans, prosecuting, said Haldron admitted putting five lO-gram
bags of heroin into her handbag before Drug Squad Police arrested them at Rush-
cutters Bay park on Wednesday. Sergeant Evans said the value of the drug was
about $50,000. Purchase and Haldron were freed on $5,000 bail each and the case
was adjourned until September 16. [Text] [Sydney THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD in

English 4 Sep 81 p 12]

ITALIAN DRUG LINKS—-Helbourne--Three Italian policemen arrive in Australia later
this month to discuss the Italian-Australian drug link with law enforcement
authorities. The three high-ranking officers will meet Federal and State police.
The move follows raids in Italy on May 26 which confirmed the drug link. The
raids concentrated on the Calabrian Mafia known as L'onorata Soceta (The
Honoured Society). Police arrested 55 people in the raids. Many of those
arrested had visited or lived in Australia. [Text] [Sydney THE SYDNEY HORN-
ING HERALD in English 3 Sep 81 p 2]

VICTORIA DRUG STUDY--A police research team has begun a big study of the effects
of drugs on driving. The project, the first or its kind in Australia, aims to
establish how often Victorians take drugs before driving and what the drugs are.
The head of the study, senior police researcher, Dr Jane Hendtlass, said some
research already had shown that drugs could contribute as much or more than
alcohol to road accidents. She said early results would be known this year
and that the study was expected to be finished late next year. Since the pro-
ject began last year, an accurate screening programme for drugs has been
sought. Although many programmes already exist, most can detect only certain
drugs, missing lower concentration of other drugs in people being tested.

[by Tony harrington] [Excerpt] [Melbourne THE AGE in English 5 Sep 81 p 161

RECORD NS" COCAINB HAUL--Sydney--Three men appeared in Sydney's Central Court
yesterday following an $800,000 cocaine haul from an eastern suburbs block of
flats on Thursday night. The men, arrested after what police said was the big-
gest cocaine seizure in New South Hales, were refused bail and remanded in cus-
tody until next Friday. They are Ivan Rodney Hull, 33, a builder; william James
Jennings, 39, a gardener, and Simon Jeremy Cowling. 33, a photographer. No
pleas were entered. [Text] [Brisbane THE COURIER-HAIL in English 5 Sep 81 p 3]

CSO: 5300/7504
DRUG SMUGGLING VIA APO INCREASING
0W71051 Naha RYUKYU 51111490 in Japanese 6 Oct 81 Evening Edition p 3

[Text] Drug trafficking by U.S. servicemen has steadily increased without letup
over the years. However, most of the cases of narcotics and hashish smuggling
through the APO have been dropped due to "insufficient evidence." The APO has been
used to mail a large percentage of the hashish and other drugs smuggled into Okinawa
prefecture. Accordingly, the squashing of drug smuggling through the APO continues
to be an important task. However, in those cases where the sender of a package
cannot be ascertained, investigation of the case is useless since the recipient may
deny his involvatent. claiming "I have nothing to do with it." Therefore, such
cases are ultimately dropped in most instances.

Last year 332 hashish traffickers were arrested, an increase of 41.1 percent over
the preceding year. Of this total, 324 were 0.3. servicemen and civilians, account-
ing for 97.3 percent of the cases. Fearing that drug trafficking may spread to the
local population, the prefectural office has time and again asked the 11.5. military
to tighten up discipline among servicemen.

According to data conpiled by the Okinawa Branch (Chief Ryuji Kuroda) of the Kyushu
Area Narcotics Control Office. As many as 33 persons were arrested last year for
smuggling drugs by nail. They were all {1.3. servicemen involved in hashish smug-
gling.

The breakdown by point of entry is as follows: Kadena Airport, 17, or about half
of the cases; Naha Airport, 91 and Narita Airport, 7. The breakdown by point of
dispatch is: The United States, 28, and the Philippines, 5. The amount of hashish
confiscated ranged from 0.186 grams to 463 grams.

In the case of APO mail, the U3. military officers concerned usually pick up
packages which look suspicious. such as those with no description of contents, for
inspection as they check incoming mail. But only 1 out of SO packages is subjected
to this kind of scrutiny. Many of the inspectors think a considerable number of
packages are overlooked. Senders, on the other hand, are using more and more
cunning tricks. One sender, for example, cut a hole in a candle filling it with
drugs and "camouflaged" the package with some smell. Others pack the drug into
ceramics or peanut butter. They resort to this kind of packing to foil detection
by a search dog.
In addition to the difficulty in spotting, the inability to ascertain the sender
poses a major obstacle to making an indictment against the suspect after his arrest.

When suspects deny their involvement, their cases are dropped in most cases. of
the 33 cases last year, only 6 were indicted. Moreover, two of the four were in-
dicted because they were found in possession of hashish during the search.

In the first half of this year, from January to June, 15 persons were arrested for
smuggling hashish through the APO. But,2 had their indictments suspended. The
remaining 13 cases were dropped for reasons of insufficient evidence. Branch chief
Kuroda had this to say: "If the identity of the sender cannot be established and

the suspect denies his involvement, we lose ail clues right there."

C80: 5300/4512
BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZURE-Rawalpindi, Sept 24--The Pakistan Narcotics Control Board (PNCB)
arrested four persons from a posh hotel here yesterday to allegedly possessing
rupees two crores worth five kilograms of heroin police said. The Director of
Intelligence PNCB Mr Mahmud Hassan on receiving information organised a raiding
party comprising Civil Lines police station and PNCB officials who conducted a
successful raid and hauled up the four accused. The raiding party seized five
kilograms of heroin from them which according to police was to be sent abroad.
The four arrested were Aursngzeb Malik Amin Jan of Peshawar and Samad Khan and
Hakim Khan of Landikotal PNCB sources said. According to them the contraband
had been supplied by one notorious smuggler of Landikotal. Further investiga-
tions are in progress.--AFP [Text] [Karachi MORNING NEHS in English 25 Sep 81

pl]

PEDDLER ARRESTED--A drug peddler was hauled up by the Provincial Excise Intelli-
gence Bureau and onekilo of heroin, worth about Rs 1 crore in the international
market was seized from his possession in the Nazimabad area, it was reported
yesterday. The reports said that accused Mohammad ﬂassan was placed under strict
surveillance after he was suspected of-peddling drug. However, when he was going
on a motorcycle in a bid to hoodwink the excise police, he was caught in a
dramatic way and one kilo of heroin was recovered from his bag he was carrying
with him. The heroin, ;he excise sources said, if smuggled abroad, could fetch
rupees one crore in the international Iarket. [Text] [Karachi MORNING NEWS in

English 22 Sep 81 p S]

HEROIN SEIZED-Rawalpindi customs officials had been informed that heroin was

_ being brought from the Kheyber Agency to Islamabad via the Kashmir highway.

The customs mobile unit foiled the attempt and captured the smuggler near the
Margnls hills. Four kg of heroin worth six crores of rupees on the international
market were seized. [CF021230 Karachi JASARAT in Urdu 29 Sap 81 p 6]

HEROIN HAUL-—Pursuing the 'leads' provided by the accused in the heroin-extrac-
tion plan last week. the excise hounds laid hands on two more drug peddlers with
5 kg of heroin worth Rs 5 million on the international market yesterday. It may
be recalled that the excise policy had last nabbed two persons and discovered

an illici; heroin—extracting plant in a people's colony apartment in north
Nazimabad. along with the seizure of 13 kg of heroin worth Rs 200 million.
[CP041117 Karachi DAWN in English 2 Oct 81 p 18]

10
OPTUH SEIZURE--Islamabad, 8 Sept-~Custons authorities in Pakistan's Baluchistan
Province today seized a large quantity of opium and contraband hashish valued
at a street price of 1.6 million dollars, official sources said. The sources
said that customs authorities, tipped off by an informer, deployed a special
contingent who "ambushed" the drug peddlers as they were attempting to snuggle
the opium out of the country. After an exchange of fire, the contingent seized
620 kilos (1,364 pounds) of opium and 75 kilos (165 pounds) of hashish, the
sources said, adding that the drug traffickers escaped. Pakistan has recently
stepped up controls of drug trafficking following United Nations narcotics
control reports that the output of refined drug has shown an increase in the
Pakistani tribal belt, which has its own adninistration.--NAB/AFP [Text]
[Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English MJSep 81 p 7]

CSO: 5300/b902

11
COUNTRY SECOID IN SHUGGLING MARIIIUANA INTO JAPAN
Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 19 Sep 81 pp 1, 5
[Article by Mario Cassyuran]

[Text] The Philippines leads other countries in the smuggling of guns and is
second to Thailand in the smuggling of marijuana into Japan.

This was revealed yesterday by a Japanese delegation attending the four-day
"Regional Customs Airport" conference sponsored by both the Philippine and US
customs services.

A four-page statistics report by the Japanese delegation cited the seizure of
193,811 grams of meths-amphetamines from South Korea leading greatly over Tai-
wan, Thailand, Bong Kong, and other countries during the 1977 to the mid-1981
period.

The number of seized firearms shipped from the Philippines, according to the
Japanese customs service, reached 70 pieces, also during the same period.
Second was the United States, with 62 pieces of firearms.

0n seized marijuana shipments, Thailand leads other countries with 108,441 grams
of marijuana, followed by the Philippines with 10,613 grams, also within the.
same period.

The mid-1981 report, however, shaaeda high jump on seized Philippine marijuana
of 1,270.9 ratio compared with the previous year of 1,150 ratio to others coun-
tries, followed by 7.5 for Thailand and 3.8 for the US.

Earlier, Prime Minister Cesar A. Virata called on the delegates to the 13-
nation conference to help stop the entry of dangerous drugs in their own
boundaries and help minimize, if not eliminate altogether, the production of
dangerous drugs and heroin. Customs Comissioner Ramon J. Farolan reminded
the conferees of the continuing need for regional cooperation.

The US government, meanwhile, would increase its budget to interdict regional
narcotics and dangerous drug smuggling, despite attempts to balance the US
budget, according to James Rosenthal, charge d'affaires of the US embassy in
Manila.
Use or misuse of heroin. opium and other dangerous drugs leads to corruption,
high crime incidence and low productivity, and is used to finance terrorism,
including insurgency, Rosenthal said.

On international terrorism for political ends with the "cynical use of peo-
ple," Rosenthal said sone 3,600 people have already died, with the US and
Americans as principal targets "condoned by other states."

Annual losses or costs to governments and corporations as a result of inter-
national terrorism amount to "hundreds of millions of dollars," Rosenthal said.

Earlier, the Thai delegation alerted the Philippines on the possibility of in-
creased international drug traffic through Manila.

Thai customs delegates confirmed that Manila was and is being used as a trans-

shipment point for opium and heroin smuggled from the so-called "Golden Triangle"
to the US and Australia.

In presenting its position paper. the Thai delegation said the traffic is expected
to increase considerably this year as opium farmers in that "triangle" were
trying to make up for the drop in production in the past two years.

C80: 5300/4902

13
HARIHUANA SEIZED IN NUEVA VIZCAYA

Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English 17 Sep 81 p 2

T .

I em nunx on. mm. Nueva Elmo! 5“,... all
V'maya. Sept. l6 - A total of w“. M
PIS-million wotth of fully-gown by team opmt
Mmplantsmupmotodand ”3.0007031
stud early dawn today from an on. of tho
dun-hectare plantation at bannuy lulled dating. a
Bltnona. Duplt :1?! Nona buymjloint IOdIyaagonn d
elements of mm 'tary '

' 1h: raid. la
opaattm In the met. Bundalian. w
W
Considered the Mum plantation m?” ‘2}
h m cm” vuhy m", It ‘3 hl.uj‘eﬂ“ bl"
situated on a 754k” mountain lntaltuncaand
dope. 11!: hot any: of ﬁntclaat
witty an wadud anion; nca
patchaa and could ha mistaken as [N mom
part of the thick fomt “caution. the National Bu
Thirty-font men snowed tha area. this month.
1: took then" font day: to ham Mm plum
and btina down the fullygrown ma uptootad
marijuana plants and meal sacksot' my W
dlicd leaves. WI.
0 o a “I. raid '8
MAJ. Miguel Coronal. Nueva 3:;ng N
Vlacaya provincial commmder. .
wported that the maijoana .
plantation is manned by membel'aof “3:31;?
a wall-enuenched syndicate from . lion in
Benguetptovtnoa. m’tmcm m!
Coronal aid the cultivates and "3° m0“-
ovner of the plantation an acartain NM ”'9
Mendoza Guat. Daniel Lintpayua ad W "W
BRIEFS

BENGUET MARIHUANA SEIZURE--San Fernando, Pampanga, Sept lb--PC and police opera-
tives raided Saturday three marijuana plantations in barangay Sadaadan in Bauko,
Dengue: and seized marijuana plants and seeds valued at P500,000. The raiders
also held three men suspected of maintaining the plantations. They were iden-
tified as Manuel Balikid, 62; Guese Kudli, 62, and a certain Rudy, all from

. barangay Sadsaran. The farms are situated one kilometer-apart in hilly

. portions about 40 kilometers north of Bauko poblacion. Earlier. Angeles City

: police arrested two suspected dope pushers while allegedly selling drugs to
EAngeles subdivision residents. The suspects led investigators to marijuana
afarms in Benguet, where 2,100 fully grown marijuana plants and six kilos of
:marijuana seeds were confiscated.--RD [Text] [Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY

£XPRESS in English 15 Sep 81 p 2]

C50: 5300/4902

15
CORRUPTION SAID 1'0 BE MAJOR I’ACTOR IN FAILURE OF OPIUH SUPPRESSION

Islamabad '1'!!! “031.11! in English 19 Jul 81 p 5

[Article by "nasal: Salayakanond]

THAILAND It MID; a lain;

[Text] hotttc aunt the duo tutti: [tout

the ”Golden 'l't'ian ”. and It:
wont cm mica cum- tmm within its
Ito-human» (etc.

11' Ilka! opium ltat h. an
Ntnwtod a utntba of police
autltou'lk! to It. aunt that my
huh-until; «mom ate nuanced
tibia; Nun” tat the aka.

The dang ot cottuptioo welt:
ahd by no less than Sqtndton
uottct Pram Soonn'tt. Sammy
Gena-at of the Nattoml Sect-my
(‘0qu (NSCL "a tail that some
vol-phat! poliu omcott h the
antrmmtm squad vote that»
solves activoly cuppa at the tntlc.
qt View using the'a volition to
platen hunts 'l‘l“it*¢$

“Cottupa'm has great ham-
peml tho Comamen't a cut to
uppteu the mm of tﬂopldmp
(tom the (Euttkn ttaogk. .. Mt.
ham; said tkjeuctlly. Ito ultbd,
that tha dun; ttatfwlten and
denim otrct huge babe: to police
onion! and othet antidtatcotit:
agents “which they at hardly
rein".

cu ARGES comcmr.’
——-——_

, Mt, haunt: duty; colno'tletl
M"! "I: tclzute at SS “layman!
No. 4 hcmta and the mat of tum
thou tutllultm on a but!“ lot of
a ”maul hotel.

To the talk: :mtuuaumant 0!
III: ltd-unto!“ lult‘el, the aim.
rtl nuns cmt‘uut that the
wire drug lot-mp6 to Poll»:
l'uhuagel NuthtI Ihzyovut’ukul. the
Mutual topcdhcntluttl of .th
Third Pttwhuol l'ulk: (‘mnnuntl

‘tulIIc mull-cm lmmuw «If
lam'uu

("funk .ul llat' "Mitt nl‘ the
NJIUIUH (utIt-ol "cult! ("NC")

cult-tutu! 'lul "N ll.tul w.“ ta-t-ttlu

about to tatllloa baht (US 3 500.
000) to local nattot and about the
to that name to ma Antonin
lltl tit-om drag tartan.

‘I’ha NICO Dtptttmaatlmod
an aunt out" tot Cotmd Nina.
who It. gave «nth out! ltd
softhhvdttuw-s atlotp.

Colmd Nina Nut-If am a
tomat mitt of tho “no“
upptudott {etc to tha null vbn
he an ttputy putt: uni-um
trttt «Clam; Md ptovtacc.

camel Ntnm was not“ ﬂat
high-talk. pollen all” m-

ctttt otlah at tho unto I»:
“up! tint; tn c. N59 anaconda
that ”tam? Mel”. mu

c t- to a to uapoo
wofmwmn the ttatl: on tho

’wAMIMpoll Colonel. Ptauutal
“dawn“ a comet uncann-
dent of tlu Ctlne Summation
mulch of It: Patton Depart-nut.
waa attested ll l972 allot a hm
mutt othaola vat adutt. Thou
aimed with him pdlld to
Colmd ﬁnal at lha «stamina
otthcdt tin;-

Sev yun ago. a dc ty
superincmleat of tit: and to
ptovinca of Lamphom wag d'tu'd
Mt! ptoectin; scmal Irwin
factott'aa heat It: Thdltmoac
bottht. but karat! to could tn
:ttutad t: had [it] to the Golda
Thank.

Althuuﬂt thy ooawtnhtad
tic outmpt ovetvlcttnhdv. hum
pub“ ot'iueu aw chatty [maln-
ctl ”11a: in: l narcotics tml: Iu
mullhmllimtﬂtt babel that
that" the [taut-heated toll lit: a
tau-mu.“ an ONCII omdal tottt
Ikrlhm-u':

An salt-natal“: apt-t matted:
“It is not “mutually tum many

16

ban has amt“ to:
ho.“ hacks; hat “an van to
ap a an pa: mu.
the aaatlatcoald mac 20"."
Mlth rota .cmpt polloa
oflcaa. may othet nuamt
ordeal: ata toputtady lavdnd
h In on: it at: way or III

out. tho
on an
m pies

m ya:
math!” had {at
otlcnu. Th: am not-I out-a
autumn of tl: tho Ida-ah
it min“ to I: tam-t 5?
MTOOtoagndtﬂayeartt a
expand to It: than the: tan-Ii
than last year: hoaaaa of good
mthn mutant.

0! th: 500700 tau of opium

on b I: Gotta ‘l‘tlaade ~-
E ta not-luau tea

«tutu; tmaa. Laos and Thai-
laod .. only about 4050 tax ate
ptodooad by hilln'bsnaa tn 'l‘hd
tutttoty.

But althuua'at dim that about
200 ton of root and tarot».
which atuoﬂae from opium. ate
mowed throuﬁ Thallmdgo
tb humans tint: maths.

The potion mot on om wiz-
atu I: a than! Italy 0! Imihd
mecca. last year. onl aboat
”19 hi ram time s at; In
tho. 3 t9 “ﬂop-m, ad in
tow. t.i9t mom.

AVERAGE HAUI.
_

m a y¢atly hats, tha 1mm
tuot amount to ugly ohwt
all. I“.

Anthonthsutlmta that ot 0B
200 tum of aatcotla thot teach
TM'MJ hot» the Cdthn Tdmgk.
ahwt halt at It tt unmet! local-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I09:

Iy by Tull-tars sbo.ooosoo.ooo
dun; Men. The othet lulf It
mugged out of the country.

“The amount at opiumeelasd
Mp9 such I hemh end mainline
sued by That uthoﬂuk mad)!
I drop in the we: 1'. add Santana
him-h. undead producer of
the ﬁlm “Ooiutn Wulotdt'.

Mt. Sedan. who spent thee
yem tn the Gdskan-de during
the shooting of It: Ilm, said the
mum-motto tannin I. father
com lead by the pditiul tunes
kw wet“. the tude.

“The Stu» state «my tannin
the Golden Ttianpte chm they
med the matey {man met: unco-
I‘u business to buy manna an!
tupples to nit-tin It may
e -d in .t cmtmult‘ battle fat
in}: mknce Mth ltutmese
ml n.“Mt.Sethu '11.

L99: I ' moth" etude] equa-
nonn the tugturtteTttelaott-n
Gmemmentt: hum tot: ting
a huge chunk o! it: grew!
exdmjnp t‘tom the ilicl 0m; hub
and II It not about may to ’-.-lo

etnmpu tn stamp out the name
In naucotlu.

Lam eeluset to the I956
Viema Islam! on IIll'llItlIll
nan-nit: entomtaelt to: obvtotl
Mei“.

Aside {mm the Sim state
«my, temuatu of the Kuununtam
(Km; «a b alw actively engaged
'II the pmducttuu gnl Inﬁnity-p of
mium mu netum m the (mitt-u
Trhmk "It: KMI' ltoltluttts antlu
(knml Lee have lvea enmsdiu
mntln lutth VIIIlt llte Slum
4nd utfm ltuuncs: miuotlly grunt:
it the luttk t'ot wand of I
dug: lminea.

The Shin Unitd Anny (30A)
under 1 (Jim named Chan (‘td

CSO: 5300/6507

Fu 0: Khan 3: meet- about 16
pet tent of the Gulch Tdruh

an! wade. m 800nm tom
m: to npeuu e Imam“

plant at the nonhuman 11a

ptmm ot Mahatma, but tut
yea: the 1111‘ Comm-neat etched
the SIM widen out of“: leni-

tay.
_ When they refuel], W
nttotce et b- mind the ma.

Mt- tum; Nd lhltoflht l5
hetutu labontotiet tn the Dumas
huitory neat lhe Thi hotdet.
tetra-(e lath: the SIM. The mt

ue created by the KMT Ind
nth ty Bun-me tebelt

IRRESISTIBLE

 

To the you"! 8 wells opium
unless. the annual: In maven
of the Inninut an Mei Ne. The
Minimum: med 0 at u 3
mt: any on which I ey depend
for food and dotting-Opium It
I!” wed by'lhﬂu to cute venom
llmenu Inga; [tom Nonesuch,
headache todhnhee.

The! Govetnment eﬂom to
wean the hiltdhsnen [tout opium
ptoductton to uttemalve crops
autpuien'ng.

Sid an ONCE olldl: “11::
gm: of anon ts only l 60th

0.05) pet “by!!! n the fem
in, and Is baht (US 3 0.15) to
Bangkok. It tries about thueyeeu
befote ounce could be hmmd.
(h the othet had. 0 an (etch:
[tom 25,000 It: 30. bid (US 8
mm - US 5 1500) to: every
1.6 ktlugam. Sn. the htlltnh-tmeu
lemon out. ‘Mty emu attematt've
nuns when we an ash in m
ophm"?

"And nth Cullﬂpl luv emot-
um an In: upmm “to“!!! tide.‘
how could thy Ian." A ONCO
oﬂ'te'nl aﬁeld?" MuthDemh.
urtytSmlt'c

17

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060032-6

ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060032-6
NEH BBROIN BRAND SBIZED--A Bangkok Finance Company salesman was arrested at the Hontien
Hotel yesterday as he was about to deliver four kilograms of first grade heroin to a
narcotics official posing as a foreign customer, the NetrOpolitan Bolice Narcotics

Unit (HNU) said. Police said that an HNU team arrested Trasit Thongchit, 27, in

the hotel's coffee shop. They said a search of two large shoulder bags he was car-
rying revealed 12 bags of "Pegasus" brand heroin weighing 6.3 kilograms. An HNU
spokesman said that the heroin was 95 per cent pure and the brand was a new one.
[Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 29 Sep 81 p 1 BR]

HEROIN SEIZURE AT AIRPORT-Customs officials arrested an American woman at Don Huang
airport, and accused her of possessing 6.563 kilograms of No 6 heroin. The arrest
was made on Rednesday evening when Miss Candice Lee Carpenter, 32, checked in at the
Aeroflot counter for a flight to Paris. Don Huang-based custocu narcotics officers
who had received a tip-off that she would try to smuggle heroin abroad demanded a
search of her luggage. They claimed they found the heroin in six plastic bags hid-

den in the false bottom of her suitcase. [Excerpt] Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English .
7 Oct 81 p 1 BR]

ported into Songkhla Province, a joint operation was immediately launched. In three
separate raids, police said 21 bags of heroin were seized, weighing about 10 kilo-
grams. In another operation in Bangkok yesterday. a woman job agency owner and

two temporary employees of the Royal Thai Air Force's transport division were ar-
rested with 700 grams of No 4 heroin in their possession. Police claimed the three

confessed to charges of heroin possession with intent to sell. [BKOZIZél Bangkok
BANGKOK POST in English 1 Oct 81 p l]

OPIUH SEIZURE IN NORTH--Loei-Two village volunteers and a Laotian were arrested

at a hut in Ben na Chan in Chiang Khan District here yesterday along with 20.6 kilo-
grammcs of opium believed to have been smuggled in from Laos. The three men were
identified as defence volunteers Plueng Tape and Thanu Phadi-oun and Sriphan

Saengpradit from Huang Kaen Theo. [Text] [Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 23 Sep 81
p 3 BK]

18
OPIUH SEIZURE IN SOUTH-dist Yai police yesterday arrested a nan and charged him with
being in possession of 8 kilograms of raw opium worth 250.000 baht. Acting on
prior intonation, the police lay in wait in front of Seng Motors Company and arrested
Niwat Suepsak, 31, as he appeared with a bag containing the drug at about 6 pm.

Niwat told the police that he had been paid 30,000 baht by a Chinese am to carry the

drug to the spot. He is being held for questioning. [Text] [Bangkok BANGKOK POST
in English 23 Sep 81 p 3 BK]

AIRPORCE m IN DRUG ARREST—Two air force non-comissioned officers and a woman were
arrested shortly after they allegedly sold about two kilogram of No lo heroin to
undercover police in front of Central Depart-eat Store on Lat Ya Road. Thorn Buri
yesterday. They were all charged with the possesion of narcotics with intent to sell,
Thou Buri police said. Police said the arrest was planned after the suspects alleg-
edly made a deal with an undercover narcotics teen to sell 250,000 baht of the drugs
and make the delivery in front of the store at l p.n. yesterday. The three suspects
were identified as warrant Officer Hahidon Siwirat. 33. who was in uniform; Warrant
Officer Thawi Phothong. 1.0. in civilian clothes; and Mrs Prachop Rhunthong, 41. who

showed up with a travelling bag. [Excerpt] [Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 24 Sep
81 p 2 BK]

CSO: 5300/1608

19
BRIEFS

GROWING DRUG TRADE ASSESSED-~Edmonton (CP)--An assessment of the growing drug trade
and of motorcycle gangs fills almost half a report on organized crime presented
Iednesday to the meeting of the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police. The

report suggests s variety of counter-measures. ranging from outlawing the sale of
drug paraphernalia in "head shops" to increasing the exchange of information

between police forces. Drug use and drug-related crimes use more police resources
than any other organized criminal activity, says the report. written by a com-
mittee under the chairmanship of Ottawa Police Chief Thomas welsh. The drug
trade's "over-ell cost to society is even more staggering...," it says. "When
our country coapletes its announced intention of softening rentences for cannabis
users, the very real danger of an increased market and demand will exist..."

The report predicts increased use of heroin and cocaine, and a continued wide-
spread use of cannabis, which has helped build the illicit drug trade into an

import business costing an estimated $3 billion to $6 billion a year. [Excerpt]
[Ottawa THE CITIZEN in English 27 Aug 81 p 16]

C80: 5320/006

20
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS OFFICER-~1n accordance with the directive issued by the Islamic revolu-
tion prosecutor general, Mr Hojjat ol-Eslam Seyyed Ahmad Z1rgar was once again
appointed as the Islamic revolution prosecutor general's representative in the
Islamic revolution anti-narcotic prosecutor's office. He assumed his duties on 27
September. [LDZ90140 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 28 Sep 81]

BELGIAN AMBASSADOR--The Belgian ambassador to Iran and Mr Hashemi-Rafsanjani, the
speaker of the Islamic consultative assembly. met this evening on the occasion of
the termination of the Belgian ambassador's tour of duty. [Excerpt] [L0290140
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 28 Sep 81]

OPIUH SEIZED IN KAZBRUN--Kazerun revolution guards have seized two individuals
following discovery of 1.050 grams of opium and 150 rounds of Kalashnikov bullets
in their vehicle. [GF301736 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1530 GMT 30 Sep 81]

HEROIN DISCOVERED IN BORAZJAN--An Afghan citizen has been arrested in Borazjan for
possession of 60 grams of heroin. [GF301736 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persina

1530 GMT 30 Sep 81]

DRUG SEIZURES--According to the central news unit, officials of the Islamic revolu-
tion committee in Sabzevar discovered a group of people engaged in the sale of nar-
cotics in that town and seized 105 kg of opium from them. The smugglers were ar-
rested and handed over to the judicial authorities. Also, according to the Paris
News Agency, officials in the antidrug squad of Kashmar this morning seized 7 kg

of opium from a professional smuggler in Zarkash village. Officials of the Gen-
darmerie post in Zahedan also discovered 209 kg of heroin in a van. The occupants
were arrested and handed over to the judicial authorities. [Text] [10060220
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 3 Oct 81]

C50: 5300/5303

21
PAPER REPORTS ON HASHISH PLANTING
PH251613 Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 20 Sep 81 p 5

[Report by AL-NAHAR correspondent: "iiashiah Harvest in al-Biqa' Begins: 80
Percent of Land Planted to Hashish; SOD-1,200 Lebanese Pounds Per Qantar"]

[Excerpts] Ba'labak--A few days ago the harvesting of green hashish began in
al-Biqa' in general and Ba'labak and al-Hirlil in particular. Since the feast
of the holy cross the "workshops" have been busy collecting the harvest in the
hope of making substantial profits.

Hashish has become one of the principal crops on which the Ba'labak-al-Hirmil
area depends, particularly since income from it in the past 5 years has generated
an estate development boom.

The area of land planted to hashish totals more than 80 percent of the agricul-
tural land in the area, and two-thirds of it is irrigated by artesian wells that
are found far and wide on the plain.

Hashish prices this year are almost the same as last year's. The price per
qantar is 800 to 1,200 Lebanese pounds. depending on the quality. The rent per
irrigated donum ranges between 1,000 and 2.000 Lebenese pounds and a laborer's
daily wage is 40 to 60 Lebanese pounds for men and women and 30 Lebanese pounds
for those under 18 years of age.

Despite the financial returns the hashish planters obtain. the inhabitants of
the area are demanding the activation of sunflower planting in view of the danger

of hashish to the young, whose increasing consumption of it has begun to cause
social ills.

CSO: 5300/10 701

22
OPPOSITION SPOKESMAN DECRIES LIGHT SW28 1’03 DEALERS
Vienna DIE PRESS]! in German 17 Aug 81 p lo

[Text] "Three to four months in jail for a heroin dealer is scandalous. The great
benevolence of the justice minister toward these dealers is due to the fact that

his attitude is based on a false foundation." Speaking at a press conference on
Wednesday. the Peoples' Party spokesman for health. Hiesinger. severely reproached
Justice Minister Broad. One year after the coming into force of the narcotics amend-
ment. Hiesinger summed up the situation as a consistent disregard for the law by a
government which. bound by its erroneous socio-political policy. was not taking the
narcotics problem seriously.

The educational campaign prescribed in the law was not being carried out and the
facilities for hospital treatment had not been increased by a single bed. In the
final analysis. however. the only way to combat drugs lay in efforts to keep the
youth away from narcotics. In the measures currently being applied. however. the
Peoples' Party spokesman for health sees neither real punishment for nor a deterrent
effect on the drug dealers. "The punishment provided for would be fully adequate
but is not being availed of to even an approximate degree." declared Hieseinger
although he does not place the blame on the judges. It is the state prosecutors
who. on the one hand. propose the sentence. and on the other hand. do not appeal
overly light sentences.

"Practice shows that state prosecutors know what the minister wants." said Wiesinger
in criticism of the minister from whom he demanded directives to correct this situa-
tion. Sympathy for dealers even in the case of first offenders. was completely out
of place in all cases. In the event that judicial procedures are not changed in

the future. the Austrian Peoples' Party was considering initiatives which would lead
to raising the sentence.

9827
CSO: 5300/ 21060

23
ARAB DRUG-DEALING ENCROACHES 0N MAFIA CONTROL
A0081647 Rome ANSA in English 1542 GMT 8 Oct 81

[Tact] Rome. 8 Oct (ANSA)-—-Rome has become the center, not only for narcotic
traffic but also of a war between Arab drug "carriers." ailing at first person
control of the market, and the Sicilian "clans." the traditional managers of the
peninsula's illegal drug business, Rome daily LA RBMIBBLICA revealed here today.

In an article citing the arrests in Milan on Monday of two Egyptians found in
possession of one kilo of pure heroin with a black market value of over one million
dollars, the Roman newspaper claimed that at one time the Sicilian nfia was the
undisputed king of the Roman market, which purportedly consumes more than 25
thousand "doses" of heroin daily for a value of approximately two million dollars.

According to the article, the Roman dealers paid for the cut and refined heroin
in part with cocaine, which the mafia then used to consolidate its contacts with
the Arab carriers, and in part with the proceeds froa heroin sales.

The cocaine apparently was obtained by sending a part of each heroin consignment
to the American mafia clans in exchange.

Now, according to the newspaper, the Lebanese and Egyptian "carriers" have begun
to bypass the "Sicilian Canal" by selling the drugs themselves. provoking the
anger and reprisal of the mafia dealers.

In fact, the two Egyptians arrested on Monday, LA RRPUBBLICA claims, were the victims
of a mafia vendetta, who decided to punish their independent business practices by
giving police a subtle "tip off."

The newspaper reveals that when police burst in on the twa Arabs, they were sur-
prised to find such a large amount of un-cut heroin. "It was purer than we've
ever seen before, " according to the investigators, who added that the heroin
was so refined that "it is proof that this new organization not only has men and
means at its disposal, but also considerable financing."

The investigators quoted in the article predicted that a "violent feud" would
explode in the near future over market ownership.

CSO:5300/2018

24
macs DRUG RING am up In mu
Bari LA cazzms DEL nezzociomo in Italian 8 Sep 81 pp 1, 2

[Article by Dionisio Ciccarese: "Vast Drug Roundup in Bari")

[Text] Narcotics still hold center stage in Bari: 18 persons, including a woman,
were arrested yesterday by the carabinieri of the Operational Nucleus, crowning an
inquiry lasting about two months. The operation was led by Capt. Saverio Cotticelli,
assisted by over #0 men. The carabinieri assert that they have smashed Bari's

small and medium caliber dope market, especially in the Japigia, Hadonella, and

Piazza Umberto areas, the latter for some time the mecca of drug addicts and push-
ers.

All 18 were jailed after deputy prosecutors of the Republic Rinella, Savino, and
Ciccarelli, assigned to combat the drug trade in Bari, issued arrest warrangs
against them. These magistrates have also signed warrants against 13 more persons
already in prison for other offenses (their names have been published in the
CRONACA DI BARI, together with additional information). During a press conference
at police headquarters on 21 August, Dr. Rinella explained the mechanism of the
anti-drug campaign, which resulted in the arrest of six persons on yesterday's list.

Thus, things are moving in the solicitors' office as well as in the police circles.

The new investigating policy was adopted during a meeting held early this year.

By its terms, the three magistrates coordinate all probes and oversee the duties
assigned to the three branches of the police force: the Fiscal Police to watch
the narcotics traffic, the carebinieri to keep vigil over the Hurst, Japigia, and
Madonnella districts, the police to survey the rest of the city-thus eliminating
all conflicts of competence and overlapping efforts. All pertinent, useful infor-
mation is turned over to the magistrates. The aggregate work done will be rein-
forced and evaluated by a newly-acquired computer. the first of its kind in Italy,
including a data bank at the disposal of the investigators and magistrates.

The new probe went into action two months ago when the operational nucleus of the
carabinieri indicted some 50 persons and released them on bail. Thereafter, a
study was made of the city districts affected and an "album of drug peddlers"
compiled to record the shifting gang memberships, their names, and the structural
and social deficiencies of the neighborhoods they frequent. This difficult task
is done by trailing suspects and intercepting telephone calls, a system which has

25
led to the identification of 31 persons dealing in medium caliber drugs. During
the crusade, the carabinieri sequestered case 100 doses of heroin, weighing 20
grams.

According to the investigators, each dose sells for $0,000 lire. More than 600
doses were being sold every month for a total of approximately 800 million lire.

The roundup has proved to be a hard blow for the gang bosses, who have conse-
quently lost a vastly profitable channel of distribution. As for the wholesale
traffic, the investigators are convinced that a good share of the drugs destined
for northern Italy and northern Europe are shipped via Apulia. Their findings

show that the accomplices include a number of Sicilian mafiosi, many of them
committed to compulsory exile in Apulia. This item of information, however, is
nothing new. Another innovation: aside from the charge of "possessing and selling
narcotics," they are now also guilty of breaking the law against "association for
criminal purposes."

0n the former charge, those who peddle "light" drugs can be sentenced to prison
for from one to four years, while those trading in "heavy" drugs can get from two
to six years. A verdict of "association for criminal purposes" can bring up to 15
years, with a three year minimum. The purpose of this measure is to keep dope
peddlers out of circulation for a considerable length of time.

The investigators now acknowledge the necessity of determining who will replace
them. Moreover, they are seeking ways to fortify their efforts not only to lop
off the tentacles of the octopus but also its head.

Bari LA GAZZBTTA DEL HEZZOGIORNO in Italian 8 Sep 81 p 7

[Article by Dionisio Ciccarese: "Dopesters Caught in the Carabinieri Net Are
Mostly Common Criminals"]

[Text] The new probe has uncovered a vast network of small-
time criminals functioning as intermediaries between drug push-
ers and buyers.

With the arrests made by the carabinieri, as reported on the front page, it is now
hoped that the wholesale traffic in heroin and hashish has been wiped out. As one
member of the Operational Nucleus put it, "The ma: arrested were selling middle
caliber dope. Now that they have been caught, the sale of dope to the retail push-
ers has been interrupted. He will soon see the results. Addicts and retailers
around the Piazza Umberto and the Madonnella and Japigia districts won't know where

to turn for fresh supplies. It was there that the carabinieri cracked down hard-
est."

Hho are the persons engaged in this illicit trade who, according to the investi-
gators, are responsible for promoting drug addiction in Bari? Some are addicts

themselves, many others are denizens of the underworld. Meanwhile, it should be
pointed out that the trade in hashish, a "light" drug, is less extensive than that
of the more deadly heroin.

26
The press conference held at carsbinieri headquarters noted phenomenal numbers of
common delinquents who have drifted into the drug world.

Let us examine for example, the situation in the Hadonnella quarter, hitherto
"worked" by six of the persons arrested, viz. Francesco Hilella, Nicola Ceglie,
Vito Palmieri, Giancinto De Filippis, Francesco Auricchio, and Vincenzo Hilslls,
brother of Francesco and incarcerated since 21 July for trafficking in drugs.
Headed by the Hilella brothers, they constitute a veritable organization of crim-
inals known for years to the police, but rather for thefts, bag snatching, and
other minor crimes. “This phenomenon," an authority explained, "has given us a
good many problems to solve because we are required to make innumerable verifica-
tions. Switching fras one gang to another, still they maintain contacts with their
former accomplices, and they often round up new recruits. Obviously, we must be
alert to discourage anyone tempted to join dope peddling gangs."

The same can be said of Francesco Carone, Giuseppe D'Ambrosio, Vincenzo Troctoli,
and Nicola Carofiglio, who "worked" the Japigia zone.

How was it possible for so many common criminals to move in on the drug scene?

The answer points to the responsibility of those who should have intervened in the
narcotics distribution front in good time. "In past years,” we were told, "dope
peddlers reigned supreme, partly because the regulations against possessing and
selling narcotics are often too vague, while the charge of association for criminal
purposes assumes other proportions." This was clearly a reference to those au-
thorities who were doing little, particularly in rehabilitating addicts.

Only three weeks ago, the district attorney had dealt a siailar harsh blow to the
drug peddlers. The same individuals-Prancesco Parsons, Giovanni Covello,

Francesco Castori, Vincenzo Hilella, Attilio Gargano, and Giovanni Santoro--have
reappeared in the latest investigation.

All the others, however, sold their wares on Piazza Umberto, the gathering place
most ‘r-qnented by addicts, where they did a flourishing business. Parsons, ar-

rested while selling gold items stolen from addicts, is well informed on this mat-
ter.

The carabinieri report also lists Francesco Bitetto, arrested for various episodes
of arson (we published a report on this yesterday), which he committed to subject
inhabitants of the Atlantide residential area in Torre a Mare to extortion. Al-
together, a wide variety of criminal activities.

These are the Name of the 31 Persons Caught in the Blitz

Francesco Carone, 21, Via Caldsrola, building A/32; Angelo Linetti, 35, Via G.
Petroni; Francesco Hilella, 36, 6 Via Giandomenico; Nicola Ceglie, 26, 27 Via Son
Somalia; Vito Palmieri, 22, 24 Via Tanzi; trancesco Auricchio, 28, lO.COrso Sonnino;
Giuseppe Coluccia, 36, 51 Via V. Emanuele, Palese; Grazia Sifanno, 19, 292 Via De
Caspari; Giuseppe D'Ambrosio, 26, Via Caldarola. building 3/17; Vincenzo Troccoli,
23, 7 Viale Iapigis, building 1/6; Martino ?asano, 34, 393/4 Corso Sicilis; Pietro
Drago, 25, 42 Via Lattanzio; Alessandro Conte, 29, 65 Via Trento: Emilio Lorusso,
27, 147/N Via Amendola; Lucio Corsi, 25, 217 Corso Benedetto Croce; Praneescio

27
Giuliani, 29, 42 Viale Concilio Vaticano II; Attilio Gugano, 24. 3 Vial: Sandra;
Francesco Castori, 28, 1 Via Campania; Francesco Pornono, 70, 28 Via G. Patroni;
Giovanni Coveno, 25. 17 Via Noicattaro; Giuseppe Di Cosimo, 26, 15 Student: de1
Ponte, Paleae; Giacinto De Filippia, 19, 27 Via Cattato; Luigi Giannoccaro. 26.
aélA Via Davide Lopez; Francesco Bitetto, 35, Via Papa Pio XII,Bitetto; Giovanni
Santoro, 26, Viale Einaudi; Vincenzo Milella, 26, 29 Via Dal-sting Vito
Caracciolese, 27, 15/A Via G. Guiacardo; Nicola Corolla, 19, 62 Piazzale Locchi;
and Luigi Ahiuso, 24, 1 Via Currants.

9653
C80: 5300/2557

28
BRIEFS

HEROIN SBIZURE-Diyarbakir, 7 Oct (AA)-Security forces acting on a tip raided an
illicit heroin factory at a village in Lice Country of Diyarbakpr and seized 33 kg
of pureiheroin which would be worth A billion Turkish liraa in case snuggled out of
the couhtry. During the raid, there was a shootout between policemen and heron
producers which left one of the latter dead. Two persons were captured as a result
of the raid and five others afterward. A number of other suspects are being sought

by the police, officials said. [Text] [TA071200 Ankara ANATOLIA in English 1100
GMT 7 Oct 81]

cs0: 3300/2015
l
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080032-6

ORGANIZATION OF CANNABIS SHUGGLING OPERATION DETAILED AT TRIAL

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 29 Sep 81 p 3

[Article by Ian Henry]

[Text]

THE British end of a multimillion-pound

transatlantic drug smuggling operation
was run by an extremely intelligent “ univer-
sity connection,” an Old Bailey jury was told

yesterday.

in a military-style operation code-named " Eagle "
the gang landed 15 tons of cannabis with a street
value of £20 million on the west of Scotland. said Mr

Joan Room. 0 C. Prosecut-
ing.

And when they thought the
game was up — "the Eagle
has blown " — they dumped
three tons of the dru into
the sea in panic, he al csctl.

Customs ofﬁcers swooped on
the gang {our and a half
months after the 1919 New
\ear smuggling operation. and
seized 1‘; tonnes ot cannabis
—" bigger than all the seizures
in any previous year in our
history."

By then the gang had
cleared more than £2 million
and had another (500.000 on
account with dealers. said Mr
Rogers.

' Slick operation '

The three men in the .dock
were extremely intelligent.
and ran a "set-y slick. verv
smooth" operation. he said.

Dorms ilowaan Malls. 36. an
Oxford graduate of Hans Road.

Chelsea. Mono/us Srcwutr
Pumas. 4!. a California

university graduate of no settled
address. and Honour MORGAN.

34. another Oxford man of Oak-
Iands Avenue. Potters Bar.
denied seven charges oi
evasion of the prohibition of
importing drugs and possession
of drugs.

Nicknames. code-names and
aliases abounded in the opera-
tion. said Mr Rogers.

Marks. the British master.
mind. “had so many identities
one wonders how on earth he
remembered who he was at any
given point of time.“

The three main ones were
Alhte Lane. John Hayes. and
Donald Nice. it was alleged.

" Even those aliases were
complicated because he also hor-
rowed names of others in place
0! inventing a purely fictitious
one himself."

Mr Rogers said that on Dec.
29. 1979. Is tons of high-quality
Colombian cannabis were
brought into Britain by a vessel
called the Karob and dispersed
to various places in Scotiand.

" The organisation which took
It in and the organlsation which
was responsible [or its desratch
from the tar side oi the At antic
was substantial"

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060032-8

hi

He
peopl:
admit
Britisl
Janna
grat
that
acts
grot
stoc
.tion
a ct

Aux
an I
tore
over
with
tion

our jut
a... 3.26 2.32. 3:
.553 222.3%: 2-3::
«2:8 - up? no a. can 53
v... 9.2.2:. 3 35 = £3
25.523 2.: :3 33:53
as 3.: 32:3.— 8 a: 8
:5 .93: 3 :8 c3 s...
63—0..

.. 2o .33 3-8: 3 3:23
9: 3. 53.0 o~ :5 3:5.
am: 82.28: a: 2:8: 58
n 35.2% 913:2. .592 in
8... .32 9.5.. w. «an.

:32. 2.... 3.53 3.33.
so: .33 5352:... . :5
3:83.... go. 3.: a a 3.
3 P252. 13...: 3.9 .. o
Mg... a: £23...
BRIEPS

NEROIN SHUGGLER SENTENCBD—Taj Din's shoes gave bin away when he tried to bring
200,000 pounds' worth of heroin into Britain through lleathrow airport. Not only
did he wear then on the wrong feet. but they were far too big for hin, padded as

they were with cotton wool. And the soles were double thick. so that heroin
could be stuffed inside. Din. 53, a father of five, of Sheridan Road, Manor Park,

admitted snuggling when he appeared at Reading Crown Court yesterday. Hrs Nikki
Saville, prosecuting, said custom nen noticed Din's uncomfortable shoes when he
walked through the green "nothing to declare" channel. She said Din paid 6,000
pounds for the drugs on his way back from Pakistan in August. lie was in partner-
ship with a fellow Pakistani with whom he worked at Fords, Dagenhan. Hr Ovais
Kadri. defending. said: "Instead of winning in aoney he's found hinself totally

in the deep end." Jailing him for 3 1/2 years, Recorder Michael Kennedy, Q.C.
said: "You deliberately took a risk with other people's lives so that you could

make money out of it." [Text] [London 1111'. DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 29 Sap 81
p 3]

cs0: 5320/003 3“”

32