FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

JPRS L/10243
8 January 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(P000 1/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
AUSTRALIA
Cocaine Use Boating, Transshipaents Frau U.S. 'Possible'
(Si-on Bohrsnann: 1118 WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN MAGAZINE,
24.25 wt 81)asses-eeceeooaeeeaoee; oeoeeeeseoeeoeooouaasee

Police Say Pure Cocaine Flooding Eastern States
(David HIISCI ﬁg "mm WWI“, 17.18 wt 81) 000 as 00 ee

Queensland Policemen Charged With Craving Marijuana
(Jm Beqley: THE AUSTRALIAN. 19 mt 81)eeeaeeeeeeeoeeeaeooee

Briefs
Access to Mail, Tax Records
Drug ’ractory'
Police on Cannabis Charge
INDIA

“P‘s Demand Stern Measures Against Drugs Menace
(PATRIUP' ‘ Dec 81)eonscoco-es.eaeeeeeseaoeeseeeoee-aoeoooee

INDONESIA

Poreign Nationals Arrested
(SINAR HARAPAN. 30 Oct 81)..................................

Narcotics Interdiction Course. Arrests
(5!” “mm, 2‘ wt 81)O...C0.00......OOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

-a- [III-W-I3BFO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAKISTAN

Thriving Narcotics Smuggling Racket Reported
(MORNING NEWS. 11 Dec 81)...................................

Drug Users Profiled: Incidence Among Students Reported
(zunat 318“, Ml 11Dec81)OO00....OOIOIOIOIOIOOOOIOODOI

Briefs
Charas. Opium Seized
Customs Continue Searching Ship

LATIN AMERICA

MEXICO

Drugs Fro. Ger-any Seized. Traffickers Captured
(EL PRONTERIZO, 2 Dec 81)...................................

Officials Witness Incineration of Seized Harihuana
(BL BRAVO, 15 Oct 81).......................................

Briefs

Drugs Snuggled for Pharlaceuticals
Jail Drug Dealers Sentenced
November Antidrug Canpeign Results

PERU

Drug Traffickers. Methods, Rehabilitation Program
(LA NACION. 9 Nov 81; BL COHBRCIO, various dates)...........

Drug Traffickers Execution

Drugs Transported in Refrigerator Truck
Drug Rehabilitation Program Costs

Tra icking Methods Uncovered

NBAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

IRAN

Briefs
Drug Arrests
Hashish Haul
Shiraz Drug Arrest
Drugs Discovered
Shiraz Drug Seizure
Mashhad Drug Discoveries
Raids in Zahedan, Tehran

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020012-1
R‘R ovncmz am: leA'

Drug Traffickers Arrested
Afghan Drug Smuggling
Opium Confiscated

Opium Haul in Khorasan

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Briefs
Omani Soldier Arrested

SUB-SAH’RAN APRICA

SOUTH AFRICA

Police Break Up Cocaine Smuggling Ring
(Sandra Lieberum: THE CITIZEN, 15 Dec 81)..“

WEST EUROPE
AUSTRIA

‘- Briefs
Hashish in Vorarlberg
Narcotics Squad

FRANCE

Briefs
Heroin Seizure
Heroin Traffickers Arrested

GREECE
Briefs
Drug Traffickers Arrested
PR6 Extradition Request

ITALY

Briefs
Heroin Seizure

NETHERLANDS

Briefs
Hashish on Lebanese Freighter

UNITED KINGDOM

Briefs
Murder of Principal witness

-c-

mp OPPTP‘I’AY. "SP. (WIN

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020012-1
COCAINE USE BOOHING. TRANSSRIPHENT5 FROM U.S. 'POSSIBLE'

Canberra THE HEEKEND AUSTRALIAN MAGAZINE in English 26-25 Oct: 81 p 5

[Article by Simon Bohrsnann:

[Excerpt]

OCAINE in

Australia

used to be a
song by JJ. Cale
on pub jukeboxes.
the Rolls Royce of
ﬂags that made
overseas pop stars
suit! .and dribble
during interviews,
the magic white
powder that Woody-
Allen sneezed into
-thin air - but.
otherwise, it was
unseen.

In the last so years.

the )etset m: dlsap-
neared up the nasal
ms or only very
rev 0! Australta's
"dopeooenoscentt".

Then. about ll months
no. a most remarkable.
thtnchappened.

. Plastic bus or eoealne.
reﬁned In South Amen-
can male laborstorlee.
suddenly appeared In at.
seable amounts on the
scales 0! Australian the
cal drug dealers. who
were dellghted to llnd
they had a ready market
of amuent muddle-class
attache. prepared to
leek out double the price
then “coke" snorting

. counterparts in the Un-

lsedetateswouldpsy. -

bu? a result: a small.
avidly ere-ans coo
calm set blossomed tn
the east: at suburbsand
northern beaches noon
ot’Sydney. and Quickly
embraced thelr lower in-
couenelehbors.

Vtsttla; pop stars dls-
coveted could now
send their uttered ll-
moustnea to ptck up
their lavonte ”show“.
even l1 they had to pay
up to three tunes the
pace back home: a
glamorous Anni-wan
mas actress at a lush so-
clety party In Sydney
had to be chipped about
$143-ng to her
nostrilsundclatmseese
snade that tn Just a few

set

sue! on I
hlchlyproatablecooalne
operation tn Australla
and were open (or bust-
ness before the law
could say “snort".

Cooatne. the socalled
sex and conﬁdence
powder whlch has be-
come the drug 0! chowe
o! mlddle Amencs. had
amt-ed

Coealne now sells In
Sydney for moo-mo a
grant. A dealer will pay
up to soon tor an «we.
thh a m In an
ounce. the dealer can
make moo pout before
"‘cuttlnr' the drug 'lth
anythingtromlactoseto
crushed ettamln mile to
nsxy amphetamnes
mated with synthetic llao
nocune.

e

"The Jet Set Flat in Australia”

The arm-at of cocaine
on the east coast 0! Aus~
tralts was too QUICK to
suggest a slowly expand.
In: denund: It landed in
bulk Ivtth everythtne
ready to so 3:: an ad-
t‘erustngeatn (It.

In Sydney. to the last
1‘ months. pollen have

some 'csehu worth.
aroundﬂmtmoutlnder
the "they onlyﬂnd to
peroent'ntle.thatcould
mean no mllllon worth
ts already We lnto
Sydneyeaehyear.
Johnxtstyplealolthe‘
new crop at Australlan
cocalnebuyersl'letakee
home about «no a week
trons his job tn the tel-
eylslon mayandhe
otten between
sea and 8100 at this on
recreationaldrualnhls-
case coalne and marl-
lumﬂesayarlvhﬂed
the Dotted States about
tour-years . It was
easytobuy .Whenl
came Mose l (orcot
aboutltunulslxmonths

um: estabhshed hem '
emu routes
through South-East

Asia to mm cocatne.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020012-1

nmo where drug: are
smuggled Into the coun-
try by mums alter t
(as: budt tuner that an
armed cm 5M“
. ute.
‘rms mm W 89'

C50: 5300/7517

been untamed
pollen. ..

Nor does the F
Oovemmcnt‘s d
mentonnomeet
tn the sun-dream
clue seem likely to
the moon or a:
Both. the ohm
it would ha man
my avoided b

lorthedmcm
man it mun!
Autumn ct
with 08m

siphon wwﬂa
am Just an:
mug-m
.tomnnlh.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020012-1
POLICE SAY PURE COCAINE FLOODIRG EASTER“ STATES

Canberra ‘1'!!! WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN in English 17-18 Oct 81 p 1

[Article by David Hiret]

[Text 1

REGULAR. plenum! and
pure sttppltes ol the trendy
“snob drug" - cocalne - are
betng smuggled into Aw
tralla and l‘etehtng more
than $200 at gram from
ttealthy users.

Although coealne is low on
the Ital. o! pollce drug prtorl-
ttes. 1n the past 14 months tn
Sydney alone :5 mutton worth
has been sealed.

Otltclals esttmate another
at: mutton worth has gone on
to the Sydney market and ln
atelbourne. where the trade
has only recently begun to
tlourlsh. about. 310 mutton
north has been sold In the
pat the months.

Vletortan and Federal Pollee
acknowledge the new popular-
lty ol cocatne. but sald yester-
day thelr attempts to clamp
dean were hem trustrated by
tradtttonal mute utexperlenee
ln dealing mth the wealthy.
people new name the drue.

Drug authorltles sud co«
came as last overtaktne mar-
ltuana as the trendy drug 0!
dmner names. tnth a “smart"
tn vogue Instead at a port

Supertntendant Graham
Hudson at the Vlctonsn Drug
squad sald: "We haven't had
any malor arrests or setatres
tor the alt-hole reason that the
scene ls not wlthln the atnbtt
ot where we have been operat-

lna. It's the smog set — tlte

ehamoaene types."

In Vu-tnna last year there
were OM reported dﬂll ott-
cncer. at whtch only ll were lor
rot-ante. The prewous year
there were Just three ooanne
arrests.

In 8\une.\'. mllee also he-
knowledge mereased use of

the (true amt
people Last
at‘llcd 32 nulllot
elite suburb ol ‘
and m August
nttllton worth u
den In crates
Bollt'tan eurtos.
am: 0! Austt
amply ls under
trotn Bollvla. a
here ls though
trolled by grout
etnlerea operattt
tabllshederlntet

"Show. “‘colte
sontettntea caller
“The Sentunen
has been :he las
tor wealthy A
some years. but
hard to buy It

It Is sttll abou
penuve as tn M
the trade I not
moon mtltlon
where about 401
the drug are tlle:
annually.

A settler Pede
beer sald the C
drug untt also to
to deal n'llll cot
my unless «Me
to the umt's dlre

"It Is not not
sense that her
eonuned to the
class 0! soetety.“

"I am not In a
tabltslt the exte
would have to r
lorce and Ito
areas. That wou
in: our backs c
we are heme co:
dated wltlt herol

Cocnne us not
through the no:
thus way ts co
m'ely harmless
ol a young man
two weeks auo
matuntrat'enot
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020012-1

a QUEENSLAND POLICEHEN CHARGED um GROWING MARIJUANA
Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 19 0c: 81 p 3

[Article by Joe Begieyl

-- [Text] TWO Queensland police. mpmredlncounm‘rowns-
men have beenclmgedmlh "mm“.

- conspmnglo cultivate hund- up. u: m Room. a“
"ﬁe/thousandsotman- mumynevomdmeme

um mm lot Polloe. It: ulna.
‘irownsammfs In forest near env- nune of “lemme who Is

The chute follows 3 seem; man MM
six-month Invest! “on byde- WWO‘MWWM
active. at the term! In- “on“
vesuauons Bumu. The No town.

consumes have been Luv.

money to Ignore 3 hue drug mbﬂnc houses would not. be
mutton netr Tommie. able w opefue “than: police
They hove been summoned Mon.

080: 5300/7517

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020012-1
BRIEFS

ACCESS 10 MAIL, TAX RECORDS—-Canberra--The Federal Government is to consider a
drug inquiry recommendation that Federal Police be given access to taxation
records and power to intercept mail, the Minister for Administrative Services,
Mr Newman, said yesterday. Mr Newman told Parliament in Question Time that the
Government's consideration would centre on the need to achieve a balance between
the protection of the public from drug traffickers and the protection of the
rights of individuals. The recommendation was among those handed down by the
Royal Commission into drugs, headed by Mr Justice Hilliams. Hr Newman said

Mr Justice Williams had stipulated that such measures should be introduced under
strict controls, which should be no less than those which nOw operate in respect
of the power of the police to intercept phone cells. If introduced, the measure
would probably require police to apply to court for permission to gain access to
tax records. [Text] [Sydney THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD in English 23 Oct 81 p 2]

DRUG 'FACTORY'--Me1bourne--The City Court was told here yesterday that a police
raid on a suburban factory uncovered a professional drug operation "unlike that
experienced by the drugs bureau in the past." Alan Frederick Neilsen (63),
builder, of Doncaster, andRoderick John Smith (35), foreman, of Fairfieid, were
charged with conspiring to manufacture amphetamines, possessing amphetamines

and selling and trafficking in the drugs. No pleas were taken. Deg.-Sgt R.
Schrimer, of the C13 drug squad told Magistrate K. Burgess that the police
seized 2.7 kilos of amphetamines valued at $90,000 in the raid on the Campbell-
field factory on Tuesday. He alleges that in a sealed section of the factory
the police had found enough chemicals to produce 984 kilos of the drug. HI
Burgess set bail or $20,000 for Neilsen and $10,000 for Smith. They were remanded
to appear in the same court today. [Text] [Perth THE WEST AUSTRALIAN in English

22 Oct 81 p 1.0]

POLlCE 0N CANNABIS CHARGE--The first prosecution witness in a drug trial involv-
ing four detectives said yesterday that he was offered $100,000 for three months'
work by a woman who was growing cannabis at Jarrahdale. The witness, Neho Covie,
unemployed, of Tuart Hill, was giving evidence in the District Court against four
men and a woman who are charged with having conspired between January 1 and
January 22 to obtain cannabis with intent to sell or supply. The accused are
net-Sgt Kerry Tangney (36), of Nilliton Road, Karrinyup, bet-Sgt Laurence Butler
(3]), of Wanneroo Road, Hanneroo, Detective Robert Stephenson (32) of Blacksll
Drive, Greenwood, and Detective Dean Lewitzka (36), of Elliott Street Scarborough.
The woman is Aloma La Donna Pelham (31), domestic, of Stirling Street, Highgate.
The detectives face further charges that they conspired together and with others
to pervert the course of justice in the prosecution of four men charged with being
in possession of cannabis, and that they conspired together to supply cannabis to
Donna Pclham. The accused deny all the charges. [Excerpt] [Perth THE WEST

AUSTRALIAN in English 23 Oct 81 p 1]
C80: 5300/7517
0
“P's om STERN MEASURES AGAINST DRUGS MACE

New Delhi. PATRIOI‘ in English 4 Dec 81 p 5

[Text] Rim” members in the Lok

CSO:

Sahha on Thursday deo
mended stern measures to tackle
me growing menaCe oi illicit
train in narcotics in the coun-
try.

lieniytng to a volley of ques‘
tions during question hour. itin-
lstcr oi Slate (or Health N R
halter and a new dog quad.
crack intelligence learns in
maior international airports and
a special narcotic cell were salts
of the measures the: the Gov-
ernrnent had initiated to combat
the menace.

hicnthers expressed cone-11
over the {act that indie was
emerging as a major conduit for
snuggling and hundreds oi
indian youth were turning drug
addicts. -

The issue was raised by Mr
Bapusaheb Peruichar at question
the 'with reierence to a publish-
ed report 'drugging oi Bornbay'
on smuggled illicit sale and use
oi cheras. ganja and other nar-
cotics on a naasa scale.

Hr usher. replied that the
otatter iell within the purview
of the Maharashtra Government.
which was already setud oi ll

5300/7014

and had reported detecting 33
cases 01 um; in narcotic
Mas

Net satisiied with the reply. the.
3.)? member protested that a
matter electing hudreda at
youth in educational institutions
in Goa. Bosnbay and Delhi was.
sought to he dismissed as a State
subject. -

in Parnlehar wu concerned
since the report spoke oi hrinlo
antly organised network at agen-
hiciuding then and women irocn
West Germany. France and Bri-
tain—ail wanted by the latcrpot
for crlaltes.

Ir Lather said again that the
leharaehtre Govemeot had
arrested certain people and sew
ed charas. genie and morphine.

Adding his own concern in the
nutter Speaker Beirut Jahhar
directed that the Government
should take serious note o! drua
trenching.

it was mainly a prohlein oi de-
veloped countries. the ilinlster
diagnosed. but with the spread
or education lndlan youth also
gradually took to this.

And. Xr Laahar earned. the
easement was takina action to

th. trenching. ,1'he
Health Ministry at the Centre
had already learned a committee
of experts.

Would the Government launch
‘an anti-drug emaede‘ in vlevoi
the horror stories and conics-.
alone by those who ran the dens.
persisted Mr Parnleher.

8e demanded an inquiry into
th. whole matter by a High Court
Judge. 'We cannot leave it to
States: Sir Parulerai said.

Congress-l member Shlvkuaner
Singh said in his constituency—
Khandwa (31?) — largcscale
iraiilcking in genie and charaa
was taking place and even the
trains were stopped by crinlnals
to smuggle drugs. As the State
Government had no control over
this. he wanted the Centre to ob
tain a detailed report. on the
matter.

Mr Veaant Mar Pundit said
there was little coordination M
ween the concerned mnistrles
oi Healthldncatlon and ﬁnance.

{or tackling the menace oi in-
creasing illicit trenching in nar-
cotic drugs.

Ir Laehr said the Govern-
aneet had already Initiated a
nuher or steps to curtail drug-
mnegilae. ' .

ccenhet
FOREIGN NATIONALS ARRESTED
Jakarta SINAR WAN in Indonesian 30 Oct 81 pp 1, 12

[Text] No foreigners, a German named Gerd liruache [as published] and an Iranian
called Abdol Alisadeh, who were arrested in Euro District, Riau Archipelago, are

dangerous persons, according to B. J. Hathaus, chief of Tanjung Pinang Imigration
Office.

Based on investigation, there are indications that both foreigners are involved in
the snuggling of narcotics, weapons, gold or in other subversive activities.
Hathaus said, who added that it was difficult to extract infornation from the
suspects, particularly the German who is a taciturn type. When arrested by the
police in 'ioro, both foreigners said they had lost their passports. These pass-
ports have been found since. The first paper to be found was a piece of identi-
fication belonging to Alisadeh, by a 6-year-old boy on a pier on 20 October.

The following day, three passports were found on a Iain street by a 9-year-old
youngster. They belonged to Hrusche, isadeh and a certain lieinz Friederich,
respectively.

The deputy coal-anding police chief in Riau, Haj Drs Sitonpul, said investigation
is still going on as to why Alisadeh's identification paper and the three passports
were found at two different places and they were found by two youngsters a few
days after the two foreigners were arrested on 18 October. Here these Iere coin-
cidences or were there other factors involved?

Sitonpui also wanted to know for sure where the two foreigners stayed in Moro.

As to the passport bearing the name of Heinz Priederich, the photograph of whom
hears a strong resenblance to Gerd Hrusche's, investigation is being nade to find
out whether Heinz Priederich is another seamed name of Hrusche. Meanwhile.
Friederich is nowhere to be found.

Pending a thorough investigation, Hathaus has a strong suspicion that lirusche and
Friederich are one and the same person. Neither passport bore any visa stamp

for Indonesia, although the pages of both passports are full of visa chops for
various trips to eastern Europe, particularly the one belonging to Gerd Hrusche.
Although his passport was issued in west Germany, one of the stamps showed a
prohibition to enter the United States when he tried to get an American visa from
a certain country in Europe.
on the basis of Investigation, both foreigners admitted they entered ludoncslu lrum
Singapore by an outboard motorboat. They landed at a beach in Moro three weeks
ago, at 5:30 am.

Who arranged their trip from Singapore? Who are their contacts in Moro? what _do
they carry—-narcotics, gold or other goods? These are questions still to be
answered. as the suspects refuse to talk, Hathaus said.

According to this paper's observation, Moro region is a fishing village and it
serves as a clandestine lane for narcotics and human traffic. Although surrounded
by water, many inhabitants of Moro do not depend on fishing for their livelihood-
or live as farmers. either.

The waters of Moro meet with the southern channel of Halacca Strait through which
runs a heavy traffic of nerchentmen and oil tankers. Local fisherman in More often
see suspicious foreign ships unloading comadities at night.

Hathaus confirmed such information. "He also have similar reports. Our suspicion
is that those ships drop anchor and unload contraband on the Moro waters. and it is
possible that they are delivering narcotics." He added that people aboard

oil tankers are comitting this thing.

Lt Col Kansas Johar, the commanding police officer in Riau Archipelago, who is cur-
rently visiting Jakarta on official duty, confirmed that More region is a trouble
spot. adding that the waters around Moro are on police record as a narcotics traf-
fic lane.

Due to shortage of personnel and equipment, the police are only able to conduct
limited patrols on an intermittent basis, he said.

9300
C50: 5300/8311
NARCOTICS INTKRDICTION COURSE, ARRESTS
Jakarta SINAR WAN in Indonesian 26 Oct 81 pp 1, 12

[Excerpts] Director General of Customs Hahono stated that Bali region has becoae

an operational center of an international narcotics syndicate to organize its
clandestine business.

Hahono made this remark at Pertanina Cottage in Kuts, Bali last Friday night dur-
ing the closing ceremony of a special training course on "Special Cargo and Nar-
cotics Interdiction" jointly sponsored by the Indonesian and 0.5. customs houses.
The course provides Indonesian customs personnel with training on how to identify
and track down narcotics.

Hahono attaches great importance to the course because, he said, Indonesia has
indeed become a narcotics traffic transit point for the illegal international
market. ”Not long ago we confiscated 5 kg of heroin at Halin [Jakarta] Airport
in a plot to transport it to Amsterdam," he added.

Philippa Gill, a member of the American Messy in Indonesia, told this newspaper
that Indonesia is not only a narcotics traffic transit point, but also a consump-
tion region. "As a matter of fact, the largest conslnnption of illegal narcotics
takes place in Southeast Asia, and not in Western Europe or the 11.8.," he said.

Speaking before the training course on behalf of the 11.8. ambassador, Hr Gill
warned the people all over the world to be alert against illicit narcotics trade,
because the current opium harvest at the "golden triangle" is the biggest in the
past 6 years.

He estimated this year's opium production from the "golden triangle" at about
500 tons. Consequently, the United States will continue to request the collabor-
ation of other countries in combatting international narcotics trade. He ex—
plained that the special training course on narcotics interdiction just ended
does not serve the interests of the 11.8. alone, but also for the entire humanity.

Drs Samadi, chairman of the training execution comittee, said that training of
this kind has proved beneficial to Indonesian customs officers while carrying out
their duties at harbors and airports, mentioning specifically in the courses in
theory and practice on-narcotics identii‘.’ cation, baggage where narcotics are
hidden, aircraft and vessel inspection carrying narcotics, and the use of detec-
tive dogs.
The training is divided into two parts, the first part held in Jakarta and the

second in Bali. Each part lasts two weeks, attended by 30 participants, starting
last 28 September.

As previously reported, a 28~year-old American citizen named Anthony Ross Worth
using the false self-identity of Frank Joseph Smith, who was arrested in Bali on
25 September, was deported to the 11.8. Friday morning under escort of a U.S.
marshal. The suspect was described as a member of a dangerous syndicate and has
attempted several times to kill American members of the Interpol.

Anthony Ross Worth was brought from Bali directly to Jakarta to be interrogated by
a special team of the Indonesian Interpol. The examination was handled in person
by the Chief of Police in his capacity as chairman of the Indonesian Interpol.
Before being deported to the 0.8., Worth was also examined by other law enforcement
authorities, namely, the Attorney General's Office and the Department of Justice.

The accused said that he could enter Indonesia because he used an assumed name of
Frank Joseph Smith. He arrived in Indonesia with his companion Miguel Trabela in
mid-September. Trabela, believed to be a leader in a Peruvian narcotics syndi-

cate, stayed only briefly in Indonesia before returning to his homeland. Anthony

Ross Worth remained in Bali for a considerable time because he wanted to enjoy the
seascape of Kuta Beach, he said.

Meanwhile, two other foreigners, Gerd Oiruache), 38. and Abdel Alisadeh, 21., of

Germn and Iranian nationality, respectively, were arrested by the police at Moro
District, Riau Archipelago.

Arrested on 18 October, both foreigners told the police that they lost their
passports when they arrived from Singapore.

However, Gerd (Hrusche) said he had been living in Java for some time and he even
has a wife and a child in Central Java.

Arcording to Drs Kamas Johar, a police officer with the rank of lieutenant colonel
and commanding officer in Riau Archipelago, both foreigners were on the wanted
list and blacklisted against entry into Indonesia.

During police investigation, both foreigners were insolent and uncooperative,
refusing to answer many questions. Kamas Johar said one or both of them were at
one time connected with the notorious Red Brigade in Germany.

He added that it is possible that both might be engaged in some subversive
activities in Indonesia.

9300
C50: 5300/831 1

10
TERIVING WICS SHDGGLING mm REPORTED

Karachi MORNING ms in 319118}! 11 Doc 81 p 9

(Text)

‘11»de
carp-.Mumw
adamant“ noun“.
meumMmhL
Evcnmmcmotmpa
01th. nonhuman
"pa-Ml! bun: We:
WWW“
byduunpotmemm
m a hm lo who": “(an buck:

hum Mummy
«momma-Menu; m
mymnwmuh
scum.

mum human-b
Mammy-molding"

humma‘mm
Hm.th
Mme: «Maw
E L :
mm.mm Wme “MwwMMWW m.~»~ “Mum mmmwmmwmm mwmm

M“.hmnmam ~. ..wm~.h WWW mwmm u .mm ”
1% E E mm a m: WM
2%. mm ﬂax .m. Kw E
M “mm: “Mammy“:.mmnmmmmm m

o “with”
Soon am: but first
.Snln'uanm
Ubn‘l'hhmmmulo

12
mm Mm wwwwm.. mmmmmm m3“ w wmfwMWcmwﬂ Mm Mammr

.. .f 2..” mammmmmw LMM “ ”mam...

WW WWW i” “Wm wwwwmwmmmw Mum imam ”mu“:
3 . « a

E. mm mm mm” “mm Fﬁmwwmm Wmmmzmxm

m m m u m
“mm mm 2mm? 3
gm”. mama“
«a mmwm “ mmmam
gm?“ 3% a m

M wwmmm an :m 5” w m m“
“mammm 5% L. mm” mm. “mm
2me 52 .: ”FEW”-

wig w “may ”mm mm”?
BRIEFS

ems. OPIUM “mar-Rawalpindi, Dec. lO--'L‘he Custom Intelligence squad in a
raid near aasan Abdel yesterday recovered narcotics north lakhs of rupees and ar-
rested two persons in this connection. According to reports, the intelligence
staff on learning that two persons, identified as ﬁashin man and Akbar Khan com-
ing to Rawalpindi in a Car (No. P3. 326) had contraband with then. The suspected
car was stopped near Hasan Abdel ftr checking. A total of about 21 kgs of charas
and opium were recovered, hidden in the car. In another raid near mils Excise
authorities in collaboration with the police, arrested two persons. identified as
Iiaquat Ali and Aznat Parvez and recovered about one kg of opium and a ninute
quantity of charas. [Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 11 Dec Bl p 81

cows CONTINUE SEARCHIM sunk-Special squads of the Drug mforcuaent Cell (DEC)
continued managing of nv "Pusrur" for the fourth day yesterday following recovery
of 8.5 kgs of heroin on mursday last. The vessel was scheduled to sail for
Liverpool when it was detained resulting in the signing-off of the Captain and the
Chief Officer and the arrests of four crew unborn now in Custons custody till

Dec 21. Customs sources said they had information that more drugs were secreted
in the ship. They alleged that the ship had been involved in 'at least three sim-
ilar cases" and was last detained in Sweden following recovery of 36 kilos of
hashish, besides yielding 80 kilos of hashish prior to its voyage a few months ago.
[Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 14 Dec 81 p 10]

C80: 5300/4576

14
DRUGS FROM GERMANY SEIZED, TRAFFICKERS CAPTURBD
Ciudad Juarez BL FRONTERIZO in Spanish 2 Dec 81 Sec 8 p 10

[Text] Mexico City. 1 December (0BM)--Agents from the FBI, and the Mexican and
German INTERPOL, are seeking additional ”fat fish” of the international drug traffic

underworld that has been operating for the past 3 years in Europe and America, sell-
ing psychotropic substances.

Among the leaders of the international gang of fugitives is the German, Claus Kesting,
a partner in the German pharmaceutical firm Globe Chemical, as well as another indi-

vidual of Mexican nationality, whose name was not provided so as not to hamper the
investigation.

Only three of the drug traffickers were captured by the federal agents, when they
discovered in the port of Veracruz a ship of Swedish registry. which had arrived
from Hamburg. Germany, carrying nearly 5,000 kilograms of a psychotropic substance
known as metaqualone, for producing the drug called Mandrax in pill form.

Javier Coello Trejo, agent of the Federal Public Ministryfor special affairs, said
that the drugs were worthy 775 million pesos, and were to be distributed on the
black market in Mexico and the United States.

Comdr Florentino Venture, chief of INTERPOL in Mexico, said that the substance in
powdered form (metaqualone) was processed in a clandestine laboratory located in
Tepic. Nayarit.

Moreover, it was reported that an investigation is being made of the pharmaceutical
firm American Medicinal Industry (IMA), with which the drug traffickers concealed
their illegal activities in order to bring in the psychotropic substances.

The three subjects in custody. the German Holder Markman Mamero, and the Mexicans

Manuel Arnulfo Lopez and Hector Manuel Godoy Calderon. were taken to the Eastern
Preventive Prison, at the disposal of the seventh district judge of penal affairs.

2909
080: 5330/59

15
OFFICIALS HITNBSS INCINFRATION 0F SEIZED MARIHUANA
H. Matamoros 8L BRAVO in Spanish 15 Oct 81 See A p 16

[Text] Yesterday norning, in the presence of various federal officials, the incine-
. ration began of over 200 kilograms of narihuana which had been seized a few days

ago by the Federal Judicial Police coriander. Victor Manuel Martinez Guerra, and
his agents.

The burning of the narihuans took place at exactly 1330 hours yesterday, Wednesday.
on the grounds of the Industrial City located on Lauro Villar Highway.

Alfredo Olivares Osuna, agent of the Federal Public Ministry, headed the operation
starting the burning of the 19 bags of narihusns.

Six soldiers and several Federal Judicial Police agents guarded the extensive area
where the drugs were burned, to prevent any assault that night be made by those
affected by the seizure of that shipment.

It took half an hour to convert the entire heap of narihuana.consisting of the
contents of the 19 bags seized on the banks of the Rio Bravo on the site of the
El Ebanito communal farm,into ashes.

In addition to Alfredo Olivares Osuna, Federal Public Ministry agent, the incinera-
tion of the drugs was overseen by Federal Judicial Police Commander Victor Manuel
Martinez Guerra and First Capitsn of the Cavalry Eeriberto Bella Carrillo. represent-
ing General Luis Molina Cervantes, cornander of the district garrison, and Dr Gilberto
anritu Saez, director of the health center.

The aforementioned authorities stated that, during the course of 1 month, nearly

700 kilograms of narihuana resulting from the latest blows dealt' to the region's
organized drug traffic have been burned.

2909
C80: 5330/59

16
BRIEFS

DRUGS SMUGGLBD FOR PHARMACEUTICALS-—Hexico City, 30 November (03H)-The Office of
the Attorney General of the Republic captured ll officials and eaployées of State of
Mexico pharmaceutical laboratories who had smuggled drugs worth several million
pesos into the country for making medicines. Those in custody, whose names were

not released, worked at the INA. SA, Laboratories. and have been questioned in the
PGR lockup on Soto Street, on the corner of Reforma Avenue, in the Guerrero district.
Several days ago, the attorney general, Oscar Flores Sanchez,had been informed that
officials of the aforementioned firm were illegally bringing raw material, chiefly
drugs. into the country for the manufacture of medicines. For this reason, he
ordered Javier Coello Trejo, agent of the Federal Public Ministry for special affairs,
to conduct the investigation of the case. [Text] [Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in
Spanish 1 Dec 81 p 8] 2909

JAIL DRUG DEALERS SENTENCBD-—Yesterday, the third district judge, Ricardo Rodriguez
Villarreal, issued a sentence of 7 years in prison and a fine of 1,000 pesos for
two individuals who were found guilty of a crime against health in the degrees of
drug trafficking, possession and sale. Jesus Jimenez Gallegos and Roberto Rendon
Ordonez are the two subjects who were given the aforementioned sentence, having
coumutted these crimes when they were incarcerated in the La Loma Prison. after
being tried for similar crimes. From record 183-79 initiated on the foregoing
persons, it was learned that, during a search which the prison director, hector
Garcia Trevino, made of the cell of Jesus Jimenez Gallegos, he was found to have

365 toxic pills. 16 grams of heroin and 6 grams of raw opium. "hen the federal
prisoner was questioned. he said that the drugs were owned by Roberto Rendon Ordonez,
who was confined in cell No 6 of the jail. and that they had been turned over to
him to sell among the addicts in La Loma. Also during the investigation, it was
learned that the drug traffickers' supplier was someone known to them by the nick-
name "Pata-Pata", who lived in Guadalajara. They claimed that the supplier notified
them of the day and hour when he would take the drugs to the prison, They were
brought in bags tied with rocks and thrown over the fence of the prison, to be sold
subsequently in the jail itself. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB NUEVO LARBDO in
Spanish 1 Dec 81 Sec C p 3] 2909

NOVEMBER ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN RESULTS-During November, 101 persons were arrested by
the Federal Judicial Police as individuals presumed guilty of various crimes
classified as injurious to health, in the permanent campaign being carried out by
that entity to prevent and combat the drug traffic in the state. According to
reports provided by Hector Aviles Castillo, coordinator for Zone 06 of the permanent

I?
campaign against the drug traffic established by the Office of the Attorney General
of the Republic, nine long-barreled and 12 short-barreled weapons, with 296 useful
cartridges, were confiscated from some of those in question. In addition, a total
of 269 kilograms and 819 grams of narihuana, 800 grams of poppy seed and 7 kilograms
and 202 grams of opium gun. as well as eight toxic pills, were seized, one laboratory
was destroyed, and 11 vehicles which had been used for the illegal activities were
confiscated. The coordinator for Zone 06 explained that the action to destroy plan-
tations was intensified, since weather conditions allowed for this. The result was

that 286 poppy plantations covering an area of 73,650 square meters were fumigated,
and 11 narihuana plantations on an area of 30,760 square meters received the same
treatment. He added that 1,611 poppy plantations, on an area of 507,767 square
meters. were destroyed manually, while four marihuana plantations over an expanse
of 9,929 square meters were razed. [Text] [Culiacan BL SOL DB SINALDA in Spanish

4 Dec 81 p 6] 2909

650: 5330/59

18
DRUG TRAPPICKBRS, METHODS, REHABILITATION PROGRAM

Drug Traffickers Execution

Santiago LA NACION in Spanish 9 Nov 81 p 8 3

[Text] Lima, 8 Nov (ANSA)-‘l'he bloody war to the death between international gangs
of narcotics traffickers, apparently directed by Italian-Americans, continues to
hold the attention of the min local newspapers. "Give up, Buccolo; your life is
in danger," the police call out at the stronghold of the alleged chief of a narcotics
trafficking mafia which has already executed-in Italian vendetta style--some eight
persons linked to the illegal drug traffic. During the last week Lima has been
shocked by reports of barbarous crimes against one Japanese and three Italian
citizens. murdered in cold blood in the streets. The police appear to have found
the thread which will lead to the uncovering of a powerful narcotics trafficking
organization headquartered in Peru. the members of which could become millionaires
through the illegal export of cocaine base to Europe and the potential U.S. market.

Pasquale Buccolo, owner of one of the best-known footwear industries in Lima, is
believed to be the ”godfather" of the narcotics mafiaa operating in Peru. He was
released several months ago from Lurigancho prison, where he had been held on charges
of possession of narcotics. Shortly after his release, Lima was shaken by the strange,
savage and cold-blooded murders of one Japanese and three Italian citizens, victims
of knife and firearm attacks. not to mention evidence of torture all over their
bodies. Other mutilated corpses of persons linked to the narcotics traffic have
been found, but police have not released any further details about these unspeakable
crimes. Meanwhile they have deployed their best narcotics agents in the search for
Buccolo, whose life is threatened by a rival gang. It is said that Buccolo failed

to make drug shipments he contracted with another organization, in view of which

the mafia decided to execute Buccolo and all his associates. among them a Japanese
indust rial ist .

Drugs Transported in Refrigerator ‘l‘ruck
Lima El. GONERCIO in Spanish 28 Oct 81 p 14
[Text] Police agents of the Antinarcotics Directorate have arrested a gang of
Colombian drug traffickers who were attempting to transport back to their country,

in a sophisticated refrigerator truck for frozen fish, 106 kg of cocaine valued at
200 million sols.

19
The drug had been packed into five cartons and placed inside the refrigerator
truck, where they were easily camouflaged. The truck was due to leave for Colombia
with 10 tons of hake, and the trip was to take 7 days. The four Colombian traffickers-
1dentif1ed as Edgar Omar Martinez Romero (31), owner of the truck and the drug;
Nelson de Jesus Berrios Hoyos (51), the gang's contact; Aristobulo Pineiro Espitia
(38), the driver; and Jose Rimel Baquero (26), an accomplice--and Maria Grandez
Lozano (a Peruvian) were arrested at a house in the Valle Hermoso district of
Honterrico which they rented for $409 a monrn. Inside the house the PIP [Peruvian
Investigative Police] found 20 kg of the drug in an inner tube from a tire. On
being interrogated, the prisoners said they were fish merchants and that they had
come to Peru in a lO-speed refrigerator truck valued at $70,000, which they had
parked in a yard in the San Miguel district.

After locating the refrigerator truck, agents of the Antinarcotics Directorate-
which is headed by PIP Gen Berly Baca V., made a thorough inspection. They were
surprised to find inside the refrigerator chamber a hollowed-out area covered with
six sheets of zinc. when those zinc sheets were removed, they found four inner tubes
tied toegether like sausages and containing a total of 86 kg of cocaine.

The owner of the truck, Edgar Martinez Romero, admitted it was the second time he
had hauled drugs. The first time was a year ago, when he transported 10 kg of PBC.
The second shipment was due to leave tomorrow in the refrigerator truck. This is

Drug Rehabiliation Program Costs
Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 27 Oct 81 p A-l8

[Text] Arequipa, 26 Oct-The rehabilitation of a drug addict requires an expenditure
of at least 6 million sols. Since the state does not have many beds for these
patients. parents who do not have such resources find themselves unable to have

their children rehabilitated. This was disclosed today at an antidrug conference

held here. In addition, medical spokesmen revealed that first stage "drug dependents"
have a possibility of being 50 percent rehabilitated; in the second stage they may
achieve 20 percent rehabilitation, but beyond that it is no longer possible to do
anything for them.

ammonia, chloride and other substances which penetrate the organism, destroy the
neive cells and, after causing the patient slowly to become incapacitated, leave
him brain-damaged.

It was revealed at the meeting that at this time marihuana is the most widely

distributed hallucinogen in Arequipa, followed by cocaine base and cocaine hydro-
chloride.

20
The drug pusher was termed a despicable element because of his responsibility for
recruitment and conversion to drug addiction of a youth which is called to contribute
to the development of the country.

In addition, Civil Guard Maj Hugo Vega nioja of the Second Sector Oumaiasary here
said that Peru currently produces 35,000 tons of coca leaves per year, of which
only 500 tons are exported. Ten thousand tons are consumed by the Indian tribes

of the mountain regions in their traditional "chacchar" ceremony, and the rest dis-
appears mysteriously, to be made into PBC or cocaine hydrochloride. The police
chief also said that the country's parents, educators and people in general have a
serious responsibility to protect our youth, who must be taught from an early age
about the dangers of drug use.

Trafficking Methods Uncovered
Lima EL COMERCZO in Spanish 25 Oct 81 p A—22

[Text] The natural suspicion and wisdom of members of the Investigative Police have
been making an impression on the ever more ingenious methods used by narcotics
traffickers or "carriers" to try to smuggle drugs out of the country, and as of
September nearly 3,000 kg of narcotics had been seized this year.

In this closed duel between the forces of order and organized crime--the majority
of foreigners being from Colombia—-the most varied rescurces have been used on both
sides, ranging from the use of pre-Columbian or apparent archeological artifacts

to innocent jars of baby powder.

There is no lack of bold cases in which carriers have attempted to transport the
drug, spread out perfectly flat, in a hit album, in the heels of shoes, in fire
extinguishers and even in tins of apparently juicy preserves.

These attempts have been successfully thwarted by the experience and thorough
knowledge of psychology of agents of the Directorate for Investigatio: of the Illegal
Drug Traffic, headed by PIP Gen Berly Baca Valdivia.

This has permitted the Police to develop a very fine and effective instinct, such
as when a Cuban national sporting a big "Afro" was pacing nervously about the
airport, and someone said that naybe he was a narcotics dealer. Indeed he was; he
was carrying the drug in his luxuriant, bouffant wig.

General Baca Valdivia said that policewomen play a very important role in detecting
drug traffic, since in many cases women have been arrested while carrying drugs in
their private parts or in false bosons.

"Generally,“ Baca Valdivia said, 'hnn and women fight hand in hand here against the
drug traffic, which in many cases has trickled down even to 12-year-old children,
who are used as carriers, as well as distributors, of the drugs." A curious piece
of data offered by General ﬂaca is that when these criminals have been captured,
very few times has there been any disloyalty or "whistle-blowing," since generally
they are great jokers or persons who want to cause trouble for others.

a

21
He said that among the problems most frequently encountered, generally, in their
work is lack of adequate resources, because the traffickers have fast automobiles,
planes and modern radio equipment, so they can change key frequently.

"For example, on the border with Colombia, in the midst of the jungle, we have to
move around pretty slowly compared with the extremely fast vehicles the narcotics
traffickers have," General Baca said.

Even so, that office has wade some good progress, and as of last September had
seized 2,491,779 kg of rv~ aine base, 33,996 kg of washed base, 75,463 kg of
cocaine hydrochloride an; - 336 kg of marihuana.

A.so included was .5 kg of hashish, seized from a group of foreigners who thought
they would pass it off as cocaine.

Baca Valdivia indicated that the DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration], the U.S.
agency in charge of fighting the drug traffic, helps them a great deal, sending
vehicles and equipment as well as specialized instructors.

"But we need planes, helicopters, modern radio equipment and more people. That

is urgent," General Baca Valdivia emphasized, as he spoke at the aforementioned PIP
offices in Pueblo Libre.

8735
C30: 5300/2083

22
BRIEFS

DRUG ARRESTs--According to a report by the PARS NEWS AGENCY, the personnel of
the antinarcotics strike group, dispatched from the Islamic Revolution
Guards Corps, in Tehran, yesterday evening clashed with armed smugglers

in the vicinity of Zahedan and managed to seize 220 kg of hashish, 2 kg of
heroin, and 1 handgun from these merchants of death. According to this
report, in the course of the clash tvo smugglers were arrested and another
wounded. One of the brothers of the antinarcotiea strike group also received
the lofty honor of martyrdom. [Text] [LD190512 Tehran Domestic Service in
Persian 1630 GKI‘ 18 Dec 81 LD]

"553153 HAlum-According to a report by the Central News Unit. the public
relations department of the Islamic revolution antinarcotics public prosecutor's
office announced that the personnel of the central antinarcotics headquarters
managed to arrest two smugglers and. seize 101 kg of hashish. [Text] [Tehran
Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 19 Dec 81 Lb]

SHIRAZ DRUG ARREST--The Shiraz Islamic Revolution Guards Corps have arrested
a number of people for possession and distribution of 43 grams to 12 kg of
heroin and opium. [017251920 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 cm

21. Dec 81 GP] .

DRUGS DISOOVERED——The gendnrmerie of the Islamic Republic of Iran announced that
the gendarnerie officials of Sistan and Baluchestan, Khash. Loresten and
Karmanshah have discovered more than 145 kg of heroin, opium and hashish during
the past few days. [Text] [1.0260312 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian

0730 GMT 25 Dec 81 L0]

23
SHIRAZ DRUG SEIZURE-Officials of the antidrug department of the Shiraz Islamic
Revolution Guard Corps have discovered and confiscated 20 kg of opium juice

from a person with a criminal record. The trafficker was arrested and delivered

to court. [Text] [617221704 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 22 Dec 81 GP]

MASHHAD DRUG DISCOVERIES--According to a report by the Mashhad police public
relations department, 31 grams of heroin was discovered at a house yesterday

in Mashhad by the antidrug squad. The owner was delivered to court. The
Bojnurd police squad confiscated 22 grams of heroin from two persons. In
addition Shirvan police personnel discovered 35 grams of heroin on a person.
[GF231864 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 23 Dec 81 GP]

{AIDS IN ZAHEDAN, TEHRANnShemiran, KEYHAN Correspondent. Thanks to the day-and-
Iight efforts last week of the brothers of the Central Antinarcotics Headquarters,
126.5 kilograms of narcotics were discovered. In an interview with the KEYEAN
:orrespondent, an official spokesman of the Central Antinarcotics Headquarters
stated: "Pursuant to the day-and-night efforts and persistence of the brothers

3f the Central Antinarcotics Headquarters last week, 326.5 kilograms of narcotics
were confiscated from smugglers of dangerous drugs, as follows: "In an armed
clash which took place in the Zahedan area between brothers of the Operations
Headquarters and five narcotics snugglers, two persons named Murbakhsh and Hazanzahi
as well as a wounded smuggler named Sohrab were arrested, but two got away.
Efforts to arrest them are continuing. 0f the said amount, 150 kilograms of
hashish was discovered and, as a result, two other smugglers named Abdollah Khademi
and Emirollah Khadeal were arrested. and 105 kilogram of hashish were seized

from them." A spokesman of the Antinarcotics Prosecutor's Office added: "The
brothers of the Operations Headquarters in Tehran arrested a person named Azizollah
Mosibi, and 28 kilograms of opium, four sundry weapons, one bandgrenade, 200 sundry
cartridges were seized." He added: "Brothers of the Central Antinarcotics Bead-
quarters have arrested four heroin smugglers in Tehran, and they confiscated 3.5
kilograms of heroin from them. As a result of the efforts of the brothers of the
Central Operations Headquarters in Tehran, more than 50 kilograms of various
narcotics were discovered and, in this connection, several bands of smgglers were
arrested. After preparation of police records and photographs, they were turned
over to the Central Antinarcotica Prosecutor's Office. [Text] [Tehran KEYMAN

in Persian 20 Dec 81 p 1]

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED-Aha central news unit reports that the Mashhad antidrug
squad seized 420 kg of opium, 2.5 million tomana 1:: cash and 5 vehicles from a
big gang of traffickers in Sabzevar. One man was arrested and three more are
fugitives. This gang was engaged in smuggling from Pakistan via Zahedan to the
southern parts of Khorasan. [Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 11030 M

23 Dec 81 GP]

AFCHAN DRUG SMUMIJNG-Jl‘he Torbat Heydariyeh police squad reports that 17 bags
of Afghan opium have been discovered in a border village. The bags weighed
115 kg. A person in this connection was arrested and delivered to court.
[Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 23 Dec 81 GP]

()PIUM OUNI-‘ISCATElF-Some 1020 kilograms of opium, 2.5 million tomans and five
vehicles were confiscated from smugglers, by the anti-narcotics officers in
Mashhad. Also, 162 kilograms of opium were confiscated and seven smugglers
were arrested by the anti-narcotics team in Khorramabad. [LDZIoO600 Tehran
Domestic Service in Persian 1030 GMT 23 Dec 81 LD]

24
OPIUM HAUL IN KHORASAN--Shomiran, KEYHAN Correspondent--Through the efforts of
officials of the Antinarcotics Headquarters of Khorssan during the last 2-month
period, 168 kilograms of opium, 20 kilograms of heroin, 18 kilograms of gold bars,
and 35 weapons were discovered, and a number of smugglers were arrested. In a
short talk with the KEYHAN correspondent, a spokesman of the Central Antinarcotics
Headquarters said: "Through the efforts and persistence of the brothers of the
Antinarcotics headquarters of Mashhad during the last 2-month period, 168.462
kilograms of opium and 20.7 kilograms of heroin were discovered". He added:
'mlso, in pursuing this effort, these brothers found 18 kilograms of gold bars,
and in other cities of Khorasan found 35 sundry weapons and a supply of aanuni-
tion". In this connection, a number of narcotics smugglers were found, arrested,
and turned over to the Prosecutor's Office of the Islamic Republic in Mashhad,
and the said contraband items were turned over to the central headquarters. In
this connection, the spokesman requested the people of Khorsan, in the interest
of the good order of the Islamic Republic, to report any information they might
have about narcotics smugglers and salesmen to telephone number 83000 of the
Khorasan headquarters". In conclusion, he added that the brothers of the Anti-
narcotics Headquarters of the township of Ardabil found fifteen 6-3 rifles and
Colt pistols plus a supply of ammunition along with the culprits, all of which
were turned over to the Prosecutor's Office of the Islamic Republic in Ardsbil.
[Text] [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 8 Dec 81 p 14]

C80: 5300/5338

25
BRIEFS

OMANI SOLDIER ARRESTED--An Omani soldier was jailed for six months. fined Dh 1,000
and ordered to be deported by the Dubai court yesterday for possessing drugs.

Shah Shanbi Dhuh Shambi. 30, was arrested by the police on 15 December for pos-
sessing 40 grammes of opium. The man pleaded guilty. The president judge also

said that the man would serve jail term for another month if he failed to pay the
fine. [Text] [GP231905 Dubayy KHALBEJ TIMES in English 23 Dec 8L p 3 GF]

CSO: 5300

26
POLICE BREAK UP CMD‘E SMUGGLIKE RING

Johannesburg TEE crrrzw in English 15 Dec 81 p 2

”22 Arrested in Cocaine lung Breakthrough”

[Article by Sandra Liobenn:

WWWWWWW. WW .
..W.WWWWWW .WW.WW..WW..WWW
3. W5. .13....
MWWWWW. .WWWW. WWW WWWWW. WWWWWWWW
..WW..W WWW. ... WW.“ W..W.WW.
..._... ..WW.WWWW. WWW.
WWW... .. W... W...
...W ...W.W.W.W ...WWW...W

[Text ]

... .. W.
.WW.. .

WWWW.,WW
.WW .WWWWHWW
WWW WW.W

..W .WW...W.

..W.W WW._W.WW

3.... .WWW. WWWWMWWW

27
m

Id.»

W: mm
mmmum m mm m

mmwmmmmwwmmm mm

28
BRIEFS

HASHISH IN VORARLBERG--Hith the aid of narcotics dogs, police discovered 70 kilos
of cannabis in a wood near Langenegg, Vorariberg on Saturday. The hashish. worth
about 2 million schillings. had been smuggled from Turkey to Vorarlberg last

summer by 28—year-old Halter Plat: of Dornbirn, who has now been arrested,

together with a Turkish citizen who is at present being detained by Swiss

police. In this connection, Austrian police also arrested 23-year—old Klaus Boesch
an editor of NEUE VORARLBERGER TACESZEITUNG, as a dealer. [AU291520 Vienna

WIENER ZEITUNC in German 24 Nov 81 p 6 AU]

NARCDTICS SQUAD--Since its establishment in June. the new narcotics squad of
the Austrian police has been very successful: it has seized 17 kilos of heroin
and smashed numerous dealer and drug addict rings. In addition to training new
squad members, Austrian police have launched a special information program for
the entire police force to raise police efficiency in combating drug abuse.
[Vienna DIE PRESSE in German 24 Nov 81 p 12 AU]

CSO: 5300/2105

29
BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZURE--The largest drug haul of the year took place 24 hours ago at
Roissy airport where the drug squad arrested nine Chinese from Hong Kong
carrying 10 kilos of uncut heroin in their suitcases. [LDZ70840 Paris
Domestic Service in French 0800 GMT 27 Dec 81 Lb]

HEROIN TRAPPICKERS ARRESTED--Paris, 27 Dec (APP)--Police smashed a "Chinese
connection" gang on Christmas Day with the arrests of nine Chinese trying

to sell 10 kilos (22 lbs) of heroin from Bangkok. Last month French police
arrested three Chinese in possession of three kilos (six-and-a-half pounds)
of heroin. and learned that a major consignment of the drug was enroute here.
Police followed the heroin from Bangkok to Copenhagen to Nice, southern France,
where four members of the Chinese gang arrived by air. The fOur then drove
by car to Paris. where they were arrested on Christmas Day. Their heroin
was 95 percent pure. The police named the alleged leader of the "Chinese
connection" as Tak Sut, who was arrested with the others. [Text] [NC270914
Paris APP in English 0807 GMT 27 Dec 81]

C80: 3300/2108

30
in front or his house. lie adutted that he had lied Kuneme with heehieh
but refused to news]. he source of supply. ﬂoat; Wu
cz-eokz'ruovslpg? 7520

Iranian Huhanet Smibur, 146, who was arrested at the Greek bowel-«following a
warning by Interpol-wand who 19 being held at the Korydanoe prison. The Heat
Gen-an authorities want. to try bin on charge: of being a meter of a dru
snuggling ring which snuggled 25 tone of haehieh from Iran to Europe. [fut]
[Ithene I KATMIEMNI in Greek 25 Nov 81 p g 7520

31
BRIEFS
HEROIN SE]ZURE—-Fuur kg with a retail market value of over 4 billion lira have
been seized by customs guards at Linate airport in Milan. Two Syrian nationals

who were trying to smuggle the drug into Italy were arrested. [Text] “32904142
Rome Domestic Service In Italian: 1630 GMT 28 Dec 8] LD]

(:80: 5 300/21 10

32
BRIEFS

HASHISH ON LBBANESE FREIGHTER--Rotterdam, 5 Dec (APP)--Police and customauen
today unloaded the last of a huge smuggled cargo of hashiah found aboard the ,
Lebanese freighter Sam! here yesterday. The total quantity of the drug on board
the Saul. registered in the Lebanese port of Tripoli, was 2,500 kilos (about
5,500 pounds weight). police said. They put its retail value at about

10 million florins (4 million dollars). The hashiah, in tins. cartons, sacks
and packets, was hidden under n false floor. among other places. and in
impermeable bags in the ship's fuel and water tanks. Four members of the crew,
three Lebanese and a Sudanese. have been arrested. Police were continuing
their inquiries and did not rule out further arrests. [Text] [NCOSIAla

Paris APP in English 1323 GMT 5 Dec 81]

Cﬁ): 5300/2105

33
BRIEFS

MURDER OF PRINCIPAL HITNESS--Lagos. December 9--A principal witness in the case
of a large quantity of Indian hemp discovered in diplomatic bags in the
Nigerian High Commission (Embassy) in London has been murdered, according to

a Nigerian Government statement. The statement, issued yesterday by the
President's Office, said the witness. whose name was not disclosed, was killed
in his London flat last Saturday: The murder "suggested that an international
syndicate might be behind the episode." the statement said. adding that
investigations had revealed that the hemp was smuggled in bags normally

used for sending Nigerian newspapers to overseas missions. (APP) [Text]

[Paris AFRICA AP? in English No 2853, 11 Dec 81 p 15]

C80: 5300/2111 END

34