FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOGSG,
1“ JULY 1982
Translation
ANALOG AND DIGXTAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
BY

SERGEY Vxxronovrcn YAKUBOVSKIY ET AL.

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Jns publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from neus agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-languge
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornmtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion art: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes vithin the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within iteas are as

given by source .

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGI‘I' LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TﬂA'l‘ DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PURICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
ANALOG AND DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Moscow ANALOGOVYYE I TSIPMVYYE INTEGRAL'NYYB 3m in Russian
1979 (signed to press 5 Apr 79) pp 1-335

[Book by Sergey Viktorovich Yakubovakiy, Nikolay Arsen'yevich
Barkanov, Boris Petrovich Kudryashov, Lev Ionovich Niuel'son.
Mikhail Kikiforovich Topeshkin and Lyubov' Petrovna Chebotareva,
Izdatel'stvo 'Sovetskoye Radio", 68,000 copies, 336 pages, UDC
621,396]

Comems

Forewrdoooootooanotooo00.0do.cocoon00.0.00oovoocoqooooodooa00......o 1

Gupta! 1: 'narninology in microelectronics and Glacification

of Integrated arcuitn................................... S

1.1. Introduction.................................................... 5
1.2.1. Integrated Mcmcircuita, mutants, Oomonenu........... 6
1.2.2. Design Blennta......................................... 6
1.2.3. Siwle and couple: 1c 7
1.2.4. Microuseﬁlieo and Hicromito........................... 8

1.3. 1c auaiiicddon................................................ 9
1.4. System of (buditional IC Migntiono............................ 10
chapter 2: Methods of Fabricating Integrated c1:mu................. 18
2.1. Film and Hybrid “udmolog....................................... 18
2.1.1. Haterials for Hybrid 10's..............................-. 19

2.1.2. ‘lhe tabulation of the Haunt. of lybrid Ic':........... 21

-a- [I-DSSR-P-POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.2.

2.3.

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

2.1.3. Hiking Electrical (banectiona in Hybrid lc'a.............

seucmdutor “analoguecoca-aceaaoaaaaeoaaeaaaaaooaaoaooaaaaaa

2.2.1. Materials for the ancients of Seaioonductor Ic'a
‘ and ‘lheir mnnfacture....................................

2.2.2. ‘lhe Fabrication of Integrated Circuit Structures.........
2.2.3. Separating a Wafer Into Clips and lbmting the Ic'a......
2.2.6. 1118 Heretic Sealing of 1c Glipa.........................
2.2.5. me hufacture of 1c Package...........................

Specific Features of the “Ethnoloy of 10': With a Hiﬂl
“‘1 of hu‘rauonOCOCOOOJDOQCO0.0000000000QOOOOQOOOOOIDOOOD...

Chapter 3: Digital Integrated Circuits................................

3.1.
3.2.
3.3.

3.10.

3050

3.6.

n.1mum .nd ”pnadon'OOOCCIOVOOCCOCCCOCOCO00.000.000.00...
Logic Functions Which Can Be halized thing Digital IC'a.........

'lhe Classification of Digital Integrated Circuits and ‘Iheir
mu Electﬂcu P‘mur’DOOC0.0.00CIO-OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOODO

Transistor-Transistor Logic Circuits........._....................

3.4.1. ‘nne Major Electrical Para-stars of 1'11. Integrated

mtcutsta-oaeaoaaaaaoaano.coo...oaaooaoooaaaaaaa-aaaaaaa

3.4.2. 111a Functional Cowlelent of the 111. Series..............

3.4.3. Son: Specific Paaturaa of 111. Integrated Circuit
ApplladomlCIC.IOCOOVOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOO00......0.00.0.0

Emitter (bupled Transistor logic Glrcuita........................
3.5.1. Fractional (blpoaition of the 3811. Series................

3.5.2. Basic Electrical Parantera and Mical (haracteriatia
of Ic ”pa ESTLCOIIOOIOO0.0.0.0...OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

3.5.3. Certain Special haturaa in the Uae of 1c '1pr 381......
nigital Inmgrated Circuits lined on 108 Structures..............

3.6.1. 1he Operational Principle of Integrated Circuits
thins p-mmml m TrmsistomlOOOOCOO0.000.00.00.00...

”WWW!”

21.

210

26

1‘3

72

102

115

115
3.7.

3.8.

3.9.

3.10.

30602. static (1121211128 hing p-alml u Ttmhtomono...o...
3.6.3. Quasiatatic and lune-it Circuits..........................

3.6.1.. ‘lhe Operational Principle of Cowlenntary ms
hmi‘wr 13““qu armtaoiltOOOOOQOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOCO

3.6.5. 'lhe Hajor Series of Integrated Circuits thing ms

stmtum‘eoteeaeeaeoo00000000v0.0.0.0oceaoeaoooncooooooeo

Integrated Circuits for Dundee..................................
3.7.1. booty Henna thing ﬁipolar 8tructnree..................
3.7.2. Phlory Blennta [hing H38 Structures......................
3.7.3. Henry Blemte Using one Transistors...”...............
3.7.4. Storege Blemtn Bqnoying HRS Structures................

3.7.5. Storage Bleants Based on "Silicon on Sapphire"

stmcturesaeoooenoeoeaone...noan...eeaaoeoaooh-Ooaooeeeeae

3.7.6. Storage Elements Based on New Hennriele...................

3.7.7. Major Series of tenor, 1111: Integrated Glrcuita and
heir Functional Structum................................

Prospects for the Development of nlgitel Integrated Circuits......
3.8.1. Integrated Injection 1049...............................
3.8.2. KS Circuits With n-(hannels..............................
Microcalculetom..................................................
Microprocessors...................-................................
3.10.1. (heracterietim of a Microprocessor“....................
3.10.2. lbdiun Operating Speed mcmproceaaor mnﬂgur’etim. .....

3.10.3. Improved Operating Speed Memprocuaor Configuration....

0'18th! 4: “13108 Integrated “twin-u...u......o............ooouo.

4.1.
4.2.

Function and Application..........................................

Operlt10llﬁl mlifienetoe-aooeeao00.000.000.00...otoaoeoeaeaaoooa

”WWMY

122

125

128

137

1100

161
162

1/05

165

167

151
152

158

163
169
218
218

218
4.3.
4.4.
4.5.

4.6.

4.7.

4.8.

4.2.1.

4.2.2.
4.2.3

4.2.4.
4.2.5.
4.2.6.

FOR OFFICIAL WE 0111.!

Operational ”linen um. a Ibo Stage Structural
“at“.tmnt000.000.00.000.0000...OOOOJOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOO

Amplifiers With Field Effect Transistors at the Input......
Amufiera Rich Super-Beta kmieuora.....................
‘me 153nm Hid: Precision Operational Aqlifier............
Ilia: Speed Operational Alplifiare..........................

Hicropower weretional Mlifieren........................

Inmmtﬂd utmt‘mn‘r‘mnoo-oooooeoaooocoooo-oeoooo00000000...

mu‘mted “rent “‘10; mdpuemoaooooonoaooooooaooaaelooaoooa

Analog Integrated Circuit- for Radio kceiving ﬁqdpmnt...........

4.5.1.
4.5.2.
4.5.3.
4.5.4.

n. mffemtm mnﬂ.rOCOOOOOOOOIOOOOQOOOOCOOQOOCOOOOCO
lav Frequency hpnfiera (1801)............................
Specialized Integrated Circuits............................

10's for the Construction of Selective c1:«:ua............

Integrated Circuita for halos to nigital and Dlsital to
hm: mt“ “amnion...OOOOOOOOCOOOOCU...OOOIODOQIOOOOOOOIOOOODOI

halo“ sﬂtches...cocoalooeoaoooooonoaooaoaoaoeeoaaoaoaoeoooooooooo

Integrated Circuit Voltage Regulators..............................

(hapter 5:

5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
. 5.4.
5.5.
5.6.
5 7.

Providing Reliability of 1c [Integraoed Circuits]
in the Production and Aesebly loparatm...........~..........

help-Technological Prindplea of Hid-A Reliabinty................

water-10nd anty mnt°:10000000..it...IOOOIOOOOOOOIO0.0.3.600...

Bjﬁcdon u‘t‘oeooooo0000.000noonto...do.0.0000000...aooeooooooeoa

Effect of External Factor: on Apparatm Production.................

For-ins and Trialling hedouta......................................

M1118 lid solhdnSQQooh...coo.aoooI...aooocoooocoooooo0000.00.00

IC Moelbly on Printed Circuit Boards..............................

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL IBE (NIX

225
233
234
239
240
242
246
250
263
263
265
270
274

2 76
291
296

312
312
314
314
323
325
331
341
5.8. 1c Protecdon Against Electrical Effects........................... 3‘5

509. m.mu1naoono...0.000....00000.00000.00000.00000000.000.009.00... 352

T013 0f “cacao.nonocoo-0.00.00.00.00.000.000.00.00.000.000.000.000... 35b

Immunity
[Text] The products list of the basic series of analog and digital
integrated circuits produced by tha electronics industry is surveyed;
Methods of their fabrication, parameters and characteristics, as well
as the Operational principles of the basic components are treated.

The developmental trends in logic circuits are indicated. basic data
is given for microprocessors as well as the specific features of their
applications. Factors which influence 1c reliability are covered, the
specific features of 10 application in the design of radioelectronic
equipment are described and reconnendations are Iade concerning the
prevention of 1c failures with exposure to various external loads as

well as during production process operations.

The book will prove to be useful to engineers working in the field of
radioelectronic equipment design and those interested in questions of
stlecting the Ic component base and specific features of 1c applications
as well as for students in the appropriate specialties.

The book contains 73 tables, 186 illustrations and 64 bibliographic
citations.

Foreword

In the main trends of national econonic development for 1976 - 1980, set by the

25th CPSU Congress, among the najor ways of improving production efficiency it calls
for a ”decisive improve-eat in the quality of all kinds of products which are pro-
duced, an expansion of the assortment. an increase in the production of new kinds

of products which meet nodern requirements" [1]. It is impossible to solve this
problem without the further development of electronics, which provides not only

for the creation of complex sutometed controls systems for production processes

in the most diverse sectors of the national scone-y, but also for the development

- 1 -
FOI:OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of fundamentally new products for mass consunption. The expansion of the area
of applications of electrrnics devices is one of the specific features of scienti-
f ic and engineering progress at the present stage.

The development of electronics, starting in the 1960's, was related to the appear-
ance and rapid improvement of integrated circuits (Ic's). Integrated circuits
make it possible to design modern comlex electronic devices with sizes and weights
acceptable in practice, as well as guarantee their high reliability. Integrated
circuits have found the most widescale applications in the design of digital

equipment .

The properties and characteristics of 10's are determining to an increasingly
greater extent the technical characteristics of computers. Modern digital inte-
grated circuits are complex products which realize the functions of entire blocks
and assemblies of computers. It is specifically this which is responsible for the
appearance of a completely new field in electronics: microprocessing design.

While digital Ic's were the basis for the design of third generation computers,
the production mastery of microprocessors, which are 10's with increased functional
complexity and universality, makes it possible to process digital signals in a
new way and thus anticipate the widescale introduction of digital data processing
techniques in the most diverse fields of engineering (even in those where the
application of electronics had previously not had a substantial impact). Fourth
generation computers are being designed around microprocessor sets (4 to 5
individual packages).

Three stages may be conditionally singled out in the development of digital 1c
technology and circuit design. The first was the development of the basic series
of integrated circuits which execute simple logic functions (RAND, NOR, AND-OR-NOT,
etc., where, as a rule, the complement of each series contained flip-flops). At
this stage, Ic's were designed with from 10 to 50 components.

The second stage was the development of more complex functionally complete units
(counters, registers, decoders, half-adders, etc.) having from 50 to 500 compo-
nents. The functional complement of the previously developed series is being
constantly expanded by virtue of such new circuits.

The third stage is the development complex functional devices having an inte-
gration level of from 500 to 10,000 components on a single chip. This stage
arrived at the start of the 10th Five-Year Plan. Pocket engineering calculators
with broad capabilities for performing calculations based on preprogramming for
the problem to be solved were designed using third stage circuits.

In the process of the development of digital integrated circuit electronics,
unipolar 10's with HOS structures were developed and found wide application along
with bipolar circuits: p and n-type. complementary (CHOS), HOS with nitride
insulation (HNOS) and some others. 'It is specifically the digital circuits with
HOS structures which made it possible to bring the number of elements on a chip
up to 10,000 and to design such complex circuits as main memories (020) having a
large data volupe, as well as random access ammory circuits and memories with
long term storage of data when the power supply is turned off.

- 2 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Experience with the applications of the entire diversity of technological
pproaches to IC fabrication, developed during the last 10 years, has confirmed
the convenience of the application and good technical characteristics of bipolar
TTL and ECL circuits, as well as circuits with HOS structures. Both the Unified
System of Electronic Computers (Yes EVE), created through the joint efforts of
CEHA member nations, and the broad family of small computers and calculators
(from the simplest school calculators with four arithmetic operations, up to uni-
versal programmable calculators which can be used in scientific research) have
been built on the basis of these circuits.

The past decade also gave equipment designers a new analog component base: a
large assortment of universal operational amplifiers, comparators, analog-digital
and digital-analog converters, voltage regulators, switchers, as well as a set of
low, intermediate and high frequency amplifiers. The application of analog Ic's
has made it possible to simplify the adjustment of instruments, increase their
reliability and precision, and in many cases also eliminate the nececcisty of
servicing. '

In recent years, the design of equipment using unpackaged 16's, with overall
hermetic sealing in modules, has become an independent direction. Such an
approach makes it possible to obtain a high component density and significantly
reduce the size and weight of special equipment. -

The domestic electronics industry produces a large products list of modern
digital and analog integrated circuits, which has become the main component base
for modern radio electronics equipment (REA) for industrial purposes.

The price which must be paid for high radio electronic equipment reliability is
the correction application of integrated circuits and the observance of their
operational modes; violation of these conditions because of inadequate knowledge
of the technical properties, electrical paramaters and operating modes is also
the most frequent cause of failures.

The goal of this book is to provide basic technical characteristics of digital

and analog integrated circuits, set forth the methods_of manufacturing them and
the functional complement of a series, as well as devote attention to the specific
features of 1c applications in‘the development of radio electronic equipment

and make recounmndations for the assurance of integrated circuit reliability in
their production and installation in equipment.

The material presented in the book is based on the results of generalizing the
experience with the development and applications of integrated circuits.

The collective of authors expresses their deep gratitude to doctor of the tech-
nical sciences, professor B.F. Vysotskiy, candidate of mathematical physics,
5.“. Fayzulayev, candidates of the technical sciences Ye.I. Gal'perin, G.A.
Podol'skiy, v.1. Kotikov, as well as V.L. Shilo, who took an active part in
discussing the contents and structure of the book and rude a number of valuable
comments concerning the material content and its layout. The authors are also
grateful to V.N. Bulanovaandv.a. Ushibyshev for rendering assistance in the
preparation and formsting of the manuscript.

- 3 -
FIHICHHHCIAL USIICMHLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors ask that e11 remarks and proposals on inproving the book be directed

to the following addreu: Hoecov, 101000, Main Poet Office, 30: 693, Izdatel'otvo
”Sovetakoye Radio".

The authors

-1...
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
[Text] Chapter 1
Terminology in ucsoeleotrmics end clusiﬂcstion or integrated circuits
isle Intranetlm

Microelectronics is s developing field of electrmios Bseioslly. it is the creation
of an integrated elenent base used to develop ems-stun. The tern integrated elec-
tronics contines the ”sis-ant." es well as the ”smatus" nimeloottonios. law

In our country. the first sttesyts to regulsrise ter- end definitions were sttenpted
in 196? when s non “Intact-std limoimits. Tet-isobar" was issued. The leek
of status or this documt us it ilposeible to recon-end it as cometary. In
connection with the coneidmble expansion or the use 0: intent“ circuits. the
necessity arose of s seven-ant OW on teninologioel questions in the field

of nicroeleotronice which use developed on the besie or the sbove-Ientioned now:-

and the wax publiostion and. in 1971. it as spmved by the m Goestendsrtéj].
GIST 17021-71 included 16 ten snd slang with genes-.1 tern such no intent
nicrocircuit. seniconductorintermted limit-suit. there were else 317:: single-
valued definitions for psrts of intesrsted. circuits (tos- We. substrste. hous-

FOI OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Terms whose definitions were given in the above-nentioned 661‘ were widely used

in technical docunents. However. the development of microelectronic means. the
increase in the wiring density and in the nunber of elenents on me chip hnd al-
ready led. in 1973. to the necessity of reworking this 681‘ for the purpose of

correcting it and introduc new terns. In 1975. this work was completed by the
approval of 613T 17021-75 bi.

Below are given the term as per 661‘ 17021-75. their definitions and the synonyms
of these terms which are widely used in productiai and in tecl'tnioal literature.

1.2.1. Integrated Hicrocircuits. melents. Colponents

An integrated circuit (1c) _is a aicroeiectronic article that fulfills a certain
function of converting and process sipsls and has a high packing density of
the electrically connected elenents or elements and conponents) and chips. This
article is considered a single whole iron the standpoint of the require-ants of
tests. acceptance. delivery and operation.

In abbreviated form. integrated microcirouits are called D6. The synonyn of an
integrated microcircuit is the tern integrated circuit or. still sispler. aicro-
circuit. or all the indicated terse. integrated circuit (1c) is .the most x‘re-
quently used. It has two subordinate terms, whose description is given by the
above-mentioned SGT. These are concepts of an element of an integrated circuit
(or simply element) and component of an integrated circuit (or sinply comment).

An element of an integrated circuit scene the part of the 10 that realises the
function of cone simple electroradio element (for exaImle, transistor. diode,
resistor. capacitor). This part is inseparable iron the IC chip (or its substrate).
The element cannot be separated fro. the 10 as an independent article; therefore.
it cannot be tested. packed and operated. Brasples of integrated elements are:

a film resistor in a hybrid N and an integrated transistor in an 1c semconductor.

An integrated circuit component also means a part of an Ic that realises the
function of acne electroradio elelsnt. However, before assenbly this part was an

independent article in special packing (complenenting article). In principle. a
component may be separated from a Innufactured 1c. Basples of integrated cospo-
nents are: a transistor without a housing or a ceramic capacitor in a hybrid 16.

1.2.2. Design Elenents

In developing tectmical documentation for It: or in preparing descriptions of IC
design. writers of the indicated docunents lust frequently use such terms as
housing. substrate. board. wafer. chip. as well as some special terns that deter-
nine special features of the internal structure of the IC.

The 10 housing is the part of the to structure intended to protect it from exter-
nal effects and to connect it to external electrical circuits by leadouts (1c are
packed in the housing). The types and sizes of the housings are also subject to
government standardisation (see 681‘ 1M7-79 [10).

. - 5 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Ic substrate is an intermediate product intended for elenents of ”bid-had

file 10. interelesent and (or) intercosponent connections. as well as contact
pads to be applied to it. I

The Ic board is part of the substrate (or the entire substrate) or the hybrid (or
frequently film) integrated circuit. to whose surface the file elesents of the IG.

the interelenent and interccnponent connections and contact pads are applied.

The seeiccnductcr wafer is an internediste product of eeniconductor uterial
(usually it is a round thin disk) used to lake It! eeuconductm. It should be
noted that in 10 production this tern is need not only for the initial inter-
mediate product. but also for a plate with eleaente of seuccnductor eiorccircuits
for-ed on it (therefore. this tern is used during the entire teclnological process

frcn its beginning t‘o the cutting or the group article into individual chips).

1c chips are the parts of the wafer obtained after it is cut (usually they for: a
network in the shape of equal rectangles). in the vclune and on the surface of
which are formed ale-ants of the sesiconductor niorccimuit. interelenent connec-
tions and contact pads.

A contact pad, present in any IO. no utter Idiat its technological or functional
features are. is a netsllieed pad on the plate or on the chip intatded to connect
contact lesdouts and integrated circuits. as well as to nonitor its electrical
pamneters and nodes.

An integrated circuit without a housing is a tern which recently acquired great
isportance because such circuits are used widely in nicroeeeeeblies and Iiorocir-
cuits. Hhile in the usual IO the housing serves to protect againet external ef-
facts, the 10 without a housing has no such protection or its own (at least. iron
mechanical effects). Fur connection to external electrical circuits. an IC with-
out a housing met have its own leadcuts and its full protection is provided by
the housing of the device in which this IO is installed.

The leadout of an 10 without a housing is a conductor connected electrically to
the contact pad of the chip and nechanioally to its surface. The sin purpose
of the leadcut is to provide an electrical contact to one of the circuits of the
IC Without a housing when it is connected to external electrical circuits. Lead-
outs of the Ic without a housing carry a considerable part of the heat. Leadcuts
of Ic without a housing may be hard (rcimd. columnar cr bean-shaped). Hard
leadouts may be used for mechanical fastening of an 10 without a housing, without

1.2.3. Sisple and Coupler 10

Until recently there was no decisive concept of the cceplerity of integrated ciz~
cuits in literature. either abroad or doseetically. when defining the tern
"large-scale integrated circuits” (BIS), an attespt was ends to use. as the basis.
the quantitative factor as well as the factor of the functional ccnlexity of the
nicrocircuit. In the-first case. suggestions were nde to define the 318 as a

circuit containing 50. 100 or 10,000 circuit elenents. For angle. to deﬁne

- 7 ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR Ol-‘FK‘IAI. "SI-Z ONLY

a "large digital circuit“ an attenpt was node to use an elenentary digital

switch as a counting unit. In this case. it was considered that a ”large“ cir-
cuit nust have no less than 100 digital switches. concepts of ”null," "nedius"
and “large“ scale integration began to penetrate donestic leteratm fro: abroad.
However. deprived of nunerical definitions. these cmcepts in each individual
case. expressed only the subjective concepts of the author. In the seventies.
following this tradition. in scientific literature. the term "very large in-
tegrated circuit.” 'superlarge integrated circuit“ and even 'ccloeeal integrated
circuit“ appear.

Supporters of defining 313.depending upon its functional coaplerity. proposed
dividing the circuits into four integratim levels: elenentarr. circuit. subsys-
tes level and finally. systen level.

The study of all the proposals led to the idea that a quantitative factor not

be used as a basis for a definition that defines precisely the quantity of the
elesents in the aicrocircuit chip or housing. cm 17021575 defined the tern.
"degree of integ-aticn of the intea'ated circuit." as an indicator of the degree
of coaplexity of the 10. characterised by the nuaber of elessnts and components.
The degree of integration is defined here by formula kid. where K is the coef-
ficient defining the degree of autonticn. rounded to the nearest largest integer,
uhile N is the nuaber of elenents and conponents in the 1c. In accordance with
this formula. an integrated circuit of the first degree of integration is called
an 10 containing up to 10 elongate and comments inclusive. In. 7.0 of the second
degree of integration contains fro: ii to 100 elenents and coaponmts inclusive
correspondingly. 10 with 101 to 1000 elenents and coaponmts inclusive should be
called Ic of the third degree of integration. Siailsrly 10 with elenente fron
1001 to 10,000 or iron 10.001 to 100,000 are 10 of the fourth and fifth degrees
of integration. ' _

When designing electronic apparatus and selecting the elenents. the so-called
packing density of the eleaents in the integrated circuit is of great importance.
By packing density is aeant the ratio of the nunber of elesents and coapouents of
the integrated circuit to its volune (without taking into account the volune of
the leedouts).

1.2.1}. hicrcasseablies and hicrounits

GGT 17021-75. besides using term with a direct relation to integrated circuits
gives. in the fcrs of reference nterisl. a whole series of tar. related to tae
field of application of IO. Such terns belong to the concept of aicroelectronics.
Here it is defined as the field of electronics that spans the problem of research.
design. manufacturing and the use of aicroelectronio products with a aioroelectron-
ic product leaning an electronic device with a high degree of integration.

The tern ”aicrcaeseably” has several synonyas used in technical literature and
docunentation. but the definition of this tern was not always given clearly.
Thus, for example. before 1975 "noroassubly' neant a sicrocircuit consisting
of various elenents and integrated circuits. The synonylsfor aicroasseably my

th terns used in literature such as: hibr integrated functional unit
61511;. large integrated functional unit (3 EYE

'a large hybrid integrated circuit
3618 and a hybrid large integrated circuit 13).

- a -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GCBT 17021-75 defined the sicroassenbly tern as a moroelectronic article that'-

fulfills a certain mnction and consists of elensnts. conponente and integrated
circuits (with and without housings). as well as other electroradio elensnts. in
various combinations, developed and mufactursd by developers of concrete radio-

electronic apparatus for improving its niniaturisation indicators. The GIST does
not define a sicroassenbly as an article with or without a housing, i.e.. a lion-

assenbly may or say not have its on housing. Thus.a nicroessesbly is not classi-
fied by the GCBT by its conplsxity.

A nicrounit is a Moroelectronio article which, besides sicro-
assenblies. may contain intemted circuits and commute. Finally. the
miniaturization level tern of a nicroelectronic article oharacterises the quanti-
tative measure of the effect of using the totality of technical solutions, directed
to the full utilisation of the advantages obtained fron the reduction in volune.
weiyzt and power used by the apparatus.

Indicators of the an [Indie-electronic apparatus] unistm'intim level are:
REA nesting the nodern teclmical standard of nicroelectrcnio articles; other
articles used in REA nesting the nodern level of niniaturieation: efficiency of
conprehensive niniaturisation of apparatus; technical conpatibility of "uninte-
grated" articles of electronic equipment. and electric equipnent with integrated
circuits.

3 .3. Ic Classification

Depending upon the mufacturing tectmology. integrated circuits my be seni-
conduotor, file or hybrid. ocs'r 17021-75 Elves the following definitions for
these three varieties of 16.

A seniconductor integrated circuit is called an 1c all of whose elenents and inter-
elenent connections are ads .in the volune and m the surfaced the seniconduotor.

The seniconductor integrated circuit may also be called a senioonductor nicro-
circuit.

Sonatines the senioonductor integrated circuit is called a "solid" (or solid-body)

circuit. This tern found its way into doneetic literature due to unqualified
translations iron the mglishﬁ cm 17021-75 defines this tern as insdniesible.

filn integrated circuit (or :11- circuit) whose elenents and interelensnt con-
nections are Inde in the fern of film is called an 10. this fill and thick file

10 are variations of technical design.

The difference between thin fill and thick fils I0 my be quantitative and quali-

tative. Integrated circuits with a fill thickness of up to 1 Iicron belong to
thin file 1c conditionally while integrated circuits with fill thickness greater
than i sicroneter belong to thick filn Ic. Qualitative differences are detersined

*Solid state electronics (English) -- senioonductor electronics.

- 9 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the manufacturing teclmology of the fills. llessnts of thin fila 10 are

applied to the substrate. as a rule. by therml-vacuus precipitation and cathode

spraying. while ole-ants of thick fill 16 are ads prisarily by silk screening
uith subsect'ant burning in.

Finally. hybrid integrated circuits (equivalent tern -- hybrid sicrocircuits) are
10 containing. besides elesents. sisple and coaplex coaponents (for is. chips
of semiconductor 1c). A particular case of hybrid IO is a sultichip IO a total-
ity of several 10 without homings on one substrate).

Depending upon their functional moss. integrated circuits are divided into two
basic categories -- analog and digital.

Analog integrated circuits (analog aicrooircuits) are 10 intended to convert and
process sinals that change in accordance with the continuous function law. A
particular case of analog IO is an It! with a linear characteristic (linear aicro-
circuit .

Digital integrated circuite(digital nicrocircuits) are It: used to convert and
process signals expressed in a binary or other digital code. A variation of the
digital nicrocircuit definition is the tern logic aicrocircuit (operations with a

binary code are described by logic algebra).

A: a rule. analog and digital 16 are developed and nnufaotured by aanufaoturing
enterprises in the fort of a series. Each series is characterised by the degree

of conpleteness. A series contains several 10 of distinctive types which. in their
turn. say be divided into rated types.

According to m 17021-75. a series of intsa'ated circuits contains a totality of
lo which can inplsaent various functions. but have a single desist-technological
tors and are intended to be used in cosbination. As a rule. the cosposition of
a prcnising series is being expanded with ties.

10 that have concrete functional purposes and their conditional designations are
called rated types of integrated circuits. By a type of integrated circuit is
meant a totality of rated types of to that have concrete functional purposes and
their conditional desigzations.

1.16. Systen of Conditional IO Designations

The entire diversity of nnufactured integrated circuits according to the adopted
conditional designatim systes is divided into three groups: ssaicmduotor.
hybrid and others. File 10. which are presently mufactured in a lisited quanti-
ty, as well as vacuus IO and cerssio 10. are frequently referred to as the last

group. The groups indicated above are assigned the following digital 1. 5. 7 '-
seaiconductor IO (designation 7 is assisted to seaiconductor 10 without housings);
2. h. 6. 8 -- hybrid IO: 3 -~ other 10.

According to the nature of the functions iaplelented in radioelectronic apparatus.
16 are subdivided into subgroups (for exasple. oscillators. aodulators. triggers.

.. 10 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
amplifiers) and type» (for maple. frequmoy. phase. duration. voltage omvu-ters).
The classification of integrated circuits in accordance with their Moticnal pur-
poise is shown in Table 1.1.

According to the adopted systen of desigxationa. an It! not consist of ‘6 dents.
The first element -- a digit corresponding to the duigndtechnoloﬂoel group.

The second element -- two-three digits assigied to a give 10 series as the ordinal

number of the develop-ant. Thus. in the first two ole-alts are three-four digits
that deterline the total nuaber of the 10 series.

The third)eleaent ~- two letters. ocruspmding to the subgroup and the 10 type (see
Table l 1

The fourth element -- the ordinal nunber of the IO development in a given series in
which there my be several equal in the functimal criterion of the ‘20. It my con-
sist of one digit, as well as several digits. GLBT 18682-73 does not liait this
number.

Below is shown an maple of a conditional decimation of an integrate! eedconductor
operational amplifier with an ordinal of the series developnen -- ‘60. the ordinal
number of the development of the given circuit in the series according to the func-
tional criterion -- ll.

_ ' r w u 1' (3)
mam w

m:p1.‘wm.1 .W 00

mm .MIM WW
I 1mm gnu

 
 
 
 

 

’ mm munwm may mm)
‘ l/Maoym ‘5)

I (6) _ ,

_/._’.'_‘-‘:/wdw mm mm Ari/m mu

l__('3.)12- 1- ~_._-. 2:1 vwam-mmmwm mm.w'
1. Series 5, Submup
2. UD 6. Quinn nunber of ven series

develop-eat according to functional techological nkeup).

criterion in the given series
a. Type (according to functional purpose)

.. 11 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030a’)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Functional claulflcetlon of 10

WE

 

m m
Lag: Letter LE:
Designe-
tion
Oscillators G We algal.

W elude
(including self-excited
annular-store. blocking
oscilhtm etc.)

meal: choosing and:
Special shape algal:

lone
Other.
I) mntude
Detectors We
Frequency
PM“
other.

Switches and K (amt
keys Voltage

Logic ole-eats L mount AID-301‘

W
Others
Multifunctional Kb Mules
circuits Digital
Cabinet!
Other
Modulators . N Alplltudo
Macao,
.. 12 -
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080030-5
Eiiii

0
Sch-mt
Combined (typos mm etc)
Other:

Rich noun-nor
lute-canto tramway"
Lou frequency“

Pulse 01W
Repeaters

Bond-cut and radon].
Indication

DO

Operational and.
airman.

95m..__
"0115.30 and pour
mum (including

low-noise

’UU Hﬂﬁsztﬂ" UKEUHI~<

Uppcr frequcncioa V
Lover Munch. 3
Band Io
Rejector 3
Others P

Rectangular pulse. 6
(bind ultivihntm.
blocking «cantata. etc.
Special shape when P
Andrus mutt: (chum A
of voltage: or mu)
We. manta R

(slums of voltage.
or curt-mt.)

other! P
gal—on

953.3
<33?

go..—
080.358
pal—0908.
980.39.
9:3..-

guaca-
08,332...
3b.. b I. if. .—
mania-B». 883.. A35
8. 3.3 088.3. agn-
§ 5.2. 083.8. cg»...-
mua 3.8. 088.6“. 33:»:
.59 89.3.. lane-BBQ
g 1.2. 0833. 33:»:
8.3. 533.. guru.
high. 888% $53 3.95
333. 3.3::-

908.-

gun...
El..-
Entang-

09.38...
V In I

§<:t":~ '0 D a» FJ§G<
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In some seriee (thia in alao stipulated in the technical documentation). the let-
ter at the end of the conditional deeiantion of the IO defines the type of the
housing used for the given rated type. For maple. the letter P designates a
plastic housing, while the letter I! -- a ceraeic housing. For ndorocircuite

utilized in widely uaed devices. the letter K ie at the beginning of the conditional
designation. The deeienaticn then appears as KIWI. If. after the letter K.

there is aleo ehown the letter I! ehead of the eeriee number. thie indicates that
all the given series in mutactured with a cereaio housing (for maple. 011551.“).

For IO without houeinge. in the shortened designation. a digit is introduced after
e hyphen to characterise a oorreeponding denial Ioditioation (for maple.
7031.31-2). vita flexible leadoute-i': with ribbon leadoute, including those nde
with polyaaide file-2; with hard leadoute-3: on a com plate manager»;
separated without loan of orientation (to: maple. peeted on the rim-53 with

It should be noted that before the introduction of GCB‘!‘ 18682-73 [6 (i.e.. before
1973). the aeeignnent of conditional deeicnatione m nde in we no with the
existing technical-hora doounentation. Artu- 1973. loot Ic 1'0“in new 00041-
tional deeienatione. However, for a certain hunter of IO for which no new techni-
cal docunentation wee ieeued. old conditional deeianatione were continued.

An example of the old deeiaution or on I?) type 11.3331 ie ohm on the next page.

'—'————_.-

*Modifécation "1" ie applied to niorooirouite with a mute: of leedoute no greater
than 1 .

- 16 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.
2.

 

Series It. mm and typo (accom-
mg to function‘s; Mono)

mum umber of develop-mt _ 5. m (woman; ‘to design-

(according to {manual antenna in technologies). my)

the 51m curios)

01111131 number of develop-mt at the

given «rise

W

Basic directions of national cocoon annoy-nut for 1976-1980. Inca.
Politiadat. 1976.

Second. supple-alt to publicaticn mam-9'09“). mu: m and
characteristic. of unicoudnctar anion and 3.10111 manipu- of m-
nents. General Mutation and tumbling.

GCBT 17021-71. ﬂicrochuim 1'01:- and doﬂnit1m.

can 17021-75. Integrated unanimity: 1‘0:- and «unitin-

cm 17067-79. Integrate! demon-cult” 30310 duo.

cm 18682-73. 1::th dmcimitm mum a mu. ot cm-
ditianl «mum. _

m: Imtol'otvo “We” radio". 1979

2291
C50:

1863/209
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(INTER TH). METHODS O! FABRICAm INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

2.1. Film and hybrid Technology

At the present time, film technology can be used to make passive components
(resistors, capacitors, inductance foils) and also fabricate the connecting con-
ductors, contact pads and microwave circuit coqonents (such a stripline wove-
guides, attenuators, splitters). Active film elements (transistors and diodes)
are as yet fabricated only under laboratory conditions for research purposes.
Thus, the purely film Ic's produced in the USSR and abroad are passive lc's (these
are usually resistive voltage dividers, sets of resistors and capacitors, and no
networks). Film integrated circuit components are nost often used in conjunction
with miniature radio components, the conponents in hybrid 16's. Hybrid 10's,
being inferior to semiconductor 16's in terns of reliobility, component density,
and production cost, have special circuit design advantages in a nmber of cases
by virtue of the use of a broad products list of outboard components (transistors,
micro-inductances ,' capacitors).

Hybrid technology is extremely flexible. It makes it possible to construct elec-
tronic devices relatively quickly which perform rather complex functions. The
set of equipment for the fabrication of hybrid 10's is less expensive than for the
fabrication of semiconductor Ic's, while the production process itself is substan-
tially simpler, and for this reason, the mastery of hybrid technology is acces-

sible to practically any instrument making plant [1].

An advantage of hybrid technology is also the higher percentage yield of good 10's
(60! to 801 as compared to 5 to 301 for semiconductor 10’s). The rejects which
occur in the manufacture of a hybrid 1c can frequently be corrected. The design
and planning methods for hybrid IC's do not differ from the design methods for
conventional electronic circuits because of the discrete nature of the film ele-
ments end the outboard components. because of the low parasitic capacitances and
good insulation of the elements and components from each other, a hybrid 1c has
better electrical properties (lower induced currents and parasitic coupling) than
a circuit corposed of discrete, "large" radio components.

Hybrid integrated circuits are most frequently used in the design of analog equip-
ment. It is especially convenient to use then to perform nonstandard functions,
where large capacitors, high resistance, highly or precision resistors are
required. The components of film and hybrid integrated circuits (resistors,
capacitors, inductances) are made on the surface of the substrate in the form of
filns of different materials (resistive, conductive and dielectric materials).

Both thin and thick films are used in the manufacture of hybrid circuits. The
choice between thick and thin films is governed by many considerations. Thick
file Ic's have the following advantages over thin filn ones [2]. They are less
expensive to develop and fabricate in the case of a small production series; lower
capital outlays are required when setting up production (simpler equipment, less
stringent requirements on the production rooms); they have greater mechanical
strength; they have higher moisture, corrosion and thermal resistance; greater

~18-
MOI-'FICIALUSEONLY
overload capacity of the elements, as well as lower parasitic capacitance. of
the interconnections and lower mutual coupling of the elements.

Thin film integrated circuits have their own advantages over thick film ones: one
can obtain nore narrow tolerances for the nominal values of the cmpoments without
trimming (resistors and capacitors); a higher layout density of the components on
the substrate is achieved, where these components have lower high frequency losses
and greater radiation immunity (by virtue of using a smaller products list of
chemical elements with a high atomic weight).

It is preferable to use thin film hybrid circuits in very complex analog systems
with strict tolerances for the elements, where extruely high stability is needed
for the resistors. The scales of the proposed production of hybrid Ic's also
govern the choice of the type of film. If it is necessary to have a small
umber of products, then it is not expedient to set up production of thin film
Ic's, which require significantly greater capital outlays, and preference is to
be given to thick film-=technology.

TABLE 2.1 The Parameters of Resistive Materials
Specific Tamper- Permis-v Nominal Toler-

 

 

 

 

 

Resistance. ature sible ance, 2
Material 9 , Ohms Coeffici- Power,
D ent of We:2
Resistance
(10‘5I°C)
Chromium (on Cu with a Cr -
sublayer) 20--800 +180 22 . 0 :5
Nichromc (on Cu with a Cr
sublayer) 100--300 +250 2 . 0 :5
Tantalum (on An with Cr
sub layer) 50- 500 -l¢00 3 . 0 15
Stannic Oxide $00 3300 2.3-4.0 :2
"LT-3H alloy (on Cu with a
c: sublayer) 300—400 3200 1.0 :5
Metal ceramic on a palladium
oxide base up to 3200 up to 1.0 :10
20,000
Conducting paint on a carbon
base 10,000 500—1,000 0. lS--0 . 35 :10

 

2.1.1. Materials for Hybrid Ic'a

IC substrates are manufactured from sitsll [ceramic glass, similar to pyroceraml,
glass or ceramic. ‘lhe major requirements placed on substrates are: good

- 19 ..
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mechanical and dielectric properties, matching of the temperature coefficient of
expansion to the other-materials, as well as high surface purity (classes 12 to 110
in accordance with cost 278a-73). Substrates of various sizes are used for the
manufacture of hybrid integrated circuits [3]. The most widespread are rectangular
substrates with the following dimensions: 6 x 15, 8 x 12, 11 x 11, 10 x 16, '
12 x 12, 12 x 16, 12 x 20, 16 x 20, 26 x 30 and 48 x 60 u (in this case, devia-
tions from the nominal dimension amount to no more than 0.3 ms and the sides must
be parallel within 0.5 an). A number of substrate thicknesses are mapleyed: 0.6,
1.0 and 1.6 ms (with a deviation of no more than 0.1 an).

The substrate for thick film IC's should be heat resistant in order to stand up to
annealing at several hundreds of degrees, which is necessary for fusing and
securing materials from which the to components are fabricated. In order to reduce
parasitic capacitances between elements, materials are chosen having a low dielec-
tric permittivity (if this effect is not employed as a useful one). Substrates
with a high heat conductivity, for example, made of beryllium ceramic, for which
the thermal conductivity is only five times worse than for copper, are used in the
manufacture of high power Ic's.

Regardless of the material, resistive films are characterized by the specific
resistance per square surface unit area, Do . This quantity is an objective
characteristic of films and depends on the specific resistance of the materials
and the thickness of the film (but does not depend on the dimensions of the
surface square).

Chromiun, nichrome, tantalum, PM alloy, metal ceramic, conducting paints and
pastes are used for the fabrication of resistors. These materials make it possible
to obtain a range of values of o fras 20 ohms up to 20 KOhu. For better ad-
hesion to the substrate, the resitive metal layers are placed on auxiliary metal
sublayers. The parameters of some of the resistive materials are given in Table

2.1[6].

The most suitable thickness for thin resistive films is considered to run from
0.01 to 0.2 micrometers. Having set the film thickness in this range, a material
is chosen which provides the requisite specific resistance DD . In this case,
one must take into account the fact that it is not always advantageous to select
materials with a high resistance, since when removing them from the vacuum chamber,
the thin films sometimes change their resistance by up to 50 percent as a result
of oxidation in air. For thin film resistors, it is best of all to chose materi-
als with 90 - 100 to 500 ohms, 'and for thick film resistors, 10 ohms to 20 KOhms.

Copper and gold with a sublayer of nichrome, aluminum or nickel are used as the
materails for thin film conductors. Silicon monoxide frequently serves as the
dielectric in the fabrication of film capacitors. In this case, it is best of
all to use alumina), since in terms of its electrical properties, it is quite well
matched to silicon. The thickness of the conductors is chosen in a range of 0.3
to l micrometer (a sublayer thickness of 0.01 to 0.03 micrometers). Gold is
frequently used for the fabrication of the bonding pads. The thickness of the
bonding pads is usually chosen in a range of 0.5 to lo micrometers.

-20-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thick film conductors should have a specific resistance of no more than 0.1 ohms/
and should allow for soldering in the region of the bonding paths. Tho kinds of
thick film conducting materials are used: based on gold-platinum. which permit
annealing at temperatures of up to 900 ’C, and based on silver, which permit
annealing at up to 700 °c.

Silicon monoxide, zinc sulfide, anodized tantalum. as well as chalcogsnide glasses
(th-bb, IRS-2“) are used as the dielectrics in the fabrication of film capacitors.
The properties of silicon monoxide films depend to a great extent on the rate of
vaporization and the composition of the residual gases in the vacuum chamber.

Films of zinc sulfide are less critical as regards the deposition conditions. when
choosing the dielectric material, its structure should be matched as best as
possible to the structure of the other materials of the film circuit. The maximum
thickness of dielectric films is limited by the resulting internal voltage and is
on the order of 1.5 micrometers. The minimua thickness of a dielectric film is

limited by the porosity of the structure and the specified working voltages (about
0.06 micrometers).

The specific capacitances, obtained when using silicon monoxide (c I 6) fall in a
range of 5,000 to 10,000 pr/cmz. Anodized tantalum (c ' 25), titanium oxides

(t - 80) and barium titanate (c - 1,000) can be used to obtain larger capacitances.
The electrical strength of dielectric films depends to a considerable extent on

the metal of the capacitor plate. Hetala with a rather high vaporization temper-
ature (for example, nickel and chromium) yield a greater number of short circuits,
since the atoms of these metals, having a high energy, pass through the thin film
of the dielectric when applying the upper plate to it. silver and gold can also
be the cause of plate short circuits. which occur because of the intense diffusion

(migration) of the atoms of these metals from the plates along the grain bounda-
ries of the film a short time following the application.

For this reason, aluminum is most often used for the plates in thin film Ic’s,
since aluminum has a low vaporization temperature and low migration mobility
because of the oxidation processes at its surface. The electrical strnegth also
depends on the presence of pores in the dielectric film, since air in the pores is
ionized it a lower voltage than the breakdown voltage of the solid film. The
presenc: of microscopic pores can be related to the presence in the material being
vaporized of impurities in the form of gas inclusions. silicon monoxide and
IKs-ZA c2alcogenide glass (c - 6, tsn6 ; 0.03, a breakdown voltage of no less than
0.8 - 10 V/cm, a temperature coefficient of expansion of 5 ~ 10‘“ l/‘C in a temp-
erature range of ~60 ’c to #125 ’C) are used for the interlayer insulation.

2.1.2. The Fabrication of the Elements of hybrid 10's

The major techniques for producing thin film components are thermal vaporization
in a vacuum, cathodic and ion-plasma sputtering, and the precipitation of films
from vapor and gaseous phases. Thick film components are produced on a substrate
by means of silk screen printing. The choice of the specific film production

- 21 -
FOR4OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technique depends on many factors, especially on the composition of the substance
being applied, the condition of the surface, the substrate temperature, the requi-
site thickness and the method used for,monitoring it. The method of depositing
thin films by means of thermal vaporization in a vacuum has become the most wide-
spread technique in industry. The major merit of this method is its universality.
One can obtain homogeneous layers of metals, alloys, semiconductors and dielectrics
of various thickness in vacuum installations of the same type, and also fabricate
thin films from different kinds of substances while determining the ratio of the

parts for various thicknesses of each sublayer.

The process of producing films by means of thermal vaporization in a «can has

the stages of vaporization of the material and the codensation of its vapors on the
substrate. The material is heated for vaporization. Joule heating is used in this
case which is liberated in conductors when an electric current is passed through
them. One can also employ electron beam heating, radio frequency field heating as
well as an electric arc. then heated in a vacuum, the material melts, and then
goes to a vaporized state. In conventional industrial vacuum installations, a
vacuum on the order of 133.322 . 105 to 133.322 - 10-6 1». [sin] is employed.
however, a deeper vacums is frequently needed to improve the structure of the films
(down to 133.322 - 10-8 to 133.322 . 10-9 ml).

The phenomenon of cathode destruction as a result of its bombardment with ionized
molecules of a rarefied gas is employed to apply thin films by means of cathode

sputtering. The cathode sputtering of films is accomplished at a pressure of
133.322 ' 10'l - l33.322 - 10'3 Pa in a residual air atsnsphere or in an inert

gas (most often in argon). A high voltage of from l to 20 RV is applied between
the cathode and anode to ignite a glow discharge.

The advantage of cathode sputtering over thermal vaporization in a vacuum consists
in the fact that one can use it to obtain an increase in the surface area and
uniformity of the thickness of the resulting films (the material is deposited on
the substrate not from a point source, but from the flat surface of the cathode,

the dimensions of which can be considerably greater than the spacing from the
cathode to the substrate).

An important merit of the technique is the constant chemical casposition of the
material being sputtered, while in the case of thermal vaporization of the
material, its casponents are vaporized at different rates, because of which the
composition of the film can differ from the composition of the starting material.
Films of difficulty fusible materials can be obtained by means of cathode

sputtering .

In the case of ion-plasma sputtering, an initial pressure on the order of 133.322 -
- 10'6 Pa is created in the chamber. Then, a thermal electron high density
current (of several Alon?) is produced between the cathode and the anode of the
installation, after which an inert gas at a pressure of up to 133.322 . 10' to
133.322 - 10"“ Pa is fed into the chamber, and a discharge is ignited by means of
a high frequency transformer. The low energy ions occurring during the discharge
bombard the substrate and remove the contaminants from its surface ("ion etching").

.. 22 ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After this, a negative potential is applied to the target. The positive ions
extracted from the discharge plasma bombard the target at an energy sufficient to
atomize the atoms of the target material. The atoms knocked out of the target
move predominantly in a direction perpendicular to the target surface [5].

The great merit of ion-plasma eputtsrim consists in its universality. Metals with
different properties, for example, tungsten and gold, can be atomized with equal
success. Such alloys as nichroms and stainless steel per-alloy are atomized with-
out the dissociation of the composition of the material being vaporized. In the
case of ion-plasma sputtering, complex (alloy) films consisting of two or more
metals can be fabricated by the simultaneous sputtering of several independent

targets. Both pure semiconductor materials (silicon) and semiconductor compounds
can be atomized.

A great advantage of the ion-plasma technique is its lack of inertia. The material
is atomized only when a voltage is applied to the target; the sputtering ceases
imediately after the voltage is turned off. The density of the depositing ion
beam can be adjusted by changing the emission current of the tungsten cathode or
the inert gas pressure. The deposition rate can be varied in a very wide range:
from tenths of a nanometer up to tenths of a micron per minute. The uniformity of
the film thickness with ion-plasma sputtering reaches one to two percent, which is
considerably higher than in the case of cathode sputtering, where distortions are
introduced in the nonconducting substrate, arranged between the cathode and the
anode. Because of the high energy of the atoms impinging on the substrate, the
strength of the film bond to the substrate where the film is obtained by the ion-
plasma technique proves to be quite high.

The main advantage of precipitation from a gas phase consists in the ease of con-
trol of the process and its individual stages. In this case, one can coqare-
tively easily introduce an additive into the gr ' film and obtain layers with
properties specified beforehand. 'lhe technique is used in the fabrication of
metallic, resistive and dielectric films. In this case, as a result of the de-
composition of a complex chemical compound or the chemical reaction of two or more
substances. the reaction product is precipitated in the form of a film on the sub-
strate. The reaction can occur with the action of heat (pyrolytic decmpoaition),
light (photochemical decomposition), or as the result of hydrolysis, exposure to
an electrical field and other factors.

Following the application of the passive film elements to a substrate, the follow-
ing components are installed on it: transistors, diodes, capacitors, transforms
and semiconductor IC chips [6, 7]. Components with rigid leads are secured to the
board by means of soldering or welding their leads to the contact pads of the board.
Components with flexible leads are secured to the board by means of epoxy glues or
are soldered. In the first case, the component is electrically insulated fra: the
board, and in the second case, it can make electrical contact. The manner of
fastening components to a board should provide for good mechanical strength of the
fastening, the absence of stresses at the fastening point, chemical stability and
neutrality of the materials used for the fastening, as well as their high heat
conductivity, low formation temperature and high working temperature of the
resulting compounds.

- 23 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Epoxy glues have little shrinkage when they harden, good adhesion to various
materials, do not liberate by-Products and are chemically stable. Their polymer-
itation taperature can be chosen in a wide range of vvalues, including normal
temperature, by neans of selecting the hardeners. fastening by means of soldering
the chips of unpackaged seniconductor Ic's, transistors and diodes is acconplished
by the formation of eutectic alloys between the surface of the semiconductor and
the gold layer on the board. The board is heated up to a temperature of about

370 'C, the chip is placed on the gold contact pad and pressed with a specific
force. As a result, there is the mutual dissolution of the silicon and the gold
with the fornation of a eutectic alloy at the separation boundary.

2.1.3. Making Electrical Connections in hybrid Ic's

The leads of components which are fastened to a board are connected to contact
pads, while the output contact pads are connected to the package leads. In the
najority of cases, such connections are made using gold wires with diameters of
from 25 to 50 micrometers by means of thermal coapression, contact or ultrasonic
welding.

The most widely used is thermal cmnpression welding, in which pressure is codined
with heating. The board and the gold wire are heated at the point of contact up
to a temperature of 200 to 1:00 'c, the wire is pressed to the contact pad of the
board with a force of from 0.05 to 0.5 N for a few seconds. The thermal coup-
ression technique requires careful selection and nonitoring of the major para-
meters of the process: pressure, temperature and welding tins.

Contact welding is accomplished by using a split electrode. The contact quality
depends on the contact area, the specific resistance of the separation surface,
and the resistance of the parts being welded. Because of this, the welding condi-
tions are to be carefully selected for the specific conditions.

Ultrasonic welding, which is based on the simultaneous exposure to ultrasonic
oscillations excited in the parts being welded and pressure in the weld region,
provides for better quality of the weld joint than does thermal compression, as
well as a lower welding temperature and a wider set of metals which can be
welded. It also nakes it possible to weld using a group technique.

2 . 2 . Semiconductor Technology

The special futures of semiconductor Ic's, which determine the specific features
of their fabrication technology, are as follows [8, 9]. The cost of integrated
circuit elements is determined to a considerable extent by the area they occupy
on the seniconductor chip. Thus, the cost of a transistor proves to be approxi-
mately equal to the cost of a diode, which in turn, approximately corresponds to
the cost of a resistor with a nominal value ofloKOhms with a tolerance of :30! or
with a nominal value of 1 {ohm with a tolerance of 3201. The nominal values of

elements having discrete prototypes are linited. It is not expedient in practice
to use "pure" resistors with nominal values above 50 non- for mass produced IC's.

.. 21, ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Capacitors having a capacitance exceeding a few hundred picofarads must be ads in
the form of individual outboard components. The desired nominal values of
resistors cannot have mll tolerances, although the ratio of the resistances of
resistors of identical shape on a single chip can be maintained rather precisely
(l--to 22), where their temperature dependence will be the same. All semiconductor
integrated circuit components are coupled together by means of parasitic capaci-
tancee and conductances, something which is due to the dense packing of the compo-
nents and the imperfection of the methods used to insulate the components.

The advantages of semiconductor Ic's over hybrid integrated circuits are as
follows:

«Higher reliability because of the smaller number of contact connections, the
limited number of materials which are used as well as because of the fact that a
semiconductor m can be fabricated only from a monecrystslline, ultrapure semi-
conductor structure;

--‘l'he great mechanical strength as a result of the smaller dimensions (approxi-=
mately an order of magnitude) of the components;

"The lower production cost of semiconductor lC's because of the more efficient
utilization of the advantages of group technology.

"Bipolar and unipolar (field effect) integrated circuits can be used as the
active elements in semiconductor integrated circuits. Semiconductor Ic's
(especially digital) with bipolar transistors are distinguished by the higher
pulse speed (or working frequency). Semiconductor digital lc's with field
effect transistors having an 1108 structure are distinguished by the marina.
packing density of the components and the least production cost. Analog lc.'s
with field effect devices have a high input impedance (more than 109 ohms) and
can be quite economical in terms of the power consuntion (microwatts). Oni-
polar transistor technology makes it possible to achieve better noise character-
istics.

Bipolar transistors increase the operational stability of circuits in a wide range '
of temperatures, make it possible to realise the maximum operational speed and

to design circuits with better load capabilities. Bipolar structures stand up
better to electrical loads. It must be noted that the capabilities of unipolar
structures are as yet far from completely uncovered (they are especially good for
future radio frequency devices and operational amplifiers).

Because of the complexity of the equipment and the stringent requirements placed
on the production conditions for semiconductor Ic's, their manufacture becomes
economically expedient only in the case of mass production (millions of pieces
per year from one equipment coupler). For this reason, in terms of semiconductor
technology, it is expedient to fabricate the following: digital 10’s and 10's

for the realization of standard analog functions, as well as high reliability
integrated circuits for the design of equipunt with maximum component packing
density.

- 25 -
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.2.1. Materials for the Components of Semiconductor 16's and Their Manufacture

wafers of monocrystalline p or n type silicon are used in the majority of
cases for the fabrication of semiconductor IC's, where these wafers are provided
with epitaxial and so-called "hidden" layers. Compounds of boron, antimony,
phosphorous, aluminum, gallium, indium, arsenic and gold are used as the doping
impurities, by means of which the conductivity of the original material of the
ester is changed. Aluminum and gold are used to make interconnections and con-
tact pads; silicon dioxide and polycrystalline silicon are used as dielectric
coatings and insulation for elements. The materials used should have a very
high purity: the impurity content in the majority of materials used in the manu-
facture of semiconductor integrated circuits should not exceed 10"5 to 10'9
parts of the base material. '

By changing the doping iwurity concentration in various parts of a nonocrystal-
line semiconductor wafer in a definite manner, one can obtain a multilayer
structure, which performs a specified electrical function and corresponds to a
known extent to that equivalent to a discrete resistor, capacitor, diode or
transistor [8]. '

The process of leanufacturing modern semiconductor IC's is extremely cowlicated.
It is carried out only in special hermetically sealed rooms using specialised
equipment. The major production process operations for the fabrication of sui-
conductor circuits can be broken down into six steps.

1. The mechanical treatment of the silicon. circular wafers with thicknesses of
250 to 1.00 um are separated free a cylindrical rod of monocrystalline silicon
with a diameter of 60 to 100 an (in this operation, the thickness of the
disturbed surface layer of the single crystal can exceed 80 um). Cutting and
polishing of the wafers is carried out to remove the disturbed layer, as a result
of which, the thickness of this layer is reduced to l to 2 um. Chemical etching
is employed for the final finishing of the wafer surface.

2. Epitaxial growth. The term "epitaxy" means a process of the oriented growth
of a crystalline lattice of silicon on a monocrystelline wafer through the
deposition of layers. when additional inpurities are introduced, it is possible
to obtain epitaxial layers (files) with a specified type of conductivity (for
example, one can obtain an epitaxial filn-avith p-type conductivity on an n-type
silicon wafer). The epitaxial layer, which takes the form of a monocrystalline
extension of the base material, has no mechanical defects or stresses. Epitaxial
growth is accomplished in special furnaces at temperatures of about 1,200 ‘0.

The buildup rate of the film thickness is on the order of several microns per
minute.

Epitaxial films 10 to 15 ms thick are the most widely used at the present time,
however, to produce modern semiconductor digital 10's with a fast operating
speed, the film thickness must be reduced down to a few microns.

- 26 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The oxidation of the wafer surface. Oxidation of the wafers in an oxygen
atmosphere or water vapor at temperatues of 1,000 to 1,300 ‘C is used to protect
and mask the silicon surface during diffusion operations. The thickness of the
built-up oxide is on the order of one micron. '

4. Photolithography. A set of photolithographic processes is repeated several
times during the production process for the manufacture of semiconductor integrated
circuits (from 3 to ll: times). Each time, a thin layer (about one micrometer) of

a light sensitive emulsion is applied to the oxidised silicon wafer: the photo-
resist, which is exposed through a negative with the image of the mask (in contrast
to conventional photomgnification here, with a reduction). The requisite "windows"
in the silicon oxide surface can be "opened up" in the photoresist after developing.
The silicon oxide is etched away in these windows by a mixture of uranium fluoride
and hydrofluoric acid, and the silicon surface is thereby selectively exposed.

5. Diffusion. This process is carried out in special diffusion furances at a
temperature of about 1,200 ‘C using special doping impurities. The following
diffusants are used to obtain n-type conductivity: phosphorous, antimony, arsenic;
boron, gallium and indium are used to obtain p-type conductivity.

6. Making interconnections. To create the "hook-up wiring" between the elements on
the semiconductor 1c substrate, the silicon wafer, which the elements formed on it
(transistors, diodes and resistors), is coated with a layer of precipitated
aluminus 0.5 to 2 ms thick, which is then etched away at the unnecessary points
through the corresponding windows in the photoresist (following the final photo-
lithography operation). In this case, the outline of the connecting alt-inn
conductors, having a width of about 10 um, as well as the contact pads, remains on
the semiconductor surface.

Several differents kinds of production processes, which differ primarily in the
techniques used to produce the insulation between the individual integrated
circuit components, are used at the present time in the electronics industry to
make bipolar transistor semiconductors Ic's.

Planar epitaxial technology with the insulation of the components by means of
reverse biased p-n junctions is the most widely used. Drawbacks to this method
of insulating structures are considered to be the increased values of garasitic
capacitances and leakage currents between individual cosponents, as well as their
considerable area (taking into account the areas of the insulating regions), the
relatively low breakdown voltages and the poor radiation insanity. however,
structures with p-n insulation are the simplest to manufacture.

In isoplsnar technology, the components are insulated by means of etching grooves
between the elanents with the subsequent thermal oxidation of the surface of these
grooves. In this case, the layout density of the components is almost doubled,
the radiation inunity is increased as well as the Ic reliability, and the percen-
tage yield of good integrated circuits is also increased.

Polyplsnar technology provides for filling the gaps between the components with
polycrystalline silicon, which makes it possible to increase the component

-27-
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

layout density even more (by a factor of three times more than in the planar
process), and to reduce the parasitic capacitances between the coqonents and
increase 10 realiability.

Technology utilising anisotropic etching of the grooves (etching along the
crystallographic axes) nkes it possible to obtain an even greater component

layout density.

The considerable diversity of technology processes (both simpler and more caplet
than bipolar) is used when manufacturing semiconductor lc's with H08 structures
[10]. Hos structures are formed with three layers: the metal (H is the gate),
the SiOz oxide (0 is the gate insulation), and the semiconductor si (8 - the
regions of the source, channel and gate). Standard technology (metal gate with
single layer dielectric insulation about 100 um thick) makes it possible to
manufacture nos transistors both with a p-channel and an n-channel (in the first
case, the charge carriers are holes, and in the second, they are electrons; for
this reason, n-channel HOS lC's have a faster operational speed than p-channel
devices). The vorking frequency of digital H08 lc‘s, made using standard tech-
nology, does not exceed 1 to 2 Ills, while for analog devices, it is 300 to 500 Kilt.

A two-layer dielectric is used in mos integrated circuits between the metal gate
and the semiconductor: a layer of silicon dioxide about 50 um thick and a layer
of silicon nitride (II) 10 to 20 pm thick. The “NOS structures have a reduced

threshold voltage as compared to standard nos structures.

A progressive technology using silicon gates (regions of heavily doped silicon
about one micrometer thick) is also used to boost the operational speed of H08
IC's. Using this approach, the speed of digital lc's has been successfully in-
creased by a factor of three to five times, and the threshold cut-on voltage fer
a switch has been reduced while the component layout density has been increased
by a ' factor of 1.5 times. The manufacture of ms lC's on insulating substrates
(sapphire or spinel with an epitaxially grown layer about one micrometer thick)
makes it possible to increase the speed of such lC's at the present time up to
100 M32 (up to 250 m: in the future).

The use of transistors with different polarities (pechannel and n-channel) as
part of H08 Ic's makes it possible to create digital 16's with relatively high

speeds (up to 20 ms) with a very low static power consuaption (the product of
the power consumption times the speed has a level of about 1 pJ). These struc-
tures are called 0408 (the letter c comes from the word complementary).

The fabrication of H08 Ic's using double diffusion (first the pvchannel is made,
and then the n-layer in it) makes it possible to reduce the channel length down
to one to two micrometers (usin standard technology. a channel cannot be made

with a length of less than 5 um .

nos transistors which oscillate at frequencies of up to 10 on: can be manufactured
based on gallim arsenide. In digital engineering, switches with a signal delay
time of less than 1 nsec can be obtained using such integrated circuit transis-

tors.

- zg-
l-‘OROFI’ICIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.2.2. The Fabrication of Integrated Circuit Structures

Planar epitaxial technology is the most widely used in the production of transis-
tors on semiconductor wafers (it is also used for the manufacture of modern
discrete transistors). The difference in the characteristics of the transistors
of saliconductor circuits and "conventional" transistors can be due to the proper-
ties of the insulating region, in which the transistor is located on the semi-
conductor circuit chip, as well as to the arrangement of the collector lead (in
integrated structures, it is alnoat always the "top" one).

Integrated circuit diodes are easily made based on transistor structures. The
emitter-base and collector-base junctions of transistor structures can belused as

diodes. In some cases, the enittar-base junction can also operate as a stabilitron
(Zener diode).

After forming the p-n junctions, it is necessary to sake the contactigpads at the
requisite points and to connect the separate eoqonents of the semiconductor 16
together. If the p-n junction was produced by means of diffusion, then it is
necessary to apply a metal layer to the surface of the semiconductor wafer to
obtain a good contact. This can be done, for example, by vacuum deposition.
After fusing the metal into the semiconductor, low resistance p or n-n struc-
tures are formed. The external leads are secured to the Intel contacts by means
of thernal compression. One can avoid deposition on the netal contacts during
the epitaxial growth process by introducing, where necessary, heavily doped p’ or
n layers. Then the external leads can be connected directly to these layers
using the same thermal comresssion. -

Separate working components are connected together or to the contact pads by
asses of depositing Ollllinl- in a vacuum on the semiconductor wafer surface
which is oxidized beforehand, and in which windows are etched through to make
contact with the semiconductor structure. The region between any pair of ohmic
contacts on a semiconductor wafer can be used as a resistor. The resistance of
such a resistor will depend on the length and cross-section of the region, as
well as the specific resistance of the material. It can be calculated using the
idfferential Ohm's Law.

Since the current in such a bulk semiconductor resistor will flow through the
body of the semiconductor, the resistance of the resistors are less subject to
the influnece of external conditions than the resistance of film resistors. The
tesperature coefficient, depending on the doping inpurity concentration, can
differ, however, as a rule, it is high and is positive. The resistance of three-
dimensional semiconductor resistons is limited only by the dimensions of the
semiconductor substrate and in practice can run up to 60 KOhns. Resistors which
are made in the volume of a seniconductor chip are frequently used as thermal
compensating resistors (with respect to the region where they are located in
actual circuits, they are called collector resistors).

So-called "base" resistors (they are fabricated simultaneously with the base
n-p-n regions of integrated circuit transistors) are more well known. This is
the major type of diffusion resistor, in which the conducting channel is of p-type

-29-

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAL USE ONLY

conductivity. Such a channel is "bordered" by the n-region. After the supply
voltages are applied to the chip, the insulating p-n junctions cut off and the
current cannot overflow from the resistive channel into adjacent regions. Addi-
tionally, pinch resistors are widely used in 10's; these are nonlinear resistors
which are "cot-pressed" on the top by a cutnoff p-n junction. They are high
resistance devices and do not have a "conventional" equivalent" this is a field
effect transistor with a small transconductance).

A three-layer p+-i-n+ structure can be used to create capacitors with a stall
fixed value of the capacitance in semiconductor integrated circuits. Two layers
of such a structure are very heavily doped with the appropriate doping inpurities.
The niddle layer is undoped material. The capacitanceof the phi-n+ structures
is deternined by the thickness of the undoped layer and depends little on the
inverse voltage level.

A reverse biased p-n junction is frequently used as a small value capacitor. The
dielectric in such a capacitor is the junction region depleted of carriers. For
any semiconductor, capacitance will be a function of the width of the depletion
zone and the junction area. than silicon is used. one can obtain a specific
capacitance of a p-n junction of up to 200,000 ple/cns2 for a breakdown voltage of
several hundred volts. Since the width of the depletion tone depends on the
applied voltage, the capacitance of the p-n jmction is also a nonlinear function
of the voltage.

Capacitors based on a p-n junction are polar capacitors, and for this reason they
are not suitable for use in circuits with an alternating component. The latter
drawback can be eliminated if two series connected p-n junctions are used. The
capacitance of such a structure becones independent of the working voltage polarity
and depends little on its anplitude.

We shall treat in nore detail sons of the specific features of standard integrated
circuit structures. The typical structure of an epitaxial diffusion transistor of
a seniconductor IC is shown in Figure 2.1. Five diffusion layers are indicated in
the vertical section through the structure. The enitter, base. epitaxial collec-
tor, hidden fusion n" layer and the chip (substrate). The specific resistance of
the p-type chip is 10 0h - en. The epitaxial n-type layer which is 25 pm thick,
and built-up or the surface of the chip, has a specific resistance of 0.5 Ohn ' on.
The n‘ diffusion layer (usually arsenic) with a high concentration of doping
impurities (more than 1019 atonslcn3) is placed beneath it.

The electrical insulation of the collector region fro. adjacent transistors

(when a positive voltage will be applied to the circuit relative to the substrate)
is assured through the presence of a deep separation diffusion region of p-type
doping impurity through the epitaxial layer to the chip. This diffusion is
acconplished-lfirst. The base is for-ed during the second diffusion of the p-type
doping impurity into the epitaxial re ion of the collector (during this sane tine,
the base and pinch resistors are nsdeg. The typical value of the resistance of
the layer formed during the second diffusion (for example, with heron to a depth
of 2.7 us) anounts to 200 ohns/u . The enitter is the n-type region which is
formd during the third diffusion (for exsnple, of phosphorous) into the base
region to a depth of about 2 ms. The resistance of the emitter layer amounts to

- 3o -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I“ '

5‘
-l
-s

  
 
      

  
   
 

  
  

a

\\\V\\\‘ . s
n— _ (V
II?!
i-
V.
E.
’u

é

s’f/ll ' 6/11 ’I/I/
' A ' l ' a!
0' I I

I ' llll
E153
(‘)‘IIIIII a

Figure 2.1. Structure of a transistor using p-n junction insulation
(planar technology).

\

Key: 1. Diffusion insulated'p-region;
2. Base;
3. Diffusion insulation;
lo. Collector.

approximately 2 ohms/£1 . The doping depths of the junctions are: 2 u- for the
e-itter-bese junction; 3 ms for the collector-base junction and 25 u- for the
collector-chip junction. The plan view configuration of the transistor gives an
idea of the dimensions of the structure on the chip surface. The enitter is the
diffusion region with a rectangular shape having di-snsions of 25 1 ‘50 pl. It is
formed after the diffusion of the n-doping inpur-ity into the region of the p-hase
(the base ares is 64 x 102 un). The electrical contacts are ends to the enitter,
base and collector regions using sluinue nstalisstion; the enitter contact is made
with stripline netslliution 12.5 un wide. The contact with the base is for-ed
by scans of two strips arranged on both sides of the emitter. The contact is Isde
to the collector with a rectsngular netsllised strip; it completely surrounds the
diffusion collector-base junction. As. can he concluded fro- an analysis of.the
topology. a considerable portion of the ssniconductor surface is used for the in.-
sulstion of adjacent structures from each other by the separation diffusion
region, which is run to a depth of 25 pm. When the diffusion process is three-
dimensional, the doping impurity atons diffuse not only into the depth of the
material, but also "leak out" in lsteral directions. The distance to which doping
impurities propagate in lateral directions is also spproxinstely 25 an. Such
technology does not allow for attaining a high degree of conponent layout density

on a chip.

-31-
l-‘OIOI'HCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The refinenent of the fabrication technology for 10's with a high conponent layout
density on a chip is acre or less related to the passive. inculation. of the eleoents,
i.e. , to the replacement of active regions of p-n junctions, which slectricall'y'
insulate active devices 'in conventional bipolar integrated circuits with any kind
of dielectric material. One of the first developents was the technique in which
electrical insulation of the ele-ents on a chip was accoqlished by a thernally
grown silicon oxide. In this technique, a layer of silicon dioxide is used as the
dielectric insulation instead of diffusion regions (Figure 2.2). The silicon
dioxide forms the walls in the case of dielectric insulation as well as the botton
of each integrated circuit conponent and the structure is placed in a dielectric
"pocket" (because of this the electric leakage is low). Such technology nakes it
possible to obtain higher voltage integrated circuit coqonents on a chip than in
the case of insulation using pdu junctions, however, the final advantage gained in
terns of structure area is snall.

Figure 2.2. The sequence for the fabrics-
tion of a transistor structure
using the dielectric insula-
tion technique (the "epic"

  
  

  
  
 

 

w process):
" e
b a. Preparation of the wafer
surface;

  

§\‘&\§&\‘é§ b. Deposition of the n+ layer

 

 

    
  

~‘\\\$§“§§ \W and the masking oxide;
-\ “'“\\\\/: c. Masking and etching of the
m insulating depressions;
(f) d. Dielectric oxide build-up;
0 e. Deposition of the poly-
II (C) crystalline silicon;
- _ \u f. Shaping of the wafer and
2/\¥/\§ . polishing;
m g. Th: final structure of the
U d .1 ‘ WC Of.

The polyplanar process is a further development of technology using silicon
dioxide insulation of the elenents. In it, the surface of the insulating groove
is coated with silicon dioxide, while the grooves thenselves are filled with poly-
crystalline silicon, forning e snooth surface on the chip. The smoth chip surface
makes it possible to use standard netallitation, silplifies the layout of the
intersection of conductors at various levels and inproves the overall reliability
of the 10's. The polyplanar process, just as the process using p-n junctions for
insulation, starts vith the selective fornation of hidden diffusion at type layers
on p-type chip (Figure 2.3), after which an epitaxial n-type layer is grown on it.
Then a layer of oxide is built up on the chip, in which, by means of standard
photolithographic techniques, windows are etched out underneath the insulating

-32-
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
regions. Anisotropic etching of the silicon is carried out in the (100) crstallo-
graphic plane in the unprotected areas to form the insulating depressions. The
depth of thd depressions is governed only by the geometric width of the hole in the
masking material on the surface of the silicon.

Then a layer of silicon dioxide is grown in the resulting depressions where this
layer is sufficiently thick to produce the requisite electric insulation; After
this, in contrast to other processes which are based on etching the depressions,
polycrystalline silicon is deposited on the surface of the chip. which completely
fills the depressions. The excess silicon is then polished away as a result of
which, a smooth chip surface remains. At this point in tine, the side walls of

the structure are completely formed end all subsequent production process operations
do not differ from the standard ones adopted in planar epitaxial technology.

Figure 2.3. The sequence for the fabrication of
a transistor structure using poly-
crystalline silicon insulation
(polyplaner technology).

Key: a. Selective formation of the

n* hidden diffusion layer and
the build-up of the n-typs
epitaxial layer;

b. Masking and etching of the
insulating depressions;

c. Build-up of the insulating
OXide;

d. Deposition of the polycrystal-
line silicon;

e. Removal of excess silicon;

l. Polycrystalline silicon.

 

Smell dimensions of the couponents are characteristic of polyplanar technology.
The oxide grooves are separated from each other by a spacing of 10 to 15 um. with
such a technology, the area needed for creating an element is limited only by the
thickness of the epitaxial layer and the minimum width of the insulating groove.
Given the condition of optimization of technological process parameters, the area
occupied by an eleeent for a random access menory can alount to hbout 0.006 n.2,
The use of polyplansr technology has made it possible to significantly boost the
layout density and reduce the sizes of chips as conpsred to the capabilities of
standard technology. Thus, bipolar n-p-n transistors, together with the insulat-
ing regionzeurrounding them, can have an area of about 0.3 . 103 umz. The area
of the glazsr epitaxial diffusion transistor shovn in Figure 2.1 is approximately
55 - 10 u .

- 33 -
FOI‘OFIWChhlIJSE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For comparison, we shall give figures which snow the layout density of memory
elenents with insulation using p-n junctions, dielectric insulation as well as
polyplanar insulation. A polyplanar matrix of memory elements with a capacity of
1,0?!» bits can be placed on a chip with an area of 2.6 “:2; while for the same
matrix with dielectric insulation a chip with an area of lo 1-2 is needed and for a
matrix with p-n junction insulation, an area of about 5.2 mnz.

Standard isoplanar isoplanar technology makes it possible to obtain transistors
with the smallest dimensions by virtue of the capability of producing thin base
regions and small collector regions with oxide side walls [ll]. The process of
creating an isoplanar structure (Figure 2.4) begins with the formation of the n*
regions in the p-type silicon wafer. Then, a thin p-type epitaxial layer is grown
over the entire surface of the wafer. The builtdup epitaxial layer is coated with
a layer of silicon nitride from which a protective mask is formed to mke the
transistorsand resistors. The regions not protected by the nitride are etched
away to a relatively great depth: down to alnost the hidden layer. After this,
lot: tern low temperature oxidation is carried out, as a result, the deep etching
regions are filled with insulating oxide, while the region coated with nitride
rennin unoxidiaed. To make contacts to the collector regions, deep 11* diffusion
is carried out. Por this, the nitride is selectively etched with the correspond-
ing areas of the silicon, which are practically untouched by the insulating oxide.
The deep diffusion regions prove to be surrounded by the insulating oxide, which
separates them from the base regions of the transistors. After creating the
resistive regions, the nitride remaining on the wafer surface is etched away and
replaced with oxide. hitter windows are formed in the oxide in which the dif-
fusion is carried out. Then the contacts to the base regions are opened up, the
aluminum is deposited and with its etching, the formation of the structures is
completed.

The further refinement of this technology will make it possible to obtain trans-
istors with areas twice as small as compared to the original technological process
through the capability of fabricating not only the base regions, but also the
emitter regions directly adjacent to the oxide regions. The reduction in the

area of the transistors fabricated using isoplanar technology is illustrated in
Figure 2.5.

The isoplanar process provides for the creation of structures with a high layout
density, since with a minisum number of technological variables, there is the
capability of substantially reducing the dinensions of the insulating region. In
this case, the surface resistance is quite high, which makes it possibel to obtain
optimal electrical parameters for the Ic's.

2.2.3. Separating a Wafer into Chips and Hounting the 10's
From several hundreds up to thousands of chips are fabricated simultaneously on a

semiconductor wafer. The electrical parameters of the 10 chips are measured even
on the uncut wafer, and the nonoperating Ic's are marked with paint [12].

-31.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
/////////'”/ -*-"=7//""’="

IIIIIICIIIZIIIIII1II

”(a

Figure 2.6. The sequence for the fabrication of a transistor structure
using isoplanar technology.

Key: a. The formation of the epitaxial layer;
h. The etching of the insulating regions;
c. The fornation of the insulating oxide and deep

diffusion;

. Final netsllisation;

. Epitaxial p-layer;

p-vafer;

. Deep diffusion;

Photoresist;

. Epitaxial layer;

. Nitride;

. pdwafer;

. silicon nitride;

. Etching;

. p-vafer.

OOQNOUIFUNHO-

3-

"Isop lanar I" "lsoplanar 11"
.MI'

I

.l
.‘

t\\\\\\\

%

   

Figure 2.5. A comparison of the areas of mics nde using "lsoplanar 1"
and "Isoplanar 2" technologies.

Key: 1. Area of 1,600 1132;
2. Area of 1,130 1:32.

-35-
NROFHGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prior to breaking the wafer into chips, it is glued to a special film, which
maintains the mutual positioning of the chips following the separation and prior
to the operation of mounting them in a package. The separation of a wafer into
individual chips can be accomplished in various ways. Scribing and breaking the
wafer are accomplished by applying a grid of lines on the surface of the wafer
using a diamong cutter with the subsequent breaking of the wafer along these lines
with the application of bending forces (the method is similar to that of cutting
glass). After separating the wafer, some of the "rectangles" can have visible
chipped places, cracks and-other defects. This is a frequently used and the
simplest method of separating wafers. Equipment uists for making the grooves by
means of a high energy laser beam with subsequent "cleaving" of the wafer.

The marked nonOperating Ic's are rejected right away while the remaining chips are
inspected under a microscope (especially the points where there are chipped
places). The chips are mounted on the metal bases of the packages by means of
brazing with the formation of a gold eutectic compound. In glass or plastic
packages, in which there are no metal plates in the bases of the packages, the
chips are fastened to the support frame with easily fusible glass in an inert gas
atmsphere at a temperature of up to 525 °c. Then the output bonding pads for the
internal leads of the package are installed.

2.2.6. The Hermetic Sealing of 1c Chips

To protect the elements of an 1c (especially if the 1c will be delivered as an
unpackaged unit) against eatposure to the external environment (moisture, dust,
mechanical loads). its chip should be hermetically sealed. The “what hermetic
sealing can be produced by coating the chip (or hybrid 00 board) with a thin layer
of protective varnish or compound (conformal coating). To protect Ic's, one mist
use organic potting and coating materials which have good electrical insulating
and moisture protective properties, resistance to exposure to elevated temperatures
and to the cyclical actions of low and high temperatures, as well as have no
incluence on circuit parameters, be elastic and reparable.

The selfvulcaniring elastic type KL compounds based on low molecular weight
silicone SKTN and SKTI-l rubbers can be recouended, where these operate in a
temperature range of from -60 to +300 °C and under conditions of elevated hmidity,
as well as type PE! hermetic sealing compounds basedﬁon epoxy resin, modified with
carbosilate rubber and polyester. These compounds are distinguished by their
strength, elasticity and freeze resistance and provide for stability of the para-
meters are well as inunity to thermal shocks and long term exposure to elevated
humidity. Used as the materials for moisture protection are the SD-ls, 03-231,
[IR-930 and 3-6100 varnishes, the I'm-096 epoxyycreeol varnish, the K47 and K-S?
silicone varnishes, as well as the EP-MT, EP-9l, BP—92 and BP-9lllo epoxy

enamels. 1-18, viksent [sic] and m compounds are used to protect the surfaces
of chips.

All of the materials enumerated above possess good electrical insulating proper-
ties: a volume resistance of man to 1013 ohm ° m, a dielectric permittivity

.. 36 ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of c - 3 to 5 (at a frequency of 1 Mia), tan 6 g 0.005 to 0.01 (1 Mile) and an
electrical strength of 20 to 90 KV/m. However, conformal coatings which make it
possible to create so-called unpackaged IC's do not provide the requisite protec-
tion against exposure to the external environment and can be used only in conjunc-
tion with overall vacuum type hermetic sealing of the entire electronic unit or
piece of equipment. For reliable protection against exposure to the enviror-ent
during operation, the chips or boards are packed in sealed packages.

2.2.5. The Manufacture of 1c Packages

As was indicated above, the major function of the package is to protect 1c elements
against the influence of the environment, assure normal operation of the 1c during
the entire service life and provide reliable uchanical and electrical bonding of
the board or chip to the other elements of the electronic assembly. The following
requirements are placed on an to package.

The package should assure the requisite electrical connections between the circuit
elements and the leads, and at the same time guarantee electrical insulation
between the individual leads. The package structure should provide for heat
sinking from the Ic chip; the package should be made of materials which are inert
with respect to chemically corrosive coqonents in the environment (for example,
oxygen, moisture and salts; in some cases, possible electrochemical processes
should be taken into account, such as corrosion in the presence of electrolytes).
Moreover, the package should be IL’ ficiently strong to protect the re elements
against various kinds of damage during mountim and operation, but the package
structure should be well suited to manufacture and applications (for this purpose,
one must strive towards universality of the processes of mounting the Ic's in
equipment). The package should have a convenient structure for printed circuit
mounting with respect to the dicnsions and the arrangement of the leads. Also of
no small isportance is the fact that the package should protect the to chip
against the influence of light (and where possible, other external radiation), as
well as absorb the natural radiation of the circuit components thenelves and
serve as a shield against external magnetic fields (or create a path for shorting
the magnetic flux).

Pour kinds of structural and production process designs of 1c packages are the
most widespread. The netsl-glass package has a metal cap and a glass (or metal)
base with the leads insulated and secured by nans of glass; the cap is attached
to the base by welding or soldering. The metal-ceramic package has a ntal cap
and a ceramic base; the cap is connected to the base by potting with a moisture
resistant compound. The ceramic package has a ceramic cap and base; the cap is
connected to the base by soldering. The plastic package (the least expensive) has
a plastic body, which is produced by means of compression molding of the chip and
the frame framework for the leads.

The complexity of fabricating IC packages increases with increasing functional
complexity of the Ic's, where the cost of a package in a nudnr of cases becomes
greater than the fabrication cost for the semiconductor chip (or the substrate
with the film elements). men an 1c is housed in a package, defects frequently

-37-
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm: 2.2 Integrated circuit Packagea

 

 

 

1.9.133..- w 1 ht mtg—.—
tion in , vitg '
608T ' ' Sub- Sub- lumber
"“7 79 Baaic Characteriatica ”at” Package ' .. :33: “:3.

1202.14 Rectangular, natal- 4.5 l9.5:l4.5:(4-5) 16:8 14

glaaa
1203.15 The aane 4.5 19.5x14.5x(3-5) 16:8 15
1211.15 The aura 7.0 22.0:19.5x5 17:15 15
1211.15 The age 12.0 295319.535 222.17 15
1303.36 The use 12.0 29119116 26:16 36
1209.29 The aane 17.0 3912M 34:20 29
2123.14 ' Rectangular, plaatic 1.0 19x7.2x3.2 3x3 14
2102.14 The use 1.2 19.7.2333 5:3 16
2103.16 The cane
2135.24 Rectangular, netal

ceramic 3.4 29:14.514 4x4 24
2204.48 Rectangular, ceranic 5.0 31:16.53!» 8:8 48
3101.08 Circular, metal-glen 1.5 0 I 9.5, I! I 4.6 383 8
3103.12 The eane 1.5 D I 9.5, I! I 4.6 333 12
4104.14 Rectangular, natal-

-glaaa 1.0 1036.682.2 4.9ﬂ 14
4110.16 The not 1.0 12.089.512.5 5513.5 16
4116.24 Rectangular, metal-

ceranic 1 . 6 19 . 5:12:12 . 6 7 . 5:5 24
4132.40 Rectangular, netal-

glaaa 6 . 0 35 . 5:23. 5:4 . 5 24:15 40
4136.48 Rectangular, ceramic 12.0 3632415 30:15 48
4137.50 The cane 12.0 36.5:24.5x5 30x15 50
4140.64 Rectangular, netal-

glaae 20 . 0 54 . 5x38. 5:5 30:24 64

 

occur which are re1ated to the poor quality of the nounting or aealing of the
packagea. For thia reaaon, two to three packagea are aoneti-ea expended before
obtaining a good It.

Standardization of the atructural deaign of packagea playa a great part in improv-
ing the reliability of 10% and microelectronic equipment. At the preaent tine,
608T 17467-79 [atate standard 17467-79] "Integrated circuita. Baaic Dinenaiona",
ia in force in the 088R, which eatabliahea the requirenanta placed on the ahape and
dinenaiona of packagea and integrated circuits (Table 2.2).

In accordance with thia atandard, packagea can he of five typea. An outline
drauing of the atructural deaip of a rectangal'ar package with leada perpendicqu

-33-
FOROFHGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the plane of the base and arranged within the bounds of the projection of the

package body onto the plane of the base (a package of the first type) is shown in
Figure 2.6a.

The second type of package with rectangular leads, perpendicular to the plane of
the package base and going beyond the bounds of the projection of the package
body onto the plane of the base is depicted in tigurc 2.6b, while a circular
package with leads perpendicular to the base of the package and arranged within
the bounds of the projection of the package body onto the plane of the base (the
third type of package) is shown in Figure 2.6c. Finally, a drawing of a rectangu-
lar package with leads arranged parallel to the plane of the base and going beyond

the bounds of the projection of its body onto the plane of the base (the ﬁourth
type of package) is shown in tigure 2.6d.

 

Figure 2.6. Outline drawings of package structures.

The fifth type of package is a rectangular flat "leadless package". The electri-
cal connection of an IC housed in such a package is accomplished by means of
netsllized contact pads about the perimeter of the package (Figure 2.6e).

Packages which are similar in terns of their structural design are broken down
according to overall size and connecting dimensions into standard sizes, to each
of which a number is assigned which consists of the designation of the package

subtype (12, 21, 31, 41, 51) and a two place nunber which designates the ordinal
number of the standard size.

- 39 -
FOR 0‘11C1A1.USIICMWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spacing of the leads for the first and second types of packages is set at
2.5 III and for the fourth and fifth types of packages at 1.25 an. The leads can
have either a circular or rectangular cross~section.

2.3. Specific Features of the Technology of 16's with a High Level of Integration

Integrated circuits of the first and second levels of integration (see 51.6) have
made it possible to integrate the circuitry of traditional electronic equipment
(these IC's appeared exclusively because of the influence of equipnent problens).
Integrated circuits of higher levels of integration are more the result of tech-
nological ”initiatives": these IC's run ahead of the needs of equipment and are yet
another step foreward in the continuing and continuous process of the further
evolution of electronics [13]. The transition from the low level of integration
IC technology to 1.51 technology takes place under the motto "Prom Circuit Integra-
tion to Systens Integration". For example, following the appearance of 10's of
the fourth and fifth levels of integration, i.e., where the nunber of elements is
more than 1,000 and 10,000, it became possible to produce new, quite complex func-
tional assemblies such as memories and microprocessor sets on a single chip.

The increase in the level of integration of standard devices coincides with the
group technique of fabricating 10's on a seniconductor wafer (or dielectric sub-
strate), where several hundreds of identical circuits are produced simltaneously.
Then the wafer is cut apart and chips are obtained, each containing one simple
circuit (in which case, very many chips are rejected). The good chips are mounted
in a package, where the chip is connected to the external leads of the package.

The equipment manufacturer, by using connections made outside the packages (for
example, printed circuit conductors).again combines a considerable nulber of identi-
cal circuits so as to obtain the requisite subsysten or system [16] .

It is obviously desirable to eliminate intermediate operations (cutting the wafer,
mounting the chips in a package, connecting the chips to the package leads, mount-
ing the individual packages on a printed circuit board and connecting them to the
printed circuit conductors). For this, one can leave the simple circuits on the
original wafer, provide them with a definite system of interconnections, and there-
by combine them into a subsysten on the wafer itself.

The overwhelning majority of defects in integrated circuits appear in the systems
for transition contacts and interconnections. The contact pads of the chips are
connected to the external package leads by means of thermal conpreasion bonds.
The breakage of these bonds which are made using manual labor is a rather wide-
spread type of failure.

In semiconductor 10's of the third and higher levels of integration, the set of
sinple circuits vhich are joined together in a complex circuit is placed on a
single chip and these circuits are connected together by netallized aluminus
tracks. It is clear that in this case the overall nutter of external therml
compression connections is basically reduced (equal to only the masher of package
leads), something which leads to an inprovement in the reliability. The reliabi-
lity is also improved as a result of reducing the dimensions of the 10 as cowared

-40-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the dimensions of an assembly consisting of the corresponding muster of simple
Ic's, since the structure proves to be stiffer, less sensitive to vibrationnand
shocks. Increasing the level of integration leads to a further increase in the
layout density, to a reduction in the overall dimensions, and consequently the
weight of radio electronic equipment assemblies, since the percentage of the volue
and weight of the equipment allocated for the gaps between the 16's, the packages
of the individual Ic's and the printed circuit boards joining the 10's is reduced.

By virtue of the more optimal design of individual circuits taking the specific
loads and connections into account, it is possible to reduce the power consumption
of individual stages, which in the case of a high level of integration, can yield
an extremely perceptible gain.

with the increase in the level of integration, it becomes possible in practice to
realize a high operational speed for individual (usually micropower) siqle

circuits, since this reduces to a minimum the parasitic capacitance of connecting
conductors.

However, increasing the level of integration entails an entire series of difficul-
ties which are manifest at various stages in the design of the 10's. Thus, with
an increase in the level of integration, the ICdevelopment time rises substanti-
ally. The labor intensity of the manual design of 16's can be approxinted using
the following formulas: the design time for analog 16's is 1‘. - 70 - Ito-55; for
digital Ic':s, the time i. rd - as . 110.55, where r i. the labor intensity of
the design work in hours, while u is the umber of elements in-the 1c.

The design process can be accelerated by using machine techniques. In the case of
co:8uter assisted design, the design time is substantially curtailed: P - 22 -

- '22. The given functions were derived by Bulgarian specialists within the
framework of scientific and technical cooperation of cm meaber nations.

The introduction of computer assisted design entails considerable preparatory
work: the acquisition of expensive computers, the development of the relevant
programs, and the mastery of machine design methods. All of this requires con-
siderable funds and time, and for this reason, there is a certain amount of dif-
ficulty in the development of 10's of high levels of integration.

The actual capability of increasing the level of integration of 10's is tied to a
great extent to the refinement of the production process quality in the process of
manufacturing series produced products, i.e. , to increasing the percentage yeild
of good "conventional" products. The better the technological process is worked
out, the more stable are its parameters and operating mode, the higher the percent-
age yield of good to, and the greater the level of integration with satisfactory
economic parameters that a new 10 can have. -

The process of measuring to parameters poses considerable difficulty. In order to
be sure of the requisite quality of all series produced Ic's, it is necessary to
make a large voltne of measurements rapidly. tor this reason. the quality control
and measurement equipment needed for testing Ic's takes the form of a complex
automated system which is computer controlled.

- (,1 -
FOR OMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, a measurement system for testing integrated circuits should feed
500-bit code combinations to the circuit. There are systems which execute up to
100,000 tests on one to at a speed of from 20,000 to 286,000 tests per second,
where up to 250 measurements can be made per second on each 10 lead.

Despite the indicated difficulties. the level of integration of 10's is increasing
at a very fast pace in step with the development of the capabilities of technology.
It is anticipated that such a trend will be maintained at least until the l980's.
Thus, the number of elements on a single chip for semiconductor Ic's nay reach
200,000 to 1,000,000 in 1980. According to forecasts, the ultinste possible
density of components for both bipolar and H08 integrated circuits will be achieved
by the 1980's.

The reduction of bipolar transistor dimensions is limited by junction breakdown,
the ”punch-through" and doping impurity fluctuation phenomena. For circuits uhich
operate only in dynamic modes. the package density is limited by the power dissipa-
tion.

The reduction of H08 transistor dimens'ions is limited by the breakdown of the gate-
oride gap and the "punch-throudt" of the drain-source gap. The power dissipation
and nigration of metal particles limits the layout density of H08 lc's which oper-
ate in a dynamic mode and complementary HOS IC's. l'or static circuits using HOB
transistors with single polarity channels, the power dissipation is a major

factor which limits the lumber of circuit functions on a chip (and consequently,
the nudier of elements). The theoretical limit for the layout density of ms
transistors on a wafer amounts to 107 to 103 elements per cm2, and for bipolar
transistors, is 106 elements per cnz.

Three major trends in the long term increase in the level of integration of
seniconductor Ic’s have been noted at the present time.

First of all, there is a further refinenent of tenporary technological processes
and the development of new processes underway. lhus, the transition from photo-
lithogrsphy and diffusion of the doping impurities to the use of ion inlantation
and electron lithography makes it possible to increase the layout density of
elenents by an order of nsgnitude and substantially boost the percentage yield of
good products. The layout density is also increased by an order of magnitude
when injection supply circuits are used.

Secondly, an attewt is being made to change over to larger chips by refining the
processes of photolithography and diffusion and improving the quality of semi-
conductor material. Thus, while the majority of 1c developed during 1970-l973
had chip dimensions on the order of 1.5 r 1.5 In, in 1973—1975 chips of from

2.5 x 2.5 u up to 6.0 r 6.0 In were being used and by 1980, it is planned that
series produced Ic's will be manufactured on chips with dinensions of 10 as r 10 1-
and more.

Finally, the techniques of IC design are being refined, new circuit design
approaches are being developed (for example, one transistor is used instead of

-42-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three in the basic circuit of a random access memory, but it is equipped with
capacitors), and injection logic circuits are being introduced.

The level of integration of hybrid integrated circuits will be increased primarily
through the use of increasingly complicated unencapsulated semiconductor IC's [15].
The possibilities of this way of increasing the level of integration are consider-
able, while the use of unencapsulated microassembliea makes it possible to design
radio electronic equipment of any degree of complexity.

we will note that at the beginning of the 1970's, progress in integrated circuit
technology which had made it possible to sharply increase the level of integra-
tion of semiconductor IC's, was most effectively used by designers of electronic
computers and their assemblies, and prinrily, by my designers. lie shall con-
sider a few examples of such devices. In 1975, the electronics industry started
the production of main memories of (0,096 bits using nos transistors made on a chip
with dimensions of 4 x lo.7 ms and containing about 20,000 elements.

Progress in computer miniaturization through the use of IC's is characterised by
the following data: desk type B to lO-digit computers (calculators) produced in
l96b-l965 weighed more than 25 kg; in 1970, computers using several large scale
integrated circuits weighed about 1 kg and in 1972, the production of pocket cal-
culators just one ‘IC in all was started, where these calculators weigh 200 to 300 g.
At the present time, the eight digit ('Blektronika 33-04" pocket electronic calcula-
tor has dimensions of 120 x 78 x 20 ms, weighs 200 g and has a power consuption of
600 m“. The pocket calculator is designed around four Ic'es which contain 7,000

H08 transistors. Calculators have been developed which perform four arithmetic

operations, which are placed in a cigarette case, fountain pen and even in wrist
watches.

Pocket calculators for engineers are produced at the present time which perform

20 to «0 and even more operations, including taking logarithms, calculating trigoP
nometric functions and converting polar to cartesian coordinates. Thus, the
“Elektronika 33-21" electronic pocket calculator (a 10 digit calculator) carries
out 30 standard functions and operations (arithmetic, power, trigonometric, loga-
rithnic and exponential). ﬂoreover, the pocket calculator makes it possible to
program calculations (up to 60 steps). The electronic portion of the pocket calcu-
lator is designed around four IC's which consume less than one watt.

At the beginning of the 1970's, the central portion characteristic of any computer,
i.e. , the processor (admittedly, having trunckated properties as cosmared to the
processor of a "large" computer) came to be placed on a single chip primarily at
the initiative of technologists who were looking for ways to apply their achieve-
ments in the field of producing regular semiconductor structures. Such semi-
conductor circuits were given the name microprocessors. Microprocessors, in con-
junction with other IC's (read only and main memories, input/output devices as
well as interfaces) form a finite microprocessor circuit, which is built on one

printed circuit board. Both a conventional computer as well as a specialised
control computer can be made from it.

Integrated circuits of low integration levels were previously for the design of
the central processors of computers. It has become possible at the present time

- 1.3 -
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to execute the majority of central processor functions (admittedly, at low opera-
tional speeds) by means of one or more third or fourth integration level lc's.
Microprocessor sets (three to five packages) are the new "building block" of
casputer design. It is interesting that the appearance of such sets has caused a
great deal of trouble of equipment designers; who had to change their traditional
approach to the design of digital and even analog equipment.

he majority of modern microprocessors operate with word lengths of lo and 8 bits,
using parallel processing in this case. The difference between microprocessors
and single chip calculators consist in the fact that they are program controlled
devices (the pernanent or progra-sable microprogrem is placed in an individual 10
of the permanent memory). The advantage of nicroprocsasors consists in the fact
that where they are used in a specific system, only a small number of 10 packages
is required, while adaptation for the solution of s new problsn is accomplished by
changing the control progran.

Not just computer circuits can be made in the form of complex circuit configurations.
For example, the digital circuitry for a voltmeter with four to five decades can
be placed on a single chip (in this case, an 1c having 2‘ leads contains binary
decimal counters with a division factor of up to 100,000, a control circuit for the
digital display, a control signal generator, a data erase control circuit and a
five place ring counter). Electronic wrist watches have become ordinary, where an
Ic generate the time markers. converts then to a decimal code and turns on the
appropriate segenents of the light displays through encoders. The electronic
industry is producing 10's for digital dialing telephone sets having a memory of

32 eight-place nubers. The lC'is made on a 3.5 x 3.5 - chip and contains about
3,000 elements.

In the development and fabrication of integrated circuits with levels of integra-
tion, questions of nsterials science, semiconductor device theory and the circuit
design of radio electronic equipment aseenblies merge into a single set of problems,
and for this reason, It: designers are also compelled to resolve certain design
questions which previously c-e within the competence of radio electronic equipment
designers. For engineers who specialized in the field of 1c design, this leads to
the necessity of the unique "integrating“ of knowledge fron various fields of
science and engineering.

It is important to note the initiating role played by lc's having an increased
level of integration in the planning of subsequent generations of electronic
equipment. It is becoming possible to construct not just highly reliable equipnent,
but also equipment which will prove to be automatically adaptable to the external
environment.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. "Hikronoshch'naya elektronika" ["llicropower Electronics"). translation from the
English edited by Ye.l. Gal'perin, Sovetskoye Radio, 1967.

-44-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Khaner D., Bigchers 0.. "Tekhnologiya toletoplenochnykh gibridnykb integral'nykh
skhen" ["‘l'hick Piln Hybrid Integrated Circuit Technology"], translation fro- the
English edited by 1.1). Sherlergor, Moscow, Mir, 1975.

Sergeyev v.s., Boshenin LN... "Integral'nyye gibridnyye nikroskheny" ("Bybrid
Integrated Circuits"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1973.

Gonorer M., "Mikroelektronika tolstykh plenok" ["‘l‘hick Pills Microelectronica"],
translation from the English edited by 1.0. Shereergor, Moscow, Mir, 1973.

Veyko V.I.. Libenson M.M., Melyucbcv Adi. . "Lasernaya tskhnologiya" ["Laaer
Technology"], Moscow. "Blektronika" Institute, 1970.

Lebedav 0.1., Ogivin M.A., "Konstruirovaniye radioelektronnoy apparatury na
osnove integral'nykh skhea" ["Badioelectronic Equip-ant Design Based on Integra-
ted Circuits"], Leningrad State Uniuersity, 1974.

Ushakov N.N.,"‘rekhnologiya eleuntov vychislitel'nykh mhin" ["Coeputsr Conponent
Technology"], Moscow, Vyssbaye Sbkola, 1976. -

Medlend 6., Diken 0., Richardson 3., "Integral'nyye skheny: Osnovy proyektiro-
vaniya i tektmologii" ["Integrated Circuits: Design and Technology tundanent-
als"), translated from the English, Edited by 1.1. Martyushov, Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio, 1970.

Ivanov-Yeaipovich N.K., "‘l‘ekhnologiya nikroskhea" ['Microcircuit Technology"],
Moscow. Vysshaya Shkola, 1972.

Penin V., Lou I... "Integral'nyye ekbeny na MDI-priborakh" ["Integrated Circuits
Using MOS Devices"), translated fro. the English. edited by LN. Karlesinskiy,
Moscow, Mir Piblishers, 197$.

'l‘aryankov S.A.,"Die1ektricheskaya isolystsiya elegantov integral'nykh ekhen"
("Dielectric Insulation of Integrated Circuit ﬁle-ante”. Moscow, Sovetskoye
Radio, 1975.

Yefinov I.Ye., Kozyr' I.Ya., "Oenovy nikroelektroniki" ("Principles of Micro-
electronics"], Moscow, Svyaz‘ Publishers, 1975.

Khanbata A., "Bol'shiye integral'nyye ekheny” ("Large Scale Integrated
Circuits"), translated from the Bnglisb, edited by 3.1. Yeraolayev, Moecov, Mir,
1971.

Curevich 0.2., Yelizarov V.N., Ruvinskiy 8.1., “Bol'shiye integral'nyye skbeuy
1 EVM chetvertogo pokoleniya" ["Large Scale Integrated Circuits and Fourth
Generation Computers"), Moscow, "Blektronika" Institute, 1970.

Chernyshev A.A., Aksenov A.I. , Ivanov V.I., "Beekorpusnyye poluprovodnikovyye
pribory" ["Unencapeulated Semiconductor Devices"], Moscow, Bnergiya, 1973.

- as -'
roe ommussouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER THREE DIGITAL INTBGRAIED CIRCUITS

3.1. Designation and Application

Digital integrated circuits (Tsls) are electronic devices which make it possible
to construct practically all computer assemblies and circuits. In the over-
whelming majority of modern computers and digital devices. the data being
processed is represented in the form of binary numbers. The variables and
functions of them which can take on only two values, 0 and l, are called logic
variables or logic functions. The properties of logic functions are studied

in the algebra of logic, while the devices which realize the logic functions

are called logic elements.

The simplest combination logic elements occupy an important place among modern
digital Ic's which are being produced by the electronics industry in both
packaged and unencapsulated variants. along with complex circuits which realise
the functions of entire circuits and assemblies (adders, counters, registers,
memory elements). Among the existing logic elements (potential, pulse and
pulse-potential), potential logic elements have become the most widespread.

the distinctive feature of which is the existence of no coupling between the
circuit inputs and outputs. Direct coupled circuit designs eliminate the
limitations placed on the lower signal frequency [1]. Circuit designs using
the multiplicity of potential type digital 16's are realized on the basis of

a number of standard basic functional components. The logic functions which
can be realised using logic elements incorporated in the series of digital 16's
and those which have found the most widespread applications in the construction
of computer circuits and digital automation equipment are treated below [2, 3].

3.2. Logic Functions Which Can Be Realized Using Digital 10's

The simplest logic_function is the NOT function (logic negation), which is
written as Y(x) - x. The truth values of the function Y(x) which are obtained
by means of negating the variable x as a function of the truth values of the
latter are determined from Table 3.1. Such a table is called a truth table.

TABLE 3.1 Negation is realized in electronic circuits by means of
a NOT switching element designed around an amplifying

Negation device. The signals at the switch output are inverted
depending on the values of the input signals and corres-
X Vim-7 pond to Table 3.1. There exist 2 - 16 different logic
functions for the two variables 11 and X2, each of
o I which is determined by four possible combinations of the
' 0 variables [1].

___————_

Four of the most widespread types of logic gates are
listed in Table 3.2 as well as the functions they perform, their designations
and names. Each of the cited logic functions can also be extended to a larger
number of independent variables, while the logic elements which realise these
functions can also have not just two. but also n inputs. In actual digital

- 45 -
FOIIMNHCIALIﬂﬂEONlY
TABLE 3.2 The Host Widespread $1259 of Logic Elements and Their Functions‘

 

 

 

Variables
Logic Function rllo 0 1 1 Function
Element Performed x210 l 0 1 Designation
AND Y - 21x2 0 0 0 1 Conjunction
HAND Y - xlxz l l 1 0 Shaffer function
08 Y - X1 + X; 0 l 1 1 Disjumction
NOR Y - £1 + X2 1 0 0 0 Pearce function

 

Ic's, which take the form of logic gates, the number of inputs is limited by
the number of leads in the standard packages, and as a rule, does not exceed
eight. Following conversion of the Shaffer stroke and negation logic functions,
the conclusion can be drawn that the function Y(31X2 ) . X132 is derived from
the Y(x) - x function by means of replacing the argument x in it with the other
logic function Y(x1x2) - x1, x2. Such an operation is called superposition.
Complex logic functions can be obtained by using superposition.

The system of simple logic functions based on which one can derive any logic
function using only the superposition operation is called a functionally com-
plete system. For example, the following five systems vill be functionally

complete [1]:

y-x- “5.33:3..." m: "— ...._._..
r-xaxz -Ioauneaaaa. cggu‘nugggon
Y-x.+x.-mumsx disjunction (3.0

‘ Y-Y — muss-e. th .
V-XIX- - teem-ms: conjunction (315

[ Y—X — missus. negation

r -X.+x. — mans; “Qumran ' on
Y - XIX; conjunction negation (Shaffer stroke function); (3.6)
Y - x1 + X2 disjunction negation (Pierce function). (3.5)

The functions missing in systems (3.2) ... (3.5) can be derived on the basis
of the well known rules of algebraic logic [1]. Each of the systems indicated
above can be realized by means of the appropriate logic gates. Thus, it is
sufficient to have one HAND (or NOR) logic gate in order to use it as the basis
for the construction of the entire diverse set of logic circuits. However,
such an approach requires a large number of digital Ic packages for the
realization of the computer unite and assemblies. In practice, logic gates

- a7 -
roaomaALusaomv
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are incorporated in a digital 10 series which not only realize a functionally
complete system, but also have considerable diversity as regards the number
of inputs, which makes it possible to nininise the volume of hardware in

equipsent design.

with respect to the kind of logic function which can be realized, the basic
logic elements can be broken down into the simplest one-step (All), on. 801‘,
HAND, NOR) and two-step (AND-OR, AND-OR-NOT, etc.) logic gates.

It must be noted that all potential type logic gates can operate in two logic
modes. The logic function which can he realised by the same element depends

on the designations assigned to the electrical levels. If the "1" level is
taken as the high level signal, "positive logic" is realized in the operation
of an (NOR) gate. If a low signal level is taken as the "1" level, then we have
"negative logic" for the operation of an (RAND) element [1]. As a rule, the
data sheet designation of the logic element corresponds to the function realised
in the "positive logic" node.

Complex functional units of both a combinatorial type (half-adders) and with a
memory (flip-flops) can he designed around logic elements with single and
two-step logic. All of the modern series of digital IC's as a rule include
various types of flip-flops, which take the form of a device with two stable
states, containing a bistable memory element (the flip-flop itself) and a
control circuit [1]. RS, D and JR flip-flops are the types which have become
the most widespread.

A Rs flip-flop has two information inputs: R and S. when s - l (the "one"
input) and R - 0 (the "zero" input). the following signals appear at the flip-
flop outputs: at the direct output Q - l and at the inverting output, Q - 0.
When 8 -_0 and R - 1, the flip-flop output signals assume the opposite states
(Q - 0. Q - 1). This flip-flop does not have a clock input. The truth table
for a RS flip-flop is given in Table 3.3. With the simultaneous arrival of

a "1" signal at the R and 5 inputs, the output signals of the flip-flop are
indeterminate, and for this reason, it is necessary to preclude the node in
devices based on a RS flip-flop where both of the R and s signals are equal to
one. The as flip-flop (a bistable element) is present as the memory in other
types of flip-flops.

A D flip-flop has an information input I) and a synchronization (clock) input.
The state of the flip-flop after the arrival of the clock pulse at the point

in time (t + 1) coincides with the level of the input signal at the D input
which acted at the point in time t. The input signal is delayed in a D flip-

flop [l]. The truth table for a D flip-flop is given in Table 3.h.

A JK flip-flop has two information inputs, J and K, as well as a synchronization

clock input. In contrast to the RS flip-flop, given the condition that J - l
and K - 1, it inverts the previous state (i.e.. reverses with the simultaneous
arrival of J - l and K - l). The truth table for a JK flip-flop is given in

Table 3.5.

- 68 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 3.3 TABLE 3.6
Truth Table for a RS Flip-Flog Truth Table for a D P1121102

Ines u+l|

      

-°-‘°-°-‘°

l
I
l
l
0
0
0
0

, Kay: 1. Outputs (after the clock
'~ pulse is fed in). -

Key: 1. Preceding intonation; TABLE 3‘5
2. Information being entered; Truth Table fora J! Mignon
3. Outputs; -. h . ..
Io. Inputs; “I lam! t
5. Outputs.

  

It should be noted that besides the
functional classification given above,
distinctions can be drawn between
flip-flops in accordance with the
manner of data entry [1]. They can be
asynchronous, where the information is
entered directly with the arrival of
the intonation signal, and clocked,
where the information entry is accom-
plished only with the feed of an -
enabling clock pulse (fed to a special Key‘
clock input).' The actuation of a flip- °
flop can occur simultaneously with the

arrival of the clock signal or after it

is completed. The operational principle of flip-flops will be treated in more
detail in subsequent sections in light of specific types of 10's.

           

————°°°° 5
3°99----
--9°- -°°

1. Output (after the clock
pulse is fed in).

The conventional designations (functional schematics) of the logic elements and
f lip-f lope given above which are incorporated in the most widely used digital
16 series and examples of their realization by means of logic gates performing
various functions are given in Table 3.6.

-59-

FOIOFHCIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3.6 Functional Schenetics of Logic Gates and Flip-Flops, Examples of the
Realization of Vang! Functions b2 Means of Logic Gates

Element Function Element Function
(Circuit) Ferforned (Circuit) Perfonled
nor (inverter) 1 - E man-nor (circuit Y - 3122 + x3115
(Figure 1) based on RAND gstes)
AND (conjunction Y - 1112 (Figure 7)
gste) (Figure 2) AND-0240‘! (Figure 8) Y - XIX; + X3XI.
HAND (Shefier Y - x1112 Asynchronous RS flip- -
stroke function) flop (the inputs in
(Figure 3) the F. and 8 groups
_ ere coupled using
OR (disjunction Y x1 4- X2 AND logic) (Figure 9)

gate) (Figure 5)

 

A JK flip-flop, - -

22:92:23?” «summa-
ciple of two stage
AND-OR (circuit ' Y - x1112 + storage of the dsts
based on RAND gates) X3x‘ (the inputs in the
(Figure 6) J and 1 groups are

coupled using A!!!)
logic) (Figure 10)

A D flip-flop with s -
control input and R

("0" set) end S ("1"

set) output (Figure ll)

 

- 50 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.3. The Classification of Digital Integrated Circuits and Their Main
Electrical Parameters

The development of microelectronics over the past decade has promoted the
appearance of miniature, highly reliable and economic computers based on digi-
tal 10's. The constant increase in the requirements calling for increased
operational speed and reduced power consumption of computer hardware has led

to the design of various bipolar digital 10's, the development of which, as

a rule, is undertaken in series. A series is a set of IC's which have a single
circuit design and structural and production process technology. Incorporated
in a digital series, along with combination circuits which perform simple logic
functions and flip-flops (memory elements) are also integrated circuits which
take the form of entire arithmetic assemblies and modules. The series of .
bipolar digital IC's being produced by the electronics industries are broken
down into the following types of circuits according to the types of basic
electronic switches: resistor-transistor logic (RTL), diode transistor logic
(DTL), resistor capacitor transistor logic (RCTL), transistor transistor logic
(TTL), and emitter coupled transistor logic (ECTL). In these designations,

the word logic is substituted for the concept of electronic switch.

Digital IC's using HOS structures (enriched channel p-type transistors, CMDS
circuits using complementary transistors, etc.) have become widespread along
with bipolar circuits. Although the RTL, RCTL and DTL series continue to be
produced by industry, they are only used to put together equipment sets for
series produced radioelectronic equipment and are not used in new designs.

The TTL, ECTL and M08 circuits have become the most widespread in modern equip-
ment. Experience has shown that these types of digital 10's are distinguished
by better electrical parameters, are convenient to use, have a higher level of
integration and possess a greater functional diversity. Thus, for example,
about forty IC's are included in the 155 series, while in the K165 series there
are IC's having more than 9,000 equivalent elements on a chip. The promising
series of digital 10': of the types mentioned above, which are intended for
applications in industrial and consumer electronics equipment, are shown in
Table 3.7.

As has already been indicated, the majority of digital Ic's incorporated in

a series take the form of logic gates which perform the NOT, RAND, NOR and
AND-OR-NOT functions. These are the so-called basic functional elements.
Their main electrical parameters govern the characteristics of practically

all of the IC's included within the complement of a series. The possibilities
for joint operation of IC's of different series in the same equipment depend
on these parameters. A number of the major electrical parameters are common
to all types of digital IC's and make it possible to compare them with each
other. Such parameters include the following: speed, power consumption (Peon)!
the noise immunity (0“), the fan-out factor for the output (load capacity,
Kout) and the fan-in factor for the input (Kin)-

He shall treat each of these parameters in more detail [1]. The speed is
governed by the dynamic parameters of the digital IC, which include the

- 51 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
MWIJSEONLY

ram 3.7 Digital 1c Series for General Applications in Industrial and

Conan-er Eimt

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Under of
IC's in the
Series
Series 519782 Function
1'11. Integrated Circuits
K155 76 Construction of. muter assenhliea and udiu speed
digital autonstion hardware.
133 63 The sane
130 12 Construction of high speed cosputer assemblies and
digital autonotion hardware
K131 11 The sane
13‘. 734 30, Construction of conputer assanhlies and digital
(uncoup- auto-scion equip-ant with a low power consuntion;
sulated) 8 The sane
530 a he construction of conputer assedﬂies and digital
KS3! 15 autonetion hardware with a high operational speed
K555 12 and low power conemption
8011. Integrated Circuits
100 1.2 Construction of high speed conputer conplms
£500 39 The same '
700 (unen- 31 The sane
capsulated)
Integrated Circuits Using p-Channel ms Transistors
505 8 The construction of nain conputer nsnories for all
types of commuter ayeteas
K527 2 The sane
K507 3 Joint applications with the 508 and K508 integrated
circuit series in the nain nanories of radio-
electronics equipnent
K165 51 Microcalculator construction

 

 

 

Integrated Circuits Using n-Channel nos Transistors

K565 2 Construction of nain cmuter nenories (0211) for
all types of conputer systens

 

 

m—

 

- 52-
“MUSEONLY
TABLE 3.7 [cont.]
Nunher of 10's
in the Series

 

 

Series $1978} Function

Integrated Circuits Using CHDS Transistors
166 26 Construction of liniature digital automation and
76b (unen- 12 conputer hardware with a low power consunption
capsulated)
564 33 The construction of miniature digital autonation
76S (unen- 9 and conputer hardware with a low power conaunp-
capsulated) tion
K176 33 The sane

 

 

 

Integrated Circuits Based On Glass Seniconductor Switches

K526 2 Construction of erasable progranehle read-only
nenories for conputers and digital autonation

systens

 

 

 

 

 

 

Integrated Circuits Using Transistors With Nitride Oxide Insulation

(EROS)
509 l The construction of erasable read-only nenories
for conputers and digital autonation systena
519 .2 The sane

 

following: tl'o is the time for the transition from the logic one state to
the logic zero state; to!1 is the tine for the transition fron she logic zero
state to the logic one tete; ‘%do is the turn-on delay tine; t'al is theo 1
cut-off delay tine; t}3.r ie the propagation delay time during turn-on; ‘28.:
is the propagation delay tine during cut-off; ‘zd.r.avg is the average propa-

gation delay tine; r1 is the pulse width and fr is the working frequency.

The read-out levels relative to which the dynamic para-stars are determined
are shown in Iigure 3.1. The average propagation delay tine is defined in
accordance with the for-ale:

. . .n. . ‘. ;
tzd.r.avg. ' 0'5(‘%d9r + 61,3er ("'°"o"(':u+‘:n:.

This parsneter serves as the averaged parsneter for the operational speed which
is used in the calculation of the tine characteristics of series connected
digital IC's.

The following are the most frequently cited in the handbook data for di ital
IC's from the list of dynanic parameters indicated above: tgao and tga the

- 53 -
FOI!DFFKJA1,U881MVLY
IN3R 0F!ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(MVLY

turn-on and cut-off delay tines. as well as tier and tgdfr the propagation

delay times during turn-on and cut-off.

Potential logic gates, when operating as part of a digital device, can be either
in a static node which is characterised by one of two states ("0" or "1"), or

in a switching stage. Depending on the type of logic gate, the power consumed
from the power supply will differ for each of these states. Sane elements consume
considerable power in the static mode, which increases only insignificantly at the
moment of switching. while others, on the other hand. are characterized by a rela-
tively low power consumption in the static state and a considerable increase in
the power consumption in the transient processes. Logic gates with a low power
consumption in the dynamic mode are characterised by the average power consumption:

0 1
005(Pcm. + PC )a
where P20“ is the power consumed by the circuit in the "0" state, while P1 is

COII

the power consumed by the circuit in the "1" state. For these circuits, the power
consumed at the point in tine of the transient processes does not exceed the power
consumed in one of the logic states.

P
con.avg. on.

Logic gates with a large dynamic power consumption are characterized by the power
consumed at the maximum switching frequency, when the currents in the power supply
circuits increase sharply, in addition to being characterized by the average static
power consumption. The CHDS integrated circuits are examples of such circuits.

1)

   

Figure 3.5. The readout levels for Figure 3.2. The transfer functions of
dynamic parameters. a ROT logic gate and the ultimate trans-
fer functions for the family [of 10's]
obtained at various temperatures.

0
Icy: 1. “out 2. 00“: max.

The static noise immunity of logic switches defines the level of the voltage which
can be fed to the switch input relative to the "0" or "1" level without causing it
to falsely actuate [1]. Since a logic gate in the static mode can be in one of
two states (”0" or "1"). a distinction is drawn between the static noise immunity
for the "0" level (02) and the ”1” level (01). the values of U0 and 01 are
determined from the transfer functions (tiggre 3.2). n n

- 55 -
FOR‘DFIHCIAI.USE(NVLY
As can be seen from Figure 3.23 the parameter I)". is defined as the difference be-
tween the minimm "1" level (0 ) and the point B voltages on the upper curve.
The parameter 02 is defined asut‘hr'aifference between the voltage at point A on the
lower curve and the maximum voltage for ”0" (0° ) To completely evaluate the
noise i-unity of a circuit, it is necessary céndli into account the dynamic noise
immunity along with the static value. The dynamic mode noise i-unity depends on
the width, aqlitude and waveform of the interference signal, as well as the level
of the static noise ill-unity and the switching speed of the logic gate.

The fan-out factor for the output (the load capability). ‘out. characterizes the nu—
ber of similar gate inputs which can be connected to the output of the logic switch.
With an increase in the load capacity, the possibilities for digital 1c applications
are improved and the number of packages in the digital device under development are
reduced. Simultaneously with an increase in the number of loads, some of the IC '
parameters are degraded: the speed and noise innity fall off and the power consump-
tion increases. For this reason, high power buffers with Rout - 20 to 30 are inclu-
ded in an 1c series along with the main logic gates having a load capacity of Rout I
- lo to 10. This makes it possible to obtain optimal indicators with respect to the

number of Ic packages which are used and the power consumption when designing digital
devices.

It must be noted that in RTL and RCTL circuits. the load inputs consume current free
the output of the loaded element, while on. and TTL circuits in one logic state de-
liver current to the load, and in the other receive current from the load. The load
is of a capacitive nature for nos circuits.

The input fan-in factor (Kin) defines the maximum number of digital 1c inputs. A die-
tinction is drawn between the input fan-in factor for an AID (In my) and for an on
(In on) gate.

In the existing series of digital 16's, the main logic gates are made with a small
number of inputs (Km AND - 2 to lo; Km 03 - 2 to 6). To increase the number of in-
puts in individual logic elements. incorporated in a series, special inputs are pro-
vided for the connection of an "expander", which provides for an increase in the
fan-in factor of up to 10 and more. An expander circuit is correspondingly incor-
porated in a series as an individual element. There are logic elements with eight
inputs in a number of 1c series.

3.6. Transistor-Transistor Logic Circuits

Transistor-transistor logic gates (m) appeared as the result of the development of
diode-transistor logic, through the replacement of the matrix of diodes with a multi-
ple emitter transistor (HST). An NET is an integrated circuit component which com-
bines the properties of diode logic gates and a transistor amplifier. The AND func-
tion in a TTL switch is performed in the base and collector regions which are COIIIOII
to several emitters. The basic structural difference between an MST and conventional
transistors consists in the fact that it has several emitters arranged in such a
fashion that direct coupling between them is practically eliminated by a passive
base region which separates them. Thus, the MIT represents a set of several trans-
istor structures, having a canon collector and which interact directly with each
other through the motion of the majority carriers. He shall treat the operation

- 55 -
FOIOFII'ICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

of s nultienitter transistor using the enanple of s m gate (figure 3.3.) with s
siwle inverter (unipolar switch) [A].

 

Figure 3.3. The current distribution in a um gate with s sinple
inverter where a ”l" is fed to the input (a) and a "0"
is fed to the input (h).

”21.2361: Supply voltage, V“;

3. Us": of approxinately 5 volts;

6. 0n NAS' V“ “ta-o. 3 volts;

5. win.

If voltages corresponding to the ”1" level (Vin) are fed to all of the inputs of

an m. the enitters of the input transistor do not received the turn-on hiss cur-
rent (a sufficient potentisl difference is not present). In this case, the current
delivered to the bees of the run through resistor kl flows fron the supply Vcc to
the collector circuit 1; [1c], which is forwsrd hissed, snd then to the base of
transistor V12. Transistor v12 is saturated in this case and the voltsge st the
output of the circuit corresponds to the ”0" level (113“). All of the m transis-
tor structures sre in the inverse sctive node in this csse, since their collector
junctions are fo rd hissed, while the enitter junctions are reverse hissed. If
the "0" voltage 31%“) is fed to one of the m inputs, the corresponding base-
-—enitter junction is forward hissed. the current fed to its hsse through resistor
81 flows in this enitter circuit. In this cue, the m collector current falls
off, transistor “'2 cuts off end the voltage at the circuit output hecones equsl

to the "1" level (0%“). ' '

 

D (b)
Figure 3.1:. Schenstics of en 8-input m RAND logic gste (s), an
OR expander (h) snd sn AND-08M logic gste (c)

-56-
l-‘OIOFIICIALUSEONLY
318“" 3.5. Basic Ochuatics of standard 1'11. series.
a. m logic gate (133m and nssuu Ic'e);
h. wn logic gate with a large fan-out factor
(133% and K1551.“ IO");
c. Circuit with an open collector (133m? and
K155“? 10's);
d. on expander (1331.01 and msm Ic's).

1T1. circuits with a siapla inverter have not found widespread applications because
of the poor noise i-unity. low load capacity and poor speed of the unipolar switch
when operating as a driver for display ale-ants. with the develop-eat and refine-
nant of the technology, a dual polarity switch hecane the basic circuit for m

switches with a couplex inverter (Figure 3.6a). the use of a couple: inverter made
it possible to increase the speed over that of the sinple circuit configuration

(especially in devices with nultiple layer printed circuit boards), as well as the
noise inunity and fan-out. and also reduce the requirements placed on the transis-

tor paraaetcrs; the latter led in turn to an increase in the percentage yield of
good Ic's.

Several variants of 1'11. series circuits are produced at the present tine. These
are the standard 133 and K155 series (functionally-analogous to the 8854/76 devel-
oped by Texas Instrunents); high speed series: 130, K131 (functionally analogous
to the SN.“ 8/748 series; here, the B designates increased speed); and the nicro-
power series 136 (functionally analogous to the SNSbL/‘ML series; here. 1. indicates
a lower power consuaption); series with Schottky diodes: 530 and K531 (functionally

-57-
MOWIBEONLY
mmmmY

analogous to the 81'5‘8/768; here. 8 indicates the presence of Schottky diodes in
the structures); and the nicropower series with Schottky diodes. L555 (functionally
analogous to the 81041.5).

 

Figure 3.6. Basic achenatics of the high speed 111. series.

Key: a. mum logic gate (130 Ml and 11311.». integrated
circuits);
h. RAID logic elenent with a large fan-out factor
(1301.“ and 11311.“ integrated circuits);
c. D! expander (1301.131 and nanm integrated
circuits).

In tern of circuit design, alnost all of. the logic gates incorporated in the indi-
cated series can he for-ed by a combination of two basic circuits: a RAND logic
gate (Figure 3.6a) and an on expander (Figure 3.61:). An on expander in conjunction
with a RAND logic gete for-e an AND-03401? logic gate (Figure 3.6c). By connecting
the expander (Figure 3.4h) to points 1 and 2 (Figure 3.“), one can increase the
fan-in load for the 08 logic input. For all m. circuits which have the Oh expan-
sion capability, the eexinun tan-in is eight inputs. "hen one expander is connected
the circuit propagation delay increases by approximately 5 nsec, while the power
consumption increases by 5 all. m. logic gates have a high fan-out load capacity

(“out ' 10) .

The large output and conparatively low input currente pronote good natching of the
circuits to each other. As a rule, the conplenent of 111. series includes a circuit
with an open collector output (Figure 3.5c) and a logic elenent with a large tan-out
factor (improved load capability) (Figure 3.5b). Basic achcnatica of each of the
warietiea of 111. series indicated above are shown in Figures 3.5 to 3.8.

-53..
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Pigure 3.7. Basic schenetics of the nicropover 111. series.

lay: a. RAID/NOR logic gate (1361.32 10);
h. mom-m logic gate (135m 10).

 

rignre 3.8. Basic scheeatic of Schottky diode 111. (MED
logic gate, 530m and 1531141 10's).

He shall consider the operational principle of 1'11. circuits using the exanple of e
um logic gate, which is shown in Figure 3.6a [6]. The circuit contains sinple
n-p-n transistors M2. V13. vra). a nultienitter transistor V'l'l, es vell as resis-
tors kl ... Rb and diode VD. Such a circuit provides for the capability of opera-
ting into a larger capacitive load with high speed and noise inunity.

The circuit of a basic m. gate consists of the following eluentary stagea: the

input nultienitter transistor V'l‘l with a low inverse current gain. e phase splitter,
designed around a transfer transistor m (this stage operates with a stall darting
current and has low p-n junction capecitencea); and the push-pull output stage V13,
V'rh. Transistor W6 is designed for a large vorking current and has a short satur-

ation cutoff tile during circuit evitching. The input currents of the load witches
flow through this transistor to ground.

-59-
FOIOFFICMLLBEONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

_,._....._——.__._————————. -. —— .._ .-..—_

14 volts
0...: out! an: out

, volts
4..
t

    

 

0 m 0 a» 0"" V

Figure 3.9. The transfer characteristics of a standard series
mm gate for 1' - 25 ’C (a), and in a range
of te-peratures (b); Vcc - 5 volts, xout - 10 [fan-
out]; the dashed curve applies to circuits with
a correcting network.

. 0 . .
Key. 1' unoise cor. net.’ 2' Utut nin’
3‘ poise’ I" uthresh.l'

The ability of m circuits to work into a large capacitive load at high switching

speeds is explained by the fact that with these circuits, both the charging and dis-

charging of the load capacitance is accomplished through the low inpedance output

network. However. when switching the states of the output transistors. there is a

point in tine when they are both turned on. Because of this, short tare but high

power current pulses occur in the power supply circuit, where these pulses can lead
to the appearance of interference pulses. To avoid this in equip-ant constructed
with m circuits, it is necessary to design a power supply with low lead inductance

and to provide decoupling between adjacent assemblies.

He shall analyse the transfer function (Figure 3.9a) of the NAN!) logic gate shown
in Bigure 3.ba. "hen U13 1 - 0 (the ground potential is applied to one of the
enitters of transistor V'l'l). the base-emitter junction (b-e) of transistor V'l‘l is
turned on. but the potential which is produced in this case, 05 vn - 0.8 volts,
cannot turn on three p-n junctions: the base-collector junction (b-c) of transistor
V'l'l, the h-e junction of transistor V12 and the b-e junction of transistor “‘6 (a
potential of approximately 3 x 0.6 - 1.8 volts is needed to turn on this circuit).
The potential at the base of transistor W6 is close to 0 and transistor W6 is
turned off. The potential at the collector of W2 and at the base of V13. which is
close to the supply voltage of +5 volts, turns on the b-e junction of transistor
W3 as well as diode VD, producing the current 1%“. The voltage at the collector
of transistor W4 is correspondingly equal to 0%“ (section 1 - 2).

with an increase in "in (at all of the emitter inputs to transistor VTl) up to the
threshold voltage level uthr 1 - 0.8 volts (point 2 on the transfer function).

-50-
MWWONLY
transistor VTZ begins to conduct. hut transistor VTb is still cut off, and with a
further increase in “in up to the voltage level of uthr.2 - 1.25 volts. transistor
VTZ turns on, while transistor VTb only begins to conduct (point 3 on the transfer
function).

A further increase in “in leads to an increase in the potential at the base of
transistor VTl up to 1.2 volts. This is altogether sufficient to turn on two junc-
tiona: the b-c junction of transistor VTl and the h-e junction of transistor VTZ.
Transistor VTZ turns on, and the current through resistor 32 increases. which causes

a reduction in the voltage 0c VTZ' An increase in the current through resistor 83
causes the potential at the base of transistor VTA to increase and nakss it conduct.
The turned—on transistor VTb (section 3-4 of the transfer function) shunts resistor
83, which sharply increases the transmission gain of transistor VTZ and causes a
further reduction in the voltage Dc v12. However, transistor VTb has already been '
turned on for some time while transistor VT3 is still not turned off, something which
leads to a current spike and an increase in the power consumed fro. the supply. The
current consunption is linited in this case by resistor 8A, as well as the bulk resis-
tances of transistors VT3, VTA and diode VD. This is the so-called short-circuit cur-
rent which leads to an increase in the power consusption in the dynamic mode.

Ppmﬂ a

as ' With a further increase in U1n, transistors VTZ and VT‘
631:3

change over to the saturation node (section 6-—5 of the

transfer function) (Figure 3.9a). The potentials 11.; V13

and "C VTA will be 1.2 and 0.3 volts respectively.

Their difference, which is equal to 0.9 volts, is not

sufficient to turn on the bass-enitter junction of trans-

” , 2 3 t 5‘”? istorVT3and the junction of diode VD. The presence of
, diode VD (Figure 3.bs) provides for shifting the turn-on

Figure 3.10: level for transistor VT3 as well as reliably turning it

The dynamic power as s off when Gang - 0.3 volts.

function of switching fre-

quency where Vcc - 5.25 v, In real TTL circuits (Figure 3.5a). in contrast to the

T - 70 'c and clogd - sinplified HAND circuit (Figure 3.6a). an equalizing

- 15 de. network is tied to the base of the output transistor in

place of resistor RA. where this network consists of

resistors 83 and 36 as well as transistor VT3. The insertion of the correcting

network makes it possible to produce a transfer function shape close to rectangular

(Figure 3.9a) and thereby improve the noise immunity in the logic "1" state as om-

pared to the noise imunity of the circuit shown in Figure 3.5a (0: eq. net ) Un)‘

       
 

The resistance of the correcting network is less tenperature dependent than resistor
R4. something which provides a number of special properties for the circuit. At an
elevated teaperature (125 °C), the recovery tins for transistor VTS (Figure 3.5a)

is short, which promotes a rapid cutoff of the circuit. This in turn reduces the
short circuit current pulse (when transistors VTA and VTS are turned on sinultan-
eously) and neans that the dynamic power consumption is also reduced. At reduced
temperatures (-60‘6), the resistance of the correcting network exceeds the resis-
tance of the resistor as (Figure 3.ba), which increases the turn-on current of
transistor VTS and correspondingly leads to a reduction in the circuit switching
thee

- 51 -
POI 0i!!(1A1.lEﬂE(MTLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As can be seen from the curves of Figure 3.9b, the
characteristic shifts to the left with increasing
temperature. something which reduces the circuit noise
immunity at a temperature of 125°C.

As was shown above, at the moment of switching of the
RAND circuit, the current consumption increases, which
in turn leads to an increase in the dynamic power con-

sumption.

 

It can be seen from the characteristic curve (Figure
3.10) that with an increase in the frequency up to

Figure 3.11: 5 MHz, the power consumption rises to £3 aw as compared

The input characteristic to 20 aw in the static mode. The current spikes in

for the case wi re Vcc - the supply circuit, which is inductive, can produce

- 5 v and T - 25 'c. induced currents and degrade the noise immunity of the
equipment.

We shall analyze the input characteristic (Figure 3.11) of the RAND logic gate

shown in Figure 3.5a. In the case of joint operation of TIL circuits, one of the
circuits serves as the load for the other. Two modes are possible in this case.
When the control IC is in the "1" state (point 1 on the input characteristic curve)
and the voltage at its output is equal to Uéuc (Figure 3.12e,b), the b-e junction

of transistor VTl of the load 10 is cut off and the current lin, which is governed
only by the inverse current through the cut-off junction, is quite low. The control
IC is shown in Figure 3.12b in the form of a switch. If the control 1c is in the
"0" state (point 2 on the input characteristic curve) and the voltage at its output
is UQuc, the b-e junction of transistor VII of the load 1c is turned on and the in-
put current changes its direction: it flows from the power supply of the load cir-
cuit through the conducting b-e junction of transistor VTl and the conducting trans-
istor vra of the control Ic to ground (Figure 3.12c, d).

As can’be seen from the input characteristic, when “in - 5.5 volts, the input cur-
rent I1 increases sharply, reaching a level of 1 mA. This value of the input volt-
age is e ultimate permissible value and exceeding it can cause the circuit to
fail. The value of the input current 12“ increases in a similarly sharp fashion
with an increase in the negative voltage at the input. For the majority of TTL
series, the ultimate permissible value of the negative voltage at the 1c input is
0.b volts. In actual equipment circuits, the signal fed to the 10 input does not
have a strictly rectangular or trapezoidal waveform. At the moment of signal term-
ination, decaying oscillations appear in the hookup wiring, which can cause false
actuation of the circuitry. To prevent such false actuations, a number of TIL cir-
cuits have been refined, as a result of which, so-called damping diodes, VDl ...
... VDﬁ are connected to each of the multiemitter transistor inputs (Figure 3.5a).

when there is no oscillatory process at the input, such a diode is turned off and
inserts an additional capacitance at the circuit input of less than 1 de, which
does not degrade the dynamic characteristics of the circuits for practical purposes.
With the first negative pulse which exceeds 0.8 volts, the damping diode turns on
and limits the amplitude of the pulse to a level of 0.8 volts, the subsequent posi-
tive voltage pulse becomes considerably less than 0.8 volts (does cause the

- 62 -

FIN!(“HHC1AI.USE(MNLY
Figure 3.12. Combined operation of a TTL signal source
and load.

Kay: s.c. Circuit 1 generates "l” and "0" respectively;
b,d. The equivalent circuits for these operating
modes;

1
1. ”out for circuit 3.

circuit to actuate, since Uéh, - 0.8 volts) and the oscillatory process at the input
decays rapidly. .

He shall analyze the output characteristics of the RAID logic gate shovn in Figure
3.5a. The output characteristics are shown in Pigure 3.13s for the logic gate at
various temperatures. With an increase in the load current, tout, the output volt-
age level will fall off until a certain value of the current is reached. Iout £2
:35 mi, when the voltage drop across resistor 35 is small. In this case, one can
assume that transistor VTA operates as an emitter follower, and the slope.of the
characteristic 0;": - f(13ut) is small. With a further increase in the current,

I out’ the voltage drop across resistor 35 increases. the voltage at the collector
of transistor VTA becomes less than at the base and transistor VT‘ goes into satur-
stion. The characteristic curve changes its slope and then the current falls off
linearly. The rate of drop is now determined by the nominal value of resistor as.
It can be seen from Figure 3.13s that although the slope of the characteristic is
practically independent of the temperature, nonetheless at a temperature of ~60'c
the current level decreases by approximately 0.5 ma, something which causes a re-
duction in the fan-out capacity of the circuit.

The output characteristics of a logic gate in the "0" state are also shown in
Figure 3.13s for various temperatures. As can be seen from Figure 3.13s, the

slope of the characteristic “gut(12ut) changes with a change in temperature.

- 63 -
FOI:OIIICJAI.U851NULY
FOR GENOA]. USE ONLY

 

Figure 3.13. 1he output (a) and dynamic (b) characteristic
curves for a standard series 11L “AND gate.
Key: 1. "1,0“ propagation delay tine;
2. "0.1" propagation delay time.

At a tenperature of -60 °c. when the output current 10 ut reaches a value of 25 ah,
the slope of the characteristic increases sharply and0 subsequently, even a slight
increase in Igut leads to a substantial rise in the voltage at the circuit output.
Thus, the lower temperatures are nore critical from the viewpoint of the load
fan-out capacity of 11L circuits.

He shall consider the operation of a “AND gate in the dynamic node. As has already
been stated above, the circuit speed is characterized by several parameters, and
inlparticular,1 the propagation delay time when switching the circuit on and off,
(ta r) and (taa1 r) respectively (Figure 3.13b).
When switching a HAND logic gate (Figure 3.14), the fraction of the propagation
delay tine due to transistor V11 say be disregarded, assuning that the switch
actuates instantaneously. Then, the overall signal propagation delay in the cir-
cuit will be governed by the delay due to transistors V12 and V14:

dig-1.5m +13%".

In turn, the delay due to transistor V12 is primarily governed by the parasitic
capacitance charging tine for 6:1, which takes the form of the sun of the para-
sitic capacitances of resistor R1 of the collector of transistor V11 to the sub-
strate and to the b-e junction of transitox V11. The delay due to transistor
V14 is determined by the charging tine for the parasitic capacitance 022. which
takes the form of the sun of the cepacitances of the structure of resistor Rb and
the b-e junction of transistor V16.

- 64 -
FOR 0FI1C1A1.lEH!(HQLY
"hen the ogate is switched off, the signal propagation delay for the “AND logic
gate, 5%.: , is determined primarily by the resorption time for the minority
carriers in the bases of transistors VTZ and V“. For standard TTL circuits at a
tuperature of 25 'C, where Kout I 10 and cu - 15 pl’d, ical values of the
propagation delay time during turn-on and turn-off are t; or - 7 nsec and 99px. -
- 13 nsec respectively.

It can be seen fra the curves shown in Figure 3.15 that with a rise in temperature,
the propagation delay time during turn-on falls off slightly while the propagation
delay time in the case of cut-off, on the other hand, increases, especially in a
temperature range of from 20 to 120 'C. with an increase in the load, the values
of the propagation delay increase somewhat and an increase in the load capacitance
has a greater influence than an increase in the number of 1c inputs connected to
the output of the TTL switch.

As has already been stated, various types of flip-flops and circuits designed.
around then - registers, counters, adders - are incorporated in a series of digital
IC' -s along with simple logic elements.

As an example of a standard 111. series, we shall treat the operational principle of
JK and D flip-flops. The schematic of a J! flip-flop is shown in Figure 3.16.

- As can be seen frcm Figure 3.l6b, the entire device consists of the main flip-flop
Tl and the auxiliary flip-flop T2. The information is entered in the main flip-
flop at the moment of arrival of the positive edge of the synchronization pulse
which is fed to input C. During the action of the sync pulse in the upper
auxiliary flip-flop, the data entered during the preceding cycle is preserved.

Upon the completion of the synchronisation pulse, the data is rewritten from the
main flip-flop into the auxiliary one.

Three operational variants are possible
for this two-stage flip-flop. - 'In the
first case, -a signal corresponding to 3'1"
is fed to the information inputs J and
K while a sync pulse is fed to input C.
The J! flip-flop then operates as a divide-
-by-two circuit.(i.e., as a counter).
‘ This mode is utilized in the construction
. of frequency dividers and counters of any
degree of complexity. In the second mode,
a paraphase logic signal is fed to inform-
ation inputs J and R. The flip-flop
_ then operates in a synchronous information
Figure 3.14. The equivalent circuit write mode from the J and K inputs.
for the generation of
dynamic parameters. Following the input of the clock pulse,
this information appears at the Q and
Q outputs, i.e, it is shifted to the
next location. The given mode is utilised in the construction of shift registers,
pulse distributors and synchronous counters. And finally, information in the form
of the "0" level is fed to the R or 8 inputs. In this case, the flip-flop is

 

- 65 -
roe omcm. Us: ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

was m» can 1 I on”!

Figure 3.15. The propagation delay tines of standard 1'11. circuits as a
function of tewerature, capacitance and the “er of
similar 1c inputs connected at the output.

Key: 1. V“ - 5 volts, '1' - 25 ~’C and Ron; - 10;
2. Vcc - 5 volts. 01°“ ' 30 pld and ‘out - 10;
3. loutlfan-out load factor].

forcibly set in the "0" or "1" state (the states of the J, K and c inputs are
arbitrary). One must take into account the fact that the state when the signal
corresponding to the "0" level is simltaneously fed to the R and 8 inputs is
indeterminate. The possibility of the occurrence of such a state should be pre-
eluded.

The circuit of D flip-flop (Figure 3.17b) consists of the main asynchronous RS
flip-flop T3, the auxiliary synchronous as flip-flop 'l'l which is used for writing
"1" into the slain flip-flop. as well as the auxiliary synchronous es flip-flop 1’2
for writing "0" into the nain flip-flop.

The information write into flip-flops 1'1 and T2 takes place at the point in tine I:
only with the apperance of the positive edge of the synchronization pulse which is
fed to the count input C. At the point in tins £91 (with the next clock pulse),
the infatuation appears at the output of the D flip-flop. Thus, a D flip-flop
generates a "l" of output infornation at the accent of arrival of a positive
synchronization pulse gradient, if a "l" was present beforehand at the D input.
when a signal is not present at the count input c, the flip-flop mintaina its
previous state; A D flip-flop perforns the function of a count flip-flop if the
inverted out Q is connected to the D input. In the asynchornous node, a D

-66-
MOWUSEONLY
tﬂiﬂﬂ‘

   
 
 

 

 

  

{aim} zngnjgmnmml'

Kara-Em

Why hi I;
" .gi‘! IEl‘iﬁ-i E‘z'ilral A %

 

 
  

 

   
 
 

  

«all

A

  
 

            

(b)

 

0

Figure 3.16. Schmtice of e KISS‘NI JR flip-flop with 3A1!) logic at
the input; the beeic electrical circuit (e), electricel
block diagn- (b) and ite logic etructurc (c).

flip-flop operate. in e nenner ei-iler to that of an as flip-flop (the eutee of
D end c input. ere erbittery).

-57-
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
ﬁaﬁlﬁ:

w
The integrated circuits of the high speed 111. series, an example of which can be
the 130 series, units it possible to obtain a typical prepagation delay tins of

7 nsec with a power consumption per elementary switch of M ii. The basic circuits
of this series (Figure 3.6) differ from the basic circuits of the standard series
(Figure 3.5) in the reduced nominal values of the resistors and lower parasitic
capacitances of the elements. since the output current of an ultrafaat m. switch
is increased, a Darlington configuration (transistors VT3 and VTS) is used in the
output stage, which snakes it possible to boost the current gain of the output trans-
istor and thereby assure approxinately equal values of the output inpedances of

the circuit when it is switched on (governed by the top enitter follower VTS) and
switched off (governed by the saturation of transistor V16) which yields alnost
sy-ctrical values of the signal propagation delay.

The low output and input inpedances of T11. circuits provides snall tine constants
for the parasitic load capacitances of. the printed board conductors, which nakes
it possible for this series of 10's to operate at clock frequencies of up to 30 His.

Hicropower series lc's, an emple of which is the 134 series, nslte it possible to
obtain an average value of the power consumption of 2~ sit for a TTL switch at a
temperature of 25 ’c. The basic circuits of this series (Figure 3.7) differ free
the basic circuits of the standard series in the absence of danping diodes and a
correcting network, as well as in the significantly increased noninal values of
the resistors. The latter is responsible for the low current and power consunp-'
tion levels with the concurrent decrease in circuit speed. The turn-on and turn-
off delay tine for a nicropower series 111. switch .ounts to 100 nsec.

lC'series with Schottlty diodes, an example of which is the 530 series, differ fron
the 111. series treated above in the use of diodes and transistors in which the
Schottky effect is used. The 530 series circuits nake it possible at a tenpera-
ture of 25 1 10 'c and a load resistance of 31.“ - 280 ohns and load capacitance
of C10“ - lS pl'd to obtain typical values of the propagation delay tine of 5 nsec
per switch with an average power consusption of 19 dd (cf. the paraneters of the
130 series). The basic schenatic of the 530 series gate is shown in Pigure 3.8.

The increase in the speed is obtained here through a reduction in the level of
saturation of the transistors, which is accosplished through the use of Schottlty
diodes which shunt the collector-base junctionuo'f the saturated transistor.
Schottky diodes, forned by the contact between a netal and a suiconductor, have
s bubstentially lower threshold turn-on voltage then the c-b junction, and for
this reason, during the action of the pulee,’ the 8chottky diodes turn on earlier
than the collector-base junction, thereby preventing the storage of excess
charges in the base region of the transistors. Charge accumlation does not take
place in the Schottlty diodes themselves since the current flowing in then is due
to majority carrier transport.

The operation of Schottky transistors in the unsaturated range leads in turn to
an increase in the voltage drop across their base-emitter junction, which reduces
the current consuaption in the static node and correspondingly, the power con-
susption. A Darlington circuit is used in the output stage (VT3 and VTS), which
snakes it possible when switching the circuit off to assure an elevated charging

~69-
FORWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

current for the capacitive load, something mich reduces the delay time for the
leading edge of the output signal. By virtue of the small voltage drop across the
b-e junction of transistor VT3, as well as the low output impedance of the circuit
in both logic states, the Darlington configuration lashes it possible to obtain a
higher output voltage level ”‘1,“t in these series. we shall analyse TTL integrated
circuits in more detail.

3.lo.l. The Major Electrical Parameters of T11. Integrated Circuits

As was shown in 53.2, the following number among the main electrical parameters
which rather completely characterize all m. circuits and make it possible to
compare them with each other: speed, power consumption, load capacity, noise immu-
nity and input fan-in factor. Also to be included anong these parameters is the
value of the logic levels, since they determine the possibility of joint operation
of integrated circuits of different series. It is important to know these levels
when interfacing m. integrated circuit signals with other digital and analog
circuit signals. All of the T11. series treated above have the same power supply
voltage, Vcc I 5 V 1 101 and similar values of the logic levels, something which
makes it possible to directly couple integrated circuits from various T'l'l. series,
and also permits the connection to DTL integrated circuits.

The direct electrical cospatibility makes it possible to reduce the number of

power supplies and precludes the necessity of designing special level matching
circuits. The major operational electrical paraneters of various TTL series are
cosmsred in Table 3.8. All of the parameters are given for the basic circuits.
They make it possible to trace the specific features of each series, evaluate their
advantages and drawbacks and give an overall idea when selecting a series during
the equipment development stage. It should also be noted that the parameters given
in Table 3.8 apply to the total working temperature range.

when designing equipment, one must also take into account the ultimate pernissible
operational modes of the 16's, exceeding which can lead to 1c failure. The ulti-
mate permissible operating modes for various 111. series are compared in Table 3.9.
One must keep in mind the fact that when utilizing the modes indicated in Table
3.9, the values of the electrical parameters can differ from those indicated in
Table 3.8.

3.5.2. The Functional Couplement of the T11. Series

Digital TTL integrated circuits became the basis for the construction of computer
hardware in the 1970's. One of the decisive advantages of T‘l'l. series is the
presence of such circuits as J! and D flip-flops, decoders, shift registers,
counters, adders, main memory elements and son's with control circuits. The
availability of circuits which take the form of ready-made computer assenblies
which isnediately include several bits makes it possible to significantly reduce
the number of digital to packages and obtain a substantial savings in equipment
volume. Thus, for sample, the K155, [131 and [(158 series 111. Ic's found wide-
spread applications in the "Ryad" unified system of electronic computers: the

- 70 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 3.8 Electrical Paranetera of Varioua Seriee of m Integrates! circuita

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Seriea
Standard Wig! i—ﬁed Micro With .Shottgz Diodea

Paraneter 1155 I l
The input "0”

current, 1%.,

M, no nore than -1.6 -1.6 -2.3 -2.3 -0.18 -2 -2
The "l" inpu

current, I ,

IA, no more than 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.012 0.05 0.05
The ”0" out

voltage, out,
volta, no nore
than 0.6 0.6 0.35 0.35. 0.3 0.5 0.5

'lhe "1" output
voltage, 01 t’
volta, no can '
than 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.3 2.7 2.7

Output fan-out
factor, ‘out 10 10 10 10. 10 10 10
The 08 input (en-in
factor, ‘in 8 8 8 8 2 - -
Turn-on propagation 15 15 10 10 100 (01 . ' 5.’ 5
delay tine, g . (c1 -. (c1 - (c - (c1 - - 60 p!) (c - (c1 -
naec, no more hen - l5 - I 15 I- - 30 - 15 p!) - 15
1)!) pl") 9:) p!) p?)
Turn-off to pagation 22 22 _ 10 100 '(cl 6. s 6.5
$1M naec, (01 ' (01 ' - (c - 60 p!) (01- (c1 -
nonorethan I15 -15 9:)..0-0 ml5pl’) .15
pt) pr) pr) pr)
Average atatic
power conemption,
Pcon: IR, no more
than 22 22 66 66 2 l9 l9
Noiae inun’ ity, 0;,
volta, no note
than 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.35 0.5 0.5
Switching fre-
quency, f, in
.m, no more
than 10 10 30 30 3 SO 50

*The loveat of the two valuea of the peraiaaihle interference level 08 and 0,1,

are given in the Table.

- 71 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3.9 Ultimate Pereieeible Operating nodes for Various Series of 111.
lntegated Circuite

 

. Ser iee
Mode Parameter .. " with
Standard nigh Speed Hicropover Schottky

Diodee .-

 

 

 

 

Hexinne eupply
voltage, Vcc»
volta 6 6 6 6 6 5.5 6

haxinn voltage
at the imut,

“in DIX! volta 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.0 5.0

Maxill- voltage

applied to the

output of a

cut-off circuit, '

Doug. volte 5.5 5.25 5.5 5.25 5.5 5.5 5.25
Minimal input

VOIQ”: "in nin.

volte -0.lo -0.4 -0.4 -0.6 -l.56 -0.lo -0.lo
Maximal load

capacitance,

01°“, prd 200 200 200 200 200 150 200

 

Yes m. The functional conpoeition of etandard, high epeed, and nicrOpover eerie.
ea well as eeriea with Schottky diodee developed in recent yeara is given in Table
3.10. The functional aneloge of theee integrated circuite are elao indicated there.
‘lhe couplete ey-hol for m integrated circuit eeriee ia for-ed free the nueber of
the series and the designation indicated in the "aubgroup, kind ..." con-n, for
example, 1331». The conplete- deeignation of the functional analog ie for-ed fret:
the deaignation of the eeriea (8356 or $176!!) and the number given in the "Deeigne-
tion of the Functional Analog" colu-I, for exanple, type 8115620 or SN'MHSO inte-
grated circuita.

3.4.3. So-e Specific Ieaturee of 111. Integrated circuit Applications

In the etructural deeign of equip-eat uaing IC'a, their etructurel packaging is of
cenaiderable importance (Table 3.11).

The epecific featuree of m Ic'a, in particular. the uee of a couple: inverter in
the output atage increaeea the current coneuqtion during switching. ‘l'hia booata

-72-
I'OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
IABLB 3.10
81! 5510/76 mien

hmctional Designation

Subgroup,
Kind and

Ordinal
III-her
of the
benign
(with
Respect
to Func-

-__________m_iﬂ"‘__121

Four zap-nor logic gates (133, 1155,
130, x131, 530, x531, x555)

Three 3mm logic gatee (133, 8155,
130, K131, 530, 1531, K55)

No 4mm logic gates (133, K155, 130,
x131, 530, x531, r555)

. 81mm logic gate (133, x155, 1.30,
x131. 134, 530, x555)

M MIMI!) logic gate. with a large
fen-out factor (133, 1155, 130, [131)

Two ZAND-ZQL-M logic gates, one 08
expandable (133, K155, 130, [131I
134, 736)

No lo-input on logic expandera (133,
K155, 130, K131

Four zmlzm logic gates (13‘, 734)

“No MIME/4m logic gates and e M
logic gate (13b, 73b)

2-2-3-6AND-bﬂoa logic ante. (13k, 734)

Four 2-input M10 gaten with an open
collector output (tent el-entc ,
133, [(155, 136 [eic]

Four 21W!) logic gate. with an open
collector output (K531, K555)

six m logic gates (K155, 130, K131,
x531, K555)

Four 2” logic gatea (133, K155, K531,
x555)

1A3

1A6

M1

1A2

M6

1.111
L31

L32

M8

M9?

1.31

LYelP

53: NOT logic gatea (with open collector)

(K531)

LIIZP

-73-
IOIOFl-‘IGALIJSEOMY

Designa-
tion

of the
rum tionel
Anelog

. 3 .

00

10

20

30

60

50

60

01

03

02

05

The Cowpoeition of the m. Seriee end their Functional Analoga in the

“or
of the
Outline

Drawing
in
Appendix
3.1

;;_____1£l_

3.1.5
3.1.6
3.1.1a1
3.1.2

3.1.7

3.1.3

3.1.4
3.1.52

3.1.53
3.1.55

3.1.12
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600080030-5

”OFFICIALUSEONLY

[Table 3.10, continued]:
1 2

 

Six buffer inverter. with elevated

collector voltage (K155) 1.33
Six buffer driver. with open

collector (K155) LIV.
Pour 2A1!) logic gate. (133, K155,

K555' L11
Three 3am logic gate. (530, [531) L13?
Three 3M1!) logic gate. (with open

collector) (K155) uuo
M Schlitt tr agger. with a logic

_ gate at the input (133, K155 11.1
six NOT buffer elenenta (K155) US
No 4m logic gate. 1.16

M M logic gate. with gating in one
gate and an OR expaneion
capability in the other (K155) LYeZ

Two lo-input MID gate. with open
collector output and increaaed
load capacity (diaplay ole-ant.)

(133, K155) 1A7
M gated lam logic gate. (K155) 1.1.3
Pour high voltage 22mm logic gate.

with open collector (1155) “11
Four men logic gate. (buffer unit)

(1:155) 13.5
1105 nenory to m interface for

four 2mm logic gate. (133) LA15
Pour 2m logic gate. (133, K155, [555) 1.1.1
Four 2M1!) buffer logic gate. (8.155) LA12
Four 2mm buffer logic gate. with

open collector output (K155) 1A13
No 6-24-th logic gate.

(530, K531, [(555) 1.311?
2-2-3004“ with on expander :

capability (133, [(155, 130, K131) 1.33

ham-21m logic gate with 03
expander capability (133, R155, 130,
max, 134) ml.

-71.-
MOI-'HGALUSBONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600080030-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R00050008003M

 

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. 2

6 x 10 decoder (134) ms
54-3-2304” logic gate (530, K531) 1391’

Binary code digital input aignal to aeven
eegpent code digital aignal converter.

(1.33) "’0
Four 0 flip-flop with direct and

inverting outputs (133, K155) W
Four 1) f1ip-f1opa(133, K155) 1315
single digit full adder (133, K155) m
16 bit Iain neaory with control circuita

(133, r155) K01
“mo bit (binary) full adder (133, K155) n42
Pour bit (binary) adder (133, K155) 1113
16 bit nain scanty with gate input for the

write amplifier (K155) K113
Four bit nunber cowariaon gate (136) ”1
Pour 2-input "exclusive 33 logic gatea (K155) 1.?5
Binary JR flip-flop (13") N15
64 bit nain my random acceaa neaory

(133, K155) 802
a bit shift regiater (134) ' 132
Counter-divide-by-lz (133, K155) IYe‘
Binary counter (133, K155. 13b) He5
4-bit universal shift regiatar (133. K155.

13(0) all
No D flip-flop (133, 1155. 130, 1310) m2

Binary-decimal b-bit counter (133, K155, 136) 11.2

JK flip-flop with logic at the 3”!) input

(133. K155, 130, x131, 134) rv1
Frequency divider with variable diviaion
factor (133, K155) 1Ye8
Pour bit aelective regiater (1310) as
No JK flip-flops (K531) N9?
- 75 -
Paloma“. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000800306
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1 2
Two JR flip-flopa'(K531) l'VlOP
Dual JK flip-flop (K531) ' 'rvnp
Pour buffer gates with three output
states (K155) LPG
Four 2NOR logic gates (trunk amplifier)
(K155) LYe6
Binary decoder for eight directions
(x555) m7
1w “HAND logic gates (trunk amplifier)
(K531) “16?
high voltage decoder for controlling gas
discharge displays (133, [(155) ml
Gated eight channel selector-mltiplenor
(133, K155) KP7
- Eight channel data selector-multiplexer
(133, K155) KPS
A dual lo-l digital selector-multiplexer
(133, K155, 530, x531) D2
Gated 16 channel data selector-mltiplexer
(155) ”I
16 to lo line decoder-denultiplexer
' (133, K155, 1310) 193
Dual 2-40 decoder-nultiplexer (K155) Ill/o
Multifunction logic gate for couputers
(K155) KhLl
One-shot mltivibrator with a logic gate at
the input (133, [(155) A61
Synchronous deciaal four-hit counter
(x155) nos
Bight hit series shift register with a
parallel output (134) 138
16 hit register nenory (K155) RPl
four bit register with three output states
(K155) 1315
_ Quad 0 flip-flop (K155) n18
Bight bit parity and nonparity checker
(K155, 13!.) H2
- 76 ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080030-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Arithnetic logic unit (K155, 134) D3

Fast carry circuits for an arithmetic logic

unit (K155, 134) m
Dual accelerated carry full adder (134) 1145
Decade counter vith pulse-phase data

representation (K155) Rel
Bit write driver, playback amplifier and

zero set circuit (K155) 01
Eight input on expander (133, 1:155) 1413
Binary-decimal code to binary converter

(x155) n6
Binary code to binarybdecinal converter

(K155) PR7
1,021: bit-ROM used as a binary code to

Russian, Latin alphabet code converter as

well as arithmetic codes and supplnental

characteristics RYeZl. .

' RYeZb
256 bit RON with control circuits (K155) “a3
Binary-decimal bidirectional counter (133, _

- K155) IYe6
Four bit binary bidirectional counter (133,

K155) IYe7
Pour storage elements (136) Bill
Majority gate (134) LPJ
Multipurpose digital structure gate (mus)

(134) m3
Multipurpose digital structure gate (urns-2)

(134) m2
‘l‘hree switch circuits (13b) ' m
Dual four channels into one switcher (136) 09
Eight channel switcher (136) 010
Four bit half-adder (134) m6
M ZMND logic gates with a co-aon input and ,

two power transistors (K153) LP?

- 77 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE uNLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000800306
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Table 3. 10, continued]:

 

 

1 2 3 Is
Two mm logicgatee with a high power
open collector output (K155) L15 SIT/51051 -
12 bit sequential approximation register
(133) um A1750!» -
Bidirectional eight bit shift register
(133, K155) 1313 1.98 -

Note: ‘lhe 133 series 10's are the functional analog of the 885!» K: series; the
K155 series are analogous to the 81176; the no series are analogous to the
$115103; the K131 series to the 811753; the [(531 series to the 811748; the
530 series to the $1548; the K555 series to the 81041.8.

 

1. See Figure 3.1.11: for the K1551.“ integrated circuit.

2. The letter P" applies only to the K531 series and neans that is produced in a
plastic package.

. See Figure 3.1.171) for the 134Ye15 integrated circuit.
. See figure 3.1.20b for the 136131 integrated circuit.
See Figure 3.1.151: for the lSloIYeZ integrated circuit.
. See Figure 3.1.l3b for the l34TVl integrated circuit.
. See Figure 3.1.h5b for the 13403 integrated circuit.

NO’JIbw

 

the dynanic power consumption with an increase in the switching frequency and
limits the rise and tr ll tins of the input pulses to 150 nsec (with the exception
of circuits having an open collector output, for which this tine is not limited).

When wiring equipment, to increase the operational stability of TH. circuits their
free inputs met be connected to a S V 1 10 2 power supply through a 1 101m resis-
tor or directly to a lo V i 10 1 supply. The connection of 20 free inputs to

each resistor is permitted.

Considerable attention in the wiring of equipnent is to be devoted to assuring
integrated circuit noise i-nnity. As was indicated above (Table 3.8), the per-
missible static noise level for the najority of m gates anount to 0.4 volts

(in the full range of working taperatures). however in coupling lines and in
logic circuits, conposed of e nunber of 10's working into each other, pulse
interference can occur. The penissible pulse interference level depends on the
pulse width. It can be seen fron a graph of the function 0““ n) for type
155LA3 integrated circuits (Figure 3.18 that for a pulse width of 15 nsec, the
pernissible pulse interference level can reach two volts. Pulse noise i-Iunity is

- 7g -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IABLE 3.11 322°' of Rectaglglar TTL Sarioa Pacgggaa

 

Kind of Conventional Kind of
Series Package ,Deai‘ggtion .Sarica Packaga
133 Metal-glans £01.10-4 136 Glaaa
Glass 401.1h-3 Metal-glans
Hetal-glaaa 601.14-2 "
" ~402.16-1 "
" 602.l6~2 Hotal-ccranic
" 605.2691 "
N
x155 Plastic 201.16-1 "
" 201.16-2 ”
" 239.24-1 ”
" 239.24-2
” 238.16—1 530 Hatal-glaaa
" 238.16-2 "
l3 Natal-gala. “01.16-6 K531 Plantic
Glaaa k01.16-3 " -

n

K1313 Plastic 201.16-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circuits, among which practically all 111. series may be included, attention is to

be devoted to the wring layout for the power eupply. When using nultilcyer printed
circuit boards, it is reco-ended that the "power" buses be arranged in one layer,
. ,, .

er end the buses are
in s leyer it is used
to increase the surface of the "ground" bus. ’

TABLE 3. 12

  

Key: 1. Huber of parallel conductors;

2. Spacings between the printed circuit conductors. II.

the printed circuit hook-up panel. If the length of

lines exceeds 20 cu, it is reco-ended that they be made by Ileana of three-
-dinensionsl wiring. were the coupling line length runs up to 20 cm for asyn-
chronous devices and up to 30 on for synchronous devices, they are made with a
lingle wire. It is penissible to connect up to five radial lines 11 with an

.30..
mnommvsaomv
overall length of no nore than 50 on to the output of one transnitting elenent.

0n panels with lengths of fro. 0.2 to l n, the connecting lines should be made as
unmatched twisted pairs. No nore than three twisted pairs with an overall length
of no nore than 2 n my be connected to the output of one transnitting element. It
must be kept in mind that when making connections using unnatched twisted pairs, the
the signal propagation delay tine increases in proportion to the length of such a
line. At the output of l Granuitting elenent, the increase in the propagation
delay during turn-on, At“.r - 61;, and during cut-off, M2 1: I 81;, where Z; is
the total length of the connecting lines which are connectea'to the output of the

transnitting element. (Here, “2&1 is obtained in nanoseconds it Z; is figured
in meters). .r

At the output of a connecting line, 21, the propagation delay increnent is in-
creased even nore and anounts to:

Mist-"2”!» “kg'at'i'o‘a-

The return wires of the twisted pairs should be grounded at the transnitting and
receiving ends. In this case, the leuth of a separate portion of a twisted pair
should not exceed 3 cu. It is penissible to nake taps with a single wire fron
an unnatched pair. The total length of the tape can run up to 20 cu.

Connecting lines of fraa l to 3 n, which do not go beyond the bounds of the
digital device, should be made using latched twisted pairs.: Where the length is
nore than3 n, the coupling lines must be nade using a coaxial cable v.21: a charac-
teristic inpedance of 100 ol-s. The connecting line is latched by leans of an
inserted series resistor of R - 82 obs with a pernisaible reeistance deviation
of :51. The resistor should be inserted directly at the output of the transmit-
ting 1c. The coaxial c'able length should not exceed.30 n.

In the case of a matched connecting line, the increase in theppropagation delay
at the output of e transmitting elenent during turn-on is ““9, I 6 nsec. and
during cut-off, “"1: - 8 nsec. At the output of the connecting line, the
propagation dslayii creases in proportion ot the connecting line length Z'(in
neters): Mid - 6 + 51; Atoal I 8 + 51.

.r z .r
In contrast to the series matching treated above, it is also possible to work with
a coaxial cable with parallel latching. In this case, the resistor having a value
equal to the characteristic inpedance of the cable is inserted "in parallel" at

the end of the connecting line.

In the 111. series treated above, there is no circuit which provides for operation
into a cable. A type 1091.11 011. integrated circuit is used for this purpose,
which takes the tern of a six input AND logic gate, intended for driving a low
impedance load as a trunk asplitier. This 10 operates directly from the 1'11. 10
and can be loaded in these circuits through a coaxial cable with a characteristic
impedance of 75 ohns.

-31-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An example of the joint operation of 155m and 1091.11 lc's through a cable with
a characteristic impedance of 75 ohms for the case of series and parallel matching
is shown in Figure 3.19. The pulse width at the output of the 1091.11 integrated
circuit with parallel matching (Figure 3.19s) should be no less than 200 nsec, and
in the case ofnseries matching (Figure 3.1%), no less than 1 usec. The maximum
cable length is chosen so that the voltage drop in the cable does not exceed 50 mv.

The information signals can be tran-itted by means of a shielded wire with the
necessary transmission of the strobéng signal via a coaxial cable. In this case,
strobing signals should be delayed relative to the information signal by the amount
of time necessary for the transient processes, while the width of the information
signal pulses should be chosen from the condition:

0 l (or 1,0)
tpul > tsd.r.str * t ’

where tzi'b str is the-gating signal delay time.relative to the information signal;
t0.1(or , ) is the switching time of the circuit which receivesnthe information.

In the case of printed circuit wiring, the coupling lines for the synchronization
signals should be separated from the information lines and from the synchronization
lines or another phase by a spacing of no less than 2.5 In. It is recomended

that the connecting lines from the outputs of 16's to display segments be made with
single wires, which can be wrapped into a bundle. The length of a connecting line
in this case is determined fra- the conditions necessary to meet the requirements
of the technical specifications for the maxim permissible voltage applied at the
10 output.

It is remanded that switched connecting lines (lines between toggle switches,
relay contacts and integrated circuits) be made with shielded wire. It is permis-
sible to use single conductors with lengths of up to 0.3 m and twisted pairs with
lengths of up to 3 m.

The functional coqlement ofrthe TTL series which has been expanded in recent
years, especially the 155 and 136 series, because of the inclusion of counters,
registers, adders and memory elements has significantly simplified the design of
digital devices and made it possible to reduce the nusber of external wiring con-
nections, which in the final analysis has led not only to a reduction in the
volume of equipment which used 10's, but also to an improvement in its reliability.

however, besides the standard circuits which take the form of typical computer
assemblies and modules, as well as digital automation hardware, for equipment
design it is essential to have specialized circuits which provide for working into
nonstandard loads such as relays, incandescent lamps, LED’s and delay lines. Tak-
ing-this into account, 1331.“, 155LA7, 133MB and K1551.“ 16's with open collectors
were incorporated in the 133 and [(155 series. The 133147 and 155147 integrated
circuits are designed to operate as display amplifiers and made it possible to
switch a current of up to 40 ms in the output circuit.

- 32 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
§~o-~e

I
'a-ISSW

0 (b)

(s) Q;

Figure 3.19. The coupling circuit for a coaxial cable in the case of
parallel (a) and series (b) netching.

A schematic for a display using a type [155147 driving a nan-6.340 incandescent
lamp is shown infigure 3.20s. A resistor with a nominal value of RI - 680 ohms
limits the current through the output transistor. the level of which at the want
of turning the lamp on can reach 100 IA.

The 1331.“ and 11551.“ integrated circuits are designed for operation as test
elements in computers and make it possible to realise the "wired or” function with
‘ a large fan-out factor. A fan-out configuration for the 1551.“ integrated circuits
is shown in Figure 3.20. The noninal value ofresistor Ill is chosen as a function
of the requisite output fan-out factor [oh out and nulher of thgic gates connected

to the codined output of the K1551.“ integrated circuit (Kent) in accordance with
the formula:

 

a o
R" "——"_ ' ‘i_'—_;.——. - 6
’31: IMO...“ 'a‘oﬁ‘c“ “Kit (3' )

where Ki“: is the actual fan-out factor (taking into account the codined inputs
of the ogic gates which are the load); “oh out is the output fan-out factgr,
11 is the leakage current of the turned-oft K1551.“ integrated circuit; ut
a“ 1}“ are the output current of the KlSSlAB and input current of the :15 m
[respectively], RI is the resistance of the resistor (the values of the currents
are substituted in nillianperes, but the nominal value of 31 is obtained in kilo-

ohms).

The umber of circuits which can be cahined at the output is linited by the
naxinun pernissihle load capacity. when 136 series logic gates are connected as
the load, the noninal value of resistor R1 calculated from for-Ila (3.6) is to be
doubled, and when 130 series logic gates are. connected, it is to he cut in half.
lhe 133mb K155u7, 1331.“ and K1551.“ integrated circuits can also he used as
HAND logic gates when their outputs are connected through an external resistor to
a 5 volt 1 51 power supply. In this node. the turn on tins, and especially the
turn-off tine for the input signal is not stipulated, in contrast to the other
logic gates otitthe 111. series, for which this tine is linited to a value of 150 --
nsec, as has laready been stated above.

-33-
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3.20. Display circuit band on K1551.” integrated circuit. (a)
and the fan-out configuration for uvcul KISSIAS .

integrated circuit. (1:) .

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Digital 10 emitter-connected transistor logic circuits (m) [BCL] are transistor
switching circuits with connected elitters and. coapared to other digital switches
have the highest speed of operation and a high power consumption. High speed of
operation (or to put it another wane cull average tine of propagation delay) of
$11. is due to the tact that transistors in these keys operate in an unsaturated
(linear) node. hitter followers that accelerate the process of charging the
capacitance of the load are need at the circuit output. A reduction in the
propagation delay tine is also achieved due to the liaitation of the output volt-
age gradient which. however. leads to a reduction in the interference rejection

of the £811. circuits. at the digital 10 8'11. developed in recent years. the most
widely used are series 100 and K500 that are siailar to a widely known 1810.000
series abroad (original developer -- the hoterols 00.).

we will consider the principle of designing the m switch on an era-pie of a
basic series 100 logic eleaent that iaplelonts simultaneously {uncticns (ll-NM
and an (m. 3.21). The circuit consists o: e differential upmier aseeahlod
with VT: and m and V'l‘s transistors. Ilhen the signal gradient is applied to the
input of this uplifier. current I, a: flow either through transistor W5 to

whose base is constantly applied reference voltage "on =-2.9 volts (during this
tine a negative blocking voltage is meat at inputs xllxu). or throua: transis-
tors VTI-V'N. when a voltage greater than Um is applied to their bases.

Qatput emitter repeaters (transistors VT? and m are connected to the bias level

rated resistances of 51 aha. The low output ilpedsnce of the circuits provides

for the ntching of the output and input levels or the logic eleaents when theﬁ
are operating together and the possibility of feeding signals into a cable wit

50 oha wava ilpedance. The 331:. circuit is connected to a negative voltage power
source Unn=5.2 volts 3; 55. The collector circuits are grounded. Such a connec-

-35-

POROFFIGALIBEONLY
me 0mm]. usa'omx

tion provides n lower dependence of the output voltege m inductim' IN. the feed

circuit and n better interference rejection. The value of the logo gradient for
the m is 0.69 sillivolts. while the interference rejection reserve is .125 sil-
livolts. lentivs and logic levels of the m circuits 01;“x =o.96 volts,

02“ “1.65 volts) low in vslue. nks it ilposeible to interfsce then directly

with the 1'11. [muster-transistor logic] series circuits. The joint operatiaa

of 111. end an. circuits is ilplee-Ited by specisl circuits of nutuel level con-
verters. altering the conpoeitian of ell the shave-indicated m- series.

 

Fig. 3.21. Essie logic clout m—sor/(n of the an. series

1. cos-on 1 ' u. u... tawny. Vccl
2. at output
3. (la-nor output (“OR output) 5. Um 9 [bias]

All inputs to the bees logic elessnt through leehee resistors 113...”. with s
resistance of shout 50 kohu. ere connected to power source 0..., 8-5.2 volts 3 S.

This connection nkss it possible to lesve the unueed inputs in the eppsrstus
unconnected. To eiiunste the street on the logic pert o! the circuit of pulse
interferences cricketing in the collector circuits of the esitter rspester st

-35-

mommtwemv
the sonent of switchin the ci:‘~uit when operating with a low ilgedance load two
"ground" buses are us 3 one icr output enitter repeaters and t e other - or

the intemal logic part of the circuit.

Reference voltage Um =-2.09 volts is produced by a special tesparature-conpensated
circuit (transistor W6. diodes vm. V12. as well as resistors 38, R9. 810) and

is selected so that it would be lower than ninisus voltage 1. its will consider
the principle of operatic; of the basic logic elenent (Fig. 3.21). If a low
voltage level. corresponding to 0 (":x 1-1.85 volts). is applied to all inputs

lynx“. transistors VTl-V’N are cut-off (only leahge currmte are flowing) be-
cause their elitters have the following voltage applied:

Us ‘ Um. 1' Unvu - - 1.29 + (— 0.30) - - 2.09 volts
The level of current I, is deternined by voltage U, and the rating of resistor
R7. Current I, flows through open transistor “'5 to whose base is applied refer-
ence voltage U0“ . as well as resistors R? and 32. A voltage drop "Rf-0.98 volts
is produced across resistor 32. The voltage at the (3 output at this mnsnt
corresponds to level 0(03.m 8-1.65 volts). while at the output or (xx-nor. the

voltage corresponds to 1 (U‘mm 3-0.96 volts) (voltage U" of transistor VT? should
be added to the voltage drop across resistor 32).

when a high voltage IOVol, i.e.. 1 (0.“ 3-0.81 volts). is supplied to one or the
inputs (or to all inputs lynx“). the input transistor opens because the refer-
ence voltage selected was sore negative than the nininl voltage 1. Transistor
VT5 closes by the {creed voltage gradialt and all of current I, will flow through

the opened input transistor (one o! the m-m row) and resistors Bi and B7. The

negative voltage on the Joined collectors of the input transistors will increase
to level -.97 volts and a level. corresponding to 0. will be established at the
output of the enitter repeater V18. while i will be established at the output of
emitter repeater VT7. Thus. the circuit produces logic function a! at the output
of transistor VT? and logic function (ll-NOT at the output of transistor ”‘8. Thus.
Ju-ps in the input signal cause switching of cmentl’, which. depending upon the

value of the input signal. flows either through transistor V135 or throng: tran-

sistors V'I‘i-VT". Because of this. the circuit with Joined enittsrs is irequently
called a current key. The paramase outputs of the basic m switch shorten the
propagation path of the signals in digital devices. The presence of eaitter re-
peaters that have low output ispsdance at the circuit outputs. provides a consid-
erable load capacity of the m circuits (In3 3 15). To provide a still higher

load capacity the m digital series include special circuits with a high branch-
ing coefficient “P03: 50...!00 at C" > 100 picofarads).

.. 37 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An increese in the Joining coerticisnt with respect to inputs ssy be sit-sieved by

connecting a logic expander to the basic circuit; however. this causes a cmider-
able reduction in the speed of operstion of the circuit due to parasitic i-
tences; theretore. expended- circuits srs not included in the m series [35. Its
will now cmsider i811. circuits in greater detail.

3.5.1. Functional Ooapoeition of the BTI. Series

In recent years technological successes ads it possible to increase the-Missal
possibilities of the BTL series calsiderably. Along with logic ales-its and D
triggers. decoding and mltiplax circuits. sunrise and arithnetic device unite
were introduced into these series. This provides for their wide use. in high speed
conputers. The functiaial coapceition of the STD digital series. developed in
recent years. and their analoge are shown in Table 3.13.

lle will consider in greater detail the purpose and special features of operation

of several 1c of series 100. 10 types 10013110? 100141102. 100111105. 100141109 and
100L1e106 (and corresponding 10 of series 1500 ispleaent functions (B401 and are

mailed with the basic logic eleaent.

10 types 10019115. 10019116 are receivers frcs the line and my be used in two nodes:
as receivers of a paraphase siaial tron a two-wire ooamnicaticns line (in this

case. the built-in leads in the housing of reference voltage source are not used)
and so logic elellents with conetsnt voltages 0 or 1 st the output (with an extunsl
connection of the leedcut fro: the reference voltage source with certain input
lesdoute. The use of both sodas aimltaneously for eleaenta contained in the ease
IO housing is psraitted.

Ic type W is a ntrix of load resistors (four resistors rated at 500 ohm and
four resistors rated at 800 ch.) which, with proper switching. are used as s load
on the nonnatching inputs of the logic circuits of the series.

10 type 1001'II130 (Fig. 3.22.) are two D tr -- “latches.“ equipped with
setting (8). resetting (R). synchronising ( inputs and a general synchronisatiai

input (0). note is received tree input 1) during the tine when c-o; 63:0. In this
case. any change in the data at input D is transsitted to the trigger output. The

data is stored_at the assent that the siaull at input 0 changes free state 0 to
state 1. For 0"1. the trigger is auppreaud at input c. A forced setting of the

trigger into state 1 (input 3) and resetting (input a) is done when c=c3=1s in
this csee, the signed at input I) does not affect the trigger. when the trigger is
controlled by the n and 8 inputs. the setting and resetting pulses should not
overlap in tile.

Ic type doormab [Fig. 3.22b). unlike 10 type 100 111130. has two dsts inputs. 1:1
and D2 and an additional selector input 8. men 1 is applied to input 8. the
data is recordedonlyhyinput D13 lhenO isappliadtoinputs. thedatsis
recorded only by input 132.

- 88 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 3.22. T13. diagram of D W oration for IO typo 100111130 (3) m
we 100mm (b).

 

P13. 3.23. Frequency divider for 10 typo 1001!”! (s) m! it. tho 415511: (b).

1. Zero setting 2. 10018105

- 39 -
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
£65
.338 5.2

..90.

FOR omcm. USE ONLY

23.583 :3: 8n :8-

....mé «$2.38.. 83. 2 83.383 3.38. .3. 3m... 95.

_ 8 a

8.78 3 .8n

33583 8.78 n 38..

odd «.8882. 885. 8.583 8.58. .08 393 9....

.8\8.78 8.-

338.383 L388: ave-none

n.~.n «.8782. 8.3! 8589. SE83 3!; 88:.

8.78 a

.38.? 38a

. swouoaaoau 33 8.78m 3......

¢.~.n «$2.58.. 835. 8338.5 3883 no? 38.. on...

8 «$8.78 n

vied. canon

an. 8 «\83

amass? .8 u 333.?

n.~.n «-3988 388.. 83:83 «358. 383 2....

8 ~\8.78 m

ail-no 3&9."

v5 8.78

sacs—48mm m 3310.?

~.~.n $8.58.. ~33! 8:38? 8:38. 38. 8.3.

8~\8_..8~

$3583 3980.?

«.Né $8.58.. 883.. .3583 «358. 3!: .38
II'III'I

Na .833? 5 an...» 88.9 89. 8. Inga

H53 a 0.055

 

‘4 o N 040‘?
83830 a 2.9

e: a .8
TnAA «5-3. 033

n5 «.6 n.n
3.810.? 0.30.." 25.

x3! 8.38“
a: w

-8 €82.82 ~.6 n.~
3510.7 0.30.." 2.9
8433‘

83am

Q339—
:83!
«33!
Snow!

983!

3.8:!
38.3.
«839.
329

539.
339

«93!

093E-

9181a”

89% 8§S~
80389
8389 8:33
«ﬁrm—Sun
R583 R68“
:SSHSQ $838
gﬁoﬁu $833
50533 «358"
88.383
among 8.35.8."
5:333
0.138? 358"
3389. .358.
59.33?
3.5.8-
52:80?
39983 $583
395.8?
82% 82.83
59583
95583 “9&8“
59:89?
858°? 833"
Jan. :31
«g

5.31 «93.8
no 5.
Lisa uoon. .32 You“?

030 ”with an”

honed—3d! «05.0
83806 doe-u and: gun
.3386 ~25." to." 557m

:33" :3: 08.3.7.3 .38—

genes

803...: n a...“

3

-92-
MWLIJSIONLY
3:33 332.3 .3: E83. 9.38
8458" 83.3.5 ﬁaaoéounou 9a

Swansea 558 Egon 62 :3:
£983. 053 Sxéo 2:.

cacao 3:3 5.2

850..
_ «3... ~ 5:. .8382? 3
SE83 .8» 8.33 atonéaiﬁdﬁ

03p 33

.. 5a: col-l E «5:88 .

38o «92:0 5:.
:8. «SA .3... $3..
- 8" 33 8“ ﬂu. has...

- 323:8 3:88
5:. 28. a2 a 5:. 8.8..
83 SS mﬁ 5:. has...

388.3 385° 5d.
38. 3.. u :3: 85.. $3
- 33 SN 56. has...

303 33

N 5d. 390.. NV 2638

«3303 5a.. aha-on 2.53803
«ca—Eco." «350.56 H2580 :3:

D8... 31$ 3%

-93-

mmmolmr

1c type 100ml (Fig. 3.23) is two double D triggers of the Is type with seperste
inputs for setting 3. resetting R. synchronising 3' end with conch synchronize-

tion input c. The date is received on the aster trigger tron input D et
c=o and Ego. hiring this tile. the eiave trigger stores the dsts received by the

trigger in the previous cycle.The dete storing occurs when the siaisl changes at
input 0 iron stete 0 to stete 1. In this cese. trigger s changes to the storege
node. while trim s changes to the receiving lode. Previously recorded dete in

the n trigger ie traneterrea to the output a: the circuit. it 'ér'i. the trigger
is blocked at input a.

To achieve the celeulet lode it is n o ect out to in D
and feed counting pulses 0 input G or . 3.3%? 00% mtg“)

and resetting (n) are achieved et en: eonsnt of tile. independently of the etste
of other trigger inputs (Fig. 3.90).

Fig. 3.2%. Tine disgra- of e D trigger type 100111131 opersticn in the calculation
node.

10 type mom» is four D triggers with stroking elensnte st the trigger inputs.
Strobing elelents ere divided with respect to trigger pits by strobing outputs
(Cl. 62 . eynchrcnieaticn input 6' end cc-cn synohrcnisstion input a. The dste

is received ire- input D et c= 1 end 6‘ =1, in thie eeee direct dets trenenieeion

iron the input to the output of the systen my be blocked by signal 1 st the input

of the strobing elensnt. lute storing occurs when the deals chenge et inputs
(:1 and 62 from stete l to state 0. "hen ell triggers ere synchronised with
respect to the con-on input 0. o sust be set st the inputs of seperete synchroni-
zation or they lust rennin switched off. Iith separate synchrcniesticn of trig-

sermirsvnhru tto’int thecuon iti
rennin switched o . or sit-113’s” be fed tongw. “3‘33. mm 6 mt

.. 95 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 3.25. Tins diners- of D trigger type looms.

To provide proper operetion of the trigger circuite.it is necessary to tote into
account s nunbsr or edditionel pen-store shown in the above-cited tine diners-ea

1:23. 63' ~- linin- sl-lowsble delny tine of theeeunnl ﬁmt or cut-oft st in-
puts D or s with respect to the positive synchronissticn pulse fruits 13.15.. mg

-- Iinilsl allowable tile for sdvsnce or the front end cut-0!! of siaasls st in-

puts D or s with respect to the positive front of the eynoiu-azisetion pulse. The
values of these :srueters not be as follows: a...) with respect to the D in*

put -- not less then 2.5 nanoseconds; (in: with respect to the 8 input -- not
less than 3.5 nanoseconds. do with respect to the 1) input -- not lees than 1.5
nanoseconds and “8 with respect to the 8 input -- not less then 1.5 nanoseconds.

Ic type 20011118» is en 8-chsnnel mltiplsasr with an inhibition input If ads of
basic logic olelsnts. The presume of the inhibition input nkss it possible to
orgmise high level decoding circuits and ilpleunt sn ”(n wiring“ opsrstion of
circuits for mltiplexing (conbininc) over eidxt channels. 1c type loononso
(lZ-input psrity check circuit) is s colbinstion of nine logic elesents thst in-
plenent the ”at loc " to functiai. The circuit is deemed to deter-ins s
psrity of words up to bite lung. The output voltage corresponds to level 1 if
an odd nulber or digit "units“ is present st the circuit inputs.

- 96 ..
FOR OFFICIAL (El-Z ONLY
Ic type 1003179 is a high-speed carry unit and is desigied for coabined use

with 10 types 100.0180 or 100mm in hirh-epeed acting arithnstic and logic
devices. operating with long words. The circuit consists of ten m-nar-at logic
elenents in which the collectors of the input transistors are conbined in an

"on viri " ircuit. 1c t 1003181 are high-speed univ arithmetic-l c
devices K145. designed mythic-ant l6 logic functions and 1 arithne‘tic op?»

tions with two four-bit nuabars.

A0...A3 and 80...:3 are data inputs. Input variables A and B in the positive logic

circuits are fed in the cosplensntary code and output function Y. in this case.

is also form in the conplenmtary code. The direct code of variables A. B and
of output funcetion Y is used in the operation of the All! in the negative logic

function (0 corresponds to the upper level and l - to the lower level). Inputs
So...s are used to assign the code of the function being ilplenented. Depmding

upon the signal at output H. the device inplesents logic or arithnetic operations.
m1 internal carry circuits are built-in in the its circuit. Input 0 is the

carry input fron the previous stages. The carry sisal into the following stage
is for-ed at output X2.

The combined utilisation of IO types 1001? 181 and 1000179 lakes it possible to
alsost halve the arithnetic operation tine for 32-bit words. Two conplenentary
group carry signals (outputs XI and X3) produced in the ALU are used in the accel-

erated carry operating node. The inplenmtation of logic transformtions of in-

put variables A and s is done when sinsl 1 is fed to input 11 which blocks the
internal carry circuits.

The value of the typical pars-store of the Am in inplenenting arithsetic opera-
tions with words froa It to 616 bits long. using accelerated carry circuits in
100m79. are shown in Table 3.14. For the continsd operatic: of series 100 and
10 series 133 and 155 circuits. 10 type mom is used. It consists of four
2-input level converters for transferring tron 1'11. to 10 of the m type. as well
as type 100N125. which consists of four 2-input level converters for transferring
from an. to IC type m.

we will consider the operation of level converters in greater detail. Fig. 3.26s
shows one of four level converters included in to type 10010121}. It consists of
input diodes vol-m. an input elittsr repeater {transistor vn), a differential
amplifier (transistors W5 and V17). operating in a current switching node, snit-

ter repssters(transistors m and ”8). as well as a sotmce of reference voltages
(transistors W9 and W10).

'I‘TL feed voltage (5.0 volts 3}) is fed to lsadout 9 and the m feed voltage
(-5.2 volts 1 as) is applied to leadout 8. Leadout 16 (com) is grounded and

the load is connected to paraphass outputs lb and 2. For strobing all four elesen-
tary cougar-tars located in this 1c. second inputs of each caiverter are conbined at
leadout . ,

- 97 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OI WM. USE ONLY

 

p1 . .26 Level converter for transferring iron the m to the m (120 type
105x132; (a) and for transferring iron the an. (10 type 100111125) (1:).

When using the circuit no a one-input level converter. the reference voltage U
(leadout l) is fed. to leadoute 2 or 3 depending on whether the circuit mt pro-
duce an inverted or noninverted oonvereion. Thue, in case "onz is connected to

input 3 and l is present at input 2. transistor m is open. while transiator “‘10

is c10eed. The voltege of the m tnnsietor collector is about 1 volt which is
enough to block transistor W8 reliably. The omt through 0pm transistor”?
enters the base of transistor W9, incur-ins its saturation.” a. result 0! which

- 93 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3 . 1“

Typical parental-act the ALI! type 100mm vhen operating with accelerated carry
circuit type ioom79

Word Adding tine Nutha- of 13

length, gag”
kite With I 0‘ Iith accelerated type 100111.81 type lOOIPl79

_m_ m in m in All! circuit
vith accelerated

L—
“ 7 - 1 -
3 11 - 2 -
12 1'6 13 3 1
16 17 16 ‘5 1
32 30 13 8 2
1&8 ’03 20 12 3
6" 56 22 16 a

The reference voltage come for. the biae voltage for the cunent oecillatcr

(tranaiator ‘16). Thin voltage ie talc: or! the eaitter o! traneietor W10. No
reference voltagee are alac created. "em '- 1.8 vclte and U,” 3-0.7 volte. Volt-

age "on. tron eaitter of tranaiatcu: '19 la ted to one input of the differential

aaplitier (bane of traneietor m). the voltage tron reeietor m2 entera the base
of still another current cecilJator (tranaietor W2). M a 2.“ volt aipial ia
applied to the input. a voltage or! about 0.05 volte criginatee at the haee of
traneietor W3 and the voltage an the hale of tranaietcr W5 will.in thie cane.

be apmintely equal to 0.8 volte vhich coueapcnda to level 1 in the m cir-
cuita. Traneiatcr VTSiefoundtobeopai, levelOie eatabliahedat outputlband
level 1 -- at outputz. ‘ro eupprm Wm puleea originating at the noaent
of awitchinginthe reed circuitecdtheﬂbcircuite. diodeemandmerein-
etalled at the level converter input.

Fig. 3.26h shove a circuit of one of the four level convu-tere in 10 type lOOPUlZS.

The circuit oooeiete of a cw key (tranaiatore W3. W5 and mo). equipped
with a stable mt oeoillatcr in the enitter circuit (tranaiator W6 and. re-

eistor R9) and an output atage (eiailar to the inverted: in the m circuits).
operating the aaturation node (traneietore m. m....m.). reed foltage
5.0 volta 1 i to applied to leadout.9 and feed voltage -5.2 volte 3 3 in applied
to leadcut 8. Leadout 16 (canon) ie grandad.

A biaa ie applied to the atable mt oecillator iron the internal eouroe of
reference voltagee (eh-ate m. m. m...m. 111...») and two reference
voltagea are alao needs 0,," =-2.8 volte. taken of! the collector of traneiatou:

W2 and 0,", =1.29 volte, altering Iron the elitter of traneietor m. Reference

voltage U is need to fix the output voltage of 0 who the circuit inpute are con-
nected to the -5.2 volt voltage eme or are free.

- 99 -
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
voltage 0°,“ \< 0.5 volts is established at output b. corresponding to level 9

of the m. circuits. when logic 0 is fed to input 2, transistormo opens and

VT) closes. The voltage on the base of transistor W9 reduced to the level of
1 volt which leads to the closing of transistor V19. The voltage on the collector
of transistor "3 increases. which leads to the opming of transistor '18. is v

a result a voltage is established at output 16 which correspods to level 1 of m
circuits (U‘=2.h volts).

lihen all four elenents of circuit 100!!!le are used. reference measures
leadout l is fed to corresponding inputs of all four eleaents. In desigiing

functional units using level conVertsr circuits. it should be taken into account

that the sero level 02“ S 0.5 volts is sosswhst higher than the core level of
m. circuits (vans 0.» volts) which reduces the noise resistance or the latter

by 100 sillivolts.

The branching coefficient of level conterters when operating at inputs of 10 series
, 155 is no greater than 8. and at inputs o! 16 series 130 -- no greater than

10 type 100mm is a supsroperstive nenory with nondestructive readout and con-
sists of a ntrix of trigger honor-y elenents organised as 16 one-bit words. The
astrix is equipped with a circuit for address and bit control. The electrical
functional circuit of such a asaory (Pig. 3.27s) consists of 16 (slelents
for storing data) organised into a two-diasnaional (along X and I) sit ntrix
(m-1...m-a). 8 address toners (1?). read-in anplifiers( 3n o.3n 1) and two
read-out ssplifiers (on 0.04 l). The circuit operates in three nodes: data
storing, read-out and read-in. Addressing (selection when reading out and reading
in) is done by eisultaneously feeding level 1 into selected address buses (xx).
Zero level list be Iaintained at all address buses not selected. When there are
no signals at read-in asplitier inputs (1)“ ,m, =0. 0,, 3... =0) the signal tro-

the selected cell of data storage is fed over the read-out buses to the input of
the read-out anplifier 0 or 1. Depuiding upon whether 0 er 1 were read-in in the
selected cell. level 1 is for-ed at the output of the corresponding alplifier.

The interrogated cell stores its data. Switching the trigger to the new state
will occur only when new data is received. To read-in 0 or l.it is necessary to
supply level 1 simultaneously to the selected buses x. y and to one of the read-in
buses (30 0 oral? 1 respectively).

The data storage eleasnt (Fig. 3.2%) is an unsaturated trigger with direct coup-
ling ends with two three-esitter transistors m and m. and three resistors.

In the storage node. the trigger has esittsrs E...l5 operating while the circuits
or enltters 1n. :6 are disconnected. In the read-out and read-in nodes. the trig-
ger has enitters :1. l6 operating. while circuits of eaittsrs 2...!5 are discon-
nected. Read-out and read-in is done over the P1 and P2 buses.

m t pe 100301602 is sn associative new: device. The associative senory device
(A80) is desiaisd for operation with 2-bit words. Besides storage functions. the

- 100 -
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1 ,1
”gel
,1 r1. r1
LW!I.IL!L I

"ran .
r‘i'

A,

  

 

Fig. 3.27. Electrical functionsl citouit of s euperoperstive memory (s) end s
dste stance eleeent (b).
1e 8‘ 3n, '"' 111M I'M-“ 1 3e bit hill
2. Beer 30! -- output reed-out 1.

A21: does exithnetic opentions on the stored anthers. At the basis of the A20
design ls s systee of socess by e tec --3the sooees to the needed word and its
selection is eede by e tee contsined in the desired word itself. Assooietive
selection (sesroh node) in eiorocirouit 100311002 my be esde under conditions of
"making" the intern-opted dets. The retrieve]. is over two buses for eeoh address.

Combination 1-0 end 0-1 ere used respectively for the retrieval of the l and the
0 states. Coebinstions l-l correspond to the ”ask.” i.e., in this case. the re-

action at the “word coupes-lean“ output con-esponds to noncoincideace of the ter-
rogsted dsts and say dste stored under eny eddrees.

- 101 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.5.2. Buio Electrical Phantom ond mm: annotation“ of IO typo m

Digital typo m 10. booidoo the am list of oloctriool ponutm typiou for

otoliior digital 1c also luv. npooinl cutie Mm: input and output threshold
v | L.

 

Fig. 3.28. chtciatioo of hole logic ole-mt of the an. action:

a - tnnnfor (at-la mm. .0114 mm (3 output. hrokon line)
b - input. 0 -- wtput. with rap-ct to out-root.

l. I)“ . volts -- innit voltoeo 3. 0w volts -- output
2. 0.. up -- tar-hold input voltm -
voltage to. I... . millions - input
amt

5. "on - rotoronoo voltage.

-102-
MWWWLY
Fig. 3.28s shows the typical transfer characteristics of a basic logic elenent of

series 100. 3500 with direct and inverse outputs. By leans of these curves. it

is possible to give the {alluring para-stew: definitim for m circuits:

U" ”a, e "”35 -- input threshold voltages; 0..."...6 llama-'- output threshold
at

voltages; . U0“ -- input voltages; l6” 0“,;- cutput voltages of unity
and sero. These para-store my be used to calculate the followings voltages of

static noise resistance 0}, = vi," m 4:}, Mann u?" a 0‘; M 41%“, . logic

Gradient U, :01" 410‘ as vell~es the cone of switching A U = U1 - 0°.

I! 0" "09 ox nor

Taking into account the low values of output lwic and the unavoidable technologi-
cal spread or rated uncut- (therefore. also or the electrical pan-stars of the
keys). sum- and uni-u- para-star values were established for the m circuits
that deter-ins the transfer characteristic (Table 3.15). These ters cor-
respond to the allowable values of static interferences (for - 0 < t 4 75°C)
U "m 3 125 sillivolts. 00"“ > 155 lillivolts; to deviation of output levels

A

of 1 and 0 (for t = 2500). ”a 690 sillivolts: switching sons (for t = 25° c)
sun 5 370 aillilsters.

- He will now consider the input characteristic of the basic logic elessnt m-nor/
m of the m series (Fig. 3.21). The input characteristic of this circuit
(Fig. 3.2813) has four sones.

In sons 1 the input transistors are blocked and the input current is low (equal
to the leakage current between the collector and the base). Iltire curer I,

flows through the enittsr circuit of tnneietor_VT5. In sons II. as the voltage

increases on one of the input transistor m-m. it padually beconss conducting.
The input current increases which increases collector current Ikl due to the cor-

responding reduction in collector curmt 112 of transistor W5. At a certain
value of voltage Us: . collector current In is reduced to a value considerably
lower than I; . In this case.- the curent through resistor R? reuins practically

constant .

In zone III. as voltage U” increases further, current I, and voltage "R? will
increase as a result of which the differential input ispedance of the circuit will

rise sharply. In sons IV. the transistor becones fully conducting and picks up
all of current In a; Is I const.

In the cut-off state of the circuit, at voltage 1 on output 2. its working point

is located on some I of the input characteristic, while in the conducting state --
in zone III. Zone II is a transition scne. In this state the input impedance is
minimal. while in some I and III for Uﬁequel to voltages 0 or 1 the input imped-

ance is high.

- 103 -
I708 OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
'00” '00810
'0.” .007”
”V
.Tihe of propention delay when - 2.9 . 25
disconnected t‘gf} , nsnoseconds

Output branching coefficiult 15 {3
Power consuned PM, . r 35 25
millitvstte (per logic elelent

(Jamar/on)

The output characteristics of the key st the transistor W8 output (see Fig. 3.21)
are shown in Fig. 3.28c. Depending upon the vslue of the given voitege st the
output. current I,“ will not: into or out or the circuit. it each circuit state.

the reduction in U,“ at the we trensietor output leads to this treneistor being
more conductive, end on inoresse in outnoving output current I...“ . An incresse
in 06m sakes this trsnsistor lees conﬂicting snd increesee the inflating output
current I,” . A further increese in Um my nke the elitter repeater mm
nonconductins, sner which the current will be deter-ind by the loud inpedsnce
which will detersine the slope of cherscteristic Icon (0.,“ ).

The low output ilpedsnce of the esittsr provides s high loeding ospecity of the
FSTL circuits on no. However. the eotuei loading cspeoity in the We node. due

to the input ospecitence of the circuit end the cspeoitence of the wiring is re-
duced to Ki“: 3 15.

-105-

roe Oman. use. ONLY
Us will now consider the dynasic psraseters of the m circuits. The “dc plian-

eter that detersines the dynasic properties of : circuit is the propagation delay

tine when connecting and disconnecting “3139’ tut, ). m circuits are the quick-
est digital 10. At norsal conditims and load inedsnce if 51 ohm. Wtylical

propagation delay tise is 7 nanoseconds. The delu tile is aessured at the level
0f 50% 15:0! the full gradient of the logic level when the circuit is switched.

It my be seen fro- the characteristics shown in Fig. 3.29 that the greatest effect

on the propagation delay is produced by a change in the feed voltage. the voltage
bias level and by an increase in the capacitive loading.

BTL series 100. K500 are considered to have identical electrical pars-stars and
differ only in fmctional oosposition, the type of housing and the operating om-
ditions. Table 3.16 shows the values of the operating electrical para-stars of the
basic logic elessnt of series 100 and [500 in s telperature range. The lisiting
allowable nodes of operation for the m series is shown below:

Maxims teed voltage. an . volts -7 for 5 sillisec;
-6 constantly

Han-us input voltage 0,, "a . volts 0

hinisnn input voltage 0.. m» . volts -5.5

Maxims output current In... ,m. silliaap 100

3.5.3. Certain Special Features in the Use of 10 type m

I. will outside: the special Icahn-es of using 1c type m an an maple of t...
series 100. As already sentiened above. an. circuits have s neative feed voltage
source of -5.2 volts 1 S and. because of this. negative vol of logic leVels.

Moreover. ms circuits logic levels are low in absolute value Um” - 1 volt and

02,“ 5-1.65 volts). All this does not allow direct connecting to inputs and

outputs of 10 type E811. to 10 type 111. or the use of HG structures. For the
mutual interfacing of logics. special circuits of calves-tor 100!!!le and 10010125

lust be used. In wiring apparatus of 10 series 100 (besides 10 types 1.0012115.
1ocu>116 and. 100mm) all unused inputs and outputs are 1m. free.

Unused inputs of 1c types 10012115 and 10019116 last he cmnected to areference
voltage source (lesdout 9 of 10 type 1000115 and lesdout 11 of 1c type 10013116)
or to feed voltage source "m = ~5.2 volts 3 f. Unused inputs of 10 type

100mm are connected to feed source 11., t 5.0 volts 3; ﬂ throudm a resistor

rated at l kohs. lIo sore then 20 unused inputs my be connected to me resistor.

If it is necessary to teed a constant algal 0 to inputs of several 10, it say he
obtained tron any logic 10 series 100 that for. signal 0 with the cmnected inputs.

The nusber of loads which my be connected to the output of such an elemt should
not exceed 2'0.

- 106 -
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 3.29. Reletionehipe between dynuic pare-etc“ end. ruietivo iced (a).
loed oepeoitence (b): voltece teed eource (0); Iain voltage ((1):
end telpereture (e). ~

1. nanoseconds - 3. pudenda
2. able

The m1. Iicrocircuite considered Above ellou e coebineticu of direct end inveree
outputs into a "wired or and e ”wired W with e coahinetion coefficient Rags

S b. so well u e combinetion of e direct output itith en inveree one (Fig. 3.30).

The letter coebinetim nethod nkee it poeeible to receive and tune-it eignele
.froe eeverel ele-ente over one col-cu comiceticue line (Fig. 3.313).

-107-
MOI'FICIALUSEONLY
' a) (b)

Fig. 3.30. Oonbinetion of 10 type m outpute into n ”wired m" (e) into e
”wired mm 0),; cclbineticn of direct and inverse outpute (c).

It ehould be reeenbered thet ee the number of coﬂined outpute ie increeeed. the
levels of output volteae chenge. which l'eede to n reducticn in the noise reeietence
of the IC. llcreover, in the “wired CB“ operating lode when even one 10 ie ewitohed
fro- state 1 to etnte 0. e neative interference appen- et the output of the con-
bined circuits (as. 3 31b) which n, ceuee e fnlee operetial of the lced elelent.
The uplitude and duration of the interference depends on the length of the col-
lunicaticne line thet ccnnecte the elemte in the ”wired at.” Tekins the ebove

into ecommt. it ie recon-«Idea to contine outpute within one been! end, if poeei-
ble. outpute of 1c which ere beeide eech other. Tekinc the output fro: the been
of en I0 that doee not have en output colbineticn ie M.

Fig. 3.31. Circuit for eiuel tmenieeicn free eevernl It: type an. over one
col-on co-micetim line (e) end e the b)

 

I)

l. U“, -- input volte‘e 3. Uno- cutput voltage
2. UM. -- interfermce volte‘e lo. TM -~ interfernoe tine
- 108 -

POI OMCIAL USE ONLY
As already asntioned above. BT14 circuits have a fairly high load capacity
“"9 g 10) which is due to the low input ispedence of the eaitter repeaters

with which the keys are equipped and the low values of the input current (less

than 265 aicroasperes). Iithin one board. the load capacity increases to
K}...3 = 20 and for aicrocircuits 1001.1.110 and 1001.!elll. designed to Operate siaul-

taneously on three transaissiai lines. the load capacity is still higher ( KM}: 30).

It is reconnended that the output of trigger circuits be loaded no acre than with
6 inputs of Ic loads. It is recon-ended to connect inputs of no sore than 16 key-
loads to the output of circuits. conbined in a "wired (8.“ In this case. the re-
duced level of the output voltage and an increase in the propagation delay tine
should be taken into account.

when the logic eleaent operates with a load resistor rated at 51 ohns (at 0‘... g

-2 volts) the delay increase when connecting one input of the it: load is 0.1 nano-

seconds. while the change in the duration of the output simal front for an in-
crease in the load ma 1 to 10 inputs does not exceed 0.5 nanoseconds. In all
cases. when deteraining the allowable nusber of inputs that my be connected to

the 10 output. it is necessary to take into accent the ooabinstion of several in-
. ts within these 10. Vith the direct operation of eleaente with «is another
{over short lines of commioaticns). resistors of various ratings cmnected to
voltage sources 0.... = -5.2 volts or to 0c... 3 -2.0 volts saybe used in the esitter
circuits of the output repeaters.

The presence in the above-considered m series triggers and logic eleaents of
various types .1!” it easy to desin typical functional coswter units and dis-
crete autosatic systen devices. Fig. 3.32 shows a lb-stage shift register circuit.
The output part of the circuit is nde up of 10011031 triggen. the parallel data
input circuit -- is ads up of 10 type 10018119. while the output part is a decoder
with two inputs and tour outputs ads of 10 type 1001.10.05. To increase the nusber
of register stages. data is fed to input Dn-l from the output of the previous stage

and to input Dru fros the output of the following stage. Depending on the type
of signal. operations. enuaerated in Table 3.17. are inplensnted at inputs 81 and

32 by the circuit.

Sjmchronous binary pulse counter (ﬁg. 3.33) is ads of 10 types 100111131 (D5.
D6. 18.1). 10018118 (mudﬁ) and 100134105 (1)7). Input Qn-l iaplenents the carry

from the previous stage and output {“4 -- the carry to the following stage. The

counter operation is controlled at input 8 of 10100111105. lith 1 at the 8 input.

the circuit ispleaenta the mnotion of a counter. Uith 0 at the 8 input. the
circuit operates as four triggers and receives data in inputs no...1>3.

The coabined utilisation of mi. and m. circuits (Fig. 3.3») sum it possible to
design special purpose units. Pig. 3.30s shows an indication circuit. desigied
with 1c type ioowizs (m) (aeries m) and 1c type 13314? (12) (ssries m.)
using the new 6,3-20 incandescent ianp as an indicator.

-109-

I’Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. 1?

mentions ilpleeented by the four-etece shift register, depending on eimals 81
and S

 

2
m Inplenented ogr_ation
S1 82
o o Blocking .
1 0 Shift right
0 1 Shift left
1 1 ﬁts received in inputs D (the cir-

cuit operates es tour trims with
upstate inputs and outputs)

hbl. 3.18
Rated resistance resistors 81 end 32 with parallel ntching

£1421! 5rd!- 22-011-

50 81 130
75 121 7 195
100 162 260

150 3'53 390

Taking into account the high-speed action of the m circuits. special attention
should be given to the smug-alt of the con-mications lines between individual
1c. as well as to boards and units. Circuits types 1001.1’115 and 10012116 which
are paraphase signal receivers free a two-wire commicatione line. were considered
previously. Reliever. data transfer between individual circuit boards my be in-

pleaented by single-phase signals ('13. 3.3%).

when a single-phese 319.1 1. fed tree the output or 10 series 100 (m...m) to
one of the inputs of the 10 types 10012115 (D5...‘W) or 10011116, a reference
voltage nust be fed to the second input. prcdmed in 10 type 10013115 (leedout 9)
or 100 LPll6 (leedout 11) located in the board fro- which the sign]. is trsnsnitted
Fig. 3.3%). the reference voltege source on the transsitting boerd (lib) my be
loaded in the receiving board with no lore tun 10 inputs. ﬁch 1c type 10012115
or lOOLPllé lay be used as a reference voltage source (17+) when translitting be-
yond the linits of the board end as a signal receiver fros the oouunications

line (D5...07). The reference voltees treneaission line nuet be decoupled at the
transnitting and receiving ads by no less than 1000 pdcotarad capacitors.

Three basic comicationa sethods are recon-ended within the limits of we board.
The series sethod is used for a col-micatione line not over 200 sillineters

-110-

POI OITIOAI. USE ONLY

Fla 3 33. Synchronm binary who cantor fro-0 t015(a)andt1-m
of counter opmtioa (b).

-112-
POIOPHGALMONLY
Hill (WW 1M. USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3.3% Sale BIL connection circuit“
e - indicetion circuit: b -~ dste treneter circuit between two boards

of the device: c end d - seriee end penile]. ntching of comica-
tions lines.

1. Panel 3. Mei-once line
2. Commicetions line '6. -2 volte

between the It: sine]. source end the Iced resistor. 10 loede ere connected along
this con-micsticne line. The recoeemded length of the coeeunicetione line
should not be .reeter then 30 a. In the been nethcd. been linee no lame: then
70 n- brench out st the end of which ere connected IO icede. The iced reeietor

is connected to one or the In iceds. nanny. in the ccncentr’etion eethcd. fro-
the point of connection of the iced reeietor. et the end of coenmicnticne line

200 u long. commicetione lines else 200 en 1on3 trench out to It: icede.

- 113 -
son omcul. us: 01m}
To ell-mote “ringing" at tho algal receive: input. 1t 19 wounded that tho

data be truiulttod over a ntchod commute“ lino. F13. 3.3%. d ohm
circulto for kph-outing tho sex-10o and parallel hotbed: for ntchlng con-mics-
tlcno lines. For commotion. lingo with uvo impedance P 3 50 ohm. rated.
resistor: R1: 1&3 ohm and 32 = 850 ohm (with cotton utching) ond 312: 51 ohm.

(with parallel latching) are and. Anathor Iothod for ponllol atoning“: am
of tuo routers. R1 ond 82. connoctod at tho cu! of tho lino) 1o ollouod. min;
the voltaéo of tho bus levol owl-co 0°" = -5.2 volts 1; 5 to which nutter-32

13 connected. The recon-coda! vnluoo of mlotoro R1 and 1:2. dopamine as tho
wave 1-1:ch 6f tho line. are ohoun 1n Toblo 3.18.

CMRIGRI‘: Mtol'stvo ”Sovotskoyo radio“. 1979

2291
(so. 1863/209

- 116 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.6. Digital Integrated Circuits Based on H08 Structures

Integrated circuits based on field effect structures have become widespread in
recent years. These structures are so naned because their operation is based on
the regulation of the current level in the layer of semiconductor near the surface
by neans of the influence of a transverse electrical field on the channel conduc-
tivity. yield effect transistors with oxide insulation which forn s metal-oxide-
seniconductor (H08) structure and transistors with codination nitride-oxide
insulation (mos) have found practical applications iin digital Ic's.

HOS structures are divided into two kinds: nos transistors with built-in (doped)
and with induced channels (Figure 3.35). In transistors of the latter type, the
channel is created (induced) with the action of a control voltage which is fed to
the gate. with an increase in this voltage, the channel is enriched by the carri-
ers. In doped channel transistors, the channel is created in the production
process. In terns of the type of conductivity, field effect transistors are
broken down into p and n channel types.

In contrast to bipolar transistors, the current in the channel in nos transistors
is transfered by the najority carriers. HOS transistors are four-electrode seni-
conductor devices. The electrodes iron which the notion of the mjority carriers
in the channel begins is called the source; the electrodes towards the najority
carriers move is called the drain and the gate is the control electrode. The
fourth electrode is connected to substrate - the seniconductor region on which
the transistor is zfsbricated.

By applying a voltage to the gate, one can chews the current level in the channel
(with a constant voltage at the drain), and this nsans, one can change the channel
resistance. H08 transistors, in contrast to bipolar ones, are voltage controlled,
and in this sense are an analog of vacuu ttbea. 'lhree variants of DDT gates
using MOS transistors with induced channels are shown in Figure 3.36. Integrated
circuits with 1108 structures have a under of advantages over bipolar circuits.
They are sinple in terns of structural design, well suited for production
processes, have a high noise imnity as well as well as a low power dissipation.
An nos switch occupies enormously less area on the surface of the substrate as
coapared to a bipolar switch. This lakes it possible to produce 10's with the
equivalent of up to 10,000 switches on a single chip.

The najority of digital IC's using H08 structures which are being produced at the
present tine are based on N08 transistors with induced p-type channels, or as
they are still called, p-channel transistors. Integrated circuits using couple-
nentary H08 transistors (CHOS) as well as n-chsnnel transistors have becone wide-
spread in recent years. "a shall deal with 10's based on P108 structures in more
detail.

3.6.1. The Operational Principle of Integrated circuits Using p-Chsnnel H08
Transistors

-115-

MOMMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 3.35. Cross-section through a structure
with an induced (o) and a built-in
(b) channel.

Key: 1. Channel;
2. Substrate.

    

a (2)

' I. I
bias
w!
x

(a) a a») a; (c) s)

Figure 3.36. Circuits of inverters: using p-type channel was
transistors (a), with an n-type channel (b) and
using conplenentary transistors (c).

 
 

We shall analyze the operational principle of an nos transistor with an induced
p-channel [5] (tigure 3.37). If no voltages are applied to the structure, the
p-n junctions which are for-ed by the drain. snurce and substrate regions, are
cut off. A negative charge of nobile electrons, which establishes equilibriun
for the positive charge of the surface states Qeur (Iigure 3.37a) is for-ed at
the separation boundary between the seniconductor and the dielectric. ‘l'he elec-
trical field is concentrated at the separation boundary of the seniconductor and
the sioz oxide. When a negative voltage is applied to the gate. an electrical
field appears, the action of which r'educes the internal electrical field at the
separation boundary. with an increase in the negative voltage at the gate, the
free electrons are displaced iron the region adjoining the gate and a depleted
layer is fort-ed in it. Hith a further increase in the gate voltage, the concen-

tration of positively charged holes increases at the separation surface (l'igure
3.37h).

- 116-
MWUSEONLY
With a definite voltage at the gate, when a sufficient quantity of holes is
accumulated in the channel region, the conductivity of the separation surface
becones of the hole type and the p-type regions prove to the joined to each other
by neans of the inversion layer with the p-type conductivity. This layer also
serves as the channel (Figure 3.37c). By applying a signal to the gate, one can
modulate the masher of carriers (holes) in the channel region, i.e., regulate the
current flowing in the channel. The channel of the transistor is isolated fron
the najor portion of the substrate by a high resistance bulk charge layer. For
this reason, if several transistors are fabricated on a substrate, one can die-
regard their cross-coupling. A further increase in the voltage at the gate does
not change the voltage in the bulk charge layer in the substrate, since the channel
which is formed shields the remainder of the substrate.

However, the voltage drop across the bulk charge layer can be varied by applying a
voltage to the substrate. A negative voltage applied to the substrate turns on
the p-n junctions betveen the substrate and the drain and source regions. A posi-
tive voltage increases the bulk charge thickness, reduces the channel conductivity
and with a further increase, can lead to the couplete disappearance of the channel.
Thus, the substrate, just as the gate, can be used as an electrode which controls
the channel conductivity.

 

Figure 3.37. nos transistors with an induced p-channel.

a,b,c. Various degrees of channel enrich-eat;
d. Saturation node (the channel length decreases);
e. An exanple of the volt-ampere characteristic.

-117-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

, (a)

Figure 3.38. Schultic of basic logic elenents for p-channel H08
transistors and their functional designation.

a. RAID gate;

h. NOR gate;

c. Alb-OR-M gate;

d. NOT gate with a buffered output.

The voltage at the gate for which an induced channel appeare between the drain
and the source is called the turn-on voltage (Dan). A certain drain current In
flows in the traneistor channel with the action of a potential difference between
the drain and the source. When the drain voltage 00 is low, the current In is
directly proportional to the applied voltage and changes linearly. with an incraee
in Up, the current ID will increase, since the electrical field along the channel
increases, but Up will siultaneously coupensate for the voltage applied to the
gate, sonething which causes a reduction in the channel thickness near the drain
(Figure 3.37d), i.e., causes a reduction in its conductivity and leads to a
deviation of the function 1]) (OD) fro. a linear law. Horeover, increasing On
leads to an increase in the potential difference between the channel and the sub-
strate, sonething which in turn causes the thickness of the bull: charge along the
channel to change. A further increase in "D leads to a reduction in the channel

~118-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
length and the saturation of In. The eaturetion condition is defined by the ex-
preeeion:

    

0(c)

Pigure 3.39. Schenatice of flip-flops using p-channel 508
transistors. .

a. Static flip-flop;

b. Universal two-stage flip-flop;

c. The diagr- ehowing the operation of the push-pull
flip-flop in a count node.

As can be seen fro- the volt-ampere characteristic of an H08 transietor (Figure
3.37e), the limiting voltage on lin divides it into two working regions: the
triode node region (1) where the drain current In is strongly dependent on the
drain voltage 0;) and the pentode node region (2), where the drain current ID alnost
does not change with a change in the drain Up. The breakdown region (3) is not
used in operation [6].

We shall not consider oral-plea of digital 10 design based on p-channel nos tran-
sistors. Three kinds of circuits using nos transistors exist and are rather
widely used: static, quasi-static and dynanic. The high input i-pedance of M08
transistors is used in quasi-static and dynanic circuits iron which follows the
capability of the parasitic gait capacitance of retaining a charge for a long tine
and maintaining the voltege level across the gate. circuits of thistypp are nost
widely used for the construction of flip-flop devices, registers and counters [1].

~119-
MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.6.2. Static Circuits Using p-Channel H08 Transistors

Circuits of basic logic gates which perform RAID and IGOR functions are shown in
Figure 3.38. For the sake of simplicity, the circuits of the substrate, which as
a rule, is joined to the source of the transistor;nare not shown here and in sub-
sequent figures.

In switching circuits with a coumon source, designed around p~channel HOS transis-
tors, a negative dra'in supply voltage is used. These are so-called negative logic
circuits, i.e., the lower voltage (low level) corresponds to the output "1" volt-
age, and the higher voltage (high level) corresponds to the output "0" voltage.
The circuits shown in Figure 3.38a,b contain two switching transistors each, W1
and VT2, as well as one load transistor m. The gate of the load transistor may
be connected to the bias voltage source, which usually has a higher level (in
terms of its absolute value) than the voltage being switched by the switching
circuit. The gate of the load transistor is most often connected to the source of
the supply voltage for the drain circuits.

To realize the "RAND" function (Figure 3.38s), switch transistors VTl and m are
connected in series with the load transistor VT3, forming a so-called tiered con-
figuration. The current can flow through transistor VT3 only given the condition
that transistors V‘l'l and VTZ are turned on, i.e. , when signals are present at both
inputs to the M10 gate. The umber of switching transistors (the input fan-in
factor “in m) can be increased, however, it usually does not exceed four. Be-
cause of the high input impedance of H08 transistors (“in > 1012 ohms). digital
Ic's designed around then have a high load fan-out factor “out > 10 .. . 20). The
load factor is linited only by the reduction in the switch speed with an increase
in the number of loads, since the tine constant for charging the parasitic capa-
citance of the load with the current flowing through the load transistor increases.
when Rout . 10, the parasitic capacitance of the load will amount to 610.4 U 20 pl’d.
Considering the fact that the resistance of the turned-on load transistor usually
falls in a range of 25 to 50 10hr, we obtain a charging tine constant of
81034610“ I 0.5 to 1 uses, which corresponds to a nexinun working frequency, f,,
of about 1 19:.

A MR gate (Figure 3.38b) is formed by the parallel connection of the switching
transistors and the connection of their cos-Ion drains to the source of the load
transistor VT3. llere, the current path through transistor VT3 is turned on when
one of the transistors turns on: VTl or VTZ, i.e., when a signal is present at one
of the non circuit inputs. The nuber of inputs (the fan-in factor, KinOR) can
here be twice as great than in the case of series (mltitiered) circuits, and runs
up to 10. This is explained by the fact that parallel M circuits have a value
for Kim which is linited only by the reduction in the "1" level by virtue of the
voltage drop across the load from the overall leakage current in the drain—source
circuits of the input transistors. since this current is quite snall, Kinop can
reach 10. An increase in the masher of input transistors in sultitiered circuits
though complicates the topology and reduces the level of integration of p-type H08
integrated circuits. Although KinAllD does not exceed lo, the tier configuration
makes it possible to realise nore complex logic functions, for example m-on-uor
(Figure 3.38c).

- 120 -
l-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
To increase the load capacity. the 10 output is provided with a buffer stage. In
these circuits, the load capacitance is always charged and discharged through the
snall resistance of one of the turned-on output transistors. The output stage of
such circuits is si-ilar to the push-pull transistor output of 'l'l'l. circuits

(Figure 3.38). then there is no signal at the input to the circuit, transistor VT3
turns on and the capacitance C10“ is charged; and when a signal is fed to the 2:;
input of the circuit, transistor “'3 turns off, but VTlo turns on. The capacitance

C10“ S‘s) rapidly charged through it. The load capability of such circuits can be
20 to .

The connection of two inverters makes it possible to obtain a sinplified as flip-
flop which contains four H08 transistors in all. The cowlete schenstics of flip-
flops included the conplenent of an 1c series built using nos structures also
includes the control circuits (the "0" and "1“ set inputs, the comt input. etc.),
which can be realized by nsans of AND and OR logic gates. In the si-plest static
flip-flop (Figure 3.39s), transistors VTS and VTb are used for the control.

Let the flip-flop be in the state where the voltage level at the Q output cor-
responds to "l", and at the Q output, is "0"; in this case, transistor VTl is
turned off and VTZ is turned on. When a "1" signal is fed to the gate of transis-
tor VTS, transistor VTS turns on, shunting the turned off transistor m. The
voltage at the drain of transistor "1 decreases, which leads to the cutting off
transistor VTZ and the turning on of transistor vn. As a result, the circuit
shifts to the new state in which there is a "0" at the output Q and a ”l" at the
output Q. To change the circuit to the initial state, it is necessary to feed

a "1" signal to the gate of transistor VT6.

Two-stage clocked flip-flop devices consisting of a Iain and an auxiliary flip-
flop are incorporated in to series using p-channel H08 transistors along.with
conbination circuits. The infomtion entry in such flip-flops which have infern-
ation and clock inputs is acconplished only by aeans of the enabling clock pulse.

In a push-pull two-stage as flip-flop (Figure 3.3%), the nain flip-flop which
receives the intonation is for-ed by transistors VTl - VTlo, while the auxiliary
flip-flop device which clanps the state is formed by transistors V19 - m2. The

control is realized by neans of All!) gates for-ed by transistors WIS-VITO and W13-
W16.

we analyze the operation of the flip-flop. Let the min flip-flop be in the state
where the voltage at point A corresponds to the "0" level and at point 3 it
corresponds to the "1" level (I - 8 I 0). If in this case there is no clock pulse
T2, then there is the sane probability at the state of the auxiliary flip-flop
will be either Q - 0 or Q - 1. however, with the arrival of the first clock pulse
T2. the infomtion will be rewritten intg the auxiliary flip-flop from the main
flip-flop and it is set to the Q - l and Q - 0 state.

The appearance of the R or 8 information signals (when T1 - 0) will not change
the state of the flip-flop. however, if a S . 1 signal arrives at the gate of
transistor VT? and a clock pulse T1 arrives simltaneously with it, the AND gate
actuates (transistors W7 and m), the voltage level at point B will change and

- 121-
MOWUSEONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will correspond to ”0", and to "l" at point A. Thus, the Iain flip-flop will
shift to the new state, which with the arrival of the next pulse 12 duplicates the

state of the auxiliary flip-flop. Naturally the pulses 11 and 12 should be separ-
ated in tine.

The schematic of s push-pull R8 flip-Slop (tigure 3.39h) is converted to a push-
pull coaplenenting flip-flop if the Q and the Q outputs are connected to the
inputs of the nain flip-flop (k and s respectively). In the absence of the
count pulse 11, with each arriving pulse 1 the information will be rewritten fro.
the main flip-flop into the auxiliary one Figure 3.39c). With thaffirat count
pulse 11 though, that AND gate actuates at both inputs of which there is a "1"
signal. and the main flip-flop is set to the state which is the inverse of the
auxiliary flip-flop. At the point in time, the rewrite of information into the
auxiliary flip-flop is blocked, since 12 - 0. The next pulse 12 - 1 will set the
auxiliary flip~flop to the state corresponding to the state of the main one.

3.6.3. Quasistatic and Dynamic circuits

As was noted previously, the property of a nos transistor of retaining the charge
in the parasitic capacitance of the gates for a certain period of time is used in
quasistatic and dynamic circuits. But in contrast to dynamic circuits, quasi-
static flip-flops do not require the so-called "clock supply" during the inforla-
tion storage period. The clock supply is necessary when the infornationiis entered
and it is realized by neans of clock pulses: phases having a width less than the
tine constant for charging and discharging the parasitic capacitances of the gates
of the MOS transistor of the circuit. As conpared to static type circuits, quasi-
static and dynamic flip-flops make it possible to reduce the number of nos trans-
istor which are used by a factor of two to three tiles.

Two and three phase quasi-static D flip-flops have bcone thr nest widespread.
we shall recall that D flip-flops, which are also called delay flip-flops, take
the form of a device with two stable states and one information input. The truth
table for a D flip-flop was given earlier (see Table 3.4).

We shall consider the operation of a two-phase quasistatic D flip-flop using

nos transistors (Figure 3.50) [l]. The circuit consists of three inverters: 821
(V12, v13), 832 (V17, V18), “33 (V110, V111); three gates V11, V16, V19; and a
phase pulse driver 02 (VTW, V15). Inverters E31 and H32 forn a flip-flop circuit,
one of the feedback circuits of which is looped through gate V16 only where the
signal 02 - l is present. Gate V19 cuts off (with the 02 - 0 signal) or connects
the output inverter “33 to the flip-flop circuit (in the case of the 02 I 1 signal).

Without a clock pulse (the signals (11 - 01 - 0), gate V11 is cut off regardless
of the signal at its input. At the same tine, the two other gates, v16 and V19,
are turned on since the signal F2 I 1. There will be a "1" level at the output of
inverter H31 and a "0" level at the output of "32. The capacitance 010.4 which
was previously charged through turned on gate V19 and the load circuit of “32
(V17) is rapidly discharged through turned-on transistor V18 and a level of Q - l
is set at the flip-flop output.

- 122 -
FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
To change the state of the flip-flop, it is necessary to feed a signal of D - l to
its input. Then with the arrival of the clock pulse (the signals 1'1 - 01 I l).
gate v‘l'l turns on. At the sane tine, gates V16 and V19 cut off (since the signal
P2 I O), the feedback loop for the flip-flop is opened and the output inverter 1133
will be disconnected fro. the output from inverter i132. With the action of the
signal D - l, which is fed through the turned-on gate vn, a ”0" level is set at
the output of inverter R31 and a "I" level is set at the output of inverter 152.
However, during the action of the clock pulse, the voltage level at the flip-flop
output does not change (Q - 1), since the charge on c1“: has still not had tine to
change substantially. with the conpletion of the clock pulse (1‘1 - 01 - 0), gate
V'rl cuts off, but since the signal 02 - l, gates V16 and v19 turn on, which leads
to a rapid charging of the capacitance 010“ through the turned on gate V9 and the
load transistor of E32 (W7), as a result of which, the ID flip-flop changes to
the state Q - 0. Thus, following the conpletion of—the clock pulse, at the input
of the circuit D I l and at the output Q - 0.

 

Figure 3.60. Schemtic of a two-phase quasistetic D flip-flop
using rohannel nos transistors.

Quasistatic D flip-flops are frequently used to construct registers. In this
case, the circuits which control the writing and shifts, as cell as the phase
drivers are incorporated in the IC series. This circustance nakes it possible
to use a single cycle external signal similar to that which we had as the single
cycle signal T1 for the two-phase D flip-flop (tigure 3.100) in quasistatic
registers, which are multiphase systens. A drawback to cussistetic registers is
the power consuption of the D flip-flops in the intonation storage node. For

this reason, dynanic registers using p-channel ms transistors have hacone nore
widespread.

- 123 -
FOI OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

tigure 3.61. Schsuatic of a two cycle dyn-ic register using p-channel
H08 transistors for n-digits (a) and the sequence of clock
pulses (h).

Dynanic two-cycle and four-cycle flip-flops are used as shift registers and
provide for the requisite delay in logic and aritI-etic units of coquters and
digital automation equipmt. We shall consider the operation of a two-cycle
dynanic register using p-type ms transistors (Figure 3.41) [l].

A register digit contains two inverters, using three transistors each (V‘l'l - v13
and v‘rIo-w v16 . The clock pulse 1'11 is fed simultaneously to the gate of the load
transistor V‘l'l of the first inverter and the gate of gate m. The clock pulse

1'1 is fed t the gate of load transistor m and si-ultaneously to the gate of the
VT gate.

We shall analyze how infornation is written in as well as its shifting. Let a
signal corresponding to "l" he fed to the input of the first low order digit. As
a result, the parasitic capacitance C1 is charged and transistor m turns on.
with the arrival of the clock pulse 1'11, transistors V11 and V13 turn on and the
parasitic capacitance (:2 is discharged through the turned-on transistor m.

Upon the conplstion of the pulse 1’11, the charge corresponding to the "0" level is
retained in capacitance Cg, as a result of which transistor m will he cut off.
The clock pulse 1'12 turns on transistors V15 and m. and for this reason, a
charging curcuit will he forned for the parasitic input capacitance of the next
digit. Thus, over two clock pulses, the "1" signal which is fed to the input of
the first digit proves to the rewritten into the input of the next digit.

- 126 -
MOWMONLY
He shall analyse the case where the input signal corresponds to the "0" level. In
this case, transistor VTZ is cut off'and with the arrival of the T11 pulse, capaci-
tance 02 will he charged through the circuit of turned on transistors W1 and VT3,
which provides for turning on transistor VTA. With the arrival of the T12 pulse,

the capacitance C; of the second digit is discharged through turned on transistor
V‘l'lo down to the "0" level.

As a result, over the tine of two clock pulses, the "0” signal which is fed to the
input of the first digit will be rewritten into the input of the next, second

digit. Since the clock pulses are fed to all of the register digits simltaneously,
the intonation shift process runs in all digits sinultaneously.

As can be seen iron the schematic of the register shown in rigure 3.lola, the power
consumption in each of the register digits occurs only at the nonent of clock
pulse arrival, when the load transistors W1 and VTS are turned on in each digit.

The width of the clock pulses is governed by the charging tine of the parasitic
capacitances (Cl, 62,...) and anounts to l - 2 usec, which assures a low average
power consunption per digit (less than that of quasistatic registers.by a factor of
three to five tines).

A high pover output stage (transistors v1" and VT"), which provide for rapid
discharging (through transistor VT") or charging (through transistor VT”) of
the load capacitance cload» is inserted at the output of a dynanic resiters to
obtain a good fan-out load capacity. The operational principle of a four-cycle
dynamic register is sinilar to the operationalprinciple of the two-cycle version,
but four-cycle dynanic registers nahc it possible to obtain a higher working
frequency for the circuit and a lower power consmption per digit.

3.6.10. The Operational Principle of Couple-antary ms Transistor Integrated
circuits

As can be seen iron the inverter circuit shown in figure 3.36c, it is conosed of
nos transistors of various types (conplenentary, cuos transistors). The n-channel
transistor is connected to the zero potential (to ground) while the p-chsnnel
transistor is connected to the positive power supply buss. Such a circuit provides
for operation in a positive logic node, i.e., the low signal level corresponds to
the "0" output voltage while the high level corresponds to the "1" output voltage.
The nost widely used series of ems circuits operate in this node.

Digital lc's based on 0403 structures have a nunher of advantages over p-channel
nos transistor circuits: they have a low power consuption in the static node

(at the level of units of nicrowatts), a relatively high speed, good noise insu-
nity and a rather large load capacity [l]. The power conauned by a mos tran-
sistor circuit is expended primarily during the transient process in charging the
output parasitic capacitances of the circuit and the internal capscitances of
the transistor. For this reason, with en increase in the switching frequency of
a circuit as well as with an increase in the equivalent output capacitance, the
power consumption elso rises, something which is nodaled hy the equation:

- 125-
FOIOH’ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2
I,dyn . 2cloac'lfvvcc

where cload is the equivalent load capacitance; f" is the working frequency and
vcc is the supply voltage. ‘

In the static node, the power is governed by the power supply voltage and the
leakage currents of the turnedooff MOS transistor. Static, quasistatic and dynanic
circuits can be designed around cuss transistors just as in the case of p-channel
HOS transistors.

We shall analyze the operation of the silplest static "AND and non positive logic
circuits using (MOS transistors (Figure 3.102) [1]. As can be seen fro. these
circuits, a parallel configuration of n—type H08 transistors and a series (tiered)
configuration of p-type transistors are used for the realisation of the non func-
tion. Moreover, each of the n-channel input transistors has the gate connected to
a p-channel transistor. The p-channel transistors are connected in parallel and
the n-channel transistors are connected in series to realise the MN) function.

When an X1 signal corresponding to the “1" level is fed to the input of the M
circuit, transistor “‘1 turns on and V“ turns off. As a result, the "0" level is
produced at the circuit output. men a "0" signal is fed to both inputs, x1 and
X2,” transistors VII and VTZ turn off, but transistors “‘5 and VT3 turn on, as a
result of which, the voltage at the circuit output corresponds to "1" level, close
to the supply voltage Vcc- Thus. the recharging of the load capacitance 010.4 is
always acconplished through a turned-on p or n-channel transistor, sonething
which increases the circuit speed. To reduce the dynanic power consuaptdon, it is
necessary to reduce the load capacitance cload~ The ninimas supply voltage for a
circuit using cans transistors is detarnined by the cutoff voltage Uoﬁ p of the
p-channel transistor, since it is greater than the voltage Hoff n of an n-channal
transistor. The supply voltage is chosen greater than not; 1,. This provides a
circuit using cnos transistors with a high level of noise inunity and good speed.

A conpsrison of the circuits of Figure 3.42 with sinilar designs using p-channel
hos transistors (Figure 3.38) shove that for the realisation of the sane functions,
the mos transistor circuits are conposed of a greater nunher of elenents, sene-
thing which can lead to drawbacks for then. But the increased operating speed and
low power consumption assure their widescale application, especially for designing
circuits with a high level of integration. In order to reduce the master of
elenents, a p-type load transistor is inserted in the 008 transistor circuits
(for positive logic circuits) (Tigure 3.42c). The circuit realises an OR-OR-NOT
function and contains five ms transistors [11. we shall analyze its operation.

when x1 - l and X2 - 0, just as when X} .- 0 and X2 - l, the pair of transistors
of opposite conductivity will turn on v'n. we or VTZ, V‘I‘3 respectively), sons-
thing which provides for closing the current circuit through the load transistor
V15 to ”ground". As a result, the voltage corresponding to the "0" level will
appear at the circuit output. Wen x1 - X2 - l and 11 I X2 - 0, the upper pair
of transistors (“3, Wk) or the lower pair (VTl, v12) is cut off, the current
circuit is broken and the voltage at the circuit output corresponds to “I" level.

- 126 -
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3.42. circuit. using (2405 tranoiuoro.

a. NOR;

I). “AND;

c. on-oa-m;

d. Conplmnting flip-£109.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let the Iain flip-flop be in the state Q' I l and Q" I 0 when the clock pulse is

a ”0” (i.e., when 01 I 0, 02 I l and gates 81 and B3 are turned on, while gates 32
and M are turned off). since gate 33 is turned on in this case, the voltage
corresponding to the "1" levels (0' I l), in going to the gates of the H83 inverter
transistors, turns on the lower n-channel transistor and the auxiliary flip-flop is
set to the Q I 0 and Q I 1 state.

however, if the clock pulse is a "l" (01 I l, 02 I 0), gates 82 and lilo turn on,
while 31 and 33 turn off. The signal Q I l in going to the gate of the lower trans-
istor of inverter 333 through turned-on gate 86 kee s the inverter turned, and the
state of the auxiliary flip-flop does not change Q I 0, Q I 1). At the sane tine,
the level Q I 0 turns off the lover and turns on the upper transistor of inverter
IE1 through the turned-on gate 32, as a result of which the nsin flip-flop is set
to the new state Q' I l and Q' I 0. Following the conpletion of the clock pulse
(the signals TI I 0, 01‘ I 0, 02 I l), gates 31 and 33 are again turned on. The
level Q' I 0 is fed through on gate 31 to the ga_t_e of the upper transistor of
inverter am and turns it on, naining the state Q' I 1. Thus, the state of the
main flip-flop does not change. At the sane tins, the level Q' I 0 turns oﬁf the
lower and turns on the upper transistor of inverter BB3 through the turned-on gate
33, as a result of which the auxiliary flip-flop is set to the new state Q I 1.

Q I 0. Thus, with the arrival of each clock pulse, the state of the main flip-flop
charges, while upon the capletion of the clock pulse, this state is transfered to
the auxiliary flip-flop.

The circuit of a static type flip-flop was treated above, however, quasistatic and
dynanic flip-ﬂops can be constructed with 0408 transistors, where these flip-flops
are similar in terns of structure to the corresponding circuits using p-chonnel
Hos transistors.

It should be noted that quasi-static and dynsnic circuits (flip-flops and
registers) using CHOS transistors nake it possible to significantly reduce the
nunber of ele-ents as compared to sinilar static type circuits as well as signif-
icantly curtail the power consumption [1].

3.6.5. The Major Series of Integrated circuits Using H08 Structures

Integrated circuits based on H08 structures, because of a whole series of advant-
ages, are becoming increasingly widespread. Technological successes have nsde it
possible in recent years to substantially increase their level of integration and
operational speed, which has to a considerable extent governed their applications
areas. In this sense, circuits based on 0108 transistors are to be singled out in
particular, where these transistors make it possible to produce up to 10,000
elements on a chip. The production mastery of these circuits has nade it possible
to start the series production of conpact and comratively inexpensive nicro-
calculators, ne-ory matrices, electronic clocks and nicroprocsssors.

The first series of IC's using nos structures were nsde using "high voltage"
p-channel ms circuits. The K172 series is to be numbered among then, based on
which an entire family of desk top electronic calculators was created. The

- 128 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
composition of the series was limited to four simple logic circuits (up to 30
elements per chip) and a two stage flip-flop with input logic. These circuits had
a poor speed (tdel.prop. . l usec), a high power consumption (40 Iii/gate) and
h3g1: output voltage levels (in terns of the absolute value) (08,“ - -7.5 volts;
“out - 2.3 volts) and were not compatible with TTL circuit levels.

Also of some interest is the 186 series which was among the first to be crested,
the complement of which even included a set of b,- 8, 21.and- 64 bit quasistatic
chip registers and a 90 bit dynamic shift register. The 16's of this series had
a poor operational speed and large power consupticn, as well as a high netative
"1" level; however, a negative input voltage to positive output voltage converter
circuit was incorporated in the series (the 186 1'01), which provided for interfac-
ing to 1'11. circuits. The absence of combinatorial elements in the series some-
what limits its applications.

Defiecinecies in the initial series using p-chsnnsl ms transistors were elimi-
nated to a considerable extent with the series production mastery of 10's using
ems structures: the 164, [176 and 566 series (analogs of the @4000 and CD600“).
The Ic's of these series have a dynamic power consuqtion of 20 sﬂ/gate at a
frequency of l m, while their static power consuption is neasured in units of
nicrowatts. The complement of the widely used series of'TC's based on 0008 trans-
istors is shown in Table 3.19 and the names of the analogs are given. As can be
seen from Table 3.19, the complement of the 0108 series includes entire assemblies,
besides the set of logic gates and flip-flOps: registers, counters, memory
circuits and level converters, which provide for joint operation with 1'11. inte-
grated circuits. Data on the structural packaging of the indicated series and
their temperature ranges are given in Table 3.20, while the main electrical oper-
ational parameters of the basic logic elements of the series indicated above using
cms transistors are given in Table 3.21.

The application areas of integrated circuits included in the series of lc's with
a mos structure are rather extensive. We shall consider several examples of
K176 series 1c applications to the construction of functional asseablies in

equipment.

Thus, a four-bit register can be realized using two [(176110 integrated circuits,
two K1761.“ integrated circuits and one K1761.” integrated circuits. Bach bit of
such a register consists of a D flip-flop and a distributor, the presence of
which increases the functional capabilities of the register, making it s univer-
sal device. A hit in a push-pull shift.:register can be designed around the
11176342 integrated circuit based on two single cycle D flip-flops.

single cycle, series carry frequency dividers are simlest in terms of their
circuit design realisation. They are made using D flip-flops by connecting the
outputs of the preceding bits to the inputs of the subsequent ones. The
division factor of such a divider is “div I 2“, where h is the nuber of
divider bits.

Single cycle divide-by-two and divide-by-eight frequency dividers (with series
carry) can be designed around “761312 integrated circuits, but is more expedient

- 129 -
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3.19 The Composition of 1c Seriea laced 0o cans Structurea and Their
Functional Analoga in the CD 4000 (RCA) and CD 4000A (RCA) Series

Subgroup,
Kind and
Ordinal Deaigna-
lh-hera tion of Ember of
. . of the the Punc- the Outline
Emotional Designation Design tional braving in
(According Analog Appendix
to Motion) 3.1
[1| [2] l3! l4]
Univeraal logic clonent (164, 1176, 764) 'LPl 07 -
Quad "exclusive on” gate (164, K176,
564, 766) LPZ 30 3.3.1
‘lVo 3301?. logic gatea and a m gate '
(164, K176) m on 3.3.2
Quad 2“ gate (164, K176, 564, 764) 1.165 01 3.3.3
No 48011 logic gatea (164, K176, 564) LYe6 02 3.3.4
Quad 2mm logic gatea (164, [176, 564,
764, 765) IIA7 11 3.3.5
No 4m logic gate. (164, K176, 564,
764) 148 12 3.3.6
Three 3mm logic gatea (164, K176, $64,
764) M9 23 3.3.7
Three 3m logic gatea (164, 3176, $64,
764) LYelO 25 3.3.8
Two anon lo ic gatea and a NOT logic
gate 164., K176, 764) mu - 3.3.9
“No 4W logic gatea and a NOT logic
gate (164, K176, 764) LP12 - 3.3.10
A 9A!!!) logic gate and a HOT logic gate
(164, [(176, 764) m - 3.3.11
Six gated 1m logic gates (564) L111 1181450“ -
Two D flip-(lope with "0" and "1"
aetting (164, 1176, 564, 764, 765) 1142 13 3.3.12
Poor bidirectional avitchea (164, 1176,
764) K11 16 3.3.13
Five inverting level convertera (164,
K176, 764) P01 - 3.3.14
Five bit counter (164, K176) IYeZ TA-S97l 3.3.15
18 bit shift register (164, K176) 1310 - 3.3.16
4 x 10 decoder (164, K176, 564) ml 28 3.3.17
Duel four-hit atatic ahift regiater (164,
[176, 564) 13.2 15 3.3.18
Four bit full adder (164, K176, 564, 765) ml 08 3.3.39
Three AND-OR logic gatea (164, K176) L81 - 3.3.20

- 130 -
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

FOR OFFICIAL
[Table 3.19, continued]:
Ill [2!
Six-bit binary counter (164, £176) Hal
four-bit univeraal ahift regiater
(166, K176) 133
'1‘» JR flip-Hope (166, K176, 566) N1
16 bit nain senory atorage netrix
(K176) 8141
Bight-bit ahitt regiater (566) 136
256-bit nain nenory with control
circuit (K176, 564) R02
Decinal counter with decoder (K176) lYe8

No D flip-nope with "0" act (K176) m
six inverting level convertera ([176) P02
six noninverting level converters
(K176) - r03
Hodulo 6 counter with decoder for data
.output to aeven aegpent diaplay
(K176) no:
Hodulo 10 counter with decoder for data
output to aeven aegnent diaplay
(K176) IYelo
15-bit binary frequency divider (X176) ms
Pour-bit aeriea-parallel regiater

(564, 765) R9
Three 3-input najority gatea ($610, '

765) ”13
Dual four-channel multiplexer (564,

765) {Pl
Six NOT logic gatea (563, 765) 1.02
Pour-bit bidirectional counter

(566, 765) Well
Quad AND-OR logic gate (566) 1.82
Si: level convertera (564) P04
Counter-divide-by-eight divider '

(564) IYe9
Quad D flip-flop (656) 1113
Quad RS flip-flop (566) m
Two four-bit countera (56b) Helo
Pour-bit conparator ($64) 192
Quad bidirectional switch (564) m
Arithmetic logic nit ($65) 1P3
Through carry circuit (564) 11%
Eight channel mltiplexer (564) ”2
12-bit comparator (S60 8A1
‘l‘riple najority nultiplexer elenent

(566) Ill

- 131 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500080030-5

“An

M811
H811

H814

381‘
I

14312
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

[Table 3. 19, continued]:

——————l-ll————__ m _L3_L._ __I£L_

Multifunction register (564) mu 11816580A -

 

*tﬁ

Note: Integrated circuits of the 164, K176 and 766 series are functional

analogs of the (206000 series Ic‘s, while the Ic's of the 654 series are
analogs of the CNOOOA series.

 

to construct group carry dividers (using cross-coupled shift register circuits)
with a low division factor (of from lo to 10) using K176 series integrated circuits.
In such dividers, the input pulses are fed to a couon bus for all of the digits;
the arrival of the input pulses at the bit inputs of a given group is determined
by the state of the control output of the previous group of digits.

Dividers using cross-coupled registers have an even division factor of Kaiv - 2n,
where n is the number of bits.

By introducing additional feedback fro: the direct output of the highest order
digit to the zero set input of the lowest order digit, one can produce an odd
division factor: Kdiv - 2n - l.

A series adder with carry storage can be realized using three K176LA7 integrated
circuits and one [1761112. The distributor for the input pulse train to four
output buses is designed for use in nulticycle electronic devices and can be con-
structed using K176u7, 11176149, [(178an and K176LYe5 integrated circuits. The
operational synchronisation of the digital intonation processing devices of such
a pulse distributor is accomplished by means of introducing a clock generator,
which provides for the generation of the clock pulse train and-‘zthe multiplication
of the pulses with the breakdown of the synchronized memory elements into groups.
The number of memory elements in each group is governed by the fan-out factor of
the clock pulse amplifiers of;the mltiplication circuitry.

For operation of the K176 series 10's with high power elements, it is expedient to
use this series together with the circuit designed around the K169 series IC. The
circuit is triggered frol- a power inverter, fornsd by the parallel connection of
three [(1761.1’1 1c inverters.

Circuits of the K176 series can be used in conjunction with K169 series uicro-
circuits when triggering relays with current parameters of no more than 75 mA and
voltage levels of no more than 15 volts, taking into account the permissible
deviation in the power supply voltage. In the choice of the type of relay, it is
necessary to take into account the change in the relay winding resistance as a
function of temperature.

- 132-
”OFFICIALUSEONLY
Series Tm‘mﬂ Kind of . "a.” the Packages

 

 

 

 

Range, 'c Used in the
Series
164 -160 .. . +85 Rectangular netal-glass 501.144
-10 +70 Rectangular plastic 201.110-1
K176 -60 . . . 025 Rectangular netal-glass 1001.15-5
S64 Rectangular netal-cersnic 502.16-1
The sane 502. 16-3
" 602.16-10
" 602.16-16

 

when designing equipnent around [(176 series integrated circuits, one nust consider
the fact that the coupling capacitance between the wires connecting the transnitter
nicrocircuits to the data receiver nicrocircuits is the load capacitance for the
nicrocircuits which trans-it the infatuation, an increase in which leads to an
increase in the dynanic current conaued by the nicrocircuits. In order to pre-
clude the influence of crosstalk interference between individual conductors in
asynchronous devices, the coupling capacitance should not exceed 100 de.

when designing equipnent based on 1176 series 10's, it is necessary to provide for
protection against the intrusion of pulse interference into the "power" and
"grand" buses, for which it is recon-ended that decoupling capacitors be installed
in the power supply circuits: low frequency and high frequency capacitors. The
types of capacitors and their capacitances are chosen depending on the equipnent
design.

The 5-bit counter (16lolYe2 integrated circuit) and 18 hit shift register (1641310
integrated circuit) included in the 1610 series provides for operation at a fre-
quency of 2.5 MHz. The ultinate pernissible operational nodes of the 166 series
10's in a tenperature range of 160 to #85 'C are given below:

Haxinun supply voltage, U , volts . . . . . . . . 12 (for 3 seconds)

1p . . . . . . . . 15 (for 5 seconde)[sie]
Maximum input voltage, Uin nan: volts ..... . . 15 (For 5 seconds)
Hinisnn input voItage, “in nin volts . . . . . . . -0.5 (for 5 nsec)
Haxinun zero output current, 1g t .i“, an . . . . . 1.0
The sane for the one current, nA ..... 1.0

The lowest load resistance for teﬂfck'ﬁ. naintenance
of the "1" level is guaranteed, 31m, tam. . . 150

-133-
FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Paul-stern

 

supply voltage, Vcc. volta

I" input curxent, 1?... uA, no leu
:han
-." input current, 111;, M, no lore
:han

ntput voltage, 0 volts, no more

out,
:han
:tput voltage,U out’ volta, no leu
:han

:ation delay tine dating turn-on,
-1 0 , naec, nonore than

'ad.r.

gation delay tine during turn-off,

:galr, naec, no note than

It conauqtion with "0" at the
lnput,18m, uA, no more than

It coneulption with "l" at the
input, 1%”, M, no note than

: noine i-mity, 03, volts

at load factor. xout

Electrical Para-etera of 005 Series 10':

 

Seriee
166 [176
9 1 101 9 _+_ 51
-0.05 -0.l
0.05 0.1
0.5 0.3
7.7 8.2
200 250
(when 01 d - (when C10“ I 50 de)
- 50 p!”

‘2'? 32:“

0.1

250
(when 010“] 0 50 de)

0.3

0.3

 

     

III“

(a)

   

£15453: n.

o
(h)

$55-33 -

   

  

    
   

Figure 3.63. Basic echenatica of 16’. (176) 1c aeriea for RAID (a) and

NOR (h) gatea.

-134-

POROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
l

:2: ,0 ”070‘”? 3091:“)?

Figure 3.54. The functions youth) and the propagation delay tine as
a function of the load capacitance for [1761112 series Ic's.

Key: 1. Propagation delay tine, nanoseconds.

Using the exanple of the 164 series. we shall consider the design principles for
circuits using 0408 transistors and sons of the =specific features of their appli-
cations. As was shown above (Table 3.19), the coqlenent of the series includes
logic gates which perforn lIAﬂD and non functions. Ihe 164MB (tigure 3.63s) can
be taken as the basic to for the realization of the RAID function, while a .
l66LYe6 integrated circuit realizes a Non function (Figure 3.63b). Practically all
of the 16's of the 166 series are designed around these basic switches.

when the 10's of the 16‘ series are operated. the unused inputs in gates which
realize the M function should be. connected to the "gromd" bus, while the
circuit inputs which realise the RAND function should be connected to the supply
bus. It is pernissible to tie the unused inputs together with the used input of
the sane logic gate, but in this case. the fan-out factor of the preceding circuit
driving the combined inputs is reduced by one. It '.is not pernissble to tie the
basic elenents together at the outputs, with the exception of the base where the
outputs of the basic elenents are joined together (no more than four, all of the
inputs of which are connected together. Operation of the integrated circuits with
a supply voltage reduced down to 6 volts is pernittsd, however. in this case the
electrical parameters nay not conforn to the values indicated in Table 3.21.

It is reco-ended that decoupling capacitors in the fern of a set of two capacitors
be inserted in the power supply circuits of 16's on printed circuit boards: low
frequency capacitors (up to 20 Illa) designed for 2.2 ul'd for each 5010's and high
frequency capacitors (to 1.5 to 2 ms) designed for 0.068 uFd for each 50 16's.

He shall discuss the inpsct of teq’erature and load capacitance on was transistor
IC's using the era-pie of the K176 series. 'lhe curves for the output voltage as
a function of temperature for the 11761142 integrated circuit (Figure 3.Ms) show
that 0%“ and 08“: practically do not change with an increase-in tenperature,
while the propagation delay tine as a function of load capacitance for the [1761342

-l35-

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
1c (Figure 3.4%) show a greater dependence on load capacitance by the propagation
delay time during cutoff, which with an increase 01“.; from 30 to 180 936 more than
doubles.

3.7. Integrated circuits for Memories

The expansion of the applications areas of modern coquter hardware has generated

a rapid increase in the under of various classes of computers. The constant

trend towards an increase in the complexity of the problem solved by computers in
turn requires an increase in the value and speed of the calculations. however,

the speed of solving any probla with a cuputer is limited by the memory access
time: the access time to the main memory (020). Hemries using ferrites which under-
went considerable development in first and second generation computers do not allow
for a substantial reduction in main memory access time. Even with a reduction in
the diameter of the ferrite cores down to 0.3 u, a main memory access time of only
0.5 usec can be obtained. At the same tine, a ferrite memory which is fabricated
by means of rather complex operations to thread the wires through the cores makes
it difficult to assemble than and even makes such devices not technologically suit-
able for production. The development of nicroelectronics has made it possible to
use semiconductor devices (bipolar transistors and nos structures) for the cons-
truction of memories.

TABLE 3.22 Characteristics of Memories based on Various Cmunt Technologies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gaaracteriatics
ojfluain 3:“! ts Access Typical Informa- Power
Hm, Tine. Informa- tion Conn-apt ion
y nsec tion Densitys During
' Capacity, bits/ca Ini‘ormation
bits Storage
Bipolar '
Semicon- Transis- 3 S
ductor tors SO. . . 300 10 . . .10 Up to 200 Yes
[408
tures 25°"'1:°°° 10 ...10 200...300. Yes
Magnet ic Ferrite 6 8
Cores 350...l,200 l- ...10 10...20 No

 

It can be seen from Table 3.22 in which the parameters and properties of main
memories based on various cosponent technology are cowared [7] that it is expedient
to design memories with an information capacity of less than 105 bits, but with a
high operational speed, using bipolar transistors. nemories based on nos structures
have a capacity of 103.. .106 bits with a nodsrate operational speed. Memories with
a memory volume of nore than 106 bits are constructed using ferrite cores, where

- 136 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
these memories have poor speed, but nonetheless the capability of storing data
without consuming power. Considering the fact that the characteristics of memories
based on 1108 structures with respect to capacity, speed and power consumption are
constantly being improved, one shodld anticipate their widescale development and
applications in various computer classes in the upcoming years [7].

The use of semiconductor structures makes it possible to substantially increase
memory speed, reduce the size and weight as well as increase operational reliability
and eliminate matching elements between digital computer hardware and the memory
through the application of a single type of coqaonent base in the various hardware

[7].

In recent years, because of the improvement of bipolar 10's as well as the expan-
sion of 1c series using H08 transistors, static memory elements have been created
(using bipolar structures as well as p-channel m8 transistors and cans transistors),
as well as dynamic memories (using p-channel H08 transistors and was structures)
and memory elements based on ”silicon on sapphire" structures. he shall treat the
structures of each of these types of memory elements in more detail.

3.7.1. Memory elements using Bipolar Structures

A static memory using bipolar structures (transistors) takes the form of a matrix
of memory elements (28), each of which can be set in one of the stable states.
Such an element is usually a flip-flop or a gate. Hain memories with 1,026 bits
with an access time of less than 100 nsec, equipped with control circuits, can be
fabricated on a single bipolar lc chip. One of the major parts of a memory is
the matrix-store, in which the intonation storage itself is realized. The con-
struction (organization) of a utrix is‘ governed by the manner of accessing
(interrogating) the memory elennts during read or write operations.

In the structural configuration of a matrix with word access and one decoding step
(Figure 3.45s), one line forms a m bit word. The symbols A1, A2, ..., An in the
schematic designate the address :buses while P1, P2, ..., P. designate the bit buses.
As can be seen from the schematic, the address buses are electrically coupled to
each memory element for one word, while the bit buses are coupled to the memory
element for one bit of all words. "hen a signal corresponding to the ”1" level is
present on the adress bus A1, the stats of each of the memory elements in the word
associated with adress Ai can be read from the bit buses, P1. . .P.. If it is
necessary to write information into a selected address A1, depending on the informa-
tion code, a ”l" or "0" signal is fed via the bit buses P1, P2, ..., P. to each of
the memory elements Ail. Aiz. . .., Aim-

The control circuits for the matrix are not shown in the block diagram for the sake
of simplicity (a decoder with address drivers, read and write amplifiers), which
are incorporated in the 16's to reduce the masher of package leads and are fabri-
cated on a single chip along with the matrix circuit.

-137-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLV

 

Figure 3.45. Structural configuration of a matrix with word acceae and
single etep decoding (a) and a dual coordinate matrix with
two decoding atepa (h).

Key: 28 O senor-y eleoent [atore location].

In the block circuit diagram of a dual coordinate aatrix with two decoding atepa
(Figure 3.45h), the neuory elemente are eelected hy aeane of the addreee hueee

X1. 12, ..., x, and Y1, Y2, ..., 7.. when a aignal correeponding to the "1"

level ie preeent on addreee hueee X1 and Y1, only one neaory eleaent.will he
eelected (231), fro- which one can read ite etate via the hit hue P mich ia
co-eon to all ele-enta. when writing a "1" into the aelected eleaent via the

hit hue, it ie neceeeary to feed in a eignal correeponding to the "1" level. Thie
ie the organization of a matrix with rn eingle hit worde.

The einpleet neaory eleuent ie an as flip-flop, which can he conetructed from two
invertere (Figure 3.46a). The enittere l of the mlti-enitter traneiatore VTl
and VTZ are connected to the addreee hue Ai, the potential on which in the etaady-
etate ie the loweet potential of the circuit. The hit hueee Pi and Pj are con-
nected to the enittere 2 of traneietora W1 and VTZ reepectively.

A reference voltage col-on to all of the aatrix senory elenente ie fed to the hit
hue Pi. The relationahip between the reference voltage, Out, the voltage ”hit
which ie (ed to the hit hue P3 and the voltage U. which is fed to the addreee hue,
governs the operational node of the my elenent: write, read, and etorage of
the intonation. We ehall analyze the operation of a ae-ory element in each of
the three nodea.

lhe intonation atorage node ie characterized by the relationehip:

ll.<-(Uref ' U ).

hit

-133-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3A6. circuit of a my eluent using two 111. inverters
(a) and the tine diagram of its operation (h).

The circuit is in one of the stshle states in which transistor m or W1 is turned
on depending on what intonation was written in heforehend: "l" or "0”. The
current flows through enitter l of one of the transistors, while the enitters 2
are cut off.

He shall consider the read node. Let a "l" have been written into the as flip-flop.
We shall assue that in this case transistor VTZ is turned on and W1 is turned off.
He take the presence of current in the turned-on transistor to he a "I". In order
to relay this infer-nation to the hit hua, it is necessary to switch the enitter
circuits: turn off the enitter l circuit and turn on the enitter 2 circuit, leaving
the state of the flip-flop unchanged (following the change of‘ are emitters, trans-
istor m is turned on and "l is turned off as before). For this, it is necessary
to change the voltage on the address hua so that U. > (051; - Out). In this case,
the current flowing enitter 2 of turned-on transistor VTZ will flow to the hit hue
P’. The presence of current in the .hit hus corresponds to a read "1", and the
aheence of current in the hit bus (with transistor VTZ turned off and W1 turned
on) defines a read ”0".

The write node depends on the state in which the nenory elenent mat he set. If
the flip-flop is in state 1 (transistor V12 is turned on and m is turned off).
then to write a "0", it is necessary to feed the potential “hit which exceeds the
reference level qu via the hit hue P . In this case the flip-flop shifts to the
new state: transistor VTZ cuts off while VTl turns on. Thus, the write "0" condi-
tion has the fern: U. > (Um; - Ur“) and 051: > 11": while the write ”1" condi-
tion is U. > (”big - Dug) and 115;: < or“. The operational tine diagran of such-
a nonory elenent is shown in Figure 3.b6h.

Thus, for such nenory elenents using bipolar transistors, the najor parsneters are
the read current I.“ [Ir] and the write voltage I!” [0.].

The data sapling tine fro- a snall capacity nenory using hipolar m. circuits can
snout to 30 to 60 nsec. An inportant para-eter- of the nenory is the power con-
suption. It cen'be 0.5 to 1.5 nil/hit.

-139-

MOFHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.7.2. "emery Elements Using nos Structures

Depending on the type of memory element, memories based on H08 structures can be
either static or dynamic. In the first case, a static flip-flop using p-chsnnel
ms transistors serves as the memory element; in the second case, the information
is stored in the gate capacitance of an nos transistor. Hemories using nos struc-

tures, just as bipolar transistor memories. can have either word by word or dual
coordinate random access.

An enpale of the simplest memory element circuit, a flip-flop for a word by word
access memory, is shown in Figure 3.67s [5]. The flip-flop is formed by transistors
V‘l'l . .. v14. The write and read flip-flop is controlled by means of transistor
switches VTS and V16. The time diagrams for the operation of such a memory element
are shown in Figure 3.67b. In the initial state, the voltage onlboth bit buses

P1 and Po is equal to 0, and on the A word bus, the potential is equal to the
circuit power supply voltage. In this case, transistors VTS and V‘l‘6 are turned off,
since the potential difference betveen the gates and the sources is less than the

threshold voltage in terms of its absolute value. The flip-flop is in one of the
stable states.

For example, let transistor VT3 be turned on and transistor V'l'l turned off. When
writing a "1", a negative signal is fed to the word bus, which changes the voltage
on it to zero, and a positive signal is simultaneously fed to the bit bus P1, which
changes the voltage on it to the power supply voltage, V“. In this case, trans-
istor v‘rs turns on, since the potential difference between the gate andthe source
becomes negative. The positive signal is fed to the drain of transistor VTl and to
the gate of transistor VT3. The pontential difference between the gate and the
source of transistor V‘1'3 becomes less than the threshold voltage, and this transis-
tor turns off. After transistor V13 turns off, transistor VTl turns on and a posi-
tive voltage is established at its drain, which corresponds to "1" state. The
voltage at the drain of transistor VT3 becomes equal to zero.

 

Figure 3.47. Schematic of a memory element for word access memories
(a) and the timise diagram of its operation (b).

Key: 1. "1" write;
2. Information read.

-160-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3.68. Schematic of a my elemnt for s dynanic ossory using
p-channel nos transistor.

To write e "0" into the net-cry eleaent, it is necessary to feed the voltage Vcc to
the bit bus P0 with s zero voltage on the word bus. In this case, the positive
voltage, in going to the gate of transistor V'l’l through turned-on transistor ”'6.
cuts off V‘l‘l, which leads to transistor V73 turning on. To read the infatuation
previously written into the nenory elenent, it is necessary to feed a negative
signal only to word bus, changing the voltage on it to zero. In this case, trans-
istors VT: and V16 are turned on and a current which is fed to the appropriate

bit bus and then to the read uplifier flows through the transistor which is con-
nected to the point of the flip-ﬂop having a positive potential.

A schewatic of a dynamic ne-ory el-ent using p-channel H08 transistors is shown
in Figure 3.48 [7].

3.7.3. Menory ﬁle-ants Using (808 Transistors

The use of (ms transistors in integrated circuits makes it possible to substan-
tially reduce the power consuqation and boost the speed of neaories. A sche-stic
of a Icoory eleuent of the matrix of a main usury using cms transistors is
shown in Figure 3.1.9. Infor-ation addressing and writing is acconlished by the
direct feed of the logic levels via the X1. Y1 and Do. I); buses respectively. A
nemry element is selected by feeding the voltage corresponding to the "1" level
via the x-Y buses. men writing a "1" into the selected eleaent, the "0" level is
fed on the DI bus and the "1" level on the D0 bus. men writing a "0", a "1"
level is fed on the DI bus and a "0" level on the Do bus. Voltage read is accou-
plished via‘the 1)}. and D0 buses; in this case, the read bus. Sch, is connected to
"RM". ‘ " --—-—,—-—- -'-—--—-‘...._.-_......_._.,__ ._

 

  

Figure 3.69. 8cheaatic of a scary elenent using C308 transistors.

-1a1-

MOWUSEONLY
FOIOI'IICIALLSEONLY

3.7.4. Storage Eleaents Employing nus structuru

In all the integrated circuits discussed above, "levying bipolar and ms
[seal-oxide s-iconductor] transistors. for the purpose of storing informa-
tion in a storage elenent the existence of a supply voltage is obligatory.
When the power is cut off intonation is lost. lowever in a umber of
cases it is necessary to cut off the power. and in addition the ability to
store infatuation with the power cutoff cmsidersbly reduces the sesn power
required by the storage unit.

 

An integrated seniconductor structure—en mos [setsl-nitride-oxide sui-
conductor] transistor-makes it possible to design a storage unit which re-
tains intonation when the power is cut off. In mos transistors, unlike
ordinary HOS structures. between the silicon oxide (310;) fills and the aetsl
gate electrode is placed a fill of silicon nitride. 813“. The storage of
charges in the region of the Sign-3102 interface nakes it possible to store

intonation when the power is cut off for several years.

The file of 8102 prevents the transfer of charges in the absence of voltage
in the gate or when it is below the threshold value. This capability of a
storage elenent eaploying an mos transistor is responsible for longtera
storage of infatuation when the power is cut off.

lnfornation is stored in a nesory element based on an mos structure by sup-
plying to the gate a certain voltage with a specific sign. When negative
voltage of a specific critical segnitude is supplied. at the interface of
the silicon nitride and silicon oxide films a charge originates, whose
magnitude depends both on the uplitude and length of the voltage pulse.

-142-

“WMMY
91th thie ia establiahed a atate with a high threehold voltage. 0 .
“hen positive voltage of a specific critical aptitude ia supplied?“ the
interface a charge originates which lowera the threebold value to a nami-
tude of U . Thedifference V -0 out iacalladthe
interthreassldnune (fig 3.50). m ' ”t n por

 

Figure 3.50. Characteristics of a Storage Elegant quoying an mos

Structure
Key:
1. l , M 6. u
2. A - 12 v s. u’?’v"
u P”
por n

when a negative voltage (U - -28 V) is supplied to the gate of an mos
transistor, a state ia eet‘bliahed which is characterized by a high threeh-
old voltage of U r - 15 V . corresponding to the ”1" level, and with

U - +28 V . a stgge Ya established with a low threshold voltage of

"z - 3 V , corresponding to the "0" level. The exietence of an inter-
tﬂgcshold zone of 60 r - 12 V lakes it possible confidently to dietin-
guiah two statea of :38 storage element. For the purpose of reading out
stored information (”1" or ”0") to the gate of the mos transistor it is
necessary to supply a readout voltage. “sch , eatiafying the condition

I"pot n < uach < upar v '
Thus, if U h - -(3 to 5) V ia supplied. then a storage elelent in which
a "l" (0 ac - 15 V) was entered beforehand will change to the conduction
state. 235 if a "0" waa entered beforehand (U - 3 V), the atorage
element will not conduct. The readout signal 335 0a aeparated by Ileana of
a not too high load reaiatance connected between the output of the storage
element and the ground (in a P211 [parlanent mory] with two-coordinate
access), or can be determined by the presence of current in the output
circuit (in a no with word-byword acceaa).

- 1A3 -
m omcun. use om:
roe OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Information entered in a storage element employing an mos structure is
stored for a long tine when the power is cut off, although at the beginning
of the storage period the interthreshold zone is sonswhat reduced. the
storage properties of mos structures sre 1:9er in multiple repetition
of the readout-readin cycle, which has occasioned a tendency to use then
for the purpose of creating paresnent senories (qu's), and not nenories
with rsndon access. Able to serve as an angle of these 920'. are series
K519 nicrocircuits. representing senory astrices for 120 and 256 hits with
electrical rewriting of intonation (fig 3.51). Let us discuss the opera-
tion of these circuits in different nodes.

 

Figure 3.51. Functional Diagra- of Type K5193!“ Integrated Circuits

Key:
1. Load transistors end b. 16 X 8 natrix
power switches ‘ 5. Number code buses
2. Inputs 1 to 16 6. Outputs
3. Circuit for setting nuﬁer
codes

When a "O" is entered (erasure of infomtion), to the "power readout"
hue (lead 57) is supplied a -9 V voltage (the voltage in the remaining
power buses (leads 1. 2 and 68) equals zero). To all the inputs (M to
WI: ) is supplied a +68 V voltsge, and to the "nu-her code.” "inhibit
ent " (lead 36) and "select crystal” (lead 14), sero voltage. In the

-1610-

m ORIGIN. USE ONLY
"enter '1'" node. to the "power readin" (contact 1), "reset readin" (con-
tact 2) and "power readout" buses are supplied voltages of 48, ~48 and
-9 V, respectively; the voltages in the ”reset readout" (contact ‘8) and
"select crystal" buses equal zero. To the inputs (m to m ) is fed
a-68V voltage. and to the ”number code” and "inhibit intry" 539... a

-9 V voltage. During readout. to the ”power readout" and "reset readout"
buses are supplied respectively a voltage of -9 and -26 v (the voltage in
the "power readin" and "reset readin" buses equals zero). To the inputs of
the matrix (M to M ) is supplied a voltage of U h - -7 V , to the
”nutter code" and "inhiﬁt reedin buses. a zero voltagi. and to the "se-
lect crystal” bus. a -9 V.

3.7.5. Storage Blenents Based on ”Silicon on Sapphire" Structures

One of the new trends in the creation of circuits for diode storage units
is the employment of the technology conventionally celled "silicon on
sapphire" (ms [808]). The utilization of thin singly-crystal film of
silicon grown on a sapphire substrate (a aaterial having a crystal struc—
ture like that of silicon) makes it possible to produce devices with high
radiation resistance, which is explained by the insensitivity of the di-
electric aubstrate (sapphire) to radiation and the small areas of silicon
p-n junctions. The area of the p-n junction in these devices is deter-
mined by the product of the thickness of the silicon file and the length
of the junction line and equals 2.10 5 to 8-10 5 n. This nakes possible
low junction capacitance and accordingly high speed of response (to 10 9 s).

The small area of the p-n junction ashes it possible also to create devices
by using the micropower integrated circuit variant. The data published
testifies to the feasibility of creating permanent memories with the SOS
technology with a high level of integration (of $120 diodes on a single
crystal) distinguished by an access time of 20 ns and dissipated power of
0.06 III" per diode. 0n the basis of these crystals it is possible to put
together PZU's of different capacity, e.g.. for 3200 single-bit words (one
base crystal). 384 16-bit words (two base crystals) and 2068 20-bit words
(nine base crystals). However. this trend for a II”! of reasons has not‘
yet received sufficient development. The series [139 aicrocircuits based
on 805 have a limited application.

3.7.6. Storage Elements Based on New Materials

or great interest are developments of storage units based on new aaterials.
An example of such a development is integrated circuits esploying switches
made of a vitreous semiconductor of the £52le type (fig 3.52s). in the
form of a storage matrix of a permanent reprograuable memory (PPZU), with
256 hits (equivalent to this integrated circuit is a PPZU uploying amor-
phous semiconductors of the C7010 type. nade by the Nitron firm in the USA).

This circuit permits 100 rewrite cycles and makes it possible to store in-
formation for 10,000 h when the power is cut off. A structural diagram

-165-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

for the revriting of intonation is given in fig 3.52h. Intonation is,
read in successively into each storage slauent. Here the hit hus selected
is grounded and to the selected nuhsr bus is supplied s plus readin pulse.
Hwna"0"isreadin.ths0v -l9to30V. -3to7u.
and 1 10 to 20 u '§“v£§3’““1" is read in. u"“- 22 v,
1m AOIA,snd r -3toIOus. Ma"1"u!§hr:adin,reado

outhcan take place only 10 us after ternination of the readin pulse. The
maxim psrnissihls rewrite rate for a single storage elenant equals

wax! - 5 Be. The current for reading in s "0” is drﬁven by oscillator

60 through diode VD]. and clipping rssistor I 11 IA). The
current1 for reading in s ”1" is driven by oacil tor (1'9 through diode
VDZ (11 - 100 IA). For the purpose of achieving consistent readin of

a "0" “MI" a 16.1011! repetition of the resdin cycle is nde possible.

 

figure 3.52. Schematic Diagram of Type K524RPIA Integrated Circuit
(a) and Structural. Diagram for Rewriting Information (h):
D—-type KSZloRPIA integrated circuit, slantitch for se-
lection of number hue, Szo-svitch for selection of hit
hue, PV-woltnetsr

Key:
1. Bit buses 33. R -
2. Number buses “h “983000

'- 1106 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
when information is read out to the selected nuﬁer bus. a plus pulse with
O h - 5 V is supplied fron oscillator 6 through clipping resistor
it” - 6 kn . heading out can be perforuacgy a pulse of any length great-
4%.»: the length of r - a oo.ooss-c (where c 1. the capacitance
of the matrix, equaling 158 pr)?c"'l'he pulse for reading in e ”0" or "I,"
passing through the matrix's storage element (a diode nde of a vitreous
seniconductor), changes its resistance. which makes it possible in reading
oat information to produgt at the output a voltage of a different Iagnitude,

uwykh [output] I 2 V , 1] I 3.5 V .

Able to serve as another exasple of a storage unit based on new uterials
is the type 307nm integrated circuit, representing the storagenatrix of
a 1’qu with a capacity of eight bits. employing piezoelectric ceramics.

A schematic diagren of a type noun integrated circuit is about in fig
3.53. A "l" is read in by supplying to leads 3 to 6 and 9 to 12 a -250 V
pulse (1’1 > 20 an). A "0” is read in by supplying a 250 V pulse (1 >

> 20 ms). Leads 7(8) are hereby connected to ground. tor the purpo e of
reading out recorded information it is' necessary with leads 7(8) grounded
to supply to leads 140 an excitation pulse of U 1

3 100 V or U 3 -50 V . The read-out signal nghkae‘c‘tsslﬂlty
opposite to thxoﬁslarity of the excitation pulse. Its nagnitude is also
dﬁaynined by the negllitude of the excitation pulse with UV . 10 V .

U kh - 1 80 IV . Type K307“ integrated circuits make possible the stor-
age of recorded information for 15 years with the supply voltage cut off.
The naxieun access rate is 100 kHz. At the present time work is being done
to increase the capacity of the netrix to 256 bits.

 

§._.__. {fr—=5
3"““1~—-1_1J . Lf—‘r—é

==
3

’ .———{-—_—‘
1::
I b

}

Figure 3.53. Schenatic Diagran of K3078Vl Integrated Circuit

3.7.7. Major Series of Henory Unit Integrated Circuits and Their Punc-
tional Structure

As was demonstrated above. the key elencnt of the matrix of s manor-y unit
is .1 storage element, as which is used most often a flip-flop. But the

- 11:7 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electrical peraeeters of a nsnory unit are not characterized only by the
paraeeters of trigger circuits. The key characteristics of neeory unit
integrated circuits are the following: capacity, neaeured by the nuﬁer of
binary units of intonation (bits) which can be stored in the energy unit;
speed of response, deternined by the ties for access to the Ienory unit‘
(speed of response can be characterized in addition by the readin tins and
readout tins); and the power required by a single storage elsnsnt (in I"
per bit) or the power requireeent of the entire integrated circuit of the
eeeory unit as a whole. An inortant characteristic of nsnory unit in-
tegrated circuits is also the degree of integration, expressed as the nu-
ber of elenents or equivalent gates in the package. .

The develop-eat of nenory unit integrated circuits has been proceeding
along two lines: Special series of nsnory units are being created, and
memory units are being developed for the purpose of expanding previously
developed digital series. For staple, in recent years the 111. [transis-
tor-transistor logic] and 3811. [electrical circuit - transistor logic]
series of integrated circuits have been expanded, whose salteup includes
020's [direct-access nesory units] with a capacity of 66 bits and tendon
access and control circuits (KISSKUZ and morons) and 0211's with a cape-
city of 256 bite and control circuits (60030610). and series of nicrocir-
cuits ewloying cms [conplensntary m3] transistors. whose sakeup includes
020 integrated circuits with a capacity of 256 bits and control (WW2
and 076302). ‘

A list of special series of neeory unit integrated circuits which have
found application in conputers for industrial purposes, used in different
sectors of the national econosly, and their characteristics are given in
table 3.23. It should be eqhasised that all wry unit integrated cir-
cuits developed in recent years contain. in addition to storage utrices.
control circuits (decoders, output shspers, etc.), which has made it pos-
sible significantly to reduce the umber of integrated circuits used for
designing a neaory unit, and at the seas tile to reduce its size, to sin-
plify installation and accordingly to i-prove reliability. As is obvious
fro- table 3.23, the majority of neeory unit circuits have been developed
on the basis of p-chennel nos technology. with which the unit cell of the
nenory unit is of small size.

The Isaiah- capacity of 0211's and PZU's is 16 bits. However in the in-
nediate future must be expected the appearance of neeory unit circuits
with a capacity of 610 bits. Of special interest are nemry units exe-
cuted according to the mos technology, since they lake it possible to
store interaction with the power cut off. tor the Sl9RYel and Sl9ﬂe2
circuits shown in the table this tile equals 2000 h. Great prospects in
the area of improving the level of integration. reducing the required
power and increasing speed of response are being opened up with further

“Here is esant the tile tron the instant the access sipal is supplied to
the instant of tersination of the process of reading in or reading out in-
tonation free the eeeory unit.

. - 148 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mom: of such circuitry and “cholouul transit to 008. HO: and
was «mm... -

       
   
    
  
  
   
  

.-'.."....—...' “' ' "
I Inc. 4-“ I.
- . (num- OIIII'"
”)rfmuv .m own. ”no.
.:.-u.:-'-“ . - up.“ . cud-III" name.
3 2). 4 .
.mMI alum-cocoon”. 03! Q

€‘m.l_ ‘m

._.“ﬂlhuo noun-Ira. WV
_._: ._. _——,___._.

ennu- mm
'4“ I I _nn mnauq— u. «Aw-II Ii
':'3.it‘.u"'.-\ _"m u? a «mu. ”urn-III-

'-v "Wu: “'0. I In}.

  
    
      

maven-I
I I.- 'I9.
.. . ...- --—_...— ~—. I;- . .._ |
I- 'II n-IMI-nnI-IIMI. I”! I- m I Ion-A.“ ‘ f ' w
“run-awn. utnneuwvu (MOI
Inﬁll-II 2°
.- —- “-0- LL“ I... h- In I --_—-'—:_
\h'mu nun-I" llh n In“! I“ tun-1) .
n. um; “cm-M Ira-fawn}. MINI "" ' “H”
Mum-v) up an an!
’! w‘u‘: - __
' I'|.o ‘I l"!

 

om .I.1rMaIIIJl—-.
nan-‘1. not“ 4am!- \‘AJI'I‘. _ 0-5.“...

I! . I‘tI~ M'D- 'MQ ~ - '
I|I\.' n an." www.m- Au!
I; 4 M‘W. mm m

 

    
    
  

-l'_\ \
‘III

9 .ul.
.

“FF-W

 

0‘ cu Inu-
Inna-II)

 

\’ ".IV‘I'

l ._.-
“’1'...

4-‘I 3 ‘ H T! "In Ian
I .I:I-\'I_ \_ 2

)2!" Mn lb" I! lag-52
b an W- J, to «out. "mm

  

I up
4 - us. I "ﬂu-q»
. .. . —-q————__
- I . m 'I 0.1! I. noun-I "uni-In s05 .
:I'w‘A'VJIS Ian-«mo In» Ida-m J;,L‘,?.:,
. «yu In.
mm)
' . "A“ l“
' . Wanna-III
. 3;.“ I."
I ' I HII’ a unann- 1m non mo Ion-0m '
I, ‘ nun (mun "out
..—_
our - . mm b I.
I #26) man w"

I
.--- o——.. n

.. .I0\ I .Aaumauawuw.» Mac-II um
l.-»I.u-. i -ouv~i75unhmnao” Inc-III

our-ao-
2!! WIN.
l..\f'|‘. ' Mum. nun-In. It)? to “VI

I'MI'I'II u‘uv- ”pun-u. c ”Im-
zonal who...» mu.-

(m 301' W" '

--—~...-

 

 

 

 

[Key on following page)

~149~

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

1. Conventional designation 19. P20 storage natrix with electri-
of nicrocircuit cal reprogrlnins

2. Functional purpose 20. ”'08

3. Technology 21. P20 storage natrix with partial

10. bit capacity (layout) decoding circuit and electrical

5. Cycle (readout/readin). rewriting of intonation
readin. address access, 22. m with couplets address decod-
end informtion readout ing. output alplifiers end "in-
tine. us tagrated circuit selection” con-

6. Specific power require- trol circuit
went, ill/bit 23. p-chennel nos

7. Conventional designation 2‘. 020 with control circuits (of the
of package dynenic type)

8. liunber of ole-ants in 25. unic type on
crystal 26. 1 [integrated injection logic]

9. 020 storage natrix with 27. Storage netrix of psrnanent re-
control circuits programsble nanory unit »

10. p-chsnnel ms 28. Vitreous ssniconductor

ll. Readout cycle tile 29. Rewrite t - 5 ll:

12. Readin cycle tine 30. P20 storage Intrix with control

13. Address access tine circuits and electrical rewriting

14. leadin tine of intonation (nuﬁer of rewrite

15. 020 with control cir- cycles—10")
cuits 31. Storage tine equals 2000 h

16. 00$ 32. In access

17. Readout access tine 33. In storage

18. ﬂith ll [supply volt-
age] - 3

3.8. Prospects for the Developmt of Digital Integrated Circuits

Each of the types of digital integrated circuits discussed above (bipolar
TIL and £511.. and circuits enploying nos structures, such as p-chsnnel,
mos. HNOS and 808) has its advantages and disadvantages, which govern
their area of application. Bipolar integrated transistors are suitable
for the «notation of relatively high currents, because of which integra-
ted circuits employing these transistors are distinguished by high speed
of response. whereby the stray capacitances oi interconnections between
packages have little influence on the operating speed.

By scans of connecting neny bipolar integrated circuits. each of which is
of soderate conplexity. it is possible to create high-speed equipnent con-

ponents. tor the purpose of designing coquters and conponents of discrete
auto-atic devices 1'11. circuits are now used cost extensively. Ultretast

equip-ent is being designed with integrated circuits of the £511. type.

Hos transistors. because of their practicality, sake it possible to a-
chieve considerably greater packaging density of switching circuits in

-150-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m ORIGIN. 083 OIL!

the integrsted structure then do bipolsr isoleted by s p-n junction or s
file of 3102. Circuits utilising ms trsnsistors srrenged on s single

crystsl csn equsl whole functionel units. This hes determined their ex-
tensive spplicstion in electronic celculstors, nesory units end nicropro-

cessors e

In turn, the stesdily incrsssing requirenents tron the viewpoint of is-
proving speed of response, reducing the required pouer end reducing the di-
nensions end cost of equipnent hsve entsiled e quest for nev nethods eating
it possible both to improve the spersting chsrecteristics of ms trensis-
tors end to increese the functionel pechsging density of elen'sntery switch-
ing circuits sede out of bipolsr trsnsistors. Let us discuss in greeter
detsil new technologicel trends in the isbricstisn of digitsl integrsted
circuits. .

3.8.1. Integrsted Injection Logic

As s develop-slut of the very first switching circuit-on direct coupling
trensistor logic (T118) circuit-oin recent yesrs hes eppeersd integreted
injection logic (ebbrevieted In. or 121.). by teens o! circuits of the 121.
type it hes been possible to overcone the trsditionsl disedvsntsgss of hi-
polsr integrsted circuits, i.e.. their lov pscksging density end high dis-
sipsted power per gste. In ter- of pscksging density 1‘1. circuits even
surpees nos circuits (it is possible to pecksge sore then 200 gstes on en
sres of l -2). end in terns of levels of dissipsted power ere conpsreble
to was circuits. The high speed of response chsrecteristic of bipolar
integrsted circuits is further-ore uintsined (the propsgstion delsy tine
per gets resches 5 as). The best known vsrisnts of been inverter circuits
utilising injection logic of the 121. type end 111. type with Schottky diodes
ere shown in fig 3.“.

Figure 3.5‘. Bess Inverter Circuits of the 121. Type

The not too high dissipsted power of 121. circuits is expleined by the sh-
sence of resistors. The injection of csrrisrs into the eres of the tune-
istor's bees is sccouplished by nsens of ectivs current generstors designed
from p-n-p trsnsistore. The high speed of response with low required power
is explsined by the insignificsnt strey cepecitsnces. the sbsence of chsrge
sccusulstion end' the very snell difference in logicsl levels. Gstes in-
cluded in the circuit csn be errenged slong the injection buses. which

- 151 -
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
simplifies the topology. In addition, on a single crystal it is possible
to unite without ditiiculty both digital 121. and analog circuits.

As can he assuned. 121. circuits with Schottky diodes will lake it possible
to achieve even higher speed of response (delay ties of 0.1 no) without
increasing the power nquirenent.

3.8.2. ms Circuits with n-diennels

The restrictions on speed of response characteristic of p-chennel ms cir-
cuita can be elininated by scans of n-chennel ms structures. The nobility
or electrons in silicon is greater than the nobility of. holes, which can
make possible a two- to thredold pester switching speed in nos circuits
with an n-channel than in circuits with a p-channel. The latest achieve-
nents in technology have ends it possible to eliminate the disadvantages

of the first n-channel circuits. Utilisation of the neth of ion inplant-
ation and the application in load circuits of a structure with depleted and
not enriched channels have made it possible to lower the supply voltage to
5 V, which makes these circuits compatible in terns of electrical levels
with TTL's. The use of a separate bias voltage for the substrate has nade
it possible to increase the threshold voltage, which at the original stage
was inpernissibly low. .

In table 3.26 are given conparative characteristics of the scat well known
classes of digital integrated circuits. which denonstrete that for the pur-
pose of designing digital equip-ant integrated circuits of the 121., C308
and 31408 types would most convenient. Integrated circuits of the mos
type have already becone widespread. The striving for a funds-ental in-
provenent in the packaging density of bipolar integrated circuits, as well
as for an increase in the speed of response of ms circuits began after the
invention of nicroprocessors.

Table 2. Key Characteristics of Classes of Digital Integrated Circuits

Characteristics p-ms ‘n-nos nos at am 121.
Area required for a 5 to 7 3.7 to 5 6.25 to 12.5 to 12.5 to 2.5
31931; gate (10 3 13.7 37.5 31 to
ml) 3.7
Delay originating >100 60 to 15 to 3 to 10 0.5 to 2 >5

in one gate, ns 100 50

Static dissipated 2 to 3 0.2 to <0.001 1 to 3 5 to 15 «1.2
pcwer, I" 0.5

"Power X speed of 200 10 to 50 3 19 10 <1
response" indica-
tor. pJ

[Table continued on following page]

- 152 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe ORIGIN. 083 MY

Nueher of diffueion 2 3 lo 4 6 to 5 3 to
end ion doping 6
proceeeee

Mr of noting 5 6 7 7 8 to 9 5' to
etepe ' 7

At the preeent tine eicroproceeeor circuits heeed on 121. ere being deve-
loped. In perticnler. the type mm integreted circuit (en enelog of
the type SOP-0‘00 integreted circuit) repreeente e nicroproceeeor on e
eingle cryetel with en operetion eaecution cycle period of l'ue ad e tote].
power requirenent o! 150 i. Alec being developed ere eingle-cryetel cen-
trel proceeeore (einiler to the Intel type 0000 integreted circuite) uti-
using n-c'hennel technology.

A few worde ehould he eeid ebout trende in the further develop-rut of nos
etructuree, in perticuler. D08 (en nos trneietor fehriceted by the nethod
of double difiueion) end m (on me treneietor with e V-eheped groove).
Both theee etructuree note it poeeihle to reduce the length of the chennel
in en nos treneietor. In no: etructuree thie ie echieved by cerrying out
two eucceeeive diffueione of inuritiee with oppoeite typee of conduction.
The driftregion provee to he depleted end the twitching tine with euch e
ehort chennel ie coneiderehly reduced.

In vms devicee the thickneee of the eource-drein gep ie deterlined by the
thickneee of the epitexiel or diffneion leyer reveeled in enieotropic etch-
ing. Ae the remit of etching, in diffueion or epitexielly grown file- ere
toned V-ehepcd groovee which reveel e thin layer with e new for-ed eur-
tece. The euhotrete hecaee the eource end the upper diffueion region the
drein. The gete ie creeted on the beveled ride of the etched groove by
neene of oxidetion end the depoeition of e file. Eunice of diecrete
ms treneietoro ere devicee oi the 9901 to K9“ type, which heve high
opereting voltegee (30 to 100 V). e gein elope of 30 to 100 lA/V. end e
drein current of 0.1 to 1 A.

In both deeigne of theee pro-icing nos etructuree control of the gein-

eource dietence ie eccoqliehed by technologicel nethode end doee not de-
pend on the cepehilitiee of photolithogrephy. ee in ell other nethode of
febriceting devicee. he the reeult of utilizing the ehove-nentioned ee-
thode it ie poeeihle to creete ms devicee with e twitching deley on the

order of 1 no with voltegee of 5 V. Thin epeed of reeponee ie conperehle
to the feeteet oeriee of m. circuite.

In eddition to hipoler end ms circuite. in recent yeere heve eppeered
devicee with cherge coupling (st'e), which conhine in the-eelvee two in-
portent functionel propertieenthe ehility to etore infornetion (repre-
rented by the cherge of while cerriere). end the ehility to trenenit it
directionelly.

- 153 -
roe omcm. use our
.-., veoov-e_ ov— ones.

The key nerits of ”8's as colpared with bipolar and ms circuits are the
fella-ring: a high degree of integration (up to 150,000 bits/a2), high
speed of response (dozens of ill: in ordinary 228's with surface charge
transfer and dozens of Gas in 928's with an ion doped recessed channel),

a low power requirenent (5 to 10 ell/bit) and basic design and technological

siuplicity.

however. m's require special circuits for linking with bipolar and nos
integrated circuits. which can be nuﬂaered among their disadvantages. PZS's
cone under the heading of devices of the dynamic type and for their opera-
tion are required oscillators which forn trains of clock pulses. . Already
created and having fotind col-arcial application are shift registers and
sensory units with rando- eccees e-ploying ns'a. tor exasple, the rssmu
type integrated circuit is in the for: of a shift register with a capacity
of 16,385 hits with an infomtion transnission rate of 8 bits/s, a maxi-
nun clock pulse frequency of 2 III: and a power require-ant in the storage
node of 30 uH/bit.

It is to be expected that after the nastery in production of circuits uti-
lizing st's they will find extensive application in equip-sot.

3. 9 . . Microcalculators

As was indicated above. at the present tine integrated circuits enploying
cms transistors have become widespread. ‘l'he cosplenentary technology
lakes it possible to produce circuits with a high level of integration

(up to 10.000 elements on a crystal) and a low static power requirenent
(to single nunbers of nicrowatts per switch). The increase in the func-
tional cosplesity of was integrated circuits has ends it possible to cre-
ate in a single crystal conplete digital devices of. the processor type,
and this, in turn. has served as the basis for the de'velopmnt of nail
electronic keyboard conputera (Rufﬁan-called "pocket" W's, or,

in other words. aicrocalculators.

As an emple let us discuss the design principle of a nicrocalculator of
the ”Elektronika 83-06" type (fig 3.55).

The input unit is designed for transnitting to the keyboard computer raw
data and cor-ands iron the keyboard unit. Intonation in the fern of a
decimal code enters the decoder input, where it is converted into binary
coded deciIsl code and the coding of cos-ands is carried out.

The synchronization unit generates the necessary trains of pulses control-
ling the operation of all the keyboard colputer's units. It consists of a
master oscillator and a set of delay lines (with logical feedback).

The progrsushle unit generates the required sequence of micron-sands
depending on the operation key pressed on the input unit.

4154 -
ms onxcm. us: 0qu
roe omcm. on m

 

rigors 3.55. structural Disgra- o! "llektronika 33-04" Type Blac-
tronic Keyboard CoIputer

Key:
1. 1.5 V 5. Aritl-etic unit"
2. Power supply 6. Progr-sble unit
3. Display 7. Input unit
’0. Display control unit 8. Synchronization unit

The aritl-etio‘unit-(Au) nukes possible performeceof addition, subtrec-
tion. multiplication and division operations. It consists of a binary
coded decinel sequential adder-subtractor operating in 84-2-1 code, dyna-
Iic infomtion storage registers and circuits for controlling copying of
intonation ad addition.

The display control unit is designed for outputting raw data and the re-
sults of coeputstione to the display. The display itself is designed in
a keyboard coquter of the BB-Ob type on the basis of liquid crystals and
serves the purpose both of visually nonitoring raw data and of registering
the results of conputations.

The power supply trmsforns the voltage of the d.c. (1.5 V) cheeicsl ele-
nent into the following series of voltages: +6 V (for powering the logic
section of the conputer. which pertorns all arithnstic operations), +6.
+12, +15 and -9 V (for powering the display). This coeputer has its own
synchroniser. The frequency of the nester oscillator is to - 100 has ,
and the clock frequency equals ft II 10/3 .

A list of the integrated circuits which are used in a keyboard conputer
of the 33-0‘ type and their electrical pars-stars are presented in table

3.25. The systen for controlling the display is executed with integrated
circuits of the KleAPl. 116501 and nasrn type. The noun circuit
enables the perfornsnce of. all aritheetic operations and conversion of the

- 155 -
POI ORIGIN. 083 ONLY
data and operation code into binary coded decimal code. and also converts
it into the sealant code required for the display control system. The
K1651” integrated circuit serves the' purpose ot storing operands and re-
sults of an operation.

Table 3.25.‘ Integrated Circuits with which a Keyboard Counter of the
"Blelttronika 33-06 'l’ype is Designed, and Their Electrical

Paranters
Conventional Functional Net of Convea- Electrical parale-
deoignation purpose . ale-ants tional ters
of integrated _ in crys- ‘ desig-
circuit tel nation
of pac-
kage UM. 0V7“- Pp“,
V V ii
Kl65aru Shaper of 378 No 0081* 9.2 9.2 6.6
pulses for 10.6
controlling
sepsnts
Kusan Digit aelec- 12 Ditto - 18 7
tor
mmn Display con- 662 " ' u 9.2 6.6
K1659?“ trol circuit 10.6
K165IP1A Processor 3600 " 6. 6 6 .6 3. 3
K1651?“ 5.3
K16SIP2A Storage rsg- 1692 " 6.6 6.6 3.3
K1651?” iater 5.3
K165PNl - Voltage trans- 6 601.16-2 - - 5
former

Note: for the K165P'Nl integrated circuit 0 - 12 to 13.5 V with I <
_<_ 1.5 m . 't ‘ "

The structural diagram tor control of the display ia illustrated in fig
3.56. It is organized according to the matrix lethod with the display hits
divided into even and odd, which has made it possible to unite like seg-
nente of adjacent display bits Or and 2r. 3: and 6:. 5r end 6r, and 7r
and Sr) and to reduce twofold the nuder of. display leads. The "K"

a'Not specified in an All-union State Standard.

-156-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(conatnt)and"-'sepaotsarecoonactadtothaco-oobuseso1theodd
and even bits. respectively. The digit selector generotea Me for

lighting the even ad odd digite.

-.
ﬁ
3:
.2
92
it

 

Figure 3.56. Control of Display

‘0’: ‘
1. Display 9. Sega-sot code (9r) register and
2. (10 to 32)r ' shapere
3. Ivan digits 10. Code access unit
lo. Odd digits ll. Converter of series-parallel code
5. Shaper into series
6. Sagesnt code, (23r) up 12. synchronisation
ister and shapers 13. Code access unit
7. Register and Shaper 16. Control wit
8. Digit selector 1:. Sag-ant code

A structural diagran of an integrated circuit of the KleUPl type is shown
in fig 3.57. Its operating half consists of a collection of the following
units: an adder-subtractor. a data and contend code storage register, a
unit for correcting paeudosuas and deteraining the position of the decimal
point. a unit for recoding data represented in the decinal system into
binary coded decissl code. a unit for coding inforIation for outputting it:
to segnonted displays. a unit for generating control pulses. The operating
part periores the processing of intonation. such as addition, subtraction,

- 157 - -
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ultiplication. division, cowutation with a constant and code conversion.
Bare intonation is circulated through a progra-abla logic natrir.

 

Figure 3.57. Structural Diagram of Processor bloying Integrated
Circuits of the rusm lype

Key: '

1. Output of result ‘. Storage section

2. Operating section - 5. Entry of intonation and «nude
3. Programbla logic natrix 6. Reset

The programmable matrix consists of a set of MD and on gates and can be
divided into the following three sections: a switching circuit for the
circulation of infornation in the execution of decisions and coding, an
analysis circuit (tun dynamic trigger circuits). and a circuit for control-
ling the storage section.

The storage section is a set of eight dynamic trigger circuits naking pos-
sible the storage of nicro-operations. Moro-operations are toned in re-
lation‘ to the information entered into the keyboard conputer. the state of
analysis circuits. and the previous nicro-operation.

The integrated circuits developed for keyboard computers of the "Elektronika
33-06" type are whole units, iaplenanting. as was denonstrated above, not
individual logic functions. but coupler arithnetic and logic operations and
naking it possible to perforn the four arithnetic operations and operations
with a constant. Other keyboard conputers have also been created, deva-
loped on the basis of series 1165 008 integrated circuits (table 3.26).

3. 10. Microprocessors

The increase in the degree of integration of integrated circuits and the
llprovcmcnt of their technical and econoaic characteristics have Ilde it
possible with high results to utilise computing equipment in any new
arcns--i’rom units of industrial equip-em; and monitoring and test

5158 -
ran omcw. use my
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equip-eat to caah ragiatera and keyboard conputara. The proceaa of the
spread of thia conputer technology haa been accelerated conaiderably with
the enploynent of nicroproceaaora M'a). 1n terna of architectural and
atructural aolutiona. m'a are ai-ilar to the proceaaora 01 "big" conutera
the procesaing of intonation in which ia porter-ad aceording to a progra-
(or adcroprogran).

Table 3.26. Liar and Structural Makeup 0! Keyboard coqutera Developed on
the Baaia of Series 1105 Integrated Circuita

Type of Conventional Nnctional purpoaa No of Convention-
keyboard deaignation ele- a1 deaigna-
murmur of integrated nenta tion of
circuit need in package
crya-
tel
33-18 nbsnuz Proceaaor, 1/0 con- 16,000 246.18-1

trol mit for aingle-
cryatal ‘engineering

calculator
33-21 KleILSOl Operating unit uhoae
[15511502 control no ia pro-
K1631X503 gra-ad to pattern
iunctiona in keeping
with ita deaign 9,800 266.408-1
nasm Dyna-1c ahift ragiater
for 1024/1008 bite 6,167 209.26-1
11650” Pour-phaaa pnlae clock 108 301.12-1
33-30 “#50154 Proceaaor, 1/0 control

unit for aingle-cryatal
nicrocalculator utili-

zing air haaic arithm-

tic operationa and a die-

play vith field effect

liquid cryatal indicatora 6,000

The very name "nicroproceaaor" rafera to the execution of the proceaaor by
employing one or nore cryatala of a eeniconductor nicrocircuit. Micropro-
ceaeora are playing the role of the najor functional unite of a new clean
of couputara. ao-called aicrocoqutera. vhoaa diatinctiya feature ia that
they are iaplenanted vith integrated circuita of inrovad dagraea of in-
tegration (the third and loath). ‘l'haae integrated circuita perfor- certain
aiqle operationa by neana of a apecial-purpoae control progra- (aingle-
progra- operating node).

Hicrocalculatora beca-e the preparatory atage in the dmlopnant of HP'a
and aicrocoqutera. 1t ia praciaely in than that the topological,

- 159 -
POI O'HCIAI. US! ONLY
a-.. v..-~--~ was. venue

circuitry and architectural solutions were worked out which were later
widely employed in the creation of the first “P's. Along with program
“P's (controlled by microprograms) in recent years integrated circuits

have appeared with increased functional complexity, performing different
kinds of logical or mathematical processing of intonation. The algoritb
for their operation is determined not by a program but by a functional cir-
cuit. These integrated circuits can be called special-purpose micropro-
cessors. In modern microcomputers these special purpose HP'a enable the
performance of input/output operations concomitantly with the operation of
the main HP. However, most widespread have become microprocessors for a

broad purpose-contro lled by programs or microprograms-dwhich will be dis-
cussed below.

3.10.1. Characteristics of a Microprocessor

A r‘ roprocessor is a data processing unit consisting of operating and
control sections, which can be supplemented with a permanent memory (PZU).
which serves the purpose of programming. Thus, an HP is a general-purpose
digital electronic unit whose function is assigned by programming.

The first HP's consisted of a single crystal, but experience in using them
demonstrated that for the purpose of creating a self-contained system it

is necessary to add to such an HP an entire series of digital integrated
circuits. Host convenient to use proved to be families of “2's compatible
with one another. making up a configuration. These HP configurations
(sets) have created the conditions for designing future digital devices by
employing new architectural principles, among which can be named the main-
line method of organizing different levels of the digital structure, enabl-
ing add-on capabilities for computer equipment, a multiprocessor structure,
microprogram control of processors, self-containment of peripherals and
standardization of a system's units. Practically all nodern HP's are de-
veloped in configurations. The employment of program facilities in place
of the switching of units for the purpose of altering the behavior of a
processor has been conducive to considerable improvement in the efficiency
of a system.

A typical operating program for an HP consists of a sequence of commands
and instruction words, stored in the permanent memory with which the HP is
supplied, to the processor. Usually these are programmable PZU's (PPZU's),
which make it possible easily to rewrite. which in turn makes it possible
Sufficiently simply by means of software to enable a microprocessor to be
used under new conditions of application, without resorting to individual
extensive changes in hardware. Supplying a standard HP with a P2" which

can be programmed in differint ways makes it possible quickly to develop
new designs.

The operating section of an HP enables logical processing of information
circulating in the HP itself. These are operations by means of which
computations are performed (binary addition, right and left shifts,

- 160 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR URELLIM U35 W14!

complements, etc.). The control section of an HP decodes instruction
words and forms signals required for the performance of a specific opera-
tion. Each instruction word represents a short program consisting of ele-
mentary operations whose sequence is called s microprogram. The sequence
of instruction words in keeping with which the control section of the HP
operates is called the progran. The program is written in the 1’20, in
which are stored both microprogrela and control progress for solving s spe-
cific problem. Almost all models of 19‘s have a fairly great number of
supplementary internal registers which serve the purpose of reducing the
time for the execution of operations and of forming addresses of greater
length then the basic.bit configuration of the processor.

In many "P's there is a register sink-storage which is used for storing sub-
programs end tables of interrupts end date. The sink storage consists of

a group of connected registers and a counter which serves the purpose of
selecting the appropriate register. Registers are cleared in an order
which is the reverse of that in which they are filled. which makes it pos-
sible to reduce the number of program exchanges between the registers and
the main memory, the capacity of the memory required and the time for pro-
cessing arrays. Information can be processed simltaneously or sequential-

ly.

In supplying “P‘s with interrupt facilities the possibility appears of com-
bining arithmetic operations and input/output operations, which increases
the processor's operating speed. In addition, the operating speed can be
increased by the employment of new circuitry design principles based on
new technological structures. Whereas the first “P's were developed by
employing p- and n-channel HOS transistors with not too high operating
speed, in recent times have appeared microprocessors utilizing bipolar in-
tegrated structures (121. and 881.), which have made possible a considerable
increase in operating speed.

Generally an HP, even with the existence of a P20 with an entered control
program, is still not a coquter, end for the purpose of converting it

into a microcomputer it is necessary to furnish it with input/output cir-
cuits which control the peripheral equipment. But the capabilities in-
herent in an HP make it possible to use it in all equipment in which by
means of digital equipment it is possible to enable the performance of
broad tasks relating to the processing of information according to a preset
program. The nusber of different operations which can be performed by a
microprocessor in some models reaches 100, whereby operations are provided
for with a double word length and byte-by-byte processing of information.

In recent times. in addition to 10's with a fixed list of instruction
words. have appeared 10's with microprogran control. making it possible to
change the list of instruction words and control algorithms. With this
the flexibility of the processor is increased and the implementation of
relatively complex microcosnands. e.g.'. such as a Tourier transform, is
simplified. however. for the effective utilization of microprogrem con-
trol it is necessary that the operating speed of the microcouend storage

- 161 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OHICIAL USE ONLY

be five to lo tines greater than the operating speed of the instruction
word storage, since each instruction word is neda up of a number of se-
quentially executed nicroco-ands. The appearance of large-capacity fast
qu's will further the extensive introduction of nicroprogran control in
the structure of W's.

One important characteristic of 19's influencing their area of application
is the word length. 19's in wide use at the current tine are divided into
three groups: 6-. 8- and 16-bit. The first are used chiefly in nitro-
calculators and autonatic cash registers and accounting nachines, and the
second in data processing systems. and the third in broad-application ni-
croconputers.

As already nentioned above, one of the nest important parameters of an HP
is its operating speed. The lastery by industry of various circuitry
trends has nade it possible already today to reach an operating speed of
from dozens of thousands to one nillion to three nillion brief "register-
to-register" operations per second. In particular, for uP's iaplsnented
on the basis of runs circuits-80.000 operations/s, n-HOS circuits--
400,000 operations/s. QIOS circuits-400.000 operations/s, 121. circuits--
500.000 to 600,000 operations/s, m3}: [transistor-transistor logic with
Schottky diodes] circuits—1.2 nillion operations/s, and 3811. circuits-
3.0 million operations/s.

0n the basis of the distinctive features of the design of cowuters using
enhanced-integration integrated circuits (fourth generation coaputers)
and of the thesis of the universality of the enploynent of 10's for the
optimal inplenentetion on their basis of a broad range of coeputer hard-
ware, it is possible to for-ul’ate specifications for microprocessor con-
figurations:

The inplenentation of an extensive set of infornstion processing algo—'
rithns. For this trust be accoqlished nicroprogran control, the capabi-
lity of arbitrarily increasing the bit configuration, the number of general
purpose registers, and the aicrocousand forest, and of specialization of

a configuration with regard to its basic purpose. and ensurance of func-
tional completeness of a configuration.

Standardization and unification of the architecture, which will sake it
possible to orient a configuration tovard a unified advanced structural
design principle for conputer hardware. For fourth generation coaputers
this principle can be the reduction of the entire diversity of computer
hardware structures to the structure of a processor executed on the basis

of functionally couplets nodules united via neinlines and controlled by
means of nicroprograns. The nest constructive concept in the architecture
of HP's at the present tine is the digital nodule arrmganent acconpsnied
by appropriate alteration of the nunber of nicrocouands.

'162-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.10.2. hediun Operating Speed xicroproceesor Configuration

A typical nicroprocessor configuration 01K) enabling the design of digital
cosputer~hardwara with bread functional capabilities and=unified software
(fig 3.58) includes hardware and nicroprogran software. The nicroprogran
software inplenents a systen of instruction words in the forn of nicropro-
grass. each of which consists of a sequence of nicrocoulands. ror the
purpose of sisplifying the development and debugging of nicroprogran.

they are divided into addressing and operating. this sakes it possible to
provide the capability of expanding the systen of instruction words, econo-
nizes on the capacity of the angry, and increases the efficiency of con-
puting facilities.

.....

   

   
 

venue-v .‘H A we?!
13) m .- .25.: l' u

      

Figure 3.58. Typical Structure of nicroprocessor Configuration

Key: .
1. Hicroprocessor configura- 8. Information exchange circuit
tion 9. Arithnetic expansion circuit
2. Hardware 10. Standard integrated circuits,
3. Set of integrated cir- storage integrated circuits
cuits ll. Microprograa software
6. Basic 12. nicroprograns for arithmetic pro-
5. Arithnetic unit (All) ceasing of data in the All
6. Control storage 13. Hicroprograns for coaputing ad-
7. Supplenentary dresses of instructions and data
[Key continued on following page] in A0
- 163 -

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P03 OFYICIAL US! ONLY

16. nicroprograns for internal 16. lucroprogrsms for control of
control of processor processor

15. Hicroprogran for external
control of processor and
controlling console

The hardusre of a typical sicroprocessor configuration can be divided into
basic and supplesentery. The siuinal (basic) set of integrated circuits
sakes it possible to construct'various digital cosputer hardware (TsVS).
Included in this set are the circuitry of the arithnetic unit and the con-
trol storage. The expanded supplementary set of integrated circuits sakes
it possible to construct digital computer hardware in the soot efficient
way and contains a circuit for the exchange of inforsation, a circuit for
arithmetic expansion, a circuit of bilateral amplifiers, etc. The struc-
ture of the supplementary configuration can vary depending on the distinc~
tive features of the digital integrated circuits designed. As an exasple
let us discuss a sicroprocessor configuration based on series :58? and
K530 integrated circuits (table 3.72).

Table 3.27. Functional Structure of Hicroprocessor Configuration Based on
Series K587 and K530 Integrated Circuits

Conventional Technical character- Purpose
designation istics

and

description

of sicrocir-

cuit

Basic Configuration

K587IK2 Four-bit. self-contained Receipt. direct-access storage,
(arithmetic sicroprogras controlled processing and readout of digital
unit) asynchronous digital and instruction inforsation

data processing aodule Designing operating units of di-
gital cosputer hardware with dif-
ferent bit configurations which
are sultiples of four

K587RP1 Self-contained asynchro- Designing microprogran control
(micropro- nous for-er of sequences units vith different infornetion
gran control of 16-bit parallel codes upmcitlco. mcroco-Iand genera-
unit) with an information ca- tor. Designing very simple digi-
pacity of 6‘ logical tel con:rol circuits (in self-
products contained mode)
K587IK1 Bight-bit. self-con- Organization of intra- and extra-
(dsta ex- tained nicroprogras con- processor parallel and sequential
change unit) trolled asynchronous exchange of data of different bit

[Continued on following page)
- 166 -
’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nodule for processing configurations (multiples of

and counting digi- eight), organisation of inter-

tal intonation connection (interfacing) of
processors and channels. de-
signing interrupt units. Used
in controllers of peripheral
units and for controlling 020's

K5871“ Bight-bit self-con- Perfornence of hardware multipli-

(arithnetic tained nicroprogra- cation of two operands. shifts.

expander) controlled asynchro- and retrieval of bit codes (ope-
nous hardware aulti- rands are whole mnbers without
plication nodule a sign or whole numbers in con-

plenent fore with a sign in the
high-order bit); matrix expan-
sion of a bit configuration
which is a Iultiple of sight is
possible

Supplementary Configuration

KSJOAPZ Self-contained esyn- Synchronous and asynchronous

(integrated chronoue four-bit transnission of binary inferna-

circuita of bilateral trans- tion through two-way co-Iunics-

bilateral ceiver of digital tiona lines; snatching of logic

anplifier- infornation ‘ levels of 1'11. and cms integrated

shapers) circuits. Cor-amicetions line
add-on ‘

Note: 1587111. 1587112. K5871” and K5871!” nicrocircuits are made with
CHOS structures in a corner 629.62-1 package. and the DMZ nicrocircuit
is based on m. with Schottky diodes in a £02.16-16 package;

The arithmetic unit (a K5871” type integrated circuit) contains 2500 C108
transistors and includes the following functional mite: a parallel arith-
metic-logic unit, a block of general-purpose registers. a shifter unit. a

state register. an operating register. a nicrocoa-and register, three four-
bit channels. exchange circuits, an instruction word decoder and a synchro—
nization unit. The arithnetic unit makes it possible to increase the bit

configuration to 32 bits. has 168 types of nicroconands and makes possible

a microco-and execution cycle of 2 us with a required static power of 10
W.

The aicroprogra- control unit (a KSBMI type integrated circuit) contains
6000 ans transistors and includes the following functional units: a per-
mnent nanory of the "progrsI-able logical natrix" type, a progra-able
layer of inverters. 13- and 3-bit input registers. a 5-bit sequencing ad-
dress register. an o' put nicroco-and register. a data exchange circuit
and a synchronisation unit. The nicroprogrsn control unit has the follow-
ing characteristics: nuﬁer of logical products 66. bit configuration for

-165-

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
(UK Ul’l’LClAL USE ONLY

input 18 bits. bit configuration for output 16 bits, nicrocommand access
cycle 1.5 us with required static power of 10 an. The data exchange unit
(a type 587IKl integrated circuit) contains 3500 (208 transistors and in-
cludes the following functional units: three 8-bit channels, exchange cir-
cuits, a trap circuit. 8-bit registers, a logic unit, a commutator, a node
register. a state mask register. a state formation circuit. a microcommand
register, a microsommand decoder. s synchronization unit, an original set-‘
ting circuit. and an expansion flip-flop. The data exchange unit makes it
possible to increase the bit configuration to 32 bits, enables the commute-
tion of three mainlines and has 60 types of nicrocommands. The ndcrocom-
land execution cycle is 1.5 us with a required static power of 10 IR.

The arithmetic expander (a 587IK3 type integrated circuit) is constructed
with 6500 CHOS transistors and unites the following functional units:

two 8-bit channels. a 5-bit channel, an exchange circuit, a 7-bit micro-
command register. two 8-bit operand storage registers, two 8-bit operation
result storage registers, a 2-bit name code register. a 3-bit position code
register. a setting flip-flop, a microcommand decoder, a multiplication
unit. a summation unit. a bit code retrieval unit, a state formation unit.
a synchronization unit, and an original setting circuit. The arithmetic
expander nakes it possible to increase the bit configuration to 66 bits.
has 66 types of microcommands, has a aicrocomasnd execution cycle of 2 us
with a required power of 10 d4.

0n the basis of the microprocessor configuration of integrated circuits
discussed above can be constructed different computer units of the required
bit configuration, microcomputers, and special-purpose computing devices.

In fig 3.59 is shown the structural diagram of a microprocessor isplemented
with three integrated circuits of the configuration presented above and a
conventional illustration of one of the nicroprocessor's units, the AD.

The purpose of the AU's leads is shown in table 3.28. The structural lay-
out of a 16-bit increased-operating-speed microprocessor system (fig 3.60)
includes the following: eight type K5321K6 integrated circuits, two type
KSBBRPl integrated circuits (with unified "stitching"), and 11 series

K566 integrated circuits of types 1H3, KT3, LYeS, LA7, LA8, TRZ and 101.
The distinctive features of the structure of this microprocessor system
are parallel execution of a connmnd in two AD's-—an operating (OAU) and
indexing (IAU)--whereby the 0A0 performs operations on operands and the

IA” simultaneously prepares the address for operands and instruction words;
combining of retrieval free the memory of the next instruction word with
fulfillment of the current instruction word; separate address and data

buses; and unified addressing of meaory cells and registers of external
units. '

- 166 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'igure 3. 59.

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!

  
 

L8

8“”!
«tﬂa'ﬁta

3.; at neg-.33 -~ - -g: n». a.-'.

an!”

Structural Diagram of Hicroproceasor (a) and Convention-

al Graphic Representation of Arithmetic Unit 0:)

1. Address mainline
2. Arithmetic unit

3, Hicroprograa control unit 8.

4. Mainline
5. Hong signal hue

Table 3. 28.
Contact

15

110
237.36.27.28,
29.31.32.30.
33.310.35.16
17

26

s
38.60,2.‘

6

Purpose of Leads

Designation

[Continued on following page]

6. Instruction word mainline
7. Interrupt signal bus

Data exchange unit

9. Data

Description

' Inputs for permitting reception and per-

forming microcomnds
Inputs of hits of microco-and register

Input for permitting operation for first
information channel

Input of state code oi carry circuit to
low-order bit

Input for setting unit to original state
Inputs/outputs of bite of information
channel Kl

Input/output of signals for termination of
reception and outputting information
through channel Kl
InputO/outputn a bit. oi intonation
channel K2

Input/output of signal: for torninction
of reception and outputting intonation
through channel. ‘2

Inputs/outputs of infomtion chonntl K3
, Con-on

Input/output of signals for termination
of reception and outputting infatuation
through chonnei K3

Output of state code of carry circuit
fro- high-ordor bit

Input/output of state code of carry cir-
cuit of: .
lav-order hit

nigh-order bit

Input/output of signal rcprding toroi-
notion of execution of operation
Synchronization input/output

tower supply
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Stop 9. Interrupt permission
2. Continue 10. Control 0A”
3. Reset 11. Oh”
i. Start 12. Control IA”
5. Control stop 13. IAD
6. Decoder 14. Separation of read/write operation
7. Control interrupt 15. Output

8. Interrupt interrogation 16. Address
. 17. Reception
18. Data

The key characteristics of the systen are as follows: Bit configuration of
instruction words. data and addresses-«16 bits; nulber of progran accessible
registers of processor in OAU-eight operating registers, one working regis-
ter and one result indicator register, in IAD-oeight indexing registers,
including an address counter and sink address indicator; nunber of instruc-
tion words distinguished by operation code or type of addressing-about

200; addressing takes place through indexing registers (It's). Types of
data addressing: direct (operand in second word of instruction); according
to indexing register, IR; according to indexing register with a consecutive
increnent; with a prelininary decrenent; with modification by the second
word of the instruction and with modification by other Ik's. In the system
there is a single-level vector interrupt and interrupt lock-out. Operating
speed for key instructions of the "add register to register” type is

250.000 operations/s. and for instructions of the "add register to memory

cell" type. 100.000 operations/s.

The existence of aicroprograls lakes it possible to realise added capabili-
ties (by employing additional circuits). such as a pulsed interrupt with

a fixed input address. direct access free an external unit to the neaory
and access to the county iron the console by enploying the processor. A
suansry of can and IAD instructions is given in table 3.29.

The "K's discussed above, baded on series K587 integrated circuits. make

possible an operating speed of conputing operations of the register-regis-
ter type of 250.000 operations/s with a static power requirenent of 10 mm

per nicrocircuit.

3.10.3. Inproved Operating Speed Hicroprocessor Configuration

when it is necessary to improve the operating speed of digital computing
systens it is possible to rsconmend a aicroprocessor configuration utiliz-

ing series K589 and K556 integrated circuits. designed on the basis of
transistor-transistor logic with Schottky diodes (TTLSh) (table 3.30).
The key electrical paranoters of nicrocircuits of this H! are given in
table 3.31. Constructionwise series K589 and K556 integrated circuit "K's

have plastic cases (table 3.32).

- 169 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3.29. List a: 0M! and W Instructions and Their Mention”. Desig-
nations

 

 

 

 
   
 
  

2’ {angel's :3) mm ‘) WW

WIN-A. Pa '2 (kl-Pei

      
 
        
      
  
 
 
 
  

(M m.) -u\ A+P.+P- ..~\ .\‘ lPa- A

   

 
 

Mum-AJMIMﬁ Mada-A swarm—A

I'll" I «)A A+P.-A .+|-;\.P..¢MIMB A°IP“-(AIA.P.).
‘ (MI. 6)

E-N‘. m

(0‘ -u ~.\

(Uh-1'

  

Vcaoe-
we neoc- unclu-
rna no ugmm'um

 
   
  
     

K-P.

‘1)".03.) ”9.3...."

Ps'HC-l’. Kcm usm' Oruu-a
.. -)

1 {'(nc'n U 12) 11)
P.(-|.|—)l-

-P.

Conventional designations and abbreviations: + «allocation operator;

I «exclusive on; A «0M! storage cell (working register); It, and Rh «
operating register {to a and h (a. h - 0 to 7); R «indexing register

No v (v - 10 to 17); I? «reeult indicator register. consists of four
flip-flops: R . z . P and H : Zn «borrow. lo I l - R ; H «nsinline;
I+) H3 «exchange of H with rearrangement of bytes; r. «4-bit constant
tron instruction word field; K «second word of instruction; sink«region
of neIIory addressed through address indicator has been drained; ‘l«gene-
rel designation of the operations 4- (addition). - (subtraction). A (logi-
cal nultiplication). V (logical addition) and 4- [ae published]

[Continuation and key onii'olloving page]

- 170 -
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(non-equivslcnce); i'2---general deaination oi the operations inversion.
LL/LP (logical ahitt left/right by one bit) and TIL/Te? (eyelic shift
left/right one bit).

Key:
1. OAD inetruction words 9. conditional transfer with regard
2. Copying. setting to
3. Hired . 10. Interrupt pereieeion/inhibition
lo. "nary - ll. Stop
5. Binsry . 12. 8nd of cycle
6. IA!) instruction vords 13. Sin]:
7. Conditional trensfere
8. Systen

Table 3.30. Structure of Inproved Operating Speed HR Utilizing Series
K589 and K556 Integrated Circuits

Description type Analog
liicroprogran control unit 76891101 3001 Intel
Central procaesor elelent mono: 3002 Intel
Accelersted carry circuit 158911103 3003 Intel
Hultinode buffer register ”891312 3212 Intel
Priority interrupt unit 6891114 3216 Intel
Bus ahaper K589AP16 3216 Intel
Bus shaper with invereion 1689026 3226 Intel
Programsble per-anent senor-y K5563!“ -

Table 3.31. Key Electrical Pareneters of ll! Hicrocircuits hloying Series
589 Integrated Circuits

Permter ”89301 K5891!“ BOOIKOJ ”891812 [5891116 [589016 ”8902

Kaxim-

static

power

require-

nent,

P .

#518!"

greater

than 900 950 650 650 650 650 650
"0" out- 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
put sig- (outputs

“61» CI to C )
"with a 0.7 (mg- 0.7
V. not puts 31 to

> I

[Continued on following page] l.)

4171-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
dun. an

nan-w n:

vuovnwou

«no: em

anus-p

«non

woven

x» no

ocnvcn

‘ .

an no
an ~.an. no

so no

anocv
o-nnw
ans».

n .
an «as:

H5
bu
POI OFFICIAL 083 010.!

Notes: 1. Values of static para-eters are indicated in the teqerature
range of r--1o:o+7o‘c andvith’epovsrsupply voltage olSV+S
percent. 2. Values of dyn-ic pare-stare are indicated at r - 2570 and
at the noninel voltage of the power supply.

Table 3.32. Types of Series 1689 Cases

Type or integrated circuit Conventional designation of case
K589IKOI . 23040-1
689m: 267.28-1
K589m3 247.28-1
”89131: 239.2%:
689mb 239.24-2
K589AP16 238.16-2
689026 238.16-2
656m“ 238.16-2

The UK discussed is intended for designing high-epeed controllers (control
units) with different types of «sanitation, hevin; e control pulse output
rate of up to 10 tile. Vith it it is possible to construct uicro- and I101-
conputers for different purposes with a order of operations of the regis-
ter-register type of up to one Iillion operetions/s. Let us briefly con-
sider each of the integrsted circuits included in the structure of this

n.

~173-

YOR ORIGIN. US! MY
FORIOFFKJA1.USE|DNLY

The microprocessor controller (EMU) controls the sequence for accessing micro-
instructiona from the microprogram memory. which is constructed as a main memory,
read-only nemory or programmable non. as well as the carry and forward and return
shift data fron the central processor unit; and in conjunction with the priority
interrupt controlle: provides the interrupt capability. The microprocessor con-
troller executes the following functions: receives the 8-bit instruction operation
code, the 9-bit microprogram memory address, the return address which feeds 7-bit
microprogrsms from the memory; performs 11 control functions for the next micro-
instruction address, including three flag signal branch functions (flags); per-
forms eight control functions for display logic (control of the flags), including
four flag set and four flag feed functions; it has outputs with three states and
an open collector.

The microprocessor controller controls the sequence for selecting microinstructions
from the microprogram memory and three flag registers, which are used for organizing
conditional branches in accordance with indicators generated by the CPU or other de-
vices, as well as for the storage and subsequent output of these indicators.

Also included in the functions performed by the microprocessor controller are the
servicing of the microinstruction address register, the selection of the next
microinstruction based on the contents of the microinstruction register, data de-
coding and checking for data incoming from several input trunks for the determina-
tion of the sequence of microinstruction execution; the storage and checking of
data transmitted from the CPU data file; the control of the shift and transmission
of input data to the CPU data array; the control of microprogram level interrupts;
direct addressing of standard Ron's and PROH's as well as the capability of addres-
sing microinstructions.

A block diagram of the microprocessor controller (a K589IK01 integrated circuit)
(Figure 3.61) includes a nine-bit microinstruction address register (RAM!) and the
corresponding trunks; a four-bit instruction code register (RR) and two flag regis-
cars. The conventional designation of the microprocessor controller is shown in
Figure 3.62, while the functions of its leads are given in Table 3.33.

The logic for the next microinstruction address of the microprocessor controller
provides for the execution of unconditional and conditional branch functions. These
functions are used to realize unconditional or conditional branch operations as part
of each microinstruction (each microinstruction usually contains a branch operation
field which defines the branch instruction and consequently, the next microinstruc-
tion address).

To minimize the number of leads of the microprocessor controller and simplify the
logic for the next address, the address file array of microprograms is set up as
a two dimensional (matrix) array. Each address of a Iicroinstruction corresponds
to a natrix element at the intersection of a particular row and column. Thus, a

9-bit microinstruction address is defined by two addresses: the row address (the
five high order digits) and the column address (the four low order digits). Con-

sequently, the address matrix can contain a maximum of 32 row addresses and 16
column addresses: 512 addresses in all.

- 176 -

FINI<HHHC1A1.IEIE(MWLY
two dimensional addressing scheme.

column.
dress matrix.

 

'

2)

(>1 mm n
==-- III 13'

--_---I

--—--—I

-—---I

—---I

III!

--R

-—

i: III.-

 

0me (MM)
I‘ll-II-

(‘3'
"P0 iﬁ r1.-
. rmm
~11 A-

 

.___=-:- is
(10)-
. -...»' —, I.
'1’ 0: human/e“: Irma”:

Figure 3.61. Block diagran of a microprocessor controller
(K589IK01 integrated circuit).

Key: 1. Output buffers for the row addresses;
2. Output buffers for the column addresses;
3. Canon gating input;
lo. Microinstruction address register (m);

5. Logic circuitry for determining the next micro-

instruction address;
6. Interrupt enable gating output;
7. Instruction code register (RR);
8. Flags;
9. Output buffer;
10. Flip-flop P;
[See Table 3.33 for lead functions]

The next-address logic of the microprocessor controller makes extensive use of this
For example, one can unconditionally branch the
the control by means of one function from any point in the natrix defined by its
own row and when to another point in the matrix with a new value of the rev and

However, it is impossible to branch the control to any point in the ad-

-l75-

NRO .IALUSEONLY

In fact. for each given address (matrix slenent). there exists a
fixed subset of nicroinstruction addresses which can be selected as the next
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

address. These addresses, to which branching is possible,
are called the branch set. Each type of branch function

of the microprocessor controller has its own set of branches
(Table 3.36).

sssna

$3

The 10 diagrams shown in Figure 3.63 illustrate the set of
branches for the ll functions of the microprocessor con-
troller. The branch functions are located at address 342
(shown with an X). The addresses, one of which can be
chosen as the next address, are indicated by the black
squares.

The logic schene for feeding flags to the nicroprocessor
controller provides for storing the current value of the
tag fed to the input T as well as feeding it out to the
output Fv (Table 3.33). The two different groups of con-
trol functions for the flags are called the flag output
and set instructions.

I
O
H
O
'0
'1
O
O
a
a
C
O
as
g
H
H
O
p
..-
0
n

The flag circuitry contains three flip-flops, designated
as the c flag. 2 flag and a simple latch flip-flop,

F, which stores the current state of the indicator fed to
the input P. The flag circuit can be used in conjunction
Fig. 3.62. Schematic with the carry and shift circuits of the CPU array for
symbol of sun and desig- the realization of arithmetic and shift nicroinstructions.
nation of the leads The flag control functions and load functions are shown in
(K5891K01 10). Tables 3.35 and 3.36 respectively.

 

#9
My
Fﬂ
lﬁ
"I
”a
. K,
'~
'~'
'.ﬂ
‘ﬂ
-&
'M
'M
I]
E
as

He analyze the branching instructions of the nicroprocessor controller. The
branching functions of the microprocessor controller are chosen depending on the
signals at the seven input buses UAo ... 0A6. Using the leading edge of the sync
signal, the nine bit microinstruction address generated by the next address logic
is loaded into the nicroinstruction address register. This nicroinstruction
address is fed out from the nicroinstruction address register to the nicroinstruc-
tion memory via the nine output buses HA0 ... Has. The outputs of the microin-
struction addresses are broken down into the row and column address outputs as
follows: Has ... HA4 are the row addresses and HA3 ... HA0 are the column addresses.

Corresponding to each address control function is its own combination on the func-
tional input buses 0A. Tron 3 to 5 bits of this code combination define the kind
of function. The format and coding of the functions are given in Table 3.34.

A detailed description of each of the 11 branch functions follows below. The fol-
lowing symbols are used to indicate the addresses of the rows and toluene:

STRn is the five-bit address of the next row; KDLn is the four-bit address of the
next column; n is the decimal number of the row or colunn.

He shall analyze the unconditional branches of the microprocessor controller. The
current nicroinstruction address. i.e. the contents of the nicroinstruction address
register prior to the arrival of the leading edge of the sync pulse train, and some
of the bits free the code on the UA buses. is used to generate the next nicroinstruc-
tion address in accordance with an unconditional branch operation.

- 176 -
IIHI(HUWCJAI.USEGDNLY
TABLE 3.33 Qgsigggtion of the Leads of the Microprocessor Controller

 

 

 

 

Active
e of
Contact Designation Function gzzput Logic
Level
1...4 Rh...K7 Inputs for the first part - "O"
of an instruction
5.6.8.10 K0...K3 Inputs for the.second part - "O”
of an instruction
7.9.11 3K2...Rlo Register second bit outputs Open '
collector
12.13 013. 0?; Control inputs for flag - "1"
entry and storage
16 Pv Indicator output Three "0"
states
15. 16 UFO. 0P1 Inputs for the control of - "1"
flsg feed-out
17 P Indicator [tag] input - ”0"
18 SR? Interrupt enable gnting Conven- "1"
output tional
output
19 s Synchronization input - "1"
20 - Cannon - -
21...26,
37...39 0A0...UA6 Control inputs for the - "l"
nicroinstruction sddreee
register
25 OS Cannon geting input - "1"
26...29 HA0...MA3 Outputs for the microin- Three -
struction address states
colu-n
30...3b MA4...HA8 Outputs for the nicroin- Three -
struction row address states
35 RS Enshle input for generet- - "1"
ing the row address
36 2! Input for loading the nicro- - "l"
instruction address
60 - Power - -

 

- 177 -
FOI.CHﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂB(HVLY
. _. _....§ «Lanai
_ _ To; «shun-n9.- .o._ 3. 1.3.. w 4.

. 5.2.2. 3.....an ’2.
.233 1.38. on douoeiuw ﬂ:

  

     

        

N _ a 2._ a _>._!.2_ \a_>. “3—. . o _. sacs-tensoanuomoﬂum.a.—.N
1.: g a £:_;_:.___.._. 2.220...._,..__;
[Key to Table 3.34. continued}:
16. Branch in accordance with the Kl. - R7 instruction bite.

 

TABLE 3.35. neg Control Functions
HE Deeiﬂtion Function UP]
Input to the flex scz Set the c and 2 than in 0
feed circuit accordance with the 1'
output
812 Set the 2 He; in accord- 0
ence with the 1' input
81.“: Set the C flag in accord- 1
ence with the 1' input
ucz Store the c end 2 flee 1
1'2.
Output of the fins FPO Feed "0" to the ﬂy out- 0
feed circuit put
an: Peed neg c to the Pv 0
output
m Peed flag 2 to the I", 1
output
"I Feed "1" to the Pv 1

 

Key: 1. Addreee of the next row;
2. Mdreee of the next calm;

2H - nicroinetruction eddreee 10nd input.

 

-179-
MOMMIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3.63. Diagrels of the address control function branches.

The unconditional branches and their characteristics are enumerated below.

ICC: branch in the next column; the 0A0 ... 0A4 are used to specify the next nicro-
instruction address; the current colunn is defined by the MAO ... HA3 outputs;

123 is the branch to the zero row; the 0A0 ... 0A3 bases are used to specify the
next nicroinstruction address in the STRo row;

- 180 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lCR is a branch in the current row; the {Mo ... 0A3 buses are used to specify the
next nicroinstruction address in the current row, which is defined by the HA4 ...

HA3 outputs;

ICE is a branch in the current calm in the group of row addresses and the feeding
of the xx [instruction code register] contents to the no 3K2 outputs; the

UAO 0A2 buses are used to specify the next nicroinstruction address in the
group of row addresses defined by the contents of buses HA7 and “Ag; the current
colunn is defined by the contents of the HA0 ....MAg buses. The synchronous output
feed of the contents of the RR instruction code register to the BIO ... ax; outputs
is accomplished at the sane tine.

He shall analyse the flag conditional branches of the microprocessor controller.

A portion of the address of the current nicroinatrucation, the contents of the
selected flag (or flip-flop l?) and sons of the code bits on the UA buses are used
to generate the next nicroinstruction address in accordance with the contents of
the flag flip-flops. The conditional branches and their characteristics are enumer-
ated below.

”-1.. is a conditional branch based on the contents of flip-flop F. The contents of
the UAO 0A3 buses are used to specify the next nicroinstruction address located
in the current of row addresses, which is defined by the contents on the HA3 bus.

If the current microinstruction address belongs to the group of colums KDLO
KOL7, defined by the contents on the HA3 bus. then the next nicroinstruction address,
depending on the contents of the flip-flop P, will be found in columns KOLg or
K0123. If the bus HA3 defines the association of the current address with the group
of columns KOL £01215, then the next nicroinstruction address, depending on

the contents of flip-flop P, will be located in column XDLM or K0511.

ICF is a conditional branch based on the contents of flag c. The contents of the
buses UAO ... 0A: are used to specify the next nicroinstruction address located in
the current group of row addresses, defined by the contents on the m7 and HA3 buses.
If the current nicroinstruction address belongs to the Kata ... K0157 group of
columns, defined by the contents on the HA3 bus, then the next nicroinstruction
address. depending upon the value of flag C, be located in colum K052 or KOLg.

If bus MA3 defines the association of the current address with the group of colums
KOLg [(0145, then the next nicroinstruction address, depending on the value of
the flag C will be located in column K0140 or K0141.

12? is a conditional branch based on the contents of flag 2. It is the sane as
the branch in accordance with the contents of flag C, but depends on the value of
the flag 2.

He shall consider the conditional branches in accordance with the contents of the
K4 K7 buses and the instruction register. The data on the K4 ... K7 buses, a
part of the current nicroinstruction address and several bits of the code on the

UA buses are used to generate the next nicroinstruction address in accordance with
the contents of the K1. K7 buses. The data stored in the instruction register.

part of the current nicroinstruction address and several bits of the code on the
UA buses are used to generate the next nicroinstruction address in accordance with

- 181 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the instruction register BK. The characteristics of these branches are given
below.

IPR is a conditional branch in accordance with the contents of the instruction .
register ax. The [no ... 0A2 buses are used to specify the row of the next micro-
instruction address, which is found in the current group of row addresses defined
by the contents of buses HA7 and HA3. Four bits stored in the BK instruction regis-
ter are used to specify the colunn address of the next nicroinstruction.

11.1.. is a conditional branch in accordance with the left hits of the instruction
register. Buses 0A0 ... U are used to specify the row address of the next
nicroinstruction, which is ound in the current group of row addresses, defined

by the contents on the HA7 and HA8 buses. The contents on the RR; and 11:3 are used
to specify the colum address of the next nicroinstruction.

ml. is a conditional branch in accordance with the right bits of instruction regis-
ter RE. The intonation on the 0A0 and U buses is used to specify the row ad-
dress of the next nicroinstruction. which a located in the current group of ad-
dresses of the row defined by the contents of the My and HA3 buses. The infor-
mation on the no and RR buses is used to specify the address of the colunn of

the next nicroinstructio .

1?)! is a conditional branch in accordance with buses KI. ... [7 and the loading of
the instruction register RI. The data on buses 0A0 and 0A1 are used to specify
the row address of the next nicroinstruction which is located in the current group
of row addresses deternined by the infornation on buses HA6 Has. The code on
the IQ, K7 buses is used to specify the column address of the next nicroinstruc-
tion. Moreover, the intonation fron the K0 ... K3 buses is written into the ins-
truction register using the leading edge of the sync pulse train.

He shall analyze the flag control functions. The type of flag control functions
in the nicroprocessor controller is selected depending on the signals at the four
input buses, designated UFO W3.

The data at the input is stored in the P flip-flop during the low level sync series
("0"). The contents of the P flip-flop are loaded into the C and/or 2 flip-flop
based on the leading edge of the synchronization pulse.

562 sets the C and 2 flags in accordance with the P input (rewrites the signal from
the input F). The value of the 1' input is assigned to both flags.

812 sets the 2 flag in accordance with the P input. The value of the 1’ input is
assigned to the flag 2. The C flag does not change.

STC sets the c flag in accordance with the 1' input. The value of the F inpu-: is
assigned ot the flag C. The 2 flag does not change. ~

acz stores the c and 2 flags. The value of the C and 2 flags does not change.

The flag feed control functions given below define the value of the signal which
is fed out to the "flag output" line Pg.

-182-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FPO feeds "0" to the output Pg. A "0" is set at the Fv output.

PFC feeds the c flag to the 1? output. The contents of flag C is produced at the
P output.

n2 feeds flag 2 to the 1", output. The contents of flag z appears at the
Fv output.

7P1 feeds the value "1" to the R, output. 'A "l" is set at the output.

We shall analyse the load function and the interrupt gating. The signal corres-
ponding to the multiprocessor controller load function is fed to the input bus for
loading the nicroinstruction, m. If the “1" level appears on the nicroinstruc-
tion load bus, then with the appearance of the leading edge of the sync series
pulse, the data is loaded fron the to ... K7 buses into the nicroinstruction
address register (M). The contents of the 11, ... K7 buses are loaded into the
nicroinstruction address register flip-flop with the mo ... HA3 outputs, while
the contents of the So 13 buses are loaded into the nicroinatruction address
register flip-flops by the HA“ ... HA7 outputs. The highest order digit HA8 of
the aicroinstruction address register is set to "0". In this case, the digits of
the aicroinstruction address register specify one of 16 possible column addresses
by means of outputs HA0 M3. Correspondingly, the sicroinstruction address
register bits free the outputs of HA1 ... HA7 specify one of the first 16 ton
addresses. The interrupt enable gating is fed free the nicroprocessor controller
to the corresponding output line, designated as the 881’. The active state (high
level) is set on the line in the case where upon the ICC branch instruction control
is transfered to calm ((0515.

Usually, the signal free the 831’ [interrupt enable gating] bus of the nicro-
processor controller is fed to the input SR? bus of the priority interrupt con-
troller (BPP). The priority interrupt controller can respond to the interrupt
by feeding a "0" level out to the RS [row address enable output] of the nitro-
processor controller, which blocks the feed of the next selected row address from
the nicroprocess controller. Then, during the feed-out of the new address of the

avoiding the nultiprocessor controller, sonething which sakes it possible for the
nicroprogran to shift over to the input of the interrupt processing program. The
changed row address which is translitted to the address lines of the nicroinstruc-
tion senor-y, does not influence the contents of the nicroinstruction address
register. Thus, the next branch function will mloy the row address in the
nicroinstruction address register, and not the changed row address. We vill note
that the load function always blocks the branch functions on the 0A0 ... 0A6 buses.
however, it does not block the output enable for the contents of the instruction
register to the no ... all: buses as well as the receive enable in the instruction
register from the contents of the 1.4. K7 buses when the ICE and m: functions
respectively are present on the UA buses. Horever, enabling of the interrupt gating
and all of the flag control functions are not inhibited via the nicroinstruction
load bus/

The Central Processor Unit (CPU). This unit takes the fore of a two-bit processor
section of a data processor; it has (.0 types of nicroinstructions and provides for

- 183 -
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOB OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

the execution of the following functions: arithmetic operations in a complentary
binary code, All), on, ROI and exclusive OR logic functions, positive (+ l) and
negative (- l) incrensnts, shifts to the left and to the right, checking e word,
portion of a word or single bit for "0", and generating accelerated carry signals.
The block diagram of the CPU (Figure 3.66) includes the arithmetic logic unit
(ALB), the fast-access memory (Ra. ... R9, T), a storage register - the accumulator
(AS), the memory address register (RA) and the microfunction decoder. The CPU has
three types of input data buses (111, no; V1, V0; K1, lo), and tvo types of output
data buses (A1 A0; DI, Do) uith three stable states. He shall analyse the opera-
tion of a CPU uhich performs the arithmetic, logic and register functions of a two
bit microprogram central processor.

 
   
 

  

m m
'iiiy

   
   

Figure 3.64. Block 'diagram of the central processor unit (9891302
integrated circuit).

Key: 1. Output buffer;
2. Hamory address register;
. Accumulator;
Arithmetic logic unit;
Multiplexer A;
Multiplexer B;
. Hicrofunction decoder;
. High speed registers R0 . .. I. ‘1‘ (sow) [fast-access
store];
. Shift to the right output.

0 “NOW?“
0

-134-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Data fra exteer eourcee (peripherele, manor-ice) ie
fed to the ca: via one of three input bueee. Data are
trane-itted from the CPU to peripherele via one of two
output bueee. The data are etored ineide the CPU in one
of eleven regietere of e faet-acceee etore (9020) or in
an accuulator regieter. Data ie fed fro- the input
hueee, the regietere and the eccmuletor to the arith-
netic logic unit through two internal nultiplexere, A
and B. The additional inpute and outpute eerve to
propagate the carry, ehifte and eelection of e nicro-
instruction. The echenatic ey-bol for the CPU ie ehown
in Figure 3.65 while the deeignetion of the leede ie
given in Table 3.37. The infatuation exieting on the
eewen input hue linee for the nicroinetructione, deeig-
nated To u, are decoded ineide the CPU for the
eelection of the arithnetic logic unit functione, the
generation of the feet acceee etore eddreee ee well ee
for the control of multiplexere A and B.

 

The input bue H ie intended {or tranenitting data tron

Figure 3.65. circuit the peripheral Iain mory to the CPU. The data are
eynbol for the CPU fed fro- bue a through the internal mltiplexer to
(K589K02 1c) and the the erithnetic logic mit input. The input hue 3 ie
deeignation of the intended for trenenitting date fron the peripheral

leede. input-outputayetene to the CPD. Data are eleo fed iron
(8“ Table 3.37 hue b to the input of the aritl-etic logic unit through

the nultiplexer, but independently of hue H. The
breakdown into two bueee providee tor relatively low
loading of the nanory bueee even in the cue where a
large umber of input-output peripherele are connected
to bue B. In another ueage variant, the input bueee B can be connected by
external wiring to one of the output bueee to obtain a ehift by eeverel hite
operation (for exanple, by one byte). In thie caee. the input-output unite are
switched by external circuite to the )1 inpute.

for key] .

The feet-acceee etore containe ll regietere, deeignated ee 80 39 and T. The
signal fro- the feet-acceee etore output ie fed through an internal multiplexer to
the input of the erithnetic logic unit, and in turn, tron the output of the arith-
netic logic unit to the faet-acceee etore input.

There ie an independent regieter, the eccueulator. to etore the reeulte of arith-
netic logic wit operationa in the CPU. The accumlator output ie coupled through
an internal nultiplexer to the arithmetic logic unit input, and noreover, the out-
put of the accumulator ie connected to an output buffer (having three etatee) for
output to the 1) output bue. The D bue ie ueually enployed to trenenit date to
the external nein senory or to input-output peripherele.

Hultiplexere A and B eelect one of the two eritluetic logic unit inpute
depending on the data on the nicroinatruction bue. The date on bue M. the output
of the faet-acceee etore and the eccuaulator are fed to the inpute of uultiplexer A.

-185-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

TAIL! 3.37 Deeiggtion of the CPU leede

 

 

 

Type of
Contacte! Deeignetion Function Output
1.2 V0, V1 External bue inpute -
3,4 R0, R1 necking bue inpute -
3,6 x, Y Accelereted cerry output M etetee
7 co Gerry output Three etetee
8 SPO shift to the right output The eene
9 891 Input for the ehift to the right -
10 81 Corry input -
11 VA Addreee eneble input -
12,13 ‘1’ A0 Memory eddreee output Three etetee
14 Co-on ‘
15.. .17 P6...“ Hicroinetruction code input -
26...27 P3...Po The use '
18 8 Synchronieetion input
19, 20 no, 0‘ lnfornetion output Three etetee
21, 22 H1, “0 lntornetion input -
'23 VD Dete enable input - -
28 Power -

Note: The output end input dete et the X, Y, Pond? leede ie repreeented in e
direct code, end et the remaining leede, in eg inveree code. The high level
voltage correeponde to e logi’c‘ “l".

___—__—.__—_——_————_————

The dete of hue B, the eccmletor end the hue K dete ere fed to the inpute of
eultiplexer B. The dete et the eelected input of multiplexer B in elveye
logically multiplied by the contente of the comeponding K input to provide
for flexible neeking end bit checking cepebility.

The eritl-etic logic wit ie cepeble o! perforning erith-etic end logic operetione.
including binery eddition in e coqlenentery code, #1 end -1 operetione, bitviee
logic eddition end eultiplicetion, bitviee "exclueive non" operetione end bitviee
logic cowlenenting. The reeulte 6f en eritlhetic logic unit operetion cen be
written into the eccuuletor or into one of the feet ecceee etore regietere. To
perfore ehift to the right operetione, there ere individuel "right ehift input"
(891) end "right ehift output" (90) leede. The cerry input end output linee

-186-

FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY
(81 and so) are intended for providing normal series carry propagation. The data
at the So and SPO outputs are fed through two buffers, which have three states
each, where output either to 80 or only to SP0 is enabled. Moreover, the standard
outputs for the high speed carry circuits x and Y make it possible to obtain
a high speed carry for any word length.

The capability of masking the arithmetic logic inputs by means of bus K consider-
ably increases the universality of the arithmetic logic unit. During nonarithmetic
operations, the carry circuits are used to obtain the logic assembly (OR) of all of
the word bits for the purpose of analyzing the operation result for "0" or of one
of the registers (for example. the Al? or can microinstructions).

Thus, the CPU provides for flexible checking of bit contents. Bus K is also
used during arithmetic operations to ask portions of the field being processed.

A supplemental function of bus K is the transmission of constants from the micro-
program to the CPU.

A separate aritlnetic logic output goes to the memory address register (RA) and
from it, to the output bus A through an output buffer with three states. Usually,
register RA and bus A are used for transmitting addresses to a peripheral main
memory. The reg‘ierer IA and bus A may also be used for selecting s peripheral
when performing input-output operations.

A microinstruction is fed to the CPU 1? 'inputs in each microcycle. The micro-
instruction decoded, the multiplemers select the operands and the srithmatic logic
unit performs the requisite operation. Using the negative edge of the sync pulse,
the result of an arithmetic logic unit operation is either placed in the accusu-
lator or written into the selected register of the fast-access store. Horeover.
the result of an arithmetic logic unit operation is written into the RA register
in some operations. A new nicroinstruction can be fed in only using the positive
edge of the sync pulse. In the case of external control of the CPU sync signal,
the sync pulse may be omitted in the microcycle, and since the carry, shift and
high speed carry circuits are not synchronised, their outputs may be used in this
cycle to perform a masher of data checks in the accusmlator and the fast access
store. The contents of the registers do not change in the case of operations in
the absence of the sync signal.

 

TABLE 3.38 Hicroinatrion P-Grogp formats

 

      
 

Key: 1. Group of functions (F-group).

   

   

-——-¢OO°
—-oo-oo

     

«acumen—o
u—o—o-gu—O

 

-187-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3.39 The Hicroinstructiion R-Group

Poi-mt 'lhe contents of the microinstruc-

tion being executed are defined by
the functional group (P group) and
the register group (I! group) which
are specified by the P bus code;

 

      

 

R. o 0 the F group is determined by the
R. o 1 three high order digits of the
2' = (I, data (Pl..:.Y6), while the R group
R: o o is deter-med by the four lov order
I R. o I bits (Po...P3).
R. l 0
z: .1) 5 ll group 1 includes the registers
R.‘ o I 30...”, T and as, and is desig-
T 0 0
‘c o I nated by the symbol Ru. 3 group 2
and R group 3 contain only the
l I T l I 0.. | I o register T and the accumulator
AC I o I I (AS). The formats and coding of
the P and 3 groups are given
3 36 g g | g I: in Table 3.33 and Table 3.39

 

respect ively .

Key: 1. Register group (R-group);

2. Register. M additional nicroinstructions

relative to the result in the case
of "0" and "l" at the inputs of the
K bus are given when considering
the CPU microinstruction following
the overall functional description of an operation. In the majority of cases,
setting the signals at the K bus inputs to "l" and "0" is either the accessing
or the absence of accessing of the accumlator respectively in the given micro-
operstion. ‘l‘he menonic symbols for the nicrooperations are included in each
description as reference data. A masonic my be used as a nicroassenbler
language. A listing of nicroinstruction is given in Table 3.1.0. The execution
of microinstructions for the "all zeros" and "all o'nes" states of the It bus is
illustrated in Table 3.41.

An example of the decoding of the instruction indicated in Table 3.40, for the
case of the P group - 0 and R group - l: logic multiplication of the accuanla-
tor contents by the K bus data, the addition of the result to the contents of
register Rn and by the value at the carry input 81. as well as the writing of the
results into Ru and the accuaulator.

An exanple of the decoding of an operation in accordance with the mnemonics In
and ALR, indicated in Table 3.101: for the case of the ILR mnemonic and the K - 00
state of the K bus, the addition of the contents kg to the value at the 31 input
and the loading of the result into the accmaulator and Rn; for the case of the ALB
menonic and the K - ll state of the K bus, the addition of the contents of the
accmulator and $1 to the contents of Ru and the placement of the result: in the
accumulator and Rn. If the accuaulator address is indicated in the address portion
of the nicroinstruction, then the accumulator contents are shifted one bit to the
left. The circuit for combining central processor units together (K5891K02

-188-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm 3.60 Liatin of cm ﬂicreinatructiona

 

 

 
   
  

Instruction "lam-n

   
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

F-gr
R ACA cemao
ATM A -cn nvI II A l
“1.3M .mﬂnvlhwwmxoh . ' ' '

l 'K R.-PA n eta-m

I 2 x‘xlmnka . ﬁixﬁ-
a vauunm»n

2 % ‘ﬁﬁﬂ‘liﬁfi
a Min—no.3.”
I 3 mm 4

a 2 JIM/Imﬁiar'
a AT+IBAKI+c.-.Ar
l clv RAAKAK,*CO RnA ”AB-‘R

I 2 CVMMCAM MAAC -4!
a china/mpg. ATA an .n '
I c.v R.AK)~C. KAR 9R

s 2 CVMA -c KA -a’
a ‘C:V3ATA J. KAAT-oAT
I Cw ACAK ~Co' R V(MAK)~R

I 2 VACA -. ATV ACAK)‘
3 avgsAKIK-{Qc' Mix/((Mxhar
I v R AAC/CM‘CO R HAG/V04

1 2 avznlAACAK)*cI M'HACAKI-od’
a c.v ATAOAKPC. arms/mar

 

 

 

lip-nuance. autumn-ammo «we. “JIM-die-
_____________._—————-

Note: The 3 indicates an "excluaive NOB operation.

 

integrated circuite) to conatruct devicea having a capacity of 2:. hi
Figure 3.66.

The high speed carry circuit (SUP) ia intended for generating the g1
in the case where it in need jointly with CPU'a. One high speed ca:
and eight CPU'e ate it poaaihle to net up a 16 bit adder. The higl
circuit haa 17 infatuation inputa, 8 inforution ontputa and I own
which ukea it poeeihle to control the output of the highest order I

it to the third atate.

-189-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3.41 The Execution of Hieroinetructione for the "A11 Zeroe" and
"All Ones" state. of the K Bun

 

   
   

      
        
     
   
 
 

 

 

"~94 . R.-I+C.-o DSM
n-" In-" M—I-w. -Ai‘ LDM
Ar—I+c...,4r 00‘

c -14 AC—H-c -oR SDR
d4-” Inc—1445M} 80.4
n. GSA a-r+c.-o.4r LDI

 
   
 
      

AC R R
cu.+M;A+c‘-. '
8+AT+c.-AT

  

CNW IMO-0C.

c A, mﬁMAAC-AT
M A AT our

    
      

   

I’LAr CAM C.V(A1'A8)-Co

 

The eche-ntic eyﬁol for the high speed carry circuit (15891!” integrated circuit)
and the deeignetion of its leede ere ehovn in Figure 3.67. The state of eech of
the eight cutpute of the high speed carry circuit ie deecribcd by the following

logic equecion: . -. .
05+t-x.r.+ v.3. '
C. " xlyl + ylyoxo 4' 71702.

.5

c- + 3 " y ex: '1' Vuytxl + Yo't'oxo 4' 707:7“!-

-l90-

I-‘OROFFICIALUSEONLY
7.. 47- 7.x + mm. + New + N.V.v.x. +

+ Y hm"?!

C. + 8 - wt. + Y.Y.X.+ yeyuygxo + Yeyoylytxl +
+ de everlyoxo + '07 .7071,“ch

.———'
c + 6 - Y Xe+ YeYeXe + YsVeYJo-O- Yuyd'ovuxo +
'+ may 5am. + Amway. m- v.v.v.v.v.v.6..

- Y Y Y Y Y x Y Y Y Y +
c'++r7.v.vt3'x3’5t. 3, Maxim: vzrzvzvt’éwa. +
+ v.v.v.v.v.r.v£.. _

if the "1" level ie net at the RP [harry reﬁieterﬂ input;
cu + 3 in the third etete, it the 'f0”__1evel eppeen at the RP inpgt.

"MI ”08... ‘- - -u

 

Pigure 3.66. Schenetic shoving the coﬁining of m'e (0891102 integnted
circuits) to conetruct devicee having 2:: digits.

Key: 1. Henry dete bus;
2. high orde: bite, 31...?“

-191-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 3.66, continued]:

3. TsPtl - central processor unit 1 [CPU]]:
6. CP02;
5. Shift to the right;
6. Low order bits, 90.. .93;
7. Carry output;
8. Constant or east tron the nicroprocessor controller;
9. Heuory data bus;
10. External bus. . .. .- . q. _. _.__ H. .____n
Designation of nigh Speed Carry
' Circuit
Pins ‘3‘. N Lw.1

      

Figure 3.67. Schematic synbol tor the high speed carry circuit
(K589IXO3 integrated circuit) and the designation of
the loads. [80? - high speed carry circuit].

Key: 1. Designation;
2. Function;
3. Inputs for the group carries;
6. 0,.3 carry enable input;
5. Two states;
6. Carry input;
7. Col-nu;
8. Three atatea.

A variant for high speed carry circuit uee (K589IK03 integrated circuit) in
conjunction with a CPU (K5891102 integrated circuit) is shown in Figure 3.68.

The nultilode buffer register (H38) is a universal eight bit register, consisting
of D flip-flops and output buffer circuits with three stable states. It has

built-in selective logic and an independent separate D flip-flop for generating
a central processor interrupt query. One or aversl Hmn's can be used to realize

-l92-

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
Pigure 3.68. 311.91” of high speed carry circuit enlicetioue (K589m3
integreted circuit) in conjunction with cum (”89802
integreted circuite) .

Key: 1.
2,3.

OPNOU9

Ccrry iron the nicroproceuor controller;
m";

. Carry to the iicroproceeeor controller;

. Carry regicter;

. High speed cerry circuit;

. Carry fro- the nicroproccuor controller;

Carry to the nicroproceuor controller;

. CPU'e.

-l93-

FOIOMGALUSEONLY
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 3.69. Schenetic sy1i>ol for the anti-ode buffer
register (£589an integrated circuit) and
the designation of the leads. [an I nultinode

buffer register] .

 

Figure 3.70. Block diagram of the ultinode buffer register (K589111112
integrated circuit).

any types of interfaces and auxiliary units, such as simple data registers,
buffer registers with data gating, multiplexers, bidirectional bus drivers,
interruptible input-output channels, etc. The circuit schematic sy-bol of an

m (0891312 integrated circuit) is shown in Figure 3.69, while the designation
of its leads is given in Table 3.62. We shall anslysa an operation in accordance

with the block diagram of it show in Figure 3.70.

in intonation D ﬂip-flops repeat the input data at the high logic level of
tl-e input signal 8, and the input intorution is written in at the low logic

- 191.-

mthSEONLY
TABLE 3.102 Designation of the Hultinode Buffer Register leads

 

 

Duis- Type
Pine nation Function of Level
Out-
put
1, I13 vxl, W2 Chip selection inputs - I ”0" (n1);
"1" (V12)
2 VB Mode selection input - ~
3. S, 7, 9, 16, 18, D;...Dg lnfornation inputs - -
20, 22
lo, 6, 8, 10, 15, Q1...Qg Information outputs Three -
17, 19, 21 states
11 8 strobe input - ”l"
12 - Co-on - -
14 R Zero set input - "0"
23 2F Interrupt query output No -
otates
2’0 - Power - -

 

level of the signal at the 8 input. The outputs of each information flip-flop
are connected to the inverting output buffer awitches, which have three stable
states. The internal bus for data output (VD) gates each output buffer. Vixen
voltage is present on the VI) bus, the output buffers are unblocked and the data is
fed to the output of the corresponding output data line (Q1, Q3).

The inputs VII and VI: control the chip selection. when a "0" voltage is present
at the Vt; input and a ”1" appears at the vxz input, the unit selection is enabled.

The VR (node melect) input defines one of two operating nodes. when there is a
"0" signal at the node select input, the device operates in an input node. The
output buffers are turned on in this node. When a unit is selected. the right-in
control is realized using the 8 input signal. men there is a "1" signal at the
node select input, the device operates in an output node, in this case, the output
buffers are turned on regardless of the selection of a unit. mus, the writing of
interaction into the register and output fron the register are accomplished in
accordance with the following formulas:

zp . c A or V 371' A at; ADP (write into the register)
VD - at v E; V 31:; (infornation output fro. the register).
- 195 -

MMLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3.71. Bxaaplea of nultinoda buffer ragiater applicatioua (K589le '
integrated circuit).

a. Input buffer;

1:. Interrupt controller;

c. Output buffer;

a. Bidirectional data tnmiaaibn.

Kay: 1.” Input infatuation;
. Hulti-oda buffer regiatet;
. Output infatuation;
. Gating input;
. 8yaten input;
. Inhalation buul;
To the priority interrupt or nicroptoceaaor controlleta;
. 8yatea raaet;
. Supply voltage - 5 volta;
10,11. Unit aelaction enable;
12. Intonation buaea;
l3. Byaten output;
11.. Syatan intetrupt.

DONOUC‘UN

-196-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
33am- §§§3§§§§g ;

E
_ ,'

 

#

Figure 3.72. Block dieg-ren of the priority interrupt controller “589!th
integrated circuit).

l'l - Interrupt blocking flip-flop;
1'2 - Interrupt flip-flop;

Key: 1. Priority coder end interrupt query flip-(lope;
2. Current etete flip-flop;
3. Priority circuit.

The interrupt query flip-flop eervee to generete the interrupt query eignel in the
proceeeor eyeten. When the eyetu ie eet to the initiel etete hy the "zero net"
109 level eignel, the interrupt query flip-flop ie eet to "l", i.e., the given
device doee not require an interrupt. sinulteneouely. the regieter R ie eet to
"0” by thie one eignel. The interrupt query flip-flap output ie joined together
vie en OR to the output of the device eelect logic circuit. It ie ecu-ed thet
the use ie in the interrupt etete when e "0" correeponde to the output of the 2P
[regieter entry], which netee it poeeihle for e direct connection to the query
input (the active one ie lou level) of the priority interrupt unit. “an working
in the input node (i.e., the low level eppeere at the node eelect input), the
input eignel s writee the infornetion into the dete regieter end eete the inter-
rupt query flip-flop to “0". The interrupt query flirflop ie eet to "1" given
the condition thet e device ie eelected (en interrupt eignel ie genereted in the
IMJOy at the 2? output). Thue, the interrupt conditione ere ee follow: 21’ -
- an A at; V C . lhe interrupt eignel reeet ie
ecconpliehed in eccordence with the folloving fomle:

 

Regieter entry reeet - R V BR1ABK2 - § V an V Bit—2

-l97-

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Priority level input -
Priority level eelection input -

Interrupt output Open
collector
Synchronization input -
Interrupt enable gating'input -
Interrupt lode output Opon
collector
Enable input for reading the -
interrupt code
Canon -
Interrupt group enable output -
Interrupt group enable input I‘wo etetee
Interrupt inhibit inpute -
Write enable input -

Power -
To determine interrupt queries, the priority interrupt
unit is gated at the and of the execution of each
instruction. At this point in tine, if an interrupt

interrupt queries are fed from the output of the pri-
ority coder to the priority comparator. This value is

 

Figure 3.73. Schematic priority level of the priority interrupt controller
designation of the which is stored in the current state register). A
priority interrupt query, which is received during the action of the
controller (K589IK14 interrupt gating (83?), in conjunction with the sync
integrated circuit). pulse causes the interrupt contirnation flip-flop to

be set in the "active interrupt" state (during the

interrupt inhibit flip-flop to the "I" state. Based on the PR signal, an interrupt

instruction is generstted in the processor which can trans-it the control directly
to the input of the interrupt servicing routine.

The microprogram which is usually a part of this routine reads the signal level
interrogating the interrupt iron the KPo ... KP; interrupt code output buses. The
inferna’ion on the query level which is stored in the interrupt query nemnry can
be transmitted to any of the input information buses of the processor in accordance
with the signal fed to the RSCh [interrupt code read enable] input. when the

query level, in accordance with which the subroutine address corresponding to this

level is generate . The exiting of such a nacroprogran is usually accompanied by
the restoration of the previous contents of the current priority uenory.

The interrupt group enable input and the interrupt group enable output can be used
when connecting several priority interrupt controllers in series, where each pri-
ority interrupt controller can inhibit the interrupt for all subsequent controllers.

The interrupt confirmation flip~flop is set to the active state (low level) by the
positive leading edge of the sync pulse, if the following conditions are net:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a) The active query level (2P0...2P7) is higher than the current status Po.. .92;
b) A "1" signal is present at the 83? [interrupt enable gating] input;

c) A "1“ signal is present at the to [interrupt group enable output] input;

d) The interrupt inhibit flip-flop is reset.

The interrupt output signal asynchronously sets the interrupt inhibit flip-flop to
the "1" state and delays the query signals in the interrupt query net-cry until the
aending of new intonation on the current priority (Po.. .Pz, VP [priority level
selection] in accordance with the 9.2 [write enable input] signal) in the current
priority register. The interrupt inhibit flip-flop is reset upon the conpletion
of the sending operation. During this process, there can be a "l" at the inter-
rupt group enable output only in the case where the following conditions are net:

a) There is s ”l" at the no input;

b) The current priority does not belong to the given group of levels (is deternined
in accordance with VP [priority level selection] 913ml);

c) There are no interrupt queries at the given level.

The interrupt code outputs 00...”: and the interrupt
Pl take the fern of an open collector, sonsthing which
lakes it possible to co'nbine then.

The noninverting and inverting bus drivers are parallel
bidirectiml signal drivers for the control of the
trunks (buses) in digital conputers and thke the torn of.
four-channel switchers, which have one bus in each
channel just for the reception of the data, one bus just
for the output and one bidirectional feedout and receive
bus. The intonation passes through noninverting bus
drivers without being changed, and is inverted in
inverting bus drivers. The schenatic syﬂols for the
noninverting bus driver (1589016 TC) and inverting bus
driver (K589AP26 ac) are shown in Figures 3.71., while the
designation of their leads is given in Table 3.“ and
Figure 3.76. circuit their block diagrans in Figure 3.75.

schenatic designa-

tione of the W Data output control logic is provided to control the

[bus driver] operating node and direction of data transnission in

(1689016 10) and noninverting and inverting bus drivers; this logic is

the 8h?! [invert- desgined around two dual input AND logic gates. The

 

ing bus driver drivers provide for the transnission of intonation when
(KSd9AP66 1c). there is an "0" at the chip selection input, V1. In

the case of a "1" signal at the chip select input. the
drivers are in the turned-off state and the outputs have

-200-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3.75. Block diagrsns of the bus driver (”89016 to) and inverting
hue driver (”89026 to).

ahi'gh output inedance (the third state). men an "0" signal is present at the
-VK input, the data output via the c and B buses is controlled by the signal at
the control input for the data feedout, UV. If a "0" signal ie present at the UV
input, then data trsnsniseion is turned on Iran the A inputs to output 3. In
the case of a "1" signal at the UV input, the data is transnitced Eran the 3
inputs to the c outputs.

TABLE 3.“. Desi tion of the heads of the Invert and Noninvert Bus Drivere

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pins Designation Function 32;“? Level
1 V! Chip selection input - "0”
2, 5, ll, 14 C1...“ Intonation output ‘lhree states -
3, 6, 10, 13 v1...“ Bidirectional data trans- The sane -
nission inputs/outputs
lo, 7, 9, 12 A1...“ Intonation inputs - -
8 - Cannon - -
15 UV Control input for information .
output - -
16 - Power - -
- 201 -

POIOPI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.104, continued]:

Datn Transmission Logic

 

:ic State at

 

: Inputs
Direction of Data Tranuiuion
:__ IN
0 Pro. input A to output 3
1 Fran input B to output C
1 no tunniuion .

 

Schmtic Circuit Symbol: for TIL-Circuits:

KW "Am-CR "csdmutma nhcxu'k'

 

M 11.:
o y

m 11.0 m. 3.1.:
s
1

l
2
u I)
"IIP'F 'IP'I "

Fdrd Fiﬁ”- F. F; F A.‘
II II

   
 

     

'IFuI'IW'

FﬂﬂI—uﬂvﬂﬁrx-IFM...

    

 

  

2 so...

unu nmwm

X XXX

M11."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

..-.—.————.

 

”all.”

 

  

 

  

Eﬂrﬁuﬂm—
I A

I

-204-

MOMMONLY
mrw‘
h: 3!.”

 

guinlqnll

   

 

 

M 1!.” M 3.1.”

 

- 206-

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

M11.”


~209-'

FOIOMGALUSIONLY
WW
“wrm
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

l-‘OROFFICIALUSEONLY

 

map has

mm bum Ia.

 

   

(pm

-212-

momaALussomv

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080030-5
-213-

FOIOWICIALUSIONLY

   

 

“am _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

g
.I- .nmmjn

     

 

Ml!”

In!»

 

-21é-

FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

~215 -
MMMMONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500080030-5
1.

2.

3.

10.

11.

12.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bukreyev 1.1L, Mansurov 3.11., Goryachev V.I., 'Mikroelektronnyye skheay tsifro-
vykh ustroystv" [Microelectronic Circuits of Digital Devices"], Hoscow.
Sovetskoye Radio, 1973, pp 7-50, 99-106.

Drozdov Ye.A. , Kansrnitskiy V.A., Pyetibratov A.P.. "Blektronnyye tsifrovyye
vychislitel'nyye nashiny" ["Blectronic Digital Conputers"), ﬂoscw, Voyenizdat.
1968, pp 73-120.

Papernov A.A.. "Logicheskiye osnovy teifrovykh neshin i programirovaniye"

["The Logic Principles of Digital Computers and Progreuing"], Moscow. Ranks,
1968.

Nnmov Yu.Ye.-, "Integral'nyye logicheekiye skhesty" ["Logic Integrated Circuits"),
Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1970.

Baliyev K.A.. Karnazinskiy A.N., Korolev ILA” "Tsifrovyye integral'nyye skhely
na HDP transistorskh" ("Digital Integrated Circuits Using ms Transistors"],
Moscow, Sovetsk0ye Radio, 1971, pp 15-27, 252-290, 355-362.

Crawford R.. "Skhennyye prineneniye MOP trsnsistorov" ["Circuit Applications of
MOS Transistors"), Translated from the English, Edited by 11.8. Sonin, Hoecov.
Mir, 1970, pp 9-21, 106-111, 126-134.

Shebanin V.V., bukhin A.A., Tonov V.I., ”Integral'nyye tunktsionel'nyye uzly
dlya zaponinayuehchikh ustroystv" ["Punctional Integrated Circuits for
nannies"), Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1976, pp 7-27 (the series "Blementy
radioelektronnoy apparetury" ["Radioelectronic Bquipoent Conponentﬂ], No. 3).

Akuchenko N.A., Sokolova 6.11.. "Tendentsii razvitiya uponinayushchikh
ustroystv" ("Developmental Trends in Memories"], mama WA“
TEXHNIKA [FOREIGN ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING), 1974, No. 3. '

Scares F.G., Krayzmer L.P., 'Toluprovodnikovyye integral'nyye :apo-inayushchiye
ustroystva" ("Semiconductor Ic Henories"], Leningrad, Energiys. 1973.

Nut. "Hikroprorseseory i tekhnologiya integral'nykh skhss" [Microprocessors end
Integrated Circuit Technology"], IIIER [PROCEEDINGS OF THE 11:32], 1976. No. 6,
pp 5-11.

Ferkhofshtsdt, "Otsenks tekhnologii nikroprotsessornykh BIS" ["An Evaluation
of Microprocessor LSI Technology"), 'I‘IIER, 1976, No. 6, pp 5-11.

Shilin V.A., "Tsifrovyye elenenty i ustroystva na priborakh s zaryadovoy
evysz'yu" ["Digital Conponents and Devices Using Charge Coupled Devices"],
ZARUBEZHNAYA BIEKTRONNAYA mm, 1976, No. 5. pp 3-4, 147-81..

Grinkevich V.A.. 'Mikroprotsessornyye konplekty BIS" ["LSI Microprocessor 8ets"],

ELEKTRWNAYA mm. 833. 6. mom [ELECTRONICS ENGINBBRD'G.
SERIES 6. HICROBLBCTRONICS], 1976, Vol. 5, No. 2.

-216-
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
13. Val'kov VJL. Il'yunhenko Yu.u., ”‘ruifrovyye integral'nyyc skinny, nikro-
protsensory i nikro-EVH" [”Digital Integrated Circuits, Hicroprocuooro and

Hicroconputero"), Edited by V.H. Prolcyko. Moscow, Sovetnkoye India, 1977,
pp 69-60 (”Electronicn" Library").

14. Alekaenko A.G., "Osnovy Iikroelnktroniki" [”uicrocloctronico W“ll"].
Moscow, Sovetskoyo Radio Publiéhnn. 1977.

15. Al'tnan I... "Perspoktivy primeniyn odnokriatnl'nykh nikroprotuuorov"

["Pronpoctn for the Application of Single Chip Microprocnuonﬂ, mm.
1974. No. a. m) 26-34.

-217-
FOIOFHGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER PW" MAW INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

 

6.1. Function and Application

Analog integrated circuits (AIS) are intended for real tine signal processing where
the output infomtion of such an Ic is similar (analogous) to the input signal.
lhe following analog lc'e are treated in this chapter: operational anplifiers;
integrated circuit voltage comparators; integrated circuits which multiply analog
signals; 10's for radio receivers; switching circuits; analog to digital and digital
to analog converter 10's as well as integrated circuit regulators. In contrast to
devices using digital lc's. each analog device has a considerably greater number of
electrical parameters which nake it possible to cone up with a cowlete nodel of it.
Moreover, the application of an analog IC is always specific: a large number of
ultimate operating modes with respect to the power supply, signals and load mast be
specified. In contrast to digital lc's, a certain number of external casponents
must be connected to each analog to where these conponents establish the requisite
transfer function of the device. The major types of analog circuits will be
treated in this chapter and emples will be given for the design of radio equip-
nent assedblies around these circuits.

4.2. Operational Anplifiers

An operational anplifier is an amplifier by means of which one can construct equip-
ment assuablies having parameters which are dependent practically on the properties
of the negative feedback circuit in which it is inserted.

The najor function of an operational anplifier (00) is the construction of circuits
with a fixed gain and precisely synthesized transfer function. 0p ans can be used
to construct the nest diverse hardware: voltage regulators, signal generators.
video anplifiers, active filters, scaling, logarithnic response, differentiating,
integrating and other anplifiers. A standard general purpose anplifier can be

used in 100 to 150 circuit configurations.

The circuits for the first 1c op anps were similar to their discrete prototypes
(with certain limitations imposed by the specific features of the integrated
circuit structure). however, by the end of the 1960's, 10 designers began to
actively use new integrated circuit structures and circuit design approaches to
improve op amp perfornance [1, 2].

Regardless of the complexity of the basic circuit configuration, an integrated
circuit op anp consists of an input differential anplifier, a voltage amplifier,

a DC level shift circuit and an output power amplifier. Depending on the amber

of stages which make the najor contribution to the oversl gain, a distinction is
drawn at the present tine between three state and two stage op amps. ‘l'he op snps
which were developed at first had a three state structure. Beginning in the 1970's,
op anps have been designed using only a two stage configuration in which states 2
and 3 have been combined.

-218.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The first stage of an op amp is designed in a differential amplifier configuration.
A reduction in errors, amplification of the Dc component of the signal and an
increase in the input stage impedance are achieved by virtue of the input stage
operating in a microampere current mode of the emitters. All of the input para-
meters of op amps are governed by the properties of its differential input stage.

The second stage of the first op ups was designed in a simple differential config-
uration. when a two-state amplifier circuit is used, the second state has a canon
emitter (OB) configuration. Besides boosting the gain, the second stage provides
for impedance matching of the input and final stages. In order to eliminate the Dc
voltage component which occurs in an op amp circuit with direct coupling of its
stages, a special DC level bias (shift) circuit is additionally introduced. There
is no special shift circuitry in two stage op amps, since its function is automat-
ically performed by the second stage.

The final (output) stage of an op amp serves to match the high output impedance of
the amplifier stages to a low resistance load, i.e., ukes it possible to obtain a
low output impedance for the op amp. It is usually designed in a push-pull config-
uration operating in either the class A3 or 3 mode. A class A output stage is
sometimes used in very simple op amp circuits.

Operational amplifiers are usually powered from two syametrical supplies which
provide positive and negative output voltage amplitudes which are equal in value.
For the majority of modern op amps, the supply voltages can vary "arbitrarily" in
a rather wide range (frequently from :3 to +15 volts), something which makes’it
possible to construct both economical circuits and amplifier with a large (or
asy-etrical) output signal maplitude. The possibilities for op amp applications
depend on its electrical parameters. More than 30 parameters are needed to com-
pletely specify op amp performance [1-6], where these parameters make it possible
to create a so-called parmsetric model. This model makes it possible to explain
operational nplifier quality without additional testing.

Knowledge of the major parameters of integrated circuit op maps makes it possible
for designers to design a circuit without long term breadboarding and to prevent
op amp operation in an impermissible mode, so as to reduce the probability of
failure. Thus, an exhaustive parmsetric mode allows for the rapid selection of the
requisite type of operational amplifier for a given assembly.

Operational aqlifiers are characterized by the gain, which is equal to the
product of the gains of all of their stages:

Kata) = frwv

‘b‘ml

were Kuhn) is the voltage gain of the op amp without feedback; In is the gain of
an elementary stage;- a: is the frequency and I! is the number of stages.

The DC gain of several integrated circuit op amps reaches 5 . 106, but it falls off
with an increase in frequency. The amplitude-frequency response of an op amp is
composed of the frequency characteristics of the individual stages operating with
various currents and loads. Bach amplifier stage has its own time constant and can
be represented in the r‘form of the equivalent RC network. For this reason, the

~219-

FOI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
me OMCIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6.1. The overall enplitude-frequency (e) and phase-
frequency (b) response for single stage (solid curves),
two-stage (dashed curves) and three stage (dashed and
dotted curves) operational anplifiers.

overall snplitude-frequency response (AChKh) of an op up is approximated in
general forn by a bode plot with several salient points (figure Lla). Each stage
introduces a phase shift of 90‘ at the high frequency; for this reason, b‘hephase
response of an op enp depends on the nu-ber of stages (figure 5.15).

because of the fact that there is a planned phase shift in the signal of 180' at
the output of an op amp for the operation of the feedback loop. the overall phase
shift in en .plifier looped with negative feedback (008) reaches 360‘ at sone
particular high frequency. And if the product of the saplifier open loop gain
tines the negative feedback transnission gain at this frequency enceeds (or is
equal to) unity, then this causes the self-excitation of the circuit.

Stable frequency and pulse transfer characteristics are achieved through the use of
amplitude-frequency response equalization. For this, capacitive negative feedback
loops are introduced which change 'the slope of the aplitude-frequency response of
the closed loop systen down to a rolloff rate of 20 (lb/octave, which character-
izes a stable first order section. A single stage (ultimate phase delay of 90')
would be ideal in terns of op amp stability, but its gain is insufficient (no nore
than 1.000). One equalizing capacitor in all is needed to stabilise a two state
op anp. Three-stage operational e-plifiers can be equalised by using two outboard
capacitors (or two RC networks). It is difficult to stabilise op ups with more
than three stages of anplification without substantially liniting their bandwidth.

An inportant pareneter of op slaps is the input impedance. A distinction is drawn
between two types of input resistances: the signal input resistance, i.e., that
observed between the op anp inputs (the so-called differential input resistance),

- 220-

l-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and the in-phase signal input resistance [coil-on node rejection] (resistance
between the input and grand). The differential input resistance is defined by
the expression:

“in dif ' Allin/51in ' ZOr/Ib I! 201/1“,

where Allin is the voltage change between the op an inputs; Alia is the change in
the input current, 6! is the teqerature potential (at 300 ’K, 01' - 26 av), 15 is
the base current of the input transistor end Iin is the input bias current for the
operational anplifier (taken fro s table of its psraasters).

The in-phase input signal resistnce (Rig ph) is defined as the change in the input
current with the action of an in-phase input voltage:

R '60

in ph ph ill/61in

where A0,}. in is the increments in the in-phase input voltage between the input and
ground.

The input differential resistance falls in a rangeof 10 Kohn to 10 liohn for bipolar
op anps while the in-phase resistance exceeds 100 Mohan. Because of the differn-=
tial input, an op enp anplifies the difference input voltage and should conpletely
suppress the in-phsse voltage. lowever, an op asp does not conpletely suppress the
in-phase signal and thereby introduces an error into the output signal. The
paraneter "in-phase signal suppression factor" (to. sf) [co-onpode rejection
ratio, CHER] reflects this property of an nplifier. It takes it possible to
conpare various types of operational .plifiers and to_also estinate the error
introduced by the op sap, and is defined as the ratio of the op .p voltage gain to
the gain for in-phaae input voltages.

The difference in the base-enitter voltage drops of the input integrated circuit
transistors, and to a lesser extent, the scatter in the noninal values of the
remaining conponents of the operational amplifier lead to the epperance of Dc
voltage at the output in the absence of ensignal at the input. In order to set the
zero level at the op anp output, it is necessary to apply a certain balance (bias)
voltage, Ubias, between the op amp inputs.

All of the above mentioned op anp paraneters depend on tenpersture. The tsnperam;
ture drifts in the bias voltage and the input current differences exert the najor
influence on the error in the function realised by the op amp. The tsuperature
drift take: the for: of a change in the voltage or current with a change in the
ambient tenperature by l- 'c. These changes are superimposed on the input signal,
as a result of which, the error voltage is and, while the error current yields
a voltage drop across the internal resistance of the signal source.

-221-

I’Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All operational anplifiers are designed for an output current (long), which
deternines the ninisua resistance of the load at the noninal output voltage.
Exceeding the given current can cause the op anp to fail.

The output impedance of an operational amplifier is defined by the impedance of
its output stage and amounts to 20 to 20,000 ohss (depending on the circuit design
and the function of the op asp). The output inedance exerts great inﬂuence on
the output signal .plitude, especially when the .plifier operates into a low load
impedance.

As was stated above, an op amp can perforn various functions, which are determined-

by its feedback. A distinction is drawn between basic circuit configurations for
op amps, looped by negative feedback: inverting and noninverting.

In

  

o (b)

Figure 6.2. Basic circuit configurations for operational anplifiers.

a.' Inverting;
b. Noninverting.

In order to simplify circuit design and analysis, the concept of an "ideal" oper-
ational amplifier is introduced, which possesses the following properties: the
open loop gain of the amplifier Ito tends to infinity, the rolloff of its frequency
response is 20 dB/octave, the input impedance of the op amp tends to infinity, the
output inpedance approaches sero and the anplifier does not introduce any errors in
the DC conponent gain.

When an op anp is used as an inverting anplifier (Figure 6.2a), the phase of the
output signal is shifted through 180' relative to the phase of the input signal.

The transfer function of this circuit (when UM,“ U I 0, Ali“ - 0, am I O and
R10“ ' ~) has the fern:

'5: 1 ' "cumin ' -20/22

where 20 is the negative feedback impedance and 22 is the inpedance of the signal
source.

-222-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A noninverting operational anplifier configuration (figure b.2b) is used in those
cases where it is necessary to natch a source having a high inpedsnce to a signal
proceaaing circuit having a low input inpedance. In this case. the phase of the
output signal duplicates the phase of the input signal. The transfer function of
an ideal operational anplifier in a noninverting configuration has the fore:

KII n.i. . uout in 0/22

Since the value of the gain for integrated operational awlifiers falls in a range
of 5 - 103 to 5 . 106, in practice, the error arising in nany cases due to the
idealitstion of this paraneter (In r 0) nay be disregarded. however, one my not
disregard the errors fron the DC couponent shift which occur because of the dif-
ference in the base-uitter voltages of the input tranaiatora and because of the
flow of the input currents Iof the op .9 through the signal source resistance,
since they can even exceed the input signal level.

The input currents (Iin) of operational .plifiers are due to the base bias
currents of the input bipolar transistors (or the leakage currents of the gates

- for operational uplifiers with field effect transistors at the input). The input
currents of bipolar transistors are needed to provide for the operating node
(supply bias) of the input stage and have a value of fron 50 nA up to 5 M.
Operational anplifiera with field effect transistors at the input have input
current: of less than 1 M. (admittedly, in a linited range of tenperatures).

Because of the nonidenticsl nature of the characteristics of the input stage
transistors, the bane currents can differ fro- each other by 20 to 30 percent and
introduce a substantial error even when the signal source resistances are equal.
1he input current difference paranetera (Alia) shows by how nuch one input current
any differ from another. To reduce this fraction of the error. the internal
resistance of the signal source should be chosen as low as possible.

The dynamic characteristics of operational amlifiers are estinted by mane of
two paraneters: the rate of riae of the output voltage vu out and its settling
tine (tug). ‘rhe rete of rise of‘ the output voltage is understood to be the
ratio of the change in the output voltage fron 10 to 902 of its noninal value to
the tine over which this change has taken place, with a stepwise changeiin the
input voltage:

”0 out ' ("0.9 ' uo.J.’/“o.9 ‘ ‘04)

“ﬁne settling the in defined as the tine interval during which the op an output
voltage changes from the tine of the first intersection of the 10 1 level until
the final attaining of the 90 1 level (of the noninsl value) and prinarily
characterizes the pulse stability of an operational anplifier.

- 223-

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By employing idealized operational anplitier characteristics, one can analyze
various op slaps configurations in a simple manner. Idealisation makes it possible
to derive two rules which may be used for the analysis and synthesis of circuits
based on operational anplifiens: 1) No current is taken from the signal source at
the input terminals of the op up (a consequence of the fact that kin + I);

2) The voltage across the inputs of an operational anplifier looped by negative
feedback is practically equal to zero (a consequence of the fact that In + I).

He shall cite two era-plea to illustrate the application of these rules. We shall
analyse the circuit of an adder (Figure b.3a). By using rules 1 and 2, we calcue
late the transfer function at this circuit. tirst of all, since the current from
the signal source is not branched off to the op up input, the an of the currents
of all sources flows through the negative feedback circuit: 11 0 12 + 13 I 10-
Secondly, because of the fact that the voltage across the inputs of an operational
amplifier looped by negative feedback is equal to sero. the voltage at point A is
also equal to zero and the preceding equation for the current can be rewritten in

t e fore:

11.2%,".3. “A:
'11 a; Rs 80

The fact that the output voltage of the operational amplifier, uouto nay be
ueasured both relative to the "rm" ground and relative to ”signal ground"
(point A) has been taken into accounthhere. But in the latter case, this scene
that the output voltage is applied to the feedback resistor through which the
current 10 I ﬂout/ho flows. 1! the nominal value of the resisters are 81 I R: I
I R3 I no, then the circuit operates as an inverting adder:

um - «no/5) (01 + 03 + 03)

He shall not consider the circuit of a logarithnic amplifier (Figure 10.3b). The
p-n junction of a transistor is usually esployed as the elenent having a logarith-
nic response. He shall assure that the voltage across the p-n junction is equal
to Up.“ I K warn), where l’ is a constant and I --n is the junction current.

In accordance with the procedure presented here: 1 No current is branched off to
the op anp input, and for this reason, I“ I Ip-n: 2) Using the "motticial
ground" potential, one can calculate that Iin I Din/k, and consequently, "out I

I up-.. I K Inwin/R). i.e. , the anplifier can take the logsrithn of the input
voltage on a particular scale.

As a result of the idealiaation of operational amplifier parameters, errors occur
when constructing equipment based on than which become less, the closer the para-
neters of the actual op sup are to the ideal. Operational saplifier designers
strive to bring the op up pars-stars close to the ideal ones: to increase the
gain, the input i-pedance, the bandwidth and the response speed. In this case,

«224 -

POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY
Figure «.3. Eagles of operational anplifier circuit configurations.

a. Adder circuit;
b. Logaritlnic anplifier circuit.

efforts are made through the use of new circuit designs and especially, produc-
tion process techniques to reduce the values of the bias voltage, the input cur-
rents and the drift in than as well as the power consr-ption of the device.

An entire series of seniconductor op llpl which can broken down into four groups
has been created as a result of the evolution of the circuit deiign and produc-
tion process solutions: the bulk of the products are general purpose operational
amplifiers which nake it possible to construct squipnent having an overall error
on the order of ll; precision (instruentation) operational nplifiers which have
a very high gain, as well as guaranteed low levels of drift and noise, which makes
it possible to realize assesblies which Operate with an error of no worse than
tenths of a precent. Moreover. the demand is high for operational anplifiers
intended for the construction of wideband uplifiers with a slew rate of nore than
50 V/usec, as well as nicropower op anps which canal-e less than 1 M fron the
power supplies and are designed for use in economical equip-eat (frequently
powered by batteries).

6.2.1. Operational Amplifiers with a 'l‘wo Stage Structural Configuration

The first operational anplifiers of the 140 001, 160 UDS and 153001 types had a
three stage configuration because of the fact that the technology did not at first
nake it possible to obtain high reiistance loads, or good p-n-p transistors. For
three-stage anplifiers, nunerous auxiliary conponents are needed for frequency
equalization. balancing, overload protection at the input and output as well as
protection against flip-flop operation. Achievenents in the field of technology
and circuit design have nede it possible at the present tine to develop opera-
tional .plifiers with a two stage structtn'e, since n-p-n and p-n-p transistors
can be produced in one production process cycle, where these transistors are used
both as an a-plifier and as an active load. M stage op ans operate with lower
supply currents and have an increased gain.

-235-

POROFFIGALUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because of the use of integrated circuit input transistors with a high gain in
such operational saplifiers, the levels of the input currents are reduced. More-
over, the active loads on the anplifier stages, which are used instead of high
resistance resistors do not require large voltage drops to obtain the requisite
operating modes, something which lakes it possible to provide for stable op amp
operation both at low (:3 volts) and high (:15 volts) supply voltages, naintaining
the high gain in this case as well as the output signal snplitude which is pro-
portional to the supply voltages. A reduction in the alder of anplifier stages
down to two also reduces the nuder of salient points in the amplitude-frequency
response curve down to two, and in the final analysis, reduces the nuder of fre-
quency equalization components to a single capacitor.

“No stage operational amplifier circuits are protected against overloads at the
input and output, and sone of then also have internal frequency equalization
components, which makes it possible to reduce the number of outboard couponents
down to a single balancing resistor. All of the op esps treated in the following
are structurally packaged in circular packages with eight leads. The socket con-
figuration of these opartional amplifiers basically conforms to the pin configura-
tion of the lSSUDl op amp. This has been done so that obsolete types of opera-
tional amplifiers can be replaced without doing any additional work on equipment.
The electrical characteristics of operational amplifiers are given in Table 10.1.

The 1530112 General Purpose Operational Amplifier. 0p steps of this type (Figure
lulu) have a couples output stage (transistors VTS, VT6, VT9 and VTlO), which is
powered by the stable current of transistor WI. The base-emitter voltage of
this transistor is controlled by a regulator (transistors m. ”VTlt and resistors
81...“). Transistors VT6 and VTlO have two collectors; one of the transistor
collectors which is shorted to the base, takes the forn of a diode which regulates
the current of the "operating" collectors in a broad range of supply voltages.
The dynanic resistances of the collectors of transistors VT7 and VTll serve as
high resistance active loads for the first stage. Transistor VT8 provides for a
constant bias at the emitter-base junction of transistors VTll and VT? by means of
resistor R7, and it additionally serves as a single inverter in the transition
circuit from the differential output of the first stage to the single ended input
of the second. Resistor R8 is intended to compensate for the bias voltage, which
can be balanced by inserting a variable resistor between pins 1 and S. Transis-
tors VTl3 and Vle, which are connected in a Darlington configuration, form the
second stage, the dynanic load on which is the stable current generator (CST),
which is formed by the open collector output of transistor “'16. Transistor VT16
has two collectors, one of which is shorted to the base, which makes it possible
to effectively stabilise the current of the second collector of resistor of VTl6.
The bias is set at the base of the transistor by noses of the current of the
collectors of transistors V1? and VT3 from the regulator circuit. The second
collector current of transistor VTl6, in passing through the emitter-base jmc-
tions of transistors VTU (in a diode configuration) and VTlS, produces the bias
for the operating point of the output stage in the A! node and powers the second

amplifier stage.
The push-pull output stage consists of an'emitte'r‘follower using an n-p-n tran-
sistor (VT20) and an emitter follower using a composite p-n-p transistor

~226-

l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.0»

n

0.0"

.3

8n

N

A
Md

On

ON

N
can
con

ON
no

 

Nana unseen n83 one: 259: .332 «E5: nae-o: 5x50:

  

no»

08

0.3
ca
2"

on
can

cod

H

N
On
on

no.0
n10
on

oz .0» no»
o6 aé «é
92 92 92
n.2 G 2
u on «2
2 .3 Q:
u can «cu
80.8 83 8..
z. a a6
36 né S
3 8 2
on 2 on
n n3.....~ 1o «6
«.o 2 on
a on :8
2 8 o
u n ...

m.—

 

 

0.5.3.3

 

H5333

 

 

 

 

 

H3339:—

 

 

.. .. .. .. 2.3.5 33:0 28$ 88
on oz on on 33:33.3 .3535 35
. <- Soon
0 on o a a .uoaugaoo nanny-6 3.5
. . . . 3H9» .. 2n:
o n." o «A o a." n on .0933 3mm... uosom 2.3
33> 1&9 am: .33.?»
a o n m use: 33313 Ilia: 33
. . 33> 5M:
n a n .— n H .0930» 9:3 nun-wad: and
50
0:0» . «a
3 on o n .ouQuHE' nae—5 nan-dud: 33
4.. 53H
m. n.— n n Juana-5 guano and: 8.3
ulna
8N 8d 8h 85 .03 .0030?! Han—U8 ANHV
2: 8.” e a Sou 6:. .8535 use: 23
u n4 a n6 8.: 5.: .IU 9.23% 85
A N n n an: .au .63" 33 Ea: a.
86 25 n6 «6 8...; 3.6 96.33 .58 a:
no 8 8 8 2. .u «on :36 8
8 an N o5 pa; .3 .33 33%» g
0.3
2 n 8 an £33345“... 89
unsung. 2.3.50 21—8.. any
can 8" n36.” n3. n4 4: .33 .080
nu. a; 38.50 233 A3
So 2:. n3.» «3% 4a . H .3833 253 5
9;: .9333
on 8 on on 33.6 333» 88 8
n m n a 3.33:?
{ED .0931; 00.3 even as
3333:
no anaemia-h dog—".3003 .1... an.

-227-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 10.1 [continued]:

Paraneters 153m>s 153ml. momno “ﬂui'm' "11 “d "13"
_ '— "— Transistor VT19 perforns the
(1) 2-5 5 ” function of a current limiter;
(2) 5 5° " it turns on when the current
(3) 125 400 250 through transistor VTZO
(4) 35 15 5° exceeds 25 IA. Transistor VT21
(5) 0-50 3 ' is protected against a short
(6) 125 2 5° circuit current in the load by
(7) 9" 70 30 a 50 oh. resistor. Transistor
(8) ' 0'1 ‘50; ‘20” VT12 serves to protect the
(£3; ‘ 1 15 output stage against flip-flop
‘ ' " lode operation. The plot of
(11) 103 200 103 the gain as a function of
(12) 15° "' ' frequency for the 1530M oper-
(13) 5 r ' ational anplifier (Pigure 10.61))
(1‘) 1° ’0 ' is equalized with a single
(15) 5 2 ' capacitor.
(16) 13.5 5 11.5
(17) 15-0 6'0 15-0 An original circuit design as
(13) ' 0'3 3 wall as the use of an active
(19) 1‘0 N0' 1'0 load and an internal regulator
(20) Y” Y“ ‘ have nade it possible to cut
* The value of the short circuit current ‘1“ ““1"“ ”maﬁa“ °£ the
1‘ given; 1530M operational anplifier
** Plus is for a positive output voltage; in h“: (“3". (”5) as con-
Hinue is for a negative output voltage. "M.“ a" 153001 op “'9'
In this case, the range of

in-phase and differential input

voltages has increased, while
the possible range of supply voltages has been reduced down to :3 volts. The '
153002 op anp is protected against short circuits at the output and has a simple
frequency equalization circuit.

The 1531102 op anp is produced in an encapsulated and unencapaulated variant. The
designation of the unsncapsulated variant is nouns-1. Additionally, donestic
industry is producing a nuber of unsncapsulated linear integrated circuits (
Table (0.2).

The 1100007 Operational Anplifier. This type of operational .plifier (Figure 6.6a)
is a simplified variant of the lS3UD2 op up circuit. The 11001107 anplifier has a
couple: input stage, the arna of which are designed in a conplenentary con-on
collector-co-on base circuit configuration using transistors VTl, VT2, VT6 and
VITO. A current difference regulator [2] using transistorsV‘l‘9 and VTlO, the bias
to the bases of which is set by neans of transistors VTS and VTlZ (used as diodes)

is anployed to naintain the output stage ctn'rents constant.
The voltage picked off of the first stage is amplified by the second stage (tran-

sisters ‘1le and VT16, which is loaded into the large internal inpedance of the
stable current generator and the input inpedance of dual emitter transistor VTIB

-228-

FOIOFFIOALUSEONLY
Figure 4.10. The 1530132 operational
amplifier.

a. Basic electrical
schematic;

h. The gain plotted as e
function of frequency.

 

which is connected in parallel with it. The etable current generator is designed
around the dual collector transistor VTlS, which is stabilized by traneistor VTll
used as a diode. The output stage, which operatee in class AB, is designed around
transistors m3 and W210. Transietor VTl7 (ueed as a diode) and transistor “'19
bias the operating point of the output stage treneistor. Transistors “'21 and VT22
are protected against output stage overloading. They turn on bu virtue of the
voltage drop across the resistors ineerted in the euitter-base circuit of the given
transistors. Transistor VTl3 and the second enitter circuit of transistor "18 are
intended to protect the output stage against flip-flop operation. The circuit hee
an internal equalization capacitor (:1 with a noninel value of 30 pt, and for this
reaeon, the aplitude-frequency reeponse of the op sup (Figure 4.61)) is coupletely
equalized. The elope of the anplitude-frequency response (-20 a/oct) and the
constant shift at high frequency thich is equal to 90’ (tigure 6.6c) allow for the
use of the operationel .plifier as a follower without additional frequency equal-
ization couponents (Figure b.6d). To increase the slew rate of the output voltage

-229-

FORWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 10.2 Dnencapsulated Linear Ic's Produced hz Donestic Industg

 

The Encapsulated 1c

 

 

 

 

Designation Major Function Series (For Refer-

ence)

Qperational Amplifiers. Direct Current ﬁlifiers
lZ9N‘l‘lA-l. . .
lZ9lﬂ'lI-l Basic differential amplifier circuit lS9N'l‘l
710mm Operational anplifier 1531M
MOUDlA-l , 1531mm,
MOUDlB-l The sane 15311le
MOMS-l " " 1531102
MOON-l " ” 1W
7600b3-1 . " " 1500131
on
Switches
Hanan-1...
nannv-l Analog voltage switch with control circuit -
NANA-l,
71150234 Differential analog voltage switch -
716101234 Control circuit for electronic switches in -
the 273 series of integrated circuits

716K'l'l-l Dual bipolar chopper for switching analog signals -
763K‘rlA-l... Series integrated circuit chopper lOlll‘l'lA
7631(116-1 lOlK‘l‘lG
K762K‘l'lA-l, Integrated circuit chopper Kl62K‘l'lA,
K762K'l'lB-l KlGZK‘l‘lB

 

up to 10 volt/usec, a provision is nade for reducing the degree of equalization.
Por this, capacitor Cl with a capacitance of 150 pl'd is connected to pin 8 (as
shown in Figure b.6e). The equalization circuit for the op amp consists of one
external variable resistor which is connected to pins 1 and 5.

~230-

FOIOI'HCIALUSEONLY
PectaCaeu never-alum
. OVMINEIu—neum
u ”remnant”:

a «rename-em
‘mme-em-

“Wu-um"
apnea. moon-um..-

  
  

 

” (c)

It... Voltage zeta, d3

   

1(6)"

lgure 6.5. Frequency equalization circuit for the 153002 op

(a-c) and their frequency reeponeee (d, e).

. Standard;

. With the maxim aignal a-plitude;

. With a lead with reepect to the high frequenc
. For the mall signal node;

For the large eignal node.

9500’.

-231-

POIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY
EOI‘OF11C1AL USEZCHVLY

 

 

Figure 4.6. The lacun7 operational aaplifier.

. Baaic electrical ache-atic;

. The gain aa a function of frequency;

. Phaae-frequency reaponae;

. Circuit configuration for a noninverting follower node;

. Circuit configuration for the equalizing capacitance to
improve the riae tine of the output voltage.

OQOU‘.

-232-

FOR‘OIIWCIAI.USE¢MVLY
4.2.2. Amplifiers with Field Effect Transistors at the Input

A pair of matched field effect transistors is frequently used to reduce the input
currents of an operational amplifier down to the level of the gate leakage currents
of the FET's (i.e., down to a value of 10'9 A). The improvement in the fabrics-
tion technology of 10's has made it possible to obtain bipolar and high quality
field-effect transistors in a single production process cycle (on one chip). This,
in turn, has made it possible to create semiconductor op amps which have an input
impedance at a level of 1011...1013 ohms, and consequently, an initial bias current
approaching 0.1 nA. One of the amplifiers with field effect transistors at the
input is the SﬁbUDl operational amplifier (Figure 6.7). The op amp is designed in
a two stage configuration. The input stage takes the form of a differential
amplifier with source followers in the form of a matched pair of n-type FBT‘s

(VT! and 9T5), working into active loads (transistors VT2 and VT“). The active
load provides for a high stage gain and an extended permissible range of of in-phase
input voltages. Moreover, the use of field effect transistors makes it possible to
feed in large differential input voltages. Inte.na1 frequency equalization is
employed to improve the frequency response of the amplifier. The second stage and
the level shift circuit (transistor VTb), which is designed around low frequency
p-n-p transistors, are shunted by an equalization capacitance. The output stage
and its bias circuit are designed in a manner similar to that of the lbOUD? op amp.
The bias voltage balancing is accomplished relative to pins 1-8.

The favorable input characteristics make it possible to widely utilise the opera-
tional amplifier in integrator circuits, operating with large time constants and
low values of the capscitances. However, the input currents of the field-effect
transistors, which are the leakage currents, are greatly dependent on temperature.
With a change in the temperature by 100 ‘c, the level of the input currents
increases by two orders of magnitude and reaches tens of nanoamperes (Figure b.7c).
Moreover, op amps with PET's have large bias voltages (up to 30...50 av) and a
large temperature drift (40 uV/‘C).

The factors enumerated above have forced op amp designers to seek out other ways of
improving amplifier performance.

One can use transistors for which the current gain exceeds 5,000 to obtain a low
value of the input current, i.e., so-celled superbets transistors [21, 25].
Transistors with an ultrahigh current gain are produced on the same chip where the
conventional n-p-n transistors are located by means of supplemental emitter
diffusion. However, the breakdown voltagesof these transistors is reduced in this
case. The combination of low voltage superbeta transistorawwith conventional
n-p-n transistors has made it possible to more efficiently produce operational
amplifiers with better drift input characteristics (bipolar superbeta transistors

have resulting drift parameters better than those of PBT‘s in a wide range of
temperatures).

-233-

FtHICHHHCJA1,lﬂiE(MVLY
FOIOI-TlClALUSEONLY

 

Voltage
Gain, d8

    

~88.

 

(h) 0 In ' (c) 0

Figure 4.7. The 5610001 operational amplifier.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
b. Gain as a faction of frequency;
. c. The input currents as a function of temperature.

6.2.3. Amplifiers with Super-Beta 1ransistors

The 14mm Anplifier. This mlifier (Figur- e I». Be) is designed as a two-state
alplifier.1he first couple: stage (transistors V11, V14, V110 and V112) consist
of a differential voltage follos'rer (transistors V11 and V112) vhich controls the
canon enitter aplifier.10 reduce the input currents of the operational
anplifier. super-beta transistors '11 and V112 are used at the input.1ransistors

~234-

MOWUSEONLY
WM and V‘l'lO provide for a low collector-miner voltage of the input transistors,
as well as an alnost zero voltage between the collector and the base of these
transistors. Such a node is necessary for reliable operation of transistors W1

and mm as well as to reduce the tenperature drift of the inverse currents of their
collector junections. The stable current generator (transistor V‘l‘7) sets the over-
all current for the input stage, while transistors m and "'11 control the enitter
currents of input transistors V‘l'l and rm, and thereby stabilise the value of the
input currents.

Transistors used as diodes are eaployed to increase the mint- differential
voltage in both branches of the stage, where these transistorslvhave a high break-
down voltage. The increase in the differential input resistance is acconplished
by inserting 32 and '37 in series with the diodes (transistors V13 and W9), vhile
resistors R6 and R9 are inserted in the emitter circuits of transistors W5 and V18
to balance the bias voltage at the op slap output.

 

ll In\
ﬁgure 6.8. The 140006 operational anplifier.

a. Basic electrical schenatic;

b. The input currents as a
friction of tenperature.

 

-235-

MOWUSEONLY
t‘ MM".

 

Pan .9 W W nu
NOVA“:

3;.mmmonmm

.umg—mﬁzm

     

'ia) ,, W”.

Figure 6.9. The 1600014 opcutiannl upliﬂu.

9-0 0’.

. lute clnctriul och-tic;

. ‘l'lu input current. u a function of tenpeuture;
. The gain an a function of frequency;

. The plane-frequency unponne.

-236-

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY .
The introduction of local negative feedback (resistors 33 and RB) increases the
speed and at the sane tine the stability of the circuit. The direct current node
it governed by the regulator which is designed around transistors V113 and V116.
The second stage of the operational amplffer is a Darlington configuration
(transistors V116 and V119). Transistor V117, which biases the operating point
of the output stage transistors in class 8 (through transistors V118, V120 and
V122). The output stage is designed around transistors V122, V127 and V126. The
overload protection circuitry uses transistors V121, V123, V124 and V125. It
limits the short circuit output current to no noreuthsn 25 an. Transistor V115
protects the output stage of the op anp against flip-flop operation. The incorp-
oration of internal frequency equalization in the second stage circuitry (capacitor
c1) reduces the phase shift and provides for an amplitude-frequency response roll-
off of 20 dn/oct up to the unityngain frequency (1 Hus). The use of super-beta
transistors has made it possible to obtain low input currents (down to 30 ad), and
what is most important, very good temperature stability of the input current
(Figure 6.8b).

The lbOUle Amplifier. In contrast to the lbOUDG operational amplifier, super-
beta transistors are used in all stages in the 1600016 op anp.(Pigure b.9a). The
op sap is designed in a two stage configuration. Transistors V13, V15, V17 and
V19 of the input stage are used in a cascode circuit. The bases of transistors
V15 and V17 are connected through series connected transistors V11 and V12 to the
bases of transistors V13 and V19. Thanks to this configuration, the super-beta
input transistor V13 and V19 operate with a collector-base voltage close to 0.
To increase the bandwidth, resistors 82 and RS are inserted in the eaitters of
transistors of V13 and V19.

Transistors V15 and V17 have a large breakdown voltage and protect the low voltage
super-beta input transistors against breakdown. Moreover, the emitter junctions
of transistors V11 and V12, which are inserted betueen the bases of the input
transistors in opposition to each other, protect the input stage against breakdown
by large-differential input voltages. The stable current generator using trans-
istor V16 provides for a regulated supply current to the input stage and thereby
also clamps the level of the input currents. The bias voltage at the base of the
stable current generator of the input stage is supplied from a voltage regulator
(transistors V113 and V115-V117, as well as resistors RS-RIZ). In a manner
similar to the regulator in the 153002 operational amplifier, this circuit pro-
vides for constant bias throughout the entire range of supply voltages. The
currents of transistors V15 and V17 are regulated by the input current difference
regulator, where transistor V111 (used as a diode) and transistor V110 are employed.

The circuit of the second stage (transistors V118 and V121), the current of which
is regulated by the no level of the first stage collector voltage provides not only
for the transition froa the differential output of the second stage to the single
input, but also for a high gain by virtue of the active load (transistors V119

used as a diode and V120), as wall as for a shift in the oc level. Transistor V
V122 series to supply bias to the output stages.

The output stage of the amplifier is designed around n-p-n transistor V128 and
p-n-p transistor V129. The stage is protected against an output short circuit to

ground or to the power supply. The use of super-beta transistors in the 1h00blb
amplifier has made it possible to obtain an input current level Iin of less than

~23“, -

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  

0 (b)

. Voltage gain _
‘0 (m as) M an

      

N
"I m
‘(«1) a . '.
PIC. .l 03¢”ng
m‘lgﬂlﬂ: '

e -- emu-anaem- we cae-
na. 6 - cue-Ia ﬂea-on Iaeun. a-w
ran am Wed m. -
eneauoeu mm yeaauana
m mun or 90mm. 0—:

MW. at..-

mmm gen-ea.-
manner-anew

penum- -

no '

Figure 6.10. The 153005 operational -plifier.

a. Basic electrical echenatic; 5. Schematic of the input etage; c. Beeic

frequency equalization circuit; 6. Open loop ~ulplitier gain an a function of
frequency; e. The gain an a fmction of frequency, feedback conponenta and

frequency equalization in a ecaling ampliﬁer node.

-233-
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
1.5 nA throughout the entire temperature range (see Figure b.9b). The amplitude-

frequency response of the op amp is equalised by external equalization circuits
(Figure lo.9c).

6.2.1.. The Isms High Precision Operational Amplifier

The 1530135 operational amplifier (Figure 6.10a) belongs to the class of high
precision op amps used for the construction of instruments. Its specific features
are a low zero bias voltage (0.5 mV), low levels of drift and noise and a high
gain (mre than 106). But the major property of this operational amplifier is the
fact that it makes it possible to maintain a high value of the closed loop gain of
the operational .plifier with a high degree of precision (for enqle, one can
obtain Ru - 1,000 1 0.31). The specific features of this parameter determine the
basic circuit of the operational amplifier and the technology forfits fabrication.

The input stage of the op amp is designed in the usual differential configuration.
However, input transistors W1 and VT3 take the form of a parallel connection of
two transistors (Figure 4.101)) to reduce the drift. The first stage is supplied
with current by the stable current generator (transistor VTZ) and is loaded into
identical resistors R1 6 R2 and Rh + R5. The reduction of the thermal effect fra-
the high power output transistor elements is achieved by the special arrangement of
the input stage. Transistors “'1 did no occupy a large area on the chip (approx-
imately one-third of it) and are positioned crosswise to each other.

0p amp circuit designers have dispensed with the use of an active load on the input
stage so as to reduce the zero bias voltage and tho temperature dependence of the
input characteristics. The increase in the input impedance of the second stage
and the corresponding reduction of its impact on the input characteristics are
achieved by designing the stage in a complex com-on collector-«omen emitter
circuit configuration using transistors VT7, m and W13, W15 which are well-
matched with respect to their parameters. The stable current generators of the
second stage (transistors VTlO-VTlZ) provide for stability of the input currents
and a high resistance load for the second stage. by converting the differential

output to a single input. the active load impedance of the second stage provides
for a high gain.

The third stage has an amplifying transistor VTZO (a «non emitter stage) with a
load in the form of a stable current generator (transistor VT16). Transistors
VTIB and V119 shift the operating point of the output power transistors V125 and
VT26 to class AB, which eliminates distortions in the output. Horeover, transis-
tor VTl9, which is used as an eaitter follower, makes it possible to reduce the
output impedance of the operational amplifier. The output current limiting in the
case of a short circuit is provided by transistors VT23 and VT“, which prevent
the overloading of transistors W25 and VT26. Transistor VT23 limits the current
consumption by the base of transistor m6. The amplitude-frequency response of
the op amp is corrected by two frequency equalization networks (Figure b.10c).
The plot of In as a function of frequency is shown in Figure 6.10d for the open
loop amplifier, while the amplitude-frequency responses of the op amp used as a
scaling amplifier are shown in Figure 4.10s.

-239-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR mt USE ONLY

33'“

1*5

4mm
in:
I W”
ii.

(Eli—"1.

 

Figure 4.11. The 1400010 operational amplifier.

a. Beaic electrical echeuatic;
b.c.1’requency equalization circuits used to reduce the aettlin;
tine and to increase the output voltage alev rate
respectively.

lo.2.S. High Speed Operational uplitiere
the limited operational apeed ia one of the eubetantial drawbacke to etendard op
anpa. General purpoee alplifiere with equalization dam to the unity gain level

have a null aignal bandwidth of about 1 ﬁll; and an output voltage a'lev rate of
up to approxinately 0.6 V/uaec. But this drawback can be overcome if a high

-2‘0-

MWUSEONLY
frequency channel is incorporated in the op amp circuitry. There exist many
methods of designing the high frequency channel, which are basically distinguished
by the circuit configurations of the equalizing networks and the types of amplifier
stages employed [5]. Although semiconductor op amps also possess low parasitic
capacitances, they nonetheless cannot have a fast response without taking special
steps, since one of the amplifier stages should be designed around an integrated
circuit p-n-p transistor. The lbOUDlo high speed operational amplifier (Figure
4.11s) has an output voltage slew rate of 50 V/usec and a unity gain frequency of
15 MHz.

The good frequency parameters of the op amp were achieved as a result of using a
high frequency channel in the circuit, through which the high frequency components
"bypass" the slow p-n-p transistor. Moreover, by virtue of a unique circuit design,
the op anp is distinguished by high stability of the parameters throughout the
entire range of supply voltages of z} ... :16 volts. This op anp is designed in a
three stage configuration. To increase the input impedance, the first differential
stage uses a Darlington configuration (transistors VTB, VTlO, VT20 and VTl9). Tb
extend the gain bandwidth, resistors R7 and 813 are inserted in the emitters of its
amplifying transistors. The input stage is powered from the stable current gener-
ator (transistor VTlS). The current from transistor VTlS is fed to a special
distribution circuit, which is designed around transistor VT17, dual emitter trans-
istor VTlZ and resistorsRB-Rlo. Transistor VT12 is inverted and provides

"make-up" current for the emitters of the input transistors.

This distribution circuitry provides for little change in the input stage currents
throughout the entire temperature range. The circuit for protecting the input
stage agiinst a high in-phase voltage is designed around transistors Vle and VTl6,
while transistors VTl, VTZ, VTA and VTS protect the input stage against differ-
ential signal overloading. Transistors V111 and VTl8 play the part of an active
load on the input stage. Transistor VTlS (used as a diode) limits the level of the
collector-base voltage of these transistors.

The second stage of the amplifier is also designed in a differential circuit con-
figuration.(p-n-p transistors VTZl and VTZb). Transistors VT22 and VT2S serve as
active loads for the second stage. The direct current mode of the stage is set by
biasing transistors VTTl and VT22 with the regulated collector voltage of the input
stage. The third amplification stage uses transistors VT27, VT34 and VT30, VTSl,
the load for which is the stable cu-rent generator using transistor VT29, the
current in which is stabilized by the voltage drop across the diode formed by the
connection of the second collector of the transistor to its base. The output stage
is designed around the dual emitter n-p-n transistor VT38 and the p-n-p transistor
VT39. The second emitter of transistor VT38 serves to control the output p-n-p
transistor.

Such a circuit increases the speed of the p-n-p output transistor, Transistors
VT32, VT33 and VT38 protect the output stage of the op sup against overload when
the output is short-circuited. Transistor VT33 protects the circuitry of the
operational amplifier against flip-flop operations, and at the instant of overload-
ing, shunts transistor VT39.

-241-

F0]! omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are three capacitors--in the op amp circiutry to improve the transnission of
high frequencies. Capacitor Cl, which shunts one half of the differential input
stage for high fuquencies thereby converts its differential output to a single
ended output. Furthermore, the high frequency signal bypasses the second differ-

ential stage which is designed around low speed p-n-p transistors through capacitor
02.

The high frequency signal component is fed frsn the output of the first stage
directly to the base of the third stage transistor. Capacitor c3 (6 de) serves
to transmit a certain percentage of the high frequency components of the signal
from the output of the first stage to the input of the final (output) stage.

high speed amplifiers are less stable than low frequency op amps, and for this
reason, to prevent oscillation in the circuitry, it is necessary to have parasitic
capacitance between the op amp output and its inverting input. To reduce the
indicated parasitic capacitance, special external equalization circuits are employed
(Figures 4.llb and c), the composition of which depends on the task which the
operational alplifier perforls. The balancing of the amplifier is accowlished by
inserting a variable resistor between leads 1 and 5.

6.2.6. Hicropower Operational Amplifiers

Operational amplifiers are needed for applications in economical equipauent, which
operates especially in a standby mode (frequently with battery power), which con-
sune little power from the power supplies. The 1530M op amp (Figure 10.12a) has a
current consumption of 0.8 us for power supply voltages of 05",, [Vcc] - :6 volts.

The gain of the op up in this mode is higher than 5,000. This op amp is desinged
in a two stage circuit configuration. The first silple differential stage (tran-
sistors W1 and VTS) drives an active‘ l-oad (transistors VTZ and VT“ and is powered
from a stable current generator, which is transistor VT3. The second stage is
designed as a co-on emitter-coupon collector circuit (transistors V118 and VTlS).
The collector circuits of transistors VTlZ and W115 serve as the loads on the
second stage. The output stage is designed around n-p-n transistor VTl9 and the
cosposite [2, 5] p-n-p transistor "17 and VTZO. The operating point of the output
transistors is biased by transistors VTl3 and VTl6.

Resistors 810 and till serve to protect the op against output short circuits. The
direct current operating mode of the first and second stages of the op amp is
assured in the case of wide variations in the supply voltages by a regulator
circuit designed around transistors V‘l'6-VT10. ‘No frequency equalization networks
are needed for conplete correction of the amplitude-frequency response of this
operational amplifier. (Figure lo. 12b) .

The 1400012 operational amplifier is available so the present tine (Figure 10.13).
This type of op arap can be used as the micropower anplifier and as a general
purpose operational amplifier. The anplifier is designed for operation in a wide
range of supply voltages of 11.2 volts to :18 volts and is designed in a two stage
circuit configuration. The amplitude-frequency response is equalised with a single

- 242 -
roe omcm. use ONLY
Inz.

 

rigure 6.12. The 153mm operational nplifier.

a. Basic electrical scheuatic (the numbering of the pins
of the 1530M op llp is given in parentheses and the
numbers outside the psrentheses apply to the 7100M
unencapsulated; :

b. The frequency equalization circuit.

internal capacitor. Protection of the output stage against overloads is provided
as well as protection against flip-flop operation. The najor difference between

this amplifier and other types of op amps is' the fact thet the operating node of
the internal stabilizer-regulator, which determines the entire 00 operation of the

op up, is specified fro. the outside.

By setting the bias current of the stabilizer-regulator, one can very the op up
parameters from nicropwer levels up to pare-store characteristic of general
purpose operational anplifiers.

-243-

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6.13. Basic electrical schuatic (a) and the circuits for
supplying hiaa entrant to the 11001012 operational
amplifier (b-e).

Circuits which illustrate the methods of setting the current of the stabilizer-

regulator are shown in Figure 6.13c-e. The parameters of the op amp for various
bias currents are given in Table 6.3.

-244 «-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
151.. I 1.5 M Ibiaa - 1.5 M

Parameter

 

 

 

Zero biaa voltage, 0..

[V0 bin]. IV 5.0 5.0
line voltage drift,

AU../A'l‘, uv/‘c 3 -
Input currenta, Ii“, M 7.5 750
Input current difference, -

Alia. M 3 15
Drift in the input current

difference, Mun/AT, nA/‘c - -
Voltage gain, Kg 50 50
Cot-on node rejection ratio,

Ito. .f, on 70 70
Output voltage alev rate,

vu out: Vluaec 0.03 0.035
Settling tine, tut. ueec 3 0.6
Input reaietance, Rim when so 5
Output reaietance, Rout. ohna S - 103 l - 103
minus output curent,

100:) u 2.9 S
Maxi-m output voltage,

"slit, VOICE 2 2.1
Maxi-um input voltage,

0%“ volta l l
Hazinun in-phaee input

voltage, “in 90’ volta 1.2 1.2
Current coneuption, IconM 25 125

 

The presence of internal frequency equaliaation, the a!
the flipping of the inputa aa well an protection again:
pernita the wide utilization of thia operational anpli!
figurationa.

b245-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080030-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.3. Integrated Circuit Comparators

The necessity arises in a number of cases of converting analog signals to digital
form. For this, among others, special devices called comparators are used, which
are specialized operational amplifiers with a differential input and a single or
paraphase digital output [7, 8]. The input stage of a comparator is designed on
analogy with op amp circuits and operates in a linear mode. A "1“ signal is gener-
ated at the comparator output if the difference between the input signals is less
than the comparator actuation voltage, or a "0" signal is generated if the differ-
ence between the input signals exceeds the comparator actuation voltage. The "
signal being studied is fed to one input of the comparator while a reference voltage
is applied to the other.

A comparator may be used as a threshold gate in automation circuits to quantize a
signal in high speed analog to digital converters. It can be used in self-excited
oscillators, in pulse amplitude discriminators and peak detectors, as well as a
read amplifier for magnetic and semiconductor memory signals. The major parameters
of a comparator are: the sensitivity (the precision with which the comparator can
differentiate the input and reference signals), speed (reponse, determined by the
actuation delay and signal rise time), fan-out load capacity (load (capability of
the comparator of controlling a certain number of digital 10 inputs).

we shall consider the circuits of’the most widespread integrated circuit comparators,
the parameters of which are given in Table 0.5 [9, 10].

A comparator based on the SleaZ integrated circuit (Figure 4.14) has two differ-
ential amplifier circuits, an output emitter follower, sener diode level shift
circuits and a circuit for limiting the output signal amplitude. The differential
input stage (transistors VTl and VTb) have the usual low zero bias voltage for
integrated circuit op amps. The emitters of transistors VTl and VT% are powered
from a stable current generator (transistor V15), because of which the collector
currents of the first stage transistors are almost independent of an in-phase

input signal.

The second differential stage (transistors VT3 and VT6) have as their basis a
balanced bias supply circuit. In the balanced state, the voltage of the single
output of this stage does not change with fluctuations in the positive supply
voltage. The base potential of transistor VT2 is thereby clamped (with an increase
in the positive supply voltage, the collector currents of transistors VT6 and V13
also increase, with the collector voltage of transistor VT3 remaining constant).

To increase the current fan-out load capability, transistor VT6 is equipped with
an emitter follower (transistor VTB). The integrated circuit zener diode VDl,
which is inserted in the emitter circuits of the second stage transistors, has a
reference voltage of 06.2 volts, which clamps the potentials without transistors
V13 and VT6 at a level of about #6.9 volts. Consequently, the permissible signal
for the comparator inputs can approach 7 volts.

Zener diode VD2, which is inserted in the output emitter follower circuit, shifts
the output signal level "downward" by 6.2 volts, so as to make it compatible with

-246-

FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEIDNLY
the input signals for digital m integrated circuits. ‘l‘ransistor V19 isolates
the output circuit from the bias circuit of the output stage current generator
(transistor V15) with a coepenseting diode (transistor V110 is used as a diode).
Transistor V17 (used as a diode) linits the peak-to-peah value of the output signal
on the positive side: for signal levels at the output greater than do volts,
transistor V‘l'7 turns on and shorts the differential output of the second stage.
Because of the limiting of the eaplitude, the speed of the coupsrator is increased

significantly.

TABLE 4.10 Parameters of Intezated circuit Erato”
gm of Mentor and gate-eter Nor-a1 Value

 

 

Paraneter 5253“
Current consumption, Icon. IA:
Pros: a positive power supply 13.5
Free: a negative power supply -.6.5
Zero hiss voltage, U... IIV 3.5
Cos-on node rejection ratio, 0133, d) 70
Average input current, Iin. us 75

Input current difference, AI“, M 10

Voltage gain Kg 75 ' 103
The "l" voltage, volts 2.5 to 6.0
The "0" voltage volts -l.0.'to 0
The "0" Output current, IA 0.5

The turn-on delay time, tdel. nsec l35

Input voltage, gating, Um. 3.“,
volts -l.0 to 0

Gating current, Igace IA 2.5

 

*Operating with a single +5 volt power supply

521m

 

10
8.9

5.0
70
75
10
7s - 103
2.6 to 10.0
-l.0 to 0
1.6
160

5218A”

 

6.0
5.0

——_—_————————————

The 5213“ comparator is single to use, but does not have any gating inputs.. In a
dual differential comparator circuit with the 5213Al (Figure 6.15a), the outputs
of two individual comparators are conﬁned using emitter followers with on logic.
One cot-on level shift diode and bias divider is used forthoth cenparators. The
application of the dual channel design nakes it possible to realise a higher level
of integration, as well as improve the electrical paraneters of equipment,

-247-

FOIOFFICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

l'igure lull». The sum coeparator.

a. Basic electrical schentic;
h,c..1'he rise tine "out as a function of I:
the input voltage over-regulation
and the load capacitance respectively.

especially devices for reading nsgnetic neaory signals. Because of the identical
nature of the pareneters of both conparators. it is possible to design dual thresh-

old circuits, having a sy—etrieal response to postive and negative values exceed-
ing the absolute signal level over the threshold level.

Comrators using the 5218Al integrated circuit, in contrast to the 5218“ device,
have two gating inputs. as well as a parallel'circuit configuration for the limit-
ing networks for the output stage saturation level (transistor V12 is added in

the second stage to reduce the peak to peak value of the signal at the base of
transistor V‘l'7 when it is saturated).

A dual conparator perforns slnost the sans electrical function as two of the shove
nentioned single comparators, however, the power consuaption of this 10 is only
50! greater. The basic circuit configuration for a type 5218“ conpsrator is shown
in Figure 4.151). The reference voltage is fed to one of the inputs, while the
input signal is fed to the other. In the case where the input signal exceeds the

-248-

l-‘OROFI'IGALUSIONLY
Figure 6.15. The SZISAI dual conparator.

a. Baaic electrical ache-atic;

b. External circuit configuration;

c. Output voltage riae tinea aa a function
of the input aignal overregulation voltage
levela.

reference voltage, the output voltage avitchea to the poaitive or negative atate
(Figure b.15c).

The comparator configuration conaidered here can he uaed aa a voltage coeparator
in analog-code convertera, where one input ia controlled by the analog aignal and
the other ia controlled by a reference aignal fed tron a atep raaiative aatrix.
the circuit can alao he uaed for a filn or diak eagnetic nanory aa read.anpli£ier.

-2£9-

F0I40FFRJA1.USBGHVLY
Threshold gates vhich are indicators

of an output voltage relative to present
precise lieita form a special group of
circuits for coeparator applications
(Figure 6.16).

0.5. Integrated Circuit Analog
Multipliers

 

Analog integrated circuit multipliers

gure ism (IA?) are designed to perform the oper-
Pi 4'16. 2,5:3'tﬁidsgiﬁzl‘SLI d ation of nultiplying two analog quanti-
cowarator ties. They can be used in frequency

doubler, phase detector, and balanced
nodulator circuits, as well as in
autonatic control systens as multipliers
and squaring circuits. In conjunction with operational anplifiers, analog 1c
multipliers can perform division, extract roots and perform trigonometric functions.

The existing types of analog multipliers can be broken down into two groups:

balanced modulators intended for operation in a wide frequency bandwidth (’00 Mile
and more) with small input signal levels (up to 0.5 volts) and analog multipliers
theuaselves, vhich are intended for operation in a narrow band of frequencies with

high level input signals (up to 110 volts). The electrical parameters of the
SZGPSI balanced modulator circuit (figure 6.17) are given in Table 6.5.

The main assembly of the 526PSI integrated circuit is a cross coupled quad differ-
ential amplifier (transistors V‘l'l, V‘l‘b, V15 and m). In terms of its action, it
is similar to a comaon emitter anplifier, but its:.emitter currents do not depend on
the input voltages. It is not difficult to note that the difference between the
output currents of the amplifier (being the output quantity) is proportional not
only to the input voltage of the amplifier (it is fed to input X. pin l0), but
also to the difference between the emitter currents:

AI ' “Din, AI ).

out 0

The eeitter currents can be regulated by feeding a voltage to the bases of trans-
istors V‘l'2 and VT? (this voltage is fed to the Y input, pin ll) with pins 2 and
12 shorted together. The transfer function of a balanced modulator is a function
of the voltages fed to the x and Y inputs, and has the form [11):

“on: " Mat-«Mutuwymiﬁiwxmms

-250-

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If identical load resistors “I! are connected to pins 8 and 9, then the output
signal can be obtained in the for- of the voltage difference:

 

"out - v.‘."«-m;‘-:.wm(ii;1ao',u~(v.m.uﬁ" “° 1’

An internal regulator (diodes VDl .. . VDS and resistor R9) provide for stable oc
operation of the circuit and set the bais for transistors H3 and V16. Iaintaining
the enitter current constant for the quad amplifier. One can conclude fro for-Ila
(4.1) that the output voltage is a nonlinear function of the input potentials,
however. at enall values of the input voltages, the circuit operates as allinssr
signal nultiplier, having the following transfer function:

lhe linearity condition for each of the inputs can be written in the forn:
[an—u macaw“ < 0'
where 6 is the penissihle nonlinearity of the amplitude response of the mltiplier.

The value of the hyperbolic tangent can be represented in the for. of a series [12]:

59::- ¥$i"—:‘—"(¥i¢)'+ War-4 -'

The values of the input voltages are given in Table 15.6 as a function of the
coefficient 6 and the tauperature.

 

 

The linear range for the Y input can be expanded if a resistor Ry is inserted
betveen pins 2 and l2. Then the input current difference will he deter-ined by
the equation:

u‘."o,)'p..+n,). (lo. 2)

where :-e is the resistance of the emitter-base junction.

If Ry >> (r. - 01-11.). then the value of r. nay be disregarded; than fornula (6.2)
is simplified: __' .. _

u - 30,17»?

. (4.3)

and expression (4.1) will have the fora:

-251-

FOIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY

Par-etc: - ' now 526m 525m

 

 

Input control signal suppression factor, ‘in “.5 (I! 66 8 66
Reference signal suppression factor, ‘in "g, as 66 65 66
The dynanic control signal voltage range, D, «ll 16 - -
Control signal gain. In 2.9 - -
Upper cutoff frequency. f”, an: 2 60 1
Input inpedancs, Bin, Hans - 0.050 20
ﬁltput ilpﬂlsnce, Rout. obs - - 30
Converter trensconductance, 8, AIV - 5 -
Multiplication linearity, percent - - 1
Supply voltage, “W!" V 112 96 :15
Pernissible input voltage, “in. volts :5 - :10
Power dissipation, Pd“, DB 230 36 170

 

TABLE 6.6 Range of Permissible Ina: Voltages

 

\

Key: 1- Vin/0r;
2. Values of ”in for various t-peratures, 'C.

 

where B is the dependence on the reference signal level (the calil‘ration ratio).
One nay assue for a low level reference signal that I . (00/291000 - 0‘, and
therefore for-ole (6.6) has the forn:

”an s; (70—me;0; U; .

/

”WMWLY
- .‘....-_.. .._._...___——.__. ...._.. . . ...... ...._.-——_.._.

 

Figure 6.18. circuit cknfiguration of the 526P81 integrated circuit
need ae a dual balanced mixer.

with an increaee in the voltage at the reference input, the function becomee non-
linear (l'igure 4.190. The convereion gain, which ie defined ae the ratio of the
intermediate frequency input [eic] voltage to the eignal input voltage (figure 6.1%)
ie meaeured in decibele:

Kn - zo log(0 Iain .). - Kn-aouum'JOIJ.

out 2

In the 14mm balanced modulator (Figure bZOa), the main multiplication circuitry
ie deeigned around traneietore v16, VT9, V‘l'll and Vle; The differential amplifier
(trancietore VTS, m and VTlZ, VTlS) controle the multiplier emitter currente.

The multiplier emitter current difference ie made to he a linear function of the
input voltage at the Y input by ineerting reeietor Ry between the emittere of
the differential amplifier (pine lo and 10). The current levele in the emittere of
the quad of amplifier traneietore (W6, VT9, VTll and Vle is regulated by the
voltage at the Y input, and aince the level of the currente flowing through the
etable current generatore (traneietore VT? and "13) ie etable, the difference in
theee currente ie determined ueing formula (6.3). 'The linear input voltage range
of up to +5 volte ie achieved by virtue of the high euppl voltage of +12 volte.

A Darling‘Eon circuit (traneietore VTS, VT8,--VT12 and VHS is need to increaee the
Y input impedance. To increaee the x input impedance, a differential etage ie
ineerted in the modulator circuit, where thie etage ie deeigned ae a cocon emitter
configuration. Thie etage controle the baeee of the mltiplier. Working from the
fact that the Y input in linear, while the input differential aqlifier hae the
gain of [B], the tranefer function of the modulator can be written in the form:

WEWMWWM»). ( )
4 . S

-254-

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
where I); ; _+_S volts. lhe level of the enitter currents is clenped by the stable
current generators (transistors VT2, v16, VT? and VT13). Bias is fed to the bases
of the transistors of these stsble current generators from transistor VTIO (used ss
a diode).

If pins 2 and 12 are joined together and they are grounded through nornalising
resistor R, then the current level through the bias diode can be determined fro.
the foraula:

1‘I - (ow - uwmooo o a),

where 14 is the diode current (trensistor VTlO). Um is the negative supply volt-
age, Deb is the voltage drop across the bese-uitter junction and R is the value
of the resistor vhich determines the current level while 600 ohns is the spproxi-
note value of the internal resistance of the diode.

In order that a high input voltage can be applied to the Y input and conversion
linearity assured in this case, the voltage at the collectors of the differential
amplifier transistors should be no less than the input signal voltage. The nornal
operating node of the nodulator is achieved by feeding the requisite bias to the
bases of transistors VTl and VT3 (the 1: input) through a voltage divider from
the positive power supply. The nodulator can operate both free balanced and un-
bslanced power supplies; in this case, it is necessary to observe the ntching of
the modulator at the inputs and output.

In the circuit configuration where the 14mm integrated circuit is used as a
hslsnced nodulstor operating fro- power supplies at :12 volts (Figure b.20b), the
direct current node is set by a divider (the noninel values of the resistors are
3.6 to 2.4 ROI-s). The current level to is set by arcane of a resistor with a
nominal value of ll KOhns, insered betweens 2 and 12 to ground. The x and Y
inputs are decoupled by Deans of;cspacitors. To prevent self-excitetion. series
resistors with noeinal values of 51 obs are inserted in the circuits of leads 5
.and 9. The voltage traces st the inputs and outputs in the balanced modulator
circuit ere shown in Figure lo.20c.

An example of a phase detector constructed with the mom integrated circuit is
shown in Figure 13.21. The operation of the linear phase detector (Figure 4.21) is
based on the following trigonometric equation:

[Cesar cannot 9m] : (K,/z)cos(zwt e- ¢) 4- (K;IZ)C0$¢

By using a low pass filter, one can segregate the desired coeponent, which is pro-
portional to coso. The noduletor in this circuit serves as a hat-Ionic function
nultiplier.

The 525P81 analog mltiplier (A?) (Figure b.22) operates st lower frequencies than
the 1601M nodulator. It is designed for the Iultiplicstion of input voltsges
with a linearity of no worse than 31 (the level at both inputs is up to :10 volts).

- 255 -
POI OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
“. POROFFIGALUSEONLY
r. . _-__.-. .....__ —_._ a.

    

s a :2 s w to {Hi In:
Pigure 6.19. The internediate frequency output voltage (an - 01)
as a function of the reference signal voltage (a)
and as a function of the conversion gain frequency (b)
and reference signal voltage suppression (c).

Key: 1. K1” [conversion voltage gain], dB;
2. 1,, op [Kin ref - reference signal suppression
factor], d3;
3. Supply voltage of 6 volts, 0y I 5 IV,
"X - 300 av and up I 500 ms.

The analog nultiplier consists of two differential amplifiers, which control the
operation of the nain nultiplication circuit (transistors we, ﬁll, v1.13 and “'15).

The differential .plifier (transistors V17, VT9 and V‘l'l6, V‘l'llo) sets the differ-
ence in the emitter currents of the two pairs of transistors of the nultiplier
circuit proportional to the differential input signal. As follows from (6.5), an
exponential component is present in the output voltage of the modulators which is
due to the nonlinear dependence of the enitter currents of the nultiplier on the
voltage at the x input. This conponent does not pernit obtaining good linearity
at the circuit output. In order to obtain a linear dependence of the output volt-
age with a high X input voltage level, it is necessary to take the logaritt-

of the 1: input signal beforehand. For this, a differential logarithmic stage

is inserted in the nultiplier circuitry. The differential stage (transistors VTl,
VT2 and VT6, VTS) converts the input voltage to the currents to 4 I; and lo - I;

-256-

FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
Figure 6.20. The 14mm balance nodulator.

a. Baoic electrical echo-tic;

b. circuit configuration;

c. Voltage tracea at the nodulator
inputa and outputa.

by scan. of reaiator Rx. which in inserted between pine 5 and 6. Since the current
Io ia determined by the atable current generatora (treneiotoro V13 and VIA), the
level of the current Ix can be calculated fra the following equation [13, lb]:

 

1x - ux/(zre onx) - "I}—-—¢ww.+a.1

The currento (10 e Ix) and (lo - Ix), in flowing through diode. W1 and W2,
produce a voltage drop acroae then, the difference in which is the output voltage
of the differential etage, end haa the fan:

"on: - ud1 - u“ . Orlnluo + Iy)/(Io - no].

- "MI-U.” -U~-" '0 '(I.+Iy)/(IQ-’.)'.n

The overall traoofer function of the nultiplier io deocrihed by the formlao:

-257-

MOFFIGALIEEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘. — —.—. .—-—_.._——... .—

 

out

Figure b.21. A phase detectr band on the 1
integrated circuit.

a. Design ample; b, c. A-plitude-phu
frequency reopen“ characteristics rape
6. Block diurnal.

a... - maul. R. Ry» 0: U:
Figure 6.22. Baaic ache-atic of the 5251’81 analog nultiplicr (a) and the
hate circuit configuration of the 525281 1c (5).

 

 

 

 

  

Figura 6.23. Schematic of a level ahiftin. analog mltiplici' using a
140007 op up powered by a :15 volt pm aupély.

-259-
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
Figure 6.25. schematic of

4‘ t0 ‘5 Ii."
' 0

-260-

IKIICIHHCIAI.USE(H‘LY

dividtr based
IAOHAI intcgt
circuit (a) I
fer function:
Figure 4.26. simltaneous multiplication and division circuit based
on the SISPSI integrated circuit.

The configuration of the SZSPSl integrated circuit as an analog multiplier

(Figure 4.22b) makes four quadrant multiplication possible for input analog

' signals having a level of up to :10 volts with an amplitude of the output signal
of 110 volts. Thus, the scaling factor of the circuit is 0.1. In order to obtain
a greater output voltage .plitnde, the circuit should operate fro- a positive
supply of e32 volts. In this case, the output voltage of the multiplier circuit
in the no-signal node is 21 volts. In order to bring this voltage to the zero
level, it is necessary to add a bias circuit.

In the analog multiplier which is equipped with a level bias circuit, designed
around the 160007 op amp (Figure 6.23), in order to match the Dc level at the
multiplier output to the per-isiible input voltages-6f the op up, a divider with
a division ratio of 1510 is inserted between then. a level shifting four quadrant
multiplier with an output voltage of :10 volts can also be obtained without using
an additional +32 volt power supply. In the circuit shown in Figure 4.23, the
multiplier operates from a power supply with voltages of :13 volts. In this
circuit, the scaling factor of the multiplier, K, is deduced by 10 times by virtue
of the reduction in the load resistance, while the op map, in turn, is used as a
scaling amplifier iith a gain of I I 10.

As was stated above, various functions can be modeled using analog multipliers.
We shall a consider a few examples from this area.

A squaring operation can be realised, if a voltage 0 is fed to the .X and Y
inputs, which are connected together in the basic circuit configuration. ‘lhen the
output voltage can be determined from the formula "out - K02, where D - Ox -

- "Y and the scaling factor is:

" ' 2Rload/1091“; _.

-261-

POIOI'I’ICIALUSEONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

The division of two signals is acct-plished by the circuit depicted in tigure 4.26
in which the nultiplier is used as a negative feedback elanent for an operational

uplifier. In this circuit, the op asp will strive to naintainground potential at
its inverting input. Assuning that the input current of the op asp, Ii... is close
to zero, we find the transfer function of the circuit:

KUx ”y/R. = rill/2.. _~
Ft“ which Ux ' ' RﬂﬂlzXUg/OY). If u: chooge RI ' “2, then 0‘ ' 402/07).

In the voltage divider designed around the 16mm integrated circuit (tigure 4.25).

the two analog lultiplier inputs are tied together; then the output voltage of the
op anp will be equal to:

_.—‘._..-_ .__ _.__._.____————-————

(Ur/Rd-(Wllku). mum U,-—V'(IWgT/WY_.

Consequently, this circuit generates the square root function of the input signal.

In all of the circuits treated above, the analog multiplier is used with a level
shift circuit.

It is possible to construct a frequency doubler based on on analog multiplier.
For this. it is necessary to connect a high pass filter to the output of the

analog multiplier. The operational principle of such a circuit is based on the
trigonoauetric identity:

(andr- Ilia-Irena)”. :

The high pass filter does not pass parasitic low frequency signals at the output.

ﬁle will note that based on an analog converter, it is not difficult to design a

device, the output voltage of which is proportional to the ratio of the product of
two analog quantities to a third conponent:

where 02 is the voltage which regulates the level of the current Io [see fornula
(4.6)]. A circuit for the simultaneous multiplication and division of signals

designed around the 252181 analog converter is shown in Figure 4.26. "the value of
I0 is deter-lined fro. the expression:

to - (uz - "um - ﬂaws, o 500).

-262-

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Some applications of analog converters can be based on the fact that there is the
capability of varying the resistances Rx and By in a linear fashion.

4.5. Analog Integrated circuits for Radio Receiving Equipment

The integrated circuit component base is being widely introduce into modern
communications equipment. The technological state of the art makes it possible
to create a products list of analog Ic's, which provide for the construction of
practically all of the assemblies ofwradio receiving equipment. For example, the
K242 series of integrated circuits, fabricated using thick file technology, can be
used at frequencies of up 110 Ila. They are used to construct the channels of
color television sets Its, 16] as well as other radio receiving equipment. The
235 series integrated circuits are designed for operation at frequencies of up to
200 an: and have good noise parameters. referenced: to the bandwidth (0;.- 0.01
0.8 uV). Semiconductor integrated circuits are being widely introduced at the
present time. ' ' —"'"'——"—— 'W

 

Figure 5.27. The 1750V6 high frequency amplifier.

a. Basic electrical schematic; b. circuit configuration;
c4. L2 and L3 are chosen from the calculation of the requisite
frequency.

4.5.1. The Differential Amplifier

Differential amplifiers were developed in the initial stages of semiconductor
integrated circuit design. These amplifiers are universal and can be used in all
assemblies of receiving and amplifying equipment. Only a qualitative improvement
in them is underway at the present time: the expansion of the frequency range,
the reduction of the noise and power consumption and the increasing of the output
power.

- 263 -

FOR¢0FFEJA1.USB(NVLY
Figure 6.28. The 175m high frequency .plifier.

e. Beeic electrical echeutic; h. Circuit configuration when
ueed ae e video aplifier.

 

Figure 6.29. The 1175082 high frequency amplifier.
a. leeic electrical echenatic; b. circuit configuration.

The einpleet differential circuit with a etahle current generator and e hiae
circuit in widely ueed in ell etagee of a receiving and uplifyin; chennel: the
RP uplifier, nixere, locel oecillatore, linitere, variehle end fixed gain I?
enplifier etegee ee well ae All and m detectore. The 1750“ integreted circuit

(figure 6.27) with e paeehand of’ 150 MB: can eerve ee an eagle of a differen-E
tiel amplifier.

The direct current node of the anplifier ie eet by the hiee of traneietor V'l'l
(by neane of negative feedback reeietere kl). Dyxewitching the tap on the divider

«264-

FOIOFHGALUSEONLY
(9. ll, 12), one can adjust the level of the collector current for transistor
V13. Transistors V12 and V1b. forn a differential awlifier, which is powered
by a stable current from transistor V13. The considerable noise level (a noise
factor of 6 to 8 dB) nukes it difficult to use this 1c in the input stages of
receiving equip-ant.

The 175W2 amplifier circuit (Figure 4.28) incorporates two additional transistors
for the construction of a local oscillator. The frequency range of the given
circuit is linited to 60 m and the noise figure to 6 dB.

Yet another example of a differential anplifier is the [157082 integrated circuit
(Figure 4.29). In this variant, the control circuit for the current generator
is designed around transistors V13 and V16. Resistors 32 and R6 as well as tran-
sistor V13 are intended for specifying the operational mode of transistor V16.
Transistor V11 serves as a preamplification stage. It can be seen free the

. ._..H. . ..

 

Figure 10.30. The 1750” broadband amplifier.

Key: a. Basic electrical schenatic;
1). Circuit configuration.

circuit configuration that realized here using one integrated circuit are an

RF amplifier, nixer, local oscillator and IF amplifier with me. The amplitude
modulated signal is fed to the base of transistor V11, the collector load on
which is a tuned circuit: capacitor C3 and inductance coil 1.1. The gain of
this stage can be regulated through the choice of the noninal value of resistor
R1. The signal is fed free the collector of transistor v'n to the base of tran-
sistor V12 of the differential pair (transistors V12 and V15), the current in
which is regulated by transistor V16. The generator circuit operates with this
transistor. the frequency of which depends on the paraneters of the parallel
resonant circuit L3, C9.

The l7SlIV3 amplifier can serve as an exasple of wide band uplifiers (Figure 4.30).
6.5.2 Low Frequency Amplifiers (web)

The design of high power seniconductor integrated circuit low frequency amplifiers
involves the solution of a number of circuit design, structural and production

~265-

lv'Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

process problene. First of all, econoeical output stages nust be developed having
high power integrated circuit structures. where the stage should introduce little
nonlinear distortion into the signal. Secondly, a technology met be developed
for producing n-p-n structures with a high pernissible current density and an
elevated gain on a single chip, as well as injection p—n-p structures with high
gains. Further, it is necessary to optiaise the fabrication technology for
integrated circuits with power output structures. so as to obtain large penissi-
ble currents (l to 2 amps) and low bulk resistance of the collector with a snall
structure area. And finally, it is necessary to develop an Ic structure which
assures reliable operation and elininates self-heating.

 

-‘

   
   
 

  

'. gun

Figure 4.31. The nmm power amplifier.

a. Basic electrical
schesatic;
b. Circuit configuration.

A number of high power and preasplifier
integrated low frequency anplifier cir-
cuits have been developed at the pre-
sent tine, which depending on the type
of radio receiving equipnent, can be
used in the following variants: an integrated circuit audio preanplifier plus
an output stage using discrete components; an audio preanplifier plus and inte-

grated circuit high power audio anplifier (or a single high power audio anplifier
10) with a sufficient voltage gain.

 

The Imam low frequency saplifier circuit (Figure (0.31) has an output power of
Ins watts. The input stage of the amplifier is designed around a conposite
p-n-p transistor (transistors W1 and m). the load for which is transistor
V‘I‘3. ‘rhe preanplifier stage is designed around transistors V17, W8 and V'l'lO.

~266-

NIOFFICIALUSEONLY
For the purpose of reducing the load on the input stage, transistors VT? and VT8
are connected in a common collector configuration. The load on transistor VTlO
is the current generator nade with transistor VT9. The power output stage is
designed around transistor Vle. VT16, VTll and VT17, and delivers an output
current of 1 amp. The bias current of the output transistor VTlO is governed

by the current flowing through transistor VT9, and the voltage drop which appears
across diode VD3. The bias current of the output transistor VTl7 is governed by
the current of transistor VT13 and the voltage drop produced across the "stack"
of p-n junctions (VDb, VDS. and VTlS). The circuit for stabilizing the DC
operating point of the amplifier uses transistors VT6 and VTS. An external
network which equalises the frequency response at high frequencies is connected

to pin 5, while a feedback circuit which serves to adjust the gain is connected
to pin 6.

The anplifier delivers an output power of up to b.5 watts into a load of 4 shoe
with a power supply voltage of 15 volts. The IC package has a heat sink radiator.
The description of yet another integrated circuit audio amplifier with an output
power of 1 watt, the KlUSTdb, is given in [18].

Audio preamplifiers are used as nicrophone and headphone amplifiers in radio
equipment and to amplify weak signals fros various transducers. The considerable

'gain (K0 3.1.000), the low noise and the good linearity are the sajor character-
istics of a preamplifier.

  

Figure 6.32. The r17auu3 audio preanplifier.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
b. Circuit configuration.

The circuit of the r175un3 audio preamplifier (Figure 6.32) contains a two stage
input amplifier using transistors VTl and VTZ, with external loads and bias

circuits. as well as a two stage output amplifier using transistors VT3 and VTS.
The circuit makes a provision for incorporating external feedback through tran-
sistor VTA. Diodes VDl ... VD‘ serve for matching the DC level of the collector
voltage of transistor VT3 end the base potential of the output transistor.

- 267 -

ITHl(Nﬂﬂ(1A1.lEﬂE(MVLY
Figure 6.33. The 5380111 preanplifier.

a. Basic electrical schenatic;
b. Circuit configuration.

The anplifier is used with a large nuaber of outboard coeponents. which govern
its tenpsrature stability. frequency response and gain. With a resistance in the
base circuit of transistor “‘1 of R - l mhn, the alplifier noise voltage refer-
enced to the input is "n I 1.5 W in passband of 20 Ills.

Inproving the noise characteristics of the amplifiers by neans of refining the
technology and optinising the choice of the operating nodes of the transistors
is the basic problem of this direction in general purpose circuits. The 5380M
anplifier (Figure 6.33) can serve as an example of a preanplifier with inproved
characteristics.

The two stage anplifier circuit makes it possible to obtain a gain of I“ g 105.
The input stage is designed in a differential circuit configuration (transistors
V12 and W6). The input stage is powered, fro. an enitter follower (transistor
W1). A coaposite enitter follower (transistors m and m) serves to latch
the input and output stages. The current of this emitter follower is governed
by the output potential of transistor m. Transistor “’12, the active load on
which is transistors V'l'lO and v'rn. inverts the signals fed fro. the output of
the conposite enittar follower. The output stage. which is designed around
transistors W13, was and V116, has good linearity and ashes it possible to
obtain a harmonic distortion factor of I}. g 0.12. transistor ‘7le serves to
protect the output stage against current overloads.

An isprovensnt is achieved in the teqerature stability and power supply voltage
stability by incorporating a voltage regulator in the circuit which uses reverse

biased diodes W2 and W3, which also reduce the collector-enitter voltage of
the input stage transistors.

-268-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82~00860R000500080030-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5
FOR1DFFKJA1.USE(HNLY

The regulator governs the entire Dc operation of the integrated circuit. To
improve the frequency response, an equalizing capacitance Cl is introduced into
the circuit. The unit gain frequency of this IC reaches 15 Hus, while the noise
voltage referenced to the input in a frequency range of from 0.1 to 10 K3: is
Un - 1.2 uV with a gain of 500.

External feedback from the 1c output to the emitters of the input stage (pin 5)
is provided for normal operation of the amplifier. To achieve stable operation
of the amplifier, the capacitance of the internal feedback capacitor Cl can be
increased by connecting an external capacitor cs (pins 6 and 7) in parallel with
the internal capacitance.

4.5.3. Specialized Integrated Circuits

Integrated circuits are being develOped at the present time for amplifying. limit-
ing and detecting PM signals, as well as Ic's for amplifying, converting and
detecting AH signals. and frequency modulated IF amplifier systems.

The K17AURl integrated circuit (Figure 6.34) is intended for applications as an
audio channel IF amplifier in a television receiver. This 1c can be used in the

FM channels of radio receiving equipment. We shall consider its design.

The audio carrier is fed from the output of an external bandpass filter. which
segregates the difference frequency of 6.5 MHz, to the input of a limiter-ampli-
fier, which consists of eight series coupled differential amplifiers (transistors
VTl--VT26) and two output emitter followers (transistors VT28 and VT27). The
limiter-amplifier is looped by deep negative feedback through resistor n26, which
suppresses the parasitic amplitude modulation (55 db) in a wide dynamic range

of input signal levels.

The limited signal is fed from the outputs of the amplifier string to the input
of an FM quadrature detector, which takes the form of a balanced modulator.

designed around transistors VT30-VT37. To obtain a signal which is shifted in
phase relative to the input signal and to control the bases of the transistors

of the detector multiplication circuitry (transistors VT29 and VT37), an external
parallel resonant circuit tuned to a frequency of 6.5 as: (Pigure 6.36b) should
be connected to pins 7 and 9.

The signal is fed from the output of the detector to the input of an electronic
attenuator, the function of which is to preamplify the accompanying audio signal
and provide for gain control. The electronic attenuator consists of two cross
coupled differential amplifiers (transistors VT38-VT66), the arm of each of
which is designed around a dual emitter transistor. The volume control is
accomplished by means of a variable resistor connected between pin 5 and the

common lead of the IC.

Because of the fact that the intercarrier sound does not pass through the
volume control circuit, it is not subject to the influence of background hum and
noise induction. This simplifies the remote control of the loudness. There

is a regulator in the to which is designed around diodes VDl-VD6, transistor

-270-

FfIl(JFF1(1Al.USE2(HWLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-6

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

 

The 526m internediete frequency mlifier.

Figure 6 . 35 .

Basic electrical echaatic;

Circuit configurationulnn mud “on audio channel

mlitier in a television receiver.

b.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"65 and resistors R46 and R68. It reduces the influence of a change in the
supply voltage on the amplifier paranoters.

The 526URl integrated circuit (Figure 10.35a) is also intended for use as an audio
channel IF amplifier in a television receiver. This 10 can also be used in other
PM channels. As can be seen from the basic schematic, the 5260111 10 is also
constructed based on a combination of the differential amplifier and multiplier
circuits treated above.

The broadband amplifier (transistors VTl--VT22) serves as a limiter-amplifier
with a high value of amplitude modulation suppression (no less than 40 dB). The
limited signal is fed to the reference input of the balanced modulator (the
bases of transistors V'l‘30 and W37), as well as to the frequency dependent
quadrature network, which includes external capacitor C, as well as the LC
network which is connected to the second input of the multiplier between pins

4 and 3. The quadrature circuit converts the frequency modulated signal to a
phase modulated one, which is then detected by the balanced multiplier.

The demodulated signal is fed through a level reduction circuit (attenuator,
transistors vras and VTSO) to an audio preamplifier with electronic gain control
(the control signal is fed to pin 10). The 52611111 integrated circuit has a low
frequency output voltage of “out audio - 150 mV when UP"! - 12 volts.

The [(176082 integrated circuit (Figure 4.36), besides its main function (video
channel IF amplifier in a television receiver), may also be used to construct a
high fidelity Ali receiver. The intermediate frequency is fed from the output of
an external lumped constant selective filter to the 1P amplifier, which has

three stages (transistors VTl, VT3, VTS, VT7, vno, VTll, VT12, VT17, VT18, VTl9,
VTZZ and V'l'23).

Electronic gain control is provided in the first two stages, which are designed
in a complex differential circuit with a common collector-com emitter configu-
ration. Identical diode structures, VDlo, VDS, VD9 and “110, the bias current of
which is controlled by changing the automatic control voltage, are used for this.
The paraphase All signal is fed from the output of the 11’ amplifier to the inputs
of a detector designed in a balanced multiplier circuit configuration (transistors
W33, V1310, W35, W46, VT“ and VTlo9) as well as a liniter (transistors VT28 and
V729). An external parallel tuned circuit, which is tuned to the intermediate
frequency (38 We) is connected to the output of the limiter (pins 8 and 9 in
Figure lo.36b). The internal resistors R61 and 366 of 5.1 KOhms each are used

in this mode. The signal is fed froa the output of the amplitude limiter to the
reference input of the detector (transistors VT39 and VT“). when two signals
are present in the detector, a video signal is produced at its output.

Besides the video signal, there are the doubled intermediate frequency of the
audio subcatrier and the doubled intermediate frequencies of the chrominance

subcarriers which appear at the output of the detector. This is due to the
presence of square-law components in the amplitude response of the detector.

-272-

. ‘ll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

‘8
h a.
q 00
5 385.
5 0g
8 g r.
In B“
u 53::
0 duo-I
u I
G H“?
" 33.
i tutu-ta
90-- o
o ‘68 3
u 008>
: H 'U-d
«.oudﬁ
0 “>0
azaw
:3 8238?.
H: o.
“H 0.0
”3
IE
I
0
M
Q
0
In
3.
'H
h
FOI‘OFF1CIAI.USE10NLX

The audio signal and the chrominance difference signals can be segregated from
the video signal by means of frequency detectors after further amplification in
the other units of a television receiver. The positive polarity video signal

is fed to pin 11 while the negative video signal is fed to pin 12 from the output
of the detector through the video preamplifier (transistors VTAO. VT63, VT65 and
VTSl) and the phase inverter (transistor VT52).

Because of the fact that the ABC system should respond to the average value of
the received signal voltage. an ABC keying system is used in the TC in which
data on this signal is used which is contained in the horizontal blanking pulse.
At the moment when the horizontal blanking pulse arrives at the input to the
keying amplifier (pin 7) from the preamplifier, it charges capacitor Cl, which

is incorporated in the keying amplifier circuitry. until reaching the correspond-
ing voltage which is also used as the control voltage for the operation of the
ABC system.

The ABC voltage is fed from the output of the keying amplifier to the input of

the regulating amplifier (transistors VTZ, VTb). By connecting a capacitor and
resistor in parallel to pin 6, one can change the ABC time constant. This pin

can he used as the input for manual gain control. The ABC voltage is fed from

the input of the regulating amplifier to the electronic gain control outputs of
the IF amplifier stages and to the input of the threshold amplifier.

The ABC voltage is fed from the output of the keying amplifier to the input of
the regulating amplifier (transistors VTl, VTd). By connecting a capacitor and
resistor in parallel to pin 5, one can change the ABC time constant. This pin
may also he used as an input for manual gain control. The ABC voltage is fed
from the output of the regulating amplifier to the electronic gain control inputs
of the IF amplifier stages and to the input of the threshold amplifier. [Trans-
lator note: Near duplication of these two paragraphs appears in original;
apparently editorial error].

The ABC voltage is fed from the output of the threshold amplifier to pin 5 and

is used as the ABC in other units of the television receiver (in the IF preampli-
fier or in the television channel switcher). The actuation threshold for this
amplifier is set by means of an external resistor, which is inserted between

pin 6 and the common lead of the IC. The ABC level is adjusted by means of

an external resistor, which is inserted between pin 10 and the common lead of

the Ic. A provision is made in the integrated circuit for temperature compensa-
tion for the change in the electrical characteristics of the detector and the

keying amplifier.
4.5.4. 10's for the Construction of Selective Circuits

Work on the design of semiconductor Ic's for selective circuits is going in
several directions (for example, 16's are being developed for active filters.

as well as Ic's which use the phase-locked loop principle [19]). The use of
semiconductor integrated circuit technology makes it possible to find circuit
design solutions which improve the quality of these devices and substantially
reduce the dimensions of selective circuits as compared to similar devices using

discrete components.

- 274 -

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
Figure 6.37. The $29UP1 snplifier.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
b. Design exanple of a low pass filter.

... ___.‘_— __ -__——_..._——-.-. . - ...._

"'1'! " ".
ﬂﬂﬂﬁ

    
 

  
  

 
     

.13.: lg

      

Figure 5.38. The K283881 gyrator.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
b. "Grounded" inductance circuit configuration.

When designing seniconductor 10's for active filters, the prinary attention is
devoted to the develop-ant of the basic operational amplifiers. The op amp
configuration as a second order filter section is the most widespread in active
RC filter circuits. This filter section is based on integrators.'snd for it,
three high quality amplifiers are required. In a nunber of cases, when elevated
requirements are not placed on the sensitivity and Q of filters, one can use
cooperatively simple 10's with a low gain. For exaaple. the 529UP1 integrated

- 275 -

FOBlOIllC1A1.lEﬂi(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circuit (Figure 6.37) contains three identical amplifiers on a single chip

(overall current consumption of 3 mA and a single power supply voltage of 6 volts),
each of which has an input impedance of 30 KOhms and a gain of #0 dB. A typical
active filter section with s Q of 50 in a frequency range of up to 200 KB: is
realized on the basis of this IC.

The research which has been done in the field of IC design for another class of
active filters, gyrators, shows that the existing circuit design techniques for
the construction of semiconductor Ic's make it possible to effectively solve one
of the major problems of the practical realization of gyrator circuits: assuring
the stability of the DC mode when the parameters of the components change and
when adjusting the value of the gyrator conductance.

Hybrid IC's - the K283SSl--K283559 [20] (Figure 6.38) - make it possible to

realize an "inductance" with a range of nominal values of from 1 mlly up to 100

ﬂy at frequencies of from 1 to 300 KB: with a Q of from 10 to 500 and a permissible
deviation in the gyration impedance of i 31. These IC's are powered from two
supplies with a voltage of t_6 volts.

The active filter Ic‘s treated here can be used in low frequency audio channels
of receivers. when developing 16's for high frequency selective circuits, it
has proved to be convenient to use the principle of phase automatic frequency
control (PAPCh) [PLL - phase locked loops]. A PLL system contains an oscillator.
which is voltage controlled, a phase detector and a low pass filter.

The development of IC's employing the PLL principle is one of the promising trends
at the present time in work on high quality radio receivers, which will make it
possible to reduce the number of inductances, and consequently, the dimensions of
the device. A further improvement in semiconductor 10's by means of increasing
the level of integration and expanding the functional capabilities opens up the
prospects of fabricating entire functional assemblies of communications equipment
in a single production process cycle.

4.6. Integrated Circuits for Analog to Digital and Digital to Analog Data
Conversion

Mutual digital and analog data converters are broken down into two groups: analog
to digital converters (ATsP) [AID converters], which serve to convert an initial
analog quantity to a digital equivalent (or code) corresponding to it, as well

as digital to analog converters (TaAP) [D/A converters], intended for generating
an analog output quantity corresponding to the digital code fed to the converter
input [21, 22].

D/A and A/D converters consist of digital and analog circuits. The digital cir-
cuits (counters, registers, decoders, adders, prograamdng memories) control the
conversion process in accordance with the conversion algorithm. Analog circuits
generate highly stable reference voltages, which switch the analog levels,
amplify and convert them on a specified scale, and realize instantaneous storage
and integration. Sets of 10's are being produced at the present time for the
construction of the analog circuits of D/A or A/D converters. The breakdown of

- 276 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a converter into several lc's, which takes place because of technological reasons,
also has its positive aspects, since it notes it possible to construct various
types of converters in terns of their resolution using a single set of Ic's.

 

Figure b.39. Basic electrical schematic of the voltage conparator
incorporated in the 250841 10's.

The type and number of 10' s needed for the construction of the digital circuits
of A/D and D/A converters is governed by the procedure chosen for signal convers-
ion. the requisite speed and the number of bits. CHDS circuits are used here

for econonical devices, TTL integrated circuits are used for standard devices and

ECTL for high speed converters.

One can use the hybrid Ic's of the 228. 2&0, 265 and 252 series for the design

of the analog circuits. The 260 series is a functionally complete set of 10's,
which is intended for the construction of sultichsnnel (up to 30 channels) [23]
10 digit AID converters with an input voltage range of + 5 volts and a conversion
tine for the maximum input voltage to a binary code of 100 microseconds. 81x
[sic] types of analog 10's are incorporated in the 240 series: the 240 8A1.

240 001. 2‘0 Ill, 260 KHZ and 2&0 rna.
The 260 8A1 integrated circuit (Figure 6.39) is a voltage comparator, which is
intended for performing the operation of comparing two analog quantities, with

a resolving power of no less than 2 nv, and has an input i-pedance of l HDhI.
The comparator is designed in a two stage configuration. The input differential

9277-

IKII(IHHC1A1.IENE(NNLY
h FtHRCHHHKJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

 

Figure 6.60. The ZhOUDl.operstionnl snplifier.

s. Basic electrical schsnstic;
b. Circuit configuration.

stege hes transistors connected in s Derlington contiguretion to increase the
input impedance. The use of the 129NTl integrsted circuit peir in the input
stage has node it possible to obtain e good bins voltsge (2 nV). In order to
limit the nnxinun positive output voltage to the level permissible for logic
elenents, the output stsge is powered et e reduced voltage of +5 volts. The
conpsrstor csn generate s current of up to 12 nA in e loed. where the slew rate
of the output voltage exceeds 10 volts/usec.

- 278 -

F08‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
Figure 6.61. The zaonu analog avitch. .

The 260001 operational anplifier (Figure 10.61) operatee as the input signal
amplifier of an All) converter, on well an an enplifier which was the input
currente in a D/A converter. Two differential amplifier stages and a differential
follower nake it poaaible to obtain an internal gain in exceee of 8,000 in a

vide band of frequenciee (nore than 100 ma). An enitter follower (tranaietor
V1310) providea for a high couon node rejection ratio. The input differential
atage, deaigned ee a Darlington configuration. has an input impedance of about

1 Hahn. an average input current of In - 1.5 nicroawe, and an input current
difference of “in - 0.2 nicroenpe. The amplifier hiea voltage ie Ubiae I 2 W,
while its tewerature drift in UN“ - 10 uVI’C.. The output power anplifier
stage generatee a current of 5 DA in the load. “No frequency equalization circuite
are introduced into the circuitry to improve the frequency reeponee: in this
case. the output voltage elev rate ie 2.1 V/ueec.

The 240mm,: analog witch (Figure tel) ie deeigned for connection of either a
positive or a negative reference voltage at the output (depending on the trout

eignala) .

-279-

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm:

 

Figure $.62. The 2100012 analog evitch.
e. Block diegr-g

 

Figure 4.43. The four bit 21.0013 switcher.
a. Block diagram; b. m1: electrical achmtic.

-280-

MOMMUSEONLY
Figure 4.66. The ZkOYeNl voltage regulator.

a. Baeic electrical anheeatic;
b. Circuit configuration.

If a "I" is fed to pin 6, while an ”0” is fed to pin 5, a positive reference
voltage appeara at pins 26 and 25. If the potentials at the input change places,
then a potential cloae to zero vill appear at pine 26 and 25, while a negative

reference voltage will appear at pin 27. The error in the traneaieaion of the
reference voltagea ie i_2.5 uv for the 260KN1A twitch and :_5 IV for the 2603313.

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
INJR‘OIWNCJA1.1EHE()RHJY

 

Figure 6.65. Block diagran of a double integration analog to

digital converter.

 

Figure 6.66. Block diagran of a 10 digit digital-analog converter.

 

Figure 6.67. Basic electrical echeaatic of
the SOlNSl reaiative natrix.

The block diagran of the 260Il2
integrated circuit (Figure 6.62) con-
tains three bit reference voltage
switches having a transaission error
of 1’10 nv. By feeding a "l" poten—
tial to pin 20 and en "0" to pin 17.
we obtain the positive reference
voltage at pin 35 and a voltage close
to zero at pin 3. If the potentials
at the inpute ere changed to the
opposite values, then a negative
reference voltage will appear at pin
3. while a voltage close to zero
will appear at pin 35.

The four hit 260KN3 switcher (Figure
6.63) is designed for switching
negative and positive polarity

- 282 -

llll(lﬂﬂCIAl.USE|NVLY
Figure 4.48. The 252$A1 comparator.

a. Block diagram;
b. Basic electrical schematic of a single comparator;
c. Circuit configuration for a single comparator.

voltages of :_5 volts, depending on the control signal levels. The switch in
the 240KN3 integrated circuit has a residual voltage of 1 av, a leakage current
of the turned-off switch of 100 ha. a resistance of the turned-on switch of

100 ohms and a switching time of 1.0 nose. The switch operation can be analyzed
using the first channel as an example. "hen the ”1" level is fed to pin 18 and
the "0" level is fed to pin 19, the switch turns on, and the signal passes fron
pin 17 to pin 20. when the potential at pins 18 and 19 changes, the switch cuts
off and the signal does not get fro. pin 17 through to pin 20.

The 240Yeﬂ1 voltage regulator (Figure 4.44) sakes it possible to obtain a
stabilized voltage of :_5 volts with an instability in the output voltage with
respect to cuvrent and voltage of no more than 0.061; the average temperature
coefficient of the output voltage is no note than 0.0051/‘6 and the load current
for each output runs up to 25 ma. The regulator does not have an internal refer-
cncc voltage source. because of which. the reference voltage supplies are designed
around external zener diodes VDl and VDZ; the output voltages are adjusted by
variable resistors R3 and RS.

The 240 series integrated circuits are made using hybrid film technology and
use active outboard elements of the 129NTlB, V, 2T202. 2T332, 2T364. 2T360, etc.
types. assembled in a 155-36-1 package and operate fron a t 9 volt 1'102 power

-283-

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0 r
f:(c)'m

 

annumwmulyuuuuusvuulﬂﬂvnh
34:“ ms mus. O-am ml. sous-elm nos.-

Wynn-um

    

Figure 6.49. The 252631 operational amplifier.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
b. Circuit configuration;

c. The gain as a function of frequency:
Key: 1. (Uithout feedback).

supply. The curves for the electrical parameters of the 240 series analog IC's
as a function of temperature are given in [23]. The 260 series was developed
for the construction of double integrating A/D converters (Figure b.45). The

digital portion of this circuit can be constructed using any TTL integrated
circuit.

-284-

FOI»OI1NCJAL.USEIMNLY
IWDR 0!1ﬂ(]Al.USEI(NULY

The addition of a resistive matrix expands the functional capabilities of the
240 series. When using such matrices, the series can be employed to construct
D/A converters and other kinds of AID converters. The possible circuit of a
10 bit D/A converter using a 301NSl integrated circuit is shown in Figure $.66.

The matrices of R - 2a resistors are intended for converting a parallel digital
code to the corresponding voltage level at the output. The major characteristics
of the 301NSl R - IR resistive matrix (Figure 6.07) are: a division factor K

of from 1/1026 to 1023/102b, a division step of h (1/1025), a relative division
error 62 (t'0.0135), the scatter in the nominal values of the resistors, AR, is
0 to 100 ohms, as well as a maximum input voltage 01“ of 12.6 volts.

W7 .1" 3

ﬁle?

-
EIHI III M!

m

    

 

Figure b.50. The basic electrical schematic of an 8 bit digital]
analog converter which converts to a positive polarity
current.

Another set of 10's intended for construction of AID and D/A converters is the
252 series, which consists of seven types of Ic's, based on which one can con-
struct 8 to 10 bit converters for analog signals represented in the form of
positive or negative voltages.

Included in the complement of the 252$Al integrated circuit (Figure 6.h8) are
three comparators with a current sensitivity of better than 2 microamps. The

two stage comparator circuit provides for a voltage gain of no less than 1.000.

The input stage of the comparator is designed in a complex differential circuit
configuration and makes it possible to configure the comparator both with a high

- 285 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

input impedance (the utilization of an input emitter follower: trunslxlnrn VTI
and VTS). and with a reduced input impedance (the signal is fed to the bases 0!
transistors VTZ and VT4). The ZSZSAl comparator has an output voltage slew rate
of no less than 30 V/usec for an input signal voltage of 10 av (the emitter
follower inputs are used in this mode).

Incorporated in the 2520D1 integrated circuit (Figure 4.49) are two operational
amplifiers with feedback resistors. Bach op amp is designed in a two stage
configuration. Two differential stages and a power gain stage provide for a
gain of no less than 7,000. The input differential stage, the arms of which use
Darlington circuits, is characterized by the following input parameters: R1“ 5
900 KOhms, "bias 5 12 av; 11“ g 0.1 vA and A11n - 0.02 uA. To increase the
input impedance of the op amp and expand its gain bandwidth, inserted in the
emitter circuits of the input stage are resistors having a nominal value of

50 ohms. An improvement is made in the frequency response of the operational
amplifier through the choice of the external frequency equalization networks;
in this case. the small signal passband of the op amp (when "in - 0.1 volts) is
about 6 MHz and the output voltage slew rate is 5 V/usec. The nominal values
of the frequency equalization components should be chosen as a function of the
gain by means of Table 4.7.

TABLE 4.7. The Choice of Equalization
Elements for the 252UDl
Operational Amplifier

 

 

 

- 0 0 0 0

mo 3. 5| I0 8,2

ID 1300 26 240 L?

I 4700 I0 240 0.75
Figure 4.51. Block diagram of an 8 bit
digital to analog converter
converting to negative
Key: 1. Voltage gain, KU. polarity current.

The 252PA1 integrated circuit is an 8 bit binary code to positive polarity current
converter (Figure 4.50) and consists of 8 switches and a resistive matrix. The
switches. depending on the digital combination at the IC inputs. control the
output current of the matrix. When a signal which turns on the switch appears

at the circuit input, a current flows in the load. which is normalized by the
resistances of the matrix and the reference supply voltage. The relative conver-
sion precision in this circuit is no worse than 1_o.4z; the current levels in
each bit of the converter are given in Table 4.8. In order to construct a

binary code to voltage A/D converter. it is necessary to connect an operational
amplifier at the output of the 252PA1 integrated circuit, where this amplifier
sums the bit currents (Figure 4.51). In this case, we obtain a D/A converter

for a negative polarity.

- 286 -

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
.
N .

Jala-

===F__-I

[I m
|[I::..

Eﬁﬂ'

IE

 

- 287 -
FIIICNWNCJAI.USEINVLY

converter converting to negative polarity current.

Figure 6.52. Basic electrical schematic of an 8 bit digital to analog
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 4.53. Block diagram of an 8 bit
digital to analog converter.
which converts to positive
polarity current.

 

The 252PA2 (Figure 6.52) 8 bit binary code to negative current ccnxerter is dis-
tinguished from the preceding by the polarity of the diodes and the reference
power supplies. The relative conversion precision is also no worse than 0.41;
the levels of the bit currents correspond in absolute value to the analogous
currents in the 252PAl integrated circuit. when a sunndng amplifier is connected
to the 252PA2 integrated circuit, we obtain a positive polarity digital to analog
converter (Figure 4.53).

A 10 bit binary code to negative current converter can also be designed using
two 252PN1 and 252PA3 Ic's. where the resistive matrix and diode switches are
incorporated in the 252PN1 integrated circuit (Figure b.54), while the 252PA3
10 contains the control circuitry (Figure 6.55). The relative operational pre-
cision of this converter is no worse than i 0.11.

The block diagram of a 10 bit D/A converter (Figure 6.56) is based on the 252PA3,
ZSZPAl and ZSZUDl integrated circuits. The four-channel 252KN1 current switcher
(Figure 4.57), which is intended for the distribution of bipolar current signals
at a frequency of fron 0 to 60 as: with a transmission gain of 0.8 and a switch
on to off transmission ratio of A0 dB is included in the 252 series for the
construction of multichannel D/A converters. The 252KN1 integrated circuit is
powered by two power supplies at “sup - 1,6 volts (:_1x) and switches a current

of up to 2 us. An analog nenory circuit can be designed around the 252KN1 and
252UDl integrated circuits (Figure b.58).

There are no regulators in the 252 series, and for this reason. one can use
integrated circuit stabilizers from the 275 or 162 series as the reference vol-
tage sources.

A prerequisite for the transition to the production of D/A and A/D converters as
functionally conplete assenblies (even on one substrate) was the creation of a
broad component base of operational anplifiers, conparstors, analog switches
and keyers, digital Ic's as well as reference voltage sources. Success in thin
filn technology is also of great importance. which nsde it possible to create
sets of precision resistors.

- 288 -
FOI‘OFIICLAI.lEﬂE(”ULY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500080030-6

‘°—l FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“-1 § _ u
g

 

Q.

  

z}

”I

Figure 6.54. The 252PN1 resistive matrix.

(82’!

 

-289-
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080030-6
F!NICMNH(JAL USEGDNLY

 

Figure 4.56. Block diagram of a 10 bit digital to analog
converter. which converts to negative polarity.

 

' I I.. . . . . . . .....1
ﬂ?- ” (b)
(I

Figure 6.57. The ZSZKNl four-channel switcher.

a. Block diagram;
b. Basic electrical schematic.

Key: 1. Input voltage 1;
2. Output voltage 1;
3. Control voltage 1;
6. Control voltage 2.

-290-

FOI‘OFEKJAI.USE(MVLY
Iv“ vess~s ~~~~~~ v. I...

TABLE lo.8. Parameters of the ZSZPAI. PA2 and PA3 Integrated Circuit Converters

 

 

IW ”full. ”inAi
Parameters SZPAI 252
Tons promos. IIA
. 2.6t0J25 2 “5&0 I”
3“ . I: (llnl.10.2%(ll'2)§0'l%
Currents I. (m 1.10.! (Us ”.10.
I. (II “*0. ’l/ 1:0. 2
I. III I.:i:l.6 (I IglutOA
'- ' }II..I*I-I - f‘I’ «It?
I :1:
(I III Am. Iggtitl. 3.3
I'. - may.“ I

  
 

(l) CyuIIspIIIII now! me pups

Simﬁj 6*on
(2) ”Remand mm Imam

“spams asaeIIsII. B 4 4
II so use mam
(3) m quIIIII pumou. IA 1 ‘-

 

 

Key: 1. Total input bit current. M;
2. Maximum level of the input control voltage, volts;
3. Current consumption for the control circuit of a single bit, IIA.

 

Figure b.58. Block diagras of an analog nemory.

(I . 7 . Analog Switches

malog switches (AK) are used for switching analog signals in analog to digital
and digital to analog data conversion circuits. Moreover, analog switchers are
used as switching couponents in telemetry. blanking, data multiplexing circuits,

as well as choppers in operational amplifier circuits vith signal spectrum con-
version [25].

-291-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The following parameters are the classification criteria for analog switches:

the turned-on switch resistance to, the residual voltage 0,“ across the closed
switch, the leakage current of the channel 11.“. the resistance of the turned-
off switch so“. the input impedance of the control circuit kin, the switchable
current Iswitch (or voltage "switch” the level of the control signal current

1c (or voltage level "con)' as well as the turn on and off speed. Both bipolar
angnunipolar structures are used for the design of analog switches. An analog
switch can be designed in the form of an individual IC, or it can be composed of
several 10's and other cosponents.

Bipolar integrated choppers of the mum and 125x11 types (Figure 6.59). based
on the series compensation effect, can be used as the switching element for the
construction of precision analog switches. There are two identical n-p-n (in
the 101KT1 10) or p-n-p (in the 12!.le IC) integrated circuit transistors in
these choppers, which are made on a single chip (so that the transistors of
these IC's have a couson collector and contain four p-n junctions: two emitter-
base junctions and two collector-base junctions). The integrated circuit
transistors of the choppers have a high degree of identity of their characteris-
tics, which assures a small mutual scatter in the remaining parameters (and in
the absolute values of the parameters in the compensated switch circuit) as
cowared to discrete transistors. Both transistors of such an analog switch
are in the same state, and for this reason. a small scatter in the parameters is
assured by the opposing configuration of the two transistor circuits with respect
to the residual voltage and current.

7
VII * I] V”
J ( 5
VII y" Out

a: A! ,, (b)

      

Figure 6.59. The lOlK‘l‘l (a) and lZIoKTl (b) bipolar integrated
circuit chopper.

The lOlKTl and leKTl integrated circuit choppers are made in a circular eight
pin package, while the 162KT1 integrated circuit chopper. which is similar to
the 124m chopper in terms of its parameters. is produced in a flat pack. The
main parameters of the lOlKTl and leKTl integrated circuits are given in Table
lo.9. The electrical schematics of the application of bipolar integrated circuit
choppers are shown in Figure 6.59. Here Ic's inserted in parallel, series and
parallel-series switch configurations are used as single switches.

The given lc's can also operate in structurally compensated switching circuits.
where an improvement in the characteristics is achieved by virtue of the special
configuration of the signal source and load.

The major difficulty in the application of the switch components treated above
using parametric compensation consists in the fact that the control circuitry is

-292-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 4.9. Maximum Values of the Main Electrical Paraneters of Various hpes

of Analog Switches

 

 

 

 

 

 

Paraseters lOlKTlA 12AKT1A 273KT1 143m 190KT1 190KT2 168m
Resistance of'the switch - - 100 100 500 50 100

when "turned on", ohms

Switch leakage current

when "switched off", an - - 100 20 . 100 50 20
Turn-on delay time. usec 0.03 - 1 2.0 - - 0.3
Turn-off delay time,

usec 0.6 - 5 1.6 - - -
Resistance between 100 100 - - - - -
emitters, ohms

Leakage current between 10 1.5 - - - - -
emitters, nA '

Residual voltage between 50 100 - - - - -
emitters, nicrovolts

Number of channels 1 1 1 2 5 b I.

 

complicated, where this circuit should be isolated from the signal source and
the load.

The hybrid 272!le integrated circuit can serve as an example of a medium speed
switch with an isolated control circuit. The switch control circuitry uses a
transformer here. The parameters of the 273KT1 integrated circuit are given in
Table 4.9, while its electrical schematic and recommended circuit configuration
are shown in Figure 4.60. A signal supplied from standard T'l'i. integrated circuits
is suitable for the control of the circuit.

 

Figure 6.60. The 272!le analog switch.
a. Basic schematic; b. Circuit configuration.

- 293 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analog switches using field-effect transistors have become quite widespread at the
present time. Field-effect transistors with a controlling p-n junction are vol-
tage switched and do not consume any control current. These devices are suitable
for switching both currents and voltages, since they are galvanically decoupled
from the control and signal circuits.

Field-effect transistor switches are controlled by voltages having an amplitude
of 10 volts. The output signal levels fron standard TTL circuits have a range
of 0.3 to 3 volts. For this reason. to realize a switch circuit. it is necessary
in the majority of cases to use level interface circuitry. In the switch using
field-effect transistors, equipped with a control circuit and incorporated in
the ZOAKNI integrated circuit (Figure 4.61). the analog switching circuit is
designed as a T-section switch, which takes the form of a conbination of series-
parallel and series switches; in this case, the series switches and the parallel
switch operate out-of-phase.

When the series switches are turned on.
the parallel switch does not influence
the circuit operation because of the
fact that its resistance is high as
compared to the resistance of the turned-
on switches. After the transistors of
the series switches are cut off. the
parallel switch transistor turns on.
shunting the parasitic signal circuit
with a low resistance, where this cir-
cuit is due to the influence of the
interelectrode capacitances of the
series switch and the resistance of the
cut-off switch. In this case, a con-
siderably attenuated signal acts on
the next switch. Because of this. T-
Figure 6.61. Basic electrical schematic section switches can operate at a high

of the 28bKNl switch. switching frequency (with low noise).

A drawback to such a switch is the large

value of the resistance when turned on. However. this resistance does not depend
on the magnitude and polarity of the voltage being switched.

 

MOS transistors (metal-oxide-semiconductor) are of the greatest interest for
applications as analog switches. This is explained primarily by the high value
of the input inpedance of the device (up to 10 ohns) for a signal of any
polarity. something which assures good isolation between the controlling and
switched circuits. Moreover. the fabrication technology for HOS devices is such
simpler than the technology for bipolar transistors and field-effect transistors
with a controlling p-n junction. while the H05 structures the-selves are suit-
able for an increased level of integration.

Enriched p—channel HOS devices (the channel conductance rises with an increase in
the gate-source voltage) are most frequently used in a seniconductor design.

- 294 -
FOR OFFHJA1.USE(ﬂVLY
mmmmmmmmvn VIIVD

VII

'7’

 

m

 

a (.) 0(a) . o<c)

Figure 5.62. Basic electrical schematics of uoltage switches.

a. The 190x11 five-channel;
b. The 19OKT2 dual two-channel;
c. The 168KT2 four-channel switch.

'7. 7721 ”25 W20 W20

 

Figure 6.63. The 163KT1 dual channel

 

. MOS switch.
‘1 a. Basic electrical
E! E g schematic;
aim—‘0'.” on: 13. Block diagras.
U
con2
,, (b)

The 190 and 168 series Ic's can serve as examples of integrated circuit switches
and keycrs using nos transistors. There are two Ic's included in the 190 series:
the 190KT1 five-channel voltage switch (Figure 4.62s) and the dual two-channel

190KT2 switch (Figure lo.62b). These Ic's sake it possible to switch voltages of

ma»-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

up to 25 volts. The control signal amplitude may exceed 6 volts. The l68KT2
four-channel switch (Figure b.62c) switches a voltage of up to 25 volts at s
switching frequency of up to 1 MHz. The design of circuits where TTL integrated
circuits are used in conjunction with the 190 and 168 series 16's is complicated
because of the incompatibility of the output signals of these digital 10's with
the input control levels for the p-channel MOS switches.

This drawback is eliminated in the lb3KTl two-channel EDS switch (Figure 6.63).
in which the channel consists of the switch and the controller. The parameters
of this switch are given in Table 6.9. The 163KT1 IC controller contains a
circuit for latching the output TTL IC levels to the input levels for the H08
transistors as well as a logic amplifier with a push-pull output to provide for
rapid charging and discharging of the input capacitance of the MOS switch.

5.8. Integrated Circuit Voltage Regulators

High precision in radioelectronic equipment is assured by the stability of the
transfer functions of all of the equipment sections. which in turn are dependent
on the stability of the supply voltages. Voltage regulators are used to obtain
the requisite power supply conditions [28].

An integrated circuit regulator has the following main parameters. The voltage
instability ratio is measured as the ratio of the change in the output voltage
A00": 1 to the change in the input voltage which causes it. It is expressed in
Z/volt.

Kins u - AUoutIOOX/UoutAUm.

The current instability factor is measured as the ratio of the change in the
output voltage. Auout- to the relative change in the load current which causes
it and is expressed in 2:

° AI .

Kins I ' 6" out out

out 0 . 100:1001/0

The ripple smoothing factor is measured as the ratio of the amplitude value of
the input voltage ripple not“ to the amplitude value of the output voltage ripple.
This factor is most often expressed in decibels:

Ksmooth ' 20 108 (AUin/Auout) [dB].

Moreover, to design the circuit configuration for integrated circuit regulators,
it is necessary to know the power level dissipated by the device, Pdis- the
maximum input "in max and the range of voltages to be regulated Auout'

An important characteristic of a regulator is its speed, corresponding to the
speed with which it handles jumps in the input voltage and load currents.
Integrated circuit technology makes it possible to create various regulating
devices [2]: from the simplest parametric regulators, for which one of the
junctions of an integrated circuit transistor is used, up to complex compensation
type regulators (Figure b.6k).

- 296 —

FCII¢)FFIC1AI.I£§EZ(MNLY
An error amplifier (usually one of the
types of operational or differential
amplifiers with a gain of about 1,000)
amplifies the potential difference
between a reference source and a center
tap of a divider. The voltage divider
and regulating element are inserted in
a negative feedback circuit for this
amplifier. Because of the fact that
the gain is high, one can assume that
the voltage at the regulator output is

 

Figure 6.60. Block diagram of a compen-
sation type regulator.

Key: 1. Error anplifier; proportional to the transmission gain
2. Regulating element; of the divider and the reference voltage
3. Divider. level:

. uout ' urefal + R2)/32

where “ref is the reference source voltage.

One of the types of rener diodes or a circuit based on current generators [2]

is used as the element generating the reference voltage. The circuit which is
depicted in Figure k.66 operates as follows. An increase in the input voltage
by the amount A01“ should cause an increase in the output voltage of the regula-
tor by the amount AUout. But the output signal increment is fed through a
divider which attenuates it by a factor of R2/(Rz + R1), to the input of the
error amplifier. The amplifier should generate a signal for reducing the

current through the regulating element and thereby substantially compensate for
the anticipated error at the output snout.

The regulating element can consist of one or more transistors, connected in a
Darlington configuration. The number of transistors depends on the load current,
the output power of the amplifier and the quality of the transistors themselves.
As a rule, transistors are not connected to an integrated circuit regulator in
the case of low load currents. Hith load currents of 1 to 5 A, it is necessary
to connect two to three power control transistors to the 10. At the present
time, several series of integrated circuit regulators are being produced, both
semiconductor and hybrid, the electrical characteristics of which are summarized
in Table 4.10.

The 275 series of hybrid integrated circuit regulators are a set of 10's with
fixed output voltages, ranging from 1 to 26 volts. There are negative voltage
regulators in this series. The use of temperature compensated internal feedback
dividers is to be noted as a special feature of the 275 series of regulators.

Such an approach makes it possible to reduce the impact of the ambient temperature
on circuit operation. but at the same time reduces the applications flexibility

of the device. In order to be able to make some adjustments, the center tsp of
the divider is brought out from the regulator circuitry.

The 27SYeN1-6A,b positive voltage regulators (Figure 6.65) differ from one
another in the nominal values of the divider resistors R11, R12 and 813. The

- 297 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Finl()FF1(JA1.USEl(NVLV

 
   
   

 
  
 

  
 

will». I}?
III’

., Hill

.0) (a) an

[I'
I'

 

Figure 0.65. The 275YeNl-6A.B positive voltage regulators.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
h. Main circuit configuration.

regulating element in this circuit consists of matching transistor VT3 and tran-
sistors VT6 and VTS which are connected in parallel. The error amplifier is
designed around a differential stage (transistors VT7 and V18) and a matching
transistor VT2. The operating current of transistor VTl is determined by the
bias produced by means of diode string VDl and V02, as well as resistors Rl

and 82. Transistor VTl plays the part of an active load for the amplifying
transistor. The built-in voltage divider is provided with a temperature stabil-
ization network (diodes VDb and VDS, as well as resistors R10 and 313). Resistor
R3 serves for the leakage of the collector-base currents of the parallel transis-
tor pair VTb and VTS. The regulator circuitry includes a protection circuit.
designed around transistor VT6, and resistive divider R6 and R5. The protective
circuit operates with an external resistor R11“. Capacitor Cl is intended for
eliminating self-excitation of the regulator. The output voltage can be adjusted
by varying the resistance of the internal divider by means of external resistors.
which can be connected to pin lb.

To protect the IC output against excessive current when its load is short cir-
cuited, pins are provided for the connection of the limiting resistor 311‘. The
load current, in passing through resistor Rlim' produces a voltage drop across
it which is applied between the base and the emitter of transistor VT6. The
load current increases until the voltage drop across resistor R 1- (about 0.7
volts) turns on transistor VT6, which limits the base current r se in transistor
VT3. Thus, the rise of the emitter current of the regulating element is stopped
(i.e., the output current of the integrated circuit). The nosinsl value of

R11. depends on the level of the permissible load current and is determined

from the formula:

Rlim ' Ube/Iload/per ' 0'7 v”load/per : 0.7(01n ' Uout)/(Pdiss.per . 1'3)’

where Pdiss.per is the permissible power dissipation of the regulator.

- 298 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i 0171.500 I.

   

Figure 6.66. The 27SYeNllA,B voltage regulator.

a. Basic electrical achesatic;
6. Main circuit configuration.

In contrast to the circuit depicted in Figure b.65a, in the circuit of the
275YeﬂllA.B regulator with an output voltage of +12 V (Figure 6.66), the nia-
uatch signal is amplified by a two stage circuit (transistors VT6 and V12). The
voltage at the emitter of transistor V16 (the reference level) is clamped by
zener diode VD3 and the control signal is fed to the base of this transistor.

The 275YeN7A,B (Figure 5.67) negative voltage regulators (Uout - -6 volts) are
si-ilar in terms of their structure to the circuit shown in Figure 4.66s. How-
ever, the active elements are of the other type of polarity, and the regulating
element (transistors VT3 and VTk) are designed in a Darlington configuration.
The 275YeN12A,B negative voltage regulator is shown in Figure 5.68, while the
basic circuit configuration is similar to the circuit shown in Figure 6.67b.

7 ’50 "I '0

    

Figure 6.67. The 27SYeN7 negative voltage regulator.

a. Basic electrical schesatic;
b. Main circuit configuration.

- 299 -

BOR¢0FFICLA1.USE10NLN
FTNROFFNHAI.USE43NIN

Semiconductor regulators have significant advantages over hybrid ones. the
active elements of which are discrete components. The merits of semiconductor
regulators are expressed in the increased stability of the output voltage in
a range of temperatures, with changes in the load and input voltage. This is

obtained by virtue of the gain reserve and the thermal coupling which exists in
semiconductor circuits.

 

Figure 4.68. Basic electrical schematic of the 275YeN12A,B negative
voltage regulator.

The 142 series of semiconductor 10's are compensation type regulators, which

have a circuit for protecting against failure in the case of a load short circuit.
An external divider is used in the 142 series regulators to adjust the output
voltage. Such a circuit configuration makes it possible to extend the range of
variable output voltages. A divider with a large division ratio degrades the
value of the regulation factors, however, in a semiconductor circuit one can
realize a gain reserve even with a large regulation range. For this reason, the
temperature stabilization coefficient for the 142 10 series is no worse than for
the 10's of the 275 series (Table 4.10).

The reference voltage supply circuit generates a reference voltage at a level of
approximately 1.8 volts. Such an approach extends the control range of the output
voltages of the 1c in the low value range [26]. Moreover,_the changes in the
voltage across the emitter-base junction of transistor VT3 (-2.2 mV/°c) and the
positive gradient of the voltage change across zener diode VDl are compensated

by means of diodes VDZ, VDA and the base-emitter junction of transistor VT2,
which have a negative temperature coefficient of -2.2 mV/‘C. A zero temperature
coefficient can be obtained through the correct selection of the nominal values
of divider resistors R1 and R2. '

In the leYeNl-ZA,B voltage regulators (Figure 6.69), transistors VT6 and VT8
which are connected in a Darlington configuration, serve as the regulating
element. The error amplifier is made as a differential stage (transistors VT3

- 300 -

FOI(MHHKJAI.USEIMNLY
Figure 5.69. The leYeNl-ZA,B voltage regulator.

a. Basic electrical schematic;
h. Main circuit configuration.

and VTS). the loads for which are field-effect transistor VTA and the base
circuit of the regulating element. The differential amplifier is configured so
that its full differential gain can be used.

Transistor VT9 perforns the function of a regulator circuit protective element
in the case of an output short-circuit. The input for the electrical turning
off of the regulator or feeding control signals to it uses transistor VT7. In
the normal mode, transistor VT7 is turned off. When a positive pulse is applied
(for exanple, from a TTL switch), it turns on and cuts off the base current fro-
transistor VT6, and the regulating transistor turns off.

The current sensor. resistor 81 (Figure 4.69b), is inserted in the circuit of

the load current between the base and the emitter of transistor VT9 (Figure 6.29a).
When the load current exceeds the set value, transistor VT9 turns on and shunts
the regulating elenent. The noninal value of resistor R1 is chosen as a function
of the maxi-um output current. Curves for the ripple smoothing factors K,“ for
the leYeNlA,B and lb2YeN2A,B integrated circuits as a function of the ripple
frequency of the power supplies and output voltages are shown in Figure h.70a

and b, while the switching and settling tines are shown in Figure 6.70c and d

as a function of the load capacitance.

The voltage traces of a regulator for the case of a pulsed change in the input
voltage are shown in Figure b.7la, while the traces for the case of a pulsed
change in the output current are shown in Figure b.72a. The curves for t1 -
f(c1); t2 - f(c1); (Al/a) - ((01) and (Azla) - f(Cl) for a change in "in and
Iload are shown in Figure b.72b respectively. The given characteristics make

it possible to estimate the speed of the regulators as a function of the noninal
value of capacitor Cl.

‘3)1-

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USU". ONLY

TABLE 6.10. The Parameters of the 162 and 275 Series Integrated Circuit
Regglatora

 

Key:

2

‘n-ua ‘P
TYPO of 1' '=7§
mam-‘- a...12 o...n no loo 0.; 0.3 0.5 om

I! 0.: 0.:
mam—:- 12...» "5.... so no 0.: 0—: ".4; 0.0:
O O

A 0.0:
mam-F 1.2m o...o so no 0.5 0.07 0,25 6,713
A 0.0.
mam—E 2.4110 1...: so so 0.3 0.09 0.25 0.0:
A , 0.00
mm? 3.0:” 1.60.0' ‘ m m 0.6 0..” o.” o.“
A 0.02

”58"“ F L0ﬁlo ‘ ..6ooo| ’ m w 0.6 0.. on” o'_m
A om

1? 6.090% 9.5...“ 20 so 0.; 0.12 0.15 0.00
mun-5- oo I096I05 I so so as 012 on 1’3,
5 o t o aoo ' o v p 0.“
mow—:- —o,o,uo l0.6...l 2o so 0.6 0.12 o.» %%
A 0.09
mus—s- 6,a*|o%l0.6.,.l 20 so 0.5 o.» 0.15 0.03
ml-ID-% 4.390 l0.6...|- so no 0,5 o.I2 0.15 2'4:-
A _ ' 0.0:
mmro 9.01;") l3,6...l 20 so 0.5 o.» 0.: 0.02
A 0.01
mean ? I2.0¢l0%l0.5...2€ Is no 0.5 0,2 0,: 0.0:
A A 0.0:
memo 6 mayo no.5... l5 so 0.0 0,: 0.1 0.03
A , 0.0:
mom.- 13 mayo :1... I6 so 0.6 0.2 0.: 0.02
mean A no lo I1 no so as 0: on 949'
8 -' o i on o o I a.” -

A V 0.0:
mus-3- -Is.o*|o 19.6... no so 0,5 0,22 0.: on
A 0.0:
memo? ammo :5... o as 0.5 0,3: 0.1 0-32

1. Power dissipation at 25° c, watts;

 

2. Temperature coefficient, "out. X/‘C.

-. 302 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NIH/71.!

 
 

(IL-MI
”en-HI (6)

   

0‘ v' c,»
(d) 0' 9“

Figure 6.70. The ripple smoothing factor of regulators plotted for

Key:

 

a,” "in max t, licroseconds

the lb2YeNl and leYeNZ integrated circuits as a
function of the supply ripple frequency (a and b) and
the switching tine [2] and settling tine [S] as a
function of the load capacitance (c and d).

l. Ripple smoothing factor, d3;

2. Switching time in microseconds;
3. “in - 20 volts,U out - 3 volts;
a.u1- 50 volts, “out' 12 volts;
5. Settling tine in microseconds.

 

I)

Figure 4.71. The change in the input voltage: a. Traces of the voltages

and currents;

-w3-

FOR OWAI. USE ONLY
Ml! (Wk “1:“. Phi. UNIJ

Key to Figure $.71. [cont.]: b. The time constants for the lGZYeNl-A,B (solid
curves) and thYeNZ-A.B (dashed curves) inte-
grated circuits.

      
 

63-0

“ﬂoss:

 
 

t 2
(a) 0 0 ch",

0
r) l) I'(b)

Figure b.72..The change in the output current:

a. Traces of the voltages and currents;

b. The tine constants as a function of the load
capacitance for Alla (solid curves) and Azla
(dashed curves).

   

Figure 6.73. Modified circuit of s Figure 6.75. Schematic of a regulator
lb2YeNl-2A.B integrated with improved output
circuit voltage regulator characteristics.

with a short circuit pro-
tection circuit made using
an external divider.

Protection against a load short-circuit is accomplished by means of a divider
(resistors R1 and 32 which control the base voltage of transistor V19) (Figure
b.69s) in the voltage regulator based on the lb2YeNl—2A.B integrated circuit
(Figure b.73). Such a circuit makes it possible to increase the speed of the
short circuit protection circuitry. In this case, the nominal value of resistor
R can be computed free the equation: R i 0.5 VI! . where I

iglghe maximum value of the output currentfiﬂ out max out max

-3o:.-

IKII‘”ﬂﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
Figure 4.75. Schematic of a regulator with a reference voltage
source powered from an external regulated voltage
supply.

   

Figure 6.76. Schematic of a parallel Figure 4.77. Schematic of a negative
voltage regulator. voltage regulator.

The characteristics of regulators can be changed by incorporating aeveral dis-
crete components in the circuitry. An improvement in the values of the coeffi-
cients K oad U and Kload l is achieved in the regulator circuit shown in Figure
6.76 by Inserting elements VDZ and 84 in place of the output resistive divider.
In this circuit, the change in the output voltage A00“: is fed to the input of

the error amplifier (pin 12) through the zener diode. The output voltage of the
regulator is:

0out - UVDZ
where "V02 is the zener diode voltage and “ref is the internal reference source
voltage. Diode VDl is incorporated in the circuit to protect the regulator at
the moment the input voltage is disconnected (the voltage across capacitor 02
can prove to be excessive). The average value of the relative instability of
the output voltage in this circuit with a change in the input voltage of 1 volt

amounts to 0.011/volt. and with a change in the output current of from S to 50
nA. is equal to 0.032.

f' ”In: '0"): 4'qu
re '

An inprovenent in the relative instability is achieved in the circuit of the
regulator shown in Figure 6.75 in that the reference voltage circuit is supplied
from an external regulated voltage source, for which a second regulator designed

- 305 -

FOIIOIFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOI:0FFKJAL.USEZONLN

using the same circuit made be used. The condition Uinl Z.uin2 should be sat-
isfied for the given circuit.

A special feature of the parallel regulator circuit of Figure 6.76 consists in
the fact that the current consumed by the Ic from the input voltage source re-
mains constant with a change in the output current. The circuit operates so
that with an increase in the current, the output voltage increases by a certain
amount and is fed to the input of the error amplifier (pin 12). which in turn
leads to an increase in the current in the regulating element of the 1c. in
parallel with which a network is connected which consists of zener diode VDl
and the emitter-base junction of transistor VTl. The total current of diode
VDl and the regulating element of the 1c flows through resistor R2. A change
in the current of the regulating element entails a reduction in the diode
current of VDl and a decrease in the base and collector current of transistor

VTl. Consequently, the changes in the load current and collector current have
different signs.

A negative voltage regulator can be constructed using the l62YeNl-2A,B regulators
(Figure 6.77). Just as in the preceding case, the l6ZENl-2A,B integrated cir-
cuit is inserted in parallel with the load and transistor VT? plays the part of
a damping resistor. the dynamic resistance of which changes as a function of
the load current. The regulating element of the 10 operates as an amplifier
having R2 as a load. With a change in the load current, the output voltage
changes by the amount snout, which is fed through divider R6, R7 and R8 to the
input of the error amplifier, and upon being amplified, appears across resistor
R2. Transistor VTl amplifies this voltage and controls transistor VT2 (i.e.,
the load current). The current in transistor VT2 changes so that the change in
the voltage in the load is compensated. A bias voltage is produced by means of
diode V02 for transistor VT2. The resistor serves to produce the requisite
working current for diodes VDl and VDZ.

The minimum output voltage level of the regulator is limited by the reference
supply voltage. In order to extend the output voltage range, one must use the
circuit shown in Figure 6.78. This regulator is designed around two integrated
circuits, which operate from unregulated power supplies with different polarities.
The circuit provides for output voltage regulation from zero up. One 16 serves
to regulate the voltage across the load, while the other serves to feed bias

to the common lead in the first circuit. The asount of bias is equal to the
internal reference voltage of the IC or exceeds it.

In many devices. a regulator is needed having a bipolar output voltage (for
example, to power circuits using operational amplifiers). For these purposes,
one can employ the circuit shown in Figure 6.79. The circuit consists of two
regulators for different polarities, designed around the 160YeNl-2A,B integrated
circuits, which are connected together. The negative voltage regulator circuit
is similar to the circuit shown in Figure 6.77. The output current of the
regulator is limited by the power dissipation of the 1c. but it can be increased
if an additional power transistor is introduced into the circuit.

-306-

INJI‘OFIHCLAI.lﬂSE40hﬂLY
Figure 6.78. Schematic of a voltage Figure 6.79. A regulator with a bipola
regulator with an expan- output voltage.
ded output voltage range.

The circuit of a regulator with an increased output current is shown in Figure
6.80. The maximum output current level can be deternined iron the equation:

Iout max ' Iouthneo ’asam" lumbar

where Iout is the regulator output current and “Zle is the current gain of
transistor VTl. It is frequently necessary to produce a regulated voltage
which exceeds the naximun permissible input voltage for the IC. One must also
use'several additional outboard components in this case. A circuit is shown
in Figure 6.81 in which the increase in the output voltage range is set by
feeding a positive bias to the common lead of the 16 (pin 8). This positive

bias is provided by zener diode VDZ. The regulated output voltage for the
given circuit is determined as follows:

"out ' "ret‘kl + “2” R1 + uvnz

where U 2 is the breakdown voltage of zener diode VDZ. In this case, one must
make su¥2 that I ; IVDZ min (here, IVDZ is the ndnimum breakdown current
of zener diode Vggf. Keyed type voltage regu atora (Figure 6.82) are used to
increase the e£ficiency of regulators operating at elevated output currents
(especially if the voltage drop across the regulating element is great). Tran-
sistor VTl operates as a switch (either saturated or cut-off). when it is

turned on, diode VDl is cut off and the current in the inductance coil Ll
increases:

I
I
ll. Til/(1!.

here. U is the voltage applied to the inductance.

- 307 -

FIIICIHHKJAJ.IEHE(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6.81. A regulator with an in-
creased input and output
voltage.

 

Figure 6.80. A regulator with an in-

creased output current. The current through inductance coil Ll
charges capacitor Cl. which is connected
to the inverting input. and feeds the
current to the load. The output voltage
increases until (capacitor C1 is charg-
ing) the reference voltage is exceeded
at the noninverting input of the error
amplifier. At this point in time. the
error anplifier cuts off the power to
the base of transistor VTl and the unreg-
ulated input voltage is cut off. The
energy stored in inductance coil Ll
serves as the reason for the appearance
of the voltage pulse Ux. which is nega-
tive. This pulse is absorbed by turned
on damping diode VDl. The current of
the inductance IL is delivered to the load.

 

Figure 6.82. A keying type regulator.

when the current in the inductance coil falls below the load current level,
capacitor c1 begins to discharge and the level of the output voltage (and conse-
quently also the voltage at the inverting input of the error anplifier) falls

off. When the voltage at the inverting input "0 drops below the reference voltage,
the amplifier triggers the transistor switch (transistor VTl) and the cycle
repeats. The output voltage of a switched regulator fluctuates about the voltage
U ut - "ref (R2 + R )/R2 with an amplitude which is determined by the sensitivity
0 the error asplifier and the ratio of the noninal values of divider resistors

R1 and 82.

The 162YeNl-2A.B integrated circuits are used in the circuit of the switched
regulator (Figure 6.83) as the device which controls transistor switch VTl.

The self—oscillating node in this circuit is deternined by the l62YeNl-2A,B IC,
choke Ll. capacitor CZ which is inserted in parallel with the load, diode V03

and zener diode VDZ. The use of p-n-p transistor VTl. which does not require

an additional power supply to cut off the switch. simplifies the circuitry. The
voltage across diode VDl provides for cutting off the switch. The circuit has
the following parameters: average value of the relative instability of the out-
put voltage with a change in the input voltage by 1 volt: 0.051/V; with a change
in the output current fro. 10 to 500 nA: 0.11.

- 308 -

INDI‘OFINCIAI.USEIN‘LY
Figure 6.8b. A threshold gate based
on the leYeul-ZA,B
integrated circuit.

 

Figure 6.83. A keying regulator based
on the leYeNl integrated
circuit.

when designing a switched regulator. one
must determine the vsluea of L and C.
The following regulator characteristics
are specified for the calculation of

L and c: the ripple level AD, the output voltage ”out' the frequency f and the
maximum output current Iout max'

By solving equation (6.7) for the inductance L. and assuming Iout max - 1.3 IL-
we obtain the value:

L - [1’3“]111 " “out)/Iout uxfla’out/Uin). (6-8)

As was shown earlier. regulator circuits have an internal amplifier with a gain
of about 1,000 and an output current of up to 150 mA. Moreover, a regulator is
suited for operation at high supply voltages (up to 60 volts). especially if

it is equipped with a heat sink. The internal source provides a reference vol-

tage which does not depend on temperature or power supply voltage changes. All
of these factors make it possible to use the leYeﬂl-2A,B regulators as either

an amplifier or a threshold gate (Figure b.86).

Its threshold voltage is the reference element voltage. The minimal output vol-
tage of this device is governed by the load resistance. the internal load resis-
tance and the internal reference voltage source resistance:

uout min , (“ref - DRload/“load + a1)’

where R1 : Ri ' R5/(Ri + 3'), while resistors R1' and 32" [sic] comprise the
reference source voltage d vider. The maximum output voltage can be defined as:

0out max - usupply - ure

where Ure is the minimum voltage drop across the regulating element.

-wg-

FOI:0IIH(JAI.USE1DNLN
1.

HM (WNFIAI. USE ONLY

Bibliography

Gran, "Proyektirovaniys i prineneniye operstsionnykh usiliteley" ["Design and
Applications of Operational Anplifiers"], Moscow, Bnergiya Publishers, 197k.

Shilo V.L., "Lineynyye integrsl'nyye skheny v radioelektronnoy appsrature"
("Linear Integrated Circuits in deioelectronic Equipment”), Moscow,

’ Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1974.

So

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Marshe 2b., "Operatsionnyye usiliteli i ikh prineneniye" ["Operational Amplifiers
and Their Applications"], Moscow, Bnergiys Publishers, 1976.

Gutnikov v.s., "Prineneniye operatsionnykh usiliteley v izneritel'noy tekhnike”
("The Applications of Operational Amplifiers to Instrumentation Bquipnent”),
Moscow, Energiya Publishers, 1975.

Polonnikov D.Ye., "Reshayushchiye usiliteli" ("Resolver Anplifiers"], Moscow,
Energiys Publishers. 1973.

Aknentyn'sh Ys.Ya., Zheyvone 0.6., et sl., "Integrsl'nyy operstsionnyy
usilitel' s ponizhennoy potreblysyenoy noshchnost'yu" ["An Integrated Circuit
Operational Amplifiers with Reduced Power Consumption"), BLBKTRONNAYA
PROMYSHLENNOST' [ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY], 1975. No 11, p 35.

Aleksenko A.G., Didenko V.I., Lebedev A.A., "Chuvstvitel'nyye integrsl'nyye
konpsratory” ["Sensitive Integrated Circuit Comparators"), "Mikroelektroniks".
Edited by A.A. Vasenkov, Moscow, Sov. Radio Publishers, 1973, Issue 6,

pp 190-201.

Lebedev A.A., "Ispol'zovaniye vrsinnykh konponentov i blokov dlya povysheniys
bystrodeystviya integral'nykh konpsratorov nspryazheniya" ("The Use of
Conplenentsry Components and Units to Increase the Speed of Integrated Circuit
Voltage Conpsrators"], BLEKTRONNKYA PROMYSHLENNOST', 1975, No. 11, p 20.

Aknentyn'sh Ya.Ya., Vsrtin' V.R., Mhtsvkin V.V., Shenin' A.E., "Konpsrstor
nspryazheniya SZlSAl” ("The SZlSAl voltage Comparator"]. BLBKTRONNAYA
PROMYSBLENNOST', 197‘, No. b.

Aknentyn'sh Ya.Ya., Vsrtin' V.R., Matavkin V.V., Shenin' A.B.. "Konparstor
nspryszheniya SZlSAZ" ["The SZlSAZ Voltage Comparator“), BLEKTRONNAYA
Pnonvsuizuuosr', 1974. No 10.

Kerekesnsr I.P., Rysin V.S., Tinonteyev V.N., Thachenko V.A.. "Analogovyy
unnorhitel' tips l‘OMAl" ["The lbOMAl Analog Multiplier"), ELEKTRONNAYA
PRDHYSMLZNNOST', 1976, No. 6.

"Spravochnik po vysshey netenstike" ("Reference Book on Higher Hathenstics"],
Edited by M.Ya. Vygodskiy, Moscow, Nauka Publishers, 1970.

.Renschler 3., "A New Basic Building Block Linear Pour-Quadrant lmltiplier",

in Proceedings of the 1833 Linear Ic Clinic, New York City, March 26, 1969.

- 310 ~
FIIICHHﬂCJAl.USEGDNlN
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

“Application Data. Data Book“, Motorola Company, 1969, MC 1496.

Khokhlov B.N.,"Dekodiruyushcheye ustroystvo tsvetnykh televisionnykh

priyennikov" ["A Decoder for Color TV Receivers"], Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers,
1973.

Sukhov 8.8., Oldin A.F., Chistov V.M., "Prineneniye IS serii 224 v tzlevizore
tsvetnogo isobrazheniya" ["The Applications of the Series 226 Integrated Circuits
in Color TV Receivers"), Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1976, (The Series
"Blenenty radiosppsrstury" ("Radio Equip-cot Conponents"]).

Malyshev I.V.. Tubeyev F.Ya., Arakelyan 8.0., Kravchuk I.F., "Poluprovodnikovyye
Is dlya priyeuo—usilitel'nykh traktov radioappsratury" [“Seniconductor 10's for
the Receiving and Amplifying Sections of Radio Equip-eat"), ZARUBBZR. BLBKTRON.
TEKHRIKA [FOREIGN ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING], 1976, No. 18.

Zubachev 5.6.. Chaykin I.P., "Moshchnyy usilitel' nizkoy chastoty" l"ﬂigh Power
Low Frequency Anplifier"], BLEKTRONNAYA PROMYSHLENNOST', 197‘. No .0, p 38.

Shakhgil'dyan V.V., Lyakhovkin A.A., "Parovays avtopodstroyka chastoty" ["Phsse
Locked Loop Frequency Control”], Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1966.

Snitnov 3.8., Trayto 3.6., Trofinov M.M., "Integral‘nyye skheay giratornogo
usilitelya” ["Gyrator Amplifier Integrated Circuits"], BLEKTRONNAYA
PROHYSHLENNOST', 1973, No. 10, p 33.

"Spravochnik po tsifrovoy vychislitel'noy tekhnike" ("Digital Computer Engineer-
ing Handbook"), 3.“. Malinovskiy, V.A. Aleksandrov, V.P. Bogan, Ye.N. Driokhovich
et al.. Kiev, Tekhnika Publishers, 1976.

Snolov V.B., Ponichev V.S., "Analogo-tsifrovyye i tsifro-analogovyye nelineynyye
ustroystva" ["Analog-Digital and Digital-Analog Nonlinear Devices"], Leningrad,
Energiya Publishers, 1974.

Zhulla R.N.. Kenyausis A.M., Martsinkysvichus A.K., at al., "Analogovyye
gibridnyye integral'nyye skheny serii 2&0" ["The 260 Series of Analog Hybrid
Integrated Circuits"]. BLEKTRONNAYA PROMYSHLBNNOST', 1975, No 8, p 50.

Niholayevskiy I.F., Igunmov D.V., "Paranatry i predel'nyye rezhi-y raboty
tranzistorov" ["Paraneters and Ultimate Operating Modes of Transistors").

. Moscow, Sov. Radio Publishers, I971.

25.

26.

Stepanenko I. P.. "Osnovy teorii transistorov i transistornykh skhen" ["Punds-
nentals of Transistor and Transistor Circuit Theory"). Moscow, Energiya
Publishers, 1967.

Dodik S. D., "Poluprovodnikovyye stabilizatory postoyannogo nspryarheniya i toka"
[”Seniconductor DC Current and Voltage Regulators"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio
Publishers, 1962.

- 311 -

'FOI10FFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

cmmn s. movmm; RELIABILITY or to [Integrated Circuits] m rm:
mwvmow m assrwm APPARATIB

5.1. Design-Technological Principles of Big: Reliability

High reliability of sesiconductoa: 10 is one of Iain reasons they becase the basis
of modern radioelectronic apparatus. The high reliability of Ic is insured by the
group Isthod of producing 10 elenents. by a suller nunber of interelelent connec-
tions and the lower level of power consuled.

In the group production nethod. all 10 elessnts are nnufactured in one technologi-
cal cycle under rigidly controlled conditions, and with a uni-us use of manual
labor. The physio-cheaical compatibility of Iaterials and processes provide equal
reliability of all 10 elements. The reliability of the functional device, ease-bled
with discrete parts. depends on the quality of the couple-eating electric-radio
elenents (BIB) which are nnufactured at any enterprises at different tiles on dis-
sinilar equipnent. The connections between the contact pads on the sesicmductor
Ic chip are ends by thersoco-preeeim (or ultrasonic) welding. Vacuus spraying of
hotel and thersoconpreseion welding provide a reliable connection of the elelsnts.
If we colpare a usual unit and an integrated circuit containing a thousand equiva-
lent . then in integrated circuits. the nuaber of interconnectims by the ”usual“
aethod is reduced to l-lOOth-l/lSOth. As a result, the reliability of the apparatus
is increased because the nulber of the nest probable sources of failures -- inter-

elenent connectims -- is reduced considerably. aoreaver. they are made by the lost
perfect lethods.

A nusber of 1c types are characterised by low power consunption. Uith low dissi—
pation power. the operating telperature of s chip-inmlittle oospered to the
asbient tesperature and. therefore, conditions are favorable for retardation of

the physio-chenical processes leading to failures.

-312-

MWWONLY
The actual reliability of IO as the property to implesent given functions and to

preserve its parameters within given lilits with tile. determined by the operating
conditions. depends on Iany factors: the perfection of the circuit. the quality
of the initial nterials and the coaplesenting components. and the quality and
stability of the technological process of IO nnufacture.

In 10 production. aonitoring operations are carried out not only at the end of the
final stage of nnufacture. but are converted to a quality control operation oVer
the entire technological process. Bowever. the technological process control is
clearly insufficient because in the Ic mnufacturing process. not only are operator
errors possible but also random deviations. related to the quality of the nterials
and working equipaent. Therefore. a single systel of checks and rejections of the
finished products is introduced in each technological process of seniconductor
aanufacture to detect m with apparent as well as hidden defects if possible. For
this purpose single horns and Iethods of boundary tests were established that mks
it possible to determine reserves of electrical and sechanical properties when
developing new articles. and check the efficiency of these or other leaslu'es intro-
duced in the technological process in series production of IO.

The true reliability of 1c is determined truly in operating the apparatus. First of
all. it lust be concluded that the reliability of It: in operating various series
(mde at various seaiconductor plants) is practically the seas in devices developed
in one and the sane apparatus enterprise. At the sale title. the reliability of 10
of one and the same series in apparatus. manufactured at various plants. is found
to be very different. This is the result of differences in the technological
standard of Ianufacture of the apparatus which can also be ude in nonspeoialiaed
enterprises.

The use of hid‘ily reliable 10 does not always autontically provide such reliable

apparatus. The preservation of the reliability of 10 in the apparatus is deter-
mined. to a considerable degree. by their proper use at all stages of develop-ant,

production and operation. The proper use of IO here leans the ilpleaentation of
recouendations on electrical nodes and assesbling aethoda. a debugged technologi-
cal procese of sanufacture of the apparatus and the use of asaaures to protect IO
fro. static electricity. therml and other effects. Achieving and nintain laxi-
sus operational reliability of It: (and consequently. the quality of the apparatus)
depends greatly on the level of the processes of the design of the apparatus. its
preparation for production and the tune-up of the equipasnt and the skill of the
personnel.

The purpose of this chapter is to acquaint the reader with several Ieasures taken
to insure the reliability of integrated circuits. as well as to nke the necessary
recouendations on using 18 when unufacturing the apparatus.

-313-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.2 Operational Quality Control

To achieve a given level of 10 quality in all production lots along with a thor-
ough finishing off of the product design and the isprovelent of the teclmological

process. a rigid operation by operation quality control is used in production.
Due to this. an unsuitable product is rejected at certain stages of the production

cycle. Moreover. constant quality control over the parameters of the technological
process (for era-pie. tesperature. tine intervals. gas consulption). technical con-
dition of equipment. and a check . of the skill of the operators is carried
out.

Table 5.1 lists the basic stages of the technological processes. the monitored
characteristics. and gives the criteria for evaluating the proper progress of the
process. The number of monitoring stages. the volune and type of nonitoring

(continuous or selective) are deternined in each concrete case depending upon the
required level of reliability of the 10 (standard or especially reliable). the type
and importance of the stage of technological process.

The second stage of production quality control is establishing relationships between
types of 10 failures. the parameters of the technological process and developing
recompendations to correct then. An analysis of causes for m failures is objec—
tive intonation that makes it possible to isprove the technological processes.
Table 5.2 shows an exasple of the plan-schedule of measures directed toward the
elimination of causes of failures of semiconductor Ic. The data in Table 5.2 mst
be analysed along with the figures. references to which are given in the table.
These diagrals show the relative change in the share of 10 failures of a certain
type. depending upon the period of ilplesentation of the leesures. The measures
in Table 5.2 are nusbered for convenience of analysis. The effectiveness of the
internal measures is illustrated in Table 5.3 where the dynasics of the reduction
in IC failures for the three aboveaentioned causes is shown.

5.3 Rejection Tests

10 manufacturers are interested in the best technological processes and strive to
have thorough production quality control for the purpose of increasing the per-
centage of finished product yield. and reducing the rate of IO failures.

However. demds for reliable IO from the users cannot be satisfied only by in-
proving the production process and the cysts: of operation by operation quality
control. A systen of rejection tests of the finished product as a leans of in-
creasing the reliability of the product as compared to the level considered standard
at the given solent plays a great role in solving such problem.

Rejection tests of IC are intended ninly for early detection of (preworking)

failures. caused by operator error as well as by randon deviations related to the
quality of the initial materials and the operation of the equipment in the process
of 1C nnufacture. The introduction of rejection tests for the entire product is
based on the fact that the rate of 10 failures. in the general case. decreases with
tine. Fig. 5.2 shows the characteristic distribution of 16 failures in production

and the tests of one of the samples of the apparatus. The greatest nunber of

-314-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
failures (up to 80$) occurs at the stage of production and tests of snll assembly
units of the apparatus and decreases noticeably when these units are consolidated

(curves 1. 2 and 3) as well as for the entire product (curve a). lith the rejec-
tion tests. it is possible to renove microcircuits from the production lot that have

hidden defects and thus increase the reliability of the apparatus. "shifting" the
failures of breaking in to the stage of rejection testing.

Table 5.1; shows an example of the composition and conditions of rejection tests to
which 1005 of the 10 produced are subjected. As may be seen from Table 5.16.
rejection tests are wade in a logical sequence and are interdependent. Methods and
modes are used for rejection tests that take into account the special features of
the mufacturing tecImology and Ic design. Hers hidden IC defects are detected.
but not failures that are not inherent in the given tecrmology and design. The
selection of methods and conditions of tests are based on the howledge of the
physical nature of the 10 failures which originate at various kinds of clintic.
Iechanical and electrical effects. The levels of external effects are selected

by the results of IC tests so that there remain certain stability reserves.

In setting up the sequmce of carrying out the rejection tests. it proceeds on the
basis that they must begin with such types of effects which will mks it possible
to eliminate immediately K: with hidden defects that cause the greatest percentage
of failures in operation. At the final test stages. methods are used that will
make it possible to eliminate poor 10 whose defects were not detected in the pre-
vious tests fros the production lots. Rejection tests include methods that facili-
tate the stabilisation of electrical parameters and reduce the spread of their
values.

The first rejection test is visual inspection after the operation of dividingthe
wafers into chips and before the sealing operation. Experience shows that this
type of inspection is one of the most isportant aethods that makes it possible to
detect my production defects which cannot always be detected electrically or in
other types of tests.

Visual inspection makes it possible to reject I0 in which the following violations
were detected: defects of chip metal-coating (scratches and voids in metal-coated
tracks and contact pads. signs of corrosion and flaking. matched sections of metal
coatings. shifting in the metal-coated layout). scribing defects (cracks in the

active area of the circuit. under contact pads and metal coating. splits and damage
to the chip) or diffusion defects (nonunifors and parasitic diffusion). In some

places there my be no passivated protective oxide on a part of the p-n junction.
shifts of layers in photolithography. and defects in the protective dielectric film
may be seen (tenants of the dielectric film on contact pads. scratches and holes).

Insulation defects can be found in 10 chips (absence of separating insulation.
contamination of the surface of the chip). fixed or loose particles of foreign ute-
rial on the chip's surface. defects of welded joints on the chip and housing lead-
outs. as well as defects of wire leadouts (the sag is greater crawler than the
norm uneven flexibility of the wire. grooves. reduction in diameter; distance be-
tween wire leadouts that are less than the norm).

- 315 -
Foe omcm. use ONLY
sun urn-u IAI. um; ONLY

Table 5.1

Stages of the technological process and the approxiaste voluae or operation by
operation quality control ,chsracteristic for 10 production

Monitorg characteristics ﬁaluation criterion

Manufacturing of seliconductor wafers

Thickness. plane-parallel. roughness Percent of set value

Structure defects: linear. displacemts, Number per unit area

inclusions

Surface orientation Percent of average value

Specific resistance Percent of set value

Bluipnent ﬂeeting technical condition
require-ante

Passivation (oxidation) of surface

muipnent operation node: Allouable deviation range
change of tenperature with tile
Velocity of gas flow up to the start Allowable deviation of gas flow
and in 'the process of oxidation velocity
Thickness of the raised (or precipitated) Allowable deviation from norm
layer
Density of aicroholes and cracks Allowable nulber of defects per
unit area
Size of aicroholes Harin- allowable site of holes
Equipment ﬂeeting technical condition re-
quireaents
Photolithography
Sizes. combination, quality . ﬂeeting requireaents of
of etching, Iicroholes, presence of foreign visual inspection
particles
Properties of solvents; specific weight. Correspondence to certificate

viscosity. solid particle sediaent.
storage teaperature

Modes of drying and exposing: teaperature Allowable deviation froa the horn
tiae

erposition nodes: intensity of light. tine

Adhesion quality Force for peeling fil-

Modes of etching processes: density Allowable deviations fro. the nor

(frequency of etching sections). tenperature.
tine (velocity of etching each level of
passivation or netal coating).

Conditions for making each type of lush: Sane
relative huaidity. temperature. dust in the ﬂeeting requirelents of visual
environment: quality of surface (density inspection

and diaaeter of aicroholes. roughness of edges

-..ne -

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chip molbly

Tonperature. the. ultrasonic power. chip movable deviations

orientation. ”bloat para-stern
Connection of intern]. handouts

Toupemture, pressure. the for Sane
akin; connection. natal conpocition.
rupture force. ﬂuent para-atom
Type of Ic
{allure

l. Rupture of
wire leadout due
to failures of

the thernocolpres-

sion connection
(see Fig. 5.1a)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Table 5.2
Approxiaate plan-schedule of leasuree directed to the elimination of 1c failures

W

1.1.Rejection of potentially unreliable

1c by centrifuging
1.2.Honitoring the rupture force of the

gold uire
1.3.Honitoring the detach-ant force of
the themcolpreeeion connection

Luna-hangs in the desim of the welding

tool (needle) to increase the detach-
aent tone of the thernoooIpression

1. 5.in°€'r‘8&3%€!ou of the technological
operation of ”dropping“ an It: on an
oaken board fro- a height of l eeter

1.6.Introduction of a process of continuous
degreasing and annealing the gold wire

2. Rupture of
plating due to poor
adhesion (Fig. 5.1b)

2.1 Introduction of a process for spraying
on alulinua by an electron bean

2.2.Introduction of group spraying on by
electron bean Iron a water-cooled
crucible

3.1.Reduction in annealing telperature

3.2.Reduction of burn-in tenperature of
"BI-10“ 0f internetal- aluainul and replacing oxygen nediul
lic phases at the by nitrogen

Interface of dissiu- 3.3.8tabilisation and eonitoring the tea-
11“ ““13 (309 n8. perature of the tool and changing the
5.1c) heating node in the process of setting
the chip on the base

'3. Rupture of con-
nection due to for-

- 318-

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Period of intra-
ducing Ieasuree

IV quarter of
1927
I quarter of

1973
I quarter of

1973

IV quarter of
1973

II quarter of
1975

IV quarter of
1972

I quarter of
197“

IV quarter 1973
IV quarter 19?“

IV quarter 19?“
.VE
SE
5E
2:5

Rupture of wire leadout due to them-loco.- 13

preeeion connection defects

Rupture of plating due to poor adhesion 18.8 2.7 0 0
Rupture of connections due to the forntion 10.1 19.6 1.2 0

of intermediate phases at the interface of
disaiailar nteriala

 

1117:": mu”
3'"; .9754 no

(I :W mam.

Fig. 5.1. Reduction in the nuaber of Ic failuree (ll) occurring for various reasone

depending upon the use of correction mum a -- break in therm-
preeaure welding; b -- break in connection: due to poor adbeaiau

c -- break in connection due to the presence of internetallic phases.
1. Period of nnufacturing.

- 319 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tie

Inspection of chipe under a Iicroscope (not less than 80
unification) to neet requiremta on limiting the num-
ber of defects of each type and their total nunber. shown
in specification

Hold 1c at a te-perature exceeding upper value in specifi-
cation for 1&8 hours

llold 10 at upper value of temperature for 21; hours

Alternate effect of upper and lower values of albient tel-
perature (transfer tron one chalber to another for not
lore than 3 linutes). Number of continuously following
cycles - 5

Effect of line loads with accelerations of 10.000...
20,000 g in the direction of the vertical IO axis for 1
minute

Check seal within mo'3...mo‘7 liters . /" l/eecond by
the nee-epectrolster lethod

Check 10 seal. pressure-naked in keen. in an indication
liquid. Deterline seal at 1x10“2 liters. fl l/second

Check seal in an indicator liquid

Honitor Ic para-etere according to specifications at nor-
mal tenperature

10 test at constant electrical load and min: allowable
temperature
Defects in chip connection (chip orientation not according to design drawing.
leadout crosses. the eutectic covers less than the allowable part of the chip
Per-"1.9M“. too such paste and glass. defects of the housing base (detonation

of the housing. peeling of the gold coating. shifts of the coating and eutectic).
defects of the housing (absence of leadouts. corrosions. esence of drops of glue.
tin on the flangeoof the housing on the side of the cover . as well as defects in

assembly (chip on board glued too high. board bent) that originate in inaccurate
assembling of 10.

After annealing to stabilise. para-stars and sealing. IO are subjected. in tum.
to the effects of ther high and low values of asbimt temperatures to detect a
sismtch between thernl expansion coefficimts of individual IO parts. After
these tests. the Ic sust preserve their externu appearance and the electrical
paraae era.

The sechanical integrity of the design is checked by testing on a centrifuge. The
sicrocircuits are attached to the housing in a special device and are subjected to
the effect of linear loads which produce forces along the vertical IO axis corre-
sponding to accelerations of 10.000 g for hybrid. and 20.000 g for semiconductor
microcircircuits. These forces are usmlly sufficimt to detect defects of welded
connections of internal leadouts and poorly attached chips.

in testing 1c. devices with isproper seals arerejeoted.The widest failure mechaniss

in such 1c is due to the soist air penetrating the housing and water vapor con-

densing causing corrosion of the metal coating. Further electrical teat! are “0
in which 1c not corresponding to technical nors docusentaticn (MD) are rejected.

After that. 10 which are to seat higher reliability require-ants are subjected to
special electrical thernl tests which are tested until they fail. This type of
testing shows defects not detected in visual inspection very effectively. Typical
defects which say be overlooked in visual inspection (but may be detected in ther-
nal current tests) are scratches on the natal coating. thinner setal coating on
the oxidation treads and aicroholes in the oxide under the metal-coated tracks.
These defects may also include poor electrical contacts and surface contasinaticns
that cause instability of IO para-stars

The final type of test is an all-around investigation of basic 1c electriol paran-
eters under nornl clintic conditions. as well as at the upper and lower values

of the tesperature in the specification. Electricaltests are also made at a con--
bination of electrical modes (input signals. loads. feed voltages) which are the
worst for the given type of test within the liaits of specification. Rejection
tests are cospleted by checking consercial type 10. with special attentim being
given to inspecting the quality of welded and soldered joints. glass in the aetal
joints. the labeling and integrity of the coatings of the leadouts and the housings.

By analysing typical experiaetal data that characterise the effectiveness of rejec-
tion tests in the process of production (Table 5.5). it is possible to conclude
that the couples: of rejection tests nkes it possible to detect a considerable nua-
ber (including 163.2! of the nuaber tested) of potentially unreliable 1c and thus

raise considerably the quality of 10 lots supplied for use in the REA.

-321.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Annealing for
stabilising pan-etersn
before sealing
after sealing

Cyclic effect
of temperature

Linear loads

Leak tests:

cull leaks
mediu- and large
leaks

Monitoring electrical
parameters at nor-31
conditions

Electrical thernl
aging

Electrical tests:
check of static paran-
eters at higher teaper
nture
Check of static paran-

eters at lower tempera-
tures

Check of dynsnio

masters
Inspection of exterior
of Ic

3".”
oo

0.?

0.6

1.6
10.6
Fig. 5.2.

l.

Inssmch as rejection tests using

 

failures of printed boerds

failures in units
failures in devices
total nunber of failures
shop test stage

5.

6.

7.
8.

Distributim of 1c failures in production and testing of apparatus:

stage when product is released
to quality control dspsrtsent

S or total nuaber of failures
circuit boards

units
devices

above-cited sethcds ere conpulsory for all

mufccturins plants. the 10 quality of various suppliers is equslised to a omnid-

ereble extent.

low 10 that have pessed through me and the seas “rejection har-
rier" at various plants have s sisilsr quality level.

5.“ Effect of Bternal Factors on Apparatus Production

A typicsl tectmological process of spparstus mufscture using snll-scsls leche-
ninetion tools is shown in Fig. 5.3.

_ -323—
momcuumouu
Fig. 5-3.

'0“ UfHLlAI. USE ONLY

snu6n0u0n0-®n

u u, '7

_- —

5

w]

«‘110n0u0110uwu

  

if]

one

23.23 E:

I
11-01101]

  

1* 0

:nmnm

acnonouonom

' 3!, U
mume
6!

of IO circuit in nnufacturing apparatus
in housings types 1 and 3 (a) and housings type 16 (b):

Technological route of

1.. IC

technological packing

forming and trimming leadouts
die for forming and trilning the
size

magnetic vacqu or optic tweesers
crucible with therul regulator
device for tinning

tinning leadouta

taking up sets

trimaing inactive leadouts
die with keying device
installation

soldering

board

19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
an.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33-

dis forming and trimming to size

spatula
device for gluing
thermostat

semiautomatic soldering device
cleaning flux from boards
brush

vat

regulation

control panels, devices
hot-cold chamber

protection against moisture

paint and varnish
centrifuge

pulveriser

-324-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The sequence of operations and transfers indicated in the technolcgical routes of
circuits say change depending on the special design features of the assesbly unite
and the specifics of production. In passing over these routes. the la are subjected

to the effects of various external factors: sechanioal. tesperature, chesical and
electrical (Table 5.6).

Mechanical forces are applied to la in assehbly operations, forning and trialling
leadouts, and nounting and gluing the 1c to the printed circuit board. Forces
acting on lesdouts and their insulation my usage the sealing of the housing.
Tesperature effects are related to the operations of tinning. soldering and dis-
mantling. In these operations. heat passes throudl the leadouts to the chip or
substrate and produces heating of the structural elesents of the IC. Ghesicals
affect the plating asterial of the housings and the Ic labeling when fluxing,
cleaning the flux off the printed circuit boards. applying moisture protectim and
disusntling. And, finally, electrical effects are related to discharges of static
electricity through the 10. This effect also takes place at all technological
operations if no special neasuree are taken to reduce and resove static electricity
charges fro- production areas.

As my be seen fro- Table 5.6. 10 are subjected my tines. although to a different
degree, to effects of external factors in the environ-ant. The nest dangerous of
than are the actions of the operator because they depend to the greatest degree on
the individual preparation of the operator and they are the soot difficult to con-
trol.

In the process of apparatus production. if the nodes and equipsent quality do not
correspond to the problea of producing highly reliable apparatus. various kinds of
IO defects and failutes lay originate (Table 5.7).

5.5 Parsing and Triuing Lesdouts

are basic requiresent that the IO housing Inst satisfy is the preservation within
it of cosparatively dry air during its entire service life. The presence within
the housing of soisture, cheaically active and electrically inconpatible with seni-
conductor substances facilitate the origination of sudden. as well as gradual.
failures. They happe: due to the corrosion of setals and their alloys and inter-
contact connections. and the deterioration of electrical characteristics caused by
changes in the surface and volusetrio conductivities and ionic contasination.

Under noml conditions. any surface of a substance is covered by a thin Ioisture
of from 0.01 to 0.001 aicroesters. Due to the sail values of a Iolecule of

- 325 -.
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Operator 8. I

Materiel covers of 2

working positions
and room

Packing 3.)!
Assembly tools 3.!

Technological -
Blui pleat

Flux -
Solder -
Hashing liquid -

Vern 13h solvent -

Bluipllent and
Interiele for
noisture protection -

Cleaning
off flux
Operator 3
Material covers of -
working position:
and room
Packing -
Assembly tools -
Technological ".3
oquipnent
Flux -

Solder -

3.!
8.}!
11.3

Regula-
tig
E
Table 5.6 continued
External factors acting on 10 in the process of apparatus ssseably

Wm 01mins Roeula- Hohturo Mctim- Mr
M .31...“ m M

Hashing liquid Kh - - - -
Varnish solvuat - - - .. n;
Bluipaent and
materials for
aoieture protection - - 3," . - -

Note: designations of actions: I -- electrical; Xh -- chenical; '1' -- telperaturep
I ~- mechanical.

2.71:10 10 meters and the low viscosity of water. noiature is able to penetrate
even the inter-olecular spaces of complex inorganic conpounds. In this case.
nechsnical destruction of ntsrisls occurs. along with a change in the electrical
properties of the surfaces. corrosion of Istals and their alloys. To avoid this.

the saline of ucrocireuit housings is usually done in an atllosphsre of dry
nitrogen in which the water content does not exceed 10 parts per aillion.

Metals, glass and ceraaice used in mufacturing Ic housings are practically im-
penetrable to gas and moisture. host plastics sre hygroscopic to sons degree. To
preserve a dry inert staosphere within the housing. the seen between unlike metals
should be axially ealed. According to the adopted noras. a good soldered seal
passes not over 1 c of gaseous heliun at a pressure difference of l atncsphere

in 30 years (practically. this leans absolute air ilpenetrability).

Metals are Joined to aetsls by soldering with soft or brazing solders, hot or cold
welding or their coabinaticn. Soldering of glass to glass or ceraaics is done by
nelting then at high tenpemtures. or gluing with low-aalting glass. Sealing a
metal-glass seas which insulates the leadoute electrically from the IC housing is
a conplex tectmical problea. This is because nest of the cannon glass has low
coefficients of linear expansion and heat conductivity, while lost metals conduct
heat well and have high linear expansion coefficimt. The difference in the speeds
of the heating and cooling of glass and natal parts cg soldered Joints. and the
difference in the linear expansion coefficients leads to aechanioal stresses and
dsmge to the Joints. As far as It! operatng conditions are concerned. glass and
metal are considered coapatible if the difference in their linear expansion coeffi-
cients do not exceed 15:10“? per centigrade degrees ['6].

Usually. in sealing IO leadouts where they cone out from the housing. crystallisa-

ble glass solders (for eranple. of the “Piroceram” type) are used. The technology
of obtaining such a sealed Joint by soldering is based on the forntim of a glass-

ceraaic Joint with the crystallisation of berm lead-sine glass. In this aethod.

-327f

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
gem an.“ 3‘. I '\l 09\I \

the glass is salted by the heat and spreads thoroughly. wetting the joined sur-

faces of the ceraaics. glass and metals like the setallic solder wets and joins
natal parts in com-on soldering).

when the soldered glass is heated further ”devitrification" occurs and centers

and crystallisation of the seas uteri-=1 are produced. The sises of the crystals
formed are-proportional to the tins and temperature of the process. The strength
of such a sealing seen is determined by its crystalline structure end is twice
that of a seam fron amorphous glass. Moreover. at mechanical loads, aicroscopic
cracks are forsed in joints with noncrystallized glass which create paths for nois-
ture penetration into the housing through the glass. In crystanisable glass, how-
ever. the microscopic cracks end at the crystals and do not pass through the Joint.
By regulating the content of the crystalline phase of the seam nterial. it is pos-
sible to change its telperature linear expansion coefficient (TKR) froa “Oxlo‘

to 120x10.7 per deg-es centigrade which agrees well with the m values for a great
nusber of glass. ceraaics and netsls used to make housing parts.

The Kovar alloy (iron. nickel. and cobalt) or the Billet alloy (iron, nickel and
chroaium) are most frequently used for IC leadoute. These alloys have low TKR
values that agree well in the working and technological tenperat e range with the
expansion coefficients of lost glas; (the TKR for Kovar is 473:10’ per degree
centigrade and for glass - - 1:60:10” per degree centigrade).

An essential special feature of moat types of IO housings is that part of the lead-

out length is under the cover of glass (or oeranics). This cover should not be
damaged in forming the leadouts.

Contradictory (Islands are lads on the 18 housing. Thus. the housing lust be suffi-
ciently strong nechanically to withstand loads originating in the apparatus pro-
duction and operation and, at the same tine, it must be as swell as possible with
a shape peraitting the greatest density of REA assembly. This contradiction must
be taken into account, providing a complex of technical leasures for preserving

the reliability of the aicrocircuits in designing and producing the appara-
tus.

In inplesenting the technological operations on preparing the Ic for assembling on
the printed circuit board (straightening. forming and trimming leadouts). the lead-
outs are subjected to stretching, bending and compression. In this case. the
stretching force P1 is applied to the most sensitive aechanical forces zone of the
housing -- the seal . inlet (Fig. 5.1;). If the stretching force is excessive,

cracks may originate in the glass or ceranics of the bouamgwhere the leadouts pass
the housing leading to an iamediate, or what is worse, a subsequent loss of housing
seal.

The die design for forning and trimming leadouts (Fig. 5.5) must insure the produc-
tion of independent and sequential forces for clamping P2. forming P3 and trilling

PI“ The values of these forces are selected so that they insure the integrity of
leadout plating, apply the lininl stretching force along the leadout axis and

obtain a given configuration. In foraing and trianing the la lesdouts. it is

- 328 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Possible types of In failures under various effects

Oject of Technological Effect factor Type of possible violation
grist omtim W and hum
Hechanioal
Ic leadouts Straighten. Pulling force Insulator cracking. causing
forming and Ola-ping force loss of housing seal; loadout
triuing defamation (pinching, twisting,
Wm}
Insulator, Hunting Static Insulator cracking. causing
housing base, and gluing IO force of loss of housing seal. Deform-
flexible con- to the board. clamping tin of housing botton causing
nections. chip diamtling housing to cracking and separation of chip.
or substrate - board substrate and breakage of flex-

ible conductors. Destruction
of housing
Table 5.? continued
Possible types of IO failures under various effects

(bject of Technological Effect factor Type of possible violation and
effect gmtion m- failutg

Electrical
Passive and All tech- , Electrical Puncture of oxide. domdation
active 1c nological charge of 10 parameters due to punc-
elements. aetal operations (nu-her of ture in the seliconductor
coating, p-n effects. structure
junctions. capacitance
protective oxide and resist-

ance in the

discharge

circuit. voltage

difference)

peraitted to leave tool traces (prints) on the 1c leadoute. that do not deluge the
plating on the leadoute. Table 5.8 shows allowable values of clalping and forming
fences at which dange of plating does not lead to corrosion. Depending upon the
cross section of the IC leadouts. the value of stretching force P1 should not ex-

ceed the values shown in Table 5.9.

 

Table 5.8
Allowable forces of for-ins and ole-ping
Sequence of force Cross section of gang-35 Forming
actiggs housinc 1mm“. L___cr_gP_a 1.....25033
II
Heak traces of working 0.11:0.) 13.? 30.4 18.6 29.“
parts of the die on the O.l§x0.l#5 19.6 30.1; 2?.“ 29.15

surface of leadouts in
The die design should profice rigid fastening of each IO leadout outside the glass
or cernaics buildup. A leadout section of l as froa the body of the housing should

not be subjected to bending or twisting detormtions. Allowable bending radii
should be mintained in foraing. Parsing IC leadouts of a rectangular cross section
should be done with a bend radius of not less than two lesdout thicknesses. while
leadouts with a round cross sectim -- with a radius not less than two dis-stars.

Table 5.9
Haxiaua values of stretching forces

Leadout cross sectionI n 8tr t f on lesdout Hench

.305
.“9
8

'.6

Up to 01

Above 0.1 to 0.2
Above 0.2 to 0.5
Above 05 to 2.0

H‘OOO

The IC leadouts inside the housing or leadouts not used in the circuit of its ap-
plication and not effecting the working capacity of the 10. my be trismd 1.0 n
tron the housing body; however. it should be take: into account that a considerable
part of the heat is reaoved over IO leadouts (especially of smll rises).

In a typically iaproper’ design of a technological device. the formtion of lead-
outs of type 15 housings (Fig. 5.6b). a gap (not less than 0.5 an iron the body of
the housing). necessary to preserve the integrity of the cars-ice was not left.

A die of such design my damge the housing seal of the 10.

Fig. 5.? shows another typical assesbly error. He will assume that the foraing of
Ic leadouts. intended for installatim on a mltilayer printed circuit board with
open contact pads. was done at the depth of the second-third layer (Fig. 5.7a).
Actually. however. it was necessary to solder then to other layers. In asseably.
the leadouts were bent In at the inlet of the seal (the bend angle in the
vertical plane my reach 1 605 . Straightening the leadouts mde without rigid
fastening of the leadout zone on a section 1 an fro- the body of the housing (i.e..
without using the technological device) my lead to damge of the leadout at the

housing. lith such a nethod of asseably. the IG my lose its seal during the con-
sequent aechanical forces when operating the apparatus because the deforaed lead-
outs are in a stressed conditim (Fig. 5.71:).

5.6 Timing and Soldering

in the production of radio electronic apparatus. group methods are widely used to
implement individual technological operations. for eraaple. tinning 1c leadouts by
”dipping into aelted solder" or soldering by aeane of a 'wave of solder." These
nodes of operations (teaperature of the aelted solder. contact tim between the
solder and the housing leadouts. area of the cmtact none of the leedout with the
solder). selected without taking into account the heat transfer characteristics of

concrete types of IO housings my lead to a destructive effect of heat shocks on
IC.

-331-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nm urru mu U-‘f. UNIX

 

Fig. 5.15. Direction of stretching force in for-ins and trim-ins leadouta

1. le 0.1 Nona!

 

P15. 5.5. Forming and trining Ic loadoutsu

a -- Ola-ping the loadouta: b -- forming the leadouts; c -- trim-ins
the leadouta.

~332-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5.7. Correct (a) and incorrect (1:) many of planar hounings an A ulti-
layer printed circuit board with open contact pads.

1. Layer:

-333-

FOR OFFICIAL J's: ONLY
In"! t...“ l\l ‘ 'al UNI\

Fig. 5.8 shows schematically individual elesents of IC design which are subjected

to thcrnal effects and participate in heat transfer. A temperature gradient is
produced along the 1c leadout in contact with the salted solder causing the trans-
fer of heat. The heat exchange is iaplenented iron the soldering zone (zone A)
through the leadout natal to the ceramic base of the housing body (2) and further
to the It: chip (1;). The heat flow is also transaitted to the chip iron the inner

part of the leadout (me B) through the internalconnecting conductor (3).

The speed of heat transaiesion depends on the teaperature difference. on the heat
conductivity of the nterial and the configuration of the 10 structure elements.

The heat conductivity coefficient is calculated by fortuila
llW/(u-‘Cﬂ - Q/AbsodT/Al. (5.!)

where Q is the aaount of heat,Joulea3 A'r -- telperature gradient, °C: 1 ~-
distance froa heat source; 3 = 40/? -- systen entropy. Joules/degree. Foraula
(5.1) contains the specific heat of the systsn c = o/ A t and the temperature

gradient grad '1' = AT/ A 1. Values of heat conductance coefficients of several
materials used in the 10 structure are shown below.

Material 3. watts/(asters. °c
Silver #60
Copper 390
Beryllium oxide 208
Aluninua ' 203
Silicon 83.5
Aluainua 19.6
Kovar 19e7
Glass (borosilicate) 1.1
Laminated epoxy plastic 0.28

To evaluate the degree of the heat effect in tinning and soldering. it is neces-
sary to know the asterial heat transfer coefficient of Ic structure eleaents

u - - Ul'p. (5.2)

where 2 -- coefficient of heat conductivity, c -- specific heat. Joules (kg.°c);

P -- density. ltd-3. This coefficient is detersined experimentally for each
type of IC housing and a given misu- tenperature of elements in individual

structures.
Fig. 5.9 shows diagram of heat distribution for five housing designs. Isotherns
are shown on these figures that characterize the degree of heating of 10 elements

when tinning leadouts. This data was obtained by thermal melting indicators whose
action is based on the irreversible and sharp change in color when a certain

- 33a -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5.8. ﬂeet emctnnge circuit in tinning and soldering external IO leadoutsn

1. contact pad 3. internal connecting calductor
2. housing 1‘. Ic chip

critical teaperature is reached. In the experimt. thernl aelting indicators
with various critical teaperatures were coated on the substrate or bottoa of the
re. Then the 10 was enclosed by covers. and fastened in a special holder nde

of textolite. and the tinning operation was time by di ing the leadouts in aelted
solder (teaperature of the nelted solder was 260° 1 500 . distance iron housing

to solder surface was 1 as, the contact tine betwem the lesdouts and solder wae
3 seconds.

The devices 'used in the experiaent provided a aininl reaoval of heat tron the 10
housing. in this case. the linear shifts pervadicular to the surface of the sol-
der were held to an accuracy of 3 0.2 as.

To deteraine the precise teaperature values (the tharnl nelting indicators gave
only liaits of teaperature changes). and to evaluate the changes of this teapera-
ture with tile. temperature neasurelents were ads on the nest typical IO elemts
(leadcute, substrate. chip) by a then-.1 electric aethod for different nodes of
timing and soldering. The teaperature was aeseured by a low-inertia copper
constantan thernocouple with an 0.06 an electrode disaster which nde it possible
to reduce the censure-ant error and the theraocouple effect on the true value of
the teaperature. In the experiamt, the theraocouple was attached to the neasure-
nent point. then the housing cover was closed and sealed by ”cyacrin" glue. The
theraocouple indications were recorded by a high-speed self-recording device.

The relationships between the teaperaturee of the 1c elesents of various types in
the process of tinning and the tinning tins and the distance to the solder sur-
face are shown in Fig. 5.10.

~335 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OUR “tilt l\l “5| "3| \

 

Fig. 5.9. Tonya-stun distribution of IO housing hosting when tinning leedouts:
s -- type "l‘rops" housing; b "plansr housing 1001.134; c -- housing
151.15-13 d -- type ”Poi 01" housing: 3 -- round housing 301.12-1.

In this figure telpersture sones obtained by thornl indicators of Ielting. are
shown for conpsrison. The test results show that tespersture values obtained by
the thernoelectricsl method sre in the temperature zone deternined by the thermal
indicators of Ielting. An snslysie of the emperinentsl dsts indicstes that the
temperature difference of heating to elenents when tinning and soldering reaches
10...20°c and for all housing types 301.12-1. the timing node is lore “rigid."
Tinning psrsneters are shown below.

W m

Max. soldering teIpersture. °C 2
Max. tine the lesdouts are in the melted solder. seconds 2 0
Min. distance from housing "body“ to boundary of solder slong the 1-3
leadout length. II
ﬂax. allowable nulber of dippinge of the sale lesdouts into the 2

5

solder
hininun intervsl of tile between two dippings of the ease
lesdouts into the solder. Iinutes

-335-

FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY
m9). -

.. _ ~Z. '
1 (""4114 ; ‘\
(XXII) ‘

0 continued on the nut that

-337-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI-ICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 5.10. (continued fron previous sheet) Relationship between tenperaturs of
IC elessnts in the process of tinning and timing tins (t) and the
distance (1) between the level of solder for housings series 217 (a).
106 (b). 218 (c) and 122 (d). The nusbers on the curves correspond
to the points of the IC elensnts at which the nessuresent is ads:
solder tesperature is 260 3 5°C.

5. t = 2 seconds 6. 1:. seconds

In tlnning. the solder should not touch the seal inlets of the housing. The sol-
der should not fall on glass or csranic parts of the IG housing. The boundary of
solder ﬂowing on leadouts should be no closer than 1 II to the body of the hous-
ing (Fig. 5.11s): however. sons nonuniforaity of tinning along the length of the
leadout is allowed. The nininul length of the tinning section along the lesdout
length tron its end lust be no less than 0.6 In (915. 5.llb). but "icicles" on
the ends of 10 lssdouts ere perldtted (913. 5.11c).

It is necessary to mks sure that connections are not forsed between the leadouts
and the soldering surface should be continuous without cracks. pores and untinned
sections (Fig. 5.lld).

Bluipnent used for tinning lust insure the setting and neasuring of the tenpera-
ture with an error no greater than 1 500.

The quality of soldered connections should be determined by the following criteria:
the soldered surface should have a light or net finish without dark spots and
foreign inclusions. The shape of the soldered connections sust have concave fil-
lets of solder along the seas (without an excess of solder). The contours of the
leadouts should cons through the solder. In soldering 1c housings with planar
leadouts the following is persitteda a flooding fern of soldering in which con-
tours of individual 10 leadouts are fully hidden under the solder on the soldered
side of a connection (Fig. 5.11s. 1‘), partially covering the surface of the con-

tact pad with solder along the soldering perineter, but in no sore than two places,

- 338-

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
not exceeding 1% of the total ares (Fig. 5.116). Bolder bits of conical shape

(Fig. 5.11h) and rounded shape (Fig. 5.111) where the soldering tool is renoved.
a stall shift of the leedout within the contact pad (Fig. 5.113) and the spread
of solder (only within the boundaries of the 1mm. length. suitable fou: wiring).

 

Fig. 5.11. ate-plea of timing end soldering leedouts of a planar housing:
a -- zone of solder flow; I: -- allowable nonuniforsity of tinning;
c -- presence of "icicles'h d -- nonuniform tinning and false ccnnec~
tions; e. f -- flooding for- of soldering: g -- partial tinning of con-
tact pad: h. i -- conical shape solder beads; J -- shell shift of
lesdouts; l -- lesdcut; 2 -- housing; 3 -- contact pad: ‘0 "printed
circuit boexd: 5 -- solder; 6 -- connection: 7 -- untinned section

when soldering Ic leadouts into natal-coated holes. the soldered connections lust
be according to the sketches shown in Fig. 5.12s-d. The solder on the side of the
housings should not spread beyond the boundaries of the contact pads. The leadout
and lay be untinned. The hotel-coated wiring holes list be filled with solder to
e. heigt of not less than 2/3 of the thickness of the boom. The correctim of
defective connections from the side of the Ic haunting on the board is not per-

nitted.

- .339 -
FOR DITA 1123. USE ONLY
Fig. 5.12. Btuples of soldering housings with plug-coupler lesdoutst
a. b. c. d -- soldering in hotel-coated holes: e. f. g -- soldering
in nonsetal-costed holes; 1 -- leadout: 2 -- netal—coated hole;
3 -- printed circuit board: 16 -- solder: 5 -- cavity in solder;
6 -- contact pad: 7 -- end not tinned.

when soldering Ic lesdouts to contact pads of printed circuit boards with holes

not coated with setal. the soldered cmnection must be made according to the sketch
(Pig. 5.1291). The spreading of the solder along the 1c leadouts should not re-
duce the niniuul distance fro- the housing to the soldering point, i.e.. it should
be uithin the zone suitable for the wiring shown in the specification. There need
be no solder at the ends of the leadouts.

The equipnent and fixtures used in soldering must provide the following: automtic
maintenance and control of the nelted solder tenperature with an accuracy of 1 5°C
when inplessnting the "soldering wave” operation; maintenance and periodic control
(every 1 to 2 hours) of the tenperature of the soldering bit with an accuracy of
3 5°C in the individual method of soldering; control of the time the Ic lesdouts
are in contact with the soldering bit or with the solten solder in group soldering:
also control of the distance Hon the housing body to the boundary of the solder
along the length of the lesdout. The soldering bit lust be gounded (the ground re-
sistance should be no greater than 5 ohms). Table 5.10 shows the recoumded nodes

of 1c soldering using single—bit and group methods.

- 340-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080030-5

Recon-ended IO soldering node

ﬁgs—I932 Soldering 10 with
W...
1-bit aoup nethod
W

Max. telperature of solder- 265 -
ing iron core. °C

Max. contact tine 3.0 -
of each leadout. sec-

onds

Min. tine interval 3.0 -

between soldering of
adjacent lesdouts.
seconds

Hex. telperature of Iolten - 265
solder. 00

Max. contact tine - 2.0
of each leedout with
solder

Min. distance fro- 1.0 1.0
housing to solder along
leadout, u

ﬂin. tine between 5.0 5.0

two repeated solderings
of sane lesdouts. min.

5.7. 10 Assenbly on Printed Circuit Boards

The following are the design features of IO housingsu ti
and sealing seam. and a relatively “thin” housing base l
are fastened the substrates or the chip. determine a who:
quire-ants which lust be ilplenonted in essenbling I0 on

All precautionary nessures, in this case, are reduced to
fro- inpernissible deforntions.

-341-

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000800306
0: one hand. the assesbiy sethod lust provide mechanical strength that would guar-

antee resistance to nechanical loads expected in operation but. on the other hand.
“rigid" attachment of the housing is isperaissible because the defer-ation of the
printed circuit board (if its deflection is even several tenths of a sillineter)

my result either in the cracking of the sealing Joints of the housing, or in the
deformation of the botto- and the rupture of the substrate or chip.

in most cases of IO application. mechanical stability is insured only by soldering
all leedouts to contact pads. The necessity and netth for additional fastening
of the IC to the board are determined by the rigidity of the operating conditions
of the apparatus, as well as the weight and size of the Ic housings.

The design of the apparatus lust insure efficient renewal of heat by air convection
and heat-reloving netal buses. The convection is provided by using housings with the
sari-um pernissible gaps between the plane of the board and the bottom of the hous-
ing. The housing arrangement on the printed circuit board must provide the possi-
bility of coating it with moisture-protective varnish without having it fall into
places that should not be coated. and have free access for disnntling any IC.

Taking into account the necessity of preserving the integrity of the housing and

to provide for heat removal. reconnendations are given below for using various

types of IC.

 

Fig. 5.13. Variations of mounting various housings on the print circuit board with
metal-coated holes:
a.b -- housings with plug-coupler pins without additional fastening;
c,d -- housing with plugocoupler'pins with additional gasteningx
e -- plastic housing; 1’ -- cylindrical housing without additional
fastening: g -- cylindrical housing with an electric insulation spacer

l. Spacer

~342-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 9.13:.» shows variations of aounting housings with plug-coupler pin lesdouts

(housings 151.1540 and 151.15-6). These housings are nountsd in hotel-coated holes.
The 10 do not have leadouts. The gap. equal to l - 0.5 II, is chosen to insure
IC stability in the entire range of mechanical loads and the preservation of the

integrity of the housing (at suller ga . it is possible to da-ge the seal inlet
of metal-glass housings due to the thersal effect of soldering).

10 in housings 151.15-2. 151.15-3 (Fig. 5.13c) and "Aktsiya" (Fig. 5.13s) require
additional fastenings. 10 in housings 151.15-2 and 151.15-3 are glued to insula-
tion spacers. for example, made of IBV-2-R-2H (GGT 17678-72) or AG-‘é (ccsr 10087-62).
The spacers must be fastened rigidly to the printed circuit board. In choosing the
dilensions of the insulation spacers, it is necessary that they be as close as possi-
ble to the area of the IC housing base and that the integrity of the seal inlet

be preserved. The la in the 'Aktsiya' housing (Pig. 5.13d) is sounted against an

LN ceaent. placed along the periaeter. Cover should be provided with a two-sided
arrangement of conductors in the board under the electric insulation of the IO

10 in housings 201.1‘6-1 are nounted on boards with a single-side or a two-sided
arrangement of printed conductors into natal-coated holes with a gap insured by
the design of the leadout (Fig. 5.13e). Fir. 5.l3f.g shows variations of mounting
10 with housings 301.84. 301.84 and 301.12-1 with formed leadouts. They are
nounted with a gap of 3+ 0.5 mm (Fig. 5.13f). If the apparatus is subjected to
higher nechanical forces in operation. rigid spacers of electrical insulation late~
rial must be used. The spacer should be glued to the board and the base (to the
bottom) of the 10 (Fig. 5.13g). The design of the spacer Inst also insure the
integrity of the seal inlets of the Iicrocircuit. 10 with cylindrical housings
without lesdouts are mounted onto natal-coated holes with a 1+ 0.5 an ap.

Fig. 5.14. Variations of haunting planar housings.
a -- against the printed board; b -- with gap; c -- against a spacer

10 in housings 1501.1'6-1 and “OLE-2 with shaped leadouts my be mounted on the
boards with a single-side or a two-sided arrangement of printed conductors by the
following nethods: amnst the printed board or on a spacer (Fig. 15.14am) or
with a gap of up to 0.3 an (Fig.15.llbb). In this case, the additional fastening is
provided by coating with varnish. The up my be increased to 0.? II, but then

the {C housing lust be fastened additionally to the board by glue.
Planar housings lust be glued to the entire plane of the housing base. The thick-

ness of the seal is determined by the chosen variation of forming the leadouts
(the distance iron the plane of the re base to the board). but the gaps between the

Ic and the board met all be filled with glue. lhen 10 are Iounted a: planar

~343-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0’11"“. USE ONLY

- ’3‘
'e

"I'll”llllllllll‘

‘ - ~ .' on»; x l
. ' e o
.32.<.>:.~

..\‘. V

 

Fig. 5.15. halple of proper (a) and ilproper (b) mounting of a planar housing on
a printed circuit

1. LR 2. 03-231

housings a shift of the free ads of the leadouts in the horisontal plane is per-
nitted within 1 0.2 II for Itching with the contact pads. hoe ends of leedouts
may be shifted within 3 0.“ II in the vertical plane from the leadout position af-
ter forming.

The use of glues vx-9(snohIo.026.aom) or Ax-zo (TU 6-10-1293-72). as well as
cement LN (TU m. 3052-55) to glue 10 to printed boards is recomended. The dry-
ing temperature of asterials used for fastening 1c to the board should not exceed
the permissible temperature for operating Ic. The recon-ended drying temperature
is 65 1 5°C. In gluing IO to the printed board. the squeezing force should not
exceed 0.08 aicrol’a. It is not permissible to glue 10 with glue or cemt applied
at individual points on beses- or at the ends of the housings.

Fig. 15b shows an inperniseible varieties: of IO aounting which is glued to the end
of the housing (this my be done for simplifying the disasntling of 10). In this
method. the gap between the bottom of the 1c and the board is partially filled
with ceasnt. In iaplelenting the moisture protection operation. {IR-231 varnish my
get into the gap which. by polynorisation, may be able to cause the deformation of

the hotter of the housing (0.1...0.l5 m thick). the ungluing of the chip or break-
age of the internal connections or the 1c. In all cases or installation of IO on

printed circuit boards, no force should be applied that leads to the defomtion of
the housing of the IC.

~344-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.8. to protectim Auinst Electrical Effects

The degree of integration of the Ic (i.e.. the dazeity of the grouping of elesents
on one water) is increasing with tile because of the development of a technology

that nkes it possible to reduce the dissnsims of the elesants, as well as those
areas by leans of which the sleamts are electrically insulated {roe each other on

the IC water. Such an increase in the density of the elemts on the surface of
the wafer lakes it possible to isprove the electrical and nmctional paraaeters of

the 10. but is accospanied by a reduction in allowable electrical loads. and in-
creases the sensitivity of the sicrocircuits to static electricity discharges.

Table 5.11 shows coeparative typical characteristics of transistors nnufactured
by different technological processes.

Table 5.11

Sosa para-stars of various design of transistors
Tghnical cmtgistig Planar epitaxial 'Isoplsnar-l" "Isoplansr-H"

mm. maim— m
Dinensions of eaitter 25:38 51.25 2.51125
area. nicroseter
Breakdown voltage 23 7 5
elitter-collsctor. volts
Breakdown voltage 55 22 114»

collectorbsse. volts

Actually, an analysis of 10 that failed in the process of production indicates that
the cause of failures of up to ’00 to 505 of such It: is electrical overload.

In dauged 10 there is detected a deterioration of the steemess of the volt-ampere
slope or s couplets breakdown of the p-n Junctim although there are no changes in
the natal coating visible under a licroscope. hitter Junctions are dalsged note
frequently than others. Brternally the defect is nnifested in that the value of
the reverse current increases by several orders of witude, while the current
asplification coefficient decreases essentially (by 705). In this case. the elec-
trical overloads cause irreversible changes in the 13-11 Junctim structures leading
to the deterioration ofsthe efficiency of the eaitter. A typical volt-sspere char-
acteristic of the Junction for a reverse bias is show: in Fig. 5.16. The enitter
current (curve 2) is alsost linear which my be due to the appearance of an ohnic
shunt on the surface. or in the voluse of the p—n Junction.

A partial or couplets burn-out of the natal coating ad the fornation of Jumpers
between adjacent tracks say occur. along with highly visible traces of p-n Junctions
breakdowns on the surface or under the passivating layer.

:34:-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rue: urn-u IAI. “3': ONLY

 

r z s an: (6)

Fig. 5.16. Volt-aapere characteristics of-enitter Junctions of two transistors
without housings:
1,2 -- transistors in working order; 3,10 -~ transistors after a 600-volt
discharge through the elitter Junction in the reverse direction;
5 -- Iicrcaaperes: 6 -- volts

10 that failed due to electrical overloads are characterised by the lelting and
spettering of eluninus (when boiling) and the fornticn of short-circuited adjacent
sections of the sets}. coating. The bum-outs occur aost frequently at the "weak-
est" points of the current-carrying tracks that have local thinning (at the ”steps“
of the oxide).

Que cause of 1c failures of the above-indicated types my be the effect of dis-
charges of static electricity originating during various technological operations
due to the wide use. under production conditions. of strongly electrifiable syn-
thetic and other insulation nterials. hcreover. due to poor grounding of device
housings and technological tools. considerable network noise inductions ny occur.

The origination of static charges is due to several generating nechanisls and the
value of these charges depends on Isny factors. The values of static voltages
(Ucr) on the surface of the dielectric. indepmdmtly of the lechanisa of their

generation are always proportional to the specific surface resistance of the (83 ).

This can easily be seen by analysing the «perinatal data on the value of static
voltages criggting on the surface of several uteriale at a relative huaidity of

50‘ (Table 5. .

-356-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5.1? shows the relationship between the static voltages and the relative air
huaidity of two types of ntorial used widely for the special working clothes of
production porsamel -- Lavoan and cotton cloth. The relative huaidity of the air
is used as the paraaotor whon neasuring the voltages. In analysing these relation-
ships. it should he noted that static potmtials at low relative humidity of the
air (‘60 to 50$) roach 3 to 10 kilovolts. The static voltage on lavean is higher
than on cotton cloth and deponds strongly an the relative hiaidity of tho air

(at 6? hulidity the voltage can ootta: is sero. Ihilo a) Lavoan. it exceeds 3 kil-
volts . -

In developing Ieaeuree to protect Ic fros the effect of static electricity dis-
charges. it is necessary to take into account also the ability of insulating aste-
rials to retain charges accumlstod on their surfaces for a certain tine. As the
charge retention tile is seemed the tile (1:, ) during which the accumlated
static voltage reduces to a half or a third.

TS, say be neasured as follows: the surface of the tested ntorial is charged (for
exanple, by rubbing) to a certain voltage and a flat notallic contact electrode is
applied to the surface of the nterial. The electrode is connected to a type 8-95
static voltaeter and then the tile it takes for the voltage to drop to half or a

third is recorded. The charge retention tiao is proportional to the specific sur-
face resistance of the nterialo exactly the ease as the values of the static volt-

aces-

 

Table 5.12.
Static voltages and surface resistanoo of various ntorials
M . Umlvolts m
Polyvinyl chloride 1.3 - 2.8 known
Vood 0.7 1.0::1012
61883 0o6 - 0.8 9o6Xl°12
Getinaks o.u5 n.3x10

Table 5.13
Charge retention tile on various surfaces
gang Engage nag;
Paper 25 (3.3 913m”
Vanished wood 1200 lJulO
Polyvinyl chloride _ 7800 1.0x101h
cm. 9000 2.2::1015
Synthetic linoleum 12000 1+.0x101"

- 347 —

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.17. Reletionehip between the nine of static
and relative hulidity of eir for cotton . ,;

cloth (1) and um cloth (2)
3. Volt. to. many '

  

c” .9 U U
' (”magmas

use 5.18. RdAtlailhip MUM
specific eurtece re-
eietence (9.) of poly-
vinyl chloride end the
level of the relative
humidity of the air .
1. One 2. Air 1h-
:MtYe

Table 5.13 ehowe experinentcl dete on charge retention tine et the reletive humidi-
ty of the eir of 6’. The tine retention tine a: the eurfece of eyntlutic linoleun
m neeem-ed et e lower hunidity (60’).

It my be concluded iron as. 5.18 thet en increeee in humidity from no to 83! re-
ducee the epeoitio ounce reeietence of polyvinyl chloride by five ordere of leg-
nitMCe

In organising epyentue production using 1c. it nuet be renenbered thet coneidereble
etetic voltuee. tron hundrede to eevercl thoueanda 0! volts. are produced on the
hende or the workers when doing venom tecknologicel operntione. The vclue end
pohrity of theee voltecee demo. a: any varioue rectors. including the humidity

.93“:

MOWMONLY
of tho oir in the roan. tho ntoriol of tho clothing worn. tho ntoriolo need to

oovor the table and ohoire. the technological ond toot equip-eat and tho demo
of inoulogion of the worker tron tho "aroma“ (uterine ot ohooe end floor)
Fig. 5.19 .

An onelyeie of the date in Fig. 5.19 ohowo thot'dth working ohooo with rubber
eoloo (curvee 2). the etotio voltogo a: the hand- ot tho workoro ie 2 to 2.5 “I“
hidur than when working in leothor ohooo (curveo l). Thio io due to the fact
that the lounge reeiotonoe of ohooo with rubber ond loother eoloo differs by o1”-
noet two ordero of latitude (leohce roeiotonoo o: ohooo with rubber eoloo u

1.8x108-2.ax109 ohno. while on lootho: eoloo -- it 1. 5.63106 to 1.w7). It
should oloo be noted thot hid: voluoo of ototio voltooee on tho workere' [undo
corroopond to tho oooo whore diolootrioo with hiya opooitio ourfooo rooietenoo
ore need ot tho working pooition.

 

Fig. 5.19. Motionehip betwoa: tho ototio voltogo originating on tho workere'
hands when rubbing difforont notoriolo ond tho rolotivo lovol of the humidity of

tho eir for the teblo eurfooo be of polyvinyl chloride (e); vorniohed wood (b).
textoltt; (o). oovorod with alooo d). Uorkco' ohooo Iith loother (l) ond rubber
eoloo 2 .

3. Volta lb. ﬂuidity. I

When the workero walk on o floor covered with oynthotio linoloun. ohorsoo ore eloo
eooumloted on then (m. 5.20). The wmtim of ototic olootricity ohorgee in
tho production prooeoo ehould prooood in two direction: firet reduotia: of the
possibility of etotio olootrieity ohoreo senentia: ad. eoomdly. inouronco of the
renovol or won-noted ohorgoe tron tho prodmtial end toormoloxiool equip-oat end
"Who

-31o9-

WWI-0880M"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In organising apparatus production sections where 10 are used the use of finishing

nterials with high specific surface resistance is not recon-ended. The use of

finishing nterials for production funiture. floors testing and technological
equip-ant nterisls with low - not over (1 to £109 chas,insures the necessary

conditions for the rapid draining cf the static electricity charges.

~—-.—.-—.—

 

Fig. 5.20. Relationship between static voltage on the worker at various values

of the relative husidity and. degree of insulation fros the floor. it
the workers' shoes have leather (1) or rubber (2) soles.

 

 

3. Volts 1‘. ﬂuidity, 5
m1. 5.).“
Relative characteristics of two types of linclsus
Type of synthetic P, . oh- R, . ohs.cs 1'5. seconds
W —
Canon tonal" ' 5.9::1017 12000
Antistatic mo9 2.mo9 0.5

A special antistatic linoleus is recon-ended to cover surfaces. The cosparative
electrical paraseters .. specific surface (9‘ ) and vcluaetric (R, ) resistances

and the tins of charge retention (1’3) of com and antistatic linoleum are
shown in Table 5.11}.

The use of antistatic linoleus elilinates the possibility of charge accusulaticn
on the worker. a contact by the worker's hand with a surface covered by the anti-
static linoleus before doing the next tecluclcgical operation insures draining cf
the charge in 1 second. Synthetic cover -P-2-l-8-5 has tge best antistatic proper-
ties. specific sin-face resistance of the nterial is 10 ohm. The use of such
saterial insures the cosplete destruction of the static charges because the drain-

Mgtiuofacmnfroaapmmiemlym04gmm

-350-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’13. 5.21. Mtimhip bum ammo turbo. m. ($) of mm
human-ow». (—) unma- (—~ «—-) thou-
truth-at by “W” Mon

1. unthctio linoleu- 3. «about!
2. tartan“ '0. oh-
5- db!-

mo of the uthodg moo-add to Mm. the speciﬁc term not-tam. of own
1. to m surface-«tin sum (Pu). fa.- mlo. Mull“ you
(1'0-6-15-605-71). which 1. gnu“ 1: I thin 1w on tho wrung 01mm our
two. at tables. to» and tool-named guy-at. packing for storing IO and
autumn. mthomnoonaMn-hmom tot-Win:
(mum-o. The mummy prom. or the Me with respect to u. m our
«new: by «pm-um data (m. 5.21).

Thoma-nu lama-two m“ nthtmuthomal anaconda totho
utmldryin‘mmncotthomtonhddnototummhbdoftlhopm-
non. mmmmbymmcd-uitmmmtoISMtthm-
rm.mthMMmmMOMhMWathoh-u

“Mommam. hthomootuiumtimuonnolmuunu

a -. 351 -
”WWONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

in using PM! to drain charges. it is necessary to insure good electrical contact
of one-two points of the processed surface (contact area not less than 1 cnz) with
the "ground."

To reduce the surface resistance of covers at working positions. it is recommended
to insure the minim relative hundity in the production areas (a satisfactory re-
sult my be achieved at 65 to 70$ humidity).
Materials with surface resistances of 106 and 108 ohms are recon-aided for inter-
operation packing. The packing nterial my be coated with aluainua current-
conducting paint. The paint layer does not prevent charge draining because it has
a low f3 .

The continuous contact between the worker and the “ground“ should be provided

by a special antistatic bracelet. connected through a high-voltage resistor (for
example. the KLV type 10 kilovolt resistor). However. it should be taken into
account that the use of an antistatic bracelet is effective only when the working
position. packing and fixtures are node of nteriale with low surface resistances
that prevent the aocumlaticn of static electricity charges. (therwise the possi-
bility of IO deluge is high. Actually. charges of static electricity on a high
resistance surface. for exalple. on interoperaticn packing. «my produce a voltage
of up to several thousand volts on the packing itself. as well as on the 10 in it.
At the moment of contact beth the worker and the 10' when there is a current
circuit "IC-worker-gromd" the pulse of the discharge current Iey cause the failure
of the 1c [2].

The workers' clothes should be ads of cotton cloth. be laundered with antistatic
“Charodeyka” paste or other surface-active substance. The workers should wear
leather or semiconducting rubber soles.

5.9. Dismantling

In manufacturing apparatus. it frequently becoaes necessary to disnntle 10. The
following are recommended for this operation. If 10 with planar lesdouts are to be
disease-bled. it is necessary ton. rencve the varnish at points of leadout solder-
ing (if needed); unsolder the IC leadouts using a node that does not eXceed the
soldering node specified in the 10 certiﬁcate: lift the ends of the leadcuts fro-
where they wear fixed in the seal inlet: resove the Ic fro: the boards thermonuc-
chanically by scans of a special device. (This device is heated to a temperature
that prevents the 10 housing fro- cverheating above the tenperature indicated in
the certificate. The heating title should be sufficient to remove the 10 and not
pert-it cracks. chipping and dange to the housing).

When removing an 10 with pin leadouts. it is necessary to: remove vanish at the
points of soldering of the leadoutes unsolder the leadouts with a special soldering
tool (the solder should be dram off according to a node not exceeding the solder-
ing lode. specified in the 10 certificate. until all 10 leadouts are freed fro-
connection with the netal-coated printed circuit board); resove 1c from the board
(not per-sitting cracks. chipping of glass or deforming of the housing and the lead-

outs). In this case also.if necessary. it is peraitted (if the housing is fastened

‘1

-' 352 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the hard with vanish or 31m) to an a tum“). whoa to “love the

10 that prawn“ ”chanting of the mains. at aha-1a.]. aolvnu tint In" no
effect on the coating. 13330113; and atom of tho homing.

3W

1. Intogntcd Circuits. maple- of Dacia and Production. muted fro-
tho mm. mm: by A. A. lolooav. noun-v. Sam-toy. auto. 1967.

2. bvursnov. v. m w. A. L. W. Yu. A. 1mm mum; in tho
“conductor Industry? Ila-gov. W”. 1975.

0mm. mtol'ltvo W0 M10”. 1979

2291
so: 1863/209

-3S3-

mmuscmv
m‘n Oman. use ONLY.

Table of Contents

Foreword '
Chapter 1

Terninologi in nicroelectronics and classification of
integrated circuits

1.1. Introductim
1.2. Tsrninology in microelectronics
1.2.1 Integrated circuits. elenente of conpousnts (7).

1.2.2 men-ante or design (7). 1.2.3. Silple and complex 1c (9).

1.2.0. Hicroassenblies and licrounitc (10).

1.2. 10 classification
. Syste- for conventional deaigxations of IO

Qupter 2
Integrated circuit manufacturing cathode

2.1.-Filn and hybrid technology
2.1.1. lhterials for hybrid 1c (19). 2.1.2. Manufacturing of
hybrid Io elelents (22). 2.1.3. Hiring or electrical
connections in hybrid IO (3*).
2.2. Senicouductor technology
2.2.1. later-isle for ole-ants of eesiconductor IO and their
mufacture (36). 2.2.2. knufacture of integrated
circuits (29). 2.2.3. Division ofnfsrs into chips.

wiring of IO (35). 2.2.11. Sealing 1c chips (36).
2.2.5. Manufacture of 10 housings (37).
2.3. Special features of high degree of integration of 10 technology

Chapter 3 '
Digital integrated circuits

3.1. Purpose and application
3.2. Logic functions obtained by digital to
3.3. Classification of digital IO and their Fasic electrical

psrasstsrs
3.16. Mentor-transistor logic circuits
3.11.1. Basic electrical para-store of type 111. IO (70).

3.“.2. Junctimal ooapoeition of 111. series (72). 3.15.3.
Sons featm-ee of using 111. type 10 78) .
3.5. Knitter-connected transistor logic 1371.]
3.5.1. Functional cosposition of the m series (80).
3.5.2. Basic electrical para-stems and typical chtactu'ietics

0ftmmlc99e .o.80 ft f t
m1c(103).() 353 uuwuosppm-nem

- 356-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VG

11
12

18 -
18

S

835.

2.3
3.6. Digital IO ads of H43 109

3.6.1. Principle of Ic operation with p-channel am
transistors (111). .6.2. Static circuits with p-chamiel
has transistors (113 . 3.6.3. Quasistatic and We
circuits (116). 3.6.1.. Principle o: ic operatic: with
cosplessntary H18 transistors (119). 3.6.5. Basic 1c
series with was transistors (123).

3.7. Integrated circuits of senory units 130
3.7.1. Honor: elensnts with bipolar transistors $131). -
3.7.2. awry eleasnts with um transistors (13a .

3.7.3. Henna-y elenents with coapleamtu'y was transistors (135).

3.7 1.. Henry elemts with no transistors (136).

3.7.5. lie-cry eleasnts with ”silicon on as e (138).

3.7 6. Henry elemts using new nterials 138)

3.7 7. Basic 10 senor, units and their functional
colposition (1'61).

3.8. Perspectives of digital IO develop-ant 1162
3.8.1. Integrated injectial logic (“361;

3.8.2. hm circuits with n-olnnnels (1 ).

3.9. Hicrocalculators 146

3.10 Microprocessors 1'59
3.10.1. Microprocessor characteristics (150)

3.10.2. liedius speed sicroproceesor set (1?).
3.10.3. High speed sicroprocessor set-(159 .

Gupta- lb
Analog integrated circuits 200
“.1. Purpose and application 200
“.2. Operational asplifiera zoo
u.2.1. Operational 33151111.: with a two-stage circuit 207;.
15.2.2. Alplifiera with field transistors at the in 21" .
“.20. Alplifiers with super-beta transistors (215 .
4.2.15. High current operational asplitier of the 153015
type (219). u.2.5. Quick-acting operational
uplifiers fag. lb.2.6. Hicropower operaticnal
15.3. Integrated coaparatou 227
15.“. Integrated analog mltipliers 231
10.5. Analog Ic for radio receivers 8&1
u.5.1. Differential asplifiers (m3). u.5.2. Low frequcioy
amplifiers (won) (2%). 11.5.3. Specialised 10 (ans).
#6.“. IC for designing selective devices (255).
0.6. IO for status]. conversion of digital and analog data 257
13.7. Analog switches 273
15.8. Integrated voltage stabilisers 278

- 35$-

l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82—00850R000500080030-5

FOR OFF" 1M. USE ONL'Y

Chm-tor ';

Providing .[C reliability when they are mufactured and

installed in apparatus

Deng-technological principles for high Ic reliability
Operational Ionitoring

Rejection tests

Effect of external factors in apparatus manufacture
Forming and triuing leads

Timing and soldering

Mounting It: on circuit boards

Protecting 10 from electrical effects

Die-antling

\AU‘U‘MEJ‘U‘U‘ UV!
\0 3.7V (by {-‘U NH

Conclusion
C(PYRIGl-l'ra lzdatel'etvo "Sovetskoye radio“, 1979

2291
(:90: 1863/ 209

-END-

-356-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500000030-5