FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10535

21 May 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 773

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain infornation prinrily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro. English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original. phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
netion was sunnrired or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. fines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGlT LAVS AND REGULATIONS GWEﬂNING WSHIP 0P
Mmms “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSMNATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L,
21 Hay

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

P000 No. 773

CONTENTS

“Tm-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Student Unrest Reported Throughout Africa
(Jean-““13 Nehet’ mm mm, 211 Fab 82)....eecs oese

Africa's New Home-Grown Journalists
(Homer Kebe lldisys; Jm AFRIQUE, 13 Jan 82) ...........

CHAD

Goukomi-Kanougus Split, FAN Takes Town
(Abacar Aawo; m, 19 Apr 82) nose-oeoeeoeeeeeee-oeee

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Leader Promises New Constitution
(mm, 19 Am. 82)....OOOOOIOOOODID.O0.00000DOUOIOOOOOOO

GABON

Statistics Relating to 1981 Budget Set Forth
(MARCHBS TROPIGAUX ET mums, 19 Feb 82) ........

British Railroad Contracts
(MARKERS TROPICAUX 8T mammals, 19 Feb 82) ........

Briefs
President Tours Interior

GHANA

Troubled Economy Reviewed; Strong Image-ant Urged
(Jacques Lstetnoliere; mm M16111! n‘r
mmms, 5 “81' 82) 0..0.0.0000...0.000.000.0000...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

onus Experiencing Hell milling Problems
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX 3T “HMS, 19 Feb 82) u...

SEEM:

New Control Shops Betebliehed in Cape Verde Area
(WI-I33 TROPIGAUX 3T mums, 19 Feb 82) .....

Briefs
Opposition Critique Planned
Paris Senegalese naya
Peat Exploitation Company
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

STUDENT UNRBST REPORTED 71130068001 AFRICA

Paris JED“! AFRIQUB in French 210 Feb 82 pp 16-18

[Article by Jean-Louis Buchet under the heading "Politics and Economics: In
Africa and In the World": "Students in Opposition to Governments"; investi-
gation by Sylviane Kat-era, Mohamed Selheui and Francois Soudan]

[Text] Universities are astir almost everywhere in
Africa. Do governments have reason to be worried?

"Abidjnn--0n 10 Pebruary the Political Bureau of the PDCI [Democratic Party
of the Ivory Coast] decided on the inediate closing of the university and
university-level professional schools in the capital, the vacating of all

university residence halls and housing, and the suspension of student grants.
The day before, a number of students had been arrested following a demonstra-
tion..."

"Rabat-~0n 11 and 12 February the science faculty observed a 48-hour strike.
Students are protesting against the ban on the activity of the union of the
URBH [National Union of Moroccan Students]; three of the five neabers of the
cum executive comittee are in prison."

"Kinshasa-0n Sunday. 31 January, the university and the National Teacher-
Training Institute were closed until further notice by government order rati-
fied by the chief of state. On 25 January students had begun a strike to
support their demands."

"Libreville--On 11 December (1981) the cewus was cleared out by the police
force. The students and certain professors on strike were calling for the
release of the recently arrested rector."

These are a few junbled recent press agency dispatches. Others could be
found. At any'rate these are sufficient to give a picture of an acadenic
year which at the start of 1982 looks troubled almost everywhere in Africa.
There is no need to look for a hidden hand behind this outbreak, if it is
indeed an outbreak.‘ Remember 1968, fanous for May in France, and also my

in Senegal; a fev months earlier the fever had taken hold of the universities

in Berkeley (USA) and west Berlin. the universities in a nuﬁer of Latin
Aserican countries were to follow, particularly in Mexico, where things were
to turn out very badly.

FOROFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the west at that time students wanted to "change the quality of life."
in the Third world they had not yet reached that stage. But, going beyond
the mos: assuredly different deeands and concerns of both the one and the
other groups of 1968 protesters-rich and poor, more privileged and less

privileged--all evidenced the unrest of young people who were suffocating.

Is that the situation today in Africa? Surveys among students, university
by university, could easily show that. But the unrest does not always
emerge into open protest. If a half dozen African campuses are occupied or
in tureoil at the sane tine, that is also in part a matter of chance. For
the moment there does not seem to be sore than a series of specific out-
bursts whose coming together is creating a stir. Hence, this is not a con-
certed movement, all the less so because there is no protest beacon to be
found in it as there was in 1968 with the Parisian students. '

Furthermore, although such a simultaneity of occurrences has rarely been
observed, university disturbances are a constant element of the current
African scene. As far as the last few years are concerned, let us recall
the repeated brawls between fundanentalists and leftists in Tunis in 1979
and 1980, and. in Algeria, the Berber movement in Tizi-Ousou and then the
confrontations between Arabizers and "Frenchifiers" in Algiers in 1980 and
1981. In Cairo, in January 1980, clashes brought religious types into con-
flict with nodernists. At the same tine, Senegalese high school and college
students were demonstrating; police intervention resulted in one death and
several injuries.

1hat sale year Malian college students and younger pupils went on strike
because of a student grant issue and demanded the reestablishnent of their

association. In January and February 1981, Malagasy students protested
against the reforn introduced by President Ratsiraka'a government. In

Antananarivo, violently suppressed demonstrations ended in two detths and
dozens of injuries.

Each university has its own troubles, as this impressive series shows.

having said that, the diversity of the situations does not prevent one from
grouping then into three broad categories. First, in the Arab world there

is the appearance of a fundanentalist movement which, to be sure, is not
petuliar to universities, and which intends to impose itself on factions

which are dying out: the left. nodernists, and so on. In this case
internal confrontation overrides the struggle for power. Perhaps that letter

struggle will be the order of the day if the "religious types" gain the
upper hand.

Elsewhere, and for the most part, university grumbling is over matters of
administration [prend uoe allure corporatiste], demands revolving mainly
around material issues (lodging and working conditions, scholarships),

studies guidance or the autonony of student organizations. Since the
authorities generally respond to this with repression, the slogans could of

course take a more political turn afterward.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, in two of the most recent cases it seems that aspirations for more
freedom played a main role. That is the way it was in December 1981 in
Libreville where it all started with a demonstration hostile to President
Bongo and the way it is in Abidjan these days. It is true that in Gabon as
in Ivory Coast. the students are more fortunate than elsewhere in Africa,
since they have modern buildings, ample financing and comfortable residences.

0n the other hand. what does not change from one capital to another is the
cycle: demands-demonatration--repression-strike-police occupation of

university faculties. To the extent possible, governments do a great deal
for their students. the future elite of their countries. But they distrust
them. As soon as students have any intention of concerning themselves with
their interests or, what is worse, with the country's affairs, instead of

being content to study like good boys and girls, the stick appears.

Since farmers are kept cut of the picture, and salaried workers are satisfied
to be salaried. students, a favored lot receiving higher education, are feared

all the more since they are almost the only ones who can think politics
through. of course this is not to the liking of the supporters of single

parties. Students are capable of questioning the established order, and
because they have knowledge they are able to propose solutions other than

those which are being put into practice.

Let us not forget that in Latin America during the 1960's the universities
provided massive numbers to the guerrillas. That stage has not been reached

in Africa, but African governments would rather take precautions. So these
Idealists of today, who will be the technocrats of tomorrow, are isolated,

and are occasionally reminded that they are better off than the majority of
the population (anything to make students not very popular) and they are

tlatteringly soothed when possible, and the billy clubs are brought out for
the slightest cause.

It is also true that while the involvement and participation of African
students in political fighting has never been comparable to that of their
Latin American colleagues, they have sometimes played an important role on

that level. Remember May 1972 in Madagascar: The large demonstrations
which started out from the university were decisive in the fall of

Tsiranana's admittedly shaky regime. But the Malagasy students did not
come to power; their victory was seized by the military.

Likewise. the French protesters 4 years earlier were quickly passed over.
Nowhere in today's world. in fact, have students come into power. They are a
protest force, and indeed a proposal-making force, but they cannot aspire to

control--and for good reason. They can, on the other hand, be used by the
government as a political base and a means of action. This has been seen in

Mao's China and somewhat in Cuba. It is seen today even in Africa, in
Rawlings' Ghana.

It is students who in fact make up the bulk of the shock brigades sent by
ankmnusmmtMcwahinuherqurmusmdumgwwa
to Accra. Small mobile groups of them numbering 100 to 200 crisscross the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country with their field rations (supplied by Libya). Furthermore, Rawlings'
circle of intimates is made up of young professors and students, more often
than not "Nkrumah-ists." Their influence is great: They are demanding a
radical purge and reject any negotiations with the IMP. They are organized
within a powerful association, the N068 (National Union of Ghanaian Students),
and they control in particular the Ghanaian people's tribunals.

Ghana is going through an extraordinary evolution and Rawlings' Red Guards
remain the exception. They are far from foreshadowing the future of African
students. Quite the contrary, what seen today to characterise African
universities which date from when their countries became independent is their
depoliticization. Let us be clearly understood: Students still for obvious
reasons constitute one of the few social categories capable of reasoning in
political terms. But they do not get together within political organizations
any more as they did in the past. There were a great number of Marxist-
Leniniats in Dakar between 1968 and 1974. Today some of them are in the PS
[Socialist Party] or the PDS [Senegalese Democratic Party]; most of then are
in Cheickh Ants Diop's RND [Democratic National Rally]. But their successors
have not picked up the torch; they are not very politicized and have mostly
materialist [corporatiste] demands.

Hhile there are still organized leftwing groups in Morocco they represent a
minority. And the UNEH of 1982 is nothing like the UNEH in its heyday. when
it was a force that mattered.

It must also be pointed out that African universities have rcached new dimen-
sions: 50,000 students in Morocco, 15.000 in Ivory Coast, 10.000 in Gabon,
and so on. These dimensions are not yet comparable to those in Europe or
Latin America but are no longer the small circles of former times. Added to
the effect of numbers is the force of the economic slump which results in
governments being less concerned about their students, on the one hand. and
in the fact that a number of those students are going to become unemployed,
on the other hand. This new phenomenon in Africa, which makes the situation
of African universities more like that of those in the west, is a basic
factor in current student crises.

The (new) concern over the future is clearly discernible in Abidjan. It will
be so elsewhere, and to an increasing extent. This allows one to say that
the restlessness of universities in Africa will, far from abating. probably
be growing.

African universities are in some ways beginning a second stage of life in
which the fairly great number of students' material concerns will predomi-
nate. So is there anything for governments in office to fear? No, not for

the time being. But if student demands are not met. a new radicalization
could start up. After all. student unrest reveals the broader unrest of an

entire society. And if that society is frozen...

One begins to feel this, moreover. And if Ivorians and Gabonese are calling
for more freedom it is not accidental. They can allow themselves to do so

u
FOR OFFICIAL use «mu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inasmuch as their countries are rich—relatively speaking—on an African
scale. That is also the reason why changes are expected, and not only by
students.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9631
050: 6719/665

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

AFRICA'S m nous-cm JOURNALISI'S
Paris JED!!! AFRIQUB in French 13 Jan 82 pp 66-67

[Article by Homer Kebe Ndiaye: ”The New BardsuAfrican Journalists Torn
Between the Desire for Objectivity and the Required Allegiance to Authority”)

[Text] In African dailies, the activities of the head of state appear on
page one day-in day-out. unless the space is given to those involving other
government officials. A ninor rally led by a ninister is covered in great
detail. Official government col-uniques are reprinted in their entirety
and without consent. Wire service dispatches are either sinply reproduced
or dealt with as if they were intended for a European or American audience.
News which touches close to hone (shortages of consuler goods, increases

in the cost of living, unenploynent, health problem...) is tucked away in
the back pages. The same holds true for radio and television.

There is, however, no shortage of journalists in Black Africa. They are

now being trained as fast as possible, like administrative clerks. On
December 12 in Dakar, CES‘rI (Center for the Study of Information Sciences

and Techniques) placed at the disposal of the African nedia 34 new
journalists-~19 for the print nedia, 8.for radio, and 7 for television. Since
1972. 236 "sodern-day bards" have graduated from this institution, bringing

to nearly 500 the number of journalists trained for West Africa by CESTI

and for Central Africa by BSIJY (International Higher School of Journalism

of Yaounde). why then do the news services provide such poor service to

the public?

The for-er British colonies were the first black African countries to show
an interest in training journalists "on the spot." It was a question of
demanding the "nade in Africa" label. As early as 1957, the Journalists
Institute of Accra was founded. ‘No years later, the African Literature
Center of Kittie (Zambia) organized regional journaliss courses. At the end
of the Biafran War (1970), Jackson College of Journalists, which had opened
in Nigeria in 1961, became the Co-unications Institute of the University
of Lagos. Today, it trains more than 60 journalists each year. Front 1963
to 1968, introductory courses in the techniques of journalisn were given
in Nairobi for the English-speaking countries of eastern and central
Africa, and in Lagos for those of western Africa. These two experinsnts

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
resulted in the creation of the Journalism School of the University of
Nairobi (1970) and the Nigerian Journalism Institute (1971).

The fever hit French-speaking Africa at the very end of the 1960's. when
training possibilities were extremely limited. It marked the end of sending
journalists to American and European (French, West German and Soviet)
schools. Since 1970. one produces and consumes African: CRSTI students
come nostly from the seven countries of western Africa, while those at BSIJY
are from the six countries of central Africa. The two schools. whose forma-
tion. operation, and program are nearly identical. also have oo-Dn

goals: "The training of multipurpose journalists and development agents
capable of answering the needs of the media and the expectations of public
opinion." The bet is far from being won. Today, although provided with 20
journalism institutes, Africa still lacks appropriate training means.
Teaching is too academic and tries to adapt foreign theories and models
above all else. Yet, the role of the mdia in Africa is not the same as in
the developed countries; they address themselves to a linited public because
of illiteracy and the isolation of certain rural areas.

Even journalist leaves the African schools with certain professional
reflexes. he remains handicapped by a general lack of education. The School
of Journalism and Comunications of the University of Ghana is the only
institution in Black Africa to offer training resulting in a doctorate
(third cycle). In creating their own journalism schools, the African
countries wanted to adapt training to the sociocultural context and make
journalists the advocates of political power. Once they are “are of the
profession, journalists are torn between the demands of objectivity and the
servitude of complying with existing authorities. That type of journalism
can lead to everything... provided one cooperates with the government.

Table 1. Nunber of Journalists Trained Between 1970 and 1981

 

 

Bx Countﬂ

L283 _Bsm

Benin 29 Cameroon 130
Ivory Coast 53 Central African Republic 13
Gabon 2 Gabon 24
Upper Volta 24 Rwanda 3
Mali 44 Chad 33
Morocco 1 Toys 42
Mauritania 6

Niger 9

Senegal 66

By SEcialtz

CBSTI ESIJY

Print media 133 Print media 107
Radio 28 Radio 76
Television 73 Television 40
COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9939

CSO: 4719/ 682 C?
FOR om Al. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUKOUNI-KAIDUCUE SPLIT, FAN TAKES m
A3191536 London REUTBR in English 1466 Glﬂ‘ 19 Apr 82
[By Abacar Aswvo]

[Text] Ndjanena. 19 Apr (WED—Chad's interior minister has said the govern-
ment will never negotiate with the rebels who now control over half the coun-

try. but an envoy sent by France spoke of a deep split between the president
and vice-president.

Interior Minister Hahaaat Abbe told Ndjanena traders yesterday that President
Cookouni's provisional government "will never agree to negotiate with the
enemy...we want peace, but not at any price."

Mr Abba. who is close to the Chad leader, said the rebels, led by former
Defence Minister Hissene ﬂabre. "are backed by a lobby made up of African
countries, behind which hides international imerialise to dictate our poli-
cies to us.” He did not identify the countries.

French President Francois Mitterrand's African adviser, Guy Penne, who net
President Goukomi here twice over the weekend, said he discussed what
appeared from Paris as differences between the provisional governnent's var
ious netﬁers.

The government split became public last week when President Goukouni's FROLINAT,
one of the provisional government's 10 rival armed factions, accused Vice-
President Abdel Kader Kanougue of wanting to negotiate with the rebels.

Colonel Kanougue, from the predominantly Chriuian south, replied that MLINAI
was attempting to fonant trouble in the south. At a meeting in the northern
city of Benoy he said: PROLINAT has pledged to square accounts with the south."

The vice-president, who has previously called for a ceasefire, told the meet-
ing that ﬂabre's forces now held the central town of Mao, hitherto believed
to have renined under government control.

he also quoted Hiseene Habre as having said his troops would be in Ndjamna
within a month.

"Everybody is sick and tired of the war, and I shall work for peace," Colonel
Kanougue added.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Speaking to reporters before returning to Paris, Hr Penne said he discussed
with President Goukouni the role of the African peacekeeping force comprising
3,800 troops from Nigeria, Senegal and Zaire in Chad since Homer last year.

According to informed sources. several African heads of state will meet in
Lagos later this week to discuss the financing of the force, which the Organisa-
tion of African Unity (0A1!) cannot meet for lack of funds.

So far the force has been financed by aid from France, the United States and

Gabon. they said, adding that it was coating some eight million dollars a
month.

According to unofficial reports. some contingenta are not receiving their pay
because of the force's financial crisis.

Meeting last February in Nairobi, the GAL! called on President Goukouni to be-
gin peace talks with the rebels to end the war. It threatened to withdraw
the force by the end of June if no progress was made.

Military sources said the peacekeeping force was the only buffer protecting
Ndjamena froa attack by the rebels.

CSO: lo 700/1162

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LEADER PROMISES NEH CONSTITUTIW
”191724 London REUTER in French 1557 (311' 19 Apr 82

[Text] Geneva, 19 Apr (WBR)--Bquatoria1 Guinea head of state (biang '
Nguena lbssogo stated in Geneva on Monday that his government will promulgate
a new constitution as pronised by next armor. The constitution will pro-
vide for free elections.

President Obiang Nguena lbasogo, who was addressing a conference sponsored by
the United Nations and ainedc raising funds for his country, told newsman
that the new constitution would be promulgated by 3 August. the third anni-
versary day of his accession to power after ousting Francisco Macias N'guen.

After being promlgated, the constitution will be admitted to s referendun
followed by elections. No timetable was announced.

The Halabo government, he said, has decreed general meaty and hopes for
the return of all Equatorial Guineans who went in exile during the pre-
vious dictatorship, in order to participate in the reconstruction.

He denied allegations made by the National Alliance for Denocrstic Restoration
-an opposition movement-in a oomique issued in Geneva charging the pre-
sent governnent with suppressing the opposition and detaining 360 opposition

meters .

Some 20 countries: have so far promised financial assistance. 08 estimates
report that $161 million will be necessary for the reconstruction of the
economy disrupted by long years of dictatorship.

The traditional cash crop of this forur Spanish colony, which became inde-
pendent in 1968, is cocoa which used to earn the country up to 80 percent of
its foreign currency.

me sales of the commodity have gone down fron 60,000 tons in 1969 to 5,000
tons only 10 years later.

080: (019/865

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STATISTICS RELATING TO 1981 BUDGET SET FORTH
Paris HARCIIES TROPICAUX ET HEDIWS in Trench No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 567
[Article: "The 1982 Budget in Its Econonic Contect"]

l'l‘ Btt] In our 18 Decanter 1981 issue. p 3375. we gave a general outline of
the Gabonese budget for 1982 which snounts to CTA 1053.5 billion. In a recent
study devoted to this budget. and one which very probably uses official
Gsbonese statistics. the newspaper L'UNION of Libreville placed the budget

in its economic context. The newsraper gave the following "provisional"
figures for 1981 in Gabon:

Consumption rose by a total of 15.2 percent fron CPA 361 billion in 1980 to
CPA 416 billion in 1981, with s nore sustained rate in the public sector
(+25.3 percent) than in the private (+ll.1 percent).

Investments progressed strongly to reach close to CPA 303 billion. or s 63
percent increase conpared to 1980. They are distributed as folIows: CPA 166

billion (of +35 percent cowared to 1980) for private invest-eat and CPA
136.6 billion for public investnent. the net snount of subsidies. loans snd

capital interests. The proportion of productive investnent to total
investments inproved by 57 parent in 1981 versus 56 percent in 1980.

The foreign trade balance dropped by 18 percent. from CIA 227.5 billion in
1980 to CPA 185.9 bil1ion in 1981. This drop is principally explained by
imports of goods (+24 percent) and purchases of services (62 percent).

The main economic indicators showed sustained activity in 1981. since prices
and salaries remained stable to all intents and purposes with a slight
improvement in the level of employment. The nudaer of job offers increased
appreciable.

These different trends confirm the consolidation of a recovery which started
in 1980 but in an unbalanced nenner since it primarily affects the petroleun
sector. This amelioration nsde it possible for the Gross National Product
(GNP) to improve by close to 12 percent. fro- 831.5 billion in 1980 to 928
billion in 1981. On the other hand. one could see the real tinidity of the
recovery in other sectors, including public works and buildings.

11
FOB Ol-TlClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the monetary field. ”the Gabonese economic situation was characterized by
unmistakable and quite distinct signs of improvement" writes L'UNION. which
states that credit to the economy has gone from CPA 125.9 billion to 153.7
billion. or an improvement of 27 percent. Likewise. one sees an improvement
of the situation of the Treasury with regard to the Central Bank: credit to
the state decreased from CPA 38.4 billion in December 1980 to 29.6 billion
in December 1981.

The restoration of Gabonese foreign credits accelerated. reaching CPA b8.5
billion in June 1981 against 26 billion in December 1980. '0n the other
hand. the development of long-term savings remained a dismal point. It was
inpeded by considerations of repayment. since the quasi-money/credit marginal
rates fluctuated too greatly." our fellow journal emphasized.

Public finances continued their recovery in an appreciable manner. thanks to
the desire to maintain State expenditures within the limits planned in the
budget. but also because of the unforeseen improvement in state petroleum

receipts (CPA +12.3 billion). the result of appreciation of the exchange rate
of the dollar.

The outstanding public debt was further reduced in comparison with 1980;
however the burden of servicing the debt is still high. since it represented
36.3 percent of state expenditures in 1981 against 38.3 percent in 1980.

The balance of payments. which showed a deficit of close to CPA 45 billion in
1977. has begun to show a surplus again since 1979. with a maximum of CPA
+20.3 billion reached in 1980. In 1981 the anticipated balance was +16.3
billion; however. one should stress one point of uneasiness: the permanent
deficit in the balance of short-term capital, which seeks better prospects of
repayment outside Gabon.

Budgetary Choices

Prom this point of view. the increase in the general budget in 1982 compared
to the initial 1981 budget (the appropriations bill) is 12 percent; it
improves more slowly if the budget is considered to have been effectively
implemented in 1981. the fiscal year having ended at CPA 427.1 billion.

Receipts should increase by 12 percent in 1982 compared to 1981. thanks
especially to receipts from petroleum (+16.2 percent).

Because of the uncertain nature of Gabon's medium-term petroleum receipts.
the 1982 appropriations bill was paired with a series of provisions, respect
of which, their originators stress, is basic to balancing the budget. The
bill covers personnel expenditures (manner of recruitment. nomination and
promotion) and common expenses (housing for officials. administrative leases.
aission expenses, discontinued residential charges for water, electricity and
telephone).

12
FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table. Gaboneae Budget (1n Billions CPA)

1981 1982
Planned Realized Planned

Receipts

Totals 404.3 427.1 453.5
Petroleum 258.0 270.0 283.0
Nonpetroleum 131.5 138.9 152.8
Loans 15.0 18.2 17.7
Expenditures

Total 404.5 427.1 453.5
Investment 135.0 137.5 182.8
Operation 134.8 134.4 150.7
Public debt 134.7 155.2 120.0

As far as investment expenses in 1982 are concerned. their exceptionally high
level (CPA 183 billion including 24 billion carried over) should be emphasized
and particularly the improvement in their sectorial orientation:

The productive sectors are receiving more than 20 percent of resources against
13 percent in 1980 and 19 percent in 1981. Of these, the share of agriculture
is improving (+8 percent), as well as the amount of investment in water and
electricity supplies which increases by 9 percent.

The infrastructures are consuming close to half of investment expenditures-43
percent for the Trans-Gabonese Railroad and 19 percent for roads. It will
also be noted that sociocollective investments receive 16 percent. especially
national education and public housing.

On the other hand, the relative weight of administrative equipment investments
has been reduced by close to 10 percent after the considerable effort made in
1980—1981 (+18 percent).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

9380
680: 4719/648

13
POI 0FFK]A1.USE1DNLM
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRITISH RAILROAD cams
Paris meats TROPICAUX 81' moms in French “0 1893 19 Fab 83 p 568
(Article: "British Contracts for the Trans-Gabonese Railroad"]

[Text] AF? announced in London on 16 February that efforts mde by the
British Ministry of Trade to encourage sales by Great Britain to French-
speaking Africa had born fruit for Gabon. where a major breakthrough has just
been accomplished by several manufacturers of railroad equipment as well as
by Transnarh. the consultant service of the British railways.

Different contracts with a total value of sane 12 million pounds (Pl 135
million) have in fact been. or are on the point of being, concluded, and
others for a total of 60 to 70 billion pounds (Pr 660 to 770 nillion) are
expected by the end of 1982. All concern the Trans-Gabonese Railroad. The
first orders were facilitated by a 10 million-pound (Pr 110 million) loan
which three of the principle British banks (nidland. Barclays and Lloyds)
have just granted to the Gabonese railway organisation. CBTBA. The loan is
guaranteed by the Export Credit Guarantee Departmt (3060). the depath
of the British Ministry of Trade which insures credit for exports. with a
relatively low interest rate of 8.5 percent.

Apart free the technical experience which Trans-ark will provide for operation

of the first segment of the railroad and development of the second. the
contracts deal chiefly with rolling stock. cranes. sections of track and rail

plates .

Future orders are expected within the framework of the construction of the
second Boone-Pranceville section. Its construction will probably be entrusted
to Burotrag. a consortium of 18 European firms in which the British enter-
prises Himpey and Taylor Woodrow. which specialise in large-scale projects,
now hold a 22-percent interest. As of this writing. the British banks have
promised a supplementary line of credit to cover this British interest.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

9380
(280: ‘719/668

11;
MOMIJSEONLY
BRIEFS

PRESIDm nouns mm0R~President Bongo and his wife. ecconpsnied by a
ministerial delegation, began a series of tours in the cabonese provinces
planned for 11-11. and 21-28 February. as well as 1-2 March. These tours are

significant in that the head of state is displaying his desire to regain
control of the country after his havingcrushed the novenent in favor of a
mltiparty systen which emerged last Deceﬁer. That is why in Tchihanga on
12 February President Bongo prosised increased efforts for the econonic
developnent of Nyanga Province (reopening of the nsrble plant. opening of a
barytine nine, the first group of bridge votks on Benin Lagoon in Keyed“.
and so on) while blasting "the ingratitude of certain sons of the province
who were inplicated in the recent events in Libreville" wanting to create a
"stillborn" political party. The head of state denounced the "leanings"
within the governsent with divisions between "progressives". "moderates" and
"convervatives." [Tat] [Paris mucus TROPICAUX ET mime in French
No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 5671 (COPYRIGHT: Rene norm et Cie Paris 1982] 9380

680: 4719/648

15
ms omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GHANA

TROUBLE!) £00m REVIEVBD; STRONG MANAGEMENT URGED

Paris HARCHBS rnoncwx ET mmmmzs in French so 1395, 5 Mar 82
pp 657-660

[Article by Jacques Latremoliere: "The Fall of the Ghanaian Economy: Jerry
Rawlings' Choices"]

[Text] Two months after Ghana's coup. normalization of relations with neigh-
boring countries has been attained, and Accra's use psychosis of the besieged
has abated. So the often excessive accounts heard in Abidjan. Lome. and
Lagos from political refugees can now be sorted out. These people are terri-
fied when they recall Captain Rawlings' earlier purges. but they also mre or
less nurture the vain intention of bringing about a reaction agath him from
the countries where they have found refuge.

For that natter, has it indeed been established that Jerry Rawlings is the
real author of the coup? People wished to see proof of this, as well as of
his collusion with Colonel Qadhdhafi, in the short visit he made to Tripoli
in 1980. However. testimonies in Accra since 1979 have agreed on how Dr
Limann's government succeeded'in keeping him in isolation after a declaration
was nade forbidding him to leave. As in Liberia in 1980 and Togo in 1963. the
coup was actually carried out by a stall group of noncoIInissioned officers.
These pe0ple might have received sons Libyan support, as has been claimed;
however, the simplicity of such intervention would have made it of no use
whatsoever. What most likely happened is that once their feat was accom-
plished. their inexperience caused them to seek out a label to rally popular
support in their favor. Thus the recourse to Rawlings.

They tried in the same way to assemble authorities to pull the state out of
its economic norsss. The truth is that volunteers have not cone running, and
the Provisional National Defense Collittee. which is acting as the government,
has only a modest honors list to offer in this area: nonconissioned officers.
students, and a Catholic priest. Its only known members are Rawlings himelf
and Brig Gen Nunoo Hensah. who until that time held the position of chief of
staff. It is he who today handles the delicate niesions. such as reassuring
neighboring governments and Ghanaian businessmen and industrialists about the
true nature of the official ideology. At their request he stopped the lilti-
tation of bank withdrawals, at 1.500 csdis for indivichals and 5,000 for
corporations. which had completely blocked all activity.

16
MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Of course the Libyan diplomatic service is ready and eager to seize the oppor-
tunity for revenge and the possibility for creating a political bridgehead in
this region. Revenge, because in November 1980, Dr Limann, following the exu-
pie of several other states in the region, expelled Qadhdhafi's representatives
who were accused of having supported an antigoverment movement. Nor is the
idea of a "destabilizing" bridgehead foreign to him, but the timing would be
poor if the 0A!) is taken into consideration. However, a step in this direction
might be interpreted from the fact that since 10 January a delegation has been
flying in to prepare shipments of food and probably of weapons, and to reestab-
lish an embassy for the J-ahiriya as well. It is to be hoped that a responsi-
ble government, and Gen Nunoo Mensah in particular, will have the good sense
not to alienate itself either from the moderate states in whose midst Ghana
must live, or from Western aid because of acceptance of Libyan assistance; the
possibilities of the latter, despite its immediate and spectacular nature, re-
main meager. Although the Ghanaisns cannot be very choosy about the origin

of the aid they receive, the state of Libyan finances does not permit great
generosity, either.

Another interpretation which has run its course in Lone can henceforth be dis-
counted: that of an Ewe coup. This interpretation purposes to be based on the
bloody incidents which occurred in 1981 between Konkomba and Rumba. Some
people would have seen in these a symptom of the state's iminent breakdown,
deemed favorable by the he Union for an attempt to reunify its ethnic group.
In this plot, or ostensible plot, were mentioned thenames of Gilchrist
Olympic, a son of the former Togolese president, Captain Rawlings himself,
who is Ewe on his mother's side, and such notables as Dr Owusu Ansah, General
Kattah, and John Tetegah. The explanation snacks of a detective story, and
Gen Nunoo Hensah'a recent visit to General Byadema would have done it justice.
Indeed, it is not difficult to detect the motives of the refugees who have
made themselves its propagators, knowing to what extent the Togolese head of
state is sensitive to the problems of North-South rivalry.

It is true that there doubtless were many attacks against human rights at the
time of the recent events in Accra. Dr Limann was arrested 6 January at
Koforidoua, 60 km north of the capital. At present he is in a guarded house,
as Is former vice president Graft-Johnson. One of the top leaders of the PNP
(People's National Party), the goverment party, Addai Amoaku, was executed.
The same party's former president, Nana Okutwer Bekoue, is at the present
time the subject of a particularly nasty charge of embezzlement. 0n the other
hand, several ministers close to Dr Limann were released after being held for
several days. Such was the case with George Benneh (finance), Mr Jantuah
(interior), Joe Rendor (justice) and Francis Acquah (youth and rural develop-
meat).

It is much harder to derive an idea of the true number of dead, wounded, or
executed. According to news from Accra, the coup was probably responsible
[or about 50 dead, as many seriously wounded, and 200 slightly wounded.
Probably about 50 people were executed for political motives. However, we
cannot let pass in silence the horrifying tales, fortunately of questionable
origin, circulating in Lagos, according to which the number of executions
exceeded 700, of whom 100 were police and a dozen were women. According to
the same source, these massacres took place in secret at Camp Burma.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fortunately, out of fear of international reaction, the most well-known per-
sonalities were spared.

The Coup's Socioeconomic Context

All there is to say about the permanent bankruptcy in which the country is
struggling has already been said. The exchange value of the currency at the
borders is only 20 percent of its official value (1 cedi-Fr 2.16). The infla-
tion rate is 180 percent. The collapse of agricultural and mining production
is attributable to lack of motivation and means. As for industry, the equip-
sent cannot be maintained, can be developed even less, and runs at 30 percent
capacity. All this in an environment of government-owned businesses, some
having economic worth, such as those dependent upon Akoaombo for the extrac-
tion and treatment of bauxite, but others (Ghana Airways, Black Star Line, an
oil refinery, etc.) operating outside any criterion of profitability, outside

any standard of wages, and in perpetuation of exorbitant privileges profiting
their directors.

However, significant correctives must be applied to this apocalyptic picture.
If the problem's specifics could be reduced to what has just been stated, it
is clear that Ghana's population would have been wiped off the map. No worker
could feed himself in a country where the minimul guaranteed wage is 12 cedis
a day, or approximately the price of a loaf of bread or'sliter of milk, a
seventh of a chicken, or a hundredth of a mediocre restaurant meal. Although
Ghana's 12 million inhabitants in reality suffer numerous constraints, they
fortunately are not aware of the scarcity. A visit to Hkola, Aeera's princi-
pal market, gives the appearance of an adequate supply not only of food and
beverages but of all ingredients--household products, clothing, transistors,
batteries, cycles, etc-~which go to make up current consumption. The price
of these objects represents, in the best cases, a considerable portion of a
worker’s wages; in the worst cases, a more or'lesshigh multiple of then.

This does not prevent their finding buyers.

Despite the drop in the price of a barrel of Nigerian crude from $40 to $36,
which represents for Ghana a weekly savings of $780,000, the state announced
at the end of 1981 a reduction in fuel imports of over 10 percent. This offi-
cial limitation did not prevent the reappearance, less than 2 weeks after the
coup, of a large number of cars on the road, many of them having large engines.
In Accra, gas and "super" are rationed only at service stations.

The phenomenon has a simple explanation: the existence of a parallel economy,
from which the official cedi is excluded. Agricultural production, especially
cocoa, the source of 80 percent of foreign exchange income, sells in Tego and
Ivory Coast, to the extent that that is not prevented by border surveillance.
In 1981, as far as can be known, these countries absorbed more than 50,000
tons of beans; this explains the fact that the officially exported tonnage,
which was 050,000 tons in 1973, fell to 250,000 tons in 1980b81. The differ-
ence between the amount of the decrease and that of the smuggling corresponds
in the first place to the aging of the plants. and then to the consequences
of customs control. The same thing applies to gold production, which fell
fros 900,000 ounces in 1965 to 372,000 in 1979. To explain the reduction in

18
IND! OIIWCIA1.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this case, management errors and wear and tear on equipunt can be added to
customs regulations. Smuggling itself is based on endemic stealing observed
in the mines (loo percent). The product is sold across the land borders, but
also in London, which has become the international market for Ghanaian gold.
it arrives there in the form of jewels and necklaces worn around the necks of
rich female second-hand dealers traveling as tourists.

Ghana's successive goverments, trained in the British school, have above all
else been sensitive to a co-ercial development stereotype. They have pre-
ferred to accommodate themelves to this economic duality rather than inle-
ment structural reforms which would permit them to avoid this impoverishment
by putting production back in its place in the circulation of wealth. Indeed,
in order to succeed. the reforms called for a temporary but radical lowering
In the standard of living. The elite are less prepared for this than in other
places because of their culture and Hesternism. Many Ghanaians have spent
several years of their lives in Britain, practicing the most varied professions
there, and sometimes staying for good (the brain drain is one of the country's
scourgee).

These habits are well enough ingrained for Dr Limann, whose government none-
theless came indirectly from a revolutionary movement, to have turned down the
proposals of the International Monetary Fund. subordinating the granting of
$800 million of financial aid to a devaluation which could have reached 700
percent. By rectifying the state's credit, this probably would have brought
about. to Ghana's profit, a change in direction in the parallel currency
market. But it would have clashed with the opposition of second-hand com-
nurse, which by definition is hostile to the control measures for domestic
prices which would be its necessary corollary. It is also tempting, for a
government subject to popular pressure, to seek a solution instead in resource
such as gold, oil, or diamonds. Unfortunately there is cause to believe that
even if these [resources] were double their present level, they would still be
insufficient.

Not only did Dr Limenn's government not consent to the reforms, but 18 months
ago it appeared to legitimize smuggling by authorizing imports without a pre-
liminary allocation of foreign exchange. The unfortunate thing is that this
flight forward imposed a purely consumer economy. as it was accompanied by a
slackening of border controls that no one dared to irqlement until they were
suppressed--indeed until the incitement to smuggling which would have been in
the logic of the system. This [smggling] goes on, on the other hand, at the
expense of industry, whose needs cannot be adapted to semibarter formulas: it
is only with great difficulty that a scraper or an alternator can be exchanpd
at the Aflao border station for a few trucks of hole nuts. Industry must, in
addition. struggle against foreign competition which is free from all taxes.

Smuggling is by nature an underground operation, even when it is unofficially
tolerated. The objects involved benefit from an exemption from taxes, but
for the raw materials imported by industry, taxation is the rule. Taxes do
not affect the sale of smuggled products. That of local industrial p:“:‘ucts
is subject to the BIC, without loss of exit duties for exports. This aspect
of things explains why industrial circles in Accra are far from hostile to the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

new regime; rightly or wrongly, they expect interventions from it that require
courage. good sense, and equity. Europeans are still numerous here, although
at times they rust have recourse to the black market in a personal capacity.

There is no love lost for leaders of past regimes either. be they living or
dead.

Another major disadvantage to the system is that it establishes a completely
unjust distribution of profits among the population. From the top to the bot-
tom of the social scale, all those who can index their cedis expressed at the
official rate,through bribes, commissions, tips or by holding more than one
job--called "kalsbul" in Accra--adjust to it rather well. This reinforces the
privileged situation of smuggling's "great lords"--the carriers and the female
second-hand dealers. The lot of the others is poverty; it is not without
sociological interest to mention that prominent among them are subordinate
officers, nonconmnssioned officers, and soldiers. General and high-ranking
officers are more discreet; thus the decimation they underwent during the 1979

purge, and the popularity that leaves Jerry Rawlings his rank of "flight
lieutenant."

Unfortunately. it is far from certain whether the new regime is resolved to
carry out a devaluation whose long-term effectiveness, considering well-
eonditioned habits, will not prevent painful social consequences. Captain
Rnwlings has just come out against it. despite, or because of, a rise in the
dollar, which is traded at the para11e1.price of 60 to 1, and at the official
rate of 2.75. National pride, which is at the basis of this decision, is
not necessarily the best counsel. Noble sentiments do not make a good econ-
omy, and this refusal, if it continues, bodes more turbulent days ahead for
Ghana.

The official Economy

The double-circuit system, as it operates in Ghana, obviously removes a lot

of interest from the study of the official economy, such as it appears through
the Central Bank statistics. Foreign debt has undergone several consolida-
tions, the latest in 1979 involving 70 million French francs. Ghanaians repay
at the rate of 2-3 million per year. Under these conditions it is hard to see
how the "Paris Club" could grant them new terms, except by purely and simply
erasing their debts. The current medium-term rate of COFACB (French Insur-
ance Company for Foreign Trade) (around 91 million French francs, but 50 of
them pertaining to accident insurance), although a modest sum, is sufficient
to put a considerable limit on French-Ghanaian exchanges.

For a gold and currency reserve of 265 million cedis, the short-term public
debt in July 1981 was 950 million cedis. Medium-term public debt. on the
other hand, does not exceed 178 million (around 6 percent of export income).
This figure is explained by the generalized block on international commercial
credits, but also by the considerable amount of free aid received from Great
Britain (50 million pounds sterling per year), from the Federal Republic of
Germany (55 million Deutschemarks), and soft-condition credits opened by
other countries, including Italy and Brazil (it seems that $35 million was
unblocked by this country in 1981). Several organisations, such as OPEC,

20
ms omcm. use only
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USAID, the UNDP, the EDF (Economic Development Fund) and the ACDI (Canada)
have also offered, as a reinforcement to the IMF proposals, advances totaling
$150 million under the same conditions.

At the end of 1979, the trade balance showed a surplus of $262 million, and
that of current payments $133 million. Since then, these theoretical sur-
pluses have decreased. In any case, they show only the tip of the iceberg.
Only by comparing announced budgets and executed budgets can an idea be

formed of the state's true operating conditions. It is eloquent. The pre-
dicted expenses of the 1980-81 budget were 6 billion cedis, of which 4.8 bil-
lion were for operations; predicted income was 4.4 billion, of which 3.1 were
from indirect taxes. Thus the announced deficit was 1.6 billion. In reality,
there were 8 billion cedis of expenditures, of which 6.3 were for operations,
and 3.3 of income, of which 2 were from indirect taxes. The real deficit was
4.7 billion cedis. In 1981-82, the budget shows 10.4 billion in expenditures,
of which 8.4 are for operations, and 6.2 in income, of which 4 are from in-
direct taxes, or a predicted deficit of 4.2 billion; without any trouble at
all. it is easy to assure that it will be double this amount.

Tonnage produced is undergoing the same drop as trade surpluses. That for
cocoa has been pointed out; smuggling is only partially responsible for the
decrease. The same holds true for gold. There is no underground compensation
to be sought out for tonnage reductions insolving bauxite and manganese; re-
spectively, these fell from 315,000 and 409,000 tons in 1975 to 181,000 and
252,000 tons in 1979, simply as a consequence of the deterioration of equip-
ment and tools.

Industry's situation varies according to the sales facilities for its exported
products and the greater or lesser accentuated liberalism of contracts nego-
tiated with the government. as concerns the granting of import licenses. The
new investment code now in preparation does not foresee any important changes
in this area; it focuses especially on reducing the minimum shares held by

the state in the various industrial and commercial branches: 45 percent for
mines, 20 percent for oil, 40 percent for banks and 60 percent for insurance.
Nationals should retain 50 percent of the shares in corporations with capital
under $500,000.

In this context, note should be taken of the efforts to interconnect the Ghana-
ian electrical network with that of Ivory Coast. This was financed, for a
total of 6.8 billion CPA (African Financial Community) francs, with the parti-
cipation of the BAD (African Development Bank), the BET (European Investment
Bank), Ghana, and Ivory Coast. An international group, with American leader-
ship and the participation of two French banks, is to grant a $28.6 million
loan, guaranteed by the Italian Government, for the creation of an aluminum
lamination unit under the trusteeship of Fate Industriale of Turin, a subsi-
diary of Babcock International. A cement plant to work on the local limestone
deposits, and able to make use of the recently discovered gas at Half Hassini,
would be studied at Nauli, for a sum of 680 million cedis financed by an interb
national group. Finally, there are projects involving the manufacture of car-
bonic gas (Peabody Holmes), brickyards, in which Brazil has shown interest,

and finally, together with Ivory Coast and Upper Volta, the Bui Dam, in the

21
FORIDFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Brong Ahafo district. in the northern part of the country. The Kpong hydro-
electric dam also remains in the files; it would involve an estimated cost of
600 million cedis, and the relocation of 65 villages, not to mention the build-
ing of new settlements.

Besides these projects or completed works which are deemed to have more or
less of a priority, the majority of small and medium-size businesses struggle
along under conditions which often are discouraging for their promoters.
Automobile assembly plants in CKD have practically closed down, be they the
west African Trading Company (SCOA) for Peugeot. the French Company of Heat
Africa (CFAO) for Renault, or the UAC for Bedford; each is equipped to produce
1.500 to 2,000 vehicles per year and employed several hundred workers. Ope-
rations conceived at the suggestion of government authorities, which would
have provided these corporations an outlet for their progressively devaluating
nonrepatriable cedis, have gone under out of the general indifference. This
was the case with the combined poultry farming unit, cofinanced by the Ghana
Commercial Bank, Shell, and the French Company of West Africa (CFAD), which
was designed to produce 1 million chickens for local consumption; efforts
exerted over 18 months resulted only in the production of 700 tons of corn.

It had to be terminated because of a lack of foreign exchange currency which
would have provided for the importation of necessary tools.

The situation is worse yet for the national corporations, the creation of
which was the work of Kwame Nkrumah. To the factors of nonprofitability and
production slowdowns there is the disadvantage of extravagant management; in
Ghana. as in many other cauntries in Africa, the benefits of these constitute
u "nomenklatura" which comes in handy for defending its interests under the
cover of political parties where one would not expect to find them. The two
best examples of this are the Black Star Line, a national maritime shipping
company, and Ghana Airways.

The former, having ceased its payments in September 1980, saw its ships seized
in foreign ports by its creditors, while the 20 units remaining in Ghana, or
three-quarters of the fleet, hmmobilized at Tema and Takoradi by striking
crews who had not been paid for several months, had to be turned over to the
navy. A technical assistance and management agreement was negotiated between
the West German company Hoerman Lines and Black Star. The Limann government's
true objective was to succeed in selling it--a difficult goal, considering

the advanced age of the equipment. Nonetheless, four ships were turned over
to Greek shipowners. while replacements for them were ordered at a South
Korean shipyard.

Despite the recent acquisition of a Fokker Fellowship by Ghana Airways, and a
considerable increase in the company's fares, its situation is hardly less
critical; a partner is being sought in Canada to share the financial burdens.
It is the same tune and the same quests for the Ghana Railways Corporation,
which has undertaken negotiations with Indian and Canadian firms, and for State
Transport. where 120 buses out of a fleet of 250 remain in operating condition.

At the time when, as a consequence of this situation, the logical tendency to
go into private hands becomes apparent, the state unfortunately is compelled

22
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lo take over the wealth of private firms. Firestone, for instance, had been
reduced to producing 300 tires per day out of a capacity of 5,000; since they
had to pay 11 million cedis in taxes, they preferred to sell, at a miserably
low price, their local facilities, including the hevea plantations of Ghana
Rubber Estates Ltd. Their prasissory notes still will not be paid for 5 years
by the Central Bank; within the framework of a three-way agreement, the cedis
obtained must be turned over for the expenses of the 0.8. Blbassy in Accra.
The only condition imposed upon this arrangement by Firestone, which is leaving
some technical advisers there, is the promise not to turn these facilities over
to a rival firm. It is highly unlikely that any should appear on the scene.

This trend toward going into private hands, which is general throughout all
Africa (it is especially evident in Ivory Coast, Mali, Zaire, and even in the
Congo). clashes in Ghana, in the same way as monetary devaluation, with a
popular sentiment of which Captain Rawlings is the expression. Thus, he would
contemplate denouncing the agreement reached between Hoerman Lines and Black
Star, and he has decided to rehire the wage earners, laid off by the preceding
regime, of the Ghana Industrial Corporation, a particularly inefficient and

impccunious state holding coupsny.
()1! and Mining Resources
French-Ghanaian Relations

This attitude on the part of the Provisional National Defense Comittee cor-
responds both to the still prestigious nanory of the Osagye [Kwame Nkrumah],
who died in exile in Guinea in 1972, mm the idea that the nonviability of
his economic ideas was only illusory—that the implementation of national re-
sources development, which would have assured a balance, was abandoned by the
prof iteers of the regimes that succeeded his, to the profit only of mercenary

activities.

Great hopes were based on oil. Up to the present time, reality has not justi-
fied them. The Saltpond and Bonsu offshore deposits, being operated or
readied for operation in shallow water off Accra by Agri-Petco International
(USA), have limited reserves of 7 million tons. And extraction from these is
undergoing technical difficulties. Total production capacity does not exceed
3,000 barrels per day. In 1980, Phillips Petroleun announced the discovery,
at the boundary with Ivorian territorial waters, of the Half Hassini deposit,
for which production is estimated at 1,500 barrels a day. This annual contri-
bution of 250,000 to 300,000 tons of crude will be able to lessen the severity
of the oil bill but not guarantee the stabilization of the economy, even when
implemented by the gas reserves recently found 30 km from Half Hassini.

Ghana Consolidated Diamonds, a joint economy corporation, the majority of
whose shares belong to the state, showed a drop in production of more than
100 percent between 1976 and 1980. Here than 25 percent of its wage earners
had to be laid off. It continues to operate only through the advances of one
of its stockholders-~Consolidated African Selection Trust, a subsidiary of
British Petroleum.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Prospects for production of gold might be more encouraging. To stimulate this,
Dr leann's government sought investors ($3 billion was deemed necessary), con-
templated tax facilities which would profit development corporations, and with
this in mind organized an international seminar in Accra. Hhen it was still
called the Gold Coast, Ghana, with 36 tons. held the rank of fifth largest
world producer, following South Africa, the USSR, Canada, and the United
States. Despite the existence of high-content ore in thick veins that

often can be developed through surface mining, production, which had been
900,000 ounces in 1965, fell to 527,000 in 1970, 402,000 in 1978, and 362,000
in 1979. These figures are official, from the weight exchanged at the Bank of
Ghana at the rates prevailing at the time. There are a few corrective factors:
premiums allowed the price to be increased by 20 percent, but this was insuffi-
cient, despite the rise in gold prices, to offset thefts in production and

smuggling, estimated at 60 percent; thus, real production in 1979 would be
13 tons.

This situation alone would be sufficient to explain the drop in production,
without even taking into consideration the difficulties of maintenance; the
lack of foreign exchange currency, facilities, and tools; or the defects in

a state management which has affected most operations since 1969 except that
of the Lonrho firm. In their case, the state has only SS-percent participa-
tion. and their technical training allows them to be able u>guarantee two-
Ihirds of national production. A state holding company, the State Gold Mining
Corporation, whose position is not specifically indicated, groups together
small mines which keep their financial individuality.

Gold isprobably the only resource whose reasonable development could contribute
to reestablishing confidence in Ghanaian currency and, by so doing, attenuate
the other flaws in the economy. It was in this context that Jean-Pierre Cot,
on his recent visit to Accra, looked into the possibility of French interven-
tion in the Tarkwa mine. This would be financed by the Central Fund for Koo-
nomic Cooperation; the position of COFACE (French Company for Foreign Trade)
could be relaxed by the guarantee of commercial credits. Contacts were made
but were not followed up; they have perhaps reawakened certain sensitivities
dating from the colonial era. It would be quite surprising if Accra's young
revolutionary government took them up again on its own.

Another project, involving the creation of oil stations in the portof Tema,
was studied by the Central Fund, which operates in Ghana through the inter-
mediary of its agency in Lone. Although such action falls more within the
purview of export credits, it could be the opportunity for French cooperation
to renew relations with Ghana; these are at a standstill, with the exception
of a low-cost eXperimental study on joint financing to be carried out by the
Institute for Rubber Research in Africa (IRCA). The question can be taken up
again as soon as a partner able to negotiate for Ghana is named. It is
plainly to he wished that Captain Rawlinga' team, whose past excesses have
been equal to the corruption of which this country has been the victim, not
deceive itself about the real causes of the evil. In order to remedy it, they
must demonstrate a rigorous management more effective than that of aubmachine
guns.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982

9927
C80: 4719/723

2h
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

OFEDES EXPERIENCING HELL 0811.me P3031316
Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET mums in French No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 562
(Article: "OPBDES Board of Directors: Probleas with Hydrology Projects"]

[Text] The board of directors of the Nigerien Office of subsoil Haters
(OFEDBS) net in Zinder on 27 January with Minister of Hydrology Yahsys
Tounkara presiding.

On this occasion the minister indicated that "with respect to the inplenenta-
tion of our planning set forth in the 1979-1983 5-year plan, it can be

considered satsifactory despite numerous problems of an administrative nature
and difficulties with materiel and unpower.

”With respect to the physical objectives set by the plan. from 1979 to

1 January 1982 we drilled 905 OYEDBs-type wells, or 100 percent of those
planned; 376 boreholes in the substratue, or 20 percent of those planned; and
30 deep boreholes. or 50 percent of those planned.

"During the first 2 years of the plan. performance was poor wing to the

tine required to set up funds and equipesnt. The annual rate of drilling for
the first 3 years is, nonetheless. good. By the end of the plan this rate
will guarantee us with certainty a aininun of 1.627 OPEDBs-type wells. or 71
percent of those planned; 1.800 boreholes in the substratum. or 100 percent;
lol deep boreholes. or 205 percent."

with respect to the operations in progress. Dr. Tounkara pointed out that "by
5 January 1982 a total of 228 boreholes had been drilled; of these 144 were
positive and 86 negative or an average failure rate of 36.86 percent within
the framework of the drilling progran. But Haradi and Zinder Depertnsnts in
particular have experienced the greatest failures.

"0f the two. Zinder is the more disturbing since of 81 boreholes drilled 63
are positive and 38 negative, or a failure rate of 108.90 percent. while
Maradi and Kinney Depart-eats record 23.18 and 16.82 percent respectively.
Such a result obliges us to revs-p this prograa and pronpts us to be careful
with subsequent progress of this type so that the state will not pay for work
that is largely unproductive."

2
F0! OFFICIASL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The BCOHAS program involving 1,500 sites. 100 boreholes and 400 village
wells. the launching of which was planned for 1981 in Niamey. Zinder. Diffa
and Harsdi Departments. is marking tine for lack of a firm and definitive
comitment.

The ZOO-borehold program for Liptako (with "ADD [West African Development
Bank] and Nigerien financing) should begin shortly after several nonths' delay
resulting from slowness in setting up financing and obtaining necessary

UNDR [United Nations' Develomasnt Progrsal-UNICBP progran of drilling 250
boreholda in Zinder Depath continues to suffer fro- adninistrative cluesi-
ness relating to the recruitment of international experts. Operations listed
in the second Danish loan. which involves 150 wells in Zinder Department and
the drinking water supplies of the cities of Guidan-Roumdji, Tibiri. Aguie
and Oceans in Haradi Department. will soon enter the phase of concrete
accomplishments after having been the victims of adainistrative nisadvsntures

for months on end.

The drinking water supplies of five secondary centers-«adamunfa. Gotheye.
Tera, Torodi and Gaya--and the determination of new collection zones for the
water supply to the city of Zinder. which has PKG financing arranged by the
GR" [expansion unknown], are nearing their end on a note that is not very
reassuring for the city of Zinder. which is decidedly running the risk of
renaining the city of thirst. In fact. the results obtained up to now do not
presently indicate underground water levels capable of covering this city's

needs .

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982

9380
C50: l0719/668

26
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

NEH CONTROL SHOPS ESTABLIS- IN CAPE VERDE AREA
Paris MRCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBDIS in French No 1893. 19 Feb 82 p 557
[Article: "Trade: 50 New Control Shops"]

[Text] Sane 50 new control shops wi11 be established in the-Cape Verde area,
bringing to 76 the under of these shops run by young Senegalese. The
Senegalese Government has Just cleared a frllB million support fund for the
extension of the control shop operation which started in the Cape Verde area
in 1975.

The operation was devised to note possible the creation of nonsalaried jobs.
It was also a question of nodernizing and expanding the retail distribution

network by creating functional stores with all essential products at lawful
prices. The third objective of the project was the Senegalisation of the

sector which is nonopelized by non-Senegalese (especially Hauritians and
Guineans).

In 1975 a first group of 15 stores was financed by SONAGA [National Conpany
for Couercial Insurance and Assistance] and SMADIS [National Invest-ant

Coapany of Senegal]. The first .coQany is handling planning and equipmt and
the second the financing of the initial stock. All this for a total of

approxinstely 2 aillion, repayahle in 6 years at a reasonable rate. In late
1980. 11 other stores were opened with the assistance of the 2 comnies and
of sore local banks.

The office of donestic trade and prices is handling the hiring of the young

managers who met first attend a 6-month training course at the baker
professional center.

The control shops should not be confused with the frontier shops. The

frontier shops operation has the object of asking staple foodstuffs available
to the residents of the frontier villages in order to prevent their crossing
frontiers for provisions. In view of the difficulty of obtaining provisions,
the Senegalese who live near the frontiers were exchanging products for goods.
It was in order to discourage this practice that the now defunct ONCAS
(National Officer of Cooperation and Assistance for Develop-eat] financed a
certain nuaber of shops. especially in West Senegal and Cass-once.

FOR MI. US! ONLY
m OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

After ONCAD was disbanded. the regional cooperation association took over.
Sone regional associations not up several shone without waiting for any
financing. Soon 10 of these shops will open in Best Senegal. and another

6 in Casanance and in Sine-Salon. State financing is expected for the
construction of 39 nhopa.

COPYRIGHT: Rene ﬂoreux et Cio Patio 1982

9380
cs0: “19/648

28
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

OPPOSITION CRITIQUE FIND-Eight Senegalese opposition parties annmnnced
their intention to forn a conittee for critical study of the Senegalese
Election Code. a revision of which is presently being worked out. In a press
release dated 1!. February the eight parties emphasised that they had not been
consulted concerning the revision of the Senegalese Election Code. They say
that they will submit their conclusions and proposals to the president of the
republic. the govern-ant and public opinion. [Text] [Faris smears TIOFIGAUX
ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 551] momma: Rene Koren:
et Cie Paris 1982] 9380

PARIS SENEGALESE DAYSuOn Hednesday 28 and Thursday 29 April in Paris. the
CNFF [National Council of French Ewloyers] will organise 2 dayso-or. nore
precisely. 3 half—daysuof intonation on Senegal. The Senegalese delegation
which will cone to Paris should be headed by Tours. the sinister of the plan
and cooperation. The objective of these Senegalese days will be threefold:
presentation of the new Senegalese developnsnt plen. presentation of the new
Senegalese Investnent Code and. finally. presentation of the new formula for
the'Dakar Free Industrial Zone. Five co-itteesnnines and energies. construc-
tion asterials. netal and electrical engineering. fishing and fishing
industries. free industrial zone-will bring together the Senegalese delegates
and French businessaen interested in Senegalese projects. [Text] [Paris MARCH]!
MARCHES TBOFICAUX ET HEDI‘IEREANEENS in French No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 557]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horas: et Cie Paris 19821 9380

FEAT EXPLORATION COMPANY-4 Senegalese Fastery Conpany (CTS). a senipublic
corporation with capital of CFA loo aillion. has been created in Senegal with
a view to exploiting the 50 million cubic netsrs of peat discovered in the
country. The CTS should start production in 1986 with the construction of two
30-negawtt peat powered thermal power stations. which would represent 65
percent of Senegal's energy consuntion. For the first year and a half. the
conpany will function as a research corporation in order to conplete the
prelininary studies begun 2 years ago; the cost of these studies is eatinted
at CFA 1 billion. Financing for this research is being provided by France. the
FRO. Canada. Finland and Ireland. The new coqany's capital. open exclusively
to Senegalese during its first phase. is held by the state. sumo (Senegalese
Electrical Energy Cowany) and SOFISDIT (Senegalese Financial Coepany for the
Developnent of Industry and Tourisn). Hith the exploitation of peat. Senegal
will be able to diversify its energy sources; up to the present all power
stations built in Senegal have been powered by fuel oil. [Text] [Paris ms
TROPICMJX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 557] [OOMIGII‘I'z Rene
Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9380

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(:80: (0719/6108