APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R000200020023-2
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2044

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language scurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratad are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current spas publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Htshington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, 01d
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I AI'ION u. soon so. . a. loduont'a Menuon u.
REPORT 2223“"? E JPRS 74572

__--_——-. ._ - ..____._ __.._..._._

a. nu. am mm. ; anon om—

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT. No. 2044 14 November 1979

mum-u. Manon um and Jams 10. mum-mu me la

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Clebe Road ILOanlvoeuuuM-IMI-

Arlington. Virginia 22201

12. MM“ Quantum um and Am“ I!- ‘lm 0V noun 5 PM... Mac

As above

It. Assam! (Li-IR: too «can

This serial report contains information on socioeconomic. government. political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

11. 00cm Mamba a. human

Political Science __Inter_-Arab Affairs 3: Libya _Su1tanate
Sociology Aﬂorth African Mauritania of Oman
Economics Affaira _x_Horocco _X_ Syria
Culture (Social _Afghanistan _Pcople'a Deno- L'runisia
Sciences) A Algeria cratic Republic __United Arab

Ethnology __Bahrain of Yemen Eniratea
Geography _x_Egypt _Peraian Gulf LWeatem Sahara
Techolosical x Iran Area __Yelen Arab
Military Sciences Iraq __Qatar Republic

x Israel _x__ Saudi Arabia

1: Jordan _Spaniah North

Kuwait Africa

1: Lebanon _Sud an

& WWW 70M“

ecoﬂnnu/Onu 51). 5C. 5K, 15

"u‘ n'1"z"'m' :"c'é‘3'"ﬂa11ab11 ity

Sold by NTIS wage-nan o 1
Springfield, Virginia 22161 “uncussmim'
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2044

CONTENTS
NORTH AFRICA! AFFAIRS

Briefs
Berber Liberation Hovanent

LIBERIA

Meeting on Party Base, LPG Elections
(133111311 cuezm Affanegﬁl. HOUNAHID, 18 Sep 79)

Oran Cites Algerian Paper's Criticism of U.S. Arms for Morocco
(arm matic Service, 2" wt 79) eeoeclooeooooeeoeo

'LE WDB' Garments on Dismissal of Algerian Mraulics
Minister
(M181 Jnnqua; LB “GIN, 16 wt 79) ooeoeeooeoeoeoee

mm
Fm Minister Interviewed on Trade
(Banier Offergeld; Cologne Deutschlurfunk Network,
” wt 79) O'COIIOOOIIIDOOCOIOCOIOCIIOOCUCCC..'."...
IRAN

Hell Placed Source Predicts Cabinet Smkeup
(m, 28 mt 79) CIDIIOOOOIIIOCOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.

All Political Parties, Groups Unite for Celebration
(3m, 1‘ sep79) O.COIIIIIOOOIOOOIOOOIOIOIIOOIOOOOO

Returning Students Dissinueioned With Money-n1 Lend
(mch “66m; m SPINKL, 2h sap 79) eoceesoooeo
WTENTS (Continued)

Unrest Spreads Among Military, Police
(EXCLUSIVE, 7 Got 79) eeleeeeeeeeeeeeoeooseeeloooeee

Rift Between Am, Pasdars
1100 Homafars Arrested

Amy Purge Planned
Retirement Requests on Rise
Police Officers Unhappy

Land Forces Chief Assays Kordestan Unrest
(BAHMD,16 wt 79) O.ICOCOOIOOIOOIOOOOOOOO0.0......

Soviet Involvement in Kordestan Rejected
(W'AT, 23 59p 79) eeeeeeeooeeoooOeooooeIoeeeoeo

'Distinguished Religious Sectarisns' Criticized by NP
(mu'AT, 25 sep 79) one...eeoeeoooeooeoonOoeoool

Fire in Tehran Afghan Blbassy Labeled Plot of
'Unidentified Blements'
(Bm'AT, 25 &p 79) ODOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00.00.0000...

Revolutionary Newspapers Express Views
(MAD, 1 Sep 79) O00......OOOOCOOOOOQOOOOO..IOOOIO

Cautious Criticism of Flogging as s Punitive Heasure
(m'AT’ 21‘ sep 79) 0.0......OUOOIOOCOOOOOOOIOOO.

State of National Economy Analysed
(IRAN ECONOMIC SERVICE, 6 Oct 79) ..................

Nationalization of Secondary Industries Suggested
(W3 ELM, 388p 79) OOOIOOIIOIOIOOODOOOO...

Govermnent Appropriates Millions To Spur Production
(“mg W, 2 SGP 79) eoeeoeeeeeeeoeeeeoeeoee

Press Highlights Commercial Developnents
(IRAN BOONOEIC SKRVICB, 6 Oct 79) ..................

Bshraqi Paved Way for Dismissal of NIOC Chief
W'AT, 25 sep 79) o.eeoaeoeeoeeeooeoeoeenoeeeeee

Industry Exployees Dissatisfied Hith Nasih
meleyni: No Confidence in Nasih
COUNTS (Continued)

Snell Consumers To Get Rater, Electricity Gratis
(W, 19 sap 79) O...IIICOOOCIOOOOOOOOI0.....00000

Naval Bases To Be Converted Into Ports
(W, 29 Aug 79) IOOOOOOOQOOIOOIIOOOOOQIOOOOOIIOIO

Tricot, Knit Goods Industry Nearing a Standstill
(m'AT, 25 §ep 79) OOOOOOOIOOOODOOIIOI00.0.0.0...

Dmestic Industry Seeking To Make Spare Parts for Autos
(W, 19 *p 79) CIOOOOOCOI.IQIQIOIOOOQIICOCDOOIOO

Briefs
Arms, Drugs Haul
Emmi loyalty

ISRAEL

'DAVAR' Foresees Cabinet Fall , Analyzes Reasons
(Daniyel Bloch; mun, 2 Oct 79)

Palestinians React Strongly to Israeli Land Decision
(Various sources, 18 Sep 79) ........................

West Bank Mayors
'AL-QUIB' Editorial

Arw Deserticns, Offenses by Women Soldiers Increase
(Daﬁd Richardson; MT, 30 wt 79) eooeooeoeoeoeo-ee

'HA'ARBTZ' Provides Statistics on kpropriated Land
(Ze'ev Schiff; HA'ARBTZ, 1 “0' 79) Iseoeoooooeoeoeeoo

“RDA"

Authorities Keep Eye on Muslim Brotherhood
(AIPHUSTAQBAL, 22 sep 79) oocoococoon-000.00.00.00...

Investment Opportunities Attract Foreign Capital
(AL-NW ‘IF'WI "A “PM, 1.7 wt 79) 00000.0

LEBANON

Effect of Jmnblat's Death on National Hovuent Discussed
(m m man my, 13 Oct 79)

Religious Leaders, Iran's Interest in South
(THE ARAB mm, 20 Oct 79) ..................

-c-

51

53

55

58
S8

59

63

67

68

70

7h

79
CORTEHTS (Continued)

Iran's Role in South Lebanon Problem
(mum, 16 Sep 79) 0......OOOOOOOICOOICOCOOOOOOOO

Armenian-Phalangtst Controntattons Analyzed
(AL-“Am, 1h sap 79) O.I..0...OOUOOOIOOOOOOOOIOIIO.

Lebanese-Palestinian Reconciliation Is Key to South
Lebanon Problem
(‘1an, 15 &p 79) 0......DOIUOOOOOOOC0.000000...

Official Bi-Monthly Bank Statistics Published
(L'ORIHIT-LB JOUR, 21 Sep 79) ooooeeoeeoooolooooo...

Briefs
Flight of Workers Reported

LIBYA

Libyan Relations With France Deteriorate
(LB mm, 2938p79) IO..OOOOOOOOOCIOIOOOOOOCICOOOO

Libyan Military Equipment Development Detailed
(EMSE NATION”, Aug-Sap 79) ooeeoeooeoeeeoeoeooo

MOROCCO
'AL—HUHARR‘DI' Urges 'Privileged Class' To Bear Its
Share of Sacrifice
(Editorial; Wm, 18 wt 79) ooeeloooeeeeoe'o

'AL-‘ALAH' Says South African N-Test. Sets Off Arms Race
('Umar “831b3AIP‘m, 27 wt 79) aoooeooooeooooioo

Briefs
Uranium Find
Oment on UN Resolution
SAUDI ARABIA

Power Plant Developnent Planned for al-Jubql
(Chris L. Pm; ARAB m, 22 Wt 79) .oooonnooooeoo

High Yield Rice Developed in Hana
(M m, 17 wt 79) 0.00....OOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOIDOOO

Briefs
Airport Radar Systems

-d-
CWTEM‘S (Continued)

SIRIA

Regime Seen Determined To Overcome 'COnspiracy,'

Shortcomings
(Hadi' al-Hilu; AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-NHALI,

1’7 wt 79) eoooeeeeeeoeoo-eeooooeeceeoaeocean-neon

Rural: Housing Project; Anti-Cholera Heasures Discussed
(WWW, 18 sep 79) 00......00000IOOOOOOOCOOOOO

TUNISIA
Briefs
away From YAR President
Message to Lisbon Conference
HESTBRN SAHARA

PCF, POI, PCB Issue Commique on western Sahara Visit
(Algiers Mastic semce, ’1 NOV 79) oooeeeo-eeecee
BR IEFS

3mm LIEERATION mVEHENTuA new movement called "The Berber Liberation
Front" has cone into being and has established its headquarters in an Arab
North African state. The aim of the front is to establish an independent
Berber state extending from southern Morocco to the Algerian riff. A French
source has told the AL-BAHADITN bureau in Paris that the front was originally
formed against Morocco but it is possible to nove it against Algeria when
necessary. In the opinion of the French source the Arab side behind the
movement in question aim to gain control of the area extending from Nauti-
tania to the upper Nile valley, that is the uranium-rich area separating
North Africa and Black Africa. The source also says that the aid being
given to opposition in northern Sudan falls within the framework of this
movement. The French source affirmed that opposition leader in Mali (Didi
Desta Noina) has received financial and military aid from the Arab country
in question sufficient to raise a 7,000-nan force under the name of the
"Bali Liberation Movement" which is expected to be moved against President

Haas Traore shortly. [Text] [1.0051129 London AL-BANADITB in Arabic
2 Nov 79 p 11 LD]

080: 41002
HEETIRG 0N PARTY BASS, APC ELECTIONS
Algiers BL MOUDJAHID in French 18 Sep 79 pp 1. 3

[chairman of party election emission, Djillali Guezzan affane, chairs
meeting on coming party base and Arc [People's Comunal Assembly] elections]

[Text] The upcoming elections of the party base and the APC were the main
subject of the important meeting held yesterday at the People's House, a
meeting which brought together all the responsible ones at the party base.
under the presidency of Djillali Guezran Affane. member of the M (National
Liberation Front) Party Politburo, and president of the party election com-
mission. The meeting was attended by Messrs Abdallah Demhne Debbih, Bache-
maoui, and Ould Kablia. members of the Central Comittee of the FLN party
and secretary general of UGTA [General Union of Alegerian Horkers], national
party couissar of the Algerian governorate, and governor of Algeria,
respectively. The meeting was within the framework of the campaign sur-

rounding the elect’ions of party base organs and the APO, which was launched
last Tuesday in Bejsia. The orientations set forth by Guezaan Affane

were followed by a debate attesting to the common will at base and manage-
ment levels, aimed at increasing and affix-ling the party's role in the con-
trol and direction of public affairs. That role will be carried out by the
militant work of mobilizing the social revolutionary forces by an in-depth
study of democracy both at party functions and at all sectors of economic
and social life. The parties involved stressed that revision would have

to be marked throughout by integrity.

Guezzan Affane took up the question of revising the cell elections and those
of the kasmas, the APC and the GSB (Socialist Management of Businesses).
we present here a synopsis thereof.

These elections were not the first to be organized, but they differ from
previous ones. For the country has had improvements in its state and party
institutions. There is a national charter; there has been the party con-
gress with its statute and rule of procedure. and some significant resolu-
tions. The real task is in organising the party. The various party struc-
tures are pressing for a program which seeks to expand the party base to all
revolutionary elements, even those still outside the party. In confronting

the problems of the country's development. the widest base in the party is
required.
And in order that this base be equal to the demands placed upon it, the
party doors must be opened to all revolutionary elements, in terms of the
national charter's criteria.

In some regions, a campaign and a significant party adhesion took place.
In other regions, on the other hand, that campaign did not take place and
the adhesion remained weak.

The campaign of adhesion to the party was launched by President Chadli
Bendjedid. It was the principal motivation for the report at the APC elec-
tions that one could no longer claim that the party doors were closed.
Because many candidates for adhesion stated that they had disposed of their
files which remained without follow—up.

of course, there were elections in 1978. but in the upcoming elections. we
are concerned with applying the rule of procedure and the party statute.

The structures of the party must know the elections before those of the APC
and the AP". They will have to take place before next October 15.

How can one have a real sense of this revision? Hhat is at issue here is
arranging the responsible structures with the responsible elements and com-
batting the evils from which the party body is suffering. There must not
be revisions just for the sake of revision. but in order to put "the needed
man in the needed place." "Moreover, criticism and self-criticism must be
employed in order to put an end to nepotism and regionalism."

We believe that the party base has the appearance of the revolution and
today this base knows the evils which the elections. not the division into

cliques supporting individual personalities, can inflict upon the unity of
the party base.

If today the elections of the party base organs will take place before those
of the APC, it is because the choice of candidates to the APC elections
must be that of the general assembly of the kasma militants.

The militants will have to strive every day to insure that the party will
have its feet planted firmly on the ground. direct its activity, master its
problems, and thus establish its authority.

Are we capable today of inspiring the party with the militant force to
apply the national charter and the resolutions of the fourth party congress?
The party's authority is acquired day after day by the work of Iilitants

at all levels, as they fight their battle for economic and social inde-
pendence.
Of course there are gaps, because in previous years. build-up of mate'riel

had priority. The party's responsibility had not been affirmed. Pressures
against the militants were exercised.

Today, the party has a leadership. What remains to be done is to give the
kasma its true identity. That is the work of the militants who believe in

the principles of the revolution. Thus, making a good choice in the next
elections will give the party new strength.

Link the Revolution to Democracy

There are the kasmas which work at ground level for the solution of problems.
Others remain inactive. The same comparison can be made between two APC's
of the same governorate, two APH's which show that one governorate is more
active than another. Thus we are concerned with strengthening the party and
the country by responsible elections. That method is outlined by the party
statute and its rule of procedure.

that is involved is linking the revolution with democracy. M methods can
be adopted. The militants at a general assembly will propose a long list

of candidates, consisting of revolutionary militants whose names will be
submitted for public choice.

The second method is the elaboration at the general assembly of a single
list in the context of a long and unanimous debate.

The popular choice concretizes the principle of the revolution by and for

the people, by allowing the people to participate, at all times, in the choice
of men and in the direction of public affairs.

The party base has an important role to uphold, because it is that base
which, at the comune level, constitutes the political leadership. We
must see to it that it is comprised of revolutionary militants. Next, we
will have to have our thought united, speak the same language and, as it
is comonly said, sing the same song: that of the revolution.

It is there that all economic, social, and organizational problems of our
country will find their ultimate solution.

Let us go back to the national charter which stipulates the need to hold
general assemblies of citizens. militants, mess organizations, and the party.
The communal assemblies, the kasma, the mass organization, must be joined
together in an assembly of militants. The party will be able to rediscover
its true expression when this assembly assmes its prerogatives, studies

the problems and decides on solutions.
For years, we have debated placing our best militants in positions of
responsibility. We noticed each time that those elected by the APO or the
kasma do not carry out the will of the general assembly but act separately
from one another. This happened because the general assembly did not exer—
cise its authority. Could it have been due to a lack of commitment?

There could certainly have been some types of mentalities prevailing be-
fore the national charter and the fourth party congress. but they must no
longer be the case. In fact, a militant from within the party usually thinks

differently from one from within the state. But that comes from a lack of
connections with the base.

In the context of the elections which will have to be held before 15 October,
the general assemblies will have to assert their responsibilitiess.

The weaknesses evidenced up to then were due to a lack of openness and a
failure to denounce the faults which were cousitted. For that. nepotism
took precedence over militantism.

To Practice Criticism and Self-Criticism

Thus. the two methods are the choice of a single list or a long list of can-
didates. This choice will fall to the general assembly. The best one is

a single list. after the longest possible debate, so that the militant base
can strengthen its unity. But that requires political courage and openness
on the part of the militants. It is well known that the militants do not
express themselves in the general assemblies but wait until they are on the
streets to speak. That is contrary to the principles of the party and es-
pecially a party of the avant-garde.

If we are not clear-sighted in the general assemblies, when will we be?

If criticism is brought against one who is responsible, it is taken to
mean an attack against individuals. That reveals a failure in the practice
of criticism and self-criticism. As militants. we must discuss matters
openly among ourselves.

Set Up a Political Reckoning From the APC Mandates

The elections of the APC will take place for the fourth time. Today,
the question is raised to all of us as militants.

Have the APC acted in conformance with the national charger? Have the

APC worked in the context of applying the charter and the commal code?
We must formulate a political debate, establish a political reckoning. The
general assembly must be ready to discuss this political question. This
requires studying the communal charter to demand accounts on that basis.
Thus, it is not a reckoning of problems of an administrative reckoning that
is required. not that everyone should bring up all the problem of his own
city, but it should be a reckoning of the APC as an organ of the party and
the state, on the basis of the national charter. This clearly defines the
relations between the party and the state, on the one hand, and the APC
on the other. In its dual political and administrative role, it answers
to two guardians: the party and the state.

Why is an APC often divided in two? It is because the guardianship at
the party base has not been exercised. For who is responsible for the acts
of the elected one, if not the one who proposed him as a candidate. And

it is clear that the elected one is a representative of the party from within
the state.

With regard to the national charter, I recall the words of President
Boumediene. "He have created a burnoose but haven't found a nan whom it
fits."

Today, it is up to us to create such men. In fact, today, the situation
is such that the president and the government must becone involved with
the tasks of the APC.

Is It a Lack of Direction?

Thus, we have the task of purification! That does not mean denying responsi-
bility over some others, but it means discussing the causes. Is it a lack
of direction? Is it a lack of means?

Besides, the role of the APC is completed by that of the party, the mass
organizations, the general assembly of militants which must insure the general
mobilization. It is clear, in fact, that social evils cannot find their
solutions by virtue of a campaign, but reach a point where each person will
assume his responsibilities. It is clear that the demanding of accounts

can only be carried out in that framework. Thus, the reckoning which APC

and APR will have to give must be exposed in its real and global, not specific,
context. _

These elections must serve as the occasion for raising the level of conscious-
ness by means of interventions, while being militant over the plan of direc-
tion and the effective control of the coIIIunal management aimed at improving
the country.

That is important, because when the APC fails, the citizen says, "See what
the party has given us."
Today, there are new elements springing forth from among the workers,

youth, and peasantry, which were formed in the context of the farmers re-
volution. The militant playing an active part in the labor union can be a
militant of the party. The choice does not have to be made by the ones re-
sponsible, but by the general assembly of militants. Because it is that
base which experiences the problems, knows the militants on their own ground.

If we make mistakes in the choice of men, we will have to live with those
problems.

We have created the APC's, but they exist as a body without a soul. He
must impart to them their revolutionary militant life. In order to do
that, there must be effective control. The APC will have a mandate of 5

years. The choice must be militant in order to give the APC their true
expression.

There is an election commission, composed of some 30 members. But that is
not the body which will choose or control the ones elected. For who must
implement the party's program, if not its base? Control must be exercised
not just every 6 years, but permanently, every month, each year...Those
elected must render accounts at all times to the base, and not from one man-

date to another. The citizens must also be informed about what is going
on and must use their control.

Regarding the 652, we as militants are responsible for exercising this
choice.

Everyone, whether he agrees or not, will have to exercise his choice.

Certain responsible ones will say that the lack of authority in the unity
and in the undertaking comes from the 683.

The 683 does not represent a weakening in the authority of those responsible,
but a strengthening, by the information of the worker who, in his undertaking,
participates in the decision, so that the work will seem to them that its
future and that of the undertaking are related.

Todya, we cannot say that we will improve this country without effective
popular mobilization. It is through this militant work that the party,

day after day, will find its authority. Because the respect, the authority,
which are due to the party cannot be dictated.

Guezzan Affane then invited the militants who were present to take part in
debate. The debate affirmed the desire for a democratic choice, the need

for integrity from base to highest levels to be strictly respected, and
the concern for making the base aware of its pressures and its militant and
revolutionary prerogatives.

9‘75
650: 6600
ORAN CITES ALGERIA.“ PAPER'S CRITICISM OF 0.8. ARMS FOR mmcco
1.0252202 Oran Domestic Service in Arabic 2200 GMT 24 Oct 79 L0
["Haghreb of Peoples" Program]

[Text] The National AL-SHA'B has published a comentary on the decision of

the 0.5. President Carter to supply Morocco with newly developed 0.8. weapons.
The newspaper writes:

The justification presented by Washington for the new deal and the doubling
of military support for the Rabat regime aimed at enabling it to negotiate
from a position of strength, is a justification that can only be described
as (7strange). Rabat did not hesitate to repeat the echo of this justifi-
cation when its foreign minister said yesterday that his government has al-
ways been willing to negotiate but [words indistinct]. This is the [words
indistinct] the United States [words indistinct]. The problem has imposed

itself and all international organizations have come to consider it a prob-
lem of decolonisation that should be solved within (7this context) as other

similar problems have been dealt with. This nature of the problem and the
tasks which the Rabat regime has undertaken to accomplish as an agent of

colonialism and 0.8. imperialist: in the region. and even in Africa. should
not be nixed.

The Carter adninistration is on the eve of elections which seem, according

to first public opinion polls, not to favor the white Home. president. Sub-
sequently, wagering on all cards which may prove winners has become impera-
tive. Therefore. the latest u.s. decision was taken only for electionearing
motives in view of the strong links between the American Zionists and Bassan
II and in appreciation of the latter's efforts in achieving the Camp David
deal. The co-entator [name indistinct] was right when he said that this aid
is within the contest of [words indistinct], otherwise how can it be logical
for Hashington to [words indistinct] the cause of people in opposition to the
tradition it has followed up to now. The tell: about other attach weapons
and other defensive weapons is mere prattle. It is being said in the American
capital that there is an agreement sanctioning the use of the weapons by
Hassan II outside his borders because Washington does not recognise the his-
torical borders of Morocco. Did the Anerican administration protest even

once when its aircraft. tanks, and artillery shelled the Saharan population
and [passage indistinct].
If there is anyone who deserves assistance and who has been actually exposed
to aggression [words indistinct] it is the displaced Saharan people. Washing-
ton very well understands the way American atlas are being used because the
given justifications are merely an exposed distortion which deceives no-one.
The United States has taken a step with serious consequences [words indis-

tinct].

C80: 4402
'LE WNDB' COWS 0N 015813841. OP ALGERIAN HYDRAULICS MINISTER
LDZSO901 Paris LE HONDB in French 16 Oct 79 p lo LD
{Daniel Junqua Dispatch: "Hr Ghouli Is Revved Pros the Govemnent"]

[Excerpts] Algiers--A short comnique fron the Presidency of the Republic
announced after the cabinet meeting on Suday 15 October that Mr Aimed Clussli
was no longer Hydraulics Minister. lie will be temporarily replaced by Haj
Brahin Brahini. Secretary of State for Forests and Reforestation.

The news was unexpected, but the fern it took was more surprising than the
content: This is the first tine for a long tine that the sacking of a top
official has been announced so bluntly. Resignations for "health reasons"
and silent departures are clearly no longer the order of the day. This is
a new style which President chadli is introducing.

The first sign of Mr Ahned Ghouli's disgrace appeared when the National
Liberation Front Congress in February elected his only as a candidate nan-
ber of the Central Comittee. 0n 8 March he lost the Energy Portfolio and
was given the newly created Hydraulics Portfolio. Be apparently accepted

it only with reluctance and showed bitterness at being removed from a sector
and a tean to which he had devoted himself conpletely. At his pronptingnhe
has a diplona from the Paris School of Highways and Bridges--Sonatrach had
becone a positive aspire (Dre than 70,000 enployees), often creasing off
the country's best cadres at the expense of other sectors.

The sacking of Hr Ghozali. who has not been given any other job for the ties
being, comes 1 math after the launch of the "cleanup" canpaign, which has
hitherto been principally eised at ordinary citizens. however, the press has
constantly mounted that sanctions would be taken at all levels against offi-
cials who proved unequal to their tasks. Therefore Dir Ghouli's dismissal
night well serve as an angle and would in no way conflict with the head of
state's policy of national union. Above all Mr Ghouli has the status of a
higher civil servant and his modest contribution to the liberation struggle-

his official biography sinply points out that be was a"nsd9er of the National
Liberation Front French University Section 1958 through l962"-wss bound to
be of disservice to him at a tine when the party's predoninance is being con-
stantly reaffirmed in all spheres.

080: 6600

10
F'RG MINISTER VJITERVIBHED ON TRADE

W311028 Cologne Deutschlandfunk Network in German to Best and West Germany
1610 our 30 Oct 79 DH

[Excerpts from interview with Ranier Offergeld. federal sinister for economic
cooperation, by Reporter Garner in Egypt--recorded]

[Text] [Question] Uhy is Cairo given such obvious privileges with regard to
obtaining credits?

[Answer] We agreed to give Egypt development assistance credits amounting
to a total of [211.9 billion. I do not believe one can term that a privilege.

Certainly Egypt is e nein point of our develop-ant policy efforts ained at
achieving stabilization here in the Middle East.

[Question] Did the Egyptians on the occasion of your visit here ask for or
expect an increase?

[Answer] The Egyptians expect in the future an intensification and extension
of cooperation in the field of develop-ant policy. Figures have not been dis-

cussed in the talks with the president of the ainisters, but there was the
clear wish of the Egyptians that we increase our credits to that.

[Question] How do you assess the econoaic situation of ngypt?

[Answer] The eoonoaic situation of Egypt is more positive than had been ex-
pected a couple of nonths ago. He discussed future cooperation vary intensely
-that was a main point of our talks. The Federal Republic wants to concen-
trate cooperation on a few sectors. Pull agree-ant existed in this respect
with the Egyptian partners. Cooperation will be concentrated on such projects
as infrastructure and telecollunications, second there is agriculture and
particularly increased productivity and, third there is iaproveaent of build-
ing industry capacities, with an annual growth of the population of nore than
1 Iillion. The Egyptians cannot catch up in the field of construction work.

[Question] More than moo million of the credits granted have not yet been

used. Are the Egyptians at all in a position to use the money that was guaran-
teed thea in a sensible way?

11
[Answer] Yes, we consider it very important for our development policy co-
operation to find sensible projects for financing, projects that would facili-
tate economic and social progress in the country. No problems at all exist
here. The implementation of projects, however, occasionally leaves something
to be desired, sometimes matters do not develop as quickly as we would like.
But generally there is no lack of socially and economically sensible projects
here in Egypt.

C80: 3103

12
WELL PLACED SOURCE PREDICTS CABINET SHAKE"?
LD011005 'l'eheran mum in Persian 28 Oct 79 p 2 LD
[Unattributed report: "Rmr of Reshuffle in Bazargsn Cabinet"]

[Excerpt] Rusors of a reshuffle in Bazargan's cabinet are resurfacing and
it is now being said that three of the larger ministries will be affected.
The reshuffle is expected to take place by the weekend. although no infor—
mation is available as to the extent of the love.

A source close to the goverment revealed today that the changes in engineer
Bazargan's provisional government were at ministerial level and that they
were discussed during the previoas shake up which resulted in the appoint—
ment of Bspahbodi as labor sinister. Ho’infar as oil sinister and the
transfer of [Laban Social Affairs Minister] Poruhar. The source added:

"The necessity for a cabinet reshuffle increased 2 weeks ago, following

the major events that took place in the country affecting several ninistries.
in the middle of which one [unnased] sinister, who had presented a national
plan. was insisting on resigning."

The reshuffle in the two other ministries is rusored to be connected with
the country's econosy, an econo-y which in a period of revolution needs
fundasental charges and rapid leaps toward the regeneration and restoration
of production and supply. As for econosic progress. which of necessity
rests on the launching pad of the country's heavy industry. sention say be
sade of the rejuvenation of agriculture, the development of anissl husbandry
and the dairy industry. and alongside this the role of fishing. which is

of special iaportance and which recently led to a probl- in Bender Anuli.
giving rise to concern.

The shakeup runor cones Just when the govern-est is facing onerous

criticises fro. all sides, and according to the source quoted it will
definitely take place soon.

(:80: 4906
ALL POLITICAL PARTIES, GROUPS UNITE FOR CELEBRATION
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian la Sep 79 pp 1, 9

[Text] Following announcements made by the Celebration Headquarters for the
anniversary of Martyrs of 17 Shahrivar [September 8], yesterday political

and Islamic Societies and groups issued statements in honoring the common-
tion of those who suffered martyrdom on 17 Shahrivar last year and announced
their support in celebrating the anniversary more splendidly. As of last
night dozens of political and Islamic organisations, societies. centers

have amounted that they would participate in the ceremonies.

Martyrs Day

The Unity Protection Society related to the Construction Jehad (holy war)
issued a statement yesterday announcing its participation in the ceremonies
and suggested naaing l7 Shahrivar Hartyrs Day.

The Blood and Message Day

The Society for the Unity of the Poor and the Islamic. society of teachers

and employees of the state technical and professional/vocational organiza-
tion in Tehran issued a statement announcing that it would participate with
other organizations in the ceremonies of 17 Shahrivar. The message indicates:
According to the martyred teacher. Dr Shariati, the revolution has two faces:
blood and message. The 17 Shahrivar was both a bloody day and a day of mes-
sage. A bloody message and blood nixed with message. The poor rose.

They revived the neaory of 'Emar Yaser, liaqud, Hosa'eb an Mir, Abuser
Ghafari. Kamil an Ziyad. Hobs-ad an Abi Bait: and Male]: Ashtar. They sent
a message for the poor to rise and take their rights from the arrogant

(those who have gold and power and hypocrisy) and not to allow a bunch of
selfish, Hesternized, bewitched by users of; Napalm bombs, international colonial-
ists etc. destroy our rights from right and left and wittingly or unwittingly
become the loudspeaker for the worldeater colonialists.

with bloody and embossed lines, the voice of the poor was written on the '

Great Bear on 17 Shahrivar 1357 and it echoed in the world. Hist the peo-
ple did on this day would not have been possible with billions of money,

1h
thousands of tanks, guns and machine guns. The voice of "Allah Akbar" of
the poor and the blood that was shed unfairly stopped the machine guns and
the coarse voice of Oveysi(a) and promised a government of 'Ali's justice.

The 17th of Shahrivar has two contradictory faces: It is a day of death,
blood and sorrow and it is also a day of victory and joy; 17 is the day of
the martr. Suffering martyrdom has also two contradictory faces: sorrow
and joy. death and life, defeat and victory.

0n the anniversary of such a great event, no matter what we say in its com-
mendation will not be enough. We perform the noon prayer at Shohada Circle,
this historic circle, the wrapped scroll of 2,500 years of monarchy, and
participate in the ceremonies honoring this day. Victory to the memory of
the martyrs of 17 Shahrivar, long live the movement and revolution of Iran's
Moslem people under the leadership and guidance of Imam Khomeyni. May the
provisional government of the Islamic Revolution be successful.

In a statement the Zahmatkeshan Party also announced that it would participate
in the ceremonies of 17 Shahrivar and indicated: In order to honor the martyrs
of rose-colored winding sheets on 17 Shahrivar [Black Friday] and in order

to renew our promise with the great leader of Iran's Islamic Revolution,

the Grand Ayatollah Imam Khomeyni, and announce our hatred for the servants
and devotees of Imperialism who create riots in every corner and bother

the souls of those who sacrificed their lives, we hereby announce that the
Party of Hard-working People will take part in the walking on 17 of Shahrivar
just as it had done in the past.

'Asef Towhidi Organization [Asef Honotheism Organization] also issued a
statement in this respect and said: By congratulating the families of the
martyrs and announcing that we would continue their way (to implement the
Islamic principles fully), we accept the invitation of the Celebration Bead-
quarters marking the bloody Friday and ask all the people to actively partici-
pate in this ceremony and prove their unity, in uplifting world monotheism
in its true meaning under the leadership of Imam Khomeyni. He persist in
wanting the provisional governemnt of Iran's Islamic Republic, in a symbo-
lic and revolutionary action, to turn the U.S. Embassy (an area of 115,000
meters) into an equipped hospital and put it at the disposal of the handi-
capped and the wounded of the Islamic revolution, as the embassy has not left
anything but an experience of adversity or misery and destruction and has
always looted the poor nations.

Iran's Woman's Society has also issued a statement honoring this historic

day and announced: The bloody Friday in the heart of the month represented
the fighting morale and the unity of the great hero nation. It blossomed
like a red rose and struck the roaring anger of the people at the structure
of the shah's regime, disgrace for imperialism, and brought down the monarchic

15
regime which was rotten to its roots. The 17th of Shahrivar was the symbol

of power and the strong determination of the people and the incapability and
weakness of the enemy. And now after the victory, the awakening of the people
against the two superpowers of America and the Soviet Union and their clandes-
tine and overt agents is a vital factor in determining the country's future
destiny and the continuation of the struggles so that everyday it is agitated
more than the previous day in various ways. The resistance, bravery, and unity
of the people on 17 Shahrivar and their ability to accurately distinguish
between true enemies and friends should always direct our future.

Iran's women's Society of Tehran District will hold some ceremonies at 4 p.m.
on Friday, 16 Shahrivar, at its office.

Iran's Islamic Struggles Organization has extended its congratulations and
condolences to Imam Khomeyni and the hero nation of Iran on the martyrs'
anniversary on 17 Shahrivar and by addressing the Celebration Headquarters

it has announced; From the beginning of Iran's Islamic revolution, the Islamic
Struggles Organization started its activities against the satanic regime pub-
licly by suffering several casualties (martyrs). It will participate in

the ceremonies of 17 Shahrivar and if necessary it is ready to provide se-
curity with its military unit.

In addition, various Islamic and religious groups have issued statements
announcing their readiness to participate in these ceremonies which will be
held in Shohada Circle.

The names of the Islamic societies are as follows: The Committee of the
Islamic Society of The Foundry in Tehran: the Council of Employees of the
National Society for the Protection of Children; the Islamic Society of
Shroudwearers; the Hujahedin Organization of God's Hay; the Islamic Society
of Husayniyeh Sar Kurd Hulls; the Islamic Society of west Tehran; the Islamic
Society of the Students of Nazi Abad; the Islamic Society of Hehr Villa.
Karaj: the Islamic Society of Perdos Shahriyar; the bazaar businessmen and
syndicates affiliated to the Hujahedin Organization of God's way.

The names of some of the other organizations and societies were published in
the previous issue.

Based on the report of the Celebration Headquarters for the anniversary of
17 Shahrivar, up to last night the following groups and societies have
announced their readiness to participate in the ceremonies:

The Islamic Society of Iran's National Gas Company', the Islamic Society
(community) of employees of the Central Bank; the Central Council of Non-
commissioned Officers and Personnel of the Police Department of Iran's
Islamic Republic; the Islamic Cmnmunity of Iran's oil Personnel; the Islamic
Community of the Children's Mental Development Center; the Islamic Conmumity

l6
of the Office in Charge of Attending to Medical Documents Affiliated with

the Ministry of Health; the Islamic Community of the Personnel of the Oil
Industry in Tehran; the Islamic Comunity of Agricultural Development Bank;
the Islamic Community of the Personnel of Tehran's Regional Water Organiza-
tion; the Islamic Community of Personnel of Vahed Company; the Islamic Com-
munity of the State Aviation Personnel; the Islamic Community of the Em-
ployees of Iran's Agricultural Cooperative Bank; the Islamic Col-unity of
Shemshak; the Islamic Community of Atomic EneISY; the Islamic Community of
Iran's Communication Company; the Social Welfare Organization. Branch 1;

the Islamic Community of the Foundry in Tehran; the Islamic Columnity of
Employees of the Ports and Shipping Organization; the Islamic Conunity of
the Ministry of Mines and Industries; the Islamic Community of the Ministry
of Culture and Higher Education; the Islamic Community of the National Wel-
fare Organization for the Blind; the Islamic Community of Iran's Carpet Com-
pany, Inc. related to the Ministry of Commerce; the Islamic Society of the
Medical School of Imam Khomeyni at Tehran University; the Islamic Community
of Qasr Garrison. 2d Infantry Division of Tehran; the Handicapped Society;
Iran's Islamic Struggle's Organization; the Javadiyeh Committee; the Islamic
Community of Employees of the Regional Organization for Health and Welfare of
Tehran Province; the Islamic Commmmity of Employees of Tehran's Regional
Power; the Mujahedin Organization of God's way; the Islamic Community of
Ministry of National Guidance; the Islamic Revolution Housing Foundation in
Tehran and all cities; the Islamic Comunity of PARS NEWS AGENCY; the Society
of Employees of the Official Newspaper of Iran's Islamic Republic; the Islamic
Community of Employees of the Insurance Industry; the Islamic Society of
Javsdiyeh-Vali 'Asr Pedsyee Group; the Pro-National Youth; the Islamic
Community of Welfare and Education Organization for the Youth and Children
Affiliated with the Ministry of Health and Welfare; the Task Group of the
12th Commdttee; the Group of the Islamic Community of Saviors of Islam;

the Islamic Society of Mehdi's Call; the Society of Qomi Patriots; the Islamic
Society of the Employees of Pharmaceutical Plants and Related Companies;

the Islamic Society of A'ameh Mosque in Shemran; the Islamic Society of
Employees of Iran's National University; the Islamic Council of Pars Oil
Company Employees; the Islamic Society of Civil Defense Organization Per-
sonnel of Iran's Islamic Republic; the Islamic Society of the Ministry of
Housing and City Construction and Development; the Society of Unity of Islam;
Nabi Akron Mosque.

9156
650: 6906

17
RETURNING STUDENTS DISILLUSIONED WITH KHOHEYNI LAND
Ila-burg DER SPIEGEL in German 26 Sep 79 pp 151, 156, 157

[Article by SPIBGEL editor Erich Hiedensnn: ”We Fell Into the Hullahs'
Irap"]

[Text] "Everyone listen!" cries the nullsh. "Is there anyone who saw how
the dogs of Sajjed Sheikh Oleshmade ate from golden platters?"

Of course there is soeeone. The revolutionary court always has appropriate
witnesses at hand when it is in need of evidence. Outside the door of Kasr
Prison continually huddle three or four dozen young people who are ready to
furnish statenents as witnesses if necessary.

The witness who saw the dogs of the multimillionaire meikh Oleshlnsde in
the golden bowl was the chief witness in the trial of the functionary of the
for-er SAVAK secret service only last week. If he continues to do a good
job, he may become a jail-keeper—-the chief judge has promised it.

Meanwhile. the trials in the mosque of last Prison are quite well balanced.
Ayatollah Chalchali, the head Jacobin of the regine, conpletes six death
sentences within a half hour-coapletely without witnesses.

The Job of jailer has a good future in Tehran. The Evin and Rear prisons are
well filled. Not long ago, the any cleared an entire block in Bareehar

Caserne in order to accosnodate the new arrivals which the young Rhoneyni
comandos deliver after nightly raids. That creates jobs.

The expanded penal catalog, although not yet even codified in an orderly
nanner, has revived old intrigues. A 70-year-old widow and her 76-year-
old earried male friend from the southern side of Tehran were whipped, under
the supervision of a nullah. until they were half dead after a relative had
allegedly caught the- in a conpronising position. One can put an obnoxious
neighbor behind bars with the aid of only an empty beer bottle from his
garbage can.

18
In place of the SAVAK sadists. today the "Odamhooje bedun-i-nachun"-the
"people without fingernails"--are operating the instruments of torture.

They are repaying the imprisoned helpmates of the toppled regime with an
eye for an eye.

The official fingernail-rippers can be satisfied with the revolution—unlike
the person who nade the coffee for the Iranian atomic energy authorities
who, on the day of Khomeyni's return. rushed through the hall with a cocked
Iachine gun and announced himself as the new director. For weeks now he

has been asking the coffee again, and he does not actually know why he
supported this revolution.

The tens of thousands of students who followed the Ayatollah home to Persia
to assist in the reconstruction of the country do not know why either. The
Moslem papists had decided to send then out to Belutschistan to work on

street construction, but the young intellectuals had not envisioned the
reconstruction that way.

Now hoards of then are streaming back to France and the Federal Republic of
Germany. All flights to the West are booked for weeks in advance. The week
before last, the American embassy on Roosevelt Avenue, barred and nailed all
around, had to close its consular department 1 hour after it had reopened
because the visa applicants threatened to crush the clerks.

Many of those wishing to return to America have settled in the amusement park

on Mossadegh Avenue (formerly Pahlevi Avenue) where they meet their daily
needs at shashlik and cola stands.

"Ile have been deceived," says cholamresa Yazdani, former medical student in
San Francisco and today owner of "Gholaaresa's Popular ﬂanburger and Rehab
Studio." "we fell into the nullahs' trap"—or their own.

Ayatollah Khoneyni and his followers have never Iade a secret of the fact

that there would be no place for left-wing and liberal intellectuals in the
Islamic Republic.

The proletariat cannot be consolidated; the students have tried it often
enough. Two weeks ago, Khomeyni's bonebreakers broke up a student demonstration
in the center of Tehran with such force that the street cleaners had to work
for 2 hours to scrub the blood off the pavement.

Only the banner with the day's slogan swung for another half day in the

branches of the trees on Pirdausi Square: "Hargbar chodam ke goftam Isrgbar
shah"--"Death to me who called for the death of the Shah."

Shah Reza would not recognize his old and new friends. "Iran was truly free
only in the last 6 months of the shah's rule." says Gholamreaa Yasdani. In
January he was still a part of the academic mob which looted the villa of

19
the shah's sister Sham in Beverly Hills. In the mullahs the intellectuals

had seen only a means of implementing their own revolution. Now the situation
is completely reversed.

A previously unknown differentiation can be sensed in academia. Today one
differentiates between the shah of torture who sent his SAVAK executionere
after peace-loving citizens and the shah of reform who wanted to lea- his
people out of the Middle Ages into the present.

The Shi'ite clergy has lost much ground, above all with women. The mullahs
dismantled what remained of the rudiments of emancipation from the emperor's
time. Educational opportunities for girls have decreased again; women mat
still pass a virginity test to acquire civil service positions; and in divorce
law women have once again been reduced to the status of property which can

be returned if it fails to please. "Who could have suspected all that?" asks
Gholamress.

Bahrnan Nirumand from Berlin, who for many years was the spokesman for the
German resistance to the shah's regime, is also no longer happy about his
revolution. after Khomeyni's Hoslem thugs beat him up during a demonstration.
"hen asked by a reporter what he was doing now. Nirumand replied: "Nothing,

absolutely nothing, nothing at all." Dmnstrating in Berlin is certainly
less dangerous.

The opposition in jail, the press and parliament under the control of the
mullahs, the students have fled or else at the shashlik spits—where is the
resistance?

At the cemetery, for example. At the beginning of the month. the central
caaetery of Behesht-Sahra south of Tehran was closed for 2 days after

unidentified persons placed hats on 500 headstones on the graves of victim
of the shah regime.

A scroll on the mortuary illustrates the meaning: "Big hats have been placed
on you." In good German: "You were deceived."

Revolutions are seldom annual festivals of relaxed gaiety. But this one here
has included melancholy right in its manifest. Laughing aloud is the devil's
work; mic is opium for the people; and women are allowed to bathe only

in a full veil. Even 7-year-old schoolgirls must appear in school dressed
in black.

Islamic morals are subject to continual attacks. Khomeyni's guards had to
swarm out in order to collect the nonalcoholic beer in shops and supernrhets:
It had been reported to the authorities that lbslems, under the evil influence

of unbelievers. had augmented the mild brew—brand name "Ayatollah Lager"--
with alcohol-producing yeast.

20
Even the foot soldiers of the holy man are not afraid to evade the prohibition
on alcohol. Mullahs and the connittees which are subordinate to them are
practicing the art of making schnapps and brewing beer. There were 10

breweries in Tehran earlier; today a fragrant aroma rises from a few hundred
illegal breweries.

The illegal art of brewing has, to be sure, not yet reached its zenith.

Every day at least a dozen "schnaps corpses" are brought into the hospitals—
victins of overdoses of the methyl alcohol which remains behind in the

sloppy processing of the hone brew.

The person who wants to get drunk safely buys his liquor from the con-ittees
which confiscate the duty-free whiskey of the tourists from the West at
Kihrsbad Airport. It is pure even if , st 8000 rial (DH 150) per bottle, it

is twice as expensive as the sour laundry slop made from dates or oranges
which is sold at the bazaar.

Everyday life in Tehran proves that the mullahs and their worldly adapts

from the bazaar had something more secular in mind than the theocrat Khoseyni
would have been ready to tolerate—had he been aware of it.

The houses of the rich in Shemiran and Niavaran were to become meeting places
for the Mostafasin, for the poorest members of Iranian society. Nevertheless,
today mullahs reside in the villas. Some have taken over entire blocks of
apartment houses which were left behind by their owners. One sullah who

lives there has for a long tine been arriving at the mosque not as a beggar
but rather in a Hercedes.

It is also harvest tine for the bazaar merchants. They financed the way
back to Qom for the Shi'ite pope with their billions of rial; now they want
their dividends. With the exception of three, all ministers in the Bszargsn
cabinet come from the bazaar. Foreign Minister Ibrahis Yssdi, descendant

of an old bazaar family, considerstely looks after the Pahlevi foundation which
is worth billions and was left over from the shah kleptocracy.

The youth are the most audacious. Khoneyni's son Hadshi Aimed and his
brother-in-law Shahab Eshraghi were observed as they emptied a suitcase
full of dollars at the teller's window of a Geneva bank. Ayatollah Nontaseri,

Jr had the Tehran airport occupied by loyal swordsnen because the flight
procedures were not to his liking.

Newspapers which report on such excesses risk being banned. On 22 August.
22 newspapers were shut down in a surprise hove. Entire editorial staffs
were imprisoned. Remaining were the supportive enterprises like the rm
TIMES, which considers the censor "axiomatic"—"because there sust be a

body which ensures that the soral standard of the revolution is not harmed."

21
Much more difficult is control of the moral standards of the foreign press.
Ali Behaadnis. formerly a gynecologist in the United States and today
director of the Foreign Press Office in the "Ministry of National Guidance"

is purging as well as he can. In the last quarter-year, he has expelled an
average of two foreign correspondents each week.

It was Behaadnia's idea to criminally prosecute journalists for each publication
of their newspapers. Journalists who stay in Tehran without an official seal

of accreditation are treated as spies at his direction. And spies are to

be shot; that is international custom.

"Write what is true," is on the slogan pasted on the walls everywhere

foreign correspondents go. Over it threatens the diabolically distorted

face of a European correspondent who is in the process of shoving a cartridge
belt into his camera.

True is only that which is useful to the revolution. Even adnitted revolu-

tionaries today doubt that this revolution is still useful to anyone at all
except the mullahs.

True, however, is also the fact that, despite everything, the masses support
Khoneyni. The left wing and the liberals seldom gather more than 50,000
demonstrators on the street. But when Khomeyni calls, sillions still march.

9241
C80: 4403
UNREST SPREADS AMONG MILITARY, POLICE
Rift Between Arly, Pasdars
Tehran EXCLUSIVE in English 7 Oct 79 p 5

[Text] Reports reaching from the Kurdish regions in West Iran have indi~
cated that there is a great deal of disagree-cut between the Revolutionary
Guards (Pasdars) and the arny officers stationed in the region. Exclusive
sources claim that the disagree-eats have gone very deep and after the
appointment of Hostafa Chamran to Minister of National Defence. Pasdars
in the western regions claim that the army troops are not fighting vigor-
ously with the Kurdish rebels and therefore Pasdars are induced to inter-
vene in order to win the var.

Non-cannissioned officers and even the officers are conpelled to take
orders from the Pasdars who give them ammunition only when they dean it
necessary. Pasdars are also giving instructions to the troops concerning
any battles and if they do not obey orders, they will be punished by
Pasdars.

Exclusive sources also said that all the armed Air Force planes are accom-
panied by at least one arsed Pesdsr in order to supervise their operation
and have a tight control over then.

Meanwhile, informed sources in the region report that nost of the young

Pesdars are fleeing from the battle scenes since they have said that they
were sent to fight the foreign elenents and forner Savakis while they are
forced to fight even Muslims and young Kurds who claim they are Iranians.

The morale of the young Paadars has reportedly declined as nest of then

are hoping to be able to escape from the region. However, there is no re-
turn for those who do not put up a fight and are said by their own officials
that if they refrain from fighting the Kurdish rebels, they sre'considered
as counter-revolutionaries and enemies of Islam

23
600 homafars Arrested

Tehran EXCLUSIVE in English 7 Oct 79 p 5

[Text] A group of Air Force officers calling themselves progressive per-
sonnel of the Air Force have issued a statement claiming that 600 lomafars
(warrant officers) have been arrested on the orders from Dr. Hostafa Chamran,
the new National Defence Minister for preventing army and Air Force trans-
port planes from transporting food and supplies to Lebanon for those fight-
ing under the banner of Amsl Political Party.

Exclusive sources claim that Chamran is still the leader of Amal in Lebanon
and that he was trying to use Air Force and Army planes to supply the mem-
bers of Amal with food and clothing just before the onset of the cold
weather. It was said that the Air Force personnel have already published

a list of goods and other cos-edities shipped to Lebanon since chamran's
new appointment.

Army Purge Planned
Tehran EXCLUSIVE in English 7 Oct 79 pp 3-4

[Text] The new Minister of National Defence, Hostafa Chamran has said that
he is planning to purge the any in order to have a true national army who
will only defend the interests of the Iranian people.

Exclusive sources believe, meanwhile, that the main reason for appointing
Dr. Chamran to this position is the fact that he is not a military officer
and has no prejudice towards the army and the former officers and thus
would have a free hand in purging the army officers who are still hoping
for a change in the governmental conditions in Iran.

An exclusive source reported, meanwhile, that the army still does not co-
operate with the Islamic government and that the higher officers are in-

fluencing the junior officers. Therefore, Che-ran has been appointed to
purge all the army officers from Major to the highest level.

Following the purge, officials of the Islamic government are hoping to
appoint their own officers to key positions, most of who have already
undergone military training abroad. To this end, it seems that the govern-
ment and the army would welcome the former officials to be retired since
they hope to have a smaller army and on the side, develop the revolutionary
corps as another source of military might.

Exclusive sources, meanwhile, believe that it would be difficult for the
new army to have trained pilots who will be able to fly the highly sophisti-

cated American jet fighters, unless they sign an agreement with the United
States to train the new pilots.

2h
Retirement Requests on Rise
Tehran EXCLUSIVE in English 7 Oct 79 p 6

[Text] Informed sources in Bank Sepah, the bank in which all army officers
are receiving their salaries, said last week that the nunber of army and
air force personnel requesting to be retired or dismissed from the army is
on the rise.

He said that each day between 150 to 200 professional officers, ranging
from pilots, engineers to doctors asked to be either retired or dismissed
from the army. It was said that most of these officers have undergone
advanced training programses and have been assured of better positions
with much higher salaries in various countries, including Oman, Persian
Gulf sheikhdoms, Egypt and even Hestern countries.

Informed sources said, meanwhile, that already many pilots have managed to
be retired and are presently hoping that new National Defence Minister
Morteza Chamran would begin his purge of the army at various levels and
that they would be able to either retire or be dismissed in this purge.

In most cases, pilots, doctors and engineers working in the army have left
their position without getting any compensations from the army since they
have been assured of better positions with such more attractive terms by
certain neighbouring countries.

Meanwhile, exclusive sources said that most professionals have been banned
from leaving the country, but they have managed to leave via the Persian
Gulf with the assistance of certain locals who had received large sums of
money from the officials of the countries who had hired these Iranian army
professionals.

Police Officers Unhappy
Tehran EXCLUSIVE in English 7 Oct 79 p to

[Text] The annual promotion of police officers this year has been delayed
and the officials have asked them to secure the consent of the local com-
mittee meters before requesting a promotion. Hampers of the police forces
stationed at various police stations are working closely with the nembers
of various conmittees who have recently moved to these police stations and
working closely with them in various capacities.

However, it has been said that the police officers are not cooperating
with the con-ittee masters claiming that they are not trained for the job
and that police jobs need training as well as experience.

Therefore, it seem that the officials are trying to induce and encourage
the police personnel to have closer cooperation with the nuisera of the com-
mittees who will also be purged to clear them out of all the undesirable
elements.

25
In addition, police personnel have also lost some 60 per cent of their
usual income which they would normally have received for discovering crimes
or narcotics. This has resulted in the total dissatisfaction of the police

personnel and they are not willing to teach the trick of their trade freely
to the newcomers who are members of the local committees.

C80: 4920

26
MID PWCBS CHIRP ASSAYS KORDBS‘I'AN WEST
1.0010811 Tehsran BAHDAD in Persian 16 Oct 79 pp 1-2 LD
[Unattrihuted report: "Present Situation in Kordestan Explained"]-

[Excerpt] In an interview with BAHDAD following the attack on his life
General I"allahi, cot-lander of the land forces of the Islaeic Republic of
Iran, gave an account of the attack on his car (carried in yesterday's
edition) and spoke about conditions in Kordestan, the role of the any

and the martyrdoe of the guards, an account of which is continued in
today's edition.

As regards the state of Kordesten, the land forces chief said: "The
Kordestan area, from Arasi to a line joining Tslarchin, Gardeneh Sheykh,
Piranshahr, Postuh, Jaldian, Naqsdeh and Bukan is calm, and both the
goverment and the arey are in control. A particularly authentic version
of the revolution will gradually be applied to this region.

"In southern Kordestan, bounded on the north by Ravanshahr, Paveh, housed
and Showshsei, the government and the artsy are in total control. A large
amber of people in this area believes in the revolution and only a seall
number has shown no desire to go along with it. In the central regions.
including leeyaren, Sanandaj and Harivan, the people are gradually beginning
to understand the revolution, and as they do so the area because calmer.

"However, in certain regions of Kordestan. such as Hahabad, Sardaaht and
Bench, the people are strangers to the revolution, which for various
reasons has eade no impact here since its successful accouplisbent. The
people are perceptibly under the influence of the defunct deuocratic party's
propaganda. It lust be stressed that the people of Kordestan should be
distinguist fro- the Deaocratic Party of Kordestan. My personal under-
standing, which is based on ny visit to the region. is that sees decent
Kurdish people have been intimidated by the party's arud activities."

CSO: 10906

27
SOVIET INVOLVEMENT IN KORDESTAN REJECTED
Tehran mzu'xr in Persian 23 Sep 79 pp 1. 2

[Text] Iranian Envoy to the Soviet Union discloses: "Foreign Planes Hanted
to Intervene in Conflict of KordeatanuIt Is Not Right to Accuse the Soviet
Union for the Events of KordestannAnerican Plans Concerning Persian Gulf
Will Not Be Left without Counterection Pros: the Soviets."

The PARS NEWS AGENCY-oh an interview with the PARS NEWS AGERCY, Dr Hakri,
Envoy of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Soviet Union. stated: ”Hhen
Occidentale went to carry out a colonization plan in sons place of the world
they first collect its literature and create a quesi«scientific background.
and then using this background they achieve the sought-for results. It is
likewise as regards Isles. They brought forward a kind of Islan in the
North of Africa that outwardly was very hypocritical and attractive, and they
defended it against another group that acted as historians and Islaniets who
were finding fault with that false and asserted that Ialan was the cause of
heckwardness. These two schenes had for-ed the base of the plan of colonisa-

tion, and the Islan they co-sndsd was liable to the seas objections and
criticisms."

Foreign Planes

Regarding the events of Kordestan and the vest country Dr Hakri stated:
“As I have already said earlier in this respect. if there had been the
slightest delay in the issuance of the Inn's order. Kordestan would be
separated. It was even about to happen that sons international organiza-
tions, such as jurists for huan rights and freedon. Red Cross. and sons
Western foundations and comtriee. would recognise the Kordieh separatists.
And there was even a possibility that the planes of other countries would
enter the disturbed area. If that happened. greet difficulties night arise.
I an a Kurd, but I don't believe that Kurds are a distinct or purest
Iranian people. I an rather of the opinion that we are all Iranians and
that no city is better than the other."

28
There Hes No Soviet Involvenent

"Likewise I should ssy that the sgitetors in the ﬂeet were not. Kurds.

In the events of Kordesten there hes been interference of colonielist
countries end there were sons with 100 percent Zionist influence. 1 don't
consider es true the involvement of the Soviets in these events end heve no
proof in this respect, unless this interference coess froe some countries
unfriendly to us. end I have likewise heerd nothing in thet respect. 0n
the whole, our friendly reletions with the Soviet Union ere such thet it is
not in the interest of the Soviets to interfere in our internel effeirs."

In enswering the question whether the Soviets will counterreect the plene
of Anerics end some countries of the Persien Gulf in the: region, end the
question of the 110,000-stron3 American force for the protection of the oil
fields, Dr Hskri said: "This prohlen is very intricete, end the Soviet
authorities should speek of this utter thenselvss. However. our viewpoint
and policy is ageinst the presence of any superpower in the Pereien Gulf .
and such e presence is also not in the interest of my of then. Anywey,

it is ny opinion thst these developlents will not renin without e counter-
action on the part of the Soviets in view of the feet thet they hsve forces
in the South Yenen. It is elso possible that the Soviet insistence in their
support of Afghanistan is not without connection with this matter."

1015
C50: 6906

29
'DISTINGOISIIED RELIGIOUS SECTARIAHS' CRITICIZED BY N?
Tehran B‘l'l'ELA'AT in Pereian 25 Sep 79 p 2

[Text] The National Front, in e lZ-page brochure entitled "Open Letter to
the Iranian People free the National Front," criticized the operations of
the Council of Experts, deviationa fron accepted legal atandarda and the
fornation of special judicial bodice by the clerics.

The brochure warned the Iranian people that a body called the Council for
the higher Study of baeic Law hae ratified the principlee of a new baaic

law that is inconaiatent with the econonic and aocial realitiea of preeent-
day Iran. This cannot be conaidered a progreeeive law, one which eefeguarda
the righte of aen in different aocial, political and economic epheree. Not
only will the new baaic law confront any future Iranian govern-ant with
nueroue abniguitiea and inadequacies, but any govern-cut eetabliehed on the
baeia of thia law will not be reaponeive to the nation‘a need for a political
structure in keeping with today'e ncientific and technological edvencea. and
which will preeerve a free and progreeelve eociety.

The Council of Bxperta' Policy

The brochure had the following to aay about the fornation of e Conatituent
Aaaeably:

"The govern-cat's failure to enact a regulation for elections to a Conetit-
uent Aaaeably. which had been ratified, and ita acceptance of 73 neabere
instead of 350, in a najor etep backwards for the revolution. After the
excite-ant of the early daya of the revolution had aubaidad on account of
the govern-cat's indeciaiveneaa and ita basic incowetence in organising
and carrying out preeeing plane, diaorder and ineecurity began to envelop
the country."

Bleewhere in the brochure. the hational front bad thie to any about the way
the Council of Experta worka:

"The National Front, in ita atatenent of 26 June. epelled out in detail ite
ideas about the Conetituent Aueably.

30
"Unfortunately, however. no attention is paid to the views, observations
and proposals of individuals and groups with social and political views.
Thus all of the Front's proposals were ignored. While the Prise Minister
has paid attention to the facts in his statements. unfortunately he and the
other members of his government capitulate to the monopoly-seeking clerical
circles and put the lstter's views into execution or facilitiate their
execution. As a result of this incorrect policy, the center of power has
shifted outside the legally constituted government, and a snall group has
stepped forward on the political, economc and social stage."

Formation of the Clerics' Special Islamic Court

The formation of the clerics' special Islasic court was the first step
towards consolidating their power, as opposed to the basic goal of the
revolution which was the elimination of privileged ruling factions.

After the establishment of this court, the next step was the approval of a
law giving the revolutionary courts separate jurisdiction in cases involving
the revolutionary guards. At present the clerics' power is based upon the
revolutionary guards and the connittees and the revolutionary courts. The
clerics' wide-ranging role has ample historical precedent, such as the

Zoroastrian priests in pre-Islamic Iran and the Christian Church in Europe
in the Middle Ages.

In its brochure the National Front referred to the Council of Experts'

deviations fros accepted legal principles and the formation of a new ruling_
class. It concluded by saying:

"He expect that after the victory of the revolution the voice of the National
Front, which reflects the wishes of the informed strata of society. will be
heeded for the first time by the ruling elements. Then the revolution will
take its place as the renaissance of the Iranian people and a progressive
example to the rest of the world.
FIRE IN TEERAN AFGHAN MASSY LABELED PLOT 0F 'UNTDEM‘I'FIED WS'
‘rehran BTTELA'AT in Persian 25 Sep 79 p 11.

[Text] The PARS NEWS AGENCY informs that a fire broke out last night in the
vicinity of the Afghan Embassy on the Abbasabad Avenue next to a gas station.
and was quickly extinguished with help of local residents and Police officers
assigned to that district.

One of the eyewitnesses told our reporter that the fire actually started
outside the building in a small watch box. This witness said that the fire
was intentional and that the damage inflicted was very small.

In the aftermath of this event we contacted the Afghan Embassy and a spokes-
man of that embassy, who didn't give his name, has confirmed the occurrence
of fire and called it a plot on the part of unknown individuals.

In describing the cause of the fire he said that at 9:00 p.l. last night the
small booth that served as a shelter was set on fire by sprinkling it with
gasoline, and that then the fire has spread to the embassy building and
resulted in burning of a window and venetian blinds.

He has also pointed out that the fire broke out in the vicinity of a gas
station with 2,000 liters of fuel. However. with the aid of the local peo-
ple and embassy's personnel the fire was extinguished and there is some damage
as a result of it. Col. Sepehri, Deputy Chief of the local Police Station,
also said that this fire was very negligible and that it occurred probably
from carelessness. such as dropping a cigarette, and that it had not much
importance. He added that a dossier on this occurrence was sent to the
Public Prosecutor's Office, and that the matter is not worth notice.

Viewpoint of Spokesman of Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in response to a telephone
inquiry of the PARS ans AGENCY concerning the fire beside the Afghan h-
bassy in Tehran said that according to their information a saall fire occurred
in a watch box near the Afghan Embassy in Tehran, but that a detailed
description of how and what happened is not as yet available and that the
coapetent authorities are investigating this event.

32

Inl‘
REVOLUTIONARY NEWSPAPERS EXPRESS VIEHS
Tehran BAMDAD in Persian 1 Sep 79 p 9
[Text] (1) This part is an impartial view of the press in Iran.
(2) The long articles have been sumarired due to limited space.

(3) BAHDAD does not take responsibility for the accuracy or in-
accuracy of the articles.

The Unity of the Revolutionary Hoslae Forces Published by GMAT, 20th issue.
The progressive religious (forces) have heavy responsibilities, because,

on one hand, they have the people on their side and, on the other hand, they
act as one of the area of the revolutionary leader. It is their duty to
free themselves from the influence of the reactionary and monopolistic forces.
Furthermore, instead of banishing the hoslen revolutionary elements, they
should take steps to cooperate and unite vith the-“putting the revolutionary
Hosleas under pressure would result directly to the benefit of imperialism
and the reactionaries. They should also take a more decisive position with
regard to the ruling liberal force. 3y doninating the decisionnaking
channels. they should put the govern-est under pressure to purge and rave--
lutionize the offices and army and for the full inplenentatiun of revolution-
ary projects and stop the regrowth of capitalism.

Under the existing sensitive conditions, any type of pressure and uniting
the activities of Hoslen revolutionary elements and forces is condensed and
dangerous. We need revolutionary unity for all Koslen revolutionary and
progressive forces to fight against the plots of colonialism, to purify the
country from dictatorship ties and relations and to cease the influence of
capitalise, to provide the country's full independence and to renovate the
society's genuine economy. Under the current sensitive conditions, sore aware-
ness and unity is required from all forces sincere and faithful to the revo-
lution. Under the existing conditions, the reactionary (opposition) and
capitalists have had more growth because of the apparent excuses for reform
(protecting the revolution and overconing the econoeic crisis) for stabilizing
the position of favorite elements and those remaining free the era of diets-
torship (under the pretext of the nud to fight against antirevolutionaries).

33
Under the existing sensitive conditions, considering the revolutionary aware-
ness that the people have, you should take positive steps for the unity of
progressive and Hoslem forces and accomplish your historic duty concerning
the continuation of the revolution, serving the poor people and supporting
the revolutionary leader by overlooking personal motives and issues and
following principles of virtue and by getting away from liberal and reaction-
ary factors. That is all.

"The Greatest Factor of Profiteering," Published by Burse, Shahrivar 8
[30 August 1979]

If our revolution has been a political revolution, there should also be a
revolution in fighting with profiteering and high costs. The revolution should
take place in the bazaar and for the general base of prices and for cutting
off the hands of brokers and a bunch of looters and freeloaders. He all know
that in overthrowing the satanic regime, there were freeloaders and profit-
eers. unaware of God. acting as Moslens who were economic and social leeches
under the name of forward purchasers, who buy, in advance, the products of
the farmer's labor at no cost before the harvest. After hoarding the food
and agricultural products in storage, they sell them to the consumer se-
veral times higher. Consumers constitute a majority of the inhabitants

of this country.

The forward purchasers for instance had concentrated on citrous gardens in
the North (Shahsavar and Ramsar) for such products as oranges, tangerines,
etc. They buy the best quality of oranges when they are unripe and still
on the tree for 10 rials a kilo maximum and then sell the same oranges for
Loo-1.200 rials or even higher before New Year's Eve. This is also done
with summer crops, such as, cucumbers, tomatoes, eggplants, onions. potatoes,
vegetables, water melon, of cantalopes, melons, etc. Isn't this the only
factor in profiteering by forward purchasers. hoarders of food products,
businessmen, those who pretend to be Hoslens, hoarders and some of the un-
fair businessmen in the bazaar and the distance between the production, dis-
tribution and consumption sites?

"Fighting with Profiteers" Published by JOSHAH, 8 Shshrivar [30 August]:

There is no Chamber of Syndicates in the Islamic Republic. “hat is considered
and respected is the degree of mercy and fairness or justice. Such a degree
determines the belief of the guild in Islamic justice. The Islamic Court of
the Guild has announced that from now on any businessman, merchant or owner
of factories who profiteers and overlooks the rights of consumers will be
punished according to religious standards. The least punishment would be
introducing them as antirevolutionaries and lashing them at Friday prayers
conducted in front of thousands of faithful persons. Perhaps it is necessary
for all to know as a reality that pretending to follow the Islamic Republic's
standards cannot protect us from sins and disobedience. Profiteering is a
sin in violation of the people's rights and God's conandment. God said

314
whosoever violates the people's rights will not be under my mercy. There-
fore. you businessmen who call yourselves the beloved ones of God treat the
consumers based on Islamic justice and do not intend to make violations.
Consider a profit for yourselves that would be fair and not in excess of the
usual limit. If you do otherwise, your actions and behavior will not conform
with God's commandment on justice and will be far from Islamic justice and
therefore you cannot enjoy God's mercy or forgiveness--the God who is every-
where observing the actions of his servants.

"Yesterday Herivan, Today Paveh, Where Tomorrow?" Published by PASDARAN
12th issue:

With the cooperation of their sincere friends, that is Palizban and Barrani.
the leftist elements are carrying out the conspiracies of CIA one by one.
The blood of the Marivani brothers shed with injustice and in a dastardly
way has not yet dried than the mercenary and traitor agents (who have even
sold their honor) have made preparations for wider bloodshed in another

part of our country. Those who. under the pretext of supporting the rights
of the workers, attack all of our national and religious sacred things with-
out having achieved any results from so much effort in trying to make our
revolutionary nation deviate from its path, have decided to get revenge from
this deprived nation. Those who found their dreams lost with the 98-per-
cent referendum which was a knockdown answer to their carrying out any

plan that Zionists and imperialists find advisable and leading our nation to
bloodshed and fire directly or indirectly. Then again without any shame

and with all their antipeople positions, they expect to be considered to be
of the people. If the government does not carry out its duty, which is to
be decisive toward entirevolutionaries, the enemy will become a bloodsucker.
Yesterday in Harivan. today Paveh and tomorrow the whole country. who is

to respond? God knows. Hoping that the government would not be participat-
ing in wasting the blood of the martyrs. Amen.

"It's a Pity that ILsn..." Published by Etehad Bozorg 8 Shahrivar [30 August]:

All of us are bereaved when any Iranian is killed. Kurd. Lor, Hasandarani.
Azerbaijani, or Tehrani, we are all the children of this country. ‘And, un-
doubtedly we want honor for our motherland and peace for our fellow citizens.
why should a small dispute and an unworthy involvement lead to the death of
so many of us? Undoubtedly, in the tragic catastrophe which took place in
the west of our country, the government is the most guilty of all as it did
not respond on time to the natural and certain demands of our oppressed
Kurdish fellow citizens. The government Government overlooked the Kurds who
wanted to keep some of their culture within the framework of Iranian nation-
ality. The presence of antirevolutionaries helped spread insecurity and,

on the other hand, by giving opportunity to opportunist elements, they pene-
trated and made aggressions at the boundaries of military garrisona and in-
flamed the (forgotten) differences. A knot which could have been untied with
optimism became an entangled knot by showing partiality and harshness.

35
who suffered the consequences? It is a pity if we do not put an end to the
war right now.

Mr Bazargan, it is not so late now.

Take a step forward and overlook all of the negligences and aistakes of
both sides. Think only of Iran which it would really be a pity to ruin.

"We All Made Mistakes," Published by HARDOH-B IRAN (JAHA) 8 Shehrivar
[30 August):

In the 6 months that have passed from the first phase of revolution. we have
witnessed deviations and observed individual and groups going to extremes.
Sometimes, this caused anxiety that the movements which were contradictory
to the revolutionary spirit might halt the revolutionary trend. However,
each tile what was hopeful was the guidances of the Imaa and the deep belief
and faith of the people in the genuineness of the revolution and their sup-
port of the decisive leadership of Iaam Khomeyni. The rich Isle-dc cultural
movement swept away people of every type who were in the way. This should
be a lesson for all, including the intellectuals. the government. the revo-
lutionary council. political organizations. the clergy and everyone since
some of the mistakes can be compensated. However, some cannot and they are
unforgiveable from the people's point of view. He should try not to make

more mistakes because we will be condeaned by history and God will not for-
give our faults.

He should also consider the point that some of the individuals or groups
who can use the special existing conditions and the people's feelings to
their own advantage will be faced with the revolutionary leader's anger and
fury, considering the sincerity and frankness that we find in the revolu-
tionary leader who reminds us of the sincerity and frankness of Hasrat-e
Ali, the true leader and Imam of Moslems in the world. The revolutionary
leader has nothing on his mind but the needs of the poor and the oppressed.
The Imam's warning that we all made mistakes should be an alarm for everyone
that if we stop serving the poor and the deprived, we will willy-silly be
destroyed by the flooding of the revolutionary uproar of the people.

"The Message Of The Leader Of The Paveh Guards," Published by Islamic Repub-
lic 8 Shahrivar [30 August 1979]:

Question: Do you have a message for the Iranian nation?

Answer: Do you mean our message or the leseage of the Revolutionary Guards
of Iran. Because the philosophy for the existence of the corps is to pro-
tect the Islamic revolution. Therefore. the message is the same Islamic

message which tells all people to protect the revolution. We are not the
only paramilitary force established for the protection of this revolution.
Our real backing is the people. Because if the people did not participate
in the movement, we would not have been successful in this revolution.

I want the people to put the government under pressure and if possible to
beat the government and to follow the Imam's policy, because the Imam under-
stands the nation's pain, as he follows Islam. I ask the Imam and the whole
nation everywhere in this territory to beat the government if it shows some
weakness or makes compromise with the traitors. The government shows a lot
of weakness. we also see this weakness in the government's foreign policies.
Perhaps they have some roots. Can we say it was a political mistake? It

is the Iranian nation that protects the revolution. The nation should not
expect all their work to be corrected by the top officials. They should

get into action and if they see that the government does not respond to the

nation's cry, they should put the government under pressure and destroy it.
This is my message.

"Remarks made by Isma'il Ra'in," Published by RUYDAD, 20 Hordad, 1358
[11 August 1979]:

Following the publication of the book "Freemasonry and Preemason's Lodge in
Iran" which I had written and some other books and articles published in

this respect, some groups assumed that the "Okhovat Society“ was also one

of the organizations related to the official Iranian Freemasonry Organization,
affiliated to Holavi's Grand Lodge and Iran's Grand Lodge. This has created
some anxiety for the reputable men and women who were members of the above-
mentionad soeiety and other para Freemasonry organizations such as the honor-
able professors, Dr Abdol Hussein Zarin Kub and Dr Abbas Zar Yab Khu'yi.

I find myself morally and conscientiously obligated to inform everyone that
as far as I have personally made studies, none of the above mentioned pro-
fessors and teachers has been affiliated to any of the 41 lodges of Iran's
official Freemasonry Organizations related to the grand lodge of Iran.

Any assumption made about these persons is nothing but a misunderstanding
and a mistake or an intention to damage the reputation of these reputable
persons who are the rare scientific resources of our country.
CAUTIOUS CRITICISM 0F FLOGGING AS A PUNITIVE MEASURE
Tehran BTTBLA'AT in Persian 24 Sep 79 p 1

[Text] Last night, a young nan and woean were publicly flogged for
allegedly exchanging sensual glances.

The undesired side-effects of this act nay outweigh the "warning" intended
by the persons responsible for the flogging. The publication of this

article was proepted by the simultaneous appearance of several item in the
press and on TV.

First, the lnee's son said in an interview: "Do not punish the effects of
corruption; stag) out the causes. end the effects will vanish by the-selves."
This is en old saying but a true one, end it should be repeated for the
benefit of those who thank that lashing several women who have eisbeheved.
black-eerketeers end drinkers of wine will banish these evils (toe the earth.

The sane day, a religious judge said that floggings cannot be ordered at
some individual's pleasure; such floggings eust stop i-edietely. This
verdict is a source of joy in places where the lash hes been used as a
scene of settling old scores end showing power; it is hypocritical to cell
it a neans of protection fro- evil.

That sans night. a filn was shown on TV about social problems as the source
of corruption. There was also a televised discussion along several authori-
ties about the intellectuals' role in the Iranian revolution, during which
the question was raised of how to reconcile huen nature end the eercy of
Islam with the harshness of flogging.

The mercy of Isles, which is exeeplified by our religious leaders, such as
the lean Khoeeyni end Father Taleqsni -wby is it allowed to be distorted
by power-seeking end harsh-natured nen. furnishing doeeetic end foreign
critics with material they cite as evidence of the revolution's collapse?
When we have built the perfect Islamic society, you will have the right to
flog anybody who violates its order, tranquellity and progress. For the
eoeent, however. we are still in what our father the Ine- calls the "Shah's
society." Therefore, enough of this harshness. let us rebuild our country
with kindness and cooperation. Let us not give the enemies of religion and
the state grist for their mills. nor throw away the fruits of our God-given
revolution. nor promote harshness. A correct econoeic progren will burn
out the roots of protiteering. snuggling end other lisdeeds.

8921
STATE OF NATIONAL ECOMHY ANALYZ.
Tehran IRAN BCONHIC SERVICE in English 6 Oct 79 pp 16-18

[Text] Political events that occurred in Iran during the last Iranian year
sharply reduced investment and production in the private and public sectors;
the country which had suffered from inflationary pressures, also faced
severe stagnation and unemployaent.

While total demand somewhat moderated during the year due to stagnation,
unemployment, and substantial drops in private and public invsataent, the
fall in domestic production coupled with suspension of imports disrupted
the balance of supply and deund.

Available statistics and evidence show that during the early nonths of the
current year. production remains relatively stagnant in both the private
and public sectors despite efforts by the Government to reactivate the
economy. For instance. during the first quarter of this year government
payments for development amounted to R1s.l$ billion, showing a drop of

921 coupared with the corresponding period of last year. At this rate,

the budget allocations amounting to Rls.880 billion for development under
the current budget will not be spent; and that in turn will lead to undesir-
able consequences arising from continued unemployment and stagnation.

Apart from operational obstacles on the path of government development
projects, those industries which have been nationalized by the Goveth
presently face numerous problem of management, labor, imports, etc.

Govern-ant measures such as nationalization of banks and some industries
and generally the Government's approach during recent months have to some
extent defined the rules and the order that will regulate the private
sector's position in the future economy of Iran, and have reduced the
crisis of confidence that had appeared during the revolution. Nonetheless,
at least for the current Iranian year it would not seen likely that the
top elements in the private sector will show much inclination towards
investment. Iberefore during the year 1358, reduced production by the
private and public sectors during the revolution and the current problem
faced in the reactivation of the economy, coupled with the inflexibility

39
of the economy's structure and the general shortage and lack of elasticity
of supply in the short-term. will act as major elements in sustaining
the inflationary pressures.

Such tasks as overcoming unemployment and stagnation, or fighting infla-
tion can be carried out within the economic structure through fundamental
ureasures and comprehensive and well-coordinated planning and in any case.
economic reconstruction and ilprovement is not a task that can be carried
out speedily; yet these problems require speedy and resolute action by
the government in the following areas:

a) All difficulties and problems that hinder implementation of development
projects should be examined and removed through urgent measures;

b) While production in the private and public sectors remain low, and
since it is not possible to rapidly increase domestic production in a
short period, the Ministry of Commerce should review its import policies
and provide adequate facilities for inportation of essential goods and
services (both consumer and comodities). Where the private sector is
reluctant to import the Ministry should directly import essential goods.
This will also erode the part played by middle men who in recent years
have effectively contributed to higher inflation.

c) Greater speed and resolution should be shown in connection with the
selection of managers, solution of labor and import problem.

d) In view of the fact that the country's foreign currency reserves were
announced to be between $15 billion and $12 billion during the first months
of the current year (Iranian calendar). and since most of the economy

cuts in the budget were in the foreign exchange field, it is essential-
in order to ensure adequate availability of rials for the budget--for

the public and private sectors to use all the foreign exchange that is

to provide the rials allocated in the budget. Otherwise. in practice, the
volune and base of the currency of the country in practice will have to

be increased; and the monetary element will be added to the shortage of
supply and the lack of its elasticity, as causes for higher inflation.

The Central Bank therefore mat not only review its foreign exchange policy.
but also actively supervise changes in the private sector liquidity; and

to adopt appropriate policies in times of need and in connection with the
overall state of the national economy.

e) Special priority should be given in the country's credit policy for
the current year to funds allocated directly for the reactivation of the
‘economy and those effective in increasing supply, especially in the build-
ing industry which is still stagnant. In view of the shortage in housing,

as far as possible. loans for house buying should be discouraged while
iiverting bank loans towards house building.
f) The cottage and small industries which account for about 352 of the
value added of the manufacturing sector. in the past mostly obtained its
finance outside the banking system through the unofficial money market.

In the country's credit policy in future, greater attention is essential
for these labor-intensive industries.

3) The government policy of subsidies for consumers and financial assistance
for producers must be reviewed and gradually reduced while using this method
mainly as additional incentives for domestic production either directly or
by reducing the cost price for raw materials and other goods required by
industry and agriculture. In special cases, such as cement, where. in the
past, a njor portion of the shortages were due to corruption and the
inadequacy of the distribution system, it is essential that the financial
burden of such aids be reduced through appropriate measures in this field.

Financial Situation

The final estimate of government receipts and payments during the last
(Iranian) year and a comparison of these figures with the 1356 annual
budget as well as the current year’s budget estimate are given in Table 1.“
As will be seen. the 1357 annual budget had the substantial deficit which
could not be filled even by domestic and foreign loans and other credit

sources. Consequently. the budget envisaged a net deficit of Rls.680.5
billion.

The political events of the year deeply affected the 1357 annual budget
both in terms of receipts and of payments, so much so that public revenues
(including oil and gas revenues, taxes other incomes. loans. etc.) fell
from an estimated P.1s.2.656 billion to Rls.l.150 billion, while expendi-
tures out of the public budget fell from an estimated R1s.3,287 billion

to Rls.l.986 billion. (These figures exclude private incomes and expendi-
tures given in the budget.)

The decline in the general budget revenues during the past year compared
to budget estimates was basically due to the decline in oil exports and
its full suspension during the last months of the last (Iranian) year.
Oil and gas revenues earmarked in the approved budget amounted to

2113.1,sz billion while in reality they did not exceed Rla.l,013 billion.
To be continued.

cso: 6920

'51
NATIONALIZATION OF SECONDARY INDUSTRIES SUGGESTED
Tehran BNQBLAB-B ESLAHI in Persian 3 Sep 79 p 9

[Text] Take, for example, an automobile factory which cannot produce
autos unless the rubber and tire industries can meet its requirements. Un-
der these circumstances, a capitalist would try to buy and gain control

of factories capable of supplying him with the needed components. Thus he
gains a monopoly and control of the market.

Nationalization and the Capitalists

In previous sections we have explained how capitalists own and manage most
factories, banks and services in order to increase their profits and strength-
en their domination until they have a nonopoly over the market. Our aim

in explaining this is to illustrate the capitalists' way of working and to
confirm the need for nationalizing their holdings. The demands of produc-
tivity and economic laws reinforce the need for total nationalization of the
large capitalist firms. If the government nationalizes one firm but not
its suppliers, then the private capitalists can paralyze the government-
owned firm by withholding supplies. In our opinion, the Main on the
Protection and Expansion of Industry ought to feel counselled to do the same
thing as the capitalists. i.e., to completely control the different stages
of production. the credit sync and services.

In other words, they should nationalize and get control of all the firms
and establishments in various fields which are controlled by capitalists.

Clearly, insufficient attention to this matter has stood in the way of
achieving the final goals of nationalization, in loosening the grip of the
' capitalists and their foreign masters on our economy. llationalizing some
industries, while leaving the rest in the capitalists' hands, is not really
nationalization, and ultimately it will strengthen the capitalists. The
chief priority in nationalizing large industries is removing them from the
control of their previous owners and entrusting the work to the workers and

employees, to be guided by the interests of society. Dealing with the plun- -
derers and colonizers in halfway measures will only double their power in

the end. It is the responsibility of the workers and other steadfast indi-
viduals to demand real nationalization of industries.

u2_
A Clarification for the Members of the Khavar Council of Technical Services

With regard to the fact mentioned in your letter. that your company is 98-
percant owned by the Khavar Co, nationalization of the latter automatically
means that 98 percent of your company is nationalized, unless the share-

holders anticipated uhat was going to happen and put your conpany's shares
in another name than Khavar'a.

8921
CSO: 4906
GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATES MILLIONS T0 SPUR PRODUCTION
Tehran ENQELAE-E ESLAHI in Persian 2 Sep 79 p 10

[Text] The government has appropriated 50 billion rials to stimulate pro-
ductive activities and services in the small to mediun size range.

'Ali 'Akbar Hoinfar. Deputy Minister in charge of the Planning and Budget
Organization. made this announcement. He said that nany individuals through-
out the country are ready to undertake all kinds of productive activity.

He added that for a long time now our country's econony in the industrial
and manufacturing areas has relied on operators whose products and services
were widely needed. At present, the Provisional Government of the Islamic
Revolution seeks to expand the activities of the private sector and hard-
working individuals, according to the precepts of the Koran and Islam.
According to Hoinfar, in order to stimlate small and medium size manufac-
turing and service enterprises, the Planning and Budget Organization, in
collaboration with the Central Bank and the National Bank, has proposed a
plan which will be passed on by the Economic Council next week. According
to this plan, a sun of 50 billion rials is to be set aside for sail and
nediun size manufacturing and service firms. It is a simple plan, intended
to promote the establishment or expansion of needed manufacturing and ser-
vices by extending easy credit to firns in more than a hundred fields, in-
cluding drugstores. dental clinics. repair shops, icesaking and aanufa'cturing
rope, packing materials and cardboard out of bits of paper. The exact cre-
dit terns will be announced by the Rational Bank of Iran. The aim of this
plan is to satisfy the public's needs through the efforts of the public
itself. Accordingly. the basic aims of the plan are as follows:

1. Paying special attention to the importance of small producers of diverse
goods in our economy. since they account for a large share of total output;

2. Expansion of anall industries and shops with one or several mloyees;
3. Encouraging firms to renovate and innovate;

6. Expansion of agricultural and industrial output, as well as needed ser-
vices;
5. Creating productive and useful employment opportunities, especially for
youth;

6. Increasing the proportion of donestic value-added;

7. Increasing the prestige of useful and productive occupations in the agri-
cultural, Ianufacturing and services sectors.

8. Promoting various activities outside of Tehran, particularly in rural
areas;

9. Expanding the sphere of private-sector operations and a corresponding
decrease in the econonic and market role of the govern-eat.

10. Increasing the tendency toward change in patterns of consulption and
attention to various domestically produced goods. In conclusion, Hoinfar
said that a sun of 50 billion rials was envisioned in the first stage of this
progrsl. If it is successful, the policy will be continued and the National
Bank will be mobilized to extend loans throughout Iran.

8921
C50: 4906
PRES HIGHLIGITS CMCIAL DEVEOPHEMS
Tehran IRAN ECONQHC SERVICE in English 6 Oct 79 p 7

[Text] POREIG’E! EXCHANGE: Still new foreign exchange regulations, rather.
restrictions were announced Thursday. Any Iranian traveller holding a
passport can now buy only 8750 exchange at the official rate and $1,500

at the unofficial governmental rate which is announced very saturdey by
the Central Bank of Iran. The wife gets $500 and 51,000, respectively
while each child gets $250 and 8500. respectively--a total of no lore than
36,000 on a joint passport.

PORT GONGESTION: There is no nore port congestion or queueing of ships
near harbors any more due to reduction in Iran's imports. according to
Roads Deputy Minister Abbasali Qavan. During the past 6 Ionths 690 ships
arrived at Iran's seven ports to unload nearly 6 million tonnes and load
about 316,000 tonnes of goods. Inport and export volume has decreased by
50 percent.

HEAT SHORTAGB: Supply of neat to supermarkets has been cut down by about
752 and this has faced the populaces of congested parts of towns with

neat shortage. Sons 400 tons of meat is distributed in Tehran daily-

300 tons of mutton and 100 tons of beef. The governsent buys the seat at
200 Rials and sells it to the butchers at 80 Rials per kilo on the average.

NEH TELEPHONE: Iran will be able to install 250 .000 new telephone lines
without any need for foreign expertise. PTT Minister Dr llassan Bela-i says.

UNEHPIL'YED ON THE EVE: There have been any instances of demonstrations
and sit-in protests across the country by the unemployed high scho'ol
graduates. Instances have been reported fron Noshahr. Langarood, Babak,
Babol, Rasht. ﬂoor, and sole other parts of the country. Unable to provide
jobs or give more convincing promises to the inportuning job-seekers,

the Governor of ﬂoor had to flee the town!

FOREIGN BATTERIES: Co-erce Ministry has authorized importation of up to

2.2 nillion car batteries of 6-volt and lZ-volt capacity. This is expected
to el-iainate the black narket caused by reduction in internal production.

1&6
BANK INTEREST: Seven percent bank interest will be paid to those who
depoait their savings in houeing credit achemee in banks, the Housing
end Urban Development Minister Ketirei promised Tuesday.

"0 IMPORT DUTIES: Agriculture]. machinery end parts are to be made exelpt
from ieport duties and commercial benefit tax according to e new bill

which has been epproved by the Council of Hinisters. Local production is
to be encouraged.

VEGETABLE 011.: Import duties on vegetable oil will be cut by fifty per-

cent in order to reduce its market prices. The government aubaidizea the
marketing of vegetable oil by 12 billion Riels annually.

C50: 69 20
BSHRAQI PAVBD HAY FOR DISMISSAL OP NIOC CHIEF
Industry hployees Dissatisfied With Nssih
Tehran BTI‘BIA'AT in Persian 25 Sep 79 p 15

[Text] uojjstoleslsm Eshraqi. son-in-lsw and representative of the ﬁnes
lhomeyni in the country's oil-producing sress, said this morning in a press
interview in Bsfahan that the oil workers are greatly dissatisfied with
lessen Nazih.

nojjstoleslam Behrsqi said in the interview, which was held in the Seyyed
Mosque in Bsfshan, that he had been dispatched to the oil-producing areas
by the Emam in response to complaints reaching momeyni from the oil workers

He said that the oil workers had complained during his mission about the
rules which have caused a split between the workers and other employees.
The difference in wages between workers and other employees has grown from
3,000 tomans to 5,500 tomans.

Bojjatoleslsm Eehraqi said, furthermore, that the workers are not allowed
the use of the libraries and other employee benefits. This kind of
discrimination, he said. is just like the discrimination against blacks in
America.

Emma Khomsyni's representative turned next to the subject of Bssssn Nazih's
selection as head of “1°C in the Bszsrgsn government. He said that while
the government remains subordinate to the Elam, the latter refrains from
involvement in small details. Thus. the Bmsm was initially satisfied with
the Prime Minister's selection of Nazih as head of NIOC.

Behraqi added. however, that in view of the workers' complaints and the
results of his mission, the has will find Nasih's continued leadership of

the oil industry unacceptable, and it will be up the prime minister to
find a solution.

hojjatoleslam Bshreqi finished by saying that "the Prime Minister certainly

knows that we do not heve a grudge and, God willing, fundamental decisions
will be made in the future." '

’48
Khoneyni: No Confidence in Nazih
Tehran BTTEI.A'AT in Persian 25 Sep 79 p 16

[Text] The Beam's representative, uojjatoleslam Behraqi, who traveled to
the oil—producing regions to investigate their problems, said in an inter-
view that the prine ninister has always enjoyed the kan's confidence.
while Mr Nazih does not. He added that Rarih's policies as director of
NIOC are responsible for unrest in the oil-producing areas.

Mr Sadeq Tabetaba'i. the government's spokesman in the hazih affair, said
that the prime minister went to Qom to discuss various natters of state with
the amen. The ham spoke about the problens surrotmding the national oil
coepeny, including the problen of its director. The Eman said that the
relies upon the prime minister alone to run the gtvernment, and to appoint
and dismiss government officials. The prime minister's confidence or lack
of confidence in a particular official is the basis for deciding whether or
not that offocial should renain in office.

Hojjatoleslam Shahaboldin Eshraqi, who on the Elm lﬂloneyni's orders visited
the country's oil-producing areas, said yesterday efter a visit to the oil
installations et Esfahan:

"The Ellen has received many reports end conplaints fron persons in the oil
and gas industry, and therefore, sent me. along with Hojjatoleslam Abtehi

and a group of engineers, to the oil-producing regions to investigate. He
held long meetings everywhere with oil industry workers and mloyees, and
after detailed study we cane to understand that the problen lay with the
director of the national oil conpany, Hr Nazih. The latter's policies have
caused the rift to widen between the workers and other snployees of the oil
industry. by increasing workers' pay from 3,000 toaans to only 3,300 tomana,
while the other enployees received a raise to 9,000 tomens, thus increasing
the pay differential between the two groups from 3,000 tomans to 5,700 tomsns.
This has been a source of indignation in the oil industry. "ther disparities
include differences in eating facilities, some of which are closed to workers,
just as in some countries which bar blacks fro- areas reserved for w..xtes."

Eshraqi also said that "while the workers and esployees are demanding a
thorough reforn of the N106, Nazih is content just to move staff Ienbers
around."

Next liojjetolealem Eshreqi stressed the need to pay nore attention to the
oil industry. He said that "the Bman Khoneyni does not involve himself in
the details of running the country, and that it was not he who appointed
Mr Nazih. Trusting Prime Minister Bazargan coapletely, the ham has
entrusted him with the responsibility for ﬂaking official appointments.
However, based on Iy own contacts with the M's office. I know that he is
very dissatisfied with the management of the oil industry. He will never
agree to let Nazih renain in office and, God willing, when I subnit my
report on my visit to the oil installations, it will not be long before the
necessary decisions are made."

8921
080: (0906
SMALL CONSUMERS TO GET WATER, ELECTRICITY GRATIS
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 19 Sep 79 p 5

[Text] The exemption of small consumers from paying water charges, a measure
which was proposed by the Minister of Power and passed by the Council of
Hinisters, has been approved by the Revolutionary Council.

Mr Tohatuba'i. financial advisor to the prime minister, elaborated on the
plan as follows:

1. Small consumers who use less than 10 cubic meters of water per month are
exempt from paying water charges;

2. Consumers who use more than 10 cubic meters of water per Ionth will
pay all water charges according to the present fee schedule.

The spokesman made the following points about the exemption of small domestic
consumers from electricity charges, which has also been approved by the Re-
volutionary Council:

1. Consumers who use less than 100 KHB per month will be exempt tron elec-
tricity charges. while consumers using more than 100 KHH per month will be
charged the full rate according to the residential or commercial fee sche-
dule, as applicable;

2. Small public services and large industrial concerns will also be billed
according to the appropriate fee schedule:

3. Individual apartments will each be considered as a separate consumer for

purposes of applying this regulation, provided that each has a separate elec-
tricity meter.
NAVAL BASES TO BE CONVERTBD INTO PORTS
Tehran Bulb“) in Persian 29 Aug 79 p 12

[Text] Tehran-PARS NEWS AGENCY-Yesterday Ali Akbar Hoinfar, Minister of
State for the Plan and Budget Organization, who had recently visited chsh
Bahar and Bender Abbas in southern Iran together with Engineer Hostafa
Katirayi, Minister of Housing and City Development. for a period of 2 days
to study the development works, announced yesterday that they had first
studied the condition of the incomplete projects of all naval bases. Since
the govern-eat had changed its nind about continuing the work on the base

as its project had originally been prepared, it was decided to put into
operation the coepleted part of the project and investsents that had been
made for the establishent of a co-ercial port with a loading and offload-
ing capacity for ships of up to 25,000 ton (capacity). The decision was nade
by taking the de-ands of the local people into consideration. For some tile.
Iran's Islamic Republican Navy and the Plan and Budget Organization had made
studies to- utilize the conpleted portion of the projects for inproving local
conditions in serving the people.

Hoinfar added: In addition to this port, it was decided to establish two
fishing ports near Xodar Chah Behar. For prosptness in action, the Ports
and Shipping Organization undertook to prepare the project in 3 weeks and the
Plan and Budget Organization provided the required credit i-ediately.

Honifsr said: He visited Bandar Abbas and the existing problem regarding
the connencenent of projects were studied, so that the work on this port
which is one of the lost isportsnt and fundamental projects of the country
would be started quickly. lie added that it was also decided to take action.
as soon as possible, regarding the establisl-ent of a fishing port at Qishn
Island. Representatives of the Ports and Shipping Organization have visited
the site and undertaken to prepare the required project as soon as possible.
The credit will be inediately provided by the Plan and Budget Organisation
for the establish-eat of the port.

51
In Bands: Abbas. the Persian Gulf shipyard was also visited. So far $170

million have been spent on this shipyard. Talks were held with the respon-
sible authorities and considering the studies made in the past few months,
actions will be taken to limit it to a somewhat acceptable project.

9156
C80: 4906
TRICOT, KRIT GOODS INDUSTRY NEARING A STANDSTILL
Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 25 Sep 79 p 16

[Text] The shortage of raw materials on the one hand and the uncontrolled
increase of costs on the other has brought into serious danger the tricot
and knit goods industry of Iran, as a result of which 150,000 workers of
this industry night lose their jobs.

One of the wholesale dealers of Tehran's market stated to BTTBLA'AT in
this respect:

Compared to the last year the increase in costs amounts to 15 percent.
Host of raw materials which are now in short supply had been previously the
monopoly exercized by a managerial minority.

One of the chief exporters to the eastern districts stated: The prices of
the raw materials have increased after revolution in several successive
stages. At present were than 12 spinning mills are in operation in the
country. of which the largest, called "Naznakh." has a capacity of 18 to
20 tons. whereas the actual production of this factory has decreased to one
third. At present, with exorbitant increase in costs of raw materials and
finished goods, we cannot compete at the international level.

Formerly, we imported rev nsterials from Japan, China and Korea. and reckon-
ing the payment of 80 to 90 rials for custom duties our imports were still
cheaper by 50 to 60 rials than the goods manufactured inside the country.

The internal production of knit goods and tricot is not only insufficient.
but the government is also compelled to import a considerable amount 0!

these goods. 0n the other hand there is interference of persons without com-
petence in pricing knit goods and tricot and in handling related matters.

One of the executives responsible for distribution of articles produced by

the "Naznakh" factory, while stressing the smallness of production and
great demand, stated:

53
Before the revolution the "Naznakh" factory had 600 Korean workers, and all
of then were dismissed. There are at present about 1000 Iranian workers
in the factory. many of whom are not technically skilled.

The other spinning mills. whose post-revolution executive and administrative
diffi:ulties were not yet properly settled, have not placed their purchase
orders for raw materials from abroad and even if such orders were placed
they are insignificant compared to the past.

As regards prices of artificial fiber raw materials, they are directly
interconnected with that of petroleum, and they increase day after day.
Production parallels the situation. Increased wages also aggravate the con-
dition. The majority of factories are likewise confronted with delayed
settlements by buyers and bank pressures.

Shokuhi, director of the production of the "Nakh" factory of cashmeres,
said:

The cashmere factory which started its operation 9 years ago had belonged
to Mr. "Hay." After revolution the property of this person was confiscated
and the factory was turned over to the Foundation for the Indigent. In the
past month of Bahman [January-February] 150 Indian and Sinhalese workers
and specialists of the factory were dismissed, and because of want of raw
materials the work of the factory was temporarily stopped.

The capacity of the factory is 5 tons, but under actual conditions the pro-
duction of one shift only did not exceed 2 tons.

To eliminate the present difficulties, the government itself should take
direct steps to import artificial fiber and ensure raw materials for the
factories.

The "Polyacryl" factory of Isfahan was founded by a joint Iranian and
American investment. After the revolution it did not begin its operation
and did not start producing raw materials.

With the onset of winter and the need of the people for clothing espeically
tricot and knit goods. it is necessary to take care of these problems as
soon as possible.

Shokuhi added: According to statistics of the last year, 150,000 workers
were employed in the tricot and knit goods industry of Iran. Under normal
conditions the cashmere factory should have 500 workers, whereas our actual
personnel does not exceed 220 workers. ~

1015
C80: 6906
DOMESTIC INDUSTRY SEEKING TO MAKE SPARE PARTS FOR AUTOS
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 19 Sep 79 p 8

[Text] Rings, nudguards, springs. gear boxes. and differentials--very soon
all of these parts may be manufactured in Iran by Iranian workers, and even-
tually Iran may be producing conplete automobiles by itself. The first step
in this direction has already been taken, with the establishment of an exhi-
bition of the different parts and components which go into the various kinds
of autos-Peykan, Zhiyan, Renault and Jeep. Iranian craftsmen who visited
the exhibition were confident that they could build more than 90 percent of
the items on display.

The Peykan, Renault, Zhiyan and Jeep factories, by putting these spare parts
on display, tested Iran's capability to produce then. About 560 workers
visited the Renault and Zhiyan displays; 175 of then said that they were
ready to begin making the spare parts and engines the-selves. In addition,
104 workers from the big tractor and machine works at Tabrir and the Arak
machine works cane to view the exhibit, and a nunber said that they could
build spare parts for the Renault in their shops. They expressed anasement.
after seeing the exhibit, that Renault's spare parts were so uncomplicated.
The owners of 74 large and small shops were shown the spare parts for the
Renault and Zhiyan, and a group of them offered to nake the plastic and elec-
trical components for these two cars. Soae also offered to build the internal
components and small parts. A total of 2,260 different auto parts were put
on display in the exhibition: the Iranians said they could fabricate 2,040
of then. They said that their lack of financial leans is an obstacle to
building these items. One young worker from Ker-an Province said that he

is prepared to build the Renault's carbuerator. This same young worker
already has 26 technical inventions to his credit.

However, the person in charge of the Renault display said that the Renault
factory also buys carbuerators from Ger-any. and that building than is not
easy. Students iron the industrial colleges also visited the Renault and
Zhiyan displays. because the governnent intends to use the industrial and
polytechnical colleges to build auto parts. Officials have said that tech-
nical and industrial college instructors and students can put the results of
their research and learning at the disposal of the Ministry of Industry and
Minerals. To this end. there should be close coordination between the
country's industrial and educational policies.
An official of the Renault and Zhiyan factory, in speaking of the possibility
of cooperation between his factory and independent shop and factory owners,
said that "one of the goals of the exhibition was to become better acquainted
with these individuals. Many of them are prepared to cooperate with us,

and we are talking with them together in groups of 10-15. asking them about
their factories' technical qualifications and their financial resources.

A questionaire is also under discussion, which would be given to shop and
factory operators concerning their production methods. After preliminary
discussions with these operators, contracts must be concluded with them.
According to the contract with Renault of France, Iran can produce all of
the spare parts for this auto, provided that they are subject to testing by
Renault. However, even if Iran's technology is not of a sufficiently high
level that we are capable of building the entire car here, I can say that
Iranian workers can produce 50 percent of the Renault‘s spare parts.“

At present, 95 percent of the spare parts for Renaults and other foreign
cars are imported. Under the old regime, engines and spare parts which were
supposedly "made in Iran" were actually imported from abroad, prolonging
Iran's economic servitude and foregoing the opportunity to use Iranian
workers. The workers expect the revolutionary government to change this
misguided policy, to use our own workers' skills and to end the unnecessary
importing of automobiles and spare parts. They expect the government to help
in obtaining the capital needed to upgrade their facilities. Given such a
policy, Iranian workers can manufacture spare parts which measure up to fac-
tory standards. The head of the Renault exhibit says that "we shall conclude
cooperative agreements with manufacturers who we are certain will produce
spare parts just like those that cone fro. the factory. We shall also inspect
their plants and, when they have given us all their technical qualifications,
we shall ask then to build parts similar to samples which we have given

them. He shall test the quality of their work.

"He shall choose those whose work is of the highest quality. Quality, not
price, is the most important consideration for us. They should be able to
produce spare parts just like those made in France."

Most Iranian manufacturers can produce plastic parts, and auto, bus and truck
bodies. According to the head of the Renault exhibit, Renault engines very
probably will be built in Iran. One company even announced that it could
build 500 cylinders daily. Its factory has the type of computer equipment
required to turn out Renault cylinders.

Raw Materials the Chief Question

The heads of the Renault and Zhiyan factories are responsible for providing
their subcontractors with needed raw materials. At present, the Esfahan

steel mill is capable of neeting only 30 percent of the domestic demand for
steel, so that most of the needed steel must be imported from abroad. With
the planned increase in the Esfahan steel nill'a production (to a level of

8 nillion tons). the output of spare parts will also rise. Another thing
which should be pointed out here is that the auto manufacturers have con-
cluded a cooperative agreenent with other industries. so that they may be
certain of being able to buy the goods they need. If this arrangement proves
practical. the annual auto production will be scaled to match the availa-
bility of spare parts.

Iranian workers also said that they are capable of making all 230 of the parts
for the Poykan auto which were put on display, and 121 out of the 183 Jeep
parts.

The Minister of Industry and Minerals has said that other such exhibits will
be set up in the near future.

8921
C50: 4906

57
BRIEFS

ms. DRUGS HAUL-~1’he spokesman of the gendernerie of the Isle-1c Republic
of Iran announced that as a result of the efforts by gendarnerie officials
in Pars, Loresten, Sistan and Baluchestan, Bsfahen, Khorasan and
Hazsnderan different types of coahet weapons. side am. hunting rifles.
sub-achineguns, 11 pieces of equipment. 31,291 rounds of amnition,
103,221 packets of foreign cigarettes, 5,660 kg of foreign tea. 200 kg of
caviar. 15 kg of opiu and other goods valued at 6 alllion rials have been
discovered and seized. The guilty individuals have been arrested and
handed over to the appropriate authorities. [Text] [1.0291865 Tehran
Donestic Service in Persian 1630 an 29 Oct 79 Lb]

1mm: LOYALTY—Reports fron Ahvaz indicate that a large group of people
from the Kuslil Bani Ka'b tribes. bearing pictures, slogans and placards. net
opposite Khuzestan's governorate-general office this afternoon. According to
this dispatch the representative of the Bani Ka'b tribesnen expressed in a
speech the tribes' readiness to carry out the wishes of leader of the Islamic
revolution of Iran Ian noneyni and condemed all discord-sowing and rioting.
At the conclusion of the speech by the representative of the Bani Ka'b tribes
an eight-point resolution vaa read out. The resolution, while renewing

the league and covenant of the Bani Ka'b tribes in Khusestan with the has
Khoneyni, leader of the Islamic revolution of Iran. expressed the tribes'
decisive support for all people who enjoy the support of the leader of the
Isle-1c revolution of Iran. This resolution also says: we varn hypocrites
and counterrevolutionaries, in whatever guise, that the overvbelning majority
of the Muslin nation of Iran, particularly the pious people of ”maestan.

are keeping an eye with the utnost vigilance and wakefulness on the

30 Oct 79 LD]

080: 6906
'DAVAR' FORESEES CABINET FALLING, ANALYZES REASONS

WSO931 Tel Aviv DAVAR in Hebrew 28 Oct 79 p 9 n

[Connentsry by Deniyel Bloch: "A Spoke in the Hheels of Cabinet
Reorganization")

[Text] Sone people thought Foreign Hinister Moshe Dayen's resignation
would mate it easier to reorganize the cabinet portfolios; end, there
were even those who played with the thought that this resignation would
unite the Coalition and extend its life, even if only by means of an
artificial lung and kidney. This night have been correct had it been
possible to carry out the sinplest. not the nost complicated, version
of changes in portfolios: giving the foreign affairs portfolio to

Dr Burg, who is in any case already fully involved in dealing with
autono-y affairs; and giving the interior portfolio to Sidia Ehrlich,
since this is an area which he understands and which is close to his
heart and that of his party. A change of this sort would have allowed
eppointnent of Yiga'el Borowitz as ninister of finance, sonething tenet
of the conpanents of the Liloud and the NIP want. These changes would
have prevented any complications with the Da-scratic novenent over the
utter of the foreign affairs portfolio and dealing with natters of
welfare. They would have provided the Liberal Party with suitable
calpensation for having the finance portfolio taken away fron it. given
the NRP the neat honorable status in the cabinet. nsde dealing with
foreign affairs nore efficient and finally put the liiniatry of the

Interior in the hands of a niniater capable of devoting an appreciable
part of his tine to his ainiatry's work.

However, the sinplest thing was not done because Dr Burg did not want
and refused to accept the foreign affairs portfolio. He did this for
two reasons: First, Burg fears that the younger generation in the NR2
intends to get rid of his before the next elections and that the
foreign affairs portfolio would serve as the finale of his career, since
there is no guarantee that the any will be able to hold on to it in the
next governnent and perhaps there will be new elections this year.
Second, the heads of his faction in the m are not prepared to give up
the Ministry of the Interior, which is a position of power both within

59
the NRP and in the country, a position they are not prepared to lose,
especially now when there is a possibility of new elections. We read

in Friday's HATZOFE that religious educators appealed to Dr Burg, asking
him not to leave the Ministry of the Interior because in his position he
greatly helps the religious educational institutions. And we, for some
reason, thought that Zvulun Manner was in charge of matters of religious
education. But in any case, Burg is not prepared to move over to the
Foreign Ministry.

If Begin only had to appoint a foreign minister without any regard to
changes in the government's functioning or to moving Simha Ehrlich out
of the Ministry of Finance. then he could have found a nonparty person
from outside the government for this job or given this portfolio to a
man from his party--Yitzhaq Shamir, the Knesset speaker. However, such
an appointment would not have solved the Coalition problems, just as the
appointment of Justice Minister Shmu'el 'l‘amir to foreign minister would
also not solve the problem because Simha Ehrlich is not a legal expert.
The only possibility remaining is the appointment of Yiga'el Yedin as
foreign minister and Simha Ehrlich as deputy prime minister. On the
surface this is a reorganization dropped from heaven, but it appears
that matters are not so simple.

First. there is Yadin's personal problem: How can a man who does not
accept some of the government's political lines—especially in the field
of settlement--and the desires of the prime minister and other ministers
to annex territories, conduct Israel's diplomatic political contacts?
How can Yadin accept a situation in which the autonomy negotiations are
being conducted by the minister of the interior (and Burg will certainly
not give up this role in favor of Yadin)? In any case, Yadin is being
severely criticized by the public for his participation in the govern-
ment. His excuse is that he is dealing with matters of welfare and the
interior, which were primary among the M's interests. How can he
justify himself, leave these issues and move to political affairs.
regarding which he is not happy with the government?

Second. stin cannot and is not prepared to let the status of Minister
of Labor and Betterment Dr Katz be damaged. It is no secret that the
Lilcud is casting envious eyes at this portfolio, and only a threat of
resignation by Yadin in the past prevented this portfolio from being
taken away from Katz. The nutter of Democratic “('9 in the government
certainly does not justify an addition in the form of the foreign
affairs portfolio. On the other hand, the Liberals will not agree to
having the finance portfolio taken away from them without compensation
in the form of another important portfolio such as labor and betterment.
It is true that over the last few days a solution has been proposed—the
establishment of a Ministry of Information headed by Minister Moshe
Nissim. But this is a fairly weak solution since it is doubtful whether
the Foreign Ministry will concede the information issues it deals with,
whether 2vulun Harmer will give up domestic informtion, which is in his

60
sphere, and whether the prime minister's office will easily give up the
government press office. In addition to this, Moshe Nissim's suitabil-
ity to serve as the person in charge of information matters is not
exactly greet.

Neither is Yadin enthusiastic about the “RP demand to have Dr Ben-He'ir
appointed deputy foreign minister. Cynics claim that the division of
labor between the pair would be as follows: Yadin would be in charge
of the ceremonies, the banquets, the cocktail parties and the trips
abroad, and Dr Ben—He'ir would be in charge of the way everything is
run. Experience shows that in coalition governments it is difficult to
work in a ministry where the minister and the deputy minister are not
members of the same party, and Yadin is not interested in having a
Kashrut supervisor tied to him in the Foreign Ministry.

All these developments have brought the reorganization of the government
to the threshold of a crisis. This is so even without mentioning Yiga'el
Horowitz' peak of cynicism. Having resigned from the cabinet because of

his Opposition to its policy, he is now prepared to return to it in
return for the finance portfolio.

There is no doubt that many ministers will be against him either because
it is him, or for the same reasons which made Ehrlich fail, and Begin's
guarantee of support is now meaningless. He can predict with certainty
that, in any event dispute between Horowitz and David Levi, Begin will
support Levi. Also, in any dispute between the minister of finance and
the education minister, Begin will support Hauler. we will not mention
such difficult customers as 'Bzer Heisman, Yitzhaq Hoda'i and Hayim
Landau. Those close to Ehrlich also said this week: There is no doubt
that Horowitz will fail within 2 months. But as things turned out at the
end of the week, there is no guarantee that he will be given the chance
to prove his ability or lack of ability in the Hinistry of Finance.

This bundle of complications was added to on Friday by Ari'el Sharon‘s
bonbshell demand that, as a condition for his remaining in the govern-
ment, there must be legislation which will in the future prevgnt the
high court of justice from interfering in the settlement issue. Every
political observer knows that meeting such a demand would be a compli-
cated and almost impossible task. First of all, because it might create
international complications. This is so because such legislation would
mean applying Israeli law to the territories, something Israel comitted
itself at Can) David not to do. either during the autonomy negotiations
or during the 5 years of the autonomy. It comitted itself not to do
this before the end of the negotiations over the final status of these
territories. However, in addition to the international side, it is
doubtful whether such legislation would find a majority in the Knesset
since the Democratic movement. some of the Liberals and 'Brer Heisman
will vigorously object to it and the Democratic movement's opposition is
sufficient for the government not to have a majority in the Knesset.

61
We believe that Sharon is presenting a vigorous denand to the cabinet
because he is interested in causing a government crisis even before the
end of the 30 days stipulated by the high court of justice for the
evacuation of Blon Hora. Sharon probably believes that an interim
government, facing elections, will not take the risk of a confrontation
with Guah Enunin and will leave the issue frozen until after the elec-
tions. It is doubtful whether the governnent. or even an interim govern-
nent, will be able to take such an approach, and we cannot know whether
Sharon will carry it through to the end. However, it is clear that last
week's two dramatic events--l‘loshe Dayan's resignation and the high court
of justice decision on Blon Hore--have not strengthened the government,
but have speeded up the process of disintegration within it. There were

those who said in the Knesset this week that the government has already
fallen, but the ministers have not yet heard about it.

C80 . 6805
PALESTIJIIANS REACT STROMLY T0 ISRAELI LAND DECISION
West Bank Mayors
Jerusalem AL-SHA'B in Arabic 18 Sep 79 p l, 5

[Article: "Hidescale Reaction to Decision To Permit Israelis To Buy Land.
The Mayors Explain the Serious Dimension of the Decision"]

[Text] The Israeli Government's decision adopted Sunday to allow Israelis
to buy land on the west Bank and in the Gaza Strip has provoked widescale
reactions.

The Municipal Council of Nablua has prepared a protest memo to be submitted
to the Israeli authorities.

The mayor of Kahlua, Bassam al-Shak'ah, said that the decision is a per-
petuation of occupation, a confirmation of the policy of expansion and re-
veals Israel's true intentions and the falsehood of its claim of seeking
peace.

He added that the decision is a blatant violation of valid lava, as well as
the Geneva and the UN charters. This makes it incuabent upon local, Arab
and international public opinion to firmly resist this policy and to secure
the national rights of the Palestinian people including the right to es-
tablish their independent state, as the only basis for peace in the area.

Huhamad Hasaan Milhim, mayor of nalhul, stated that this decision is an
extension of Israel's old policy which it had used to confiscate Arab

lands under the pretext of security. He called for the issue to be brought
before world public opinion.

The mayor of Al-Birah, Ibrahim al-Tawil, expressed his belief that no citi-
zen is willing to sell his land to the Jews. lle said that anyone who
allows himself to violate the national consensus in the occupied Heat Bank
should be dealt with with an iron fist in various means and fashions.

The Gaza municipal Comcil held an urgency session, after which it issued
a statement stressing that the decision is aimed at usurping Palestinisn

63
land and enabling Gush Emunim to establish settlements by various authori-
tarian means.

The Municipal Council sent cables of denunciation to the Israeli prime
minister and defense minister, the 0.5. President, the ruler of Egypt
and Dr Kurt Haldheim.

Ilyas Frayj, the mayor of Bethlehem, condemned this decision and stated

that it will have serious consequences because it means that the Israeli
Government is pursuing its policy on self-administration before the con-
clusion of the talks on this issue and despite the Palestinians' opposition.

'Adel Ghanim, the secretary general of the Trade unions Federation said
that the decision was absolutely unjust and illegal. It indicates Israel's

desire to expand and to annex the Heat Bank, and it belies all words about
the alleged peace.

Zafir al-Hasri, head of the chamber of commerce and deputy mayor of Nablus,
stated that all citizens have expressed their indignation over this deci-
sion which confirms Israel's intentions to annex occupied Arab lands and
deprive our people of their right to their land.

he said that this decision fully contradicts existing laws in the occupied
territories which fovbid the sale of land to non-Palestinians, let alone
the citizens of the occupation state.

Haj Ha'suz al-Hasri told AL-SHA'B: "He do not accept this decision, nor
do we accept autonomy. The Palestinian's adherence to the land will not
be affected by this decision."

A number of citizens expressed their views to AL-SHA‘B reporters about
this matter.

'Abd al-Rahman al-Shumali said that this decision compliments Israel's plan
to expropriate the land gradually and is another link in this plan’s chain
adopted long ago and which [has been upheld by] Al-Sadat's policy.

Khalid shabaru, president of Al-Najah University's student federation, said
that the citizens are too aware to be affected by such decisions.

Khaldun 'Abd al-ﬂaqq, a municipal councilman, said: "We are just like
passengers on a hijacked plane who are subjected to one extortion after
another by the hijacker, but are helpless. Those laws and decisions are
a totally false pretext."

'Atef Sa'd said that this decision is an extension of the pattern used by

the occupation authorities. "We categorically reject this decision and
any others like it," he said.
Merchant Subhi sl-'Anabtawi said: "Our land was made fair game by the
occupation of 1967. It is not surprising that now it is fair game to be
bought and sold."

Isna'il Safiyah said: “This is an entirely illegal decision; the Israelis
have no right to own a single inch of Palestinian Arab lend."

'AL-QUDS' Editorial
Jerusalem AL-QUDS in Arabic 18 Sep 79 p 1
(Editorial: "The Israeli Decision and Us"]

[Text] Fro. the practical standpoint, the Israeli decision to permit indi-
vidual Jews or private organisations to buy land in the occupied areas has
not had unexpected or unknown results.

If we say that the step is contrary to international law and custom, this
would not be the first tine, nor in all probability would it be the last,
in which Israel has violated international law. In fact, Begin and other
senior officials do not hide their allegation that occupied territory is
"liberated Israeli land." Moreover, nenbers of "Gush hanin," who enjoy
official support, have gone so far as to say that Jordanian and interna-
tional laws do not apply to the occupied territory because they are,
according to their claim, Israeli territory.

If we were to say that the objective is to seize more land and to establish
settlements, then the Israeli Govern-ant in fact has not been "reniss" in
this regard. It has seized vast areas of land before the issuance of this
decision, either by open confiscation of land for settlements or by veiled
confiscation such as closing of certain areas, security reasons and estab-
lishment of military areas. All of this leads ultimately to the sane
objective which is to turn the occupied territories into a Jewish area as

quickly as possible in order to settle it and absorb in the Arab territories
isnigranta from all parts of the world.

Although we, as Palestinians, have so far been unable to prevent the Israeli
Governnent fro. confiscating land and building settlements because its
power is bigger than us, we can certainly confront the recent decision.

If the Israeli Government feels that it is entitled to pass laws for the
purchase of Arab lands, then we feel that it is our right, since the land
is ours, to refuse to sell this land which is the crux of the conflict in
the past, the present, and the future. Therefore, it is our responsibility,
from a purely practical standpoint, to invalidate this decision since noone
pays heed to denunciation, protests and citation of international law and
covenants. If Israel chooses to continue to confiscate land by its spe-
cial well known fashion, then this is another matter which is unrelated to
its recent decision.

was 65
ARMY DBSKRTIONS, OFFENSES BY W SOLDIERS INCREASE
TA300726 Jerusalu POST in English 30 Oct 79 p 2 TA
[Article by David Richardson]

[Excerpts] The number of soldiers asserting from military service has been
growing since 1973. This was revealed yesterday by Tst-Aluf Baruch Arhel,
the comnder of the military police who was briefing military reporters in
Tel Aviv to mark Military Police Day this weak.

Arbel noted that avoidance of military service was becoming more acceptable
among certain sections of the population. He mentioned in particular people
whose parents had been excused from military service because of absorption

problems and who did not provide their children with any positive incentive
in this direction.

Among the deserters there are also a significant number of foreign volunteers
from countries such as South Africa, England and Canada, who desert during
their service and leave the country on their foreign passports.

The nutter of soldiers who go absent without leave for short periods is about
15,000, he noted.

Referring to the military prisons, Arbel mentioned that the past two years

had seen a disturbing upswing in the alder of women soldiers imprisoned.
Last year's total was nearly 1,000.

He attributed the increase, in part, to the fact that the army was being
forced to draft women whom it would normally turn down because many others
were exempted on declaring themselves observant.

Referring to the recent case in which soldiers allegedly stole weapons fron
an ordnance corps store in the Sinai and sold them to Arab arms dealers in
the Wadi Ara region, Athel disclosed that in the past two years there have
been about 10 similar cases.

(280: 6820
'HA'ARETZ' PROVIDES STATISTICS 0N EXPROPRIATED LAND
11010947 Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 1 Nov 79 pp 1, 2 TA
[By Ze'ev Schiff, HA'ARETZ Military Correspondent]

[Text] Since the 101? conquered the Rest Bankand the Gaza Strip, 61.060 dunan
have been expropriated there on grounds of military and security needs. About
21,000 dunan have not been put at the disposal of the settlers. distributed in
65 settle-ents of various types. In addition, the state purchased 80.000 dune-
of private land in the West Bank. These findings easrge froe figures gathered
by the defense ministry. According to this survey, 61,000 dunan have been ex-
propriated in Judaea and Smria. and only 60 dunam in the Gaza Strip.

According to International Law. this expropriation is considered to be ten—
porary as long as the conquering force rensins in the area and no final arrange-
nent is reached. This confiscation does not expropriate the ownership.
[Sentence as published].

Out of the expropriated lands, 21.000 dunsn have not been given to the various
settlements. Hence the rest of the land—1.0.000 dunno—has been earurksd for
settlements and the settlers' agricultural needs. The number of Jewish settle-
ments of all types (excluding footholds or neighborhoods near Jerusalem) reaches
57 in Judaea and Samaria and 8 acre in the Gaza Strip.

According to data obtained by the defense ministry, 696.000 dunes in the West
Bank and 100,000 dunsn in the Gaza Strip are currently registered as state-
owned lands. In addition, there are 63,000 dunan of disputed ownership in
the Gaza Strip. The ease mdeternined status applies to 530.000 dunan of
land in the West Bank. It has been reported that no thorough survey of the
unregistered and uncultivated lands in these two regions has yet taken place.

Other lands registered under various ale-eats: private lands—3,200,000 dunes:
[presunably in the Heat bank) and 250,000 dunes in the Gaza Strip. [According
to International Lav, even municipal lands are considered private].

Absentee property—1030.000 dunes in the Heat Bank and 8,000 dunes: in the Gaza

Strip. Land registered as belonging to Jews from before HAG—30.000 dune-
in the West Bank and 800 dunsn in the Gaza Strip.

67
AUTHORITIES KEEP EYE 0N MUSLIM BRO‘RIBRBOOD
Paris AL-HUSTAQBAL in Arabic 22 Sep 79 p 25

[Article: "Has the Confrontation Between the Muslim Brotherhood and the
Jordanian Authorities Begun?"]

[Text] Last week the Jordanian capital. 'm-an, witnessed the first in a
series of steps in the anticiapted confrontation between "the Muslin Brother-
hood Group" and the Jordanian authorities.

On Thursday evening, 6 September 1979, the residents of the capital were
startled to see large nuabers of police armed with tmncheons and light
weapons take up positions in the center of the city, particularly in the
great square facing the Great al-liusayni )bsque and along the narrow streets
and Iarkets leading from it.

Naturally may people would flock together to find out the facts. particu-
larly since it was soaething cmletely new, for the first tine in more than
7 years, for security forces to appear in such a fashion.

Jordanian sources said, "What the Jordanian security officials had done was
nerely to take 'precautionary aaaaures' to warn the 'Huslil Brotherhood Group'
and give it to understand that the authorities were vigilant. and that it
could not begin a new confrontation with then after years of an unannounced
truce between the two sides."

However, what did happen?
The sane sources related the following odd tale to AL-lhataqbal:

0n Hednesday evening, 5 September, the Jordanian security Inchinery got hold
of a "secret publication" which had been distributed by the "Malia Brother-
hood in Jordan" and called for "solidarity with the Muslin Syrian people who
were being subjected to collective repression and assures." The state-ant
called upon the Jordanian Govern-ent to intercede with the Syrian Govern-ant
to halt these alleged aassacres and also called upon all Huslina in Jordan

to hold a peaceful denonstration the next day—that is, Friday-40 express

68
their sympathy with their brother Muslims in Syria. The statement, or
publication, also fixed the Great al-Husayni Mosque, the largest mosque

in Amman, as the starting point for the demonstration. which would start
right after the prayers.

The Jordanian sources went on to say: So the security machinery found it-
self between a rock and a hard place. It could either ignore the affair.
as it had ignored 3 number of earlier movements by the Muslim Brotherhood,
and in this event the Brotherhood would escalate the crisis, leading who

knows where. Or it could follow a compromise solution, heading off and
aborting the Brotherhood's plan. The latter course was chosen.

The Jordanian source went on to say that a rumor went around at the same
time that there would be an execution of a man condemned for a serious moral
crime, and the execution would be at the front of the al-Husayni Mosque
square, the site of all hangings for more than 30 years. No sooner had

this rumor spread with great speed then crowds began to collect at the
execution site. and this attracted the attention of the security authorities.
They had to impose control over the area, and this prompted the Muslim
Brotherhood to launch a demonstration against them. This is what happened.
Throughout the morning and until the afternoon, police surrounded all the
exits from the mosque, and so any idea of a demonstration was automatically

abandoned. Naturally there was no execution, there having been no crime
against public morals.

However, the question raised by this "incident" is still going around the
Jordanian capital, whetting the appetite for what story tomorrow will bring.

The question is: Has the time come for a confrontation between the Jordanian
Government and the Brotherhood?

It is an important question, one well understood by those aware of the history
of the "Muslim Brotherhood" in Jordan, whether from the standpoint of its size
in the Jordanian streets and its ability to arouse them, or of its being the
one political organization permitted to operate publicly in Jordan. This
comes from the fact that the law banning parties passed in the mid-1960's

does not touch it, since the Brotherhood is not a "party" but a "group."

and the law bans "parties," not "groups."

In any case, nothing is certain except that a relationship of "watchful
waiting" and extreme watchfulness pervades the “group's" relations with

the Jordanian authorities. This relationship began when the Muslim Brother-
hood organized a "popular delegation" to go to Iran and congratulate Imam
al-Khunayni on the success of the Islamic revolution. This relationship

was stepped up when the Syrian authorities declared war on the Muslim
Brotherhood in Syria shortly before and following the Aleppo massacre.

8389
680: 6802
INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES ATTRACT FOREIGN CAPITAL
Paris AL-NAhAR AL-'ARABI HA ALPDUHALI in Arabic 1-7 Oct 79 p 21

[Interview with the Jordanian Minister of Trade and Industry by Randah Taqi
al-Din]

[Text] There are only a very few countries that are not grumbling about the
sparse inflow of Arab fiscal surpluses and not claiming that their balances

of payments are suffering because of oil prices. and Jordan is one of those
few. It is confident of the ability of its economic structure to attract ‘
the flow of capital, in the wake of productive projects and economic assets
that can make it the starting point for many industries operating jointly
with foreign institutions wishing to market their products in Arab markets.
However. what are the factors behind this Jordanian position?

Dr Najin al-Din Dajani. Jordanian Minister of Trade and Industry, defined
these factors:

[Question] How do you appraise the Arab aid policy. what is Jordan's share
of capital. and what effect does this have on the domestic sectors?

[Answer] The Arab oil-producing countries are currently playing a large
role in helping with the expenses of economic development and the costs of
purchases by developing countries. however. the rise in oil prices during
the past 6 months has also affected the prices of all materials, whether

oil products, foodstuffs, industrial commodities, manufactured goods, or
minerals. There has been a great rise in the prices of all these things.
While the oil price rise was in the lS-percent range, the prices of many
commodities rose more than 60 percent. with an overall average of 25 to 30
percent. This high percentage had severe inflationary effects. The devel-
oping countries have specific financial needs so as to continue to implement
their development plans and to cover the costs of purchases abroad. however,
the prices for exports by the developing countries have not risen as much as
the prices of their imports. Therefore, one has to say that the [oil] exporting
Arab countries are playing a much larger role than any industrial country,
countries with great capabilities. Hhat some Arab countries. such as Qatar.
have provided has amounted to 20 percent of their national income. while

70
Saudi aid has amounted to 4 percent of income and the UAE 10 percent. These
are high percentages. What has been provided by the industrial countries--

the United States. for example--amounts to not more than .03 percent. Eaten
on national incomes. the Arab countries are providing at least 10 times what
the industrial countries are providing. He would like to find a higher per-
centage earmarked for aiding the Arab countries. but this percentage would
require a specific climate and specific investment opportunities. Some
countries are luckier than others. in the sense that they have readied their
investment opportunities. Jordan attracts a great deal of Arab capital. While
the economic nature of some countries require a reliance on a flow of govern-
ment capital for developing the infrastructure, others have moved into a
position where they can use these investments in production projects. Jordan
is one of these latter countries, because throughout the 1960's and the early
part of the 1970's it undertook huge projects within the context of building
its infrastructure and created an economic base to enable productive invest-
ments to play a part in economic development. Consequently. Jordan's share

of foreign investments is greater. for example, than that of other countries,
such as Yemen, Somalia. or Sudan. The economic infrastructure is there. on

the one hand, and on the other hand it helps to attract private capital. While
some countries depend totally upon official outside capital, Jordan is in a
position whereby private and public funds alike can be invested. I would
estimate that investments in the industrial sector. education, and tourism

in Jordan as the result of private foreign financing and investments have
amounted to $1 million a week during the past year. in addition to the extensive
funds that enter Jordan for real estate purposes, and about 70 percent of

these investments are Arab.

The Arab Common Market

[Question] There is continuing talk about the importance of the Arab Common
Market. Is this market a reality or is it still just an idea? what does
Jordan hope to gain from belonging to it?

[Answer] Official investments for the most part depend on the level of
international relations and on specific bilateral relations. The bases of
the market issue are completely different from the private investments sector,
which is fundamentally working for revenue and profits and is influenced by
the level of confidence and by the investment climate in the country and
guarantees felt by the investor that his investment will last. An evaluation
of the situation in any country hinges upon the nature of the offers. whether
they are agreements of the Arab Market, bilateral agreements. or agreements
to guarantee investments or bar double taxation. They all help. However.
the basic thing is the availability of investment Opportunities. Jordan's
being a member of the Arab Common Market helps it for foreign investments.
Moreover, there are European institutions that recently have begun seriously
to discuss entering into joint projects in Jordan with the objective of
marketing their products in the Arab Common Market countries and the other
Arab countries. In the industrial sector. for instance. there are a number
of German. Danish, British. Norwegian, and Bulgarian institutions and others
that have begun to try to find Jordanian partners to carry out joint projects

71
aimed at entering Arab markets which they find difficult to enter directly,
such as the Saudi market. By industrializing and creating Jordanian industries
with Jordanian material and labor. they can now get into these markets. Then
there is another investment approach: some industrial countries, particularly
European countries. have begun to feel the need to hold on to their share of
certain markets and, consequently, have to get preferential treatment or

lose these markets. An example of this is the electronic industry. Color
television industries are being established today, for example. in Syria

and Iraq, and the industries of these countries are entering Arab markets in
the member countries of the Arab Cannon Market exempt from customs duties.

The difference in duties in this regard amounts to 70 to 80 percent. with a
minimum of 40 percent. Enjoying this exemption gives these projects an ad-
vantage. Therefore. a number of countries are trying to set up such industries
in Jordan to get this advantage, because after there is sufficient industriali-
zation, their products can enter these markets as a local industry. A third
pattern arises from the fact that our area is wealthy. Jordan continuously
works to develop its industrial sector by pursuing a specific strategy aimed
at expansion in order to export industrial connodities to foreign markets.

The local Jordanian market is limited in size because of low population.
Therefore, the Jordanian industries that have been established during the

past 3 years have had a goal of more than 70-percent dependence on the export
market. Jordan enjoys certain advantages in having a trained and qualified
labor force, a high degree of education, and the availability of certain

basic material, in addition to the preferential agreements, being a member of
the Arab Common Market and the cooperation agreement with the BBC in addition
to agreements with a number of countries of the socialist camp and Asian
countries, such as Japan, China, and Indonesia. All these factors have opened
up new opportunities for export of Jordanian commodities, and, consequently
these countries in turn have obtained concessions for the entry of their
goods.

[Question] How much have Jordan's revenues been affected by the downturn
in phosphate prices. and do you think that the prices will continue to fall?

[Answer] Phosphates are Jordan's primary export cor-sodity, averaging 2.5
million tons this year. Production has currently begun at a new mine, and
our production from it is expected to rise to about 1.5 million tons. Jordan
also exports fruits and vegetables to the Gulf area and Saudi Arabia. Next
in line comes industrial goods, starting with raw plastics and moving to
building materials, fabricated metal products, and a number of consumer and
middleman commodities. He are now concentrating on high—technology industries
which require intensive capital. Although Jordan exports labor, it at the
same time imports some and, therefore, tries to rely on technology more than
on labor-intensive projects. Phosphate prices have again begun to rise
gradually, but I think that during the coming year the increase will be in
the range of 12 to 15 percent. Nevertheless, Jordan's exports of phosphates
and industrial commodities are almost enough to cover the cost of our crude
oil imports. Given a strong industrial posture relying on outside financing,
revenues from tourism, and remittances from Jordanians working abroad, Jordan
is in a good financial position, despite the rise in prices, and its balance

72
of payments still registers a surplus, though a small one. Jordan is still
suffering from an external deficit, as is the case with a large number of
developing countries.

[Question] How is Jordan meeting the challenge of the problem of food
security?

[Answer] He are constantly working to ensure food security. One has to
remember that when the 1967 war broke out, there was no lack of food supplies
in Jordan, particularly flour and wheat. Food stocks in Jordan are sufficient
for sore than 2 weeks. He now have grain storehouses and mills sufficient for
our consumption for a long time. As for other connodities, such as meat and
poultry, we now have widely dispersed cold storage and frozen food depots
with sufficient quantities to last us for months, in addition to a number of
strategic co-odities. We have paid careful attention to all these things.
However. the rise in connodity prices has proven to us that our actions have
had a good return. For example. there has been a big rise in the prices of
several comodities, but storage costs and interest charges on the funds tied
up in storing them have still been far less than what we would have had to
pay were we to buy them at current prices. with regard to local food pro-
duction. during the past 2 years Jordan has seen a severe lack of rainfall
which has prevented us from taking advantage of a large nuuber of dams we

had earlier constructed, because they did not collect the required rainwater,
and this had an effect on agricultural crops.

8389
C80: 6802

73
EFFECT OF JUMBIAT'S DEATH 0“ NATIONAL MOVEMENT DISCUSSED
Beirut THE ARAB "ORLD MRI)! in English 13 Oct 79 pp 16-20

[Text] It is often said that the death of Kansl Junblat marked the begin—
ning of the end of the National Hovenent's unity. The Movement, which groups
now around 22 leftist, nationalist and progressive parties and organiza-
tions has been consistently trying to preserve its unity and existence ever
since the death of its leader and founder, in March, 1977. However, the
assassination of Kansl Jutlat was not the only reason why the Pavement fell
in trouble, many other factors have provoked the disintegration of the Move-
nent. And the general impression today is that the Rational Hovenent, in

addition to being torn apart, has someohat failed in fulfilling the purpose
for which it had been created.

:‘irst Steps. The birth of the Lebanese Leftist National Movement, like
that of the rightist Lebanese Front, was not in the natural order of things.
It was aerely s regrouping of parties that were separated by many factors,
including their ideologies, and especially their allegiances, within nove-
nents or fronts whose sole purpose was to fight against each other and which
failed to cone up, towards the people, with an alternative to the system
they were supposedly denouncing.

‘rhe birth of these fronts and movements was linked to the onset of the
Lebanese crisis. Drawn from the realm of traditional opposition to which
they belonged, these parties were bound to return to it as soon as their
role was fulfilled. The political aspirations they formlated were already
beneath the aspirations of the Incas they were to represent, and, although
the National Novenant drew up a detailed programs of political, adminis-
trative and social reforns, it failed to present concrete proposals of
economic reforms which could have pallieted the political and ideological
lackings of their policy statements and platforns.

The National Hovenent has been known under this name only since 1976, but
it was founded several years earlier, in 1969-1970 as the "Regrouping of

National and Progressive Forces and Parties". Led by Kansl Juﬂlat, this
group included mainly Judlat's Party--the Progressive Socialist Party--

and the Lebanese Co-mist Party, as well as a meter of Lebanese

7h
leftist personalities. The Death Party joined it in 1971 as one party and
remained as a pro-Syrian branch and a pro-Iraqi branch after the syrian
and Iraqi Baath parties split.

The "Regrouping" was represented in Parliament by a bloc called the National
Struggle Front which was also led by Kamel Jx-blat. It dealt mainly with
social and political problems. On the social level, the Regrouping devoted
time and attention to the problems of tobacco planters, fishermen, students,
factcry workers, etc... And on the political level, it called for political
and administrative reforms and for official and popular support for the
Palestinian cause, especially after the Septednr 1970 events in Jordan.

The Jordanian events marked the beginning of close cooperation between the
National Movement and the Palestinian resistance, and the beginning of
strained relations between the National Movement and the Lebanese state,
especially after the first major Army-Palestinian clashes of 1973.

The National Movement acquired this name in July, 1971., after a meeting at
the Beau Rivage Hotel in Beirut. All progressive, nationalist and leftist
parties and "unions" (Ittihad) joined its ranks. A few months later, a
Central Political Council was formed under Kamal Juablat and a nutter of
institutions were created--such as the Regional Councils in the various
Hohafazats (provinces) of the country.

From A Cause To A Her. In the early 1970's, Kamal Jumhlat accomlished

two steps, one was to confer a legitimate status to the Lebanese Conanunist
Party which thus became the only Arab Commist Party not to be banned, and
the second was to unify the various leftist parties and forces in the cauntry.

The creation of the National lbvement came in the wake of these moves and
was primarily aimed at setting up, in Lebanon, a movement that could work
and struggle alongside the Palestinian resistance. Jtnnblat is said to have
had a two-fold purpose:

l--On the one hand, he was eager to assume the leadership of a moveaent
sewing an enormously papular cause in the Arab world, which would have
seated his political weight and influence on bases reaching fa: beyond the
limits of Lebanon.

2--0n the other hand, such an action would have enabled him to reinforce
his position on the local political scene to give momentun to the programs
of reforms and the changes he was calling for, and to strengthen his action
against the rightist alliances.

A non-National Movement source who knew Junblat well told THE ARAB \DRLD
that in his opinion Jumblat "was cornered" and had no choice but to tread
the path he tread, when the Lebanese war was looming. The source added
that he was "probably wrong in his calculations because the data were not
clean... He was not aware of the reality of the Syrian role in Lebanon."

75
The Factors of Disintegration. The assassination of Renal Jumblat in March,
1977, dealt the National Movement a heavy blow on more than one level. It
soon appeared that it was only the personality of this leader and the nature
of his leadership that could bring together and keep together parties that

only shared a role in comon, but very little by way of prospects, princi-
ples and purpoues.

0n the internal level, the loss of Jumblat meant the loss of unity for the
National Movement. On the local level, this loss cost the National Movement
the official support that had enabled it to survive and enjoy some influence.
Furthermore, it also cost the Movement the Arab and international support

it had enjoyed because of the Arab and international support and esteem
Junblat had earned.

In addition to the support, the National Movement lost its independence, of
thought and :ction and fell because of the inter-Arab differences that were

not long to override the unified action the Movement had maintained during
the two-year war.

Little by little problems and factors emerged that further deepened the
gap between the various sides regroupad in the Movement:

I) The problem of choosing a successor to Jumblat at the head of the Movement.
2) The conflict between the Baath parties and the comnunist parties
3) Inter-Arab conflict and differences

la) The change in National Movement-Palestinian relations brought about by
the recent Middle East Developments

5) The new pattern assuned by the Lebanese question since the onset of the
Middle East peace talks, and the change in the attitude of the Lebanese
leftist and Moslem base.

Leadership and Conflicts. More than two years have now elapsed since the
death of Jumblat and no solution has yet been found to the problem of his
succession. That the PS? would remain the dominating party in the Movement
and Kamal anblst's son, Walid, the leader of both party and Movement, was
questioned by most of the other sides because of Valid Jumblst's young age
and lack of experience. Each sponsor-state also sought to put forward its
own side and the unity of the Movement fall prey to the inter-Arab conflicts.

The main consequence of these conflicts was that the National Movement lost
its independent decision-making and policy asking which led to the outbreak
of many internal conflicts, such as the recent crisis with the Lebanese
branch of the Iraqi Baath Party. After the arrests and executions that
followed the announcement of an abortive coup d'etat in Iraq, P8P leader
Valid melat criticised the executions. This drove the Iraqi Beach Party

76
to quit the National Movement. It returned a while later to avoid being
completely isolated on the Lebanese scene.

Another lasting problem has been the defiance of the nationalist or pan-
Arab parties towards the main leftist organizations in the Movement: the
Comunist Party and the Organization of Comnist Action in Lebanon (OCAL).

Earlier this sumer, a conflict developed between Valid Jumblat and the

Nasserite Independent Movement (Mourahitoun) following the implementation
by Jusblst of a decision to close down most of his Party's offices in West
Beirut. He was accused of trying to comply with the demands of the state.

As time went by less joint comniques were issued by the National Movement
and, whereas in Kamal Jumblat's time comniques expressed the position of
the entire Movement, after his death, each party, organisation issued its
own statements and they were sometimes contradictory. The Movement's
paper AL HATAN, which is mainly controlled by the Left, sometimes ignored

declarations or statements made by other parties and this prompted Jumblat
to re-open the PSP's organ, AL ANBA.

The Rairon d'Btre. Primarily, however, National Movement sources believe
that the Movement has lost its raison d'etre. Pounded to take up arms
alongside the Palestinian resistance they have been outrunned by the Pales-
tinians in the first stage and, in the second stage, the Palestinians have
stopped the struggle everywhere in Lebanon, except in the South, to launch
political and diplomatic activities on an international level. In addition
to this, they have also lost a substantial part of the support given to

them by the Moslems of Lebanon who were irritated by abuses and have now
turned their attention and support to formations such as the Moslem Alli-
ance, the Front for the Safeguard of the South and the Higher Shiite Council.

On the other hand, intensive efforts aimed at bolstering coordination and
unity between the National Movement and Fronts such as the pro-Syrian
National Front (led by Raul Chstila) and the National Confrontation Group-
ing (led by Minister Talal Meraabi), have failed.

Prospects. The internal situation of the National Movement has slightly
improved over the past few weeks as its leaders have been trying to build
a new solidarity among the parties and organizations on the basis of agree-
ment on some principles such as attachment of the unity of Lebanon through
the balanced entry of the Lebanese Anny in the South and elsewhere and the
reform of the political and administrative system.

Plans to divide the Movement into two new movmnents one more pro-Syrian and
the other pro-left have been set aside, along with plans that called for
enlarging the Movement to include the National and the Confrontation fronts.

Efforts are currently being deployed to bolster cooperation and coordination
between the three groupings.
0n the internal level, it is expected that a solution will be found to the
leadership issue by appointing ualid Jumblat as president of the National
Movement and appointing Secretaries to each of the Hove-ent's institutions
in such a way as to have each institution managed by a different party.

The Secretaries would meet once a week around Jumblat and thus constitute

the executive body of the movement. The 22 parties represented in the
Movement are expected to be soon increased to 30.

For the time being, the National Hovement's role is to maintain its posi-
tions pending the turn the situation will take in the country. If peace
returns, some of the parties will return to parliamentary life and the

others to non-parliamentary opposition, with prominence given, again, to
the individuals rather than their parties. If violence breaks out again,

it is expected that it will account, again, for these parties' solidarity
on the battlefield.

C80: 4820
RELIGIOUS LEADERS, M's INTEREST I“ 801111!
Beirut TEE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English 20 Oct 79 p 17

[Text] The new Iranian regime's interest in South Lebanon became manifest
over the past two weeks with the visits to Lebanon and in particular to
South Lebanon first of Foreign Minister Sedeq Tabetabei end then of Inam
Ayatollah miminy's grandson, hussein Khomeiny. '

Both Tahatabai and momeiny held talks with Palestinian and Lebanese Shiite
leaders and toured the South.

No Positions. The two leaders apparently came for the same purpose as both
denounced the Israeli aggressions on South Lebanon and promised-to extend
assistance to the population of the South. However, informed sources say,
the two Iranian leaders came as the representatives of two factions of the
Iranian regime that uphold different, although not contradictory, positions

concerning the situation in the South and the policy to follow to settle
the problem of that region.

Foreign Minister stetabai, who is also the nephew of missing Imam Mousse

Sadre, came, the sources said. as the representative of the Iranian govern-
aent of Prime Minister Baaargan. The official Iranian position which he

expressed is that Iran should give all its support to the Shiite population
of Lebanon and to the demands of the Shiites who have been calling for the
withdrawal of Palestinian arned elements from the South and for the deploy-
ent of the Lebanese regular armed forces in the region. Even if the grow-

ing antagonism between the Shiites and the Palestinians should lead to an
armed confrontation between the two sides.

Bussein Khomeiny, on the other hand, came to Lebanon as the representative
of Iran's religious leaders and in particular of his grandfather Ayatollah
luhallsh Idiomeiny whose position is that a compromise mat be achieved be-

tween the Shiite population and the Palestinian resistance in order to avoid
a confrontation between them.

It is worth noting here that the P10 despatched a delegation this week to
Tehran for talks with both official and religious leaders. According to

the observers, the move reflects the concern of the PLO towards the attitude
that Iran may take and especially the support that it may extend to the
Shiite population of the South at a time this population is growing sure and
sore angered by the sufferings it is enduring. The no is particularly con-
cerned over the possibility that Iran any are the Shiites and that, in case
the Army deployed in the South, a confrontation between the Shiites and the
Palestinians may involve the Army.

CSO: 6820 79
IRAN'S ROLE IN SOUTH LEBANON PROBLEM
Beirut AL-NABAR in Arabic 16 Sep 79 p 2

[Article: "Lebanon Rants Results Before Arab Sunni: To Be Able To Make
All Pace Their Responsibilities'_'/

[rest-I Recently, there have been growing nurnurs about an inportant role

which the new Iran is playing in helping the authorities reclaim south

Lebanon from the illegal authorities and overcome the obstacles which are
blocking the inplenentation of the UN Security Council resolutions pertaining
to this region. Sons have begun to fear that these resolutions night be
transfomed into nere fornalities which are inpossible to inplenent--a
situation which would result in future enshrinenent of the accomplished

fact, nanely the apportion-ant of the south between Israel and the Palestinians.
especially if the current efforts to produce an overall solution to the

Middle East crisis falter.

Local political circles have increasingly begun to wonder about the real
nature of the Iranian role and the reasons behind the information blackout
about this matter despite the great inortance it holds for the country
and the significance attached to it by a number of Iranian sources both
official and unofficial.

when asked about these nmrs and questions, widely inforud political
sources said that the Iranian nove in the south proceeded prinrily from
two factors:

1. The Iranian revolution's absolute belief in the Palestinian cause.

It was on this basis that the Iranian revolution becane concerned about

the south because it is the only Arab front open to Israel, as a blanket

of silence covers the other Arab fronts, and because the Palestinians are
the originators of the issue and are involved in it from the human, nilitary
and political standpoints.

2. The desire of the Iranian revolution to aid nenbsrs of the Shiite sect,
who for- the aajority of the population in the south, and help then to rennin
steadfast and avoid subjection to the threats of expatriation, forced
inigration and occupation; and to provide the capabilities for steadfastness
and survival through coordination with the Palestinian revolution, in which
they believe and with which they have a good relationship.

80
The sources added that the developments which occurred after the Security
Council issued its first resolution concerning the south, resolution 625,
have made the application of it and Subsequent resolutions an impossibility.
Israel has continually obstructed the application of these resolutions, and

thus the Palestinian resistance has been affected by considerations which,
in its view, are strategic in nature.

The price has been paid by the inhabitants of the south, and especially

the inhabitants of Jabal 'Amil which holds a special importance for Iran.

The price has been paid by all Lebanon, as well, since the Lebanese situation
has remained chaotic because of the failure to plug the dike in the south
through which the water is leaking.

Everyone Takes Stock

The political sources said that all parties have begun taking stock of their
situations, particularly members of the Shiite sect whose effective leaders
such as the Supreme Shiite Islamic Council and the "Anal" movement are greatly
respected and understood in Iran. A series of contacts and meetings has

been held in which it has been agreed that Iran will exert whatever efforts
and possibly even pressure it can to bring the Palestinians into final
agreement with Lebanese authorities on the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, even if Israel, on its side, refuses to agree. Such

a refusal on Israel's part would expose it before international public opinion.
which has become fed up with its impudence and no longer looks at the Middle
East situation from a single viewpoint. Moreover, Iran is to make every
possible effort to assist the Lebanese authorities in restoring the balances
in Lebanon which were in effect before the 2 years war, because it cannot
exist without them and simultaneously they provide all kinds of guarantees

to the Lebanese sects, including the Shiite sect which, in the final analysis,
constitutes a minority group whose nation is Iebanon.

The same sources added that at Iranian-Palestinian meetings the resistance
was told that Iran is prepared to help the revolution to the maximum extent.
possible, but only on the condition that it provides the ingredients for
peace in the south and reaches agreement with the Lebanese authorities and
the UN Security Council.

In this connection, responsible Shiite sources say that the Palestinians
have tried to gain time and have not reached a decision on the matter,
possibly because of their belief that conditions or standards could change.
But nothing of the sort has occurred. "hat has occurred is a continuation
of the Israel aggressions against the south.

Meetings and Initial Agreement

Shiite efforts are again underway with Iran, and Iranian efforts have been
renewed with the Palestinians. all of which has resulted in contacts and

meetings between the Shiite and Palestinian sides. The most important
of these include:

81
l. A neeting between Representative Husayn al-Hussayni. secretary general
of the "Anal" mvenent, and Yasir Arafat, head of the P10 Executive Connittee.

which took place prior to the strike protesting the continued disappearance
of Inan al-Sadr.

2. A 4-hour meeting held this week between Mr al-Husayni and Palestinian
leader Abu Jihad.

3. Another nesting has been arranged with Mr Arafat after his return fron
Spain.

Shiite sources report that the meeting with Alan Jihad was fruitful. In it.

Mr al-Husayni affirmed that the southerner is prepared to sacrifice everything
for the Palestinian cause. but not to the extent of sacrificing his land.

He also stressed that the present phase, especially in the wake of the
international victories achieved by the resistance, is one of diplonscy

rather than military activity because the latter would especially serve
the interests of Israel at this tine.

Abu Jihad's position, according to the sane sources. was initial agreenent
to the denand that the any enter the south (Sur and Al-Nabatiyah) and
inplenentation of the Security Council resolutions.

When the discussion moved to the practical details of inplenentation,
Al-Husayni felt that this should be discussed with the legal authorities.

The encouraging thing in the eyes of the sane sources is that these details
will be discussed with the authorities in the near future, either at the
anticipated Lebanese-Palestinian suit or at the meetings held periodically
between Prine Minister Salin al-lluss and Palestinian officials.

Inforned sources believe that there nust be agreenent on the issue of the
south anong the authorities, the Palestinians and the United Nations, and
that what they agree upon nust be inplensnted before Novanber. i.e. prior
to the convening of the expanded Arab unit. This is so that the agreemnt
can be sanctioned and at the sane tin additional neasures can be approved

which would put Lebanon in a position to reconstruct the south within the
feasible franework.

If the efforts regarding the south are not going to achieve positive and
practical results, the concerned parties insist that this be understood
prior to the sunit as well so that the Arabs will assune their responsi-

bilities toward the south and Lebanon and approve appropriate neasures, if
it is within their capability to do so.

Under any circunstances, negative results fron the efforts would force tin!
concerned parties-warticularly the authorities and the population of the
south, which neans the Shiites--to search for another way to save the south

and its inhabitants and an alternative fornula which my not be pleasing
to none.
Extent of the Hager on the Iranian Role
is betting on the Iranian role conceivable under Iran's present conditions?

Some Lebanese and Arab political sources urge that betting on the Iranian

role not be carried too far and that such a role should not be blown out

of proportion. This is because unsettled conditions in Iran do not

permit the officials in Tehran to concern themselves with issues considered
peripheral to domestic issues, and also because nothing could be worse for
the Lebanese situation, particularly in the south, than increased interference
from abroad, whether Arab or foreign.

Nonetheless. Shiite sources regard the wager as justified, particularly
since Iranian authorities have demonstrated their ability to maintain a
hold on the domestic situation.

In this connection, the sources wonder why the Iranian preoccupation with
the resistance is seen as advantageous despite the growing number who

are similarly involved with it, and yet the same preoccupation with Lebanon
and the issue of the south is not advantageous. They urge no action until
all the stages of the Iranian nove on behalf of the south are conpleted.

The sources disclosed a secret in this connection. They said that Iranian
officials have made the south a main item in their talks with Soviet officials.
and they have asked the Soviets to deal seriously with the south to insure
that the Security Council resolutions are ilplemented. The sources added

that the Iranian officials will make the sane appeal in any dialog with
American officials, in the event that such a dialog takes place.

8591
C80: 10802
Beirut AL-IWMR in Arabic 1’. Sep 79 p 2

[A—rticle: "rward Frank Meetings To Remove the Elements of Mutual Suspicion
in Order to Obviate Coqlications Hhich Keep Lebanon as the Sole Loserﬂl

[text] Official circles welcomed the cease-fire agreement approved last
Wednesday night by the Phalangist. Liberal and Tashnak parties, as the
numerous steps in this agreement continue to be i-plemented one by one.

The two factions called for disregard of the formalities and adherence to
the substance which will restore solidarity and kinship to their former
familiar clashes and difficulties between the two factions will resume
after a while because the scale reach by the latest clash uncovered con-
trived purposes and preparations among the factions. This indicates that
one must look beyond the i-ediate cause of the clash. in spite of its
importance. to the real causes of the tense situation between the Armenians
and Phalangists in order to eliminate these causes and prevent new clashes--
especially since inediate causes or protests can be created every day.

What are the basic reasons for the conflict between the Armanina parties.
in particular the Tasimak Party, and the "Lebanese Front" parties. in
particular the Phalangist Party. which put the political and electoral
alliance which spans 30 years in danger of collapsing?

Sources close to the two factions. say that an extended discussion of these
reasons would prove inconclusive, aside fron being very lengthy due to the
multiplicity and diversity of the causes. This is especially true since
the 2 years war and subsequent were brought about fundamental developments
which altered any of the givens both on the ground and in the people's
minds and which gave room for the emergence of new positions or movements
backed by weapons.

Mutual and Renewed Suspicion

The s.urces sum up the condition which has befallen yesterday's allies with
one word: suspicion—~suspicion which developments and events have made
mutual and are possibly buttressed by evidence and proof.
In the "Lebanese Front." and the Phalangist Party to be specific, there is
suspicion of the Armenian position. This suspicion began during the 2
years war in which the Armenians remained largely neutral between the two
struggling factions in the country. This suspicion could have died down
if the ordeal which Lebanon is experiencing had ended with the fighting

in early 1977. However. the renewal of the fighting with an alteration in
the map of alliances and enmities caused this suspicion to arise again
since the Armenians again maintained neutrality despite the fact that they
were forced out of their neighborhoods and jobs on a rather large scale as
a result of the "wars" in the capital during the summer of 1978. This
neutrality was not limited to avoiding participation in the fighting but
also applied to sharing the burdens of "resistance," in the view of the
"Lebanese Front." Thus, the suspicion and mistrust increased. Clashes
began on an individual basis at first and then expanded.

The Armenian faction responds to this by saying that its military neutrality
helped the "Lebanese Front" considerably in its war because the Armenians
maintained an open channel which was utilized fully to supply the front
with all sorts of vital supplies from which they had been cut off.

The Armenian faction ascribes its lack of active participation in the war to
the fact that the wars which the Armenians fought in their country did not
bring any results, and moreover civil wars are exploited from abnoad and

in the end always work against the welfare of the nation-any nation. They
say that they did not spare material support. but they went the support to
be voluntary and not as a propitiation for not participating in military
conflicts as the front tried to suggest, because giving in to this logic
would make the Armenians subject to continual blackmail.

The Armenian faction believes that the objective of the gradually escalating
clashes is to strike a blow at the Armenian Party structure.

Do the two factions talk frankly to each other in their frequent meetings
in order to contain the incidents and eliminate the mutual suspicions?

Sources close to them say that the misgivings remaind within the walls built
around each faction, and that accusatory remonstrations dominate the meetings.
For instance, the Phalangist Party accuses the Armenians of endeavoring to
create an independent sector within the eastern area. and of seeking to
pester rue Phalangists, on advice from outside. The Armenians say that the
Phalangists want to contain them; and, as they see it, the solution is to
turn over all the "independent sectors" to the legal authorities.

The Authorities Fear Complications

Hhat are the drawbacks of a clash between the Armenians and the front?
Government sources believe that if this clash is renewed and escalates,

it will certainly have an effect on many areas and will create new situations

that will increase the authorities' confusion and compound their apparent
inability to deal with basic problems and incidental matters.

85
The nest inportant repercussions of the clash, according to the sane sources,
are:

l. A deepening of the wounds between the Arneians and the Phalangists which
will lake then difficult to heal.

2. The authorities' attention will be distracted from important utters
and fateful issues so they can search for a way to end the clashes.

3. A consolidation of the organizations which the war in Lebanon had isolated.

lo. Another new social calamity would be added to those already created by
the 2 years war-calamities for which the state has not yet been able to
produce a solution, such as forced eaigration and the continuation of a
collective existence under constant niatrust and fear.

5. A confirmation of the weakness of the state and. possibly, the enshrinenent
of this weakness.

While the clash was taking place, the state was unable to do anything except
contact the two sides involved in the conflict and try to convince then to
stop. Nearly 3 years after the and of the war, this is seen as an indication
of considerable weakness.

The other sources feel that the front lust not make a final break with the
Amnians. because they could harm the Lebanese cause which is chaapioned

abroad. i.e.. in America and Europe where their presence is well established
and effective.

Why Hasn't the Arny Been Deployed?

Hill the any be deployed to maintain the peace in this area if the clashes

resume? Why wasn't it deployed when the clashes escalated during the past
2 days?

Both government sources and those close to the two parties say that the
deployment of the army would only be possible at the request of both factions.
It would be deployed as a peace force and would take all the necessary neaaures
to prevent a renewal of the incidentr-sinilar to the way in which it was
deployed in 'Ayn al-Ramnah and ham al-Shubbak-but would not be deployed

in the case of a clash. when the two conflicting factions reach a stage

in which they are unable to gain or inpose solutions or to continue fighting.
then the any would be deployed at their request and with their approval.

This is inossible, however, as long as one or both of the factions are

convinced that they have the potential to settle matters or steer events
to their advantage.
Informed political sources believe that the fragmentation occurring in

the "eastern areas." which began with former President Sulayman Franjiyah's
withdrawal from the "lebaness Front," and is slated to continueI matched by
the continuing fragmentation in the "western areas," is in the interest of
the legal authorities because it will allow them to take possession of the
entire region. Despite everyone's welcome of state control. the citizens
want this to be achieved without casualities, victims and the carnage which
would make things all the Horse.

8591
CSO: 4802
LBBANESB-PALESTINIAN RECONCILIATION IS KEY TO SOUTH LEBANON PROBLEM
Beirut Alf-NARA]! in Arabic 15 Sep 79 p 2

[A—rticle: "Palestinian-Lebanese concord 1: Sole Avenue to a Solution of
the South Lebanon Problem Sanctioned by Syriai/

[Text] The official Lebanse efforts to hold a special Arab suit on the
south continue despite negative signals which make the likelihood of such
a stnlmit remote.

Government sources explained why the authorities are clinging to the idea

of convening a separate summit on the south and why they are doing every-
thing in their power to achieve such a suit. The sources said that Lebanon
is in a hurry to produce a solution to the problem of the south--a problem
which will brook no delay. The Israeli aggressions continue despite
periodic cease-fires and with them the exodus of the population, not to
mention the negative repercussions which affect the entire Lebanese situation
and involves the entire country—particularly during this historic period in
which the destiny of the region may be decided.

These sources indicated that the Arabs might not be in any rush to meet

in the type of expanded sunnit which they agreed to hold periodically at
the latest Baghdad emit, particularly if they perceive that there has
been no change in the international equation which would necessitate a
meeting, and if they feel that such a meeting night unravel their formal
solidarity. This situation has compelled Lebanon to work for a sun-it speci-
fically concerned with the south. Aside from this, Lebanon wishes to treat
the issue of the south within a framework which is detached from the Middle
East crisis and the Palestinian problem. However, this would be impossible
in the approved annual sunit which is set up to study the larger crisis.
because the discussion at the suit would deal with the south from the
standpoint that best serves the efforts being exerted to produce a solution
to the region's crisis which would satisfy all sides. Such a solution
establishes and reinforces the link between the problen of the south and

the general regional problen, when what is needed is to dissociate the two
problens or at least lessen the linkage between them.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP82-00050R000200020023-2
Despite the deep understanding which Arab leaders showed toward the problem

of the south and the motives behind the move made by Prime ninister Dr Salim
al-Huss and the personal delegates of the president, conversations with these
leaders have caused Lebanese officials to doubt the likelihood that a sunnit

will be held before November, or that two separate summits can be held during
a 2 month period.

In view of the lack of agreement on the Lebanese demand, the authorities
decided to seek to get the issue of the south included as a major item on
the regular summit's agenda. having obtained promises from some Arabs that
they would support any Lebanese position.

Despite the importance that the problem of the south be discussed at the

Arab manic-whether it is a special summit on the south or a general summit--
the most important point in the view of the government and the administration
is that Lebanon approach the Arab kings and leaders with definite ideas.
solutions and alternative solutions which guarantee Lebanon's welfare and

do not put hard choices before the Arabs-~choices which are painful at best.
Lebanon cannot be content with presenting the problem and asking for a
solution from the Arabs because, whether due to inability or lack of desire,
they will not offer one.

Lebanese-Palestinian Accord Required

In the view of government circles, the best thing that Lebanon can do is
reach an accord with the PLO as soon as possible and then carry this accord
to the smit. make the Arabs face their responsibilities and demand from
them whatever solutions and positions are feasible.

For, in the opinim of these circles, an Arab sumit would be easy to convene
in the presence of a Lebanese-Palestinian accord and would be guaranteed

to produce results. However, the summit would be difficult to convene and
its outcome would be uncertain in a climate of continued Lebanese-Palestinian
incompatibility.

This is because the Arab states, whether because of intimidation, enticement
or their own belief, side with the Palestinians right or wrong. Hoveover,
the Arabs cannot possibly be less Arab than the rest of the world which

has begun to enter the Palestinian era--particular1y since it has become
convinced that continued neglect of Palestinian rights will result in
economic, political and social catastrophes.

The government circles point out that a Lebanese-Palestinian accord would
not alone fully realize both Lebanese or the Palestinian interests in full,
and they insist that this accord be sanctioned in the expanded summit which
would then constitute a guarantee for the accord and its continuation and
implementation in the approved form, thus eliminating any future sudden
shocks or disputes.
The government circles believe that a Lebanese-Palestinian accord must be
followed by a Lebanese-Syrian accord which will solve the problems pending
between the two countries and help form a specific guarantee for the first
accord prior to the achievement of a broad Arab guarantee. Syria is concerned
with the situation in Lebanon for a number of reasons, as well as being
concerned with the Palestinian problem and the overall Middle East crisis.
Above all. Syria maintains a presence in Lebanon, and coordination with

the Lebanese on all matters is a must.

Is a Lebanese-Palestinian Accord Possible?

In spite of the fact that the problems pending between Lebanon and the
Palestinians are numerous and multifaceted, recent developments have

amassed them all into one big problem, namely that of the south. It is on
this issue that the efforts of an accord between Lebanese authorities and

the PLO must concentrate, because it has become the key to a solution to many
issues both at home and abroad--and the padlock on such a solution as well.

In the view of the authorities and the international community, the problem
of the south can only be solved by putting the resolutions of the UN
Security Council into effect. This means that terrorist operations and
Palestinian infiltration must be halted, and there must be no obstruction

to the return of sovereignty and legality through the introduction of the
army into the area, along with security and vital administrative activities.
By definition, the solution will begin immediately, according to the
authorities and the international community, when the authorities send their
army to Sur and Al-Nabatiyah after armed Palestinians vacate these cities.
Such a move would tend to give the international community, and especially
the United States, an opportunity to pressure Israel to halt its aggressions
and operations and ultimately end its support of the border groups which
would pave the way for the army to enter the border area.

These matters will constitute the main topic of discussions at the anticipated
Lebanese-Palestinian summit, which everyone hopes will result in the desired
accord.

Interests of Three Sides

Hidely informed political sources believe that the interests of three sides
will be served by the pacification of the south. They are:

1. Lebanon, of course, because the south is the gateway to the problems
affecting all of Lebanon. and tranquility there is considered the key to
an overall Lebanese solution.

2. The PLO, some of whose staff feel, along with devotees to its cause,
that any military actions by or within Lebanon and any armed incident afford
Israel an opportunity to continue its war of attrition against the PLO

and possibly to plunge the PLO once again into the Lebanese war in order to
divert it from its goal which has begun to acquire international interest
and approval. This does not mean an end to Palestinian military action,
however, as the "zealots" would try to proclaim. Such action would be
maintained as an effective reserve and would be developed and modified
according to circumstances and developments.

3. Syria. for whom the south is considered a real trap. For this reason,
Syria's welfare requires that the necessary backing be provided to put the

ZIN Security Council Resolutions into effect in the south and thus prevent
Israel from luring the Syrians into a destructive situation.

Accordingly, the political sources feel that the authorities must take
advantage of the benefits to be achieved by moving the army into the south
and solving the problem there. Moreover, they feel that the Lebanese,
especially those who sympathize with the Palestinians, must rid themselves
of the difficult demand for prior consent and take the initative to request
the entrance of the army and approve this move.

These sources also feel that the argument that Lebanon has performed its
duties and now it is up to the United Nations to fulfill its obligations

is not accurate. While it is true that Lebanon sent an army into the

south and carried out other measures, the Security Council resolution
stipulates that the international forces will assist Lebanon in reclaiming
its sovereignty and extending its authority, and not that they will reclaim

sovereignty and extend authority and then hand them over to Lebanon on
a silver platter.

8591
C80: 4802

91
OFFICIAL dI-HOh‘THL! BANK STATISTICS PUBLISHED
deitut MOMENT-LE JOUR in French 21 Sep 79 p 9

[text 7 The Bank of Lebanon published yesterday its bi-nonthly report as
established on 15 September, which, cupared to that or 31 August, elicits
the following cements:

1: Fiduciary currency shows a two percent decrease fru one two-
veek period to the neat, falling tron 3,7h1,728,653.82 hbanese pounds to
3,66h,523,722.9h Lebanese pounds (LL).

At the same tine, assets in gold and foreign currencieu (the elasnts for
securi the pound) dropped by two percent, amounting on 15 Septenber to
2,993’1

8,630.58 LL, compared to 2,993,899,391.3h LL, thus naintaining
cover of our currency at 80 percent.

2: 0n the other hand, dnand deposits needs to the Bank of Lebanon
by the Lebanese banking systqs increased by 7.1; rcent, rising to

2,3h0,733.977.37 LL, cc-pared to 2,180,55h,779.7 IL on 31 August.

3: The result is a net increase in nonetary assets during this
period, on the order of 1.1; percent, for a total of 6,005,257,700.31 LL
Wed to 5,922,283'h33e56 LL.

)4: The I'Other Deposits" entry also increased, rising tron
1,19h,h72,h62.51 LL to 1,22h,962,102.51 LL.

5: The other assets of the Bank of Lebanon increased by 3.2 percent,

amounting on 15 Septeeber to 3,929,260,828.hh LL col-pared to
3,808,22h.971.10 LL.

6: Loans inthepublic sector rossbyso-s SOnillion LLin1Sdays,
whereas those granted to the private sector remained stationary at
61.8 million LL.

The report as issued by the Bank of Lebanon is reproduced below.

92
ASSETS:

1:
2:
3:
h:
5:

Gold and foreign currency
lame to public sector

loans to primate nectar

Ioene under Lav 28/67

Other assets and debit eccounte

mm‘l‘lﬁs :

13

2:
3:

S:

Dam lnbiliuee
e: Fiduciary honey
M Dean! depoeite

Other deposits
Capital

General reserve fund
Other credit. eccounte

121139

050:

h800

LL

2.933.1h8.530.53
931.1%.1 mos
61,8111 .731 .26
5.1hh,567.58
3,929,260,828th

O b O

3,66h,523,722.9h
2,310,733,977.”
mm
1,22h,962,102.51
15.000.000.00
263.085.660.55
352.23h.h05.57

77mm

93

LL

2,993,899,391 .31:
881,1hh,111.o&
61 .7721, 328.68
h72,h0h.78
3,808.22h,971.10

3,7111 ,728,653.82
2.130.551» 779.714

3, ‘22 Dgaaﬁnjj.“
1,19h.h72.h62.51
15.000.000.00
263,085,660.SS
350,673,550.”

77m
WBFS

FLIGHT OF HORKERS REPORTEDuMinister of Labor and Social Affairs Nazca Kadri
has requested the proper services in his deparusent to give his! a thorough
report on the exodus movement of Lebanese workers to foreign countries. But
it has become evident that these services do not have at their disposal the
full statistics on the subject, and the only figures they have been able to
establish are those regarding workers who request a work permit from the
ministry in question before their departure. This permit, incidentally, is
required of Iabanese workers by certain Arabic countries, Saudi Arabia in
particular. In the absence of full, exact statistics on the matter, some
economic eateblistssente have had recourse to approximate estimates. Thus
it has become apparent that the industrial sector has witnessed, during the
past four years, the exodus of over 60,000 workers, nade up for the most
part of technicians and specialists. for their part, the trade and finance
sectors have been deserted by some 20,000 workers. As for the banking sec-
tor, losses have been limited, not exceeding 1,000 uployees, whose loss
hes largely been nade good as a result of recruiting among university grad-
uates. [rm] [Beirut L'Oﬂlﬂlf-LB Joan in French 23 Sep 79 p 9.7 1211.9

cso: heoo
[Excerpt] In spite of a good number of turbulent initiatives from Tripoli
and sometimes vehement charges of "Imperialism" -- recently accused of
wanting to "halt the progress of Islam" with its military intervention in
Central Africa -- Franco-Libyan relations have been marked lately by an
apparent cordiality and close cooperation in many areas.

In fact, Franco-Libyan cooperation dates from the first years of the new
regime. Colonel Qaildhsﬁ had always praised General de Gaulle‘s Arab policy
and his attitude toward Israel. After the MB war, Tripoli went so far as
to organize some sympoaia on Gaullism, often welcoming representatives of
the leftist movements.

France's flaunted independence from the United States, especially on the
level of defense . was also greatly appreciated in Tripoli, where they called
on their industry to succeed Great Britain in the equipment of their army,
especially in aviation. Mirage planes and helicopters were supplied.
Military cooperation between the two countries is currently continuing with
maintenance of materiel, although since Libya's break with Egypt in 1972

and the border war in 1976, the USSR has worked its way up to first place
among Tripoli's suppliers.

0n the economic level, French sales to Libya have developed considerably
in recent years, especially in the automobile sector, in which France has
carved out a large part of the market for itself. This progress is all the
more remarkable since France buys a share of Libya's oil production judged
very modest in Tripoli: 3.6 million tons in 1978, or 3 percent of our
total imports.

Nevertheless, Tripoli has not ceased to assert its African ambitions which
have at once collided with those of Paris. Colonel Qadhdhafi keenly in-
terested in the black continent, has since 1970 been working on a wide-
spread operation aimed at breaking the ties that many African states have
formed with Israel on the diplomatic level and in the areas of civil and

95
military cooperation. Thanks to its large financial means, Libya has been
able to score spectacular successes, nocably in Uganda. Unfortunately.
those rspprochements were to send Colonel Qadhdnfi flying to Gen Idi Amin
Dada‘s defense in the conflict with Tanzania, which was to be fatal to him.

Libya's intervention in the internal conflicts which tore Chad asunder were
even more dangerous for Franco-Libyan relations. While serving as a refuge
for PROLINAT, Libya did not hesitate to have its troops occupy the Azousou
Strip in Chadian territory. That attempted annexation was to provoke the
break between Tripoli and current head of the N'Djamena regime Goukouni
Oueddei, Libya not succeeding in playing the role of mediator between the
different disputing factions. Was it the failure of this policy which
pushed Colonel Qadhdnfi to look for "military facilities" in Central Africa

and make it stand up to France, without, however, provoking a reaction
from Paris thus far?

ll937
C80: 6800
[Text] The Beir Grassa, prototype for a group of 10 missile-launching
patrol boats ordered from Mechanical Shipyards of Normandy [CNN] in Cher-
bourg, was launched on 28 June.

These boats. which are an intermediate version between the Combattante l

and II types from those shipyards and whose reputation is well established.
have the following characteristics:

Displacement: 300 tpc

Dimensions: 49 x 7 x 2.6 meters

Propulsion: 1. “Tu diesels, 4 propellers, 20,000 hp (16,710 ha)
Maximum Speed: 40 knots

Armament: lo Otomat antisurface missiles* 1/76 CA Oto Helara compact
forward 2/100 CA (II x I) Breda Bofors aft

Otomat is a rocket conceived jointly by the French firm Hatra and the
Italian company Oto Helara. Its maxim. theoretical range is over 150 in
but aboard these patrol boats, it will be limited to that of the radar
horizon, or about 60 km.

The ordering of these 10 patrol boats from am and 6 corvettes from Italy
shows Libya's desire to increase its naval forces and play a role in the
Mediterranean in line with Colonel Qadhdhafi's ambitions.

These corvettes, whose construction was entrusted to cum [expansion
unknown] in Riva ‘l'rigoso, aro boats of a little over 600 tons and 32
knots. Their main armament includes lo Oto-at missiles. l/ 76 Oto Helara
compact, a double gun carriage of 30 as well as 6 T/ASH (III at 2) HR 32.

* Three very similar boats but with 10 a- 38 Exocet instead of the Oto-at
missiles were ordered from cm by liseria.

97
The first two. Hadi H'rach and Wadi Hajer, are on their trial runs. The
other two are still under construction. They will be in service by 1982.

In addition to these boats, the Libyan Navy currently has the following
vessels:

--3 1,950-ton, P-type submarines, supplied by the Soviets: Al Badr,

A1 Fatah. A1 Ahad. The first was delivered in December 1976, the other
2 in 1978. Three others are reportedly expected. These very modern sub-
marines are furnished with 10 S33-TLT (6 forward, 6 aft) with a total of

22 torpedoes (10 in tubes, 12 in reserve). These torpedoes can be replaced
by 26 mines.

—l frigate, Dat Assawari, 1,325 tons, completed in 1973 in the British

shipyards Vosper Thomycroft (37 knots) 1/114 CA (11 x I) and 2/30 CA
in x l) and l ASH mortar.

--1 (mo-ton corvette, Tobruk, dating from 1965 and also built by Vosper.

--6 Osa II missile-launching patrol boats supplied by the USSR since 1976
(2100 tpc, 36 knots, 6 antisurface SS-N-Zb Styx missiles, 10/30 CA). Six
others are expected. The order, which was originally for 25 units, was
apparently reduced by half, which explains the order for 10 patrol boats
from 04".

--7 95-to-100-ton patrol boats built in Great Britain, some 10 years old.

--2 LST, Ibn Ouf and Ibn Karissa, completed in 1977-78 at La Hediterranee
shipyards in La Seyne. Their cargo displacement is around 3,000 tons.
Their armament includes 6 loo-CA (II x 3) Breda-Bofors cannons and 1 81-

mortar from the army to support a small landing operation. The capacity
of these LST is about 570 tons.

--3 Pblnamyi-type L8H built in Poland, Ibn A1 Hadran, Ibn (hays, Ibn Bl
Parat. The first was delivered at the end of 1977 at the same time as
another, christened Ibn Qves, which was destroyed during the night of
14-15 September 1978 after a fire. The other two were delivered last June.

--1 small, 2,000—ton repair ship, Zeltin, which, thanks to its apron, can
accomdate, for example, the careenage of Goa II-type patrol boats.

11937
C80: 6800
‘AL-HUHARRIR' URGES 'PRIVILEGED CLASS' T0 BEAR ITS SHARE 0? SACRIFICE

LD291523 Casablanca AL-MUHARRIR in Arabic 18 Oct 79 pp 1. 8 LD

“Editorial: "No Third Choice for the Bourgeoisie")

[Excerpts] The war which Algeria is waging against our country is multi-
faceted. There ia the military front. on which it deploys troops and large
quantities of amnitions and equipment. There is the diplomatic front. on
which it has mobilized all its political and financial capabilities as well
as its experience in international circles and gatherings. There is also
the propaganda front which Algeria considers as important if not more
important than the other two fronts.

What is significant in the psychological warfare which Algeria is waging
against us in the press and radio is its exploitation of the nistakes which
the rulers or the privileged class cor-sit.

For several days now the Algerian infornation media have been linking
[Morocco's] economic difficulties to the Sahara problem. Of course. what
interests the Algerian rulers is not the prosperity of the Moroccan people
but rather seeing them weakened so they will give up their adherence to the
integrity of the national soil. For this reason the media insist that the
cause of the economic difficulties and the social crisis is the adherence
to the national rights in the Sahara and that this crisis will be solved
as soon as the Sahara is abandoned and the establishment of the alleged
Saharan state is allowed.

It is by harping on this tune that the Algerian information Iedia, in their
psychological warfare against Morocco. are trying to undermine and weaken
adherence to the integrity of national soil. It is worth noting however,
that it is not this psychological warfare alone that is trying to attribute
the causes of the economic difficulties to the cost of the Sahara war; the
privileged class is also doing the sane thing. This class often alleges
that the Sahara problem with its past and present costs is the principal
reason for the economic difficulty fron which the country is suffering.
Indeed. this unsubstantiated allegation has been adopted by some goverment
officials thenselves.
The allegation that the Sahara war is responsible for the economic difficulty
serves the psychological warfare which Algeria is waging against our country.
In fact what the privileged class is reiterating objectively and clearly
agrees with what the Algerian information media reiterate in their daily
intensive psychological warfare against us.

Discreditation of the psychological warfare against our country cannot be
achieved solely by the bourgeois class giving up blaming the Sahara problem
for the effects of economic, capital and liberal policy and renouncing the
false allegation that the Sahara has led to the economic crisis. This alone
is not enough. Rather, the bourgeois class must also take the step of bearing
its share of sacrifice for the sake of preserving the territories that have
been regained. The bourgeoisie is called upon to offer part of its wealth--

a part commensurate with this wealth as well as with the size of the
bourgeoisie groups themselves. By making such a contribution and abandoning
the theme that the Sahara is responsible for the economic difficulties the
bourgeoisie would repay some of the debt it owes to the national cause and
would foil the plans of the enemies of the integrity of Moroccan soil, who

are exploiting the mistakes of the privileged class in assessing the situation
and in failing to beer its share of the sacrifice in the continuing war

against Morocco in the diplomatic, military and psychological war fields.
The privileged bourgeosie has no third choice.

C50: #502

100
'AL-'ALAH' SAYS SOUTH AFRICAN N-TEST SETS OFF W8 RACE
1.0020913 Rabat AL—‘ALAM in Arabic 27 Oct 79 p 2 LD

[Article by 'Umsr Najib: "Africa Enters Nuclear Age From the Gate of
Destruction"]

[Excerpts] A 11.8. television station. citing CIA reports, said on Friday
that racist South Africa detonated a low-yield nuclear bonb in the Indian
Ocean on 22 September. U.S. spy satellites confirmed the occurrence of

such an explosion and seismograph stations in several countries also recorded
it.

In South Africa the ruling circles denied the explosion story in a manner
aimed at achieving two objectives: intimidating the African states by hinting
at the potential existence of a nuclear weapon and forestalling the antici-
pated wave of protest and condeamtion from all parts of the world because

of South Africa's entry into the nuclear club and the introduction of this
weapon to a continent hitherto free of it.

South Africa’s ability to manufacture a nuclear weapon comes as no surprise
to anybody because for any years reports have been indicating that the
Pretoria goverment is developing its nuclear capability in cooperation with
aany Western countries, foremost among which are France. West Germany and
the United States, in return for supplying these states with raw uraniun,

of which South Africa is considered the most important producer. Where is
the surprise then?

The surprise is that the Western states have allowed Pretoria to carry out
its threat to possess a nuclear weapon after these states had made the world
and the African states in particular believe last year, when there was an
uproar about an ininent nuclear uplosion in the South African desert, that
they would not allow Pretoria to possess such a weapon. Hhat makes the
surprise even more seriously politically and nilitarily is that the dis-
closure of the explosion was made sore than 1 month after it took place,
which thus scans the South African Government has been given time to
answer and an opportunity to inpose a fist accolpli on the world with

the connivance of its allies.

101
Hestern pressure on South Africa last year to prevent it from exploding a
nuclear bomb was aimed at forcing it to reach an agreement on the independence
of Namibia. at least as far as appearances are concerned. when the
nationalist forces in Namibia rejected this agreement and the United Nations
did not endorse it. it was logical for the proponents of the agreement to seek
to enable Pretoria to possess an additional lever in order to be able to
dictate its will. The nuclear bomb was the best means for doing so.

The existence of a nuclear bomb on the African Continent will upset many
balances. The people of the continent are struggling to get rid of the
vestiges of colonialism at a time when the international powers are struggling
to control its destiny. In order to restore the balance that Pretoria has
upset. these [African] states will be compelled to acquire strength
equivalent to South Africa's nuclear capability. Some of these states might
succeed in manufacturing their own nuclear bomb or greatly increase their
military expenditures. Other states might be compelled to look for powerful
allies who possess nuclear weapons in order to safeguard their stability and
security in an equation called the balance of nuclear terror.

Africa has entered the nuclear age through the gate of destruction and not
the gate of construction. This is its fate.
BR EFS

URANIIH PIND--Uranium has been discovered at Hafags in the western lligh
Atlas region. Drilling has revealed the existence of a3- 5-meter seen of
radioactive ore with an oxidized ore horison of l,$00-2,000 ppm b(3)0(8)l.
[expansion unknown]. Furthermore, following the conclusion of a uranius
prospecting program in the "Tarekochid" pilot zone of the High [as pub-
lished] houlouya project, some encouraging indications have been observed.
These two pieces of news, revealed by the Mineral Exploration and Investment
Office in a booklet published on its 50th anniversary, encourage high hopes

for future exploration and exploitation of this strategic material. [Excerpt]
1.0051141 Casablanca LE hATnl in French 2!. Oct 79 p lo LD]

com 0“ UN RESOLUTION--Pollowing the vote at the UN fourth connittee on
the question of the Sahara, the spokesman of the Ministry of State in charge

of foreign affairs and cooperation has made the following statement: It

is noted that despite the efforts exerted by Algeria on all levels--finan-
cial, diplomatic or political-4nd despite the pressures and distortions

it used on some occasions, the Algerian draft resolution secured only 83
votes and there were some reservations in respect to some of its paragraphs.
This same draft resolution secured 89 votes last year. On the other hand,
the nmber of countries which voted against this draft resolution, abstained
or did not participate in the voting was 70. It is also noted that even
some of the countries which voted in favor of the draft resolution, particu-
larly Yugoslavia and India, have demanded the inclusion of some amendments
in acne paragraphs. These reservations concerned the description of the
POLISARIO as the sole legitimate representative of the Western Sahara people
and the need for the withdrawal of what Algeria insists on calling occupa-
tion forces and the need to respect the territorial integrity of the Western
Sahara and the sovereignty of what it calls the Saharan people. This entire
paragraph was canceled out by the invitation extended to Morocco to partici-

pate in the dynamism of peace. [Tut] [1.0032160 Rabat Domestic Service in
Arabic 2000 GMT 3 Nov 79 Lb] .

C80: 4400

103
'(llt'lill PLANT III-ZVHUH’MEN'I' PIANNEI) FOR AL-JUIMYI.

liddnh mum mats in English 22 Oct 79 pp 20-21

Article by Chris L. Parr]

Want]

the lubail industrial complex will soon hove primary and secon-
dary industries' in production A public electric utility established by
lloyal Decree willsupply maniveanmntsolenergy aSproducrion
itereases II the three oil reﬁneries. four petrochemical plants.
aluminum smelter. steel mill. petmprotein plant and M tertiliur
plants which will be in operation in the early 1980:.

The bub at this syuetn is the Gbazlsn Generation Plsnt lowed
eight kilometers northweal of lu‘aymelt It is the ﬁrst major steam
powered elearic generating plant in the Kingdom. and willliave (our.

400 meg-watt generators prodtta'ng l600 megawatts [or the 230
kiovolt transmission system

The Gbazlan plant will provide much of the electricity that will be
needed ottertbesbupriee hueinmontbstooome assteelproduo-
tionpoeeonstreatheGbazlanbdilyispartoltbeSaudiCon-
aotideted Electric Company (SGCO).

ﬂiesiaolproiectsiotbeﬁastemﬁovineecanbeseeahomtbe
fautbat mostoftbeelectrieitygeneratedtberewill be nothingbots

-produet «desalination projectsprodadng fresh water {or human
and industrial consumption.

Mitsubishi Corporation has )IIR signed a SR 935 million contract
to build a 550 megawatt power station drivenby steam from the

Mﬂti-Stapeﬁasbdeaalinationpmcestes. pmoestesltwlllbemwater
forindustrialprojnearbyeetsaswellasbr
lybenSCECOwascreaedbylloyalDecreeinAw 1976. its
main hmtionsincludeddltectingtbeelewtitybomtbedeealine-
tionprooeasestotbe [50.000th
townsandvillaaenandtolaryitdurtrialproieeu tbelobaﬂ
mphllcmlﬂtymm wpocebtodealwitbtbehuieate
mstbatarisewhonavaluableeoetysooreellhnamalpasis
“turned hm electricity.
AnmbasarpedalcontraarhbSCBCOtommmahuln
and operate SCECO for a ﬁve year period born 1971an:
AnmcoltasSRl .6bilionvortboldureslrtSCECO(o(SR5billion

total).itisanoperatorolgenenting mashmbolderanda
payincostontcrolSCECO. PM

ThemsonAnmcomchoeenfortBrobistlhdlk
larpst existing powernenvork when SCEOOvascreawdmd tlte
skils necessarytodealvitltlugeelootrﬂeetion mains

The ﬁrst step taken by Aramoo was to consolidate. upgrade or
scrap inetﬁdent or duplicatlve smaller generating hdlities forming a

1”
corn-non end. 'lhete wcte 1o mull m-npanm m the I..I.\le‘ttt Pro-
vince that malty supplied less energy than w.» needed by local
consumes. -

By December. 197 7 all 16 companies had teen nought, hh-trehul-
dcrs were given generous shares in SCECO in a ratio of three new
sharestor every old \‘hﬂt held by independent mmpamn Also 3 l5
per cent return profit ptl year rm allure wax guaranteed.

“to mwlts tor ﬁtntctn Province consumers haw been startling. lo
the AI Haw oasis. for example. 62 villages now an: electrified that
had no player helore last summer. Within the nu“ two yearn remote
area such a the Wadi Wyatt between Ain Dar and Nariyu will have
all ita villages clcctriﬁed. '

" In some very remote village) there wtll be temporary locul elec-
tric generntiun until ntuin transmision Iines.are cttnnttucted. " said
ladi Uthntan. acting manager ot SCECO Public and Customer
Aﬂaits. " This will case any hardships encountered in the \mullet
lovms and villages tur (tom metropolitan areas. " he continued.

Another area of SCECO modern are large cities. such as the
tri-city area ot Dammant. Dhahran and Al-Khohar which already
have been supplid adequate power by SCECO.

The urged potential rummihility that SCECO tr.» will he to
supply putter for large consumers: the luhatl Royal Comntnuon.
the Dawn-am Industrial Estates. Ara-nu) oil installations and :pccial
government industrial protects.

The common: electrification system that SCECO operates lot
Mum and Vll|agc\. metropolitan areas. and large industrial consum-
‘1‘ M natural pix to run in turhinca.

Until nou- ﬂared up pa" 'at [unveil separation plant:- tUOSPs) Wat
lust :t\ a pmcr \MIWL‘. But \oon panenpcrs on jets ﬂying to and from
the linstern Province will no longer ace these “are: lighting the
«k mt. The natural gm will he tapped at the rate of three billion cubic
leer .- di“ and it will provide the fuel needed to ntn such large
rant-ration plan“ like that lound at Ulluhtl.

'lln: ( ilLtzlan Plant will be producing ltttlt) megawatt» by 1954. and
" there i~ ongoing coordination between SCECO and the .luhail
Royal Commmion concerning energy needs. “ said Uthman. As the
hawk ol lullait expand. electrical production will increase to meet

these needs.

In I978 two outstation: were establisltod in lute-it. /\l.\al lwu.
800.000 gallon tuel tanks for a 50 megawatt Met piitlll had heeu
erected. pressure-tested. and were heing ﬁlled. Owrhcud power
lines were completed and energized

1he thermal pmter plant at Ghazlan has a unique strategic Sc“:
raphical loculirm to major present and future knoll renter). in the
Eastern Province. It is capable ot utilizing various Ilquitl fuel; in
addition ttt natural gas: ethane. fuel oil at naphtha ean .tlm he
burned.

With a superahundanoc 0! these luck in the Eastern Prmiuce the
mecca of various SCECO eleariftuttitm project: welt .o the lulu-it
industrial inlrmtmclutc ll'tttt depend on this energy wins insured
|l(2|l YIELD RHIE DEVELOPED IN IIASA
Iitldrth ARM! NEHS in English 17 Oct 79 p 3

l'l'cxt]

JEDOAH. Oct. to -— A
Nationalist Chinese agricultural
team in ilasa hasdeyelopedavar-
iety 0! red rice that may double
output in the area.

The Chineae Embassy here said
Tuesday that” yieldsotthencwvar-
iety. My: Number One. run
lrom ﬂvetoseventonsahectare.
That compares with the two or

three tons given by the local Has-
sawi stra'ut.

lt' s the result oi hybridhatlon
between Hassawi and Ai Chao
Chico. a dwari. high-yiem var-
iety developed on Taiwan

Prof. lingChens-yhheadotthe
Chineae mission gavea adenonst-
ratinn Sunday in Hot-i.

He said the local variety has
many characteristics restricting
espec'nlly the extremely tall plant
heat and uowth duration.

said with the plant height
runningirom ISOIoIGOcntJlas—

(230: It 820

begins. andthiscouldreduceout.
puby60perwnt.11teloalvui-
etytaheslwtolwdayito you.

To remedy these dehets. he

to cioaabreed Hassawi with vari-
ousdwaﬂnrletienandiromthe

oil-lassawiandAiChao
Chien it reload the new variety
in early 1978. .

Alter lunher experiments. the
mission has detentined the new
variety is suitable ice thercuon

The plant height oithe Has-ink
NttrnberOneisonly‘ltltowent.
anditstayserectevenwhenthe
rice is the. In addition. the new
WQIMW l00to 00de

top“.
Anotheradvan’tageotthenew
variety. heaaid. istht'nsstratv

still mm rcentot
tein after maﬁa W

withonly 3. s percentoillascawl.
Thh will enable tanner: to earn
extra proﬁt by selling the straw as

we

animal iced.

Them-don also loud that
Talehtm. Indies Number Three.

alongp ain white ricevatiety also
developed tn Taiwan. iscxtrernely
suitable for the region.

Out putoithatvarietyinthc
milion' s iarrn reaches a me. lo
tons per hectare. According to
Lin. the variety’s best perfor-
mance in Taiwan isteven tons per
kettle. '
ration

hopdthllin
don and
.taeuotur

Lin
with the Hasa lrr'u
Drainage A ‘ arch

‘ Agricultural Res:

OW and the Directorate oi
Agriculture oi Hate. the mission
at! beget carrying out extension
worktolocaliarnierscanbeneiit
horn is research.

Auendin. the demonstration
were HIDA Director-General
Muhammad Abdullah Al-u-

Butain. HRARC Director Mahdi
Ramadan andtorne lOOiarnrent
BRIEFS

AIRPORT RADAR “SIDS—— Jeddah, Oct. lTo-Saudi Arabia's aerial nonitoring
system has been cleeted. It covers 28 airports. According to the presi-
dent of Civil Aviation, Abdullah Nehdi, the system will be in Operation by
the end of the year. Hehdi told AL-BILAD the system has 21 earth satellite
stations, 12 landing control devices which nonitor the muent of planes
fro. touchdown to rest and coununications equipnent for direct ground to
air and air to ground connections. The existing five radar systems will
be inroved. Once they are ready plane novenents at the country's airports
will rise to 100 per day, he said. A new runaway has been opened at Jeddah
airport to neet increasing demand. The aprons at Jeddah and Riyadh have
been enlarged to take nore planes. Studies have been coupleted on proposed
airports in 'ruraif, Qurayyat and Khafji and contracts are expected to be

awarded shortly. Mosques and housing units will be included. [Jiddsh
ARAB ms in English 18-19 Oct 79 p 2]

CSO: 4820

1W
REGIME SEEN DETERMINED 1‘0 OVERCGE 'CONSPIRACY,’ SHORTCOHINGS
Paris AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI "A AL-DWALI in Arabic 1-7 Oct 79 p 8

[Article by Hadi' al-hilu: "Anid Expectations of More Annunciation and
Bombings, Damascus Keeps One Eye on the 'Conapiracy' and Another on the
Gaps in the Regine"]

[Text] Damascus: A visitor to Danascua has no trouble
realising that "something" within the authority needs to
be corrected and that the individual assassinations and
batting incidents have left clear narks, but have not
caused confusion within the regime.

There is nothing unusual or "unnatural" in Dannacus. The explosions which
occur from tine to tine, which are followed by individual assassinations.
have caused the citizens to question the country's ability to withstand
then; however, to the authorities, they are actions to be expected at a
time when the Syrian regine is opposing the Camp David agreements. Syria,
in the view of a nuaber of party and govern-ants] leaders, is like a fire-
man who rushes about putting out fires anywhere that is required. Now,
the Camp David parties are trying to ignite a fire not only in the Syrian
firelaan'a house but also in his clothes.

These leaders say that the objective sought by the Casp David parties is
to divert Syria's attention to its internal problems by creating these
incidents on the one hand or on the other hand by utilising gaps which
exist within the regineuon the principle that such gaps are like open
windows through which winds can blow through the entire house.

Talk of change in Damascus begins at this point, because the eaisting gaps
at various official and party levels open the way for "those who fish in
muddy waters." Such a situation could becone like a rolling snowball,
which increases in site every ninute and every hour.

The latter of the Koala Brotherhood is another issue. The arrest of

llusni ’Abu, one of the Brotherhood leaders and the accidental murder of
'Abd al-Sattar al-Za'in by the security nan affin that the authorities'

108
crackdown on this group has so far been fundamentally successful. The
Syrian officials acknowledge that a number of Brotherhood leaders are still
free and admit that some are still operating in Syria, although some have
succeeded in fleeing to certain Arab countries which Damascus still refuses
to identify. however, a Syrian official says that these countries encour-
age the Brotherhood to Operate outside their territories while banning
their activity in their own territory. Syrian officials say that those
Arab countries are threatened with sectarian outbursts themselves unless

they "assist" in stopping Hosleu Brotherhood activity from emanating from
their territory.

Explosions of a Sectarian Nature
How will the Syrian authorities deal with this problem?

Officials here expect that the intensity of the sectarian explosions will
multiply until the end of this year at least. They say that the more

Syria presses on with its opposition to the Camp David agreements, the
more the wave of assassinations will multiply but the wave will continue
despite everything within certain limitations which are well known to more
than one country in the world. Syrian officials emphasise at the same time
that while such things are possible, the eruption of a sectarian strife

in Syria is impossible. Such a prospect is not possible even in the calcu-
lations of those who are seeking to weaken or create confusion in Syria
not to soften up its position regarding peace with Israel but to make peace
possible between Israel and other Arabs. Syrian officials think that as
long as Syria is willing and capable of political and military action,
other Arab parties who wish to join the Camp David bandwagon will not move
in that direction. One official says that Syria now is strong and capable
of both endurance and confrontation at the same time. The air battles
which occur over Lebanon from time to time are in fact an actual expression
of Syria's ability to endure and confront--an ability derived from a polit-
ical decision made some time ago and being carried out by the competent
agencies.

The Syrian official adds that what is happening inside Syria is an attempt
to sow confusion carried out by certain elements in service of political
goals. The aim behind all this is to subjugate Syria to the logic of Camp
David. It other words, the objective is to force the Syrian leadership to
make decisions in such an atmosphere--decisions determined either from fear
of what lies in the future or as a reaction to what is taking place. The
Syrian authorities will not heed the Israeli warning to stop intercepting
its aircraft which roam Lebanon's skies at will--it means that "Syrian
confrontation will continue."

Ther Is Another Hatter
This is one thing, but the gaps caused by some officials unwittingly or

premeditatedly are another thing. The Syrian leadership is convinced that
it is urgently necessary to plug these gaps. This "corrective action"

109
will be carried out through the general party conference which will be
held before the end of this year. Well informed party circles in Syria
think it likely that the conference will be held between November and
December. At this conference, there will be an assessment of what has
been done thus far on all political, economic and organizational levels,
through reports currently being prepared and which will be discussed in
various party branches. After each branch secretariat has drawn up its
own comments and suggestions, the congress will then be called to convene
so that it won't last a long time as in the past. Indeed, the Syrian
leadership is currently studying a proposal that the conference be convened
in two stages--the first on the party branches level and the second at the
congress itself, so as to save time. The question of time is being taken
into consideration because all the officials will have to devote their full
attention to the congress, resulting in a disruption in administrative work.
In the past, debate over reports and voting on proposals was done during
the congress, and this process was very time consuming. The congress will
be called to convene by President al-Asad, in his capacity as secretary
general of the Ba'th Party.

it is expected, as reported by officials in Damascus, that the congress
will result in major changes in positions and responsibilities. The con—
gress is also expected to draw up a new plan to confront the next phase.
Meetings are being held within this framework between the regional leader-
ship of the Ba‘th Party and the central leadership of the National and
Progressive Front which is participating in the government. A Syrian
official says that the purpose of these meetings is to strengthen cohesive-
ness and cooperation among the parties participating in "the national
front" and to broaden the base of that front by including nationalist ele-
ments and personalities who enjoy a fund of popular respect and support.
It is well known that the statement made by President nsfes sl-Assd upon
his renomination to the presidency included a statement to this effect.

Strife la the Goal

A political observer returns from Damascus with impressions which may be
summarised as follows:

1. The assassination incidents which have occurred so far are a preface
to explosions designed to inflame sectarian disputes and escalate them to

the point of a sectarian strife, such as the strife which set Lebanon on
fire.

2. Syrian authorities expect more such activities but completely dismiss
the possibility of a sectarian strife occurring.

3. These authorities acknowledge that while the Moslem Brotherhood is being
incited externally and partly funded by Arab money, there are within the
political system gaps which must be plugged in order to prevent violent
winds from blowing through them.

110
4. Syria stands almost alone in confronting Camp David. It is still
strong, but the international objective is to weaken it and sow confusion
in it to pave the way for the kind of decisions which would satisfy the

policy that the Camp David signatories are attempting to carry out in the
Arab region.

S. Syrian officials are convinced that despite these givens, resistance is
possible and capable of undermining the policy of capitulation to Israel
on the one hand and achieving an honorable Arab peace on the other.

6. With this in mind, officials confirm that Syria will continue to con-
front Israel in Lebanese or Arab skies, and that Syria will not allow

Israel free movement in Lebanon regardless of the sacrifices. The Syrian
eye will resist the Israeli awl so that this awl will not reach the heart.

7. It is expected following the meetings of "national front“ that the
front, after it is expanded, will play a larger role in public and polit-
ical life. Public resolutions, and others that will in all probability
remain secret, will confirm this course of action.

8. There will be no governmental changes before the congress. Syrian
Foreign Minister 'Abd al-Halim Khaddam confirmed this before his departure
for New York.

9. All of these conditions will remain the main hallmark of Syrian activ-
ity prior to the congress. It is difficult to speculate right now what
the picture will be after the congress.

The Confusion Is Deliberate

Nevertheless, the primarily deliberate confusion presently occurring in
Syria is designed to disfigure the features of the present regime. During
and prior to the Baghdad conference, Syria was able to persuade the Arab
states that endurance and resistance were possible because it was strong
and capable of doing so. However, the increase in the assassinations and
bombings might rock a strong regime, without necessarily toppling it. This
is the view of those who oppose this regime. what is being sought is only
to rock the regime. Syria is now fighting against such attempts. The
Hoslem Brotherhood, no matter what it does, will not succeed in creating

a popular trend or in finding sections within the army which will support
and help it carry out a military coup, nor will it succeed in fomenting
sectarian strife which would burn [passage dropped] [the Ba'th Party]
succeeded overs number of years to create a broad popular base from the
diverse sects in Syria, as well as in maintaining an international balance
in the Arab region. This is something which cannot be easily overcome.
Therefore, an incident generates whispers which make it look to be more
than it actually is, but soon the whispers will evaporate. Officials in
Syria anticipate such incidents and say that some anticipated incidents

may surpass in severity anything that has happened so far, so as to make
the regime appear unable to control the interns]. situation or to drive it
into reactions which would be necessary first step toward igniting a
sectarian strife.

However, does that mean that things will occur with such simplicity? This
is not so. The plot to which Syria is currently being subjected nay sur-
pass the level of the resistance shown by its rulers. However, one offi-
cial says: "Regardless of the size of the plot, we will maintain our
positions until we attain the peace we want. Although the regime in
Damascus has thus so far shown some of its weapons, it has not yet shown
then all." An observer needs only to visit Damascus or any Syrian city,
on the coast or inland, to feel that the features of the city have not
changed and that nothing has actually changed. An observer needs only to
ask the ordinary citizens to find out whether "something" within the
regime needs to be corrected or changed.

7005
(:30: 4802

112
“MAB HOUSING PROJECT; ANTI-CHOW MEASURES DISCUSSED
Damascus AL-TIWRAH in Arabic 18 Sep 79 p 1.

[Article by SANA and AL-mum correspondent: "100 Million Syrian Pounds
To Build Housing Units in Bamah"]

[Text] Hannah: One hundred million Syrian pounds has been allocated to
build new housing units in Hanah, at a time when the health situation in
the province has been examined and the actions taken to prevent the spread
of cholera reviewed, especially after its appearance in neighboring coun—
tries.

It was decided that the Public Institution for Insurance would participate
in financing the housing units which will be built on Al-'Alaneyn St. in
the city. That was the result of a nesting between the governor and con-
rede branch secretary with the director general of. the institution end a
nuder of its officials.

The director of the institution in lanah stated that agrees-eat on financing
the construction was reached between the municipality and the institution
by sharing the anomt of approximately 100 million pounds iron the funds
reserved for life insurance which the office of the prise ninister has per-
mitted the institution to use.

The organizations concerned in the nunicipality are beginning to prepare
the necessary studies and plans for the project.

llamah'e director of health chaired a nesting which included the directors
of the national hospital, the Al-Salniyah hopsitel, end the nursing school.
and the chiefs of the health centers in the province. They revieved the
health situation in the province in general and the actions taken to pre-
vent the spread of cholera in Syria, especially after it had appeared '.n
some Arab countries. The chief of preventive services confirmed the readi-
ness of the city's quarantine station and the health center to receive chol-
era ceses at any tile.

The director of health also urged health authorities to show concern for
the sick, give than good treatment, as well as insure good nintenace of

113
the health centers and institutions, and the safeguarding of drugs, in
order to provide excellent health services for the citizens. The director
of health aphasized the need for full compliance with duty hours by all
doctors and those who work in hospitals and health centers, and said that
all violations should be reported to the health directorate so that any
delinquents could be brought to account.

He indicated that simple surgical operations could be performed in the
health centers, so that the patients would not have to bear the difficulty
of being transported to hospitals for that purpose.

The directorate of health has provided all health centers with surgical
equipmt to this end. He emphasized the need for the centers to be stocked
with drugs at all tines and said that the chiefs of the centers will be held
responsible for the lack of any such drugs.

In the meeting he also reviewed the subject of inoculations and providing
them for children at the prescribed intervals. as well as the need to apply
this program strictly. They also discussed the need to preserve vaccines
by professional methods after distribution of special containers in order
to preserve and carry vaccines to various areas.

It was also decided to provide the health centers which have recently been
established in the province with refrigerators.

7005
(ISO: 4802

11';
BRIEFS

ENVOY FRO)! YAR PRESIDENT-June Minister Bedi Nouira received Lt Col ﬂusayn
Muhammad el-Daf'i, the Yemen Arab Republic president's special envoy to
President Bourguibe, in the Kasbah govermnent palace at 1100 yesterday. In
a statusent to the Tunisian News Agency [TAP] the North Yenen envoy indi-
cated that the talks related to relations between Tunisia and the Yemen
Arab Republic. The Yemen president's envoy told a TAP representative that
the meeting took place within the frenework of pemnent consultations be-
tween Tunisia and the Ymen Arab Republic. "The talks related to the
strengthening of bilateral relations between the two countries and the
latest developments on the Arab political scene," Hr el-Daf'i added.
[Excerpts] [1.0061429 Tunis L'ACTIOII in French 24 Oct 79 p 4 L0]

MESSAGE TO LISBON CONFERENCE-Junie Nov 2 (TAP)--Preeident Bourguiba conveyed
to Lisbon world conference on solidarity with the Arab world and the Pales-
tinian cause, a nesaage in which he snphesised that the conference would
allow to better infor- about the just cause of the Arab peoples who are
seeking to recover by force, their occupied territories and especially
institute a state, for the Palestinian oppressed refugees, in their honeland.
Furthermore. the president stated that the Palestinians under the no
chairmanship, are gaining nore and note support on the international level.
This let than hope to find a aettlaent to their problen conformny to

the civilised world's principles and international laws. Finally, the Mis-
ian head of state asserted that sone western countries, radically, despise
the Palestinian problem. This etc-ed undoubtedly fro. a lack of infome-
tion. Events such as the world conference on solidarity with the Arab world
and the Palestinian cause will help restore the international justice and

norals as well as peace. [Text] [1.0021525 Tunis TAP in English 1423 GMT
2 llov 79 LD]

080: 4400

115
PCP, PCI, PCB ISSUE COMMUNIQUE 0N WESTERN SAHARA VISIT
1.0042358 Algiers Donestic Service in French 1300 CHI lo Nov 79 Lb

[Text] As was agreed in Madrid, a joint delegation of the French, Italian
and Spanish commist parties consisting of Mr Greuetz, nenber of the
Political Bureau and secretary of the Central Consnittee of the French Con:-
uunist Party [PCP]; Hr Pajetta, nesber of the Italian Comnist Party [PCI]
Directorate; and Mr Ballesteros, nesber of the Executive Cmittee of the
Spanish Commist Party [PCB], have visited Western Sahara at the invitation
of the POLISARIO Front. This is how the commique begins which was jointly
published by the commist parties today:

The delegation of the three parties had detailed discussions with Mohamed
Abdelasis, secretary general of the POLISARIO Front, on the situation and
the prospects of the struggle. It traveled several hundred kilometers
across the country and had talks on the political-military situation with
the minister of defense.

The delegation--the cansunique seys--has thus acquainted itself with the
Saharan people's lives, their living conditions, their social attainments.
their administrative organisation under the direction of their unquestion-
able representative the POLISARIO Front. Everywhere it saw great activity,
strong participation by the people, the people taking real charge of their
own affairs, their determination in their fight for national independence
and freedoa, which is reflected in important nilitary and diplonstic suc-
ceases.

The examination of equipment seized by the POLISARIO fighters from the
aggressor has allowed verification of the aid given to ibrocco by govern-
ments in the first rank of which are those of the United States, France
and Spain.

The delegation--the statement seys--is returning convinced that the only
solution is that of the cessation of the Moroccan aggression and the open-
ing of negotiations with the POLISARIO Front which will allow the Saharan
people to live free and independent on their territory. The represente-
tives of the three parties conic themselves to do everything to enable
these talks to go ahead in each of their countries so that their respective

governments my contribute to the positive settlement of the conflict in
this part of the world.

mm
cso: 4400 116