FUR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/1017O

9 December 1981

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 18/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/1011
9 December

USSR REPORT
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(F000 18/81)

CONTENTS

INVESTMENT, PRICES, BUDGET AND FINAMB

Soviet-American Symposium on Prices
(A. Dynkin’ VOPMS‘.’ EKMIKI' Sap 81)neeooeeoeeeoocooeeee-oo

RESOURCE UTILIZATION AND SUPPLY

Economy Needed in Use of Labor, Material Resources
(Editorial: VOPROSY EKONONIKI, Aug 81).......................

- a .. [III - USSR -

p". Amy-v . e “an tun u
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INVESTMENT, PRICES, BUDGET AND FINANCE

SOVIET-AMERICAN SYMPOSIUM ON PRICES
Moseow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 9, Sep Bl pp 154-158

[Article by A. Dynkin: "The State and the Formation of Prices in the USSR and the
United States (The Sixth Soviet-American Symposium of Economists):/

[Text] The pricing mechanism is an important lever in the management of the economy
and in the stimulation of the efficient use of all types of resources. This was
confirmed at the Sixth Soviet-American Economic Symposium, which was held from

8 Lo 11 July 1981 in Alma-Ata in conformity with the agreement on cooperation be-
tween the USSR Academy of Sciences and the American Council of Learned Societies

and was organized by the Association of Soviet Economic Scientific Organizations and
the American Economic Association.

The macroeconomic problems of pricing were examined in the reports of Yu. Yakovets,
C. Chubakov (USSR) and B. Bosworth (United States).

The growing role of prices in the system of the planned management of the economy

of mature socialist society was shown in the speech of Doctor of Economic Sciences
Yu. Yakovets (USSR Academy of the National Economy). The importance of the improve-
ment of the system of prices in the accomplishment of the main task of the present
stage 05 :he development of planned management--the consistent orientation of all
its links toward the end national economic results, the all-round intensification

of production, the increase of its efficiency, the acceleration of scientific and
technical progress and the economy of resources-~was noted.

6. Chubakov (Scientific Research Institute of Prices of the USSR State Committee
for Prices) emphasized the role of planned pricing as an important tool of the eco-
nomic policy of the socialist state. The speaker analyzed a new direction in pric-
ing--the elaboration and approval along with wholesale prices of the standards of
the net output.

in the discussion which developed on the question of price stability in a planned
economy Professor A. Bergson (Harvard University) noted that the aspiration for
stability of the system of prices can lead to certain difficulties in the assurance
of balanced development. To this Academician T. Khachaturov responded that the oc-
currence of some specific disproportions for various reasons, which are of both an
objective and a subjective nature, is not at all ruled out. They may occur, for
example, as a consequence of abrupt changes in production conditions. But the dis-
proportions with respect to the physical composition of the output should be

1

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eliminated first of all by the corresponding structural changes in production it-
self. In those instances when prices promote the elimination of such specific dis-
proportions, by stimulating or limiting production and consumption, the necessary
changes are brought about in the system of planned prices.

In the report of B. Bosworth (Brookings Institution), 'ﬁhe General Policy of Price
Stabilization," it was reported that during the 1980's the U.S. economy has been
faced with two most important problems: a high level of inflation and a decline of
the growth rate of labor productivity. The problem of inflation, in the opinion of
the speaker, is governed by two factors: first, the "wage-price" spiral and, sec—
ond, the increase of prices for fuel, energy and food resources. Here the second
factor is acquiring greater and greater importance, since the expenditures on energy
resources alone amount to IO percent in the overall structure of consumer spending.
The increase of energy prices has led to a decline of the growth rate of the real
income: during 1959-1969 it was 2.1 percent, while during 1969-1979 it was only
0.2 percent, and for the period of 1978-1979 its decline by 3.1 percent was ob-
served. In addition to the increase of the cost of energy in the 1980's, the real
income of the population will decrease in connection with the lengthening of the
training period of manpower and the exhaustion of the resources of the additional
involvement of women in the labor market. But the reduction of social payments
(pensions, unemployment benefits, health care subsidies) within the economic policy
of R. Reagan's Administration with the simultaneous increase of defense spending
will have the greatest negative influence on the level of income of the population.
Thus, as 8. Bosworth believes, the further onslaught of inflation is fraught with
social conflicts in American society. The decline of the growth rate of labor pro-
ductivity will also act in this direction. During the 1970's the slowing of the
growth rate of labor productivity did not affect family income that perceptibly,
since this relationship was partially weakened by the increase of female employment,
but in the 1980's these reserves will already be completely exhausted, and all this
will strongly affect the level of income of the population.

The economic policy of the present Administration is attempting to solve the problem
of inflation and labor productivity by stimulating saving. With this aim in view,
taxes are being reduced sharply in the hope of increasing capital investments, which
for the most part, as is anticipated, will go for new technology. Thus, the main
attention is being devoted to attempts to increase the growth rate of labor produc-
tivity as a result of the change of fiscal policy. The solution of the problem of
inflation rests on monetary levers, and first of all an attempt is being made to
damp inflation by a high discount rate. But a potential conflict between monetary
and fiscal policy is built into this. Under conditions when the overall decrease

of taxes is covered by an increase of the discount rate, an automatic slowing of
capital formation occurs. In the opinion of B. Bosworth, if R. Reagan's Adminis-
tration is not able to convince business circles that it is possible to curb infla-
tion on the way to economic growth, the economic program is doomed to failure. The
speaker comes to the conclusion that some improvement of the economic conditions is
possible in 198171982, but the reasons for this are beyond government control, yet
are connected, in particular, with a favorable phase of the economic cycle and the
relative stabilization of the prices on the world market of fuel and energy re-
sources. In subsequent years a high rate of inflation and unemployment is again

anticipated.
Academician L. Kantorovich, V. Cheplenov (USSR) and M. Adelman and P. (Joskow)
(United States) spoke in the second group of speakers.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Academician L. Kantnrovlch 1n the report "Prices and the economic nyp.----- -_
Resources" substantiated the application of the methodology of optimum modeling on
the basis of linear program models to the solution of the problem of the optimum
use of a number of interchangeable and interrelated resources with allowance made
for the diversity of the possibilities of their distribution.

In the report of Doctor of Economic Sciences V. Cheplanov (USSR State Committee for
Prices) the setting of prices for fuel and raw material resources as a stimulus of
their efficient use was examined and measures, which are connected with the revision
being made of the wholesale prices for fuel and raw materials in the interests of
the qualitative improvement of the system of prices and the improvement of the
mechanism of their economic influence on production and consumption, were substan-
tinted.

The report of Professor M. Adelman (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) concerned
the setting of prices for energy resources in the United States. During 1973-1980
in the United States energy consumption decreased annually on the average by 1 per-
cent, while the real prices during this period at least doubled. The present U.S.
energy balance is formed in the following manner: petroleum-—47 percent, gas-—26
percent. coal--20 percent, water power-a percent, uranium--3 percent. During the
postwar period the practice of state regulation of the setting of prices for petro-
leum in the United States underwent a number of important changes. which in the re-
port were characterized on the w'ole as ineffective. The system of control of the
prices for petroleum resources in the United States decreased the supply of petro-
leum resources on the domestic market to less than the optimum level and increased
the dependence on imported petroleum. In February 1981 the control of prices was
abolished, after which they increased in conformity with world prices. As a result,
according to preliminary estimates, consumers will pay the petroleum monopolies dur-
ing the 1980's a "special rent" in the amount of $200 billion. As to the prospects
of the production and consumption of petroleum in the United States, in the opinion
of the author of the report, petroleum production will decline gradually until 1990
and sharply in the 1990's. The level of imports--5—7 million tarrels a day-~will
continue until 1990, while petroleum consumption will decrease negligibly.

The goal of the reform of natural gas prices in 1978 was the increase of prices to
their level on the free market. At present the growth rate of natural gas prices
reflects the rate of inflation, and the complete repeal of price control will take
place by 1985. Such a policy should. as is written in the report, stimulate the
production of gas and the economy of its consumption. But this is encountering
serious difficulties, since about 50 percent of the housing in the United States is
heated with gas. At present the government policy of gradually lifting the control
of natural gas prices does not have extensive support. M. Adelman believes that a
definite shift in the direction of the supplanting of natural gas by coal will take
place after 1985. The dynamics of the prices for environmental protection equip-
ment in case of an increase of coal consumption will be of great importance in this

prooess.

The market of uranium for civilian purposes began to be leveloped in 1966. For a
long time the supply of uranium led the demand. In 1973 the price of 1 pound of
uranium was $7. The situation changed sharply during l97h-1975. In 1976 the price
for 1 pound of uranium, having reached $42, stabilized. The increase of the demand
for enriched uranium on the part of Western Europe and Japan did not cause serious
changes in prices due to the decrease of domestic demand following the accident at

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant. In the opinion of H. Adelman, the pros-
pects of the development of nuclear power plants in the United States to 1990 are

unpromising, but in the more long-term future the return to atomic energy is in-
evitable.

Touching upon the general problems of the deregulation of prices for energy re-
sources, M. Adelman writes that this means "a major redistribution of revenues in
favor of the petroleum monopolies to the detriment of individual and commercial con-
sumers. Decontrol is regarded as unjust treatment of consumers and illegal enrich-
ment of the oil companies." However, as follows from the report, the real practice
of R. Reagan's Administration is in flagrantcontradiction with this assertion and is
creating the most favorable conditions for "illegal enrichment of the monopolies."

Questions of the regulation of prices for electric power were examined in the re-
port of Professor P. (Joskow) (Massachusetts Institute of TechnologY). The princi-
ple of the reflection in prices of the marginal production costs is the basic prin-
ciple of the establishment (if prices which regulatory commissions use in this
sphere. However, such a practice is encountering serious difficulties. The most
difficult problem is inflation. Usually the regulatory commissions set fixed

prices for electric power for the following year with allowance made for the fore-
cast of the dynamics of the prices in associated sectors. The consideration of in-
flation is accomplished by means of the use of correcting formulas in conformity
with the anticipated dynamics of fuel prices. Often the results of such forecast-
ing are unsatisfactory. Since the electric power generating firms cannot change the
prices for their product without the consent of federal and state regulatory commas-
sions, they are often unprofitable. Moreover. the power companies buy some raw
materials and materials in unregulated sectors of the economy, which additionally
results in a deviation of the electric power prices fixed for the given year from
the real generating costs in the direction of the leading growth of the latter. As
a result, according to the data of P. (Joskow). on the average for the United States
in the past 10 years the prices of electric power have not covered the costs of its
generation. The profitability of electric power generating firms in the United
States has fallen below the average rate of return on capital, which, in turn, is
complicating the issuing of stock by these companies and in practice is depriving
them of access to the market of borrowed capital.

Thus, at present the financial opportunites for the updating of the fixed capital

in the sphere of electric power generation are extremely limited. This is one of
the causes which are preventing the dissemination of nuclear electric power stations
in the United States. as well as the changeover to the burning of coal for the gen-
eration of electric power instead of the modern technology of generating electric
power by the burning of petroleum and fuel oil, which predominates in the United
States. The lack of opportunities for technological modernization in the sphere

of electric power generation, in the opinion of the speaker, carries the threat of

a short1ge of electric power in some states in the late 1980's. The general con-
clusion, to which P. (Joskow) comes, is that government regulation of electric power
prices in the United States is ineffective, does not promote the optimum use of re-
sources and does not stimulate technical progress in this sphere; it is necessary,
he believes, to step up the activity of market forces in the sphere of electric
power generation.

Questions connected with the problems were examined in the third group of reports:
L. Rozenova, I. Lukinov, T. Ashimbayev (USSR); D. Johnson, L. Ueiss and (P. Warren-

Bonlton) (United States).

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(”ﬂﬂ(1Al.USEZONLY

rhc rule of prices in the stimulation of technical progress in the USSR was shown
in the report of Candidate of Economic Sciences L. Rozenova (USSR State Committee
[or Prices). The prices for new products, on the one hand, compensate the producer
for the expenditures on the development, assimilation and production of new techni-
cal equipment and, on the other, create for the user opportunities to decrease the
production cost when using the new technical equipment.

Academician of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences I. Lukinov (Institute of Eco-
uomics of the USSR Academy of Sciences) delivered the report "The General Principles
of the Planned Regulation of Prices in the Agra-Industrial Complex of the USSR,"
which was devoted to the problem of ascertaining the specific nature of the forma-
tion of prices directly for the agricultural products produced in the central block
of the agro-industrial complex-agriculture.

Corresponding Member of the Kazakh SSR Academy of Sciences T. Ashimbayev (Institute
of Economics of the Kazakh SSR Academy of Sciences) in the report "Pricing and Cost
Accounting at Socialist Enterprises and Associations" duelled on questions of the
functions performed by prices in the activity of enterprises. The speaker distin-
guished two functions of prices: a planning and accounting function and a stimulat-
ing function.

Pricing in the private sector of the American economy was examined in the report of
Professor L. Heiss (University of Hisconsin). In his opinion, pricing in the group
of highly monopolizcd sectors of industry is of the greatest interest. He charac-
terized in detail the evolution of the principles of pricing in U.S. corporations
during the postwar period, beginning with the methods of "target" pricing and "price
leadership," which were disseminated in the 1950's and 1960's, and the transition

to the modern methods of "elastic" pricing and pricing with allowance made for the
"learning curve."

The principle of "elastic" or "flexible" pricing implies less dependence on agree-
ments between the "leaders" on questions of prices and a smaller desire among the
"followers" to go along with its price policy. The special role of computer hard-
ware in the emergence of the new method, which makes it possible to quickly obtain
more complete information on the results of the activity of companies. is usually
emphasized when discussing questions of "flexible" pricing. The production costs,
for example, can be calculated almost daily. Of course, this does not mean that
the prices should change at the same time as they do. Nevertheless it is possible
that frequent changes in price levels will be very profitable, especially for small
companies. Data on physical production stocks, the level of utilization of produc-
tion capacities and the sales volume are also obtained by computer. All this once
again presumes constant fluctuations of the prices for the products of small com-
panies, but L. Weiss believes that frequent changes in the level of prices for the
products of the "lender" in the sector with a high degree of concentration of pro-
duction and capital will be inefficient. "Flexible" pricing implies the rejection
of the establishment of a "target" rate of return. The possibility of obtaining
rapid and complete information about the activity of a company enables the adminis-
tration to react quickly to thechanging situation and to adhere to various methods
of price policy when producing and marketing one product or another or an assort-
ment of items. At the same time this method enables at least some large companies
to centralize their price policy. having limited the rights of sellers in granting
price discounts. At times the emergence of the method of "flexible" pricing is

linked with the increasing influence of imports.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "learning curve" method is another modern method of pricing, to which. for
example, Japanese exporters adhere. This means that prices are reduced in time, re-
flecting the decrease of costs in the production of complex durable goods. Some
American companies (for example, Texas Instruments, which produces electronic equip-
ment) have adopted such a price strategy. Moreover, many Japanese producers in-
crease or decrease the level of prices for their products more vigorously during

the economic cycle than the largest American industrial companies. During the
1950's the achievement of stable prices was the main goal of large American com-
panies. But at present, as L. Weiss believes, precisely their aspiration to stabil-
ize prices during periods of the decline of business activity has led to consider-
able losses in face of the mass invasion of imported goods. Some movement in the
direction of the development of cyclically more elastic prices has emerged recently.

Price policy in U.S. agriculture was examined in the report of Professor D. Johnson
(UniVersity of Chicago). The prices of the majority of agricultural commodities

in the United States are governed by the conditions of supply and demand on the
market. In some instances government programs can have an influence on prices by
effecting the supply of agricultural products. But as a whole to a greater extent
than in other countries the prices for agricultural commodities in the United
States are still governed by market forces.

However, the U.S. Government reserves the right to pursue a policy of price support
and the regulation of production under some circumstances. During nearly the entire
period since world War 11 legislation in the area of agriculture has provided the
Department of Agriculture with tools to regulate the volume of agricultural produc-
tion. The regulation of the production volume (in particular, its restriction)

was always resorted to in those instances when too sharp an increase of the output
of products with a given level of demand and, consequently, a decrease of the prices
and the income of farmers were anticipated. The regulation of the production vol-
ume assumed various specific forms, but in nearly all instances it included the
limitation of the area used for the production of certain crops.

In early 1980 the U.S. Government began the implementation of a liberally subsidized
program of the production of alcohol for use as fuel. The program provides for an
increase of the consumption of biomasses for the production of alcohol. The low
costs of growing corn in the United States make it possible to use this crop for

the production of alcohol.

Transfer prices in the case of deliveries of products between the decentralized
enterprises of a single corporation were examined in the report of Professor (F.
warren-Boulton) (Washington University of St. Louis). The tasks of transfer pric-
ing include: to be a source of information for the managers of the decentralized
Subdivisions of firms. which makes it possible to distribute resources more effi-
ciently and to stimulate the activity of managers in the interests of increasing the
profitability of the company as a unified whole; to be an indicator of the efficien-
cy of the activity of subdivisions and to serve as a tool of the evaluation of the
results of the activity of their managers; to stimulate efficient decisions of the
board of directors of corporations in the reflection of the amounts of necessary
capital investments with the elimination of inefficient units of the corporate
structure; to decrease the amount of taxes or the effectiveness of antitrust legi-
slation by the reallocation of the receipt of revenues or profits to the most
favorable stages of the production cycle or to favorably situated subdivisions of
the corporatlon. For multinational corporations the existing policy of setting

6

FORlOFFﬂﬂAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transfer prices makes it possible to reduce considerably the payment of taxes on
the profit and the amount of duties, as well as to evade the import quotas on flows
ol goods in the case of large sums of money.

There are several methods of establishing transfer prices: market prices; reference
prices for the marginal or actual (standard) costs; the method of decomposition with
the use of linear programming. Taking into account the multipurpose nature of the
tasks assigned to transfer prices in intrafirm settlements, corporations use, as a
role, not one, but simultaneously several methods of establishing the transfer
prices. The speaker described in detail the merits and drawbacks of the methods
being used and cited the results of surveys of 40a American companies: of them

ihl use transfer prices in intrafirm settlements, and 23 percent use two systems of
establishing the transfer prices and 28 percent use three or more methods.

N. Petrakov, V. Rybalkin and A. Deryabin (USSR) were in the last group of speakers.
lxictor of Economic Sciences N. Petrakov (Central Institute of Economic Mathematics
of the USSR Academy of Sciences) presented a report on a system of mathematical eco-
nomics models of the balanced growth of the real income of the population, in which
the results of the modeling of the mechanism of the coordinated planning of prices,
income and the supply of goods were cited.

The foreign economic aspects of pricing in the socialist economy were analyzed in
the report of V. Rybalkin. In specifying the place of the system of prices in the
control of the process of socialist economic integration, he noted that, first,
prires function as one of the tools of the planned management of integration proc-
esses; second, they are one of the objects of cooperation in the area of planning;
third, the economy of national labor, which is achievable on the basis of the assur-
ance of the complementarity of the structures of the national economies, is evalu-
ated by means of them.

The role, features and economic nature and character of the formation of state and
other retail prices in the USSR were examined in detail in the report of Doctor of
Economic Sciences A. Deryabin (Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences) on the state policy of retail prices for consumer goods.

There was a lively exchange of views on all the reports, which was conducive to the
mutual clarification of the points of views of the sides both on the most important
problems of the formation of prices in various sectors of the economy of both coun-
tries and on questions of general policy in the area of pricing.

At the final meeting of the symposium Professor L. Reynolds, head of the American
delegation, noted that, in his opinion, the SYMP051UN held was the most successful
of all hvld previously. He emphasized the high professional level and representa-
tive nature of the Soviet delegation, the high level of organization of the sympo-
sium and the great importance of such measures for the development of relations be-
tween the two countries and expressed gratitude to the Soviet party for the organi-
zation and holding of this symposium. In an interview granted to a correspondent
oi the Kazakh Department of TASS, L. Reynolds stated: "American consumers would

be happy to have such stable, reasonable prices for foodstuffs and nonfood consumer
items as in the USSR. Pricing in the USSR meets the interests of all the people"
(KAZAKHSTANSKAYA PRAVDA, 12 June 1981, p 3).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Academician i. Khachaturov, chief of the Soviet delegation, noted the successful

work of the symposium and its contribution to the strengthening of the scientific
contacts between Soviet and American scholars.

In the final couumnique adopted by the symposium participants it was indicated that
it has promoted the search for means to solve economic problems with the use of

the mechanism of pricing in the area of the efficient use of energy and other natur-
al resources. the production and marketing of various types of industrial and agri-
cultural products and the stimulation of technical progress. In conformity with

the signed communique the parties expressed agreement to hold the next. Seventh
Soviet-American Symposium of Economists in the United States in 1982 and to dedi-

cate it to the problems of the cost effectiveness of the use of energy and a number
of other non'encuable resources.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'scvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

7807
C80: [820/42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JJ‘URCFI UTILIZATION AND SUPPLY

rumor» [Jr-.2051) 1:: USP. 0? Inch. MATERIAL mowers
Hmcou vomosv EiﬂWHZI in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 3-1“
ﬁditorial: "Sevinr Laterial Resources_'_‘7

[792457 The 26th Ci'Sll Connress has determined that the most important trend in

the continuous advance of the national economy and the basis for a further in-
crease m the welfare of the Soviet people is the acceleration of scientific and
technical progress, the transition of the economy to an intensive path of develop-
ment. more efficient use of the country's production potential. every possible
economy in all types of resources, and improvement in work quality. "Intensifi-
cation of the economy and improvement in its efficiency," L. I. Brezlmev stressed
in the report at the party's 26th congress. "if this formula is put in the lan-
more of practical affairs, consists mainly of ensuring that the results of pro-
duction increase more rapidly than expenditures on it, so that more can be a-
chieved by involving relatively less resources in production." This requires
maximum use 0" all the advantages of the socialist economy and our existing in-
ternal reserves in the field of accelerating scientific and technical progress.
iunrovinn the use of capital investments and producer goods, every possible saving
in mterisl resources. improving the level of organization in production and la-
her and increasinr- its productivity, reducing the production cost of output while
sin-:ultaneously increasing its quality, and improving the organisation of minis-
trution of the national economy.

'0

Snvinks in labor and work tine is the most important component in an increase in
production efficiency. In advancing increase in production efficiency as the key
aspect of econon'ic strateny, the party is guided by the basic concepts of Marxist-
Lo-zénict economic theory and is creative]: adapting them to new historical condi-
tions, the conditions of developed socialist. Mining the efficiency of pro—
duction and its planned develoynent in organic unity. the classics of Marxism-
Icninim have demonstrated that the plan of the future society "will be determined
in. the final analysis by weighing and comparing the useful effects of different

production."1 The more fully the constantly increasing requirements of socialist
society and its nenbers are net, the more efficiently and economical]: past and
lfvSnr lot or is utilized in the process and the greater the efficiency of produc-
tion.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Having socialim in mind, K. Marx onphasisod that both for tho individml and for
socioty as voll, the conprohonsivono of its dovoloplont, its consumption and its
activity dopondo on savings in timo. Tho socialist ooonau is dovolcpad on tho
basis of tho knovlodge and conscious utilization of objootivo ocononic laws. in—
cluding tho law of tiao savings. "...'i'iao savings, oqmlly with plannod distri-
bution of work timo among tho dittoront soctors of production." Iroto K. Han,
"remains tho first oconomic Lav at tho foundation of collootivo production. This
boconos a lav ovon to a much highor dogs-om")

‘I. I. Lonin attachod vast importanco to rational. oconmioal conduct of tho occ-
nouy.“ Ho onphasizod that "socialia is inconcoivahlo...vithout state organiza-
tion according to plan which subordinatoo tons of millions of poOplo to tho
striotost cbsorvanco of a unifiod noon in production and distribution of output."5

Socialist ocononic operation, unliko capitalin. is tho lost oconoaical nothod or
carrying out production. This is dotoninod by tho vary naturo of tho ooononic
system of socialist. which is hasod on public worship of. tho nsans of produc-
tion, tho spontanoous public labor or tho working pooplo oi socialist produc-
tion for thonoolvos and thoir oooioty. tho univoa-sality of labor, and tho plannod
dovolopnont of tho national oconm. All thoso advantagos of sociali- nko ia-
plomontation of a policy of ocono-y an inhomt toaturo or it and bring about tho
groatost opportunitios for tho fullost utilisation of all production rosourcos—
labor, fixod capital. rau matarial and aatorials. And it is nocooury to put

thoso opportunitios in practico purposofullq and porsiotontly.

0 O O

In ordor to roolizo tho broad program of oconcnic and social dovoloput outlinod
by tho couross for tho llth Fivo-Yoar Plan and tho 1980's. vast atrial no-
sourcos must bo involvod in production. And our fucthor novalont {m will
dopond noro and noro hou skillfully and oitioiontly no can uso thoso rosoulwoos.

An ooononical. wopriotary attitndo ton-rd public proporty and raw atrial. tuol
and povor and othor natoriol roommos acquiros spacial national oconuic signin-
canco undor aodorn conditions. and in this concoction. tho constantly incroasing
extraction and transport of than aro bocoaixg not: and noro cponsivo, hut tho
stocks of minorols cannot bo roplacod. For mplo, in tho last 5-year poriod,
tho upondituros to attract a ton of potrolou in our country mo noro than twico

as high as at tho boginning of tho 1970's, and thoy will inoroaso "on noro in
tho curront fin-yon: plan.

Cortain progross has boon nado latoly in aving "coma. Thus. tho ntoa'ialo
consumption of the national product is roducod in tho last fivo-yoar plan. El'ho
savings in raw notorisl. mtorials, fuol, onorgy and other objocts of labor a-
mountod to 11.10 billion rublos. Bovovor. tho chongo duo in inmving tho uoo of
matorial rooourcos has not yot takon placo, and a docisivo turn tong-d strict oh-
sorvanco of a policy of ocono-y in all parts of tho national ocono-y is nocosary.
"rho ocouo‘ny should bo ocononicol." L. I. Brozhnov stroosod in tho CPS!) Conn-a1
Committoo Roport to tho 26th congroos, "such is tho roquironont of tho tiao."
Tho congross pointed out that a toohnical policy. a policy or capital invostaont.
and a syston of plan and accounting indicators lust bo ainod at an oconaaical ro-
lationship toward public voolth.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cannot-t1; con-yin out o ”no, 0! occucw to o otutouuo nun-taking. Guldod
by tho conga-coo «olden. tho cm Control c-ittoo on tho ”I! Council c! m-
utotou-o um tho doom "Ou lawman at tho out on lung- und ntica—
ul uoo of no Iota-m, ﬂol old pot-or. uud cthor ntou-lul moo." which ocu-
toluo u cup-chad" prop- c! opooiﬂc loom unol ut low-oat c! produc-
ttu ottlclouoy ud tutououmtlu c: tho ocean. m. docroo lo cuplc cud
lcurnno to stun on to uluod ut chm no with lo- roocurcoo. Putting
rooorno ut tho who of tho puhllc. tho docroo uctoo, to tho ucot Wat
comic on! polltlcul tut in tho cut-rut otogo.

'l'ho Coot-co point. out tho uocoouty. M pha- uro druitod and “pl-um, of
man. for rolulmuout of tho Mutation ct coo-mic “night tut-rd uh
incrouoo 13 mun multo Inch cutotrtp «manta-co. that to, tons-d 13-
touotttcutlcu of tho M IN! on 1ucrouoo in 1th otﬂclm.

Ouoctthoucot thuthomklcooouoqundntlouuluooctuu-
totul moo, out thlo 1o not“ oopoculh in tho docroo. 1o Lip-cunt in
tho ptton c! tho utlouul ocouq out 1to occtcu-o with tho ul- cf ova-y pcoolhlo
rotation to tho com and out-duh con-pun o! pcducticu. tho uni.- c-
tmtiou of nth-uh fro- tho oath, out tho cmloto. thorough moo-I133 ct nu
uutox-tolo. rho much of Iota-tn ”out“ to Mutt: ucv touchoo 80 to
85 ”ﬂout c: all ago-um to tn cut cmouty much. lunch; th-
in M l pom-t would uuho 1t )oodhlo to ouvo chat MS to 5 ulllcu rchloo
can-11:. In that. tho ofﬂoim o! tho roducticu cltod would ho ovou groutur
1! it to tux. into account that, in tho prccooo. lmtod und Wablo untu-
xul rooourooo no hot-g ccuoonol and pollutlu at tho aura-out to both; ro-
hood. und oc torth.

Sudan in uutortul roocurcoo 1- )coothlo 1n ull stun c! tho produticn prccou.
hogmm with tho ctxuctlcu o! no nturiolo. It 1o cough to nu tint up to
JMOpoucut ctthoccol,uto§0,ou~cohtc2thoguo.upto'IOpomcutcftho
you-elm. out 19 to 20 pox-cont o: tho iron on on loft in dopcdto. It 1- no-
cum to 13cm tho ytold ct maul toocucoo. noun; {or thio m1"
”coo-12¢ oothcdo ouch oo thcoo uctod in tho "holc tund- 2cu- tho occuaic uud
occhl dovolopnt c! tho M f.- 19u-1985 uhd tho pol-1d up to 199M!”
duh-31o. uov uothcu of acting on all-booting mu. tho wccoduro c! goo 11::

qlcltotlcu c: vollo, and tho "plinth: ct huh}; Mt!" loop-nu pupa.
nth tho :1- ct inn-coon. tho Ittuctlcu o! maul no uutorlolo. tho oceanic

mum" ct morn-1o“ in tho ctr-nun industry uloo m ho "tum“.
Io ooh. lot In ”. onlooto tho mt! cud cunt thotr vuluo to tho hulouo
ct tho outcry-1o“. Thou to cool duo cclloottvoo. to:- mono. thou m1 ho
matlvootoutooocultcthoo'acotruthhoouonlchuclmuunn-

tugocuotcvcrh.

Pull null-tin of no ntorm ctroctot 11.14. u Juno goth. Hm colloctlvoo
huvo occuulhtod pcdttvo mono 1h thio row-d. nu. ot tho now-lunc-
“mammogram. Mount (on. duo-two" basswood
nod diva-auto! output to hoax polled. unlit-g output tint Mandy a.
mac-ton touoot tho (out. At thohlhhudallluh‘undhottIuCChdno. tho
Wat cutntmtotcuptomm-tctcmnmucu. Attho

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

horil'oh lining ond bolting Guano. memo: hovo boon oot w for tho doop ox-
tzvoeticn of mm. emol- ond ooholt. 81-11:: “loo could ho outinnod. At
tho no tho. no not holy hot noto thot In noon]. common" cattinod in
row ntoriolo hm «trootod oro not boing ntiliood; sine. hi-uth. “ti-cw,

toast-I. oolyhdm. gold ond oilvoo' oro going to tho duping poundo. m. oi-
tmtin not ho omtod.

rho Miot Ibi- io no of tho too omtrioo in tho mld thot dovola’o ito ooo-
nnnthohooiootitomm moo. Atmt, vopodmonoorly ano-
titth or tho world "in. But moo o: thooo rooomoo oro not limitlooo. ond

thou- «traction, wood“ ond Wt coming onto ond mo would".

In portion”. loo-go odditiml cponditu-oo m oodo mom w W133
M Ira thooootonrogino to tho WP" of tho country. Bury poooihlo

nviuoinroolondpolorroomooo iocoo otthoooot upon-toot notiuol ohmic
pom-o. t in tho yottorn of tho mo 0! tho tool and pooc- can]...
to thich tho 6th m cm dmtod ottatiu. io upon-tut in nviog thooo
moo. who ooootioo emu-no rodootion at tho much or oil oo m ond
ito ouhotitotia w 'o old ml. tho no“ dovolopoot of otuic poor. imludiu
toot breeder roootu-o. ond nomination o: tho ooomh for Ind-atoll; n"
moo of non-g7. including ootohlioh-oot at tho hoooo of thorooouoloor porn.

no dooroo oodlo ono of tho ooot inch-tout no of mo oﬂiciontly nod-g ood
nving ntoriol rooomoo tho oido inundation o: ocintitic ood tochniool o-
ohimto oiood ot imoooing ottioionoy in tho no cd ocutmtico ond othou-
ootoriolo. M and pom ood no -toriol moo. ond tho emotion o! tho 1--
pl-oto o! lobar, cot-o o! nohinoo. ond high]; oocouiool indutriol procuooo
olth littlo or no noto which oro noooonry ior thio.

he tnoo of m homology con ho diotingniohod. ‘i'ho first ootogory inolndoo
“ﬁlm-“muddle! qﬂputuhioh. m.u~ootu.lnothoihg
tonod out in Mtioioot quatdty. Uith noon to nah qdput. Io oro confront-
od Iith tho tour 0! ito .- httodmtioa into Mtioo. Isiah all noko it poo-
odhlo to loom ito toohoiool lovol ond to moivo o lorgo comic goin. Thu.
for intonoitiootioo of rodootim in tho oil and goo indultry no not imoooo tho
.3th o: onloto nitiood ate-tod int-notion in tho indootriol propor-
totiooor oiloodpoondthoptoooooing ofpoondgoomto. ondoaoploto
ooohinod Wit: inotollotiooo to: oil tori-dag. hon-o nonunion cogni-
ooticn of Win in town. ootollorg ooh ho oohiovod through vido no of tho
Gwyn-onwa- moon in otool “notion in connotation with ito continuum
to-ing ood on inoroooo in tho reduction of ”mod ootol {no hon-kind ootol
inotood of killodoom. Io-ohino haildingondootol working. groot avingooon
ho ohtoinod oo o ronlt of ouhotitotiou, ohm thio io poooihlo. of ootn cutting
hypooom. tamiohthooutputorrouodohootootolmthoinorooood. 'i'ho
dotorimtion of Iohino ond quipont yorto con ho roduood h: maintain th-
out o! (unlit: otoolo.

Anothor typo 0! not tochnolog io {undo-onto]; now. ouch oo rohoto. now typos o!
oqoot ond oouaniool Iota-o mob do not hood pow-elm hol, ond tho 11b. Ao-

oolontioa of tho dovolopooot ond introductio: of ouch tochmlogy io tho high
root! of toohniool m.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Advanced new materials and industrial processes which contribute to swings of
material resources should be mentioned especially. In the CPSU Central Omittee
Report to the 26th party congress, the intolerable sluggishness in assimilating
long-range developments in the field of continuous steel teasing and powder me-
tallurgy and high-strength artificial fibers ums critically noted. In the 10th
Pi ve-Year Plan, the proportion of continuous steel teeming—a method developed in
the USSR and patented in 28 capitalist countries—us increased from 7 to 11 per-
cent of the total value melted. while in a number of other countries it makes
up 1.045 percent. If the annual level of continuous steel teeming is carried out
to its optimum extent of 30-10 million tons—in conformity with the scales and
specifications of our economy—then the resources of prepared rolled metal in the
country will increase by 2 to 3 million tons. Our output of metallic powders in-
creased by 28 percent, which also is inadeqmte. Taking into accomt the progres-
siveness of powder metallurgy, it has been planned to triple the production of
metallic powders in the 11th Five-Year Plan. Our production of polymer nterials.
synthetic resins and plastics. and synthetic fibers is still being inadequately
developed. For this reason, a significant increase has been qecified in the ma-
nufacture of these important materials. which in mm cases effectively replace
ferrous and nonferrous metals. as well as natwal fibers. especially for the pro-
duction of engineering fabrics [tekhnicheskiye thing.

A substantial reserve for savings in material resourus is concealed in the sharp
reduction of waste products and losses of raw material and nterials in all stages
of their processing. storage and transportation. and in the more complete utilisa-
tion of secondary reammces and by-products in production. The decree devotes
particular attention to the necessity for putting these reserves in use. losses
of material valuables in the national economy are high enotgh now. In machine
building and metal working, a large quantity of metal scrap. half of which con-
sists of cuttings, is created every year. If the losses and scrap of the metal

in metal working were reduced by just one-half. this would be equivalent to in-
creasing the production of finished rolled metals by 10 pennant. In the process
of forest exploitation. sawmill operation. woodworking and transportation. tens
of millions of cubic meters of timber are lost and become \mste products. Nean-
while. wood pulp. splint-slab and wood-fiber boards, cellulose. paper, cardboard,
and a number of wood chuistry products can be produced from thn. the lessee of
construction nterials—brick. glass. calent—are significant. The losses of ai-
neral fertilizers, which we produce more of than any other country in the world.
are high. During the harvesting, storage, transport and initial processing.

a large quantity of agricultural products, and so forth, is lost. All these loss-
as are linked with the lag in development of certain m [iroisvodetvg and the
infrastructure, but sometimes they are caused simply by poor nnagalent. Propo-
sals should be worked out to establish an economic mechanian to prevent losses in
work time and material valuables in the national economy.

Utilisation of secondary resouces of raw natarial and energy must be improved.
At present, tens of millions of tons of steel and a sigificant amount of non-
ferrous metals, paper and cardboard are produced from these resources. The reco-
very of energy and heat represents several tens of millions of tons in recalcula-
tion for standard fuel. However, many foo-ms of secondary resources are still

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being inadeqmtely used. For example. only 1‘0 percent of the mobile resom'ces of
secondary heat and energy and about one—quarter of the waste paper are remed.
Plastics. industrial rubber item and other products are being recovered in call
quantities. It was demonstrated in. ago that good construction materials can be
obtained from the waste products of thermal electric power stations. but they are
being turned out in very limited quantities.

Opportunities to improve the organisation of the acwmlation of secondary raw
materials and the establishment of their reprocessing at specialised enterprises
exist in practically all sectors of industry. It has been calculated that such
investments in production are significantly more efficient than in extractive
sectors. since not only the economic effect. but the ecological effect. must be
taken into account here. It is necessary to increase attention to this utter.
and to disseminate more widely the work experience of party organisations and
collectives of the Magnitogorsk Metallurgical Canbine. the Volkhov unint- Plant.
and the Novcpolotsk "Polimir" Association for using secondary energy resomes.
which has been approved by the CPSU Central Omittee.

Implementation of measures to ave material renames requires the appropriate
capital. The provision of priority allocation of capital investments. equipment.
and the capacities of construction organizations to carry out these meames is
stipulated by the decree when plans are drafted and put into effect. Blinding
the production of. let us say. more eoonasioal equipment; the creation of energy-
saving machinery; the construction of gas-collecting systems. compressor stations.
natural gasoline and other installations. capacities. and so forth with the aim
of preventing large losses of casing-head gas; improvement in the heat retention
of buildings and structures; and development of the infrastructure presuppose
additional capital expenditures. of course. but these expenditures are highly ef-
ficient. Thus, calculations demonstrate that specific capital. investments direct-
ed at saving fuel and power resmnces are three to four times less than specific
investments necessary for an increase in fuel extraction. 0r let us take the in-
frastructure. As a consequence of the insufficient umber of good roads. are-
houses. elevators and refrigerators. grain is lost. potatoes. vegetables and fruit
are spoiled. and the live weight of cattle purchased by the state is reduced. As
a result, society bears the direct losses. Meanwhile. expenditures in developing
the infrastructure, if elimination of the losses of agricultunl and other output
is taken into account, pay for thuselves in periods which do not exceed 2 to 3
years. This also nmkes it possible to improve the amply of food prodmts to the
public. which is atremely important.

. 0 0

Improvement in the efficiency of production and the more rational use and avings
of all material resources depend directly on' further Want in the mechni.
of economic operation. with the aim of impluenting the measures outlined by the
decree of the CPS!) Central Cumittee and USSR Council of Ministers. the decree
provides for specific organizational and econuaic measures directed at improving
the level of all work connected with planning and norm setting for the coast-pun
of resources. and tutorial incentive for their econunioal use. Measures have hen
outlined to improve stanmds and specifications and nonnative mt aimed
at raising product guilty and the eocnmnical and efficient use of raw nterial.
materials and fuel and power reswrces.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conformity with the decree, we are faced with increasing the mobilizing impor
tance of some and fixed standards. ensuring upeditious specification of norms
in force and the establishment of new pmgreaeive rates of consuption for Inte-
rial resources. proceeding from planned targets, and taking into account the a-
chievements of science and technology as well as the experience of advanced col-
lectives. In five-year and ennnl plans, fixed standards will be set for sinis-
tries and departments for expenditure of the east inportent types of nterisls,
fuel and energy in physical terms per unit of output. which according]: must be
brought to enterprises and organisations. At the use time, the range of uteri-
al reaotn'ces for which centralized targets are being established in accordance
with the avenge reduction of rates of cam-ption will be expanded.

The production cost of output is a highly important indicator and criterion for
evaluating the status of production. Practically ell the components of efficiency
are reflected in it—improvement in the organisation of production and labor. bet-
ter utilization of funds. increase in labor productivity, and savings in raw ma-
terial, materials. fuel and power. One cannot help note that attention to this
indicator has been relaxed in recent years. which adversely affects its improve-
ment in a number of cases. At present. in accormnce with the decree, targets in
accordance with the production cost of output (wtions) will be apwoved for
industrial, construction and transport ministries, associations, enterprises and
organization in five-year and ennul plans. and forming a part of these targets
will be a limit (maximal: level) of material apoditures in monetaryterms per
ruble of output (operations) which, unquestionably, will contribute to wt
in the overall level of economic operation in sectors, associations and enterpri-

The planned administration of public production under socialim organically in-
cludes use of a system of economic incentives and levers which are adeqmte for
it. The Lenimist thesis that cos-1min can be approached ”not directly by enthu-
siasm, but with the aid of enthusiaan born with a great revolution, by personal
interest. by persmal concern, by economic calculation...”6 is widely linens. n-
cononic incentives, to the correct application of which the perty and government
have devoted and are devoting much attention. inve been called upon to unite to-
gether personal, collective and public interests, to motivate production collec-
tives and every worker to undertake stepped-up plans. to econalise resources. to
reduce the production cost of output. to improve its qmlity—in a word, to can":
cut production nest efficiently. A further stop fore-rd is being taken by the
approved decree in developing economic incentive and in increasing the concern of
workers. supervisory and engineering and technical personnel and employees of as-
sociations. enterprises and organisations for the efficient use of tutorial re-
sources. The economic incentive funds of ministries and departments. associations.
enterprises and organizations now depend not only on an increase in labor produc-
tivity and product quality, but on the level of material expenditures per ruble
of output (operations) as well. Beginning in 1983, direct deductions will be made
from the sum of swings obtained by reducing material expenditures compared with
the established limit. In cases where the limit is exceeded by enterprises, de-
ductions in the ftmds will be decreased. Beginning in 1982. the meat of bonus-
es for workers. foremen. technoIOgists, designers and other engineering and tech-
nical personnel will be expanded for swings of specific types of nterial

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resources against establishel technically sound (average-progressive) rates of
consuption. Ferment of bonuses is provided for on a scale 0: up to 75 percent
at the total savings of material resumes. depending m their type, value and
scarcity. These bonuses will be paid to workers above the minus rates of he-
nuses established for sectors. Beginning in 1983. payment of bonuses also will
he introduced for leading workers and uployees of production associations. an-
terprises and organisation, depending on the level o! usterial expenditures per
ruhle of output (operations) capared sith the estahliahed limit. taking into ac-
count the fulfillment.“ targets for the production cost or output (operations)
for each association, enterprise ud organisation.

Beginning in 1982. all or half (depending on a umber of conditions»? the profit
sctually received tron the sale of counter goods and articles for an industrial
engineering purpose [isdeliya proisvodstvenno-tehhnishedtogc nascacheniyg? Innu-
factured iron the mate products oi production will min at the disponl o! as-
sociations. enterprises and organisations and be included in the coast-er goods

fund [fond wrong.

Together with a broad met-n or econonio incentive measures for aving aaterial
resources, the decree provides for the expansion of eoonuio penalties for the
violation of stanm and specificatims. These penalties will apply to planning
and design and scientific research organinticns and developer enterprises

iyatiya-rannahotchik in the develop-ant and production or output; to agi-
cultural. prooureaent. and urketing, Meals and retail trade organisa-
tions and enterprises in the sale of output and its storage: to tranqort organi-
zations in the transport of output; and to enterprises and institutions in the
services field in rendering services. At the sane tine. we are faced with the
task or improving control over distribution and use of tutorial resources. For
this a cyst. o: accounting. reporting and econaic analysis or the consumption
orresourceswillhe iaprovedandastriotacoounting oialltppescrnsteand
losses will he introdmed. People's outrol organs have ben order“ to ceroise
tighter control over observance of the policy of ecu-now and thrift in all paste
of the national eoonuw and over rational use oi electric and ther-l poser. raw
material and materials, fuel. agricultural output. nohines. equip-est, scans of
transportation and labor resources. It is necessary to decisive]; suppress. the
decree aphasises, any uanifestations of Hangs-ant and astravagance, and to
cake the persons responsible strictly answerable (or inflicting harn upon the
mt.s

Iuplesentation of a policy of nvings is inocnceivahle without strict observance
of state planning. production and labor discipline and continuous iaprovant in
planning and administration. Such shortouings as. my. shock work and stoppages
in the material and technical supply c! enterprises and associations are fraught
with high losses. For maple, violation of the periods of tine for deliveries
of equipment and naterials compels enterprises to use sore expensive materials
and articles which make up complete units, and irregular operation adversely a:-
fects the quality of output. All the pauctice of socialist econonic Went
demonstrates that the vast reserves available in stings can he put into etiect
only under conditions of improving administration, raising the level of good or-
gonization. and maintaining a strict procedure in production. Regularity and

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

irreproschshle discipline in deliveries. strict observance of contact obligstiom.
and well regulated control and accounting—en this is s guersntee or the econ-1-
on1 conduct of production and an increase in its efficiency. But tho

and sobilizing role of the plan mt be m for this. In test, the plan

ductive expenditures must be givon sn ovulation based on principle and strictly
penalized. And here the line mt he pursued persistently to increase the perso-
nsl responsibility or managers. the necessity of which as noted st the party's

26th congress. Prohlus of discipline should be in their sight continuously.

The discipline Ind industriousness of workers must he cabinet! with their crestive
initiative and enterprise, which is strikingly Wed in soot-list competition.

Thrift is s omist trait. mm?" «rote V I. Lenin. "begin. Ihere the

in inns; {or M lsbor produc-
tivity. {or atom-rung /every good of grain, oosl. with mug? and other
Th

is trsit is tor-ed by our entire up of life

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the sociopolitical ahcsphere of our society, but it nust be fostered. ‘rhis
is why the decree provides for organization in the cyst. of economic education.
in institutes, in faculties and courses for isproviu drills. and in universities
of Marxian-Leniniu for studying problus of scam and thrift in light of the
tasks advanced by the 26th CPSU Congress, as well as intusificaticn of work to
cultivate a spirit of thrift and a cmist attitude toward labor and public pro-
perty anong students and pupils. Attention is devoted to the necessity of improv-
ing the study of econcnic disciplines. increasing the role of the edmatioml pro-
cess in this. of widely conducting lectures and discussim, and utilizing other
forms of «planetary work on the problnns of economy. Putting these m into
effect is an important and honorable obligation of scientist-economists and teach-
ers of econonic disciplines.

O 0 0

The decree approved by the party and government defines the principal directions
for intensifying work on swings and the rational use of nterial resources for

a protracted period. Proceedin fro- then, qecific propcals should be developed
that are aised at reinforcing the policy of swings in the entire national econuy,
in its different sectors. in associations. in enterprises. Bcononic science has
heenoalledupontcplsyanisportantroleinthis. "rhetasshromhtforthby
life." L. I. Brenhnev stressed in the mo Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th
party congress. ”require the developent of theory. econonic science. that it be
brought nearer to the needs of econuic practice.” In light of the congress' de-
cisions. the development of economic research must be subordinated to a still
greater extent to solution of the tears of ensuring the stable. progressive deve-
lopnent of the ntional economy. the acceleration of scientific and technical pro-
gress. an increase in production efficiency and its intensification. and en in-
crease in the welfare of the Soviet people on this basis.

All this predetersines the necessity of further research, ninly in the field of
the political econony of socialist. which reweaIs‘lhhs objective eccnonic principles
in developent of a socialist society and which serves” the basis of the systqs
of economic sciences. Many problens have been mandated in it which await so-
lution, as L. I. Brezhnev noted at the 26th CPSII Congress.

The concept of a developed socialist society. worked out by the CPBU Jointly with
other fraternal parties. is the scat important contribution to Mistakeninist
theory and the political economy of socialimn. Guided by this concept, the party
has specified and defined concretely the paths and periods of tise for realisation
of program targets, and has outlined strateg and tactics for a protracted histori-
cal period. At the some time. we are confronted with the task of understanding
and eliminating new phenmena in life and further developing theory. Scientific
collectives and scientist-monuists Inst continue study of the economic problens
of nature sccialisn, Uk. know its advantages and opportunities which have arisen.
and determine have for their realisation in the practice of cal-mist oonstructiai.
The problems of increasing the collectiviution of socialist production and inc-cv-
ing socialist predation relationships and their develop-ant into comnist ones
are subject to further elaboration. Research on the cysts. of eccnaic laws of
socialisn and the aechaniu of their use is an indispennble condition for the
correct application of each one of than and their systsl with the aim of enming
the progressive novenent of the socialist economy.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Working out the problns of socialist expanded reproduction and optiniaing its
proportions, developing the Interial and technical base of mature oociali. and
its pattern, taking into account the latest achiev-ents of scientific and tech-
nical progress, and determining aye of developing it into the saterial and tech-
nical base of connunisn are inseparably linked with research into all these prob-
lems. At the ease time. it should be emphasised that analysis of production re-
lationships, economic laws. categories of political. econosy. and other problus
must be coordinated with the requirnents of practice in the closest w.

It is highly important to continue research in the field of further improving ad-
ministration of the socialist econasy as a unified national economic couples. the
problem of providing for the opportunity "to widely propagate and subordinate in
a real any public production and the distribution of output in accordance with
scientific considerations related to nking the lives of all working people the
easiest, providing than with the Opportunity for well-being“ is resolved precise-
ly in administration of the econoqy.

The CPSU Central Canmittee and USSR Council of Ministers decrees on improving the
econmaic nechanim were an important step forvsrd in improving administration of
the national economy. These decrees aim at planning and administration to achieve
high national economic and results. acceleration of scientiﬁc and technical pro-
gress, more efficient use of producer goods and material and labor resources. and
reinforcement of the policy of economy.

They stipulate the necessity of correct definition of priorities in the develop-
ment of sectors and econuic regions for ensuring progressive changes in national
economic proportions and for improving efficiency of capital inth and all
public production. All this dictates the necessity of raising to a qmlitativelv
new level the maintenance of planning an the basis of reinforce-ant of the role of
long-range plans. broad application of the weanling-special purpose nethod, and
introduction of a system of scientifically valid technical and oceanic horns and
fixed standards. In this connection, it is important to improve the methodology
of planning. Plans must be guided by the achievenente of science and econaaic

and engineering calculations. Hush vork already has been carried out in preparing
methodical directives. regulations and instructions. in which the principled pux~
poses of the party and government to improve planning and the econosio sechaniln
have been mde specific in conformity with nrious levels of adsinistration. II-
plenentation of these docuents is producing positive results. But life does not
stand still. The progressive development of socialist production and efficient
economic operation require further improvement in adsinistratios of the econoovy.
Speaking about the decrees on improving the econosic secbanisl and systes planning
approved in 1919, L. I. Brezhnev stressed at the party's 26th congress: "they nust
be put into effect consistently. And at the use tine, we must go further, resol-
ving the problems which have acct-Inﬂated."

Proposals on improving the organisational patterns of administration. on overcom-
ing departmental dissociation, on creating a system of sanaging groups of similar
and interrelated sectors, on improving administration at the level of enterprises
and associations. which are directly linked with work on saving naterial resources,
must be worked out. The CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers de-
cree on savings and rational use of aaterial resources devotes particular

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attention to the necessity of inproving coordination of the work of ainistries.
departnents, associations. enterprises. and scientific and other organisations in
the econonical use of new ulterial, saterials. fuel and energy.

Better use of such ccononic levers and incentives as cost accounting, profit,
prices, bonuses. and financial and credit instruents ere inportant trends of
econoaic developments to further isprove the someic nsohsnih fro- the stand:-
point of strict inplsnentstion of the policy of uvings. Developent lust con-
tinue on a cysts: of mteriel end soral incmtive. penalties for violations of
plan and contract discipline. and problens connected with isproving cages and
non setting and the developnent of socialist cospetition. this in turn presup-
poses extnsion of resesrch on s qstsa of interests of socialist society. the
mechanics: of utilizing the law of distribution according to labor, trade and may
relationships with the new content characteristic of it under socialiu, prohl-s
connected with the creation and me of economic incntive funds. and also no less
important, the stud: and diusaination of advanced «sparince in econuic activity
'ith the aitcf its broader introduction in pectic». Corresponding effective cri-
teria for evaluations of labor and its efficiency must be worked out in order to
induce production collectives and individml workers to achieve a reduction in
specific expenditures of raw nterial and asterials ale-us and in all cases.

Acceleration of scientific end technical progress is of parenount isportanoe in
putting into effect a policy of cocoa: and increasing the efficiency of produc-
tion. For this it is necesury to bring scintific research and planning and de-
sign work clownuicelly and organiationally—tc production. In resolving
this taut. scientist-economists can render such assistance in practice. they have
hemcalledupontoginsoundrecundaticnsforilprwimplanningandnterial
incentive for the introduction of scientific an technical innovatius in order to
elisinate everything which sakes the process of introduction difficult and slow.
Production nust he vitaqu concerned with incorporating the fruits of thought and
labor of scientists and designers sore rapid); and better. Bonuists are to
continue elaboration of the theory of the sooioeoonoaio efficiency of scientific
and technical progress. to sake ham the relative efficiency of its different
trends, to work out recouendsticns to further reinforce its applicability
ﬁetselannoet' to the saving of saterial resources and expansion of the creation
and introduct on of resource-saving technology and equipent. and to substantiate
nethods of improving control of the qmlity of new equip-ant and increasing the
efficiency of scientific research and technical elaboration. It is necseary to
bring to light and scientifically abstanuate reserves for intensificatig of the

reproduction of fixed capital and its use. taking Mucmmffcr‘ths
retooling of reduction.

The developent and iapluentation of caplet special-mes ms plays an
important role in the acceleration of scientific and technical progress. the
June decree of the 0980 Central Omittee and the our Council of linisters pro-
vides for seasures to iaprove work on preparing and ispl-enting caplet progre-
fcr solution of the cost important scientific and technical problus and for in-
prcveaent of organisation to introduce scientific achievaents in production.
Closer coordination of plans is noose-r: to ispreve the technical level of sec-
tors with final results for nving new aaterial. sates-isle. fuel and energy. And
here sccnaic science also aust have its an.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reeks of no .nll ieportnnoe eleo confront eoientiet—eoonaiete in non-kin; out pro-
ponnle in the eta-mile epinet loeeee at work tine end neteriel ulnhlee. in e
rule. neneuren to rednceloeeee rennin edditienel .onpitel invent-onto end mix-rent
expenditures. prortunitiee to e ion recon-eon by neeewee to reduce loeeee

ere linited. For thie ten-cu. etc ¢ eoonuio "elation M‘W 0‘ cox-neo-
pondin; neneuren according to the level of etficienoy of expuditnree to coneme

reeoumee ere neceeury in order to enteblieh the priority of theee neunree end
eneure the axin- gnin tron the capitol elloceted. Mtion of loeeee requixee
improvement in plenning end ite nomtive hue. the eeoheni- ot production incen-
tive. end the entehliel-ent of ooet accounting reeponeihilit’ for the expenditure
of reeomee.

A vent ptodnction potentiel providing the omtnnity to omeheneively develop
the economy end me on thin hneie e further inoreeee in the people'e were

hen been erected by the lnbon- od the soviet people. To unto the soot ei'ticient
nee of thin potentiel. to echieve pent unlte in lehor with leee nuditme
in order to noet efficiently corn out the decinihn of the 26th C?“ Congre- end
the targets of the 11th rive-tee: Plen—thie in the ted; o! the petty. In reeolv-
1113 it. the eoientiete end eoonuiete will unite their on contribution.

mm
1. it. her: end 1'. Bagels. "Bochineniyn" M. Vol 20. p 321.
é. See K. Her: end P. Mele. op. cit.. Vol II6. Port 1. p 117.
3. ma.

A. see, for apple. V. I. Lenin. “Polnoye eohreniye eoohineniy" ﬁanlete Von-hi,
Vol 36. p 171.; Vol I»), pp 17}. 261. 283.

5. v. I. Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 36. p 300.
6. v. I. Lenin. op. cit., Vol No. p 151.
7. V. I. Lenin. op. cit., Vol 39, p 22.
8. v. I. Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 36. p 381.
COPYRIGHT: Indetel'ctvo "Prom”, "Von-on: ekonaiki". 1981.

8936
cm: 1820/31. 8ND

21

MR ("7910"de "<7. ONLY