FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10021

29 September 1981

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 25/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain information primarily iron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nstion was sumrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within iteas are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Govern-ent.

COPYRIGIT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE Tm? DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10021
29 September 1981

USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOOD 25/81)

Cameras

RNIOML

AzSSR Academy of Sciences Scientific Research Development
(m mlmmn.wm) OOOOIOOIOOOUOOII'. ....... 1

Shevardnadze Struggle with negative Elements
(laud Amma'yevich Shevardnadze; VOPROB! FILOSOFII, Jun 81) .. . 1.1

[III - ossa - 35 F000]

n-.. n—~- u..- R‘NOI
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RmIONAL

AsSSR acme” or SCIENCES SCIENTIFIC macs nsvmomm
Hoscow vmm macaw NAUK 5333 in Russian No 5. Hay 81 pp 3-11

[Articleu "Basic Trends and Pros ts for Developsent of Scientific Research
by the “58R Acadeny of Sciences"

[Text]. The “881! Acadny of Sciences is the country's najor scientific center.
Guided by the docuents and decisions of the CPSU Congresses concerning the devel-
oplent of Soviet science. technoloy, and culture. and by the directives and reco-
sendations of the republic's executive organs. they have carried out a great deal
of work on further developing basic research. increasing the effectiveness and qua-
lity of scientific studies. strengthening and isproving the ties between science
and production. The basic trends and prospects for the developent of scientific
research by this republic's acadeny were discussed at one of the sessions of the
Presidiun of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences.

Delivering the report at this session of the Presidiu was the president of the
AsSSR Acadeny. corresponding nesber of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. 0. B. Abdul-
layev.

The rapporteur dwelt on the successes achieved by the AsSSR in the developent of
economics and science. Functioning at present in Azerbaijan are sore than 100 sci-
entific research institutes; more than 22.000 scientific workers .ars aployed here,
including appmxisately 1.000 doctors of science and 8.000 candidates of science.
This republic's VUZ‘s have an enrollment of more than 100,000 students.

Created in January 19%. the A3883 Acadeny of Sciences includes 30 scientific in—
stitutions; slang the. are 25 institutes as well as a nebtork of design bureaus
and experisental plants. Horking in the Acedeny's institutions are sore than
12,000 persons. including 270 doctors of science and more than 1,800 candidates of
science. About 600 graduate students are enrolled in graduate work at the acadesy;
1110 graduate student interns of the acadeny are undergoing training at scien-
tific institutions in Hoscow. Leningrad, Kiev. and other scientific centers. The
annual budget of the AnSSR cosprises approximately “0.6 million rubles, including
20 sillion for projects in accordance with econonic agreanents.

The principal problens confronting the Acadesy haVe derived from the tasks as—
signed by the 25th CPSU Congress and the 29th Congress of the Conmunist Party of
Azerbaijan.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Of the 550 topics which were being worked on in 1979. 3?? were of All-Union im-
portance. They were very carefully emined in the USSR Academy of Sciences and
were approved by the USSR State Connittee for Science and Technology. During the
last few years the Acadany's institutions have carried out inportant basic and sp-
plied research studies in the fields of astronomy. mechanics. electronics. and
other physical and nathematical sciences. geological-geographical and biological
research. along with important projects in the areas of the agricultural sciences.
social sciences, economics. and culture. Also being developed are such new scien-
tific trends as the neurophysiology of the brain. molecular genetics. and molecu-
lar biology. Broad prospects are opening up for the developnent of chemical re-
search and the study of natural resotmces. Basic research is being conducted in
the sphere of the social sciences. linked with the radical changes in all spheres
of Azerbaijan's life.

Speaking at the ceremonial session. devoted to awarding the Order of Lenin to Da—
ku. the general secretary of the CPSU cc and chairman of the Presidiun of the USSR
Supreme Soviet. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted the following: ”...today Azerbaijan
is not only a region of oil derricks. Also developed here are machine building.
chenical. electrical-engineering. electronics. and radio-engineering industries.
along with non-ferrous metallurgy and other sectors." This has become possible.
to a considerable extent. thanks to the achieve-eats of science in the republic.

During the past 10 years nany developments by the AaSSR Academy of Sciences have
been introduced into the national econony. The over-all economic effect from such
introductions has exceeded 510 million rubles. During this same period the Acade-
ny's scientists acquired 1.100 authorship certificates for inventions; moreover.

on 57 of then 200 patents have been obtained in 310 of the world‘s countries.

Three licenses have been sold (in the United States. Italy. and Bulgaria). An in-
crease in the effectiveness of MR [scientific research work] and on [experimen-
tal design worlg] has been facilitated by the creation of new scientific and produc-
tion associations within the body of the Acadeny of Sciences. The annual value
of operations has reached 15 million rubles.

The Academy is the leading and coordinatirm organisation in the country with re-
spect to research on seleniun and tellurim and instrunents based on then. as well
as with respect to magnetic seaiconductors. developing nedical theme-electric
epparatus. and synthetic naphthenic acids.

Institutions of the A288}? Academy of Sciences actively participate in intemation-
a1 scientic cooperation anong the socialist countries. Joint projects are being
carried out on 11‘ topics. It is coordinating the sub-satellite range studies
which are being conducted in the socialist countries on the problen of straying
the Earth tron outer space. '

G. B. Abdullayev further enumerated certain very important research trends being
carried out at the Academy. One such trend is the physics and technology of crys-
tals. Obtaining semiconductors. studying their properties. utilising and creating
new transducers has attracted the attention of a large group of the republic's '
physicists and chemists. A great deal of attention is being devoted to the study
of seleniuuthe only polymeric sniconductor in the Hendeleyev Table which plays
an important role in the vital activities of plant and aniaal organisms. In con-
Junction with their colleagues fro- the Institute of Biology of the USSR Academy

2
FOR OFFICIAL l VLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Sciences, Azerbaijan's biologists have succeeded in establishing the selective
inhibitory effect of seleniua on the activity of RM [ribonucleic acidl-polynersse-
1 in isolated nuclei.

The basic research studies which have been conducted have allowed us to work out a
technology for obtaining new layered. including anisotropic. semiconductors. based on
selenim and telluriun. by means of a well-targeted synthesis of crystals and their
groups with the prescribed properties and to create a series of new transducers. At
present they have succeeded in obtaining nonocrystals with rigorously parallel natu-
ral surfaces. These aonocrystals harnish an interesting object for studying the tu-
nneling of current carriers and for the creation of new transducers. Ile have dis-
covered previously unobserved effects. which have allowed us to create and put into
industrial production new decoders. aodulators of laser radiation. acory eleaents.
receivers and sources of coherent radiation. as well as micro-coolers for receivers
of infra-red raiiation.

Projects are being actively carried out in the field of aetallurgy. New types of
economic steel alloys are being created and put into production. A new lethod has
been developed for obtaining iron powder at teaperatures below 1000’ 0. Such rela-
tively low taperatures allow us to avoid adherence and. thanks to the convection of
natural gas. we can obtain a good quality of powciers. This aethod is utilised for
the manufacture of parts for refrigerators and air conditioners.

The Academy's chenists are working on the creation of the scientific foundations of
the comprehensive refining of petroleua and raw materials. on creating effective ca-
talysts for the processes of oil refining and petrocheaistry. and for obtaining the
products of "small-scale" chemistry. The Acadeny's organic aetallm‘gists have
worked out a aethod for imposing on the surfaces of netals and ceramics coatings
made of such refractory aetals as tungsten. by scans of the thernal disintegration
of these aetals' organic compounds. By usirg low-temperature. electro-cheaical ae-
thods, they have succeeded in setting up production. under ordinary conditions. of
pure arsenic. telluriun. 'seleniun. rheniu. and their compounds.

or great importance for oil extraction and refining and environmental protection is
the chemical reagent "Azerbaijan-1;," which was created at the Acadeny; it is des'
signed to purify water from oil and to soften it. In a concentration of 25 g/n
this reagent allows us to reduce the oil content in polluted water fron 100 to 3 5
per liter. The reagent is pulped into an oil strata: in order to increase the oil
yield and to avert pollution of the environnent by oil ._

Another nodification of the reagent allows us to reduce water hardness froa 5.5 g of
salts per liter to i ng per liter. The technology has been developed and introduced
for utilizing the reagent in purifying drill-well water and seawater. In particu-

lar. we have succeeded in oil refineries in creating a circulating water supply and

in bringing seawater up to conditions good enough to be used in thermal electric
power stations.

Research has been expanded, directed at utilising new types of energy, including
studies in the use of hydrogen energy engineering, utilizing solar energy. and wind
power. Already at present in the Caspian Sea units are in operation. converting
solar and wind energy into electric power. By means of utilizing solar energy we
have succeeded, in particular. in preventing corrosion on marine structures.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the traditional trends of basic research at the republic's Acadesy of Sci-
ences is the study of the geological structure of ‘the Earth's crust. the role of
depth processes in the fomation and distribution of minerals. The geologists have
provided a new, scientifically grounded forecast estimate of the oil and gas re-
sources on the republic’s territory, and they discovered the zones with the great-
est accmulation of hydrocarbons. Large-scale. geonorphological and landfom naps
of Azerbaijan have been compiled, as well as maps of the quaternary deposits and the
dissemination of radioactive elements in the ploughed layer of the soils.

With regard to the Biological Sciences Department the principal future trend is re-
search on the laws of formation and developaent of Azerbaijan's flora. the appear-
ance of valuable plants and their introduction into cultivation, the study of the
problems of the physiology, biochemistry. biophysics. and genetics of plants as the
theoretical basis of agriculture, working out the theoretical fundamentals of the
heredity and mutability of plants and anisal organisms.

The Academy's scientists have evolved new and productive species of agricultural
plants, hard and soft "heats. cotton plants. and mulberry trees. A new, high-yield
soft wheat has been created and adopted to grow within this republic. A new, fat-

and-uilk-producing breed of Caucasian buffalo has been created and introduced for
livestock raising.

The biochemistry of Azerbaijan's flora is under active study. In particular, there
has been a successful introduction into ophthalmological practice of the use of saf-
fron for improving the activity of the organs of vision in cases of the disease of
dystrophy. The technology has been worked out for obtaining a umber of biologically
activenedicinal compounds derived from the waste products from processing meat and
fish, and their production has been set up. This is all the more important inasmuch
as certain compounds up to now have been successfully obtained only fro. Caspian
sturgeon--the fish in other regions evidently has other biochemical characteristics.

The Academy's social scientists are conducting work along three principal lines:
working out general theoretical and methodological problems of social sciences. as
well as the urgent problems of building communism; Aserbaijanian and Caucasian stu-
dies as a whole; and the study of the history, culture. and econoay of the countries
and peoples of the Near and Middle East.

0. B. Abdullayev further informed the session that, with the aid of the USSR Acadesy
of Sciences, construction has begun on a scientific-research vessel with a displace-
sent of 1,130 tons. And he esphasized the need to speed up work on solving fuel-
and-energy problens. on utilizing the latest sethods of discovering, extracting, and
refining oil and gas from deep deposits. on raking use of the energy of the Sun and
the wind, on developing hydrogen-energy engineering.

belivering a co-report was a vice-president of the USSR Acadeay of Sciences. Acadeai-
cian Yu. A. Ovchinnikov. who headed up a couission of scientists. acquainting thea-
selves with the work of .the AzSSR Academy of Sciences.

After lentioning the successes achieved in the development of Azerbaijan's econosy,
Yu. A. OVchinnikov noted that the development of science in this republic corresponds
to the high growth rate of its economy. Azerbaijan's scientists occupy good posi-
tions in many fields of physics. especially solid-state physics; chenistry is

’4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

traditionally strong here. particularly petrochemistry; renowned far beyond the bor-
ders of Azerbaijan are the works of Aserbaijanian biologists connected with the de-
velopment of sedicine and agriculture; the achievements of scientists working in the
field of Earth sciences are considerable. The rapporteur also noted the broad com-
plex of projects being conducted in the area of the social sciences. The AsSSR Aca-
demy of Sciences. Yu. A. Ovchinnikov continued. is a scientific center comparable in
scale with the Far Eastern or Urals Centers of the USSR Academy of Sciences. It is
natural that it should be called upon to make a very serious contribution to scien—
tific and technical progress. '

One of the most important characteristics of the A2383 Acaduay of Sciences is the
presence of mnerous design bureaus and experimental centers within its institutes;
this allows a sharp acceleration in introducing scientific achievements into prac-
tice. A particular strong experimental-design center exists in institutes engaged
in the study of chemistry and chemical technology; great possibilities for creating
such a center also exist and are already being utilised in the field of physics. Si-
milar institutions are being created and have already begun to operate successfully
at biological institutes. .

This aspect of the AsSSR Academy of Sciences' work is particularly important at pre-
sent inasauch as the scan-series production of equipment and the low-tonnage output
of various chemical compounds has taken on special significance these days. In par-
ticular, the Couission rocosnended that the AsSSR Academy of Sciences concentrate
special attention on the output of items of the so-called small-scale chemistry--
products of low-tonnage chemical production. These principally comprise substances
such as additives. stabilizers, inhibitors. compounds for agriculture. pesticides.
biologically and physiologically active substances for medicine. There exists a ge-
nuine possibility for creating in Azerbaijan an important center for producing such
products for the entire Soviet Union.

Subsequently Yu. A. Ovchinnikov dwelt on the shortcomings in the work of the A3383
Academy of Sciences. noting, first of all, the prevalence of petty topics, the lack
of coordination between the operational profile of certain sub-divisions to the pro-
file of the institutes which include these sub-divisions. as well as the low nmber
of individual laboratories. including those working on extremely important problems.
There should be a strengthening of the ties between Aserbaijan's scientific institu-
tions with.the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences; in the new trends of re-
search it would be feasible to train large groups of young scientists simultaneously
in the country's leading scientific centers. A top-priority task is strengthening
the Academy’s links with the republic's VUZ's--these links determine the possibili-
ties for the progress of science and its future.

Then Yu. A. Ovchinnikov informed the session about the achievaents of the'AsSSP. Aca-
demy of Sciences in developing specific fields of science.

The republic's scientists have had considerable successes in developing the complex
of biological sciences. One of the country's foremost centers in the field of soil
science and agrochenistry has been formed here; important results have been attained

in the area of plant and animal genetics. particularly in solving the problems of
remote hybridization. in physiology and in certain other branches of biology. Yu.- A.
Ovchinnikov enphasized. however. that new trends in biology must be intensively de-
veloped. There are possibilities for this. In particular, important projects are

5
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being conducted in the Molecular Biology Department of the Institute of Physics.

It is high time that He should convert this department into an independent insti-
tute of physical-chemical biology, which could become an important center for de-
veloping new trends in biology. Yu. A; Ovchinnikov noted the work of the Design
Bureau of Biological Machine Building. which functions within this department, where
models have been created of quite simple-to-produce instruaents which are fully ca-
pable of replacing analogous instruments being imported from abroad. In Yu. A. Ov—
chinnikov's opinion. it would be feasible to request the AsSSR Acadeay of Sciences
to expand their work in the field of biological machine building and to specialise
in the output of certain types of equipment, bringing them up to the level of world
standards. in order to guarantee that scientific institutions throughout our entire
country be supplied with this equipment. and. perhaps. even to begin exporting it.

Under Azerbaijan's conditions great importance has been asst-ed by the developaent
of a complex of social sciences. most of all, the study of the history and culture
of the peoples of the Middle East, as well as the socioeconomic processes taking
place in this region. It is also necessary to expand economic research, using up-
to-date techniques and to strengthen the printing centers of institutions engaged in
studying the social sciences.

In conclusion, the rapporteur gave high marks to the work of the “553 Academy of
Sciences and noted that it has genuine possibilities for gaining a truly leading po-
si tion in many important branches of scientific developent.

A number of questions were then put to the rapporteurs.

In answering a question from the president of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Academi-
cian A. P. Aleksandrov concerning the scope of the introduction of applied projects
into production. Yu. A. Ovchinnikov noted that at the A2553 Academy of Sciences more
scientific results are being introduced than at most of the other republic-level
acadeslies. According to this indicator. the AsSSR does not fall behind the Acade-
mies of Sciences of the Ukrainian SSR or the Belorussian SSRnand this is a hip: le-
vel of introduction. However, we have not managed to obtain data on the econoaic
effect with regard to many things which have been introduced. since sufficiently se-
rious econoaic analyses and appraisals have not been conducted in the A2883 Academy
of Sciences.

In answer to a question by A. P. Aleksandrov concerning the development and use of
substances to increase the extraction of oil from strata, G. B. Abdullayev inforled
the session that intensive work was being conducted within the ArSSR on creating ac-
tive reagents. based on surface-active substances obtained from the waste products
of oil refining and other cheaical production facilities. By utilising these re-
agents under laboratory conditions. we have succeeded in raising oil output by 20
percent. A decision has been adopted to utilize these substances under industrial
conditions.

A. P. Aleksandrov remarked on the importance of this work both for the republic and
for the country as a whole. and he reconendod that these substances be tried out
both at the deposit sites and in other regions of the country.

Academician H. A. Styrikovich stressed the iaportance of the projects of the Baku
school of hydrodynamics on exploiting complex deposits of oil and gas condensate in

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a natural system, i. e., in a system with reduced pressure. At the A288}? Academy
of Sciences programs and calculations have been drawn up for developing complex de-
posits in Hester-n Siberia, which at present cannot be developed by traditional
methods.

Academician A. A. Bayev posed a question concerning the prospects for convertirg the
Department of Molecular Biology of the Institute of Physics of the A1358]! Acadesy of
Sciences into an independent institute. G. B. Abdullayev informed the session that
during the last few years the saterial and staff potential of the department had be-
come significantly stronger. and the Presidium of the AsSSR intended to submit a pe-
tition to organise an independent institute. based on this department.

Academician N. H. Zhavoronkov expressed an interest in the quality of oil additives
which have been developed in the Academy's institutes. G. B. Abdullayev informed
the session that the additives being produced on the basis of the Acaduy's devel-
opent are enjoying great daand. The effectiveness of their utilisation has grown
considerably during the last few years in connection with improvement in the puri-
fication of the oils. inasmuch as the capability of these latter to accept additives
depends on the purity of the oils.

In opening up the discussion of the reports, Academician-Secretary of the General
Biology Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Academician H. S. Cilyarov no-
ted the great achievements of the A2883 Academy of Sciences in working out problems
of soil science. Research which is new in principle is being conducted there. In
particular. corresponding member of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences V. R. Volobuyev
has developed a system of evaluating the mathematical characteristics of the inter-
related factors of soil fonation. Especially interesting are recent stmiies on
the energy engineering of soils; these allow us ’o characterise the various types
of Azerbaijan's soils with the utilisation of precise methods. These results are
being widely used in the national economy. Research is being conducted on a rela-
tively high level in the classic fields of b10105!“ however. it is feasible to ex-
pand these studies, particularly in the field of ecology. and. above all. that of
entonology.

The work in mycology which is being conducted in this republic is extremely impor-
tant; it is being headed up by Academician of the AsSSR V. l. Ul'yanishchev, who
has been awarded the Lenin Prize for these projects.

There has been very good organization of projects for the study of plant cover;
these studies. however, could be considerably more productive if the institutes
conducting them were better equipped. As regards the training of large groups of
specialists from Azerbaijan at the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, at
the present time, n. S. Gilyarov emphasized that do not have the right conditions.
nor. above all. the places. for such a program.

Academician-Secretary of the Department of Biochemistry. Biophysics. and the Che-
mistry of Physiologically Active Compounds, Academician A. A. Bayev. joined in the
high marks which H. S. Gilyarov had given to the research on soil science and agro-
chemistry which is being conducted in Azerbaijan. The weakness of biological re-
search in the A5381! Academy of Sciences is the lack within the system of biologi-
cal institutions of institutes of a physical-chemical type. At the Institute of
Physics. however. there is an operational sector of molecular biology in which a
successfully operating group has already taken shape and inortsni results obtained.
in particular, models of instruments have been created.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Bayev remarked further on the work of the microbiology section. which is
studying primarily the micro-organisms which are destroying petroleu and petro-
leua products. These projects are inportant both for environ-entail protection.

for the struggle against its pollution by petroleum and petroleun products. as well
as to avert the spoilage of the petroleus products the-selves. Furthermore. A. A.
Bayev eaphasised the importance for present-day biology of the projects being con-
ducted in the AsSSR in the field of "shall-scale" che-istry, the creation and pro-
duction of small—series equipment.

Academician-Secretary of Physical Chenistry and the Technology of Non-Organic ha-
terials. Acadenician N. H. Zhavoronkov noted the general high level of the work of
the chemical-type institutes of the A5583, including projects with regard to the
theoretical problems of cheaical technology as well as the creation and output of
additives to lubricating materials. These projects lust be continued and developed
becauSe, despite the successes which have been achieved, in our country. due to the
shortage of additives and their insufficiently high quality. the expenditure of
lubricating oils in internal-colbustion engines is still too great. The ilprove-
nent of additives and organizing their production is one of the principal tasks con-
fronting Aserbaijan's chemists.

Academician-Secretary of the General Physics and Astronoly Depart-eat. Acadenician
A. h. Prokhorov. axarded hiya harks to the condition of physics research in the As-
SSR, above all, in the field of semiconductor physics and solid-state physics. He
remarked on the good connections which exist between this departsent's institutes
and the institutions of the AsSSR, and he expressed the desire that these links be
developed even further. In the name of Acadeaician R. z. Sagdeyev. who could not
take part in the session. A. M. Prokhorov expressed a great deal of satisfaction
with the cooperation with the institutions of the “6% Academy of Sciences with
regard to the creation and operation of the autonted intonation center with its
satellite link.

Academician-Secretary of the Department of General and Technical Chenistry, Acade-
Iician N. H. Beanuel'. proposed to support the initiative of the AsSSR Academy of
Sciences in creating scientific-production associations in the field of ”small—
scale" chemistry. He noted the insufficient attention being paid by the produc-
tion organizations to the chelical nethods of increasing the petrolem yield fro-

s stratum and the feasibility of creating, on the basis of the A283}! Acaduly of Sci-
ences. a. center to engage in the development and coordination of appropriate
projects.

In concluding the discussion. the secretary of the CP of Azerbaijan 00, K. H. Ba-
girov, expressed great gratitude and recognition for the attention to the develop-
sent of Azerbaijanian science on the part of the USSR Acadaly of Sciences. Having
mentioned the economic successes achieved by this republic during the 10th Five-
Year Plan. he underscored the iaportant contribution made by science to the devel-
opment of Azerbaijan's econony. Thus. from 1971 through 1979 the scientific insti-
tutions of this republic's Academy of Sciences introduced into the national econo-
ny projects with an anticipated economic effect exceeding by a factor of 15 the in-
dicators for the preceding 10 years. K. Pl. Bagirov noted that the Conunist Party
cc and the Aserbaijanian government have exhibited constant attention to the acti-
vities of the heads-y, concerned themselves with strengthening the material and
technical base of science, improving the comprehensive administration of scienti-

fic research, planning-design and experimental-industrial organisations, improving

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the everyday conditions of staff members. and. in turn. they expect from the repub-
lic's scientists even more strengthening of basic research. further deepening of ‘
the study of the socioeconomic and political aspects of the scientific and techni-
cal revolution. increasing the effectiveness and quality of scientific developments.
improving the training of highly skilled personnel. more extensive introduction of
achievements into the national economy. and perfecting the ties between science and
production. "’

In the name of the Conunist Party of Azerbaijan CC K. H. Bagirov expressed confi—
dence that the discussion of the activities of the AsSSR Academy of Sciences by the
Presidim of the USSR Academy of Sciences will facilitate the solution of those re-
sponsible tasks which the Communist Party has assigned to Soviet science and. in
particular. to the A2388 Academy of Sciences.

In conclusion. the president of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Academician A. P.
Aleksandrov noted those serious achievements which have been attained by the A2581!
Academy of Sciencesin many substantial trends of scientific research. and he pro-
posed the approval of the basic directions of its activities. as well as wishing .
new successes for the AsSSR Academy of Sciences.

In its adapted decree the Presidiul of the USSR Academy of Sciences notes the suc-
cesses of the AeSSR Academy of Sciences in developing many areas of research. In
this republic a major scientific school has been created in the field of functional
analysis and its applications. new. complex semiconductors have been developed. as
well as semiconductor compounds and their structures; a sub-sattelite information-
measuring system has also been created. The technology has been worked out for
high-strength. economical steel alloys which do not contain any deficit admixtures;
also developed is the theory and technology of the process of obtaining multi-lay-
ered. reinforced shells. and this has allowed us to work out designs for high-
strength. flexible hoses for the oil and gas industry. as well as the technological
principles for the comprehensive processing of alunites and the accompanying petro-
leum waters. highly effective reagents for purifying natural. drilling waters and
the industrial wastes from petroproducts. a highly effective process for obtaining
aroeatic nitriles by the oxidising ammonolysis of hydrocarbons and a catalyst for
producing them; all of these are of great iaportance for the national economy.
Production has been set up of individual types of especially pure materials which
are in short supply; a new. highly productive system has been proposed with a mov—
ing stream of a catalyst for the highly exothermic processes {of obtaining ethylene
oxide. formaldehyde. maleic and phthalic anhydrides. and allyl chloride.

In the field of Earth sciences an estimate has been conducted of the forecast re-
sources of oil and gas. maps have been drawn up of prospective oil-and-gas-bearing
areas. recomendations have been formulated for exploratory drilling, a new classi-
fication scheme has been worked out for the productive magnatite formations of the
Lesser and Greater Caucasus. and experimental models have been created of the mo-
bile infomation—measuring ”Nature” complex for gathering meteo- and geophysical
data.

In the field of the biological sciences research has been conducted on (inking. up
an inventory of Azerbaijan's flora and plant introduction; processes have been de-
veloped for obtaining valuable products from plant resources: measures have been

recommended for protecting the forests. increasing the capacity of winter pastures.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on preserving and reproducing rare and disappearing species of animals. increasing
the biological productivity of the Caspian Sea. developing fishing. on the biologi-
cal methods of combatting plant pests and animal parasites; important results have
been obtained in studying the organisation and regulation of the complex-reflex,
Visceral, and somato-sensorial functions of human and animal organisms; a new com-
pound has been introduced into production for preventing blood clottingnprotomin-
sulphate; the following new directions of soil science have been developed: soil
ecology, the energy engineering of soil formation; the principles of hmus forma~
tion and the saline regime of soils have been studied; land-improvement measures
have been recommended for combatting their salinization. In the field of the so-
cial sciences a cycle of projects have been carried out on the history of Azerbai-
Jan's working class. and a number of basic works have been published.

At the sane time, a number of shortcomings have been noted in the Academy's work:
a lack of conformity between the work of the individual institutes and the basic
trends 2-hich have been approved for them. a multiplicity of topics and a dispersal
of staff members. insufficient concentration of forces and funds on solving the
most. important problems. and insufficient participation in Ali-Union problems.
There is excessive slowness in using the results of exploring for Mesozoic petio-
leum. in studying plant resources, and in projects for creating production lines
without waste products. Hork With regard to the biological study of the Caspian
Sea has been too veakly developed. There is insuffiently activity in developing
the problems of socioeconomic forecasting and the comprehensive utilization of the

ramblic's productive forces. too little use has been made of mathematical-economic
me ods and computer technology; also being developed too slowly are problems of the

republic's history, problems of the socioeconomic development of the countries of
the Near and Middle East, and the role of ideological currents in the national-
liberation struggle. Insufficient use is being made of the possibility of attaching
scientific staff members of the A2881? Academy of Sciences to the scientific insti-
tutions of the USSR Academy of Sciences in order to increase their skills.

The Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences has decreed the following:

to approve the scientific and scientific-organisational activities of the AsSSR Aca-

demy of Sciences. directed at developing the republic's science. economy. and
culture;

to approve the principal trends of scientific research at the institutions of the
AzSSR Academy of Sciences;

to recommend to the S‘residium of the AsSSR Academy of Sciences that it bring the
structure of individual scientific institutions and sub-divisions in line with
their basic directions of scientific research, to activate the work of the repub-
lic-level Council on Coordinating Scientific Research in the fields of the natural
and social sciences, and to adapt measures to improve the training of highly skilled
scientific staff members, particularly with regard to specialties which are in

short supply. at the leading institutes of the USSR.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "Nauka". "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

238“
CSC : 1800/ 619

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

SHEVARDNADZE STRUGGLE WITH NEGATIVE ELEMENTS
Moscow VOPROSY PILOSOFII in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 3-19

[Article by Eduard Amvros'yevich Shevardnadze. first secretary of the Georgian CP
CC and candidate for membership in the CPSU Central Committee: "The Establishment
of the Leninist Principles of Socialist Humanism")

[Excerpts] The victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution in Russia and
the subsequent declaration of Soviet rule in Georgia gave the population of our
republic boundless social prospects. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev described this very
well when he spoke at the ceremonies in Tbilisi: "Georgia's lot in the past had
been difficult. For centuries it was invaded by foreign conquerors who devastated
the country. But generations of your ancestors were as solid as the rock of the
Caucasus. They defended their independence and created and preserved their own,
in many respects unique, national culture. Georgia's voluntary unification with
Russia and its centuries-old friendship with the great Russian people played a
beneficial role in this."3 Later, L. I. Brezhnev stressed: "Socialism brought
Georgia real freedom and awakened the deep-seated creative strength of its people.“
The freedom-loving spirit of the people took shape and was tempered in the struggle
for independence, for national and human dignity, a struggle the Georgian people
had to wage throughout its centuries—old history, first against Greek colonizers
and the legions of the Roman Empire, then against Mongol and Arab conquerors, and
finally against the shah'e Iran and the sultan'a Turkey. This spirit was reflected
in a unique culture, in colorful folk traditions, in ancient schools of philosophy
in literature and art and in romantic poetry which extolled love, friendship and
fraternity so beautifully and expressed complete faith in the omnipotence of

virtue and humanism. ‘

History had almost never indulged us with its favors, and it was only after the
Georgian people had thrown in their lot with Russia that they finally, in the
words of the famous Georgian writer and public spokesman I. Chavchavedze, received
their long-awaited peace and tranquility, and along with this the necessary condi-
tions for development. As Comrade L. I. Brezhnev said, "our ancestors made the
right choice 200 years ago. The friendly ties uniting the Russian and Georgian
people have grown and have become much stronger during Georgia's six socialist

decades."

After the October Revolution, Soviet Russia, in spite of the chaos created by

the civil war and foreign intervention, found enough strength to help the outlying
districts of the country consolidate Soviet rule and quickly put socialist reforms
in motion. Georgia is a quite convincing example of this. Once an agrarian

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. “SI". ONIN

region with many remnants of feudalism and extremely weak industry, it became a
developed industrial-agrarian republic during the years of Soviet rule.

The 26th Congress of the Communist Party of Georgia was held in our republic in
January. It summed up the results of the republic party organization's activity in
the last 5 years and outlined the prospects for the republic's socioeconomic and
cultural development. 0n the whole. we are pleased with these results, and the
prospects fill us with optimism and a sense of security. They reaffirm the funda—
mental advantages of real socialism. No socioeconomic system but socialism could
have ensured such rapid development in all spheres of republic life. It only be-
came possible after the October Revolution and the Soviet regime had put an end

to exploitation and national oppression, had made the multimillion-strong laboring
masses masters of their own fate and builders of a new civilization and had
strengthened the fraternal friendship and mutual assistance of Soviet peoples.

From the very first days of Soviet rule, as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev said at the 26th
CPSU Congress. the economic and social policy of our party "was aimed at raising
the level of development in the former outlying districts of Russia up to the

level of the nation's center as quickly as possible. And this was accomplished.
Close cooperation by all of the country's nationalities and, above all, the sslf-
less help of the Russian people played an exceptionally important role here."

In the subsequent implementation of Lenin's policy on nationality we see conclusive
evidence of socialist humanism.

II

The moral education of the individual is of primary significance in the mature
socialist society. The enhancement of the material well—being of the working
public can lead to lapses into the philistine, consumer mentality and morality

unless it is accompanied by moral and spiritual growth. Our own and experience
has convinced us of this.

Not long ago, symptoms of a consumer mentality, philistinism, acquisitive tenden-
cies and a heartless, bureaucratic attitude toward the needs of the working people
and their interests began to be displayed in our republic as a result of the ob-
vious relaxation of party and state discipline and the decline of personal re—
sponsibility. There were more frequent incidents involving the theft of socialist
property. bribery, opportunism and other negative behavior, fundamentally contrary
to the principles of the socialist way of life.

of course, this first had a negative effect on social production growth. By the
beginning of the 1970's Georgia's rate of economic development was one of the
lowest in the country. The damages suffered in the moral sphere were equally
serious. The minds of some people were infected by the dangerous microbe of ego-
tism, individualism, cynicism and nihilism, leading to the distortion of social
values and attitudes. All of this naturally alarmed communists and all con-
scientious workers with a vital interest in the flourishing of Soviet Georgia. The
time finally arrived when the situation could not betolerated any longer.

The famous CPSU Central Committee decree "0n the Organizational and Political Work
of the Tbilisi Corkom of the Communist Party of Georgia for the Implementation of
26th CPSU Congress Decisions," adopted in February 1972, marked the beginning of
a purposeful, consistent and uncompromising struggle against all types of negative
behavior and deviations from the standards of communist morality in the republic.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Georgian party organization received a specific program of action, and this
program became the basis of intense effort to strengthen the party's guiding
role, reestablish Leninist standards of party, public and social life, create a

healthy moral and psychological climate in the republic and thereby ensure dramatic
economic growth.

Subsequent decrees of the CPSU Central Comittee and USSR Council of Hinisters in
regard to the Georgian SSR were also of great help to us in this work. Our party
organization cannot remember any other time of such intensive concern and atten-
tion on the part of the party, government and union organs. Since the time of the
publication of the decree on the Tbilisi party gorkom, fundamental resolutions were
passed by the CPSU Central Committee on the Georgian party organization and by the
CPSU Central Collittee and USSR Council of Ministers on the Abkhazskaya ASSR and on

measures for the further development of the republic economy and the accelerated
development of republic agriculture.

Backed up by effective support, republic columnists took a principled stand, dis-
closing shortcomings and errors in the administration of economic and social
processes and fighting even more resolutely against everything inhibiting the
republic's development and impeding our advancement. Today we can confidently say
that the main result of those years was that we essentially won the battle for the
human being, for the disclosure of his most human qualities, the best qualities of
his spirit, and elevated the consciousness of all working people.

This turned out to be an extremely complex process. We had to learn to fight for
each member of society and find new ways and means of cultivating intolerance for
shortcomings and giving people a sense of civic responsibility and personal involve-
ment in public affairs. Our experience in this area reaffirmed the accuracy of the
Marxist premise that the public mentality does not keep up with everyday life,

that it is easier to change people's way of life than their way of thinking, and
that this is a slow and lengthy process. He were convinced of the accuracy of this
premise literally at each step. It turned out that it was much easier to overcome

economic retardation than to combat individualism, egotism and other deviations
from the standards of communist morality.

The intensity of the struggle against behavior contrary to socialism in the eco-
nomic. moral and psychological spheres, a struggle which began when the decree on
the Tbilisi gorkom was passed, grows with each year in the republic. The need to
firmly establish the Soviet way of life is a constant matter of concern to party
organizations, all party comittees. soviet, economic, trade-union and Komsomol
organs and other public organizations. It is from this vantage point that we

assess the results of our efforts to eliminate traces of petty bourgeois, philis-
tine thinking from the public mind.

0n the whole. our successes in this area are unquestionable and, as L. I. Brezhnev
put it, the republic party organization has "waged a principled and uncompromising
struggle against negative phenomena and for the reinforcement of party and state
discipline and a correct personnel policy."12 Whereas acquisitive tendencies were
once regarded as a neglected and serious illness, we can now say with pleasure
that the measures we have taken have done much to localize the seat of infection.
But this illness is far from cured and we must continue combating it. Re are fully
determined to perform all of this work even more consistently and purposefully.
guided by L. I. Brezhnev's instruction that "the constant effort must be con-
tinued so that the moral atmosphere in Georgia will be as pure as vour mountain air.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"13
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

It is becoming increasingly obvious that it is not enough to regard these devia-
tions simply as remnants of the past or to assume that negative phenomena contrary
to the Soviet way of life and our society are simply the "birthmarks of capital-
ism" and will fade away by themselves. We must also remember that remnants of

the past are still present in the public consciousness and will continue to exist
for a long time. we feel that some of the problems we encounter in our daily work.
particularly the important problem of the correlation between the growing needs

of people and the possibility of their satisfaction, require thorough scientific

analysis by academics and by practical workers, with the participation of the
entire society.

Some people have expressed the opinion that wages are slowly but surely losing
their significance as a motivating factor in the Soviet individual's labor activi-
ty. Citing sociological research findings, they conclude that wages are no longer
the chief motive for the labor of Soviet people and that the role of financial
incentives in the structure of behavioral motives is systematically being reduced,
making way for such factors as recognition of the social significance of labor and
satisfaction with the content of labor.

The constant rise of factors connected with moral and social prestige in the
motivational sphere. encouraging individuals to find creative work, is certainly
unquestionable. This is a general trend and it is relatively simple to trace. An
analysis of the hierarchy of motives determining the individual's attitude toward
his field of employment, conducted by the Council on Public inion of the Georgian
CP cc. confirms the conclusions of Soviet sociologists regard ng the

increased importance of sociocultural incentives in the overall structure of be-
havioral motives. However, it is too soon to conclude that financial incentives,
particularly wages, are playing a less important role. This is not only contrary
to the facts but is also totally inconsistent with the policy of our party and
government to raise the average wage. And in general, we wonder if the correlation
between financial and moral incentives is really this simple and if it is correct
to say that wages have no moral bearing on the matter.

As a direct expression of the individual's economic interests. wages in our country,
at least at present. represent one of the principal ways of combining his personal
interests with the interests of the entire society, and we must strive for the
unconditional observance of the socialist principle of distribution "from everyone
according to their abilities and to everyone according to their labor." Our ob-
jective, consequently, consists in ensuring that the volume of socially useful
labor expended remains the chief yardstick of benefits received. This labor must
be the only source of prosperity for all members of society. This calls for a
great deal of planning because this principle affects more than just the sphere

of distribution. Apparently, it also determines the effectiveness of labor indoc-
trination and the cultivation of a communist attitude toward labor.

"The chief criterion of distribution in the socialist society can only be labor--
its quantity and quality," Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stressed: "Unfortunately, this
is not always the case. All types of excessive egalitarianism. cases in which
people collect wages essentially just for showing up at work and not for tangible
results, and the issuance of undeserved bonuses all have an extremely harmful
effect on production indicators and on the public mind."15

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This means that we must do more than just influence persons with a petty bourgeois
mentality with the aid of administrative and legal penalties, and coercive meas-
ures when necessary. There is no question that this is an important aspect of
the matter. But something else is equally important--the "humanization of condi-
tions," the placement of members of society under conditions which exclude the
possibility of any return to obsolete social behavioral stereotypes.

He must constantly strive to ensure not only the absolute growth of wages, but
also an increase in the purchasing power of the ruble and the better satisfaction
of consumer demand. We must put all of our energy and resources to work to in-
crease the real income of the population. and this will depend largely on local
initiative, on the efforts of individuals and local administrative bodies and on
their ability to mobilize the hidden reserves of the socialist economy.

At the same time, we must thoroughly analyze the reasons for the survival of the
acquisitive mentality. Without a solid scientific analysis of commercial produc-
tion and the marketing sphere it would be difficult to plan the struggle against
these tendencies. Unfortunately, our scientific community has not been overly
eager to tackle these problems. But the party teaches us not to avoid critical
matters, not to be afraid of "difficult questions" and to answer them boldly.

III

There is also another side to the struggle against negative phenomena and it is
directly related to the individual's morals, his social aims, his views on life
and his system of values, all of which guide his actions. Experience has cor~
roborated V. I. Lenin's idea that "changing the form of government is not a dif-
ficult matter..., but changing the fundamental conditions of economic life and
combating the habits that have been cultivated for hundreds and thousands of
years in the petty owner is a matter which will require many years of persistent

organizational work even after the exploitative classes have been completely
overthrown."l6

The habits that took root over centuries of slavery, feudalism and capitalism,
habits that have become the closest thing to instincts, are extremely tenacious.
The struggle against these habits and traditions is a struggle of socialist aware—
ness against the bourgeois-anarchistic lack of control engendered by petty owner-
ship ambitions. Communism will become invincible, as V. I. Lenin correctly
believed. when the victory over petty bourgeois habits and economic practices,
over egotism, inertia and dissipation is consolidated, when conscious socialist
discipline is established and the standards of communist--that is, collectivist--
morality replace the rule inherited from the old world that "each person must take
care of himself and let God take care of the rest." "Cormmmism," he wrote, "begins
when average workers, performing difficult labor, make a selflesseeffort to in-
crease the productivity of labor and preserve each pound of bread, coal, iron and
other products furnished not to the workers themselves and not to those 'close'

to them, but to the more 'distant'--that is, to the entire society."17 The petty
ownership ambitions that are inconsistent with this social and moral goal are
extremely dangerous to society. But they are much more dangerous to the moral
health of the individual. The greed and cupidity engendered by the possessive
mentality cripple people, deform them and corrupt their spirit. The individual is
inevitably alienated from society, and, as we know, the individual cannot reach

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his full potential outside the society. This means that the struggle against these
phenomena is being waged primarily on behalf of the individual, on behalf of his
spiritual inspiration and moral splendor.

The improvement of all ideological and political indoctrination work is of primary
significance here. The Georgian CP CC is confidently reorganizing this

work in accordance.with the natural development of life and the current stage of
our social progress--thst is, in line with the requirements of the 26th CPSU
Congress and the well-known party Central Committee decree on ideological matters.

This approach is the only correct one today because the increasingly important role
of the subjective factors stems from the very nature of socialism. Socialism is

a product of conscious creation by the masses. Whereas antagonistic forms of social
organization were upheld with discipline by the stick and starvation, the social-
ist society presupposes the existence of conscious discipline in the working
public; it is made strong, as V. I. Lenin said, by the mass consciousness. The
high spiritual requirements of the Soviet people, their rising educational level,
their general erudition, awareness and culture dennd that everything connected
with ideology and indoctrination be totally devoid of cliches, familiar refrains
and propaganda formulas that have been voiced so often that they have lost their
impact. We know have an extremely wide range of means of informing the masses of
party aims, heightening our ideological effect on then and solving many problems
in ideological and political indoctrination. It is important to use all of these
means skillfully.

This is why the ideological sphere is precisely the object of such close attention
by the Georgian 0? ‘00 at present. It is in this sphere that many problems

are now being solved in the struggle against the negative phenomena discussed
above. We are striving to direct this work into fundamental channels and to lay
a solid scientific foundation for it. This is attested to, for example, by the
all—union applied science conference held in Tbilisi in 1976 to discuss aspects
of Lenin's policy on nationality and the internationalist indoctrination of the
working public. As Comrade L. I. Brezhnev has remarked, even in the nature social-
ist society the dynamics of its multinational state's development can give rise
to many problems requiring quick party action. Our experience has proved that the
regular discussion of these matters helps in making the right decisions in dif-
ficult situations. It was with good reason that L. I. Brezhnev said at the fes-
tivities in Tbilisi that "an atmosphere of truly international friendship reigns
in Soviet Georgia."18

On the initiative of the of the Georgian CP cc, an applied science conference was
also organized to discuss ways of overcoming acquisitive tendencies and establish-
ing the principles of the socialist way of life. The academics, party and soviet
workers, trade-union activists and journalists who attended the conference dis-
cussed extremely crucial matters concerning our entire society. Undertakings of
this kind. which are now organized in the republic regularly, are given extensive
coverage in the press, in our sociopolitical and literary journals and on tele-
-vision and radio.

This proves. in particular, that the ideological role of the mass media has been
noticeably augmented in recent years. They have done much to improve the moral
and psychological climate in the republic and they energetically and creatively
support the Central Comaittee in the inlementation of its major policy lines.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I-‘K‘IAI. USE UNIX

However, if we assess the work of the mass media from a highly exacting stand-
point, we cannot say that they have completely overcome their tendency to be too
glib and superficial, and sometimes their lack of objectivity keeps the party from
assessing certain facets of our life correctly. But after all, any defect in their
work is particularly unacceptable because each of their statements generally has
considerable public repercussions.

The comprehensive approach to the resolution of ideological problems calls for a
persistent search for new methods and forms of work that would heighten the degree
to which the individual is influenced by propaganda during the process of communist
indoctrination. For example, a council for the coordination of work in the further
development of interethnic relations and the international indoctrination of the
working public functions within the Georgian GP cc for the more thorough

and competent resolution of ethnic problems. The council was of great help in

the preparations for the 60th anniversary of Soviet Georgia, its cummndst party
and its autonoaous units. we expected to also play an important role in the prepa-
rations for the bicentennial of the Georgian Treaty, the historical document which
securely fastened the bonds of friendship and fraternity uniting the Russian and
Georgian people, which we will celebrate in 1983.

One of the noteworthy forms we have used is the activity of the Council on Public
Opinion, established within the Central Committee in 1975 and mentioned previously
in this article. 0n the basis of sociological polls, the council has worked out

many useful recommendations that have helped us to find the best solution to a
lumber of problems.

The popularization of new, socialist customs and rituals is assigned an important
place in our ideological work. Abundant experience has been accumulated and is
being put to active use in overcoming some conservative traditions and customs
that are incompatible with the socialist way of life. Morals and customs alien

to our present way of life are being combated according to plan on the basis of a
decree adopted a few years ago by the Georgian CP CC "0n Measures to Inten- _
sify the Struggle Against Harnful Traditions and Customs." New, socialist festivi-
ties are being offered in their place. For example, the Tbilisoba holiday has
only been celebrated twice but it has already won universal recognition. It
symbolizes the ideals of friendship and fraternity, strong humanitarianism and
internationalism. Many traditional folk holidays have begun to sparkle with new
colors: Such holidays as Alaverdobs,$huamcoba and others have been freed of
their religious trappings and have become a reliable part of our arsenal of indoc-
trinational means. Therefore, our experience has proved that success is possible
even in what I would call a delicate sphere if we take purposeful action.

The socialist way of life, in addition to all of its other merits, encourages us
to constantly look to the future and perform today's work with a view to tomorrow.
It is for the sake of the future that we live and work and it is best personified
by our splendid youth. The party is greatly concerned about the indoctrination of
the yt.nger generation and the development of youth's moral characteristics. In
recent years much has been done in the republic to raise the level of indoctrina-
tion work with youth and cultivate active comndtment and the skills of political
fighters in each boy and each girl. Re are persistently overcoming the harmful
effect the negative phenomena of the recent past had on some of our youths. Com-
munists in the republic always support the initiative of the young wholeheartedly

1"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ISSl-I ONLY

and give them a more important role to play in the resolution of urgent govern-
mental, political, economic and social problems. Regular progress reports of

the students are widely disseminated to the workers of their neighborhoods and
to labor collectives.

Now the republic party organization's work to overcome negative phenomena and
establish the principles of strong humanism is entering a new stage. This

is possible because most people in the republic have regained their faith in high
social and ethical ideals and values and the feeling that they are the masters of
their land and of their faith. People have learned through their own experience
that only conscientious labor can be used to measure human dignity and the social
prestige of the individual in our society. The heightened labor and social activi-
ty of communists and non-party members in the republic has been accompanied by the~
constant reinforcement of the ideological, political, moral and psychological
unity of the working class, kolkhoz peasantry and people's intelligentsia. There
is an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect between various social groups and
strata. between ordinary workers and administrative personnel.

Literature and art in our society reflect the interests of the people and popular-
ize the high ideals of humanism, thereby performing their basic social

function of cultivating communist morality. Understandably, the republic party
organization is backed up by the creative intelligentsia, which is fully aware of
its responsibility to establish high moral and ethical values. The 26th Congress
of the Commmnist Party of Georgia had a serious discussion about the development
of literature and the arts and the augmentation of their role in communist con-
struction. It is particularly significant that even when negative behavior was
widespread. the best representatives of our science, literature and art did not
betray their calling and their public duty and vigorously withstood the pressure
exerted by the philistine and acquisitive mentality. Now that we are striving to
completely overcome all of these phenomena. the scientific and creative intel-

ligentsia is naturally a reliable help to the Georgian CP CC and all party
committees.

It is also significant, however, that many social scientists are not involved in
the implementation of party plans for indoctrination. The criticizing remarks
voiced by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev in the accountability report of the Central Com-
mittee to the 26th CPSU Congress, when he correctly chastised our philosophers for
"frequently preferE%Pg to prove what has already been proved instead of interpret-
ing new phenomena,‘ applies directly to many of these social scientists. This is
party due to their isolation, which gives rise to the study of unimportant matters
and the loss of contact with applied science and real problems. A comprehensive
program for the development of the social sciences in the 1980's is now being

d1 up to eliminate shortcomings in the republic. It will become the basis for
un. . effort and coordinated research into the social sciences, fundamental

aspt. s of Harxiat-Leninist theory and ideological and indoctrinational work.

We still have much to do to equalize the developmental levels of spiritual culture
in urban and rural areas and create all of the necessary conditions for the eleva-
tion of cultural standards in our rural villages, particularly in alpine regions.
This will require a great deal of effort from all of us--party and soviet workers,
economic personnel and representatives of science. literature and the arts.

He still have several problems in this area, however. Some of them are connected
with undesirable sociodemographic and sociopsychological consequences of urbaniza-
tion, which, in turn, is an unavoidable result of the continuous industrialization

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the republic. The increasing density of the population in the cities and the
exodus from rural areas. especially in the mountains, are giving rise to many
complex economic and social problems. of course, it would be absolutely wrong to
stop developing the industrial base for this region. Obviously, the solution does
not consist in reduced rates of industrialization, but in the more efficient dis-
tribution of productive forces with a view not only to purely economic factors,
but also to the consequences of social, demographic. cultural and ecological
factors. we must, and the party demands that we do. strive to preserve all of

the positive features of urban and rural life. In our republic one of the signifi-
cant factors in the attainment of this fundamental socialist objective is the
expansion of the network of large industrial enterprises in rural locations, which

will help us to avoid many of the complex social problems connected with the rural
population's migration to the cities.

,The eradication of social boundaries between cities and the rural countryside
certainly cannot be interpreted as the absorption of rural areas by cities. as
complete urbanization. We must raise the economic, social and cultural standard
of living in rural areas up to the urban level, preserve all of the valuable
aspects of rural life and enrich urban life with them. In this connection, the
actual alienation of prominent members of our intelligentsia from their native
rural villages is naturally disturbing. After all, it is no secret that only a
few nature-lovers constantly stay in touch with the rural countryside, and this
certainly has a negative effect on the rural cultural level. Evidently, we must
search for the best ways of ensuring actual participation in rural cultural life
by members of the scientific and creative intelligentsia.

The development of mature socialism's political system is moving closer and closer
to the top of our Leninist party's list of strategic priorities. In our day, the
viability and appeal of socialism depend largely on the capacity of the political

system for improvement and for the further disclosure of its highly democratic and
humanist content. In the final analysis, this is the avenue our nationwide

state must and will take to reach the stage of communist self-government.
FOOTNOTES
3. L. I. Brezhnev, "Speech at the Festive Meeting Commemorating the 60th An-
- niversary of the Georgian SSR and the Communist Party of Georgia," Tbilisi,
1981, p 3.
4. Ibid., p b.
5. "Happy Anniversary," PRAVDA, 26 Hay 1981.

9. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
' 1981, p 55.

12. L. I. Brezhnev, 0p. cit., p 6}
13. Ibid.

15. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS," p 59.

19
FOHIOF11CIA1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16. V. l. Lenin, "Polnoye sobraniye acchinenly" [Complete Collected ﬂbrka],
Vol 39. p 121. -

17. Ibid., p 22.
18. L. I. Brezhenv, Op. c1:., p 5.
21. "Haterlaly XXVI s"yezda KPSS," p 78.

COPYRIGRT: Izdatol'stvo 13K KPSS "Pravda", "prroay Eilooofil". 1981.

8588
cso: 1800/669 5'”

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY