FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10660
15 July 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 782

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain infomtion primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions 'and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGl‘l' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 01’
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA REPORT

P000 80. 782

Comeurs
Im-mtw mum

0663 Aid to Attica in In Quarter of 1902 loaned
(W TROPICAUX 81’ MIN. 7 My 82) ..........

mom

Brief.
Belgian. hutch Citiuno' mu:

BURUNDI

Bank of Burundi upon. Country'u team-i: situation
(mans TROPICAU! 81' Him. 30 Apr 82) .........

Britt.
World Isak Aid

mm

County luf- Dp routine Indoacry
(01“. "00:11“:ng ml”. 26 "I, .2) noooooooo-oooo

ETHIOPIA

Relation. Hit]: Man Unlikdy To Inn”
(m mm”. 26 Jun .2) 0.00.00.00.00...-IOCOOIOOOOOOO.

'lblu' Bun Morin; Ind Our Offmivo
(m 'msr. 26 Jun .2) 0.000.000.0000...OOOOOOOOOOO-IOO

lad 8n: ensign not Achieving Objectives
(tuned. Bandung m Anna. 26 my 82)
POI OPPICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

Beomic Ptoopocto for 1982 Betta: Than in 1981
(means IIOPICAUX 31' non-3mm. 21 my 82) . . . . . . . .

UGANDA

Patio Maine Publish“ Interview With Idi Ania
(Idi Ania Dado Intent"; PARIS KANE. 23 Apr 82) .......

ZAMBIA

Chut'ch Oppooition to [undo Could Haunt
(m mmsr. 26’“ .2) .00..0OOOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOO
COCK AID T0 AFRICA IN 18'! QUARTER OF 1982 REPORTED
Perie mains TROPICAU! 31' mime in French 7 Key 82 pp 1195-96

(Article: ”Centrel fund for Boone-1c Cooperation: 632.5 Hillion French
France in Loene for the Firet Quermr of 1982”]

[Text] The Supervieory Council. the Co-ittee on Loene to French Overeeee
Territoriee. end the Conittee on loene to Foreign Countriee, ell under the
Central Fund for Econonic Cooperation [6003], during the loathe of Jenuery.
February. end March 1982 epproved loene toteling 632.5 nillion french frence.
broken down ee follm (ell loene ere given in French frence):

Donne to Foreign Countriee

Benin-4.0m of L7 Iillion frence to cover pertiel finencing of the tune-
for-etion into e hotel of inetelletiono of the villege of the African-
Heuritien Co-on Orgenieetion (00AM) et Cotonou. It eppeered thet it would
be sufficient to rebuild exieting etructuree to turn then into en hotel.
Given the intereet efforded byrthe eite beceuee of ite proxieity to the beet
beech in Benin. the new eeteblieheent ehould hewe no difficulty in ettrect-
ing e lerge proportion of the touriete vieiting this country.

Celeroon-e) been to the Ceuroon Develop-eat Corporetion (CAMDEV) for 26 mil-
lion france ee pert of en overell loen of 48 nillion frence cofinenced with
the 031 [Europeen Inveetnent Bent]. The purpoee of this loan ie to finence
the conetruction of e new peln oil pleat et ldeneu. with e treetnent cepecity
of 20 tone per hour. which ehould neke it poeeible to hendle the growing pro-
duction of the plentetione et Ideneu end Debundehe. ee well ee the evet‘tuel
eurplue fro. the pell oil plent et lbndoni.

b) Loen to the Ceeeroon Develop-eat Benk (300) for 42 eillion frence end e
loan to the hetionel Invest-ant Coupeny (8!!!) for 5 million frence. Theee
two loene cover pertiel finencing of the expeneion of ectivitiee of the Mn
Per- Peln Oil coneny (SPFS). with e production of 80.000 tone of pel- oil
end heerte of pale. Celeroon ie the fourth lergeet Africen producer. efter
Nigeria, Ivory Coeet. end Zeire. Since 1968 the Centrel Fund for noonolic
Cooperetion hee eupported the pel- oil plen. The new loene ere for the hein-
tenence end developeent of the plentetione.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c) Loan to the Cameroon Shipping Lines (CMSRIP) for 100 million francs. This
loan is for partial financing of the purchase of two cargo ships. An invita-
tion to bid was issued in 1981 for the acquisition of two new semicontainer
ships. and WHIP chose Chantiers de l'Atlantique [Atlantic Shipbuilding Com-
pany]. despite heavy Gemn coupetition.

Ivory Coast-wa) Loan to the Ivory Coast Electric Power Company (EBCI) for

8 million francs. This loan is to finance preliminary engineering studies for
the construction of the Soubre hydroelectric dan. Situated below Buyo on the
Sassandra River. 115 In north of San-Pedro, the Soubre site was chosen by
Blectricite de France [French Electric Power Cowany]. which has been charged
with the preliminary studies for the initial draft of the project. This dam
will have a total length of 8 km and a total height of 28.5 I. and a water-
reteining capacity of 1.0 billion m3. It involves a water-pumping station
with a maxi-um capacity of 6,500 m3 per second.

b) Three loans to Ivorian develop-ant banks totaling 30 million francs of lo
nillion francs each: Credit de la Cote d'Ivoire [Ivory Coast Credit Bank--
CREDICODI], Conpagnie Financiere de la Cote d'Ivoire [Ivory Coast Finance Com-
pany—COFINCI], and the Banque Ivoirienne de Developpenent Industriel [Ivorian
Bank for Industrial Develops-entnBIDI]. The opening of lines of credit in
favor of these Ivorian banks appears to be an appropriate formula for the fi-
nancing of small and aedium-size comanies. The Central Fund for Economic
Cooperation has authorized two loans to each of the three banks under the fol-
lowing conditions: a jointly financed public assistance loan of 7 million
francs in the first. stage; and a jointly financed loan of 3 million francs in
the second stage.

Csbon--a) m loans to the Banque Gabonaise de Developpement [Gsbonese Devel-
opnent Bank] for 2.2 million francs and for 2.24 million francs on a jointly
financed basis. These two loans are for the refinancing of a loan to the
Societe Plastique-industrie [Plastics Industry Company] (in order to extend
the capacity of the plant). which manufactures: reinforced polyester glass
products for septic tanks. refining and filtering installations. cisterns and
water towers; and for the construction of canoes and boats, cold injected
polyester products, furniture, and polystyrene foam products for packing and
insulation.

b) No loans to the Societe d'energie et d'ssu du Gabon [Gabon Power and Water
Conpanyusml. one for 3.48 million francs and the other on a jointly fi-
nanced basis of 8.12 nillion francs. These two loans are for the partial
financing of a progran for expanding facilities for the distribution of elec-
tricity in Libreville. This project will expand the capacity provided by

the electrical installations in the capital and will make it possible to re-
duce the use of the thermal power station. resulting in substantial savings
in production costs.

Guinea-Bissauua loan to the Societe d'economie nixte d'ermement et de peche
de Cecheu [Mixed State. and Private Shipping and Fishing Company of Cacheu--
SWBSCA] for 2 million francs. The loan is to finance a SD‘IAPBSCA expan-
sion prograa. The company will shortly begin production of shrimp in

2
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
saltwater lagoons. This promising new kind of activity will use existing
installations. The company will also process and sell fish landed by Sene-
galese ships from Dakar which are licensed to fish in Guinean waters. Repair
of company ships is also provided for. with a view to chartering them to a
Preach shipping company or selling then.

Upper Volta-a) A loan to the Republic of Upper Volta for 70 million francs
for the modernisation and expansion of the telecommunications system. with
6.500 telephones in service. or 1 line for every 1,000 inhabitants. the tele-
phone network of Upper Volta is one of the smallest in the world. In order
to satisfy requests for extensions of telephones already installed and those
over the next few years. the Postal and Teleco-unicstions Office (OPT) has
developed a program for the expansion of the Ouagadougou and hobo-Dioulaeso
networks. as well as for the construction of new switching installations in
six provincial centers.

b) A loan on an exceptional basis of 50 million francs for improving the fi-
nancial situation of various public and senipublic bodies. supplementary fi-
nancing of investment projects under construction, and financing of state
participation in the capital expansion progran of multinational companies.

c) A loan of 16 million francs to finance a hydroelectric and agricultural
dam at Tousaiana, on the Yannon liver. The difficulties encountered by the
Societe sucriere de ﬂaute-Volte [Upper Volta Sugar CompanyuSOSUlN] in its
efforts to provide satisfactory supplies of water in its sugarcane fields
have led the Upper Voltan authorities to apply to the Central Fund for Eco-
nomic Cooperation to finance construction of this dam. which will regularire
the flow of water in the Yannon River.

d) No loans, one for 11 million francs and the other for 3 million francs.
for partial financing of the project for modernisation of agriculture in Heat
Volta. using medium-size tractors. The first trial use of medium-size trac-
tors in Upper Volta took place during the growing season of 1977-1978. Sons
18 tractors and related inlenents were put to work. The tractor used was a
simplified model developed by a French firm (bouyer).

Madagascar-s) A loan of 8.9 million francs to finance the reconstruction of
the irrigation network in the rice-growing area around Lake Alaotra.

b) A loan of 11.6 million francs to finance the reconstruction of the irriga-
tion network in the rice-growing area around Atananerivo.

c) A loan of 9.55 million francs to finance the reconstruction of the road
between Horamsnga and Ambatondrasaka. The transportation of agricultural sur-
pluses from the region around Lake Alaotra is possible as far as lioramanga
over a road network 1‘0 kn in length and. from Horusnga. by the railroad be-
tween Antananarivo and Toamasina. The use of the road has become very diffi-
cult at present. owing to the damage caused by the rains over the past few
months. This reconstruction effort will complemt the redevelopment of the
rice-growing area around Lake Alaotra.

FORMING!!!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d) A loan to the Jiro sy Reno Malagasy Company (JIRAHA) for 2.3 million francs.
This loan is for the partial financing of the small-scale hydroelectric proj-
ect at Beasha. The problen of the electrification of small. isolated urban
centers has not yet been resolved in countries with a low population density.
like Madagascar. The snail consumption of electricity in such countries does
not justify connecting isolated areas to the distribution network of the large
cities over what are frequently long distances. That explains why these iso-
lated urban centers are being provided with self-sufficient means of prcduc-
tion of electricity, such as small-scale hydroelectric generating facilities.

Hali--A loan to the Banque nationale de develOppenent agricole [National Agri-
cultural Development lank] of Mali for 8 million francs. This loan, whose
ultimate beneficiary is the Societe des Grands Houlins du Mali [Mali Large
Hills Coapanyl. is for the partial financing of construction of a flour nill.

higer-a) A loan for 19.6 million francs. This loan. which is accompanied

by a loan from the World Bank and a grant from the PAC [the French Govern-
nent'e Aid and Cooperation Fund]. in a project with an overall value of 71.6
nillion francs, is for the financing of a forestry project in higer. The
project involves the planting and maintenance of 3,855 ha of forests for the
production of rirewood and related service activity, the protection and de-
velopment of 6,000 ha of natural forests, as well as activity involving forest
protection. soil restoration, and water conservation.

b) Two loans to the Banque de developpament de la Republique du Niger [Devel-
opnent Bank of the Republic of Niger] for 6 nillion and 2 million francs.
respectively. These two loans, whose ultinate beneficiary is the Societe na-
tionale des transports du ﬂiger [Niger National Transportation Company].
take into account the importance of highway transportation in Niger. The
loans are for the partial refinancing of a vehicle maintenance center at
Parakou.

c) Loan of 60 million francs for financing the repaving of wornout rural roads
and tracks, a forestry project, and additional work on the Hotel Gaweye.

d) A loan to the Societe des nines de l’Air (SOHAIR) [Air Region Mining Com-'
pany] for 12.6 million francs. The loan is for the financing of the remainder
of the participation of SOHAIR in the capital stock of SONICHAR [expansion
unknown]. SOHAIR has contributed the bulk of its assigned share out of its
own resources. however. given the uncertain financial prospects as they re—
flect the present state of the uranium market. SOHAIR has asked the Central
Fund for Economic Cooperation to refinance the balance of its subscription.

Senegal--A loan of 6.7 million francs for the partial financing of a project
for the developnant of truck garden farming in the Gandiolais area in Senegal.
in order to improve the supply of agricultural input (seed. seedlings. fer-
tilizer. and eaall tools). lapleaentation of the project will bring together
the local trade of the Gandioleis region and the people of surrounding vil-
lages (120 wells, 50 vegetable canning stores, and a warehouse for the cen-
tralization of sales).

6
INJI10FIHCJA1.lﬂ5lI(ﬂ‘LY
Seychellee—A loan of 2.5 nillion ance to finance the further participation
of the Seychelles atate in capital of the Coqagnie eeychelloiee de pronotion
hoteliere (CORPROH) [Seychellea Hotel Development Conany]. The Seychellee
Government uente to regroup ite hotel aeeeta in a eingle entity benefiting
from foreign technical aaeietance. to purchaee a hotel. and to direct ita ef-
forte toward improving the quality of touriat eervicea.

Vanuatu—A loan to the lanque de developpenent de Vanuatu [Vanuatu Develop-
nent Bank] for 6 million franca. Thie loan in for the financing of participa-
tion by the bank in the economic activity of the country.

Capital Participation in Benita and Cowaniea

The Superviaory Cmmcil authorized the director general of the Central Fund
for lcononic Cooperation to eubecribe increaeed capital in banka and conpaniee
to an additional total of 27,583,600 france.

Ivory Cont—Participation by the Central Fund in an increaae in the capital
of the Credit de la Cote d'lvoire (CREDIOODI) [Ivory Coaet Credit Bank] total-
ing #333,500 france. The Central Fund in maintaining ite participation in
the capital of the bank at 9.2 percent.

Tmieia--Participation by the Central Fund in en increaee in the capital of
the lenque de developpenent economique de Tuniaie (303T) [Tuniaien Bcononic
Development Bank] totaling 6.25 million france. The Central Fund ie maintain-
ing its participation in the capital of the bank at the level of 6 percent.

BCBOHuThe 3630!! (Bureau central d'etudee pour lea equipenent. d‘outremer)
[Central Study Office for Overaeae Equip-ant] haa obtained the agreement of
the Central Fmd to increaee the latter'a participation in DC!!! capital for
a total of 3 million trance. The Central Fund haa aleo agreed to provide an
advance to the new for 10 Iillion france to cover an authorized overdraft
for a Innin- period of 2 yeara. Theae advancea are to facilitate participa-
tion by the ICEOH in tranaectione other than thoee financed by the PAC [the
French Govern-ent'e Aid and Cooperation Fund]. including thoee financed by
reeourcee coming free the budgete of foreign countriea. Theee advancee con-
cern only tranaectione taking place in countries where the Central Fund ia in
a poaition to participate.

SATECnThie concerna the Societe d'aide technique et de cooperation [Tech-
nical and Cooperative Aid Conpeny]. The purchaae of all or part of the eharee
held by SATEC in the capital of credit compeniee owned by overeeae French de-
partnenta haa been authorised. Theae eharea are held in SODDIA. SODBGA, and
SOFIDBR [expaneion of theee three conpaniee unknown] by SATBC. The Central
Fund may purchaae theee eheree up to a total of 16 aillion france.

COPYRIGHT: Rene horeux at Cie Paria 1982

5170
080: 6719/955

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
331m

BELGIAN, men CITIZIS' ARREST-dour Belgian end tvo French echoolteechere
were erreeted 1n Angole Enter weekend. it one leerned on 21 Apt-11. me e1:
were apprehended while teldn; e boet trip Iron uneheee on the Congo liver,
on the border between hire end Angola. Engine trwble forced then to eben-
don the bent. [text] [Peru mucus 110?!an t'r Hummus in French
No 1906. 7 Hey 82 p 1231] [COPYRIWN Rene Morena: et en Perie 1982] 9516

C80: l0719/963

”WWW?
BANK 0? 3mm! REPORTS couu'ru's remorse SITUA‘IIG
Peril mucus 1'30le 81' mm in Preach llo 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 116‘

maeignod article: ”hrundi: The lcononic Situotion (According to the 1980
Report of the Bank of the Republic of Mandi)?

ﬂag The anmol report of the bank of tho hepublic of Burundi for fiecol
year -1980 includee an an introductory prooontotion on exteneive occount of
the country'a econonic and finonciel develop-onto during thet yeor.

The year 1980 voo nerhod by fairly unfavoroblo econooic circunetancee, noinly
hecauoe of the poor coffee herveet nado woree by falling pricoa realised froo
it. Alao, overall growth hae been well: up 1.8 percent in reel tor-e. a
rate drop of 66 percent fron the 3.2 percent incroaoe achieved in 1979. The
slight advance in groeo donoatic product cane nootly fron the eocondary eec-
tor which. however, eccounte for only 15 percent of the note-up of tho GNP.

the general f inenciol aituntion showed on opprecinble deterioration following
the poor roeulte of tho coffee aoaeon; the goverr-ont finance deficit in-
creaood.

In epite of tho woraening of tho deficit in goode and eervicoa trade. tho
balance of poynenta cone out with a elight eurplue of 28 nillion hurundi

franca inatoad of the 907 nillion deficit in 1979 (l Burundi frenc equele
about 0.067 French franco) owing to the eieabl'o inflow of outeide capitol.

becaueo of the contribution node by foreign aid. groeo foreign oxcbenge re-
eervoa at the end of December 1900 represented an oxelnnge value of nore
than 9 billion Durundi france. covering about 9 nonthe of inporto.

Agricultural Production

The 1980-1981 coffee eoaoon uao poor. with 18,628 tone exported (don 9.100
tone) including 16,921 tone of arabice and 1.707 tone of robueto. hporta
generated 6.8 billion bumndi franca of revome coopared to 8.8 billion free
the previoua eeaeon. The United Statea “5.2 percent) and the BBC (35.1 per-
cent) are the nain coneunero (trance caning in for L6 percent).

7
F0! OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Production of seed cotton rose compared to the previous harvest, up t 5,611.
tons: furnishing gin operations with 2,015 tons of staple fiber of which
1,515 tons were exported (223 million burundi francs) and 500 tons delivered
to the mjumbura Textile Complex.

After the recovery registered in 1979, production of dried tea returned to

the 1978 level with 1,655 tons. Except for a slight tonnage (102 tons) sold
to Cameroon, exports were sent to the London and Mombasa tea suction sarkets.
Sales generated 213 million mrundi francs. By the end of 1980, 85 percent of
the program for setting up different tea projects had been accomplished.

The estimate of livestock at the end of 1980 cane to 600,000 cattle, 731,000
goats, end 330,000 sheep.

The five reforestation projects in the process of being carried out will
involve a total area of 22,600 hectares by 1985.

Hines end Industry

Mineral production has completely stopped; exploration is nainly concentrating
on nickel and gold.

As a whole, the industrial sector registered satisfactory development. In
order to meet growing demand, beer production capacity was increased with a
target of 900,000 hectoliters by the end of 1981.

The Bujumburs Textile Complex (COTBBU) has experienced difficulties in selling
its production since the market is still dominated by the accunulation of
stocks of imported fabric; the complu only showed 22 million hurundi francs
in sales. Blanket manufacture once again shoved a decline (down 6.8 percent).
Likewise, shoe production saw a drop of 8.8 percent, because of temporary
difficulties with raw material supplies (plastic and rubber).

In the chemical sector, production of oxygen and acetylene increased (up
17.5 percent and 35.7 percent respectively). Manufacture of soaps, paints,
detergents and cosmetics nsde progress. 0n the other hand, plastic bag pro-
duction continued to fall off (down 32.5 percent).

The manufacture of cigarettes was affected by a 3-month interruption needed
for the installation of a new assembly line. As of the beginning of 1982, the
unit has integrated all stages of production starting with the tobacco leaf,
no longer packaging imported tobacco which is already chopped.

Various industrial projects are in the process of being accomplished or under
study: porsolana-based cement production by the National Line and Cement
Enterprise (ENACCI), a Hursmoya flour mill by the Rational Flourmilling
Industry. a bottle and glassworks, plastic tubing. plugs/stoppers, and indus-
trial bricklaking.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Infrastructure

Road programs were continued. The construction of the hydroelectric den on
the Hugere uas conpleted with aid fron China. The Gitaga pouer plant on the
Ruoyironza began operation. The construction of a hydroelectric power plant
on the Gitenge near Rvegura, the international financing for which is settled
in principle, figures along the projects under study. The Dujunbura inter-
national airport modernisation work has financing fro. the Central Fund for
Bcononic Cooperation. France contributed to the financing of the teleco-Ini-
catione ground station as well.

The year 1980 as narked by recovery in tourist activity with 210,585 visitors
(up 15.5 percent) and 220 aillion Mrundi francs in incone.

Foreign Trade

Tron being in surplus for 1976 and 1977, the balance of trade has since gone
into deficit. Burundi'a foreign trade is mad up timely:

Minions of Burundi francs

1972 1978 1979 1980
Imports 6,678 8,863 13,721 15,109
Exports 8,051 6,265 9,85 5.906
Balance +1 ,373 -2 .578 - 6 .286 - 9 .203

Anong imports in 1980. consuner goods cane in for 62 percent and capital
goods for 19.5 percent; fuel purchases required 2.2 nillion Burundi francs.

In exports, prinary products registered 98.1 percent and nannfactured products
1.7 percent.

The BBC and the United States are lurundi'e principal suppliers and custoners.
Iran, Japan and China supplied 25.8 percent of its inporta. Regional trade
with hands, Zaire and Kenya is relatively large (6 percent of imports and
2.9 percent of exports).

The balance of payments cane out. this my:

Millions of Burundi francs

1977 1978 1979 1980
Goods and services +1.900 -3,992 -3.826 -5,372
Unilateral transfers 44,542 +1.875 +2.019 +3.36!)
Capital nove-ents + 105 + 638 + 900 42.055
Balance +3.5" -l.679 - 907 + 28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ln unilateral transfers. net contributions from international assistance
amounted to 2.6 billion Burundi francs in 1980 coapared to 1.8 billion in

1980 5a publisheﬂ .
Finance

Outstanding public debt sextupled between 1975 and 1980. going fro. 3 to 18.8
billion burundi francs. At the end of 1980 it included a domestic debt of

7.7 billion (treasury bills and Bank of Burundi advances) and an external debt
of 11.1 billion. In 1980. debt service required 0.9 billion Burundi francs.
corresponding to 7.7 percent of export earnings.

The overall budget for fiscal year 1980, revised in July, added up to 11.3
billion Burundi francs in receipts and 15.6 billion in expenditures. increas-
ing by 6.3 percent in receipts and 5.3 percent in expenditures coapared to
1979. Investment credits cans in for 6 billion (up 0.6 billion). The budget's
projected deficit was to be covered by resorting to domestic borrowing and

adjusted by carrying payment for certain expenditures forward to fiscal year
1981.

The average rise in consuner price in Bujunbura an to 11.9 percent over
the course of 1980 cospared to 26.2 percent in 1979.

The prospects for an abundant coffee harvest in 1981 (the long-tern production
objective was between 30,000 and 60,000 tons) are to have a sore favorable
influence on Burundi's general situation starting in 1982 and will pernit

the revival of developnent activities progra-Ied in the Five-Year Plan which
is in the process of being carried out. However, the low level of progress in
coffee develop-ant will liait budgetary receipts and appropriations to capital
equipment prograns.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cia Paris 1982

9631
C50: 6719/927

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sum

90m BANK AID—0n 31 larch nurundi‘e eeheeeedor in Heehinston, Shoo
Sobi-hone, eigned I 16.2 sillion $03 ($16 sillion) credit esrce-ent vith

Hr Repcuhene. world leak vicc preeidont, for financing the Ngoxi III inte-
grated rurel project. The project in oiled et hclpin; the fer-ere of ﬂgori
Province. which ie the loot populous one in Burundi, to increeeo production
of coffee. thc country'e top export product. end to import other food crope.
[1’er erie mm: noncmx 31' mlrnmms in Preach no 1900, 9 Apr
82 p 97 50mm: Rene Horeux ct on am 19317 9631

080: 4719/927

. .11.
F!”l(lﬂﬂ(1hl.USE(ﬂVLY
comm: 333’s 01’ 1100318? INDUSTRY
Peril JIM! MIG)! in Preach 26 May 82 p 31
[Article by Claude Hauthier]

[Text] It in a queetion of deetroying e eyth: the ayth of Djibouti ae an
infernal deaert where nothing but “zinc pal-e" grow. And replacing it with
a public image that in cloeer to clinetic realitiee...end more likely to
encourage touriae. The niniatry of ca-erce. traneportation and routine-
which ie headed by Aden Robleh Awele, one-tine leader of the Soaali Coaet
Liberation Front—bee eettled down to the tank.

The firet thing touriate need to know ie that Djibouti between Septelber and
April enjoya a pleaeant clinate with an average tenperature of 27 degreea c.
under a cloudleaa aky and hue relatively cool eveninge. The aecond ie that
the region turne out to have acne of the neat unique ecenery in the world:
nerveloue undereea deptha for diving enthueiaate; the prodigious vietae

of Lake Abbe, with ite calcareoue pillere and flaningoa, and Lake Aeeal with
ite eparkling aalt-floee. girdled with black lava; inpreeeive eitaa like
Goubet, which according to legend ia a pit in which lurk daone fron a
eubnerged volcano...‘l‘he third thing. finally. that local tourin pronotera
eaphaaize. ie that eince the Sheraton opened (laet Nov-her). Djibouti now
has a najor hotel-200 air-conditioned row. a ceaino and nightclub-40
serve an a comfortable beee-canp for touriete who will have to bup and lurch
their wey ecroee the deaert traile in jeepa or contend with the roll of a
dhow on the wavea of the Red Sea.

Anong the leading developnent projecta currently under etudy in one to exploit
the country'a geotharaal reaourcea: in this raapect Djibouti ie one of the
neat fortunate countriee in the world. an witneee the heat eourcea of Lake
Abbe and Lake Anal, aituated at a unique location where the earth'e cruet

in only a few kilonetere thick (co-pared to aeverel dozen kilo-etera noet
plecee). The eite eelected for the firet geothernal plant in Djibouti ia
Iianle. between the two lakee: the area fron the euperbeated ground water
would drive turbinea that would provide 20 negawatta of power-cor half of

the republic'e current energy coneuption. at leee than two-thirda the coat

of a power plant running on fuel oil. The lanle power plant could aleo
provide the heat needed for e fieh-drying facility and the weter for irrigation
projecte. ‘l‘he firet borehole ahould be drilled in 1983, with financing being
provided by several Arab countriea.

12
amateur
" nos omcm. use own

Arab countries are also the sain financial backers of the proposed paved road
between Djibouti and Tadjourah and the plan to sake the capital city a port
for container-ships. But developsent also scans political stability. The
young republic has been able to preserve a delicate balance between its two
powerful neighbors. Ethiopia and Somalia. both of which have long hoped to
annex it soseday. According to the sinister of foreign affairs. Hr Hisoun
Bahdon Farah. the ease concern for balance inforss relations between Djibouti
and the two Yelena. Yet for all that, Djibouti'e foreign policy is not a
spineless one: the governsent dii not waver in its position in the fight
over adsission of the Saharan Arab Republic to the CAD [Organization of
African Unity]. and Hisoun Dahdon Iarah. in the interview he gave us. node
sous harsh criticisss of the role played by Mr Eden Kodjo.

As for Prance, he told us. everythgng is going well. France is now giving us
sore, he said. than it ever did in 115 years of colonialiss.

0n the dosestic political scene, it is a tise for peaceqsaking and
conciliation: the last opposition political prisoners. including forser Afar
prise sinister Ahssd Dini. were released several sonths ago. Dini, just like
Ali Aref. who was prise sinister during the last years of the colonial period,
has gone back into private business and no one bothers his. "The doors of
the People's Rally for Progress [IPP] (the lone political party. whose
standard-bearer is President ﬂassan Gouled Aptidon) are not closed to than:
Djibouti has need of all its sons." said Hinoun Dahdon. who is the party's
secretary general.

Preparations for the legislative elections slated for 21 Hay are proceeding
uneventfully: a single list of 65 candidates. all of then sssbers of the
RPP, will be presented to the voters. The caspaign season opened on an
auspicious note: for the first tise in its history. Djibouti harvested wheat
in April, on an experimental fars just outside the capital city: an event
which in its own right is helping to efface the "zinc pals" legend. Even if
the famous bar of the ease ness--where a terrorist attack in 1977 cost the
lives of several Preach legionnaires and created a serious political crisis-
continues to attract custossrs in the heart of Djibouti. Perhaps awaiting
the tise when it will be made into a historical sonusent....

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9516
cso: «719/1053

13
IIIIOIFIJAI.UIIIINLY
RELATIONS HITB SUDAN UN'IMIKELY TO IMPROVE

London THE BCONOHIST 1n Englsh 26 Jun 82 p 61

MMWMW
WWWMMM
WMMMMMM

M:MM

MMMM MMM

[Text]

mm MM WMMMME mu
MMMM MM.
mg i
wumeummwmm mmmwm
MMMMM .MMMMMM
«mm m? mmwﬂm

mm
MMM MMMMWMM MMMM

M
M

TM

memaummmmm

MMMM

COPYRIGHT: The Economist Newspaper Ltd, London 1982

b700/1477

C80:

1A

FOR!0F11C1AI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'HOLBS' SEEN WERING RED STAR OWSIVB

London ‘l'llB BCONOHIS‘I‘ in English 26 Jun 82 p lo].

COPYRIGHT: the Economist Newspaper Ltd. London 1982

4700/1477

C80:
RED STAR CAMPAIGI M ACHIEVING OBJECTIVES
Paris mm ARIWE in French 26 May 82 p 32
[Article by Francoie Soudan: “The lad 8tar Eedae"]

[Text] The decieive offeneive ia fer froa eucceeeful.
Ethiopian forcee have auffered four tinee the loeeea
eueteined by the guerrillaa, reporte eay.

The ”Red Star" offeneive, launched 6 mnthe ego with a flurry of epeechee and
a din of armred vehiclee ea the biuut operation the Ethiopian euthoritiea
have conducted in the laet 21 yeera againet the Eritrean guerrillee. night
well turn out to be a falling etar. In fact. the ton of Nelda. etronshold
of the biggeet reeietance nvelent. the m: [Eritrean People'e Liberation
Front]. hee etill not been re-tahen by the any, whore loeeea (wounded and
killed) are eaid to cone to nearly 20,000 nan. be) other operatione of
mller scope launched at the ease tine—in titre province (north-central
Ethiopia) and the Group region (eeetern)-eeee to have ended einilarly in
defeat. It ie undoubtedly a eerioue pereonel aetback for Lt Col hangiatu.
who had ineieted on pereonelly overeeein; thie ”decieive" ceqeign.

Eleven Ethiopian em unite—or nearly 150,000 eoldiere-were thrown into

the battle, under the operational co-end of General Gabre Eidan. the defence
einiater and hero of the Ouden cenpeign againet Sonelie in 1977. Along the
unite were the 19th armred divieion. trained by the Soviete. end the
celebrated Nebalbel (6th diviaion) trained by the Ieraelie before the fall
of I-laile Seleeeie. To support the operation. alnat the entire covenant
and the Supra. lilitary Council (the DEEG) had even eat up field
headquartera in Aenera. the Eritrean capital, before returning to Addie
Ababa when it becane obvioue that "Red Star" night well be abort-lived.

After a thunderoua b-week advance over terrain that had been prudently
evacuated by the W'e 20.000 conbatante. the Ethiopian troope-eplit

into two eutonoaoue groups (the 505th and SOBth teak forcea). each eupported
by Ric-23 fighter planae and the fanue iii-2b entiguerrilla heliooptera»
were confronted in early herch, at a dietence of 6 monetere from Nakfa,
with e deter-ined Eritrean reaiatence force. Since that tine. they have not
advanced a centieater. Fined down. doubtleaa, by the deter-ination of

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the guerrillas--but also by their own weakness. Once the outcone of

this offensive—which was supposed to result in a clean. quick victory--
becene doubtful. the traditional ills to which the Ethiopian Army is heir
quickly reappeared: poor troop mrale. unreliable re-provisioning of
nunitions and fuel, sporadic mtinies. distrust of officers suspected of
providing intonation to the sunny. purges. etc.

Certainly Hengistu's an hed a few local successes. including cutting the
secret trails by noses of which the Britrsans were provisioning their
allies of the ‘rigre People‘s Liberation Iront and the Orono Front. But
what a price they paid: the guerillas have lost 5.000 (killed or wounded)
while they theuelves have suffered four tines that nsny casualties,
according to reports.

Moreover, despite the substantial shunts of equip-eat provided by Moscow
and Tripoli (Libyan Hercules c-130's lend frequently at hears, their

cargo holds full of munitions and foodstuffs), the cost of the war—close

to 8500 nillion in It nonthsnis becoming increasingly hard to sustain. And
in Addie it is being rumred that non like Captain Selassie Hogderes and
Captain Legesse Asfaw, both influential nenbers of the one. are criticising
the way Hengistu has organised the ”Red Star" offensiveo-end are doing so
with Ibscow's blessings.

It is a fact that the two tangible results the offensive see-s to have had

so far are—to say the least-bin contradiction to its initial sin. It has
once again focused public attention on one of the longest and least
understood wars on this planet. And, for the first tins since 1978. when
Soviet and Cuban advisers arrived in Bthipia, the Britreans are today in a
position to comterattsck. Hilitarily, and also diplonatically (an mo
delegation recently went to several Heat African countries and apparently

was given an attentive hearing), the guerrillas, who have been fighting since
1961 for indepec once. nay well stand to profit fros the turn events have
taken. But this essues, of course. that these men, with all their mrderous
fighting spirit, also know how to exploit their victories.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9516
C80: 4719/1052

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm

m FOOD AID--‘l'he Omission of the European Oo-Inities has decided to pro-
vide lbsadaique with eesrgency food assistance totaling 2.1 eillion ecus.
including 5,000 tons of grain and 500 tons of powdered eilk. The no [Food
and Agriculture Organisation] has estieated that meanbique urgently needs

to ieport sons 180,000 tons of grain as a result of alternating drought and
excessive rain. The food situation is tenuous in the big cities. The United
Nations is preparing an international eeargsncy assistance effort. [‘rext]
[Paris was TROPICAUX tr museums in French lo 190‘. 7 May 82 p 1231]
(comm: Rene Koren: et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

SOVIET mcnmc ASSISTANCE—The Soviet Union is going to lend its help to the
establishant of tour vocational-technical training schools in Hosaebique.

It is also going to provide the equip-ant tor the classrooes. workshops. and
laboratories. Soviet teachers will also be sent to give on-the-spot assis-
tance to their Flouwican colleagues, and students will cosplete their train-
ing in the USSR. It will he recalled that three agricultural centers end two
industrial centers built with Soviet technical assistance are already in
operation in nosedique. [Text] [Paris meats MPICAUX 31' “DIM
in French In 1904, 7 Kay 82 p 1231] [oomxcnrz Rene Norm et Cie Paris
1982] 9516

BAILUAY WATIW-Renovation work on the Dondo-Derunde railway will begin
in the second half of 1982. at Alcsntara Santos, the Hots-Mun Iinister of
ports and land transport, visited Dondo in lid-April to View the site where
offices, workshops. personnel housing, and equip-ant storage facilities will
be built. The work will involve restoration of a 70-]:- stretch of track.
[Text] [Paris moms TROPICAUX B'r nun-mm in French No 1906, 7 May 82
p 1231] [OOPYRIGII‘I'z Rene Morena at Cie Paris 1982] 9516

080: “19/963

18
[0| OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC ROSPBCTS Fm 1982 BETTE! THAN I! 1981

Paris HAROHBS TROPICAUX 31' moms in Mob No 1906. 21 my 82 pp 1317-
1313. 1319

[Mattrimted article: "The Economic Situation in Suegal'J

L Excerpts] The year 1981 constituted a particularly difficult year eoonoai-
oally and financially. Indeed. the drought that struck the Sahel in 1980
draaatically cut harvests in the 1980-1981 season. The drop in the purchasing
power of farmers remlting froa that. and the shortage of ground nuts. had rs-
percussicns on the level of industrial production and a: the activity of coa-
aercial enterprises. For its part. the aining sector felt the aftereffecta
of the crisis experienced by the developed countries.

Despite the steadiness of world aarket prices in francs for oilseed and phos-
phates. exports were therefore at a standstill. whereas. because of the size
of the cereal deficit and the rise in the price of petroleua. iaports continu-
ed to rise. The deficit in the balance of trade rose (nos acre. It was the
sane with the balance of payamts deficit; despite foreign aid. a serious
worsening of the situation. particularly in net foreipz credit. was noted.

The bad harvests. and heavier and heavier indebtedness as well. caused serious
difficulties in public finances: despite the corrective neasures take: in
1980. iapleamtation of the finance law of 1980/1981 resulted in an increased
deficit. which would have been ova: higher if there had not been delays in
payaent of suppliers' invoices. Already rather heavily in debt towards the
banking systea. the Treasury was thus forced to have recourse to new advances
froa the bank of issue and other banks.

The only reason- for sstisfactim was the activity of the tuna fishing indus-
try and the low level of inflatim. held down. it is true. through costly
intervention by the Equaliaation Fund and by price stamiaatim.

The year 1982 presents itself in a less unfavorable light for the Smeplese
ecatoay. The harvests for the 1981 -1982 seasm have indeed been definitely
acre abunhnt. The rise in the qmntities aarketed and the rather signific-
cant recovery in production: costs of agricultural products should have a posi-
tive effect on the activity of industrial and coaaercdal enterprises. In ad-
dition. the Senegalese :overnaent. helped by the International Mustary Md and
suns: [Stabilisation of Export Earnings Systaa] ,haa obtained acre tine froa its aain

l9
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

creditor: for the repaynmt of its foreign debt and has talus: measures to
limit tho budgetary deficit..

The world phosphate aarket. however. remains dull: as for the world market
prices for the principal products exported by Senegal. there has been a signi-
ficant decline coepared to last year. In these conditions. a very large in-
crease in exports cannot be expected. The rise in farmers' buying power. and
the resumption of economic activity. could. hawever.. bring about a renewed up-
surge of ilports and cause a fairly large defioitin the balance of trade to
continue. hence also in the balance of payments.

The regulatims adopted at the beginning of the year to hold dom the burden
a: the Equalization and Price Stabilization Fund. incidentally. are likely
to bring about some worsening of the urban population's purchasing power. As
for the efforts undertaken to balance the budget. it is not sure that they

will be entirely successml. in the short run at least. given the extent of
the arrears.

This aeans that even though the problems to be solvsdby the Senegalese autho-
rities in some-ice and finance in 1982 are less serials than the ones con-
fronting the. in 1981. they will be far fro. negligible.

Agricultural Production and Fishing

The drought that struck the Sahel in 1980 had very grave consequences upon
the level of Smegalese harvests for the 1980-1981 seasm.

Ground nuts were the nest affected: the narketed production. which is the
only anount known for certain. having already dropped by half in 1979-1980.
was again cut by over 50 percent: as for deliveries to oil-mills. at 70.000
tons. they amounted to scarcely more than one-tnth of what they were in the
19784979 seasm. 'l‘o neet doaeetic aarket needs while keeping a certain

amount available for export. Senepl had to import sunflower seeds grown in
the Ihited States and soy oil fro- Spain and France.

In addition to ground nuts. two other ventures were affected by the bad cli-
matic conditions: cotton. which for the fourth year running produced a lower
harvest. this tine by 15 percent. and paddy. of which production dropped -
nearly 50 percent. and of which. as in 1979/1980. there was no marketing.

Other crops perforaed better: thus slight progress over the previous season
was noted for nillet. sorghum. and naiss; and aanioc production proved stable:
been production dropped only slightly.

In any case. the harvest was insufficient to nest domestic needs. To make up
for a cereal deficit estiat.ted at 140.000 tons. Senegal therefore Ind to ap-
peal for international food assistance: over 100.000 tons of cereals were

supplied to it in 1981 unde: this procedure. is for rice imports. according
to the FAO. they amomted to about 1.00.000 tons.

Better clinate conditions. as well as a fairly significant rise in prices paid
to producers had a favorable influmce on the harvest volume of the 1981-1982
seascn. Of course. the value is still uncertain; however. it seess

20
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
reasonable to think that. as the table shows. it will be significantly higher
than in the 1980-1981 soasm. and evn than in the 1979-1980 season. while
still renaming substantially below the 1978-1979 season. except for cotton
and maize.

As for Smegalese fishing. the overall results for 1981 are not yet known
with precision. It is how. however. that so far as tuna is concerned. the
results have been very satisfactory.

Indeed. during the first 11 months. catches reached 10.100 tens. which is con-
siderably more than for the whole of 1979 (9.100 tame). and especially than
for the whole of 1980 (8.300 tons). Moreover. Preach imports of Senegalese

canned tuna rose in 1981 to 12.1.00 tms. as compared to 10.600 in 1980 and
10.AOO‘ for 1979.

In the light of these good results. Senegalese exports of fish products sees
distinctly to have improved (37.5 billion CPA francs. cospared to 32.5 bil-
lion in 1980).

Mining and Industrial Output

Phosphates: The crisis through which the econosy of industrialized countries

is passing had unfavorable repercussions in 1981 on Senegalese lining sector
activity.

Of course. calcium phospl-nte production. which had fallen considerably in
1980. improved last year by over 30 percmt. But exports dropped off by
200,000 tone. or 16 percent. while local sales dipped somewhat less. A setback
in both production and exports :. raw aluminum phosphate was also noted.

Only shipments of dehydrated aluminum phosphate gave proof of stability.

Industrial Production: The loss of purchasing power anmg the peasant masses
aid the shortage of ground nuts obviously acted as a rain on the development
of Senegalese industrial enterpr as activity in 1981.

During the first 9 months. the industrial production index. which had fallen
significantly in 1980. roved by only 1.6 percent. and remained below the ,
level reached 5 [months earlier.

Of course. it was the oil mills that were mainly responsible for this weak
improvemmt. However. setting the oil sills aside. the index showed an in-
crease of only 6.7 percent. as a result of the recessions noted in the cheni-
cal industry sectors. and in petroleum refining. construction materials. and
mechanical industries particularly.

Domestic Trade and Prices

The inadequacy of the harvests had a negative influence on trade activity.
As early as 1980. the non-seasonal turmver of gogds for the principal cos-
mercial enterp see. as calculated by the BGEAO L Central Bank of the West
African States had fallen by 6.5 percent. The recession cmtinued during

the first quarter/M1981 (9 percent). However. it was far less pronounced

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during the next three months (0.1 percent).

The evolution of domestic prices constituted in 1981 one of the few positive
aspects of the Senegalese economic cituation. Indeed. the retail price index
"in traditional circles" rose on average only 5.9 percent over 1980.

This rather exceptiaaal performance. in view of the international environment.
cost the Senegalese Bqualiaaticn and Price Stabilization Fund several union

CPA francs used to subsidise certain staple products. such as wheat and millet
flour. oil. rice. and sugar.

However. the subsidies did not prevent the rise in retail prices from becoming
more widespread at the end of the year (9.8 percent in the fourth quarter);
unfortunately it is likely that the evolution thus started continued as- of the
beginning of 1982. because. to hold down the Enualisation and Price Stabilisa-
tion Fubd deficit. the Senegalese authorities were induced to increase very
considerably. m the advice of experts-from the International Monetary Fund.
the price of flour. bread. and rice.

For its part. the retail price index "in European circles" rose an average of
11.3 percent in 1981. A rise of this sort. which was not limited by artifici-
al aeans. compares favorably with those observed in other African countries
and even in some industrialised countries.

Foreign Trade

Export prices: It cannot be said that in 1981. the evolution of world prices
was unfavorable to Senegal. Indeed. as a result of poor harvests. particular-
ly in the waited States. the prices of ground nut products reaained at high
levels. at least until the beginning of autumn: for the year overall. the equi-
valut in CPA francs of the average dollar market price for peanut oil increas-
ed by 56 percent! Unfortunately. for lack of sufficient supplies available
for export. Senegal was hardly able at all to take advantage of the favorable
situation. which is not likely to recur for a long time.

Meantime. the selling, price. in CPA francsu. of calcium phosphate improved by
over 30 percent. The rise more than made up for the recession in quantity
sold.

Quantities exported: In the absence of customs statistics. traffic through
the port of Dahr gives a fairly accurate idea of the voluae of Smegalese ex-
ports. In 1981. the quantities of goods loaded onto ships in this port smountn

ed to 1.999 million tons. compared to 2.087 million tons in 1980 and 2.69 mil-
lion tons in 1979.

Compared to 1980. the recession was essentially attributable to the fall in
phosphates shipents. Exports of other goods. on the other hand. were higher
to those noted for 1980 and eve! 1979. which. considering the shortage of
ground nuts. is rather surprising. It will be necessary to wait and find out
the details a: Dakar port traffic to inve this phenomuion explained.

22
I70. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Total worth of exports: Since there are no natimal custoas statistics anil-
ahle. there is no altemative but to refer to other sources of inforaatim to
estimate the value evolution of Seneplese exports.

In 1981, French imports from Senegal decreased overall by 17 percent: 657.3
million Frennh francs cospared to 791.8 million in 1980. The decrease was due
not only to a drop in peanut oil purchases (-66 percent)but also to a reduction
in purchases of calcius and aluminum phosphates (131 percent): on .the other
hand. i-ports of canned tuna. as reported. increased significantly (+29 pen
cent); it was the sane. but to a such lesser extent. for French imports of
other.products (+5 percent).

wring the first 11 sonths of 1981. imports by menber nations of 0860 free

Senegal fall by 28.5 at in dollars. which is about 8 percent in CM
francs. L as publish

It may be wondered. in the circumstances. whether Senealese estisates accord-
ing to which exports were said to show a slight improvement in worth during
1981 are not a little too optimistic.

It should be noted, in any case. tut to cospasate in part for the recession
in ground nut product sales. Senegal received from STARE!

last October an advance of 18 million ecus (or about the ease sammt in dollars)
This advance will very certainly be complemented in the coming weeks: however.
it is not certain that STARE! resources will be adequate to per-it full compul-
sation for Senegal's loss.

Quantities imported: Quantities of goods unloaded in the port of Dakar in 1981
anomted to 2.566 millim tone. or 5 percent more than in 1980. but 6 percent
less than in 1979.

Stagnation was noted in imports of petroleum products. and a reduction in
crude oil deliveries. The overall increase as cospared to 1980 was thus due
solely to an increase in the unloading of various goods. anong which food pro-
ducts lust have weighed especially heavily.

Total worth of imports: In 1981. the worth of French exports to Senegal wait
up only 7.1. percent over 1980; 1,876.8 million French francs versus 1,746.2
millions

Exports of OECD masher nations to Senegal fell during the first 11 months. in
dollar worth. by 15 percent; which oorre ends to a powth in CPA francs of
something like 10 percent L as published .

Allowance made for. purchases of crude oil not made in OECD countries. and
which anounted reportedly all by themselves to '71 billion CIA francs (against
55 billion in 1980), it is estimated in Dakar that for 1981 as a whale. the
worth of imports increased by 17 percent. There is every indication that this
estisate is very close to the facts.

Balance of trade: Exports having at best stagnated. and iaports having increas-
ed. the balance of trade obviously deteriorated. In toms of the balance of

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

payments, the deficit rose from 103 billion CPA francs in 1980 to at least
130 billim in 1981: that means that the deficit was greater than the amount
of exports. and that the percentage of coverage of imports by exports was
quite considerably lower than 50 percent.

Public Finances

Despite measures taken under the economic and financial recovery plan imple-
mented in 1980. execution of the law a: finances for the 1980-1981 financial
year (1 July to 30 June) ended in a deficit of 35 billion CPA francs. that is.
considerably higher than the ones noted in 1979-1980 (19 billion) and particu-
larly in 1978-1979 (4 billion). The deficit would have been considerably high-
er if the periods for payment of suppliers and even certain creditors had not
been substantially extended. According to the head of state. it was due to
the coincidence of three principal factors: increases in personnel expendi-
tures. stagnatim in fiscal returns. and the growing burden of public indebt»
edness. The latter factor seems to have been preponderant: indeed. the ex-
penditures of the Autonomous Sinking Fund. charged with the service of the
national debt. at 35 billion CPA francs. by themselves probably amounted to
30 percmt of the state's ordinary revenues.

In the circumstances. the government had to subject the 1981-1982 budget legis-
latim to review. Bxpmditures for equipment and charges for certain special
accounts were restricted; the equipment budget. incidentally. was revised
downward. and the total for capital expenditures to be handed from domestic
resources was limited to the anount of extraordinary revenues. or only 2 bil-
lion CPA francs.

At the same time. the Senegalese authorities. after securing in September 1981
some help from the International Monetary had. started negotiations with
state creditors. within the framework of the Paris Club. in October 1981. The
negotiations turned out successfully. since for the 1981-1982 financial year.
service of the foreign debt was reduced by nearly half. Senegal also succeeded
in persuading its principal loan suppliers to agree to the principle of funding
through foreiyl aid some portions of the equipment budget that are customarily
the responsibility of the state.

At the same time. the government attespted to repay. at least in part. debts to
suppliers. Considering the size of the arrears of payments. this is a lengthy
task. however. It is not certain. indeed. despite measures taken to increase

revenues and decrease expenses. that inplemsntatim of the 1981-1982 finance
law will not result in a deficit again.

Monetary Situation

Net foreim assets: The heavy deficit in the balance of trade could not help
having serious repercussions on the balance of payments. These repercussions
are reflected in evolution in net foreign assets.

Constantly negative for many aany years. these assets fell again by .51 .3.hil-
lion CFA francs between 30 November 1980 and 30 November 1981. At the end of

2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the period. there was a negative balance of close to 150 billion CFA francs.

Yet at the ease tine. net deposits from the International Monetary Fund to

Senegal amounted to 63.4 nillion dollars. The country also received the
benefit of substantial special aid fros other lenders.

Banking systea credits to the state: To sake up the budget deficit. the Sons-
galese treasury departnent obviously had to turn more often to the Central
Bank. Between 30 November 1980 and 30 Novssbsr 1981. banking system credits

to the state increased by 28.9 billion CPA francs. The credits were multiplied
by over 2.5.

Credit balance in the econcsy: During the 1980-1981 season. the increase in
credit balance in the econosy was obviously very ninor. Since the start of
the 1981-1982 season. in light of the inprovsnent in harvests. sose accelera-
tion has been observed. as is logical. Thus on 30 Novesber 1981. the increase
was arctmd 20 percent as compared to 30 Noveeber 1980.

The nonetary sass: At the ease tine. the sonstary sass also increased by
about 20 percent. Indeed. asong the various coaponent parts. the drop in net
foreign assets was lads up by the increase in banking syste- credits to the
state. Thus it is not surprising that the increase in the sonetary sass cor-
responds signii‘icantly to that of credits in the econoay.

COPYRIQHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

1211.9
cso: 4719/1032

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PARIS HAGAZIU! Pumsnrs mew H111! IDI AMI]!
Perie PARIS mm in French No 1717, 23 Apr 82 p 82

[Interview with Idi Aein Dede. for-er preeident of Ugende, by Leyle Deer
under the heeding "tell Ue...Idi Anin Dede." dete end plece not epecified

Etna @eetioﬂ You heve juet eede en eppeel for eoliderity in eid of
your country. which ie undergoing en inteneive inve of repreeeion, while you
live in exile in Seudi Arebie. Wet do you think of the preeent eituetion in
Ugende?

Enema Anything I could eey ehout ny beloved country would etill fell fer
ehort of reflecting the eignificence end greetneee it hee for ne. The Ugendene
who were unheppy under ny governnent ere trying now to contect ne to beeeech
no to return to power. Noudeye. it eeene thet et leeet 10 children ere dying
of hunger eech dey end thet there in e greet ecercity of nedicinee. men I

wee chief of etete, journeliete tron ell over the world who need to cone to
Ugende were free to write enything they noted. Now. Obote hee thn, ee well
ee e-bere of the United Retione end the Red Croee. expelled.

[ﬁneetiqﬂ Do you hepr to be in contect with your eucceeeor Hr Obote?

Enema I send hie lettere eeking hie for e perdon end eleo eehing kin to

let Ugende eort thinge out ell on its own. but he dieregerde thu. So. now

I eddreee nyeelf to the whole world: more ere the big deiendere of been
righte? Uhy do they mp eilent ebout whet ie beppening enong ny countrynen?
where ere the United Stetee, Greet britein, hence. Chine, the 0883? Every-
one ueed to criticize ey policiee before. And todey. men they ehould be utch-

ing very cloeely whet in going on in Ugende end be toning to ite eeeietence,
they keep eilent.

mueetioﬂ However, when you were running Ugende, you were eccueed of con-eit-
ting horrible crinee. of heving unted to neeeecre Iereelie et Entebbe. end of
heving pereonelly tortured Dore bloch beceuee ehe we Jewieh. now do you
enewer to theee eceueetione?

Enema There heve been eo neny etoriee eede up ehout thinge which heve been
inputed to eel l’eople heve even gone eo fer ee to cleie end write thet I need
to heve the heede of ey Iriende cut off end then drink their blood. end thet I

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was a barbaric ester of Men flesh. At the origin of all those unfounded
slanderous things are the British, who are nore barbaric than anyone in the
world.

est owever. t s t rit a you ca r ric roe ou as
mu inﬁll i i he! ih ll"baba "f whony had
for a residence visa a year ago...

Gnswaﬂ I have no feeling of hatred for the British. 0n the contrary, I
feel a deep love for Queen Elizabeth and for liargaret Thatcher.

[Question Nevertheless. you had written acne insulting sesaages to the
queen: "If you not to neat a real nan. cone aee ne," and "Pull your stock-
ings back up; they are wrinkled..."

Enswaﬂ Those are only the ones that appeared in the newspapers. There are
also the sesseges which have not done so and which, to the best of sy know-
ledge, nade the queen even nore furious. I do not deny that I cane out with
those mrds. You cannot expect as to forget all about the centuries of op-
pression the British lads ny country live through. One of sy greatest sense-
nents has alt-ya been to enrage Her Majesty's subjects and Ianiliste then.

If one day I get sy visa for England, you will see the good jokes that I will
nansge to play on than to tease than.

@estiﬂ And the Aaericans? what do you think about Ronald Reagan's poli-
cies'!

Enema To tell the truth. at the start I did not have any negative feeling
with regard to hin. hat. to the saesure that I have been able to observe his

actions nore carefully, I have becone aware that he is not a good nan. Bis
policies consist of doing everything so that the rich are richer and the poor
poorer. Now I do not like hin any nore.

@uestiﬂ And Hitterrand? "hat do you think of his?

Ensueﬂ I a not as wall inforned about hitterrand as I should be. Neverthe-
less, I an carefully gathering intonation concerning his and should be able

to give you ny opinion soon.

[meeting Have you received death threats since you have been living in
exile?

[Rani] In ay country I escaped nine assassination attespts. That is the
reason I so called the nan with nine lives. Noudays. I an constantly being
pursued by Obota's agents who want to poison se. But I believe in the Al-
nighty. I do not think that soaaone will be able to kill as so long as I have
not served ay country as I want to.

@eatioﬁ Is it true that you fled fron Uganda with an i-ensa fortune?

@sweﬂ Let ne clarify things: I never fled Uganda. An arny fron Tanzania.
six tines larger than nine, started to invade ny country. I only retreated in

27
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
accordance with the tectice which the Britiah had taught Ie. I had no other

choice. Rom. ae fer ee IIy "his" fortune goee, I met tell you that there ie
no chief of etate in the uorld ea poor ae I: you can eat all the banks and
you will eee that I have not depoaited a einsle centile in then!

meetiﬁ But how are you living in Jiddah?

(Kama I owe a great deal to the genetoeity and eoliderity of ay Saudi
frieude. noreover, I will never be able to repay th- except with ay eternal
gratitude!

conucar: 1982 per Cogedipreeee 8.A.

9631
C80: 6719/927

28
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHURCH OPPOSITION TO KADNDA COULD MOUNT

“I

m Wm M

wwmumm mm mmm-g

Emma

”Ebbwunanlo

comma: The Scone-int Newspaper Ltd. London 1982

4700/1678

C50: