FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10597
17 June 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 35/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli—
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(FOUO 35/82)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLCXIICAL

Suzuki's Political Gamble Discussed
(Kenji Kitahara; THE DAILY YOMIURI, 21 May 82) ........

Impact of Diet Session Extension on Suzuki Cabinet meined
(Masao Kanazashi; THE JAPAN BCONMIC JOURNAL,

25 MW 82)...a...oesoooeeeoieooeeoeeoooe eel-00.0.00...

Connections of Tanaka Far ti on Analyzed
(myoaki Tsuboi; BUNGH SHUNJU’ W 82) .IOOOIOIOOCOOOO

Possible Isolation of Kameito Discussed
(Takehiko Takahashi; HAINICHI DAILY NEHS, 19 May 82)...

Komeito's Diet Strategy Discussed
(Takehiko Takahashi; HAINICHI DAILY HERB, 27 May 82)...

MILITARY

Japan-0.3. Technological Cooperation Seminar on Launching

Reconnaissance Satellite
(sum, 12 “w 82) DOC...IOQICOOCCOCOO.IIOOIOOOIOCOOCC

EGONCHIC

Prospects for Long-Term Energy Supply, Demand Given
(NIHON KmYO 9mm, 22 Apr 82) coeeooooeoeoeoooooeeoo

-a- [III-ASIA-ll

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlClAL USE 0NL\

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI'S POLITICAL GAMBLE DISCUSSED
Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 21 May 82 p 2
[From "Political Beet" column by Kenji Kiteherel

{Text} “Why wee the om m extended for Under this threet, Teneks decided to
such e long period?" former premier it» so on the offensive end propose extension
mtmnukedcioeesssodem.“ho oftheDietsession.
one told me snything." Another reeson is thet ‘i‘eneke end So-
‘i‘hiswessioke'renekemostecrteiniy mlidonotteitetheiuneaverdietso
knew everything since he is thousht in seriously. -
he the wiermind behind the move to Men, intrsperty observers believe thst
extend the Diet. \ Tomiseboro inanimate. former trensport
Revision of the Public omcieis Dectioo minister. end ‘rekeyuki Soto. former per-

new to comet the netionei constituency listnentery trensport vice-minister. both
election system to: the Roast of Cook defendents in the triel. will he found gull-
ciiore hes been e long-pending issue for_ ty end thetthe nsme of Nikeido will he
the [Aurel-Democntic Peri-y (LOP). mentioned in the judgment.

It is nonsense to cell clesn polities end novever, there is elso e prediction thet
dissolution of the lntrepurty actions if neshlnmo will be emitted end thet the
the present netionei constituency which none of Nimido will not he mentioned in
costs eech undidete from m to 9300 the verdict. If this hsppene. Teneke snd
million per eunpeicn Is left untouched. Suzuki will not he hurt by the extension

Inthissensethesnothedeteilthet oltheDletseesion.

Teneke pushed Prime minister sushi to .Another reeson for prolonging the Diet
visetheeieciion sessionisthetSumkiwouidiiheioper-

eieer . prove if his permanence eon-

mtrepertyohserveregivesevereireseons unuestoheeepooresinthepest.

to main this. . Therefore amhi 'es persuaded to ex-
‘rheyspewlstethetltispertof'rene- tendthesessionbymen.

he's counteretteck. . But these reesone ere unconvincing to

origin-ﬂyformerpreniers‘l‘skeomki 32.8usntiviiihederneoedbythenock
end‘hheolhhndepressedherdforn heedverdiet,willhehissnedfo
long extension oi the Diet. ' revenue shortfsli end will teke heet for

Their reeson 'es simple. It hsd been “ministntive reform
predicted thet the nuns of Menu Ni- ministretive Reform Council nines its
moo. seeretsry-generel of the DD. would reeommendetions in e lengthened Diet

hediseloeedeseredpientofusoneyln session.
the verdict of the Lockheed peyoif triei But Bunihi seye nothing. Does his silence

due June it The no ex-prelniers hoped to cones from his Judgment thet his reelec-
jolt the Suzuki sdnnnistretion in the tionissssuredeslongeshehesthe
midst of e Diet session with this sm- necking of the lei-zest LOP fection led by
munitions. _ - _ Team? .

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yoniuri 1982

C50: 6120/276

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SWIOIDGICAL

IMPACT

0? DIET $358108 MENSIOﬂ OR SUZUKI CABINET WINE

Tokyo 'l'llB orient noomtuc scam in English 25 itay 32 p 10

("Political Scene" Column by ltaaao Kanamht:

Britons ion" ]

[Text 1

Prime Minister Mo Suzuki was new
tionally glum on that thy. Susuki ust-ily
' iaceandttiutobeascour-

porters‘ questionsevenil heisina tnrry.0n
that particular day. however. Susuiu re
mained gum and mum and quickly got-out ot
his oti'icial resident: without bothering to
answer the reporters lairryiru alter him.
ashim questions. On that day. the ruling Lib

eral Democratic Party decided to matte a big

«tension ot the nirrent Diet session (origi-
mlly scheduled to end on Nay m and noti-
tiedthespealiersotthebothliousesotthe
Dietolthedeeision.

in; soil day in and day out in thetaahionable
resort totsn ot Karuizawa. He is glum mostly
became ot the complete derailment of his
political schedule and the acute sense at
diagrin he is ieelim shot: it. Suzuki never
dreamed that any long estension oi the cur-
rent Diet session was possible. He was.
thereiore. 'tlabbergasted when calls tor a
long-term esterision oi the Diet session came
out oi nowhere and immediately gripped the

ruling party.

tivesarecertaintocallorithecovernmentto
take due responsibility.

Thewpositionpartieealsoare certainto
taltethecwernmenltotasklorthenowin-
evitabie revenue shortlalls. Many irlorrnams
believe tint a revenue shortlall totalitg some
V moot billion will come to the surface in the
cotirseolJtuiewhentaxrevenueliguresior
fiscal mt are made public. large-scale tax
mm shortlalls also will be inevitable tor
the current fiscal year ending next March
and the Government will not be able to
tormulate a nation“ btiuet lor fiscal 1m
unless it again issues deﬁcit-ﬁnancing Gov-
ernment booth. Such a move goes complete-
ly counter to the Suzuki Adnlnistration‘s
promise "to reconstruct the nation's
iirunca without any tax increases" and “to
cut down the nation's dependence on national
bondstovirtualurointhecwrseotiiscal
1m." ii the Suzuki Administration tails to
live up to its promises. the Opposition parties
will certainly press the Government to take
responsibility. Calls la- no confidetioe mo
tions against Finance Minister MicLio Wata-
nabe are already heirs voiced evenby some
ruling party members.

Administrative reforms. trade frictions
with the United States and other countries
and deiense problems etc. also could prove
total roadoloclts tor the Suzuki Admin
istration. Solution to all these crucial
problems will never be-lorthcoming miss
Prime Minister Suzuki exerts exceptionally
strong leadership. Suzuki is certain to be
demanded in the Diet in make his stand clear
Visa-vis all these important problems. it will
be extremely diiticult tor Suntki to handle all
these knotty problems without making any
blunders and come out at the battle in glory.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Suzuki. Becomes Glu- frotl Diet:
Copyright :

C50:

4120/ 278

Suzuki originally hoped to put an arty end
to the Diet tension. thereby minimizing
political troubles emanatim tmthe abow
cited delicate woblems. Santa's hwe. how-
ever. was dashed to pteces when he was
forced to accept the Tanalta tacticn‘e belle!
that uteGovernment midpoint-calm
It it toiled to carry out relornutton o! the
natioml constituency at the Home of
Counciton in the current Dtet newton.

As the final objective of the Stuart-hunks
coalition is obvious. namely. reelection. ot
Suwlti in the torthcorntnc president“! elec-
tion at the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
however. members at the Ftkttda (action
and other ant-mainstream maps within the
ruling petty are bristling with ll'tdlmtion

"You ammo tigeratbunlaayoucet
into a tiger‘s cave." states one 0! Suzuki's
lteutenants by way at explatning the Prune
Minister's present state at mind Glam thy:
will corlinue [or Suztltt tor some more time.

1982 The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

CONNECTIONS OP TANAKA PACTION ANALYZBD
Tokyo DUNGEI SHUNJU in Japanese May 82 pp 126-135

[Article by Kiyoaki Tsuboi: "The Motivation and Power of the Tanaka
Paction's Hidden Candidates"]

[Excerpts] Unbridled Infiltration of Election Districts

It is rumored that Niromu Nonaka, lieutenant governor of Kyoto Prefecture,
will stand as a candidate from Kyoto's Second District in the upconing
general election. He is a Tanaka supporter.

"I have known Hr Kakuei (Tanaka) for about 30 years, since the time when

I was mayor of Sonobe, Kyoto Prefecture. Although I was unimportant, he
looked after me with kindness on various occasions. Be is able to grasp
the earthy, provincial outskirt's atmosphere and understand it. when asked
to do something, everyone says: "of course." In his case. however, he

not only says, "of course, I understand," but he takes care of it immediately
and gets back to you with the result himself--himse1f, mind you. "hen my
mother died 9 years ago, he sent his secretary to the funeral and not only
that, on the occasion of the first Bon Festival. he sent a lantern. Who
else does such things? The Lockheed trial? Regardless of the outcome, I
am devoted to him. I hope he will continue to guide me in many ways in

the future as he has in the past.

Currently Kakuei Tanaka is absorbed in preparing to put up 20 or so new
candidates from his own faction. At present. the Tanaka faction in the
upper and lower chambers together numbers 109. Including those reputed

to be "hidden Tanaka followers," 120 are said to belong to the Tsnaka clique.
(Liberal Democratic Party leadership) In terms of the posts they hold and
funds distribution they control, many believe that the Tanaka group is now
more than just a political clique. His recent movements and utterances,
which can only be interpreted as an attempt to upgrade the Tanaka faction's
membership to 150, is in anybody's estimation. out of the ordinary.

But Tanaka intends to go through with it no latter what. Tanaka has his
own logic and that is... no, wait a moment. Even if Tanaka intended to
expand his own clique, that is take over the Liberal Democratic Party, he
could not force anyone to run with Tanaka faction backing if the person

INDI‘OFFICIA1.UEIICMVLY
FORIOFFNJAI.US£(NNLY

were unwilling. If Tanaka has his logic and plan for expansion, there must
be corresponding logic and plan onthepart of people wanting to represent
(or be backed by) the Tanaka faction. Therelmst be a debt of gratitude
which makes a man say, "Yes, I will run," when told to announce his candi-
dature. The side that wants to run and the side that wants to support--

unless we focus on both sides, we cannot unlock the secret of the Tanaks
corps.

Tanaka's extraordinary obsession with the upcoming general election is
demonstrated in the indiscriminate infiltration of election districts. No
benevolence and honor here. Where there is an opportunity, where there

is an unguarded chink in the armor, be is prepared to run his candidate.
Even though there is Shosei Hisama, a Tanaka faction legislator, in
Nagasaki's First District, Tanaka is prepared to back Hasahiko Yamada
(lawyer). Although there is Kunikichi Saito-head clerk for the Suzuki
faction and a close cohort of Tanaka's-in Fukushima's Third District,

he tries to run his son-in-law, Naoki Tanaka. In Kagawa's Second District,
which belonged to Hasayoshi Ohira-a friend of Tanaka before his death-—hs
is trying to run Shoji Oksshita (Ministry of Finance, Fund Management
Section chief) in spite of howls from Hajime Morita, Ohira's son-in-law.
When the former lower house speaker, Shigesaburo Maeo-another longtime
friend--died, while the Knee supporters were trying to select a successor,
Tanaka made an attempt to fill the vacancy (Kyoto's Second District) with
the aforementioned Nonska. hiroshima's First District is currently repre-
sented by Hirokichi Nadao, an opponent of Tanaka but a man who once was
the speaker of the lower house; he has not formally announced his retire-
ment as yet. Nevertheless, Toshinobu Kuriya (a former under secretary at
the Ministry of Construction) has declared himself as the successor....

In the Liberal Democratic Party, there have been instances where the main
force and the opposing force would not yield and the two opposing candi-
dates were put up in order to destroy cliques. But there have not been too
many examples of poking interfering fingers into the eyes of the Suzuki
faction, which is friendly to Tanaks: or to opposing the incumbent who was
won away from another clique by running a true blue Tanaka clique candidate
against him. Moreover, the party elders' intentions and the desires of

the deceased 1eaders--such as Ohira, Maeno, Nadao-have never been so trod
upon.

The Tanaka faction is like a General Hospital. It is made up of many
departments--Construction, Postal Policy, Welfare, Environment, National
Railways. Telephone and Telegraph, Sewage, Public Corporation and so on--
all under the direction of Tanaka. If Construction cannot find the "cure,"
then the case is referred to Telephone and Telegraph; if Public Corporation
cannot help, then it is passed on to Postal Policy. Well known "section
chiefs" such as Tatsuo Ozawa for Environment and Gen Tamura for Sewer System
are lined up like glittering stars. when any kind of appeal comes in,
regardless of what department receives it initially. a "cure" is effected
immediately by the proper branch. It may be put to city, town and village
discussion, metropolitan and district discussion, and finally into the

5
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hands of Diet members. Anything and everything from traffic accidents to
major concessions are handled expertly and systematically, on occasion in
exchange for moeny. Director Kakuei of this Tanaka General Hospital does
not have to deal directly with the individual cases any longer, he simply
collects the department chiefs' takings.

A Liberal Democratic assembly nan progresses from under secretary, Policy
Affairs Research Council Section chief. House of Representatives/house of
Councillors leader and minister. Unless he is taken care of well in this
upward mobility, there is no point in belonging to a clique. The secretary
general (Susumu Nikaido). the assistant secretary general (Noboru Takeshita)
and a few deputy secretaries general have control of the decisionmaking
power in this regard. In addition, in the Tanaka faction, the leader
himself is more attuned to his clique members' posting than any other
political "boss." Thus, within the Tanaka clique. there is a secure
feeling that one will reap the benefit of membership sometime; and the
members work industriously toward the day when they will attain the post

of "department chief" in the Tanaka organization. Therefore, many of them
are bound tightly from the miunte they decide to join the Tanaka faction.
There is no escape. In the first place, their constituencies would not
allow it; and there is fear that, if they so much as entertained the idea
of defection. there is no telling what kind of vengeance would be taken

on them in the next election.

Why Expand?

Finally, the question of the Tanaka clique. th is it fighting the other
cliques and spending colossal amounts of money? (All those interviewed

told me that in any election district a new candidate must spend several
hundred million yen.) why does it have to do all that in order to aggrandize
itself?

One reason is the uncertainty that Kakuei Tanaka, the penal defendant,
suffers from ceaselessly. He is a man afraid to be alone. He is convinced
that only kin are reliable. and the more of them the better.

Certainly, politics is "numbers." The fact that he can hold his head high
in the Liberal Democratic Party is attributable to the protection the

Tanaka faction offers to the current administration with its absolute
numerical strength. No matter how superior a clique may be. a minority
clique's influence has its limits. So, 110 is better than 100; 120 or 150
would be even better. Should Tanaka be found guilty in the Lockheed trial
and a bill for Tanaka'a expulsion be introduced in the National Diet, Tanaka
would like to have enough power to block its passage.

But Tanaka is constantly balancing cost with results. Thus the motivation
is not solely that. He is not necessarily aiming for an actual election
win. but for the efficacy of shouting: "We will put up candidates here and
there." If there is a problem, then he can always withdraw his candidate,
thereby gaining the gratitude of other cliques. He may have learned this

33(NULY
F0!!0FFTJAI.USE:ONLY

technique at the time of the inception of the new commercial broadcasting
station, when just about everyone applied; then there was a negotiating
conference and then the final settlement. The other important motive is the
preelection campaigning for the gubernatorial primary election-cultivation
of the regional politicalarena. Neglecting this step could cause grave
consequences at a critical time. Moreover, there are numerous side benefits
in being able to display a solid pipeline between the central bureaucracy
and the district politicians. There is an expression, "Fame begets faae."
"hen the number is large and the time spent in fostering is long, the result
will be more efficacious: the fame achieved thereby will draw new followers
and the organization will become progressively bigger.

But even the Tanaka clique cannot continue to keep up this expansionist
development forever. Although I have stated that the Tanaka faction has
an advantage when the pie gets smaller because of its perfected appeal
processing system, the situation is quite different when there is no hope
of recovering the size of the pie. At present, a high growth rate cannot
be hoped for. If this condition is prolonged, the Tanaka faction's
admirable appeal processing system may become useless in the near future.
Some members of the Tanaka clique-both old and new-~are becoming aware of
this critical situation.

Moreover, there has been a spread of premonition of the Tanaka faction's
downfall. As described before, a certain backer of Dai Shiojima (Nagano
Fourth District) states: "I feel resistant toward the Tanaka faction."

And a backer of Nagasaki First District‘s Shosei Hisama says: "Why bother
with the Tanaka clique at this point in time." Such comments were previously
unheard of in the Tanaka faction or its suroundings. The fact that Hisama
delayed his entry into the Tanaka faction was probably due to his own
hesitancy. Hasakazu Ban (formerly ambassador to China) ran in the previous
House of Councillors election on a Shakomin ticket and lost. Immediately
thereafter he formalized his association with Tanaka. In the next general
election, he intends to run for Kochi Prefecture's at-large seat as a
member of the Hichio Ustanabe group. He is in a great quandary and is
vacillating between Tanaka's seemingly powerful figure and an intuition
that the clique's disintegration is inevitable. Ban states:

"After losing the House of Councillors election, I visited Hr Tanaka at
his Hejiro residence. He asked me if I was interested in engaging in
politics as a Liberal Democrat, to think about it and let him know. I
thought about it for a months but was not able to reach a decision. I
was vacillating on how to reconcile my association with Mr Tanaka and the
Lockheed issue. I resolved in the end that the outcoae of the hearing
is known only to God and that it has to be left to chance."

I did not quite comprehend, so I asked him what influence the fact that
Tanaka is the defendant has on the current political situation and how he
was coping with the ripple effect. He responded: "On that question, no
cement." AlthOugh he has not reachedadecision, he probably wants to
leave the sinking ship before it goes totally under. The fact that Tanaka
sent Ban to Hatanabe is, no doubt, because he sensed this.

7
FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR,0FFKJA1.USE:ONLY

As long as Tanaka can refer matters to someone else. things are going well.
In due time, the incumbent Tanaka clique legislators will begin expressing
"concern over the faction's decline." Then, Tanaka is found guilty. Should
these developments coincide with deepening recession and loss of the Tanaka
clique's ability to coordinate the pie distribution, there is danger of the
Tanaka faction not being able to save itself because of a mutiny by its
members. '

Perhaps this is being anticipated, for among the upper stratum of the Tanaka
faction, there is an indication of disassembly. Hasumi Baaki, who was not
able to secure a ministerial position or any of the party's big three posts;
Gen Tamura who became party's Diet Affairs Committee Chairman and yet has
not achieved the reputation he should; Tokuaaburo Kozaka who in becoming
minister of transportation became unpopular within the faction-all these
men are outsiders in the Tanaka faction. and they have begun to move on
their own. There are those who have started to distribute noney withOut
going through the clique. and one person was criticized because he was
backing a high-level bureaucrat in the next general election on his won

and not the Tanaka faction's candidate. Susumu Nikaido will perhaps be
further restricted in his movements depending on the verdicts that Tonisaburo
Rashimoto and Takayuki Sato receive in the Lockheed adjudication. and Shin
Kanemaru has a health problem.

Under these circumstances much depends on Takeshita's ability to consolidate
the clique members and prepare for the worst. It is rumored that Tanaka's
chronic anxiety at times turns into suspicion and causes difficulty for
Nikaido and Takeshita. In the event that Tanaka is found guilty, some of
the executive level members will no doubt desert the organization. taking
with them several y0ung and middle-ranking followers. But those that have
won less than five rounds of elections all entered the political arena with
Tanaka/Takeshita backing. There are many who emphatically state that
"these are solidly organized under Takeshita's leadership no ma:ter what."

Takeshita was brought up by Eisaku Sato and Kakuei Tanaka. He is the
foremost fund raiser but also has a wide spending channels. His association
with the officials extends over 20 years. Even among politicainu he has

a variety of friends who transcend political and clique barriers. Tanaka's
General Hospital can almost be described as Takeshita's creation. so the
transfer of power ought to be easy. The people brought in under Tanaka's
present extraordinary new face recruiting all have received Takeshita's
sanction. Although somewhat different in motivation from Tanaka's reasons
for expansion, Takeshita, while representing the Tanaka clique, must also
foster the Takeshita clique. Lockheed adjudication. decampment, split,
reorganization of the clique--in these situations, the only people he can
trust are the underlinga he brought up himself. Takeshita is thinking thus.

No doubt, Takeshita is the material and spiritual mentor tothe 20 some
Tanaka faction new faces up for election. But in addition. he probably
has already made formal contacts with other candidates-independents and
those representing other cliques-dwho, taken as a whole, are numerically
twice as strong as the Tanaka candidates.

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju Ltd 1982

11460
CSO: 4105/87

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOG ICAL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POSSIBLE ISOLATION OF KOPIEITO DISCUSSED

Tokyo .‘lAINICliI DAILY NEUS in English 19 May 82 p 2

[From Nagatacho Doings column by Takehiko Takahashi]

[Text]

The Komeito is the third
largest political party lollowing
the Uherai-Democratic Party
and the Japan saialist Party.
An agreement has been reached
earlier by the Korneito with the
Japan Socialist Party and the
Democmtic Socialist Party on a
governmental administration
concept. Since the J5? and the
D6? are in severe contronta-
tion.theliomeitolsservingasa
bridge between those two

political parties.
the revision oi the

election system lor the Home oi
Councillors national con-
stituency. which has now
become a problem. is being
opposed the strongest by the
Komeito. Became at that. the

J5? and DSPareencountei-ing'

trouble carrying out their Diet
policies.

The Japan Socialist Party is
thinking that it would like to
have the Home ol Councillors
national eonaituency arranged
into a proportional represen-
tation system based on
restricted registration 0!
candidates. in the backyard
ol this way oi thinking is Sohyo
(the General Council oi Trade
Unions ol Japan). Nearly all ol
the JSP's candidates in the
national constituency are
connected with labor unions.
Since the House at Councillors
election. which is held every
three years. is a big burden

financially lor the labor unions
that put up candidates. Sohyo
would like to see this situation
remedied.

Nevertheless. the Komeito.
with which an agreement was
reached on the administrative
concept. isopposing the election
system revision this time and
the JSP is hesitant about having

the revision billpushed throw!
bythestrengtholmmibers

JSP Cooperation

in addition. the JSP ones the
Komelto a debt. In the local
constituencies ol the iiouse ol
Councillors. to the electoral
districts vihere the liomelto

cooperating with the JSP.
There are places where the JSP
is barely able to obtain Diet
seats in this way.

it the JSPntoves positively in
an attempt torevise theelection

system tor the House oi port

Councillors national con-
stituency. the Kornelto is liable
to reiuse lurther cooperation.
putting the JSP m a dlilicuit
position.

The Komelto is emphasizing
this point as it applies pressure
on theJSP.

The Democratic Socialist
Party is opposing. as a party. a
revision ol the election sytem
tor the Home oi Cornicillors
national constituency in the
same way as the liomeito. But

9

F0! OI-TICIAL USE ONLY

in the same way that the JSP is
backed by Sohyo. the 05? has
Domei iJapanese Con~
iederation ol Labor) behind it
Domei is in lavoroi the revision
lor the same reason asSohyo's

Nevertheless. since both the
Komeltoand lheDSPareln the
center oi the middleol-theroad
inlluences and should
cooperate. it is dllllcuit tor the
DSP to taite Diet action by
moving away iron the
Komelto.

Another centrist party. New
liberal Club. is in lavor ol the
proposed revision. The tilts
relations with the liomeito are
much weaker than in DSP‘s
ease Thereiore. althoudt the
05? must keep in step with the
Komeito. the NLC need not give
this much thought. As a matter
oi tact. Toshio Yamaguchi. the
NLC's secretary genersL has
ted sun

aentationsystein.

The dillerent attitudes
towardanextensionoltheDiet
sessionarecioselyrelatednith
the proposed revision oi the
Upper Home election system.
There is also a connection with
the verdicts expected to b!
handed down June a in the
incitheed trial «tor delendants
Tomisaburo Hashimoto and
TakayuitiSatoI.

The Japan Socialist Party.
New Liberal Club and anti-
‘CEC =,ﬂ E .adﬂ Stu I (-5-

oxﬁie. 2 =5 92 moms:
can 8.58.33 :5... as?
3:3 :5. 3.8.. 8 :5
c8393. :8 Haws: 2:.
.93. nan—Sancuazs...
=5 92 3552. w .2. u
.893 .318. 5a 9.25
335.338.. 5: 32 m
2.2.... gun 2633 5 3%
8 :5 2:28.». 9322...

Z 288.. a 5.93 9..
885.. 2 5n 9: 888:
.82.; 88.29 a...“ 1:.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

90LIT1C\L AND SOCIOIDGICAL

KOHEITO'S DIET STRATEGY DISCUSSED

Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 27 May 82 p 2

[Front 'Nngntacho Doings" Colman by Takehiko Tnkahashi: “Uncanny 'Nezuini. Hanabi'

Strategy']

[Text]

There is a type ol ﬁreworks
called "nezuml hanahi." Alter
it is believed to have been ex-
tinguished. it suddenly begins to
sputter and send out sparks.
Secretary General Junya Yano
oi the Kameilo has said. "we
willcarryout Diet tactics by the
mutual hariahi' method lrom
man."

he current Diet session has
been extended 94 days. This is
an extraordinarily long ex-
temion tor a regular Diet
sessionihehiggeetreaaonwhy
the Liberal-Democratic Party
carried out such a lengthy
extension wasinordermrevise
theeiection systemol the House
0! Councillors.

Since Prime Minister Zenko
Suzuki willheaway trom Juries
to ll to attend the Versailles
Summit and the United Nations
Disarmament Conlerence. it
was originally intended to
extendtheDletsessiouwtothe
time oi the m minister's
departure. i himsell
seems to have had such
thoughts.

it was judged. however. that
this would not provide enough
time tor the election system
revision to become law. But it
the Diet session were extended
and the major purpose oi that
extension not realized. Prune

11

Minister Suzuki‘s political
responsibility would be
miestloned.

0n the other hand. even it it

were to he a lengthy extension.
it the proportional repmen-
tation method could he in-
trorhicedlorthelirsttlmeinthe
House 0! Councillors election
system. it imid he a big
political achievement [or
Suzuki. lie began to thinlr that
with this as the background his
prospects would improve in the
LDP proscenuai election in
November.

Staten

UptolnreJhisisthesoenario
at Prime Minister's Suzuki's
handling oi his administration
Whether thing will proceed
according to the scenario

on the ettect ot the
“nuuml hanabi" strategy
which Secretary General i'ano
has mentioned it alter ex-
iendingiiieoiatorsidaysue
revision ot uie election system
oi the House at Coiuicillors’
national constlhiency camothe
realized. Prime Minister
Suzuki's political responsibility
will he questioned not only by
the opposition but also troin
withtntheLDP.

The aim of the Koineito's
fireworks strategy is to prevent

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

JAPAN-U.S. TECHNOLOGICAL COOPERATION SEMINAR ON LAUNCHING RECONNAISSANCB
SATELLITE

Tokyo SANKEI in Japanese 12 May 82 p 2

[Text] At the "Japan—U.S. Technological Cooperation Seminar on mutual
security" beld by Fuji Sankei Group's Defense Information Center and Sankei
Shimbun, the U.S. proposed, as concrete technological cooperation on the part
of Japan and the U.S., that "in order to carry out regular tracking and
surveillance of Soviet naval vessels which continue to build up especially

in the Pacific Ocean area, Japan and the U.S. launch reconnaisance satellites,
establish an ocean surveillance system and cooperate and engage in operations
in the northwestern Pacific Ocean." This was proposed as one method for
defense of the sealanes between Japan and the U.S. in the northwestern Pacific
Ocean and between Japan, the U.S. and the Middle East, which the 0.8.
government has proposed. But it is notable as a proposal symbolizing that
"inasmuch as a British destroyer was destroyed with one guided missile in the
Falkland Islands area, modern warfare has already entered a new stage of high
technology surveillance and assault with highly efficient guided weapons.

(Summary of discussions) (Suetake Yananaka. editorial committee member,
Defense Information Center.)

Japan-Data Analysis for Sealanes Defense

This proposal was a proposal by former U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense
William Perry in a keynote report and furthermore was a concrete response to
a question by Hisao Iwajima, director of the Defense Training Institute's
First World War History Research Laboratory. Perry responded: "The field
where Japan-U.S. technological cooperation can be usefully developed is in
the field of ocean surveillance." Although Perry stated. "At this point in
time it cannot be called a system with a concrete division of labor," he
also stated that using the new U.S. launched reconnaissance satellites, then
having data sent from the satellite recieved by Japan's ground stations, and
having Japan's main responsibility be to take charge of computer processing
and having Japan offer a pilot plan for this technological cooperation would
be extremely beneficial toward strengthening the Japan-U.S. security system.

At present, it seems that in fact America's ocean surveillance consists only
of partial surveillance by means of various early warning aircraft and there

is no comprehensive surveillance system regularly or intermittently covering

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the ocean area. Because of this, it teens that the idea of Perry's proposal
is to have a regular. intermittent comprehensive surveillance of the ocean

in order to deal with the buildup of Soviet naval strength by launching a
reconnaissance satellite. and in the northwest Pacific ocean region having

the results of Japan's information reception and data processing sent to
America. creating a deterrent posture so that, if necessary, the 0.8. military

which receives the data will take countermeasures with various highly
efficient guided weapons.

Japan made no positive reference to this proposal by Perry but is evaluating
the points in the proposal on concrete technological cooperation as it
directs its attention to the defense of the sea lanes in the northwest
Pacific Ocean.

At this seminar, there were lively discussions day and night about U.S.-Japan
cooperation in terms of military technology and nonmilitary technology, and
following the previous example of cooperative development and production of
missile weapons used by American and the NATO (North Atlantic Treaty
Organization) countries. the proposal that there must be agreement on the
necessary terms for military technological cooperation between Japan and the
v.8. was made by both countries. Besides this, America stressed carrying out
possible technological cooperation between Japan and the 0.5. as quickly as
possible in a format which does not contradict Japan's constitution or the
three fundatmental principles on weapons exports.

At the "Japan-0.8. Technological Cooperation Seminar on Mutual Security" held
at the Japan Press Center in Uchisaiwaicho on the llth, eleven Japanese

and 0.8. experts held lively discussions. Many questions were submitted--
such as the question of the defense of the Pacific Ocean sea lanes, the
lifeline of the 0.8. and Japan. and whether or not there will be a Soviet
attack on Japan. Likewise, concerning technological cooperation, there were
ideas such as cooperation on an ocean surveillance system vis-a-vis the
Soviet naval power. Besides this, such gaps as the restrictions from Japan's
three fundamental principles on weapons exports toward Japan-v.5. military
technological cooperation stood out in bold relief; and future problems were
thrown up. (Hiroshi Iwano, editorial staff member; Tadaaki Yoshii, assistant
director of the news staff)

Necessary Strengthening of Ocean Surveillance Capability

[Perry] During these past 10 years, the USSR has been allowed to increase
greatly its military strength in the Pacific Ocean region. They have
stationed nuclear submarines and backfire cruisers, and their nuclear
capability has increased fivefold. The threat to China has increased twofold,
but the threat to Japan has not increased to that degree. Rather. with the
threat of their military power the USSR is trying to pull Japan, a 0.5. ally.
away from the 0.8.; in other words, the USSR is trying to "Finlandize" Japan.
There is the danger of war occurring accidentally due to Soviet miscalculation;
and it is necessary to have a deterrent force toward such a war.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet labor costs are cheap. and it can transfer large military expenditures
into supplies of weapons; there is the danger of a military imbalance between
us and the USSR.

it is necessary for us to apply our technological cooperation to oppose the
Soviet military challenge. Especially. in order for Japan and the 0.5. to
secure the sea lanes of the Pacific Ocean sphere, we must build up our
surveillance of Soviet military strength. Japan also must not forget the
defense of its territory; especially, defense against submarines is necessary
and, if possible, application of electronics to such things as sonobuoys
should be made.

[Banshol Despite the fact that Japan has the three fundamental principles
on weapons exports, and Japan and the 0.3. are allies which have contracted
the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, we have been discreet in weapons exports.
The Japanese government should handle this so that it is possible to export
weapons and supply weapon technology to the U.S.

0n the other hand, Japan is doing licensed production of 0.5. equipment,

such as the F153 fighter and the P3c sub-spotting plane, but recently the

cost of importation from the 0.5. to Japan has increased, and also introduction
of the newest technology has become difficult. It is saiu that reexamination
of license contracts is being made in order to protect employment within the
0.5. and predominance of the U.S. defense industries. He desire a consistent
posture on the part of the 0.5.

[Augustine] It isn't that difficult to assign the Japan-0.5. cooperative
relationship in commerce to defense. For example, there are planes, ships

and vehicles. However, there is the profit that comes from being allies

in shifting technology from the 0.8. to Japan. Hhat does Japan think about
the flow of military technology transferred to Japan to the field of commerce?

[Nakama] There is an example in the past of a U.S. license being applied
to Japan's new weapons and the U.S. laying claim to it; but that is not the
case now.

[Perry] Without waiting for Japan to revise the three fundamental principles
on weapons exports, we should try it in an experimental field.

Maintaining Secrets Difficult in Japan

[Nakama] In the supply of technology from the 0.8., the black box (a part
not supplying any technology or know-how) has increased, but is that a
matter of security?

[Bloom] There is a difference in the exchange of defense information between
the 0.5. and Japan and the 0.5. and NATO. The reason why there is an
imbalance in terms of secrets between Japan and NATO is that in Japan's
constitution the penalty for disclosing information is small, and preserving
a secret in Japan is difficult.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN UFFLULAL UDB UNDI

[Iwajimai Even concerning Joint development, there is a great perception
gap between the people of the 0.5. and Japan about weapons. On account of
this, no matter what is done, it is necessary to create a system which can
clearly be regulated by both countries. I think weapons which the ordinary
Japanese wants in the future are roughly the following weapons I have
considered. Those for the Americans are bound to be quite different.

First of all, the 0.8. wants "invisible bombers" and "invisible missiles,"

but Japan wants "invisible reconnaissance planes." With these, we will
secretly patrol the four islands of the northern territories. Besides these.

I think we would want guided devices allowing us to change the direction of
incoming enemy missiles and return them to enemy territory, submarines which
fly in the air, and a system of terrorist countermeasures. As for the present,
perhaps it would be the small scale PGH weaponry.

[Bloom] Regarding joint production and joint development, Japan has taken

a great interest in NATO. In Japan's case, because it has the three
fundamental principles on weapons exports, there is also the opinion that
Japan will not go the way of RAID, but I think this depends on how it is done.

Regarding this, I recollect the role played by the technology for the Delta
rocket (Delta 2914) which the 0.8. supplied to Japan in the past. This was
accomplished in an agreement between the two governments, and there was
opposition because this model of rocket could be converted into an inter-
mediate range ballistic missile. But I think overall everything went well.
In that instance, along with the technology. the 0.3. offered its expertise
in launching and the controls to put the satellite into orbit.

I think this was a wise purchase for Japan. The reason is that it gave Japan
the technology and experience at a very low cost compared to developing it
from the start. With this as the base, Japan developed a much larger rocket
and launched its own meteorological satellite and communication satellite
designed by Japan. The rate at which the U.S. offered technology decreased
year by year. It is very beneficial for emergency communication for Japan

to have its own communication satellite. Japan-v.8. technological cooperation
in the field of ao-called soft military technology which can be used not

only for purely military reasons but also in emergencies should advance.

Contradictions in the Soviet Attack Opinion

[Tsukamoto] In Perry's report, it was said that because the USSR does not
have sufficient military transport means in the Far East area, there cannot
be a Soviet attack on Japan, but I think this is a misconception. As an
example of that, it was understood that Nazi Germany could not attack the
British homeland, but Britain at that time maintained a serious national
defense force and its air force secured mastery of the skies over the British
homeland. I think this is different from present day Japan. we have acquired
information that the USSR has enough strength to attack Japan.

[Perry] I think that the Soviet Far East Army does not have the capability
of making an attack on Japan possible, including its means of sea transport

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFI('2AI. “SI-I ONLY

and air transport. Moreover, I do not think the Soviet air war capability
can counteract the effectiveness of Japan's interceptor fighters; and if it
is considered that the 0.5. navy would intervene. a Soviet attack could be
confronted and checked.

[Bansho] In today's seminar, we see several gaps between Japan and the 0.5.
1) Defense budgets; 2) the relative importance of research and development
in those budgets; and 3) the position of the defense problem in Japan and
the problem of a consensus of the people. It is understood that we must be
sufficiently cognizant of these.

Concerning the form of military technological cooperation, first of all. it
cannot be implemented without clarifying the three fundamental principles on
weapons exports. On account of this. a political resolution is necessary
and after the framework is prepared, it is possible to have the same kind

of cooperation as in the nonmilitary fields. I think that both Japan and
the 0.5. must put great effort into these points.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizai Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1982

9600
C80: 4105/110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROSPECTS FOR mac-rm MERCY SUPPLY. DMD GIVEN

Tokyo "IRON KOGYO snnmm in Japanese 22 Apr 82 p 1

[Text] The Comprehensive Energy Research Committee

(an advisory organ to the “In minister chaired by

Mr Hiromi Ariaawa) Supply and Demand Division held a
meeting on 21 April and cowleted its revision of

”The Prospect for the Long-Term Supply and Demand of
Energy." It was reported to and acknowledged by HITI
Hinister Abe. According to the report, the total energy
demand in FY-90 is estimated to be 590 million kiloliters
(oil equivalent). Demand has been revised downward

15.71 percent from the tentative forecast compiled in
August 1979. The reasons for the change are the economic
slump and an increase in the rate of energy conserva-
tion. which is expected to rise to 15.5 percent (in the
previous forecast it was 16.8 percent). As a result,

oil dependency falls from the previous 50 percent (350
million kiloliters) to 49.1 percent (290 million kilo-
liters), and breaks the SO-percent level for the first
time. On the other hand. the ratios of coal and nuclear
power to the total energy demand rise from 17.6 percent
and 10.9 percent to 19.5 percent and 11.3 percent respec-
tively. The nuclear power ratio, in particular. will
jump up to 18 percent (90 million kilowatts) in ”-2000
and become the third most important energy source. trail-
ing only oil and coal. This is the most characteristic
point in the new forecast. which will be used as a guide-
line in formulating energy policies hereafter. The
domestic and overseas situations are. however. still
uncertain. Therefore. this forecast will require revi-
sion again within a year or two.

Corrected Downward by 15.71 Percent

Oil Dependency Breaks the SO-Percent Level; Increase in the Nuclear Power

Ratio

In order
H111 and

to predict long-term energy demand and secure energy supplies.
the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy (AN!!!) estimate "The

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prospect for the Long-Term Supply and Demand of Energy." According to the
forecast prepared in August 1979. total energy demand (oil equivalent) would
be 582 million kiloliters in PY-BS. 700 million kiloliters in FY-90 and

870 million kiloliters in FY-95.

After the second oil shock. however, the domestic and overseas energy situa-
tions have changed greatly. Especially within Japan, the progress of energy
conservation measures supported jointly by the government and private sec-
tor and cancellation of the joint Japan-U.S.-Hest Germany coal liquefac-
tion project caused discrepancies in the previous forecast. Therefore,
ANRE as the principal drafter has been working on a revision of the previous
forecast that changes the target fiscal years to 1995 and 2000.

The most characteristic point in the new forecast is that the estimation of
energy demand is corrected downward by a large percentage. It is estimated
at 590 million kiloliters for FY-90 and 770 million kiloliters in the trial
calculation for FY-2000. which is even less than the previous estimate for
FY-95 (870 million kiloliters). The prospective need for oil. in particular.
drops to 290 million kiloliters in both FY-9O and 2000 (approximately 4.97
million barrels per day). As a result. the prospective oil dependency is
lowered to 49.1 percent for FY-90 and 38 percent for PY-ZOOO. Crude oil
imports are estimated at 230 million kiloliters, slightly less than a
million barrels per day. The decrease is more than 2.3 million barrels
below the 6.3 million barrels per day of the previous estimate.

Coal supply is estimated at 153 million tons for FY-90. Of that. domestic
coal supply is estimated at 18 to 20 million tons. The basic policy of a

20-million ton production structure remains. Imported steam coal is esti-
mated at approximately 53 million tons. just over 80 percent of the total.
The coal supply for FY-ZOOO is estimated at 200 million tons. an increase

of over 30 percent. However. the ratio of coal to the total energy supply
is expected to remain the same. ‘

0n the other hand. nuclear power is estimated at 46 million kilowatts for
FY-90, about a 12.5-percent decrease from the 51 to 53 million kilowatts of
the previous estimate. This is "due to the prospect that nuclear energy
expected to be generated by five nuclear reactors will not be supplied until
later years because of siting difficulties" (ARRE). Electric power demand
share of total energy demand is expected to increase from the 33 percent of
FY-80 to 37 percent (its annual rate of increase is 4.2 percent). Conse—
quently. the ratio of nuclear energy in total energy demand is estimated to
be 11.3 percent for FY-90 and is expected to jump 18 percent (90 million
kilowatts) for FY-2000.

New fuels and types of energy supply are estimated at 15 million kiloliters
(oil equivalent) in FY-90, less than half the 38 million kiloliters of the
previous estimate. Their share of total energy demand is also expected to
fall from the 5 percent of the previous forecast to 2.5 percent. This is
due to cancellation of the coal liquefaction project. However, new fuels
and types of energy as a share of total energy demand for FY-2000 are
estimated to be 8 percent--65 million kiloliters--thanks to the diffusion
of solar water heaters and other factors.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Prospect. for Long-Tu- na!” Supply and M

"-00 gum-l)

J02! Illllon kl

quality

92.‘ ollllou loo.
I8.| Illlloo was
2|.) ollllou toa-

lSJ Ilium kv

25.9 IIIIIOI ll

u p.) 2.2 Milton .’
I6.I Illlloo to“

It l9 Illllon iv
10.. Illlloa lw
300.000 kl

other. 700.000 ll

20$ Illlloo kl
5w.” Ill
IA nlllloo too.

‘29 Illllon kl

made all equivalent. u OJ“ Ital/l.
Le coal "1ch. sou". cool.
Id on than; alcohol '00";

zen! due to rounding.

"no (I)
“.7

5.0

6.0

5.6

0.l
0.2

“.5

lW.0

"-90
590 Illlloo kl
IS.”
gunk, "(to (1)
l” Illlloa cm 19.5
10-20 sullen KOO.
66 Illlloo too.
‘6 ullllo‘ kv ll.)
6. .tlllon H “.5
7.3 blllloa .’
‘3 nlllton coat
21.5 allllon Iv 5 0
22 ollllon Iv ’
6 ullllon ll l.0
IS olllloa ll 2.5
290 allllon kl NJ
I.9 Itlllon kl
2‘ .Illlon (m
590 cllllou ll l00.o

(2) Cool Inc‘odo. coal uud lot cool I

(t) Nev (sol ollo. M type. 0! energy and on.“

oolu may; (ﬁrewood; clonal; etc.

(”150'
[Commentary by reporter Yoshitatsu Furudate]
"Closer" to the Actual Condition

While the domestic and overseas situations are uncertain, the committee has
somehow made a realistic estimate which is close to actual conditions. This
is certainly progress compared with the previous forecasting work, and this
forecast deserves to be evaluated on its own. Total energy demand for FY-90.
however. assumes an average annual economic growth rate of 5 percent from
FY—SO. As for industrial structure, which is closely and inseparably
related to energy demand. the comittee used the Industrial Structure
Council's report of May 1980 on "Prospects and Problems of the Industrial
Structure in the 1980's" as the basis for its forecast. although reference
is also made to recent economic conditions. However. everybody admits that
a S-percent economic growth rate is extremely difficult to achieve. The
industrial structure. especially the materials industries such as the 70,000-
ton aluminum output assumed in FY«90, is likely to change suddenly and
drastically in the future. Considering all these factors, the new prospect
still contains questionable points.

For example. coal demand. next in importance to oil, is based on the assump-
tion that "the prices of coal and oil will never be reversed in the future."
However, there is a movement among coal-producing countries to impose export
taxes on coal. The movement toward price control by "coal majors" may
strengthen but will never weaken. In regard to new energy sources. the
forecast incorporates a rather radical estimate of increases from 15
million kiloliters (2.5 percent) in FY-90 to 65 million kiloliters (8
percent) in FY-ZOOO. This radical increase is based on the assumption that
solar water heaters will be widely used. But the diffusion of solar water
heaters also faces real problems. "Unless the price of oil sharply rises,
the demand for solar water heaters cannot be expected to rise, and conse-
quently, cost reductions stemming from mass production come very slowly"

(a major solar manufacturer).

In this forecast the energy conservation rate is increased from the previous
estimate of 14.8 percent to 15.5 percent for PY-90 and 25 percent for
FY-ZOOO. Not a few people point out that energy conservation measures have
been more effectivethananticipated and question whether or not any room
remains for further conservation or any new measures are available for
further conservation. Concerning nuclear energy. although its share of
total demand is revised upward slightly. the absolute quantity is lower. It
is true that many voices say additional efforts to increase the nuclear
power are desirable insofar as the forecast advocates promotion of nuclear
power plant siting as a basic national policy. Since this forecast will be
used as an important guideline formskingenergy policies hereafter, the
comittee's efforts in preparing a general forecast and fulfilling its
charge will be sought.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbun 1982

9896
C50: 4105/106 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY