FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10430
1 April 1982-

West Europe Report

[FOUO 21/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information priurily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mstion was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govaruent.

COPYRIGT MUS AND REGULATIONS GWBRNINC WHIP OP
EWIERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P nus PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(I’OUO 21/82)

Coureurs

POLITI CAL

NE'IHE HANDS

Va: Tran on Labor Party's International Elation.
(marten van Tran Interview; VIIIJ NBDBRLAND, 20 Feb 82)....... 1

mm
FRANCE

Arianeapaee Plans Launches. hceim Orders, Improves Rockets
(Pierre Langereux; AIR 81' C(SKS. 2 Jan 82)................... 10

Orders, 1.3de (hlendar, Military Use

Rockets in Production. Manufacturers Involved
Backgromd. Stockholders of Arinnupaee
Launch Site Diagram

Competition With herican launchers

Technical Aspects of Ariane 2, 3, lo

- a - [III - WE - 150 POUO]

can nmm.v I“ A‘NV
VAN TRAA ON LABOR PARTY'S INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Amsterdam VRIJ NEDERLAND in Dutch 20 Feb 82 p 13

[Interview with Pharten van Traa, international secretary of PvdA (Labor
Party), by Jan Stoof: "Yes, Eh, Not 'In My Campaign I Said Demagogically

I Hould Go by Train with a Sleeping Bag, but that isn't Rightﬂ"; date and
place of interview not given.]

[Text] or all the Dutch political parties there is one
which can boast an international secretary with a full-time
job: the PvdA. Moreover. this functionary elected by the
party congress is also included in the executive connittee
of the party. As such he also has to concern himself with
the general duties of that executive committee.

The international aspect predominates, however. The diplo-
matic attache' case of the current man, hearten van l‘caa. is
provided with a durable namatag supplied by a large travel
agency. Bonn, Paris, Helsinki, Tel Aviv. I-atin Amrica;
that attache' case has been almost everywhere.

huch of the work of PvdA's international secretary is con-
cerned with maintaining contacts with sister parties, mem-
bers of the Socialist International. The international la-
bor movement for a long time past has looked beyond national
borders; the yoke of capitalism was always pushing every-
where. The concept of the world-wide importance of initia-
ting the 8~hour workday, just to mention a 19th century con-
troversy. led to the establishment of the first International
in 1864. Karl harx attended it. This organization existed
for 8 years.

In 1889 the Second International was founded in Paris. an or-
ganization of the various national socialist groups. Periods
of great prosperity and sharp decline alternated. In 1951

it even had to be refounded in Frankfurt Amongst r.thers.
the M was represented there.

International secretaries of the PvdA were, consecutively:
Alfred Mozer and ﬂax van der Stoel (who were not part of the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
executive committee). Piet Dankert, Bolus ter leek,

Harry van den Bergh, Him Bogaard, Relus ter Beck again.
and since 1979. haarten van Tree.

The international secretary of the PvdA does more than
just maintain contacts with the other neebers of the Inter-
national. Sometimes he prepares standpoints of the party
on matters such as NATO membership. the desirability of
placing cruise missiles in the Netherlands, the attitude of
the Israeli government toward the Palestinians. and the op-

pression in Argentina, just to mention a few topics. Further
he maintains contacts between the party executive and the

comission for foreign affairs of the parliamentary group of
the Second Che-bar. speaks at denonstratione and demonstra-
tion days and writes angry letters to evil dictators who
keep kindred spirits locked up. It's a dog's life. but
never uninteresting.

The discussion on the socioeconomic policy of tin second
Van Agt cabinet seems to have pushed to the background some-
what the discussion which was raging, especially within the
PvdA, on NATO and nuclear arms and on various foreign coun-
tries in general. Somtimes a matter comes into the lime
light again. such as the oil boycott of South Africa only

last week, and shortly, the Dutch troops in the Sinai. And

then haarten van Traa will be speaking again. in private,
at party council meetings, in the media, and with activist

groups .

Harry van den Bergh said to me "When Haarten came, there was absolutely no
foreign land for the PvdA."

Haarten van Traa, the foreign secretary of the M, lights his pipe for the
umpteenth time. He gives me an inquisitive look: "Did Harry say that? And
(distrustfui) does he think it is there now?”

[Question] He told me: "Maarten is doing rather nicely.”

Van Traa smiles weakly: "When I came. no; there were primarily a few dossiers
on the back burner which had to be sorted out. I spoke for an afternoon with
my predecessor . Relus ter Beck, and then I got started. Oh, yes, that after-
noon Relus ter leek called the eternal colleague of the SPD, Hans Eberhard
Dingels, in order to introduce me to him. Two weeks later I went to Spain. and
there I introduced myself to the ladies and gentlemen of the Spanish socialist

party. Hell. that was that.”

Relus ter Beak. foreign specialist for the M in the Second Chamber, became
interim foreign secretary after Him Bogaard had given up. Van TraaI "Relus
had kept things rolling. had kept them better rolling than his predecessor who,
well, eh, who didn't really know how to do it. Let me put it this way: he had
both underestimated the job and. moreover. he had another half-week job. Thus I
found something without direction, and little by little I gave it direction in

ny own way."

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Weren't you surprised (I asked as Pvda dues-payer) that the foreign
secretariat was so easily put on a back burner?

[Van Traa] "Yes, a little, indeed a little. I had wondered on occasion what
exactly was going on there, but of course there is always a sort of secrecy
involved You think a lot ass to be done. and the documentation has to

exist. I was somewhat surprised about it, yes. Bolus had the general outlines
in his head, but they were not worked out on paper. There were some letters.
some dating back 2 years, those kinds of things. but everything now has been
pulled together.”

[Question] When you took office you said that the international secretariat
must again become a center where ideas come together which stimulate discussion
on the long term. That did not turn .out;as well as expected.

[Van Traa] "At that moment we had an entirely different pattern of expectation
with respect to the power of the party. Officially we were still involved in
the Forward program at that time, which in practice had been abandoned by mem-
bers. In that program, foreign policy more or less was composed of phrases such
as "take care of . . . comma," and ”or in such an event to advocate . . ." etc.

Therefore the debate had become somewhat unclear, especially within the party.
Of course there was the debate on NATO and, more than now. on North-South rela-
tions. But not on the Soviet Union, the problems of human rights, and relations
with the United States. At that time we lived with an election platform which
read that NATO was actually a threat to world peace. That had been included by
mistake. or perhaps by amendment, but no one found it very important; it was
more in the sphere of: you have to include twice the volume. so that half of

it will get done. I never found that a good approach. although sometimes it is
easy to understand that it was resorted to -- out of integrating considerations,
to put it faslionably."

[Question] Do you mean: to keep the party together?

[Van Traa] "Yes. °'

[Question] Since 1979 the discussion on peace and security and on NATO has be-
come considerably less abstract; the decisions which were asked for were rather
concrete. Horeover, Den Uyl's threat in 1979 to give up his candidacy if the

party were to insist on the rejection of all nuclear tasks put the party on the

ground with both feet.

[Van Traa] "Stemerdink, and Klaas de Vries and Relus in the parliamentary
group, brought’ the discussion to a practical level with respect to the conse-
quences of that American modernization decision. There was an enormous accelera-
tion at that time which led to practice and the party getting closer together.
And although Den Uyl still had a difficult time when he had to speak at the
manifestation against the modernization in Utrecht in November 1979, it did
bring credit to the party; it was a successful operation, for due to that , the
fact that we do not want to place them was in any event accepted in wider
circles. I'm still thinking: if we had not done that at that time, we would

not be in the cabinet now -- and ultimately that is the objective."

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] It seems the discussion on nuclear arms will never stop . . . .
[Van Tree] “No. and I think that's good . . ."

[Question] and shortly the nuclearization of the F-16 and, woops, there the
party goes again, on its hind legs . . .

[Van Traa] "Yes, but we'll have to avoid that. I think a plan should come
about. He must not distance ourselves from the minister; there is little sense
in that if one doesn't make good on it; I have also learned that meanwhile.”

[Question] Hhat plan?

[Van Tree] "A: which nuclear tasks you reject -- the F-16 has to be included in
that, and 3. why you do it. Recently I discussed this problem with a few high
officials of Defense, and there is really no one who can indicate why those
things have to be kept around exactly. There are general political reasons,
but you should have a foreign policy with it. and that still doesn't exist.
Thus, for example, at one point we will have to explain what kind of link ex-
ists between the United States and Europe, for that has sometimes been a mis-
take of the PvdA; it always acted as if the United States did not exist in
relation to Europe."

[Question] Isn't the party driven to some extent by the desire to resist the
United States. cost what cost?

[van Traa] 'lnok. a lot has been said about the position of the PvdA in the
Netherlands. at least the position we thought we had: if the socialists are
the biggest party in the Netherlands. then we should be able to do what we want
to do. In itself that still is the correct attitude, only one is confronted

with the data that outside of the Netherlands power politics play just as much
a role and that therefore one is forced to make all sorts of compromises, first

as a party and then as government.“

[Question] ﬁelding, in the NRC [Nieuwe Rotterdamse Courant-Handelsblad] recent-
ly accused you of not being clear on that . . .

[Van Traa] "Because of my daily political work. it has unfortunately not been
possible to write a thorough article in Heldring's magazine. the respectable
"International Spectator.” But Heldring does give somewhat the impression of:

how can a decent guy not agree with my standpoint?”

Alternatives

"His position is essentially: we are in RATO, the United States are the most
powerful in that, and that puts limits on what is possible and what isn't; any

alternatives that could be developed in Europe come to nothing anyway. That's
why I believe he wrote after the Polish coup that we should give Jaruzelski the
benefit of the doubt. In other words: that we should not have the illusion in

the Netherlands that we can change even an iota in foreign policy. I disagree
with that.Socialists also must find room and strength for a different view of
society where they are the strongest. That is within Europe.”

6

FOR OPYICIAL US! ONLY
[Question] Haven‘t you had a difficult time with the Soviet union in the
last 3 years?

[Van rtan ”Yes. First Afghanistan, then Poland, and in between the 83-20.
I don't think we're out of our difficulties yet. I think that in the
Netherlands we are going through a process which also took place in France
-- to a more violent degree. we are wondering exactly what the sociological
development of that state is. Officially. that was already covered in our
declaration of policy, for that states that democratic socialism differs in
principle from state socialism. but that simply means the Soviet model as
compared to the American, the capitalist model.

We have of course been a little too long under the influence of well-meaning
clergymen who, without any dialectical knowledge, adopted the attitude of 'it
can't be all that bad' in ucsv [Dutch Christian Studehtt° Union] camps, and
who were of course very much influenced by the pressure to eliminate anti-

communism." -
Teach-in

"Look. if you are from a party which in 1952 let Koos Vbrrink go to the SPD to
persuade the comrades in Bonn to agree to German re-armament with the Atlantic

Alliance and whatever else, and through Dr De Jong at that, then a prominent
PvdA member whom I can still see defend the position -- at a teach-in together

with Hiltermann -- that the regime of Mr Diem offered the best guarantees for
a democratic development in South Vietnam, and through Hr C.L. Patijn who saw
the regions of Pomerania and East Prussia as natural German territory in the

debate on the DDR, then you really have to swallow a lot. And then it is not

so strange, in an historical respect, that as a party you needed time to
digest the Gulag -- the 10 or 15 million dead of Stalin.

"But we have indeed made mistakes in the analysis. and I have indeed changed
in that respect. But what I am always being accused of with respect to
Poland is that I did not do anything worthwile. and that is not right.

Solidarity did not want direct contacts we tried it but they did not want con-
tact with any socialist party in the ﬂeet because they clearly understood they

should not do that. Now they want it. and now it's too late."

[Question] Harry van den Bergh, at the time his re-election came up, was re-
proached for spending too much time in airplanes and too little in the party
branches. Him Bogaard promised congress the opposite manner of working and

he was elected. Van Traa also has the international air traffic schedule at

his fingertips.

[Van Iran] ”I also use airplanes. In my campaign I said demagogically that
I would travel by train, with a sleeping bag, but that is not the case."

[Question] The international home port for the international secretary of a
socialist party is the Socialist International. The members of that Inter-
national are parties from such diverging countrhs as the Netherlands. Finland.
the PRC and Senegal. How does that work?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Van Traa] "Sometimes it works smoothly, but sometimes not so smoothly.
Brandt was very irritated about the course of events with respect to Poland.
I can easily understand that from his point of View; he is the architect of
the 0stpolitik. Sometimes things don't go too smoothly. I know that Brandt
said to Hitterand -- but that was not in an s ] [Socialist Youth]

meeting--s ‘Do you know we have many more missiles stationed in the PRC than
there are in your republic. and do you also know that you will use the
weapons you have first in Germany and not in France, and that we do not have
the same power of decision on that as you do?‘ Hitterand answered to that:
'well. yes, that is one of the nasty consequences of Horld War II; I can't
help that either.‘ Hell, that doesn't promote communication.

"Often things go much better in slaller groups than in large meetings which
sometimes threaten to become a type of small United Nations."

[Question] who are the greatest contributors?

[Van Traa] "Kreisky, Palms, Jospin, Joop den Uyl also when he feels like it,
Karel van Hiert, Michael Harrington because he always has a very fine and good
analysis of what is happening in the United States, and Brandt himself. al-
though he does not participate too much in the debate. but he does all sorts
of things in connection with it. The Italians; not many people listen to them
except to Craxi when he comes himself, but he usually doesn't come. Felipe

Gonzales, Scares to a lesser degree; that is somewhat of a past glory, but
Gonzales is one of our few younger forces who have a very great tactical

capability. He has a very good analytical capacity. And he is also a nice.
ordinary man. Some of those people no longer act like mortal men. That is
part of the difficulty."

[Question] Who?

[Van Traa] "Mitterand. very much so. I spoke with him 5 times in my life. but
only once. after a dinner in Santo Domingo, was I able to simply talk with him
for an hour. Not that he will ranember. but I find something like bat im-
portant, because I still have the normal Dutch notion that you have to know

the person you're dealing with.”

[Question] Eternal feuds?

[Van Tran] ”Yes. the Israelis and Kreisky. of course, but that is known. But
in general things are done diplomatically. and it should be that way in order
to get down to business in such a large group.”

Direct Power

[Question] In that International you are concerned with real international
giants, such as the Heat Germans, people who have cabinet responsibility such
as the French, and people who are truly in the midst of the struggle. such as
the Israelis. Hhat exactly is the weight of the PvdA in such a group?

[Van Traa] "Of course it is not a matter of power as such, but more of the
dynamics of such a Socialist International'-- the image they have of it in

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-Latin America and in the United States -- rather than of the precise content
of our discussions. But sometimes you have direct power, as I did during the
1980 congress when I was chairman of the resolutions commission; then, of
course, you have influence on such a declaration. It is also a matter of
just being everywhere. of presence. And via the secretariat of the Socialist
International. you can organize something. such as last year when I wanted to
go to Argentina. I phoned and said: "Can't we make a mission of it?” And I
went there, and walked on the square with those women. He were there also in
connection with the situation around the Argentine socialist party, which had

discredited the Socialist International by cooperating too much with the
junta. Now, after our report on that trip, they are being suspended.“

[Question] Thus you get to see rulers who are not always kindly disposed
towards you. Have you ever been thrown out?

[Van Traa] ”No, but sometimes something like: 'That's enough, sir.‘ I always
try to act properly and start with a long introduction. Sometimes it is dif-
ficult when people really want to start a discussion with you. The clas-

sical counter question is: 'You had the Holuccans, didn't you? You took steps

against them, didn't you? There were casualties, weren't there?’

"In Argentina we wanted to discuss the missing persons. He asked if we could

submit a list with 6000 missing persons. He were told: 'No, we don't want that,
that matter has been closed.’ ‘But,' we resumed, 'aren't there special cases

of people who either completed their punishment or who were never convicted

and who have permission to enter four or five countries?‘ 'Hell, which people
do you mean, exactly?’ Do you understand: first it is the general principle,

and afterwards a choice. And then you still don't know if it will work.

"But thrown out. no, not that. There were some tricks, however. Last year we

were in Uruguay, three of us -- the Spanish party, the French one and we. I
was chairman. And the minister of foreign affairs wanted to talk only to the
French because he had studied in France and had such good memories of that.
Actually, he did that of course because Hitterand had just been elected '

[Question] Have you ever had the feeling that you're being driven up a wall?
Kurds, Nicaraguans. Afghans. Turks, South Africans, they all knock on your
door, and then the nuclear arms and milk prices in the Common Market?

[Van Traa] "Yes, eh no. that is the advantage when you have been a journalist.
so that you have an idea of everything you have to do with so many duties.
And as to all those people. I think you have to give them time if they are

at least somewhat bona fide. The only thing I hesitate about sometimes is
solidarity by signature —- sending another telegram. Then you sometimes
think: you're getting off too easily.”

[Question] -The IKV [Interchurch Peace Council] determined the atmosphere at

a few congresses. The whole discussion almost cost the party its primary can-
didate, and now it has gone so far that the IKV is invited to weekend retreats

of the party leaders.

7

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
[Van Traa] "Recently we talked at length with Ben ter veer again. That was
in the framework of the discussion with the IKY and I indeed saw somewhat of
a shift in the direction of more attainable standpoints. Look, the frus-
tration evoked by the cry [The Netherlands Free of Nuclear Arms] is that the
IKV used that slogan to make us reflect on a different security policy in
general. A lot of people thought, however, that it was not a means, but
precisely the goal. Hell we did not agree with that goal, and then they
started to call us 'Joop then Uyl] Atom and his pals.’ Therefore we asked
Mient Jan Faber [IKV secretary] just how important making the Netherlands

free of nuclear arms is to him in the framework of the European approach
of the peace movement. Then he said: 'In itself that is not so important.’

Look, sometimes we act as if such an activist group wronged us, but we also
call ourselves a party of action. and we should not show an attitude of rejec--
tion toward a group such as the IKV. For that matter, we put ourselves be-

hind the IKV slogan in 1979."

[Question] Doesn't it surprise you that after 21 November a party such as
the PSP [Pacifist Socialist Party] isn't making greater gains than it is?

[Van Traa] 'No. we have already seen that people are running off to the right,
primarily because of the socioeconomic problems. lhey think that the left
won't succeed ultimately. but in the end they will find out that it does make
a difference to the armament policy that we are here. They will notice that
when the government comes to a decision, that it will be opposed, or that

there will be a cabinet crisis.”

[Question] Hill there be one, then?

[Van Traa] ”Yes, that will happen. You won't believe it. but it will happen.”

[Question] Do you find that, as foreign secretary, you are helping to govern
the party as a whole?

[Van Tree] ”1 find less and less that I am responsible only for foreign mat-
ters; I also like to participate in Dutch politics; look. otherwise you be-

come a type of technocrat who says: 'I have nothing to do with that health

insurance act.‘ I don't want it that way. The first thing I do in the morning
is look to see how many lay-offs there are. You have to fight daily against

the image that the PvdA is making a mess of things. thus, raging inwardly,

I can easily phone Perdinandusse about a headline in VRIJ NEDERLARD such as
'The Healthy National Perception of Minister Van der Louw,’ without an s.

As though unconsciously we have to be associated with national-socialism. Then.
use a term such as the silent majority or something similar. Hhat nonsense.”

[Question] From our discussion it is continually obvious that the nuclear arms

discussion is a theme that dominates almost everything. It keeps you busy al-
most daily) it has brought Den Uyl to the edge of the party; the parliament-
ary group is continually queried on that matter. Is all that not too much for

a party with a broad interest?

8

FOR OFIICIAL USE ONLY
[Van Traa] "It's not that bad. really. I an involved in it. it does deter-

mine a great deal of my work and perhaps that of one or two members of the
parliamentary group, but not of others. And look. if the govern-eat is able

to: a. give an idea of how it intends to reject nuclear tasks and in what
framework, and b. ultimately still is able to make a decision on those mis-
siles, we'll have made great progress.

"If it does not happen. yes. then it will indeed come back. For then the ter-
‘pushing back of nuclear arms' can be relegated to the manage attic of

false claims. If we are not able to show that scathing is happening. I do
not see much hope for the party. ”

COPYRIGHT 1982 VN/BV "eekblndpers
8700
cs0: 3105/117

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL FRANCE

ARIANESPACE PLANS LAUNCHES. RECEIVES ORDERS, IMPROVES ROCKETS
Orders. Launch Calendar, Military Use
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 2 Jan 82 pp 22-26

[Articles by Pierre Langereux: "Firm Plans for 27 Ariane Launches Through
1985"]

[Text] The ESA [European Space Agency] and Arianespace now have firm orders
for the launching of 25 (soon to be 27) satellites. from Europe and abroad.
These are made up of the 12 satellites for which the ESA took responsibility--
3 satellites during the flight tests in the APEX free-launching program and 9
in the promotional series-as well as the 15 satellites next assigned to Ariana-
apace for operational launchings to take place from the middle of 1983.

These 27 satellites will be placed into orbit for 13 customers, including 7
from Europe (15 satellites) and 6 from abroad (12 satellites), among whom are
3 large 0.5. companiesuGTE Satellite Corp., Southern Pacific Commanicationa
Corp., and Western Union—and the international organization Intelsat. Five
Intelsat 5 satellites are now assigned to Ariane. The Board of Governors of
Intelsat. meeting in Washington on 11 Dec-be: 1981, in fact decided to order
two more Ariane launches to place its last Intelsat 5 satellites (1‘16 and P15)
into orbit in March and June 1985. This new contract with Arianespace, total-
ing about $93 million for the two launches. should be signed in January 1982.
He should remember that the first three Intelsat 5 satellite launchings

(F6 to P8) have been ordered from the ESA at prices (indexed) of from $27.5
million to $28.2 million each. These are, in fact, launches planned to take
place between October 1982 and July 1983 and benefit from the ESA "promotional"
rates.

Operational launches ordered from the BSA and Arianespace extend from the
beginning of 1982 practically to the end of 1985. (See the table.) Some
scheduling conflicts between Arianeapace and a umber of customers whose
launch orders are firm are not yet resolved.

Thus, Arianespace has scheduled the launchings of the French Telecom 1A and 18
telecomnications satellites for September and December 1983 respectively,
whereas a recent official commique jointly released by the ONES [National
Center for Space Studies] and the DGT [General Directorate for Telecoms-mica-
tions] pointed out that the customers had planned the launchings for July and

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1. Arianeapace Customers (ea of 31 Deccaber 1981)

Firm Orders

APPLE

HBTBOSAT 2

HARBCS A and B

SIRIO 2

BCS 1 and 2

BKOSAT

GIOTTO

”BAT/OSCAR

INTBLSAT 5 (1’6 to P8)
INTBLSAI 5 (1’14 and F15)
TBLBCOH 1A and 13
SPOT 1

VIKING

TV-SAT

TD? 1

ARABSAT 1

WESTAR 6

SPACBNBT 1 and 2
GSTAR 1 and 2

27 Launchinga

NNHHHHHHNNWPHHNHNHH

 

Options

ECS 3 and 6
L-SAT

SM 2

mm

SATOOL 1 and 2
831's 1 and 2
AUSSAI l and 2
our 1
SPACBNET 3
GSTAR 3

SN 1

ARABSAT 3
was C
TBLSAT 1

17 options

1-0 HHHD—‘D—‘NNNHPHN

Under Negotiation

INTBLSAT 6 (Fl-F6)
ERS 1 and 2

Hipparcos
CBS 1
038 1

HHHNO‘

India

BSA

BSA for 1W
BSA

BSA for BUTBLSAT
BSA

BSA

Radio Amateurs (Ger:
IMBLSAT

msar

nc'r (France)

CRIS (France)

SSC (swam)

m (Genny)

1131? France

ASCO (Arab League)
Western Union (11.8.:
Southern Pacific (0
C133 Satellite (11.8.:

13 customers

 

BSA for BUTBLSAT
BSA

CNBS (France)

SSC (Sweden)

m (Columbia)

911 (Brazil)

P'ﬂ' (Austrdia)

cu (Iamellbourg)
Southern Pacific (U
GTE Satellite (0.8.
Satellite TV (0.8.)
ASCO (Arab League)
BADG

BADG for- 'l'BLSA'l‘ (SW

12 customers

INTELSA'I

BSA

BSA

CBS (0. S .)

Direct Broadcastim
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i, Table 1 continued]

1+ RCA RCA (0.3.)

1+ ANIK TBIBSAT (Canada)

3-4 OPHBT mu

2 SKYNET 3 Ministry of Defense (Great Britain)
1 NATO lo NATO

1+ SAHRO Ministg of Defense (France)

20+ Under negotiation 10 customers

October 1983 respectively. But the launch window of July 1983 is at present
reserved by the BSA for its ECS 2 satellite or an INTELSAT 5 (P8).

On the other hand, the launch windows between the end of 1984 and the begin-
ning of 1985 which, up to now, had been tin are now free because of the delay
(about 6 months) of the direct television satellites, the German TV SAT and the
French TD? 1. Their. deliveries. in fact, are now planned for 15 February 1985
and 15 Hay 1985 respectively, which defers the launching of the TV SAT until
May 1985 and of the TD? 1 until September 1985. Telediffusion de France
[French Television Network] reportedly wished to launch its satellite in

July 1985 but that window is reserved for the ESA comet probe, Gi'otto, which
must necessarily be launched on 10 July 1985!

Seventeen Options

Some 12 customers, of whom 5 are from Europe (7 satellites) and 7 from over-
seas (10 satellites), now have options from Arianespace for 17 satellite
launchings between 1984 and 1986 with the new Ariane 2, 3, and lo rockets.

These include an option for the BSA's 308 3 teleconunicetions satellite in
April 1984 and no fewer than 13 options for 1985. Among the latter one notes
the ESA's ECS lo telecommunications satellite, SATCOL l and 2 for Colombia,
SETS 1 and 2 for Brazil, AUSSAT l and 2 for Australia, CLT 1 for Luxenbourg,
and ARABSAT 3 for the Arab League, as well as SPACBNET 3 of the Southern
Pacific Conunications Corp and GSTAR 3 of GTE Satellite Corp., already
Arianespace custoners. The British firm, British Aerospace Dyna-ice Group
(BADG) has also taken an option for launching either the MARBCS-C satellite
or the TELSAT 1 which it hopes to build for the Telsat firm (Switzerland).

Three additional options for 1986 involve the ONES earth observation satel-
lite, SPOT 2, the television broadcasting satellite TBLBX of the Swedish
Space Corp. (Sweden), and the European experimental direct TV satellite,
LSAT, whose placement into orbit has been deferred from 1985 to 1986. Be-
sides, Arianespace has potential orders which are practically certain but for
which contracts have not yet been signed. Then there are the 30$ 3 and lo
satellites whose placesent into orbit by the Ariane is planned on dates which
remain to be specified.

FOIOI’FICIALUSEONLY
Table 2. Schedule of Firm Leunchinse With the Ariane Between Now and 1986

Flight No
Test Flights

L 01
L 02
L 03
L 04

Operationel

r-r‘t-‘r'r'r‘r‘
HHOQNO‘U‘

HO

Entry into Service of the New Ariane 2 and Ariane 3 Versions

L 12
13
16
15
16
17
18
19
20

r‘r'r‘r'r‘t-‘r't-

Date

 

24 December 1979
23 Hay 1980
19 lune 1981
19 December 1981

Flights

April 1982
July

October
December
February 1983
May

July

September
December
February 1984
April

June

August
October
December
February 1985

Payload

None

mm + oscu. 9*
meosxr 2 4- ms
names A

mates 3 + sum 2

scs I. + msu/oscn
EXDSAT or INTELSAT 5 (P6)
exoeA'r or mats“ 5 (F6)
music 5 (F7)

tea 2 or muse: 5 (F8)
rcs 2 or muse: 5 (F8)

ransom 1A + 1

1m 13 + “enter 6
sacrum 1 + mm 1
csnn 1 + (lacs 3)"
spot 1 4- Viking

05m: 2 + spmm 2
Open

Open

(8318-1 + SAIOOL 1)"

Rocket

 

Ariane
Arlene
Ariane
Ariane

Ariene
Ariane
Ariane
Ariana
Ariane
Ariane
Ariane

1

r-r‘r‘

F‘F‘F‘h‘h‘h‘h‘

(mid 1983)

Ariane
Ariane
Ariene
Ariane
Ariane
Ariane
Ariane
Ariane
Ariane

Entry into Service of the "BLA 2" Second Launch Pad Ouarch 1985)

21
22
23
26
25
26
27

l‘r‘r‘l‘l‘r'l"

March
May

June
July
September
October
December

mus“ 5 (HA)

‘l'V-SAT

ImLSA'r 5 (n5)

storm + (src 1)“

rm? 1

First firing, Ariane 4 + 7

Open

Entry into Service of the Ariane 4 Rocket (March 1986)

Ariane
Ariane
Ariane
Ariene
Ariane
Ariene

* Failure: launcher exploded in flight and aatellitea were lost

**Option to

be confirmed

13

Ft“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂﬂE(MVLY

2/3
2/3
2/3
2/3
2/3
I.

eoraas

Ivuornomoxd

V83 SZNO

anodeauerav

aoedsauerxv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Twenty Launchings Being Negotiated

Negotiations in progress with Arianespace involve 20 launches with the Ariane
for 10 customers.

Thus, Arianespace notes negotiations with Intelsat for the new Intelsat 6

(F1 to P6) telecommunications satellites whose comparability with the new
Ariane 4 rocket is planned in the specifications. Contracts are being drawn
up with the Canadian Telsat firm for launching the ANIK telecommunications
satellites as well as with several American companies for telecommunications
and direct television satellites, among them the CBS Network (one satellite).
the Direct Broadcasting Satellite Corp. (one satellite) and RCA (several
satellites after RCA 3). For its part, Grumman Aerospace also believes that
other potential customers, such as $33, ATAT, American Satellite, and so
forth, may aJso be interested. Europe also contemplates launching three or
four OPHET operational meteorological satellites as successors to the HBTBOSAT
satellites now in orbit; but that program is linked to an agreement among the
member countries to establish EUHBTSAT, a new European organization responsible
for exploitation of operational meteorological satellites.

0n the other hand, even though options have not yet been taken, the launching,
in 1986, of the European scientific satellite, Hipparcos, and the first
teledetection satellite, £38 1, of the BSA-dwhich also plans an BRS 2 a little
later--can be considered certain.

This adds up, therefore, to at least 35 certain launches for the Ariane between
now and the middle of the decade, of which 27 are firm, plus 5 launches under
option, and 3 more in negotiation, to count only the satellites whose construc-
tion is certain and whose launchings are necessarily planned with the Ariana.

Military Satellites

For the first time, Arianespace is also counting upon negotiations with defense
organizations for launching of military satellites between now and the end of
the decade. The launching of such "nonaggressive" satellites (telecommunica-
tions, observation, navigation, and so forth) is actually compatible with the
objectives of Arianespace, which is committed to "peaceful" launchings.

Thus negotiations are underway with the British Ministry of Defense for
launching two SKYNET 3 military telecommunications satellites. These launch-
ings are being negotiated by Arianespacs in competition with the Space Shuttle
at "military" prices. The company is also proposing.to NATO the launching of
a NATO 4 satellite built in the United States.

Arianespace also makes mention of contacts with the French Ministry of Defense
for launching several SAHRO military reconnaissance satellites, construction
of which has been under study for several years. These satellites will
utilize the platform of the CRES observation satellite, SPOT, fitted out with
new instruments for taking pictures.

COPYRIGHT: A 8 C 1981.

lb

llll(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(liLY
no... u...--...— §-~_ sous-C

Rockets in Production, Manufacturers Involved
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 2 Jan 82 p 27
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Twenty-four Ariane Rockets in Production"]

[Text] Construction of 21. Ariane rockets for launchings planned during the
first 5 years of its utilization, up to the middle of the decade, is now
cos-titted.

These include the four rockets of the develonsent program utilized for the
flight tests (I. 01 to I. 06) from Decenber 1979 to Decusber 1981, as well as

the first 20 rockets of the series ordered for operational flid'uts (1. 5 to l. 24)
from the middle of 1982 to the middle of 1985, that is, during the first 60
nonths of commercial exploitation.

For the first operational launcheao-"the promotional series"--a first lot of
six rockets in the series (L 5 to I. 10) was put into production by the BSA in
April 1978. This operational series, which initially comprised five rockets,
was later expanded to six, to include one spare which was recently allocated
to an operational launch for the Intelsat organisation. These six "promo-
tional" launches are thus intended to place three INTKLSAT 5 (F 6 to F 8)
satellites into orbit, as well as the European BABES B, SIRIO 2, EXOSAT and
305 l and MEAT/OSCAR, the German radio snateurs' satellite. Launching of
the French TELECOM lA teleoolsunicstions satellite, to replace the SPOT 1
satellite, is also contemplated for 1984. All these launches are planned
between the beginning of 1982 and the beginning of 1983.

Arianespace next assured responsibility for building the rockets in the
series intended for succeeding operational launches. A second lot of four
rockets in the series-(L 11 to L 14) was ordered in April 1979 for launches
planned between the middle of 1983 and the beginning of 1984. Recently a
third lot of five rockets in the series (I. 15 to L 19) was placed in produc-
:ion for succeeding launches planned up to the end of 1981..

From 1982, Arianespace begins long tern stockpiling for a fourth lot of

five serially produced rockets (I. 20 to L 24), which should be ordered dur-
ing the third quarter of 1982, or perhaps sooner, considering the very favor-
able development of the market. These rockets will serve operational launches
up to the middle of 1985.

The first 11 rockets produced, for the flight tests and promotional series
will all be of the present Ariane 1 type, which will be used up to the middle
of 1983. Starting then, in fact. the new Ariane 2 and 3 versions, with im-
proved performsnce, which will be built within the scope of the second serially
produced lot (I. 11 to L 16) and subsequent lots, will be placed in service.

Only starting with the fourth in the lot series (L 20 to 1. 2‘) will the new
Ariana lo rockets, which have still higher performance, be built; the first
flight test of this series is planned for the end of 1985 (October or December)
so that they may go into operational service in March 1986.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Arianespace firm has been delegated manufacturing supervision of production
by the BSA. For this Arianespace depends on seven European aerospace firms
with which it has contracts as manufacturing general contractors. These are
Aerospatisle (France) for tasks of manufacturing design and providing the first
and third stages; SEP (France) for propulsion units; HAIRA (France) for equip-
ment compartment; Air Liquids (France) for the third stage tanks; RENO
(Germany) for the second stage; Contraves (Switzerland) for the nose; and
Difesa e Spasio (Italy) for the solid fuel boosters. This industrial organiza-

tion will be involved with the present (Ariane 1) and future (Ariane 2 andA3)
versions. .

At present production rate of the Arisne launchers-«about five rockets a year—
building on a new rocket should begin every 2’5 months. This rate, considered
ambitious yet a short while ago, is going to be revised upward as the Iarketing
effort has taken off very favorably.

Arianespace, now in charge of production, will draw up the schedule of launcher
orders at the end of the third quarter of 1982 in order to determine how much
to increase the production rate.

The present status of firm orders booked (27) and those potential orders which
are quite certain (8), or 35 satellites to be launched between now and the
middle of the decade, necessitates increasing the production rate to at least
6 rockets annually and perhaps more right now. The manufacturing investments
to be made to attain a rate of six to eight rockets a year are practically of
the same order of magnitude, about 80 million francs, according to Ariana-
space. Moreover, European industry is ready to go to a rate of eight rockets
a year. However, it must be noted that there is s limitation—unforeseen-—on
the production rate of Ariana rockets: simply stated, it is the time (18 months)
required for delivery of the rolled sheet metal for the structure and the
tanks. In fact, it requires special rolling mills (Sendsimir) which, in
France, are limited in number and are at present working at full capacity to
meet the great demand.

Manufacturers in the Ariana Program

The Ariana rocket development program of the European Space Agency (BSA) is
being carried out with the National Center for Space Studies (CUBS) as
general contractor, with the following principal contractors: Aerospatiale,
58?, Metre and Air Liquide (France); Contrsvas (Switzerland); and B‘l‘CA—ACBC
(Belgium). The ONBRA has provided technical assistance.

The other manufacturers participating in the program are:

In France—Arms, Aubert at Duval, ACME, 31m, SSR, Cll-lloneywell Bull,
Bronzavia, Cegedur, Cluessy, Comsip Enterprise, Crouset. CSSB, Daassult-
Breguet, Dembiersont, Deutsch, Dunes, Daher-Eugonnet. Industria, Intertech-
nique, Porgeal, Le Bozec et Gautier, Hoosier-disperse. Hotorol's-l’rance, SAPT,
SAT, Sfena, Sfim, SILAT, Sintra, Sodsteg, Souriau, Sofrair, Shams, Starec,
Steiner, Socitec, Sofrance, Societe Commentryenne des Aciers Pins, Societe des
Produits de l'Azote, 868, Sam, La Technique lntegrale, Thomson-08F;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VI Ul'flbll‘ls U“ Ul‘lsl

In Germany—Bosch, Dornier, DMR, HAN, EBB, BRNO, Bansa;

In BelgimuBell Telephone, FN-llerstal, SABCA, Valcke;

In Italy-deritalia, cos-rm, Laban, Selenia, SNIA-Viscosa;

In the Netherlands--Fokker-VFV, Philips, ELF, Rosscher;

In the United Kingdor-Avica, British Aerospace, Ferranti, Marconi, Simon;

In SwedenuSMB-Scania, Volvo;
In Switzerland—Battig, CIR, VFW ban-FFA-Pilatua, Cryophysics, AGIE;

In Denmark—Dennebrog Blektronik, Kampsax, Rovsing, Term, Logstor, Bruun
Sorensen;

In Spain-~CASA, Duro, Sener
COPYRIGHT: A a C 1981
Background, Stockholders of Arianaspace
Paris All! 31‘ COSMOS in French 2 Jan 82 pp 30-31
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Arianespace, First Space Transport Company"]

[Text] Arianespace is the world's first cmercial space transport company.
Established 26 March 1980 on the initiative of the National Center for Space
Studies (cuss), Arianespace is responsible for financing, production, and
marketing of launchings for the Ariana rocket in its present version (Ariane 1)
and for future improved models (Ariane 2, 3, and lo). It is a private corpore-
tion organized under French law which was entered upon the cornercial register
at Corbeil, Department of Basonne, on 8 April 1980. Its headquarters are at
Bvry, near Paris. It now has about 70 employees, but there will be about 115
by April 1982. The president~geners1 manager of Arianeapace is Frederic
d'AlIest, director of the "launcher" division of the CNES and by virtue of
that fact the official responsible for the Ariana program. He is assisted

by a secretary general, Roland Deschamps, and two deputy general managers,
Klaus Iserland, for technical and commercial matters, and Berve' Loiseau, for
administrative and financial matters.

The board of directors of Arianespace comprises 18 members, including the
president-general manager and 10 directors of 7 companies (Aerospatiale, SEP,
Mstra, ram, Volvo, SABCA, Contraves) and of the ONES (2 representatives), as
well as 6 auditors (BSA, CASA, Dornier, SNIA Viscosa, British Aerospace, and
Credit Lyonneis). [Sentence as published]

17

MOWALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fifty-One French and Foreign Stockholder.

The Arianespace company now has 51 French and foreign stockholders, including
the CNBS, which is the largest stockholder (34 percent) as well as 36 European
aerospace firms which, together, hold 61.9 percent of the capital stock, and
14 European banks whose total participation amounts to only 6.1 percent.
French stockholders. public and private, hold a majority of the stock (59.25
percent). However, all the leading manufacturers of 11 countries participating
in the Ariane program are represented more or less in proportion to their par-
ticipation in the development and production of the European launcher.

Arianespace has available a capitalisation of 120 million francs, subscribed

by the 51 European stockholders who are also committed to lend the company.

if necessary, 30 million francs in the form of restricted current accounts.
Besides, the special stockholders meeting held on 26 June 1980 unanimously
authorized Arianeapace to contract a loan of 29 million francs with six French
banks: m, Credit Lyonnais, Societe Generale, Banque Vernes, Paribas and
Banque Francaiae du Comerce Exterieur [French Foreign Trade Bank]. Thus the
company has 179 million francs of its own funds available.

In addition. a towined media: and long-term loan of 150 million francs in-
tended to finance the building of a spare launcher has been agreed to by four
European financial organizations: Credit Rational (France), Banque Buropeene
d'Investissements (Luxembourg), Kreditanstelt fur Hiederaufbau [Bank for Recon-
struction] (Germany), and the SoCiete Rationale ds Credit a 1'Industrie in
Belgium. That loan is intended for preliminary basic financing of the company's
operations. The first installment of 75 million francs has been drawn, which
makes available to Arianespace 256 million francs of permanent working capital
(with the 179 million francs of its own funds) for its activities.

This basic financial structure enables Arianespace then to limit itself to
short term "construction“ loans depending on its production schedule and
accounts payable or receivable. Methods of payment in the form of medium
term "purchaser credit" are also being proposed by Arianeapace, its principal
bankers and the specialized organizations for foreign trade (OOFACB) to help
customers finance their orders.

Arianespace's order backlog, which at the end of 1980 (6 months after the
company's founding) was still only 1.4 billion francs, now amounts to 2.10
billion francs in firm, signed contracts, of which 60 percent are "exports"
(that is. outside the EEC). This corresponds to launching 3 heavy satellites
of the Ariane class at $50 million each and 6 media "semi-Ariana" class
satellites at $26-25 million each. among the 13 firm launching orders now held
by Arianespsce. To these there will very soon be added Intelsat's new order,
amounting to $93 million, for launching two more Intelsat 5 satellites in
1985, which will increase the total orders on the company's books to nearly

3 billion francs.

Arianeapace predicts that the financial break-even point will be attained
during the second year of its launching activities, that is, during the 1984

fiscal period. Ariansspace will in fact assume responsibility for Ariane
rocket launchings in the middle of 1983, beginning with the 11th launcher

18

“MUSEMY
(L 11), the first four test rockets being part of the development program
managed by the ONES and the first six serially produced rockets being the
responsibility of the BSA in the scope of the ”promotional series." All
operational launchings thereafter effected will be the responsibility of
Arianespace. Fredericd'Allest, the president-general manager predicts that
the company will realize an annual business volume of 1.4 billion francs in
1986 and on the order of 2 billion francs in 1985 (current francs).

Arianespace has already forged the first links of a vast commercial network
which extends over practically all the continents: certainly Europe, but also
India, Australia, Latin America (Brazil, Colombia and so forth), the Arab
countries and especially the United States. Arianespace has delegated to the
American Grumman Aerospace Company responsibility for promotion of the Euro-
pean launcher in the United States and it has assigned to the OEEHA [French
Office for Export of Aeronautical Equipment] responsibility for representing
its interests in other countries.

Twenty-five to 30 Percent of the Worldwide Launching Market

Arianespace actually expects to capture 25 to 30 percent of the worldwide
market for satellite launchings during the 1983-1990 period. in which launch-
ings of about 200 satellites are contemplated worldwide (excluding the coun-
tries of the East) for installation or replacement of space systems (see AIR
ET COSHOS No 791). About 20 percent of those are launchings into low orbit

of from 600 to 1,200 km for scientific or observation satellites, both civil
and military, and 80 percent of the launchings are for geostationary satel-
lites (at 36,000 km) for meteorology, telecommunications and direct television
(starting in 1985). Telecommunications satellites which have experienced an
explosive expansion (25 percent annually for Intelsat) dominate the present
market. Now, Arianespace is in an optimum position precisely for geostationary
launches.

The market is divided geographically as follows: 36 percent of launchings

for the United States, 29 percent for Europe (BSA and two-country programs),

14 percent for international organizations (Intelsat, Inmarsat, Eunetsat, and
so forth), 10.5 percent for developed countries (national programs) and also
10.5 percent for developing countries (national or regional programs). In view
of the fact that the European market by itself already constitutes a third of
the worldwide market and knowing that nowan Ariane option is required in prac-
tically all international invitations to bid, Arianespace's objectives there-
fore do not appear unrealistic.

A 25 to 30 percent share of the worldwide market should represent. for Ariane-
space. 50 to 60 satellite launchinge in 8 years, that is, a business volume of
$1.5 to $1.8 billion out of a $6 billion market. Moreover, the company already
has practically realized a quarter or a third of this objective,since at the
beginning of 1982, it can count on 15 firm launches, even though the European
launcher is only completing its qualification tests.

It therefore appears quite probable that between now and 1990 Arianspace will
attain--indeed even surpass-~its planned objective.

19

FOR‘OITHC1A1.USE(MVLY
FORIOFFICLA1.USEGMNLY

Table l.

[in percent]

France

GEES
Aerospatiale
SEP

MAIRA

Air Liquide
Consip

Crouzet

Deutach
Intertechniqua
SAPT

Sfenn

Sfin

Sodetes

Credit Lyonnais
BNP

Paribas

Banque Vernea
Societe Financiere Auxiliaire
Valorind

Germany
HAN
BRNO
Dornier
~ H33
Dresden Bank

Bayeriache Varainnbank ac
Hestdautache Landeabank
Girozentrala

Spain

CASA
Sener

COPYRIGHT: A 6 C 1981

59.25

35.00
8.50
8.50
3.60
1.85

‘__o.1o

Participation of Arianaapaca'a Stockholdaro

[in
Belgian

SABCA
BTCA-ACEC

Italy

o:ibhn_.hu

0.10
0.10

O

O OOyNU‘N
UUQGNO

3°
use: 0| 9:
c:

ova
O

20

SHIA-Viacooa
Sclania

Aaritalia
Inatituto San Paolo di Turino

Switzerland

Contravaa

CIR

Era

Union dos Banques Suiaaeo

United Kingdon
British Aerospace

Perranti
Avica
Midland

Sweden
Volvo
SAAB-Scania

Netherlands

Fokker
Allganane Bank Nederland

Denmark
Rovaing
Handelabank

Ireland
Adtac
Aar-Linsua

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
Launch Site Diagram
Paris AIR 31' COSMOS in French 2 Jan 82 p 35

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "EM Z—A Second Launch Pad in Service in
March 1985"]

Next] The rate of operational launchings now planned, counting only firm
orders, will grow from four annually in 1982 to five annually in 1983, six

in 1984, and then six or seven, or even more, starting in 1985. Actually there
are already 6 fit. launchings and no fewer than 10 options for 1985.

By the middle of the decade. this planned workload will have saturated the
present capacity of the ELA l launching ensuble at Kourou, even when the
launch preparation tine is reduced (iron 3 months at present to 7 weeks in
1986) and taking into consideration mmerous double launches and increased
launching capacity of. the European rockets.

Therefore it will be absolutely necessary to have available a second launch
pad--the an 2, whose entry into service is now set for March 1985, which is
a year later than originally planned, taking into account the comarable delay
experienced by the deVelopIent program (see AIR 81' 603105 No 814).

It will be possible for the second launch ensemle, the ELA 2, to attain a
steady rate of 10 launches a year, but that will require additional invest-
ment: husan (launching teams) and equipent (payload preparation bays, fuel
storage facilities, transport facilities, and so forth). Therefore, in the
beginning one can count on only three launches a year from the ELA 2, in
addition to the five or six a year nada possible by the BIA l (which will
rennin in service until 1987). This should make it possible to easily neet
the predicted denand in 1985.

The possibility of some customers withdrawing and inevitable delays in satel-
lite readiness nust be comidered. However, to avoid excessive laxity in ob-
serving the launch dates stated by customers Arianespace is introducing

into its contracts a "penalty" clause which varies, depending upon the date
at which schedule modifications are announced.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
amino: «5 «MN»
338» ~wcw-uv§~
53:. Eurugocé its 38
~08 Pawgvae 3:3: NS 3w»
«can hug!- uwoaurwnw 88
.. 320 A35.” at
/, / A38.» awn goat
/ J
., . .33
by)...“ ..
hes—cu «39 _ . ..
3:3: 3: and
30996 3:52
no.3.
«3, 3a m
~00 3.300
Competition with Andaman.“
Paris AIR 3T cosmos in French 2 Jan 82 pp 33, 35
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Arianespece Proposing Launchings To Order"]

[Text] Under present circumstances potential customers have a choice amoru
three launchers for their satellites, Arianespece‘s president, Frederic
d'Allest, explained recently:

--To rely on the American Shuttle which will offer the lowest price ($16 to
$18 million with -launching services) during the first 3 years of operational
service (from October 1982 to October 1985); but which also during that tine
will present serious risks of delay and operetional unavailability because

of the large reduction in the number of flights (only 28 between now and 1985);
01'

--To stay with a proven launcher such as the American Delta (more than 140
launchings) which is more readily available than the Shuttle but whose price
is distinctly higher ($25 million at the beginning of l982) than that of the
Shuttle or the Ariana for equal performance. The Atlas-Centaur launcher

has also proved itself but that rocket is now at the end of its career: it
has few customers (except Intelsat and perhaps the 0.8. Air Force also) be-
cause its performnce has not evolved sufficiently and its price is very high
($61 million per launching); or

--To choose the Ariana, which is beginning its career but whose conventional
design limits the technical risks and whose price is interlediate ($25 to $30
million for a median satellite of "semi-Ariana 3" class or $65 to $50 million
for full capacity) between that of the Delta and the Shuttle, with comparable
performance, and in addition, with better availability and a potential for in-
creased performance and cost reduction which is highly advantageous in com-
parison with the 0.8. rockets.

The advantages of the European launcher, moreover, are already being demon-
strated since it has just won three important contracts in the United States
in less than a month in the face of competition from the Shuttle and the Delta.
The Ariane 3 rocket which has been ordered in fact offers performance superior
to that of the new Delta 3920, whose entry into service is planned for the
middle of 1982, by about 100 kg of additional payload, which is decisive for
customers. This actually makes it possible to add redundant channels and am-
plifiers for increased reliability or to carry more fuel to increase service
life, as was explained by Roger P. Vallo, president of GTE Satellite Corp., an
Arianespace customer.

The European launcher's trump cards in the face of competition from the
Shuttle, the only one which will remain at the end of the 1980 decade, are at
the same time technical, commercial, and financial, d'Allest explains.

23
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ariane's Trump Cards

The Ariana has numerous technical traps to play against the Shuttle yhich is
poorly suited to high orbit nissi'ons, especially launchings into geostationary
orbit.

The Ariana makes possible a process of direct injection into geosynchronous
transfer orbit, the passage into geostationary orbit being provided by the
apogee motor incorporated in the satellite. In contrast, the Shuttle neces-
sitates, in addition, a perigee motor which is put into operation in accor-
dance with a relatively complex procedure: first, the entire assembly must be
deployed out from the hold and then moved away from the Shuttle before ignition
of the propulsor whose guidance is generally gyroscopic (except in the case of
the expensive ms with inertial station); the entire phase of placement into
orbit by the Ariana is controlled by an inertial station. In addition, con-
sidering the relative distance of Cape Canaveral (28.5’) from the equator
compared with that of Kourou (5’) injection by the Shuttle must also include
a large correction of the plane of the trajectory (for example, by means of
reignitian of the perigee motor in flight), all things which affect the reli-
ability of launchings and precision of injections. Arianespace's president
thus believes that geostationary satellites are penalized by more than a year
of service life when they are launched by the Shuttle instead of the Ariana.

Ariana facilitates incorporation of satellites in the rocket even if they were
designed for the Shuttle or Delta. In fact, Arianespace has made special study
of the methods of incorporating payloads in the Ariana (explained in the
"Customer's Manual") in order to reduce interface problems.

The European rocket permits double launches, which considerably reduces the
price for launching medium satellites (of "semi-Ariana" class) in comparison
with the Delta, and this while retaining ease of incorporating each satel-
lite, thanks to the special adapter (SYLDA [Ariana double launching system])
made by Aerospatiale, which enables each satellite to be treated completely
independently.

In addition Ariana provides a favorable environnent for satellites as far as
payloads in flight are concerned (acoustics, acceleration, vibration,
pollution and so forth). This results in lower stresses upon the satellite's
(lights structures, hence a gain in the payload), which influences costs.
Arianespaca estimates that double launching of Delta class satellites with the
Shuttle is about $6 million more expensive than with the Ariana.

These constraints of incorporation and flight are important for customers.
Intelsat has in fact abandoned launching its Intelsat S satellites with the
Shuttle because of the technical difficulties and hence the additional cost
(not to mention delays) which they represented (see AIR 31' 008108 No 886).

Arianaspace is also careful to stay abreast of developments in the market;

that is, to adapt Ariana rocket performance and services to satellite develop-
ment at the technical and commercial levels. Hence, there is the developent
underway of an "Ariana family" which, in lo years, will enable the launching

24.

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
capacity to be doubled at proportionately lower costs. And this without recon-
sideration of the launcher's design, and therefore with minimal risks.

The performance in geostationary transfer orbit will thus increase from 1.75
tons with the present rocket (Ariane 1) to 2 and 2.10 tons, respectively, with
the improved models (Ariane 2 and 3), and then to L3 tons with the new Ariana
lo rocket which will enter service in the beginning of 1986.

Ariane at present also offers greater availability although this advantage is
going to grow less distinct in the next few years with the entry into service
of a fleet of four or five Shuttles es NASA plans. However, the fact remains
that the Shuttle has not passed the hurdle of a major technical problem which
will prevent the flight of the entire Shuttle fleet for some time, as can be

seen now with airplanes. Moreover, this has led to the decision by NASA to

form a "mixed fleet" of Shuttles and conventional launchers (see AIR ET COSMOS

No 887) .

The European launcher's commercial advantages are also decisive. Arianespace

is actually a commercial company where "the customer is king" according to the
policy reiterated by d'Allest, who proposes to sell rockets like airplanes,

that is, with consideration given to the problem of customers, particularly,

as far as launching windows, schedules, and facilities for payment and so forth
are concerned. In this regard the company is greatly aided by its banker stock—
holders who may, in certain cases, offer "easy" payments (OOPACB credits),
which will, for example, enable a customer to pay for launching its satellite
over 5 years with revenues from exploitation!

Arianespace also guarantees to all its customers, in the event of a launching
failure, priority for relaunching another satellite within a maxim of 10
months after demand has been nade by the custaaer. In addition, clients may
take out an insurance policy of guaranteeing the costs in the event of failure
for a premima of about 10 percent of the launching price. But the Ariane's
reliability is supposedly guaranteed at the same level as that of American
rockets whose average success rate is about 87 percent. Ariana is allowing
for an average of I failure out of lo firings.

Such is the entire difference between the "made to order" service offered by
a commercial cospeny like Arianepace and the "take it or leave it" service
provided by a [government] administration like NASA, d'Allest explains.

The financial advantages of the Ariane, in contrast, are less obvious. The
European rocket at present is more expensive than the Shuttle, although the
prices proposed in 1980 for launching Intelsat S satellites were comparable.

But the Shuttle prices are going to be substantially increased at the end of
the "promotional" period (October 1985), NASA has in fact given a glimpse of
an increase on the order of 66 percent in the launching rates of the
Shuttle in order to absorb operating expenses fully.

The launching prices for the Ariane are also going to change. In particular,
the prices for launching by the new "Ariane lo" model European launcher will be

renegotiated, d'Allest announced.

25

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ariane is nevertheless not on a parity with the Shuttle. Both launchers,
as a matter of fact, have the benefit of government financial support, but

each to a very different extent. In order to promote the Ariane rocket on the
international market, the European countries have agreed to pay a little more
for their launchings than non-Europeans will pay. In contrast, the Shuttle

benefits from very large subsidies from the 0.8. Goverment: construction of
the Shuttles ($1 billion each) is in fact entirely financed by NASA, that is,

actually by the American taxpayers and that enor-ous expenditure is not in—
cluded in the price of Shuttle launching services.

It is only under such conditions that the Shuttle is at present oometitive
with conventional rockets, American and European!

It remains to be seen whether that policy will be maintained in the future or
whether, on the contrary, the Americans will come around to establish a "true
price" for their recoverable launcher which would result in a corresponding

conformity of the prices of European launchers with the true market price for
launchers.

COPYRIGHT: A 6 C 1981

Technical Aspects of Ariane 2, 3, 4
Paris AIR B‘l‘ COSMOS in French 2 Jan 82 pp 37, 39, lol, 43

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Ariane 2 and 3 Rockets in 1983 and Ariane lo
in 1986"]

{Text} Europe has undertaken development of an Ariane family of launchers
which, between now and the middle of this decade, will permit tripling of per-
formance and reduction by 60 percent of the price of launchings compared with
the present basic version (Ariane 1).

Development of the new Ariane 2 and 3 versions was decided upon in 1980 to
improve the European launcher's performance (+ 50 percent) and reduce the price
of launchings (-25 percent), which may be still further lowered (-10 percent)
if recovery of the first stage proves feasible and useful.

The Ariane 2 and 3 models should enter service at the end of 1983, in Septem-
ber or December (I. 12 or L 13 launchings). The first Ariane 3 firing could
take place with the launching of the French Telecoms 1A satellite now planned
for September 1983 (I. 12). It is planned to build at least 12 of these new
models for launchings up to 1986, when the Ariane 2 and 3 will be succeeded by
a new and more powerful model, the Ariane ’0.

The Ariane 2 and 3 incorporate several improvements over the basic launcher
(Ariane 1):

--A 9 percent increase in the thrust of the Viking S motors of the first stage
to 66 tons at takeoff and 72 tons in space (compared with 61 and 66 tons,
respectively for Ariane 1), and of the Viking lo motors of the second stage to

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
76 tons in space (compared with 70 tons) by increasing the cosbustion pressure
of the motors to 58.5 bars (compared with 53.5-54 bars);*

-An increase of more than 25 percent in the mass of cryogenic fuels of the
third stage, which will carry 10.5 tons of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen
(co-pared with 8 tons) by lemthening the tanks by l.3-meters;

--An increase of 3.5 to lo seconds in the specific impulse of the third stage
an 7 sotor by raising the combustion pressure to 35 bars (compared with 30
bars) and lengthenim the divergent cone of the nozzle by 150 millimeters,
which raises the sectional ratio to 80 (compared with 60). The thrust of the
motor remains the same (6 tons) but the burn time reaches 700 seconds (com-
pared with 540 seconds);

«mpansion of value available for the payload by modification of the upper
portion of the nose (semitones) which. however, retains the same diameter
(3.2 meters) and length (8.7 meters).

In addition, the Ariane 3 version has two solid fuel boosters. 8 meters long
and lmeter in disaster, weighing 8.7 tons. of which 7.3 tons are solid fuel
(Plexadyne). each delivering thrust of about 70 tons (maxismm of 770 kilo-
newtons) during burn time of 28.3 seconds. They are ignited at takeoff and
jettisoned during the subsonic flight (250 meters per second). These boosters
are constructed by Difesa e Spazio (Italy) with the collaboration of HAN
(Germany) in the separation systu and reinforcement of the motor support
necessitated by the additional stresses.

The Ariane 3 launcher's performance in geosynchronous transfer orbit has thus
been increased to 2,420 kilogrmns, or 2.660 kilograms for a single launch.

But, taking into account results achieved during the Ariane 1 flight tests the
(INKS has recently decided to reduce the "guidance reserve" (remaining fuel
planned for compensating variationsin the operation of the motors), which re-
sults in a weight gain of 200 kilograms. It is also planned to lighten cer-
tain elements (equipment compartment, batteries and so forth) which will re-
suit in a further gain of 15 to 20 kilograms.

This is manifested by a significant increase in the payload which the Ariane 3
can place into geosynchronous transfer orbit--a payload which now reaches
2,560 kilogram for a single launching, and two times 1,190 kilograms for a
double launching with the SYLDA (180 kilograms). The Ariane 3 will thus have
a launch capacity distinctly greater than that of cmetitive launchers for
payloads of these kinds (Shuttle or Delta-PAH D).

The Ariane 2 rocket. which incorporates the same improvements as the Ariane 3,
less the solid fuel boosters, will be able to place about 2,100 kilograms into

geosynchronous transfer orbit.

* The combustionpressure of the Viking motors of the Ariane 1 in the four test
firings were, successively. 54 bars (I. 01 and L 02), 53 bars (I. 03) and 53.5
bars (I. 06). It will remain at this $3.5-bar level for all operational flights

of the Ariane 1.

 

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINRI)FFICIAI.[EHE(MQLY

The most powerful Ariane 3 will weigh 233 tons, with a thrust of 40k tons at

takeoff, whereas the Ariane 2 will weigh 216 tons and develop thrust of 264
tons.

Ariane 4: Competitor of the Shuttle

Development of the new Ariane 6 rocket, upon which France decided on

15 October 1981 (see AIR ET COSHBS, No 878), is at present subject to the
other European countries, which have declared themselves very favorable to

the project, joining in. At that point the ESA will have no difficulty in
amassing the quota contributions necessary to begin the project-cost of which
is estimated at 1,500 million francs (1981 prices) with 20 percent contingency
margin in 1982. This also includes fabrication of a first Ariane a launcher
for the flight test planned in October or December 1985 for a payload which
will be open for bidding (see boxed text). The Ariane 6 rocket should enter
service in March 1986 to compete with the Shuttle more effectively than the
foregoing models, up to 1992 at least. It is even foreseeable that the Ariane
4 rocket will remain in service for at least 10 years.

This new version of the European launcher, the most powerful, will be char-
acterized by very great flexibility of use. Depending upon the configuration
it will in fact be able to place from 2 to 4.3 tons in geosynchronous
transfer orbit, it will have an assortment of nose cones (contraves) of

large diameter (6 meters) and lengths adapted to the payloads (9.6, 11.8 or
13.1 meters), and also a new adapter for double launchings, the SPBLDA (Ex-
ternal Support Structure for Ariane Launchings) a part of which functions as
aft neck of the nose cone. Construction of SPELDA, estimated at about 30
million francs, was the subject of an invitation for beds, which were sub-
mitted by the British Aerospace Dynamics Group (Great Britain). Dornier
(Germany), and Aeritalia (Italy). Selection of the manufacturer will be made
in the beginning of January 1982, taking into consideration the willingness
of the British to increase their participation in the Ariane 4 program to A or

5 percent instead of the present 2.4 percent.

The Ariane 4 launcher is directly derived from the preceding Ariane 3, whose
three stages it retains-the first being lengthened--and to which there are
added solid fuel and/or liquid fuel boosters. This configuration was adopted--
in preference to the addition of a fifth motor to the first stage-in order to
reduce technical risks while still further improving performance. However,
this launcher configuration requires modification of the launch pad of the new
ELA 2 launching station which, in every way will be adapted in particular to
the Ariane 4.

The two stages are precisely those of the Ariane 3 with, however, structural
reinforcement to sustain the additional stresses.

The first stage of Ariane 6 resembles that of Ariane 3 with four Viking S
motors, each with 66 tons of thrust at takeoff, operating under combustion
pressure of 58.5 bars. But the tanks are lengthened by more than 6 meters
(the length of the stage increases from 21.7 to 27.9-meters) for a SO—percent
increase in the amount of fuel (UDHB [unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine] and

28
FOI‘OFEK]A1.USE(NULY
N20“ [nitrogen tetroxidel) which thus comes to 210 tons (instead of 160 tons
as in the preceding versions). The first stage burn time is thus brought to
200 seconds (compared with 148 seconds).

In addition the new launcher will be selectively equipped, depending upon the
mission, with solid fuel and/or liquid fuel boosters attached to the first
stage and ignited at takeoff and then jettisoned in flight. This has entailed
reinforcement of the first stage motor support to sustain the additional
thrust of the boosters and an increase in the surface of the stabilizers to
improve pilotability with liquid fuel boosters.

The solid fuel boosters initially are to be the same as those of the Ariane 3.
But Italy offered to increase its participation in the programhyimproving

the Ariane 4 solid fuel boosters which will henceforth be loaded with 8.3 tons
of solid fuel (instead of 7.3 tons). These boosters are ignited at takeoff
and each provides thrust of about 70 tons. Like the previous ones they are
being made by Difesa e Spazio, in cooperation with HAN.

The liquid fuel boosters are entirely new. They are propuleors of 2.3 meters
diameter and 16 meters length which carry 37.5 tons of storable liquid fuels
(UDHH and N20“) and each has a Viking 5 motor (with fixed nozzle) which
delivers thrust of 66 tons at takeoff (like the first stage). The liquid fuel
boosters are ignited at takeoff; they function for 135 seconds and are jetti-
soned at about 60 kilometers altitude (and are possibly recoverable).
Incorporation of the liquid fuel boosters has been assigned by the CHIS to
ERNO (Germany). the motors being supplied by the 88? [European Propellant
Company] (France). The selection of other manufacturers responsible for
structures (tanks, skirts, and so forth) and equipment will be made in
January 1982. Complete tests of the first stage with the liquid fuel boosters
are planned for 1986.

In the most powerful configuration, Ariana 44L with four liquid fuel boosters
coupled to the first stage, the new rocket will weigh about 460 tons, of which
415 tons are fuels, double the present launcher, with a total thrust of

nearly 530 tone (8 Viking 5 motors of 66 tons each) and a launching capacity
2.5 times that of the launcher. [Sentence as published] Depending upon the
configuration, the launcher will be from 56.9 to 60.4 meters long (compared
with the present 47.6 meters).

The Ariane b launcher can thus-depending upon the number and type of
boosters--be used in six different configurations, in order to launch any
satellite whatsoever into low orbit (polar) and medium and heavy satellites
into geostationary orbits. In particular, Ariana 6 will be able to place a
large Intelsat 6 class satellite of 3,550 kilograms into transfer orbit and
still have a reserve of 700 kilograms available for launching the improved
Intelsat 6A whose construction is planned. It will also be able to launch
a double payload consisting, for example, of a direct television satellite
(five channels) of 2,450 kilograms and a telecommunications satellite of
1,450 kilograms with the sranA adapter (375 kilograms).

The maximum performance predicted for the Ariane 6 is at least 6.3 tons
(guaranteed performance) into geosynchronous transfer orbit (180-3s,9oo

29
BOI‘OFTHCJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY
kilometers, inclined 7') from Kourou. or 5 tons into heliosynchronous orbit
(circular at 800 kilometers. inclined 98.6’).

New Studies for Future Launcher

The configuration of the future European launcher which will replace the
Ariane 4 at the end of the 1990 decade is now under study at the CNES which,
incidentally, has just formed, with the mm, a French-German task force to
conduct this study jointly, and in liaison with the ESA, which is also conduct-
ing studies of this subject in the perspective of servicing a future European
orbiting station derived (or not) from the Spacelab.

The problem of the future European launcher is indeed much vaster than simple
definition of a successor to Ariana lo. The definition of the future European
launcher is in fact tantamount to definition of future European space activi-
ties in the next 20 years. It is reasonable to believe that ability to com-
pete with the Shuttle for access to geostationary orbits will remain the
dominant element in the 1990 decade. It is also necessary to plan increased
ability to compete in low orbit missions. The future European launcher must
therefore do better than the Shuttle in geostationary orbit and nearly as well
in low orbit. It is also possible that Europe will decide to give itself some
independent capability for launching manned (and therefore recoverable) vehi-
cles. The end result would thus be a launcher in two versions: one for con-
ventional missions (possibly with an automated shuttle) and the other with in-
creased reliability for flight of human crews with. necessarily, a recoverable,
piloted shuttle.

Up to now, a two-stage Ariane 5 launcher. derived from the Ariane 6 but equipped
with a new second stage having a large cryogenic motor of 60 to 80.tons thrust
(HM 60 and m 80) to place 10 tons into low orbit and 5.5 tons into geosyn-
chronous transfer orbit has been contemplated for that dual purpose.

That study is continuing but with more ambitious objectives. Now it is a
matter of placing 7 to 8 tons into transfer orbit and 15 tons into low orbit.
particularly to launch a manned minishuttle of the HERMES class, or an
automated orbiting station of the SOLARIS class.

The conception of the future European launcher has even evolved toward con-
figurations very different from that studied up to now under the designation
Ariane 5. However, the key element of that future rocket remains a large
cryogenic motor, but of 90 to 100 tons thrust. The design of this motor now
under study by the SEP. moreover, has been fixed. It will be a turbopump
motor with branched flow (440 to 1.65 seconds specific impulse), less complex
to develop than an integral flux motor.

Two schools of thought are at present conpeting to define the future European
launcher. One involves a launcher "of Russian type" (Soyuz launcher) with four
stages in s cluster, each with a cryogenic motor of 90 to 100 tons and a small
solid fuel booster. The other concerns a rocket "of merican type" (ELLV
class) with attached elements, including two large solid fuel boosters of _
100 tons thrust and a stage with cryogenic motor of 90 to 100 tons surrounding

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
av» use-ea...- vu- we ens.

a large fuel tank (liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen). These launchers nay he
more or less recoverable.

These studies of future launchers are going to continue and be refined in the
next few years, the objective being to offer a precise project to the European
nenber countries in 1985 in order that the future launcher nay be available
about 1995. taking into account the tine required for developnent (10 years).

 

The Ariane 6 can be used in six configurations, depending upon the
boosters coupled to the first stage.

TEXTS 0P BOXED MATERIAL
Box 1. Satellite for the Ariane Open to Bidding

A payload is now planned for the Ariane lo rocket during the first flight test
launching set for October or Deceasber 1985 fro- the m 2 launching field at
Kourou. The launcher version foreseen is the hybrid Ariane 46 LP with two
solid fuel boosters and two liquid fuel boosters which can place 3.8 to 3.9
tons into geosynchronous transfer orbit.

This launch capacity will be offered by the CRIS and 38A "to the highest
bidder," that is, to competitive bidding, which has never before been done in

connection with a launcher.* There nay be three or four "passengers" for this
launching. The CNBS is thus contemplating launching its geodesic satellite
GRADIO along with several technological experinente (Iagnetic sensors. bear-
ings, and so forth). The GRADIO satellite (1 ton) is said to be equipped with
four ultrasensitive acceleroneters of the cum [National Office for Aerospace
Studies and Research] to improve, by anorder of magnitude (1 to 2 nilligals).
gravinetric resolution of the entire globe.

*RCA recently sold the repeaters on one of its satellites at auction.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For its part the ESA contemplates launching its solar probe, DISCO, on this
occasion. That project, which was the subject of a new study with a view to
providing support for the extra-ecliptic TSPM solar probe, concerns observa-
tion of the sun's luninous variations in visible infrared and ultraviolet over

a period of 6 years, the probe separating at 1.5 million kilometers from the
earth.

Box 2. hydrazine Hydrate for the Viking Motors

After the failure of the second test flight (I. 02) the injectors of the Ariane
rockets Viking motors were modified and manufacturing quality inroved. Now
"reduced dispersion" injectors are used and they are, in addition, subjected
to a "hot" acceptance test by bench firing.

The principal modification in the Viking injectors, to eliminate recurrence
of the combustion instability phenomenon at high frequencies (2,300 to 2,700
hertz) consists quite simply of enlarging (by some 1/10 millimeter) the injec-
tion port diameter. This has enabled combustion to be stabilized, but at the
cost of degraded performance.

To restore performance to the original level, and even improve it for the
future Ariane 3 and lo rockets (combustion pressure $8.5 bars instead of 53.5

to 5!. bars) without having recurrence of the previous incidents, it was de-
cided to effect Viking combustion stabilization by chemical means. This time
it was a matter of adding hydrazine hydrate to the unsymmetrical dimethylhydra-
zine (UM), which will also permit better cooling of the divergent cone of

the nozzle. Thus, it is planned to add about 3 to 6 tons of hydrazine hydrate
in the tanks but the was is awaiting the conclusion of tests--in particular,
the study of possible secondary effects—before definite adoption of the
procedure, tentatively in the first quarter of 1982.

Complete model studies of the combustion phenomena (and of instability) in
turbopunp motors at low pressure, moreover, have been pursued fore year at
ONERA [National Office for Aerospace Study and Research] in cooperation with
the 881’ [European Propellant 001mm]. But the conclusion of the work must
be awaited-11: 2 years, perhaps more—before judging the results.

Box 3. Ariane First Stage Recovery Test in 1982

The GEES has warded manufacturing contracts for construction of the recovery
system for the first stage of the Ariane 1 rocket. The contract to function
as general contractor has been given to Fokker (Netherlands), already parti-
cipating in the Ariane program by fabricating the third stage motor support
and interstage skirts. Fokker is at present responsible for design and fabri-
cation of the systan of recovery by parachutes with the Irvin firm (Great
Britain) and Autoflug (Germany) as subcontractors to furn.‘.sh the flotation
cushions.

The problem consists of braking the descent of the 13-ton first stage (18.4
meters long and 3.8 meters in diameter), separated at about 53 kilometers
altitude at speed of 2,100 meters per second, which causes it to reach a peak

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Ul‘ \II'I‘IQ'IRI‘ Us,” Vl‘lal

altitude of 87 kilometers along a ballistic trajectory which ends with impact
on the sea at about 360 kilometers from the launch site.

Recovery consists of fitting the stage with a cluster of parachutes located

in the first-second interstage skirt. The operation proceeds in several
stages: An extractor parachute will enable the pointing parachute to be
deployed at about 6,000 meters altitude, then the main parachutes (2,600
square meters surface) will deploy at about 1,500 meters altitude, in order to

reduce the speed at impact to only 10 to 15 meters per second. The stage
should then float, thanks to inflatable balloons, until recovery ships arrive.

During the fourth test flight (L 06) of the Ariana rocket which just took
place on 19 December 1981 the ONES had already tested the first phase of the
operation; that is,tracking the stage (not braked) during its descent and
locating it at sea. The descent was tracked by the Adour radars at Kourou and
by telemetry stations aboard several ships, including the "Francis-Garnier" of
the French navy (see AIR ET COSMOS, No 886). The ships were easily able to
spot the stage, which was still floating although broken, its tanks apparently
intact.

The ONES now contemplates proceedings with a complete recovery test with the
braking system fabricated by Fokkers during the seventh Ariane launching (L 07)
supposedly planned for October 1982.

The recovered stage will be decontaminated in Guiana before being sent to
Europe for detailed analysis of the condition of the elements to be recovered
(tanks, turbopunps, and so forth). The objective is to be able to reuse ele-
ments sufficiently without excessive expense for reconditioning, in order to
reduce the price of a rocket launching by about 10 percent (or 2 million
accounting units).

If the operation succeeds the recovery of the first stage will be a regular
practice, starting in 1984.

But it is not at all obvious that with only a single test of recovery as
planned the reliability and attractiveness of the operation will be definitely

demonstrated, if one is to judge by the recovery of the Shuttle boosters which
was not conclusive in the first attempt!

33

INHICHﬂﬂKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

'- c.1981

END

36

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY