l-‘OR OFFK’IAI. “SF. ONLY

JPRS L/10446

12 April 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and encloued in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELacomumcmous POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(P000 8/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
JAPAN

Satellite Broadcasting ProJected in 1990
(AMI MING m, 22m82) O...00.0....IIOOOOOOIOOOIIOI.

Briefs
New Meteorological Satellite Launched

WET EJROPE
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

France To Participate in Development of Sweden's TELE-X
(AIRmcosms,6m82) 0.0IOOOOIOOIOD0000.00.00.00.0......

FRANCE

Navy Reveals Details of Military Satellite, Fixture Options
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET'COSKDS, 31 Oct 81) ................

Ariane Elicita Colombian Interest, Conpetee With MBA
(Francois Lebrette; VALEURS ACTUELIEB, 28 Dec 81-3 Jun 82) ..

MATRA To Build New Facilities, Enter mas Market
(Pierre Langereux; AIR Er COSMOS, 6 Mar 82)

.. a - [III - w - no room

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SATELLITE BROADCASTING PROJECTED IN 1990
OH221305 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEHS in English 22 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] In the report the Study and Research Council on the Diversification
of Broadcasting submitted on Friday to Posts and Telecommications Minister
Noboru Minowa, it says that people will be able to enjoy television broad-
casts using broadcasting satellites in the 1990's. Broadcasting satellites
will make it possible for people to enjoy TV programs that are as clear as
movies. the high-fidelity reproduction of music, and to receive, by means
of a facsimile machine, hundreds of thousands of pages in just 30 seconds,
as well as still images with sound.

The report called for studies on technical developments, the establishment
of technical standards. the benefits to listeners and the economic feasibil-
ity of such broadcasts.

The council was established within the Posts and Telecommications Ministry
in July 1980 and consists of 15 professors, journalists, researchers and
critics. They studied demand trends, technical developments and problems
connected with future broadcasting policy.

The report submitted Friday to Minowa consisted of three parts: (1) Trends
toward diversification in the broadcasting field; (2) outlook for and
problems of broadcasting policy; and (3) proposals.

Symbolic of the whole is satellite broadcasting, which will begin with the
practical broadcasting satellite (BS-2) to be launched in March 1984. 'lhere
will be color broadcasts on two channels; both channels will be used for
NHK broadcasts to remote islands and mountainous areas, where the reception
of ordinary broadcasts is poor, and during disasters.

Later two satellites, 38-3 and 85-40, will be launched to make available
eight channels under an international agreement. Users can receive broad-
casts anywhere in Japan if they turn a bowl antenna one meter in diameter
toward the point where longitude 110 degrees east crosses the equator.

The problem is economic feasibility. If the advertising charge system is
adopted, the NMK channels will compete with commercial broadcasting stations.
The report proposes that the broadcasting waves be encoded and that listeners
buy magnetic cards each month to insert into decoders. The proposal is,

in effect, for pay television. The report says that such broadcasts will be
economically feasible if 10 million people buy the pay TV receiving cards.

covvsrcm': Asahi Evening News 1982

C50: 5500/2167
1

FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

NEH METEOROLOGICAL SATELLITE LAUNCHED-401070, 17 Mar (JIJI PRESS)--Jspan
will launch a new geostationary meteorological satellite, called ate-3, by
N-II rocket in fiscal 1984 to replace the present "llinawari (Sunflower) II,"
the Space Development Council decided Wednesday. The council also decided
that Japanese space engineers will start in fiscal 1983 preliminary
designing of the nation’s third telewmunications satellite, dubbed cs-3,
to be lofted by the next-generation large rocket H—I. The council, chaired
by Director-General Ichiro Nakagawa of the Science and Technology Agency,
works out Japan's space development program every year, taking into account
the domestic and international situation. [Text] [011171645 Tokyo JIJI

in English 1433 GMT 17 Mar 82]

cso: 5500/2167

2
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY
FRANCE TO PARTICIPATE IN DEVELOPHBNT 0F SNEDEN'S TELE-X
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 6 Mar 82 pp 43, 48

[Article by P L.: “Important French Participation in the Swedish 'TELE-X' Sat-
ellite"l

[Text] French industry isbeing called on to play a very considerable part in
the building of the Swedish TELB-X experimental telecommunications satellite.
The CNES [National Center for Space Studies], which has participated in the
preliminary project studies since 1980, is taking on the role of consultant to
the Swedish Space Corporation during the definition phase presently in pro-
gress. Furthermore, the Swedish company SAAB [Swedish Aircraft Corporation]-
Scania, responsible for the design and construction of the satellite, is get-
ting support from the Franco-PRC Eurosatellite group, which will furnish the
platform for the TELE-X satellite, and from the French company Aerospatiale for
project definition and management. In addition, the Swedish firm LN Ericsson,
reaponsible for TELE-X's payload, is getting important technical support from
the French company Thomson-CSF [General Radio Company], notably for definition
of the repeaters, which will make maximum use of the equipment developed for
the French direct-TV satellite TDF l and the TelecOm 1 telecommunications sat-
cllite.

within the framework of the contract made with the CNBS at the end of I981, the
Toulouse space center has formed a special support team for the ISLE-X project;
in liaison with the personnel responsible for the French direct-TV satellite

TDF 1, it is assisting the Swedish team with the technical monitoring of the

industrial contracts in progress and preparation of the contract for construc-
tion and launching of TELE-X. Furthermore. an agreement to reserve a EurOpean
launcher was signed by the Swedish Space Corporation with Arianespace on llFeb—
rusry 1982. It provides for the launching of TELE-X in June 1986 with an Ari-

ane 2 rocket.

Furthermore. the TELE-x project has been considerably revised from the initial
proposal. In particular, the Swedish Space Corporation has eliminated the
Trucksat payload, intended to provide for communications with trucks in West
Europe.

The three other missions of the TELE-x satellite, using two repeaters for di-
rect TV and two others for transmission of data and video images, are retained,
though. They involve preoperational missions for:

3

Ft"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NVLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAL U3: UNLY

--transmission of digital data: a two-channel repeater. operating in the
[4-14.25 CH2 frequency band (for upward connections) and the 12.5-12.75 GB:
band (for downward connections), provides for transmissions among a large num-
ber of earth stations located on the territory of the Scandinavian countries.
The choice of a high radiated power for the satellite (100 w per channel) is
related to the objective of use of earth stations that are as simple as pos-
sible;

--transniasion of video signals, using, on a time-share basis, the same equip-
ment on board the satellite as for the preceding mission. These video-signal
transmission cover both visual- and sound-broadcasting transfer connections
and teleconference, tele-education and teledistribution connections;

--broadcasting via satellite, through the intermediary of a two-channel repeat-
er operating in the 17.3-18.1 6H2 (upward connections) and 11.7-12.5 CH:
(downward connections) frequency hands. This is a broadcasting (direct-TV)
mission in which the choice of high radiated power on the satellite (230 a per
channel) permits individual reception with the aid of a small-diameter (60 to
90 cm) antenna at any point in the territory of the Scandinavian countries
(same coverage as for the preceding two missions).

We note that TELE-X will be used not only by Seden but also by Norway, Finland

and Denmark. It effectively prefigures the future Nordcon operational telecom-
municationa satellites of the Scandinavian countries.

COPYRIGHT: A. G C. 1982

11267
050: 5500/2155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NAVY REVEALS DETAILS OF MILITARY SATELLITE. FUTURE OPI'IONS

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 31 Oct 81 p 43

[Article by Pierre Langereux:'The Syracuse Network will Be Operational in January
1984': for related article see JPRS 79740, 24 Dec 81. 019‘ of this series. pp 35-

36]

[Text] By 1 January 1984, the French Army and especially the French Navy will
have available to them an operational SYRACUSE [Satellite Radio Communication
System] network for military and government telecommunications via satellite.
This was revealed by the French magazine ARHBES U’AUJOURD'EUI in an article by
Navy Capt Christian Ract-Madoux, a distinguished officer of the SYRACUSE program
in the Operations Division of the Navy Staff.

This SYRACUSE program. the existence of which we revealed several months ago (see
AIR ET COSMOS No 866), will use the first two national civil telecommunications
satellites--Teiecom l's—-that will be launched in July and October 1983 respec-
tively by European Ariane 3 rockets and placed in geostationary orbit at 7 and

10 degrees West to cover Europe, Africa, the Middle East, the Mediterranean and
Atlantic Ocean, and part of the Indian Ocean. These satellites are built by
MATRA [Mechanics, Aviation and Traction Company] with the participation of numer-
ous French firms, including Thomson-CS? for the telecommunications payload invol-
ving the two 7.25—8.40 Hz military transponders, the TOP [progressive wave tube]
amplifiers of which will be furnished by the American firm Ford Aerospace.

The SYRACUSE network will provide the Armed Forces with telephone and telegraph
circuits that are reliable, secure and protected against jamming. This space
telecommunications system will be "supplementary“ to the military BF network and
'justifies the effort being made by the Navy to improve the reliability, security
and resistance to jamming of its HP circuits,” Captain Ract-Hadoux explains.

According to this high-ranking officer of the SYRACUSE program. the ground seg-
ment,developed under the aegis of the USA [General Delegation for Weaponry],
the General Staff of the Army and that of the Navy, will include:

--Three earth stations situated near Brest, near Paris and Southern France. Two
of these three stations will be on Navy bases and will be manned by Navy person-
nel; the third will be on a Ground Forces base:

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'IL'IAI. U3I'. UNLY

--Some l0 mobile stations designed especially for use by the Navy for foreign
actions and to strengthen the OHIT [Military lnterforces Communications Organiza-
tion];

--SOme 10 naval stations which, taking into account their cost and to optimize
their use, will be transportable from one ship to another; some 15 large ships
will be equipped to accommodate these stations.

By way of one of the two Telecom 1 military transponders, the ships will be able
to establish up to three simultaneous links with the metropolitan earth stations.
These links, which will be encrypted and protected against jamming. will be
operated mainly as slow- and high-speed telegraph circuits and CBS [high-grade-
encryption] telephone circuits.

SYRACUSE will be the first military telecommunications satellite facility to
become operational in France.

Succersor to SYRACUSE

Considering the limited service life (7 years) of Telecom l satellites, the Armed
Forces have already begun thinking about the space system that is to succeed these
satellites come 1990. According to Captain Rack-Madoux, this could be:

--Either a mixed civil and military satellite-~a solution that, attractive though
it is from the cost standpoint, poses two major problems: A limited and very
likely insufficient capacity if the network is to be opened to other users; and a
spot on the orbit that will be very difficult to provide, since the more different
frequency bands a satellite covers. the more complex its positioning becomes. It
must in effect be distanced at the same time from other military as well as other
commercial satellites. This problem. already a difficult one for Telecom l, is
likely to be an impossible one in 1990 considering the large number of satellites
that will be launched between now and then.

--Or a satellite exclusively for governmental and military use. which would make
it possible to extend the network to many users and, by the use of other frequency
bands, to resolve the problems of station congestion and hence to consider air-
craft and submarine links.

But--the author concludes--while this solution is attractive. the question is:

Will the Armed Forces be capable of undertaking such a space program while con-

tinuing their effort to improve telecommunications links that use conventional
frequency bands?

COPYRIGHT: A. S C. 1981

9238
C50: 5500/2111

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARIBNB BLICITS COWIAN INTEREST: COHPBTES WITH NASA
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 28 Dec 81-3 Jun 82 pp 28-29
[Article by Francois Lebrette: 'The Clients of Ariane']

[Excerpts] Space is smaller than it would seem to be. It offers only 90 spots
to geostationary satellites--those links that more and more will be replacing
earth—based cables for teleoomnunications--although present plans call for the
launching of over 200 of them during the next 10 years.

"Basically," says Mr Klaus Iferland, assistant director of the Arianespace cos-
pany. "all that is necessary is to increase the frequencies used in order to
obtain a severalfold increase in the number of usable channels.‘

This German engineer, who 10 years ago worked on the Europa rocket, now works on
the technical aspects and the marketing of the Ariane launcher. In a French
barely marked by a slight accent, he explained to me:

“Actually, the problem will not be really acute except where direct television
satellites are concerned. Each country is going to want to brim over into the
other countries so as to increase its audience. And it is not yet certain that
the receiving antennas will be sufficiently selective.

The issue has been brought new to the fore and in an unexpected way, by a country
one w0uld not have expected to do so: Colosbia. Straddling the equator as it
does, this country has decided to “nationalize" the space region directly over it.
The United States, the first to use the American zone of the equatorial orbit,

has obviously refused to agree to this intent on the part of Bogota. And with
arguments that are not without substantial weight.

To begin with, says the United States. there is a difference between outer space
and adjacent space. Furthermore, it is unacceptable that the geostationary orbit
be confiscated by the only countries situated on the equator, thus constituting a
kind of orbit OPEC consisting of Zaire, the Maldives, Indonesia and Gabon.

Above all, the Colombian claim is inconsistent from a technical standpoint. Once
or twice a month, a satellite is subjected to an eclipse: The sun no longer feeds
its photoelectric panels. Since it would be too costly to carry heavy batteries

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I‘IL'IAL Ubl'. UNLI

aboard the satellite, the spacecraft is shifted, in these cases, a few degrees
westward of the receiving country, to reduce these l'outages" to just a few hours
during the night. In other words, if Colombia wanted to put up satellites, it
would have to 'shift' them over above its neighbor: Ecuador:

The concern of the third-world countries, however, is understandable. They too
will be needing satellites, and even more so than the industrialized countries.
Thus, Indonesia has ordered from the United States its own geostationary satel-
lite, which since last spring has been providing telephone communications among
the largest of the country's 4,000 islands. To interconnect them by means of
conventional cable facilities would have been very much more expensive.

In cauntries lacking basic infrastructures, the most viable solution is the satel-
lite. Provided there is room on the equatorial orbit. In this context, those
able to launch satellites can dictate the law. But they can be counted on the
fingers of one hand.

Japan, with its small "N” rocket can place 250 kg in geostationary orbit. But

it is still in the testing stage, and tests so far have not been conclusive. It
appears that China is doing double quick time as regards the launching of its
'Wong March" rocket, but the launching is not expected to take place for at least
another year.

Ariana launched the first satellite dedicated to maritime links-~Marecs l--on
20 December. And it is still Ariane that will place narecs 2 in orbit in April.
But for the first time, the Soviets have offered to launch a foreign satellite:
The international organization lnmarsat's satellite scheduled to be orbited in
1983 or 1984.

Apart from this exception, competition in the international satellite-launching
market is reduced to two rivals: Europe with its Ariane, and the United States.
The term "competition" is actually not very exact: with only two in the market,
they cannot keep up with the world demand. Hr Iferland explains:

"NASA cannot fill all requests, because of constraints with regard to launching
dates, which must often be very exact. Ariana derives the benefit from this
situation.

Nevertheless, the Americans are not welcoming with enthusiasm the arrival of the
Europeans in a market that has been their monopoly since the launching of Early
Bird (weighing scarcely 40 kg) in 1965. The fact that Ariane is competing with
NASA for its own domestic clientele does not make them any happier.

The Arianespace company and the BSA [European Space Agency] have in hand 22 firm
orders for launchings, including particularly those of five American satellites:
one for Western Union, two for the GTE Corporation, two for Southern Pacific
Communications. Moreover, the Europeans have gained the Arabic clientele. The
14th Ariane rocket will carry up the first Arabsat in February 1984. In sum. the
international organizations, long dominated by the Americans, are beginning to
deal with the European organization: This is already the case with the Marecs
launchings and will also be the case with Intelsat.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Arianespace also has bookings on 16 reservations, each one covered by a paid-in
binder of $100,000. Among its potential clients are: Brazil, Australia, again

Arabsat, and Colombia for two Satcol's.

“The controversy between Washington and Bogota on the ownership of space has been
beneficial to us.‘ says Mr Iferland laughingly.

Each launching represents 1 million hours of work for the firm that is chosen.
Five contracts a year guarantee close to 4,000 jobs: The economic interest is
obvious. This explains the decision by the Europeans to build. at Kourou, a
second launching platform for Ariane. it will cost 600 million francs and will
be ready by the end of 1984. By that year. Kourou 1 will have reached saturation

with six launchings (versus three planned for 1982).

The Americans are reacting by preparing a second launching platform for their

Thor-Delta rockets: this installation could become operational next year. The
delays experienced by the Shuttle had already led NASA to resume building its

Thor and Atlas-Centaur rockets. on which it had been marking time.

Even the coming into being of the Shuttle does not worry the Europeans. Today,
a launching by Ariane costs 20 percent less than with a Thor~Delta. But the price
of a launching by the Shuttle will be half that by the European rocket.

'Actually,‘ Mr Iferland thinks he is correct in saying. 'for the Americans this
represents a price to which they are bound owing to a serious underestimation of
the cost of the Shuttle. and which will be valid only until September 1985."

Beyond that guaranteed period, NASA will therefore have to revise its price. Will
it then be cheaper than Ariane? Designed to return to earth, the Shuttle cannot
go too far out into space; it cannot attain the height of the transfer orbit from
which a satellite reaches its final orbit under its own power. To orbit geo—
stationary satellites. the Shuttle must therefore carry as a supplement the equi-
valent of the third stage of the Ariane rocket. This presents a very complex

and costly problem.

In any case. the Americans, over the next 10 years, will have only four shuttles.
By 1985. the Europeans will be able to put into orbit weights of A tons with
Ariane 4 (versus less than 2 tons with today's Ariane). The choice between the
two vehicles will undoubtedly depend upon price, but also upon diplomatic con-
siderations. And it is still not certain that these two launchers will then be
enOugh to satisfy the demand.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 'Valeurs Actuelles'

9399
C50: 5500/2109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

MATRA TO BUILD NEW FACILITIES, ENTER DBS MARKET
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 6 Mar 82 pp 39-4l

IArticle by Pierre Langereux: "MATRA (Mechanics, Aviation and Traction Co] 18
Taking On the Direct-TV-Satellites Market"]

[Textl As 1982, marking the 20th anniversary of NATRA's entry into space, be-
gins, Noel Hignot, director of the company's space sector, has reason

The turnover of MATRA—Space has doubled in 1 year, from Fr 382 million in 1980
to Ft 702 million in l98l, while its personnel grew from 645 to 854 persons,
with an average age of 32, the lowest in the company.

Furthermore, the staff will soon reach 950 employees (51 percent of them engin-
eers and cadres), and they will number more than 1,000 next year-~ha1f at Veli-
zy. near Paris, and half at Toulouse, where MATRA has just placed in service
its new Palays space center, which represents an investment of Pr 190 million.
MATRA thus has Europe's biggest sgace center for construction and integration
of satellites. with its 25,000 m of covered surface area, including 2,200 m2
in clean rooms, it will make it possible to integrate 5 satellites simultane-
ously and will be able to accomodate the biggest satellites of the 1990's--both
those of the Shuttle kind and the future European Ariane 5 rocket.

Outlook for Evolution of MATRA—Space's Turnover by Sector from 1981 to 1986

 

 

 

1981 1986
Millions Millions Growth

Igrnove: of francs _J1_ of francs _Z_ 2

Te lecomnunicat ions 244 34 . 7 350 18. 4 43
Observation of Earth 215 30.6 820 42.2 281
:3c ience 40 S . 7 300 15. 7 650
Launching facilities 152 21.7 290 15.3 90
Miscellaneous _21 7.3 140 7.4 174
702 100.0 1,900 100 0 170

 

NOTE—-The relative decrease (not in absolute value) of the telecommunications
sector derives from the fact that MATRA has not identified successors to
the ECS, MARECS and TELECOH l satellites before 1986.

10

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NAFRA-Space's order book presently stands at Pr 1.2 billion, or a little more
than 2 years of activity, and it should reach Pr 1.5 billion in 1984.

HATRA-Space's forecasts are to realize a turnover of Pr 900 million in 1982 and
Fr 1.3 billion in 1983, and subsequently maintain steady growth to reach
Fr 2 billion in 1986.

Evolution of HATRA-Spsce Personnel Strength and Turnover

 

Turnover
Years Personnel (millions of francs)

1973 196 117
1976 23A 145
1975 286 198
1976 392 262
1977 393 281
1978 427 290
1979 A76 305
1980 645 382
1981 854 702
1982 (955) (900)
1983 (1,026) (1,300)
1984 (1,043) (1,500)
1985 (1,046) (1,700)
1986 -- (1,900)

Editor's Note: The figures in parentheses are forecasts.

Note: To take the general services and internal subcontracting into account,
the number of personnel has to be multiplied by 1.6 to give the actual
number of NATRA personnel working in space.

 

For that time, Noel Hignot foresees a levelling-off in the volume of MATRA's
space activities (in terms of turnover). The distribution of these activities
should then be as follows: observation of earth, 42 percent; telecommunica-
tions, 18 percent; scientific programs, 16 percent; launching facilities, 15
percent; several other activities, 7 percent. HATRA has especially aimed at
getting firmly established in the sectors of data-processing and space robot-
ics, in which it wants to become one of the principal French firms, notably
with a view to the future automatic—orbital-station (Solaris) and relay-satel-
lite (Star) space programs, French or European.

Opportunities Missed

Everything would therefore be going for the best if it were not for the cumula-
tive effect of four missed opportunities last year, which have somewhat damped
the natural optimism of HATRA's "space people."

MATRA lost'the contracts for the Arab Arabsat telecommunications satellites

(won by Aerospatiale-Ford Aerospace) and for the Australian AUSSAT telecommmni-
cations satellites (won by Hughes Aircraft). Next, it was best out--by deci-

ll

HOR(MHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
I'UK Ut'l‘lkIAL USI'. ONLY

sion of the public authorities-- for the Brazilian Brasilsat telecommunications-
satellite contract (awarded to Aerospatiale). Finally, it was not able to
reach an agreement with the American builder Hughes Aircraft for participation
in conStruction of the Intelsat 6 telecommunications satellites.

This obviously comes to quite a bit, and one understands that HATRA is uneasy
about the future--all the more so in that the new export competition in the
relecommunications-satellite sector (Mexico, Colombia. etc) is far from being
won by the European builders--principally the French builders--against the two
big American competitors, Ford Aerospace and especially Hughes Aircraft, whose
position as world leader is strengthened after its recent successes.

Nonetheless, MATRA is responding to Mexico's call for bids for its domestic-
telecommunications satellites.

MATRA—Space has therefore had to change its strategy somewhat in order to coun-
teruttack on two fronts--i.e., on the telecommunications front, with a new and
improved platform, and also on the direct-TV front--a market heretofore "re—
served" to Aerospatiale by a sort of consensus (approved by the public authori-
ties) from which MATRA now considers itself liberated after the "Brazil af-

fair."

However, NATRA does not want to wage a pointless competition with Aerospatiale.
"The most absurd thing," declared Noel Mignot, "would be to end up in a Franco-
French competition"; rather, "it is necessary first of all to conquer the Euro-
pean internal market."

Fourteen Satellites

MATRA is playing a major part in the construction of 14 satellites: French (Te-
lecom 1); British (Skynet 4); and European (OTS. ECS, HARECS)--these latter
having been built within the framework of the European MESH [HATRA-Brno-Sidde-
ley-Hawker] consortium.*

Two OTS satellites have been launched, the second successfully, in May 1978.
This OTS-Z has already been functioning for almost 4 years.

Two HARECS satellites have been built. The first, HARECS I, successfully
placed in orbit on 19 December 1981, went into service on 27 February. The
second satellite, MARECS 2, will be delivered on 8 March 1982 and will be
launched from Kourou on 22 or 23 April. A third flying model will exist, in
the form of unassembled parts, but it is not planned to launch it.

Five ECS satellites are under construction. The first, ECS 1, will be deliv-
ered on 19 Hay 1982 and launched by Ariana on 9 July. The following three sat-
ellites, ECS 2, 3 and h, are to be launched on 23 April 1983 and January and
October 1986, respectively. The fifth satellite will remain in reserve on the
ground.

* MESH: NATRA (France), Erno (FRO), British Aerospace (Great Britain), SAAB
(Swedish Aircraft Co) (Sweden), Aeritalia (Italy), INTA (National Institute
for Aerospace Research) (Spain) and Fokker (The Netherlands).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Three Telecom l satellites are also under construction, at Toulouse. Final in-
tegration of the first satellite should begin in September. There is a chance
that the launchinga of the first two satellites, Telecom lA and 13, officially
planned for July and October 1983 by the CNES [National Center for Space Stud-
ies] and the apt [expansion unknown], may be delayed by several months, until
September and December 1983, according to HATRA, because of delays in delivery
of equipment (X-band power source) by the American firm Ford Aerospace, for the
satellites' military payload. But MATRA has provided for a third integration
team in an attempt to make up for this delay. In principle, the placing in
service of the Telecom l satellites, planned for March 1984 by the French PT
[Posts and Telegraph] administration, should not be jeopardized.

In addition, HATRA has recently obtained a participation (attitude control) in
the two new British Skynet 4 military telecomlmnications satellites, for which
British Aerospace has adopted the Telecom 1 platform. These Skynet A satel-
lites will be launched at the end of 1985, by the Shuttle or Ariane.

MATRA is also participating (attitude power plant) in construction of the Euro-
pean L-SAT telecommunications satellite under the prime contractorship of Brit-
ish Aerospace, and of the FRG's direct-TV satellite TV-SAT, built by EBB [Hes-
serchmitt-Bolkow-Blohm].

It also hopes to participate on the future Italian Italsat telecommunications
satellite, in exchange for the Italian industry's participation in fabrication
of the structure of the Telecom 1 satellites.

Improved Platform

These 14 satellites all use the BCS/Telecom 1 type of platform, which actually
derives directly from the OTS platform, the technology of which is also being
reused.

HATRA now recognizes that this ECS/Telecom 1 platform is no longer suited to
certain new high-performance missions (Australia, etc), especially in the face
of the American competition (RCA, Hughes Aircraft).

MATRA and British Aerospace have therefore decided to improve the ECS/Telecom 1
platform, in two phases.

In the first phase, a second-generation Telecom l platform will be developed
and tested, with a deadline of September 1983. Two principal improvements of
the existing platform will be made: nickel-hydrogen batteries (SAFT [expansion
unknown!) instead of Ni-Cd batteries, and a liquid-bipropellant propulsion sys-
tem (MBB) instead of hydrazine propulsion. This will make it possible to in-
crease the platform-position payload capacity by 40 kg (30 percent more than
for Telecom l). The new platform will then be at the level of the recent Amer-
ican products (RCA's Advanced Satcom). However, it is not certain that it will
be used for the Skynet k satellites; but it will be proposed by MATRA for the
future Telecom 2 (successor to Telecom l) and Star satellites, as well as for
an eventual French military telecommunications satellite (successor to Syra-
cuse).

13

IYJR‘OFFICJAI.IMSE1(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Cenerui view 0: .‘M‘TRA'S new Palays space center. The big technical building
contains the integration rooms and an antenna-testing base (radome on roof).

In the second phase, furllwr improvements will he added, so as to have in 1986
:1 platlorm suited to the level of the European Ariane -’. launcher. The platform
will :herefcre have the following additional features: H carbon-fiber structurP
rather than a metal on»; 1.51 [expansion unknown] components instead of diserete
components; and in particular, microprocessor—based programable digital elec-
tronirs. This new conceptionunodeled on the one adopted by RCA and lluuhes"
will in effect make ir possible to associate the platiom more closely with the
around control segment and to simplify the latter. providing increased flexi-
bi Ill.}' and economy.

MA'I'EM and :lritish Aerospncc, which since April 1981 have been joined in the
batcom International group, thus hope to regain the advantage over their compe-
titors, bv having both an improved platform, better-adapted to the market, and
operational rvicrvnces ncecessary for convincing the potential customers (()'!‘S
is: 41‘. experimental satellite).

Ar: ol the and or this yvur, MESH and Satcom International will thus be able to
show (hr-“w- operational telecommunications satellites (MARECS l and 2, PICS I),
and at the end of 1983, rlwre should be seven telecommunications satellites in
"-<-‘7\‘icv in l-‘urope.

This will therefore delinitnly establish MA'I'RA'S credibility-1nd especially
that of {Sritish Aerospace. For the 14 satellites mentioned above have all been

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
built under the prime contractorship of British Aerospace, except for the
French Telecom l satellites. British Aerospace is therefore really the No 1
European builder of telecommunications satellites, contrary to a recent asser-
tion by the president of MATRA.

Adaptation of the ECS/Telecom 1 Family to the Market

mmm(1)

 

"no!
"Beg,
“IO
'9‘\
MRS '
_ \\
mm (IO-mums:
Emil!” '
mum.
more 0
// lam"!
onnm. ' coach-mm
“'54 . ’ (6) MINIMUM-ﬂ
-.._'-.-r--_w—_-=== :FI==#
nes-1- ““ 5:3" “I. 'm-ﬂ
Key:
1. Payload mass in kilos 4. Brazil
2. Advanced Telecom l 5. Australia
3 Mexico 6. Payload consumption (in watts)

Evolution of the ECS/Telecom 1 platform to increase its launching capacity--
first to the capacity level of the American platforms (RCA and Hughes), and
then beyond that level. HATRA document.

MATRA also has a kind of "prime-contractorship" complex in this area vis-a-vis
its British partner and its French competitor. This explains its ambitions.

NATRA thus hopes to obtain, between now and 1990, the prime contractorship for
5 to 6. even 5 to 7, programs for telecommunications satellites for export--
i.e., 15 to 20 satellites. This represents 20 to 30 percent of the world mar-
ket outside the United States (25 programs). HATRA is counting especially on
1 to 2 European programs (out of 8), 2 to 3 "sovereignty" programs (out of 7),
and 2 to 3 programs (out of 10) outside Europe and the United States, at the
prime-contractorship and integration levels, with also the possibility of par-
ticipation (remote measurement, telecommand, attitude control, data-processing)
in 8 to 11 programs, including half of the European programs.

0n the national level, MATRA is aiming notably at the prime contractorship for
the Telecom 2, Star and Syracuse-successor satellites. At the European level,
it is counting on the successors to the ECS's and HARECS's, and on the interns-
tionnl level, participation in the coming Inmarsat satellites and prime con-
tractorship for a future "hybrid Intelsat."

15

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to make its export breakthrough, HATRA is therefore counting a great
deal on its iminent credibility and on its new, improved 'l'elecom 1 platform.
This "one-third Ariane lo"-clasa platform will in effect make it possible to
launch into geostationary orbit satellites of 1,350 kg, including 250 kg of
payload (1,200 W), for telecommunications and direct-TV missions (3 channels,
ellipse of l-l.5°).

Thus, HATKA is prospecting for applications in telecommunications in Italy for
the Italsat program and in the [-116 for the proposed Postast national satellite,
as well as in direct TV in the European "small countries" (Switzerland, Luxem-
bourg, Spain, etc), for launching: around the end of 1986.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

11267
CSO: 5500/2156 END

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY