FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10213
23 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO 14/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HRTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION ~
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(FOUO 14/81)

CONTENTS

WORWIDB AHAIRS

EEC. PRC Discuss Nuclear Fuel Cooperation
(Alain C8387 FIWIA‘I TIMES, ‘ DOC 81’ooeeeeoeeeoeeeeoaleoae

ASIA

JAPAN
Atmic-Power Plant Building Slows Prou Objections, Consuuption

Trend
(JAPAN ECONCMIC JWRNAL. 10 Nov 81)..........................

SUB-SAHARA)! AFRICA
SOU'l'ﬂ AFRICA

Government Tries To Obtain Enriched Uranium Illegally
(Reggie Major; NEW AFRICAN, Oct 81)..........................

WEST EUROPE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Waste Disposal Seen as Obstacle to New Construction
(Sebastian Knauer: STERN. 12 Nov 81).........................

UNITED KINGDOM

Br iefs

USSRU i‘acrichuet
"M n " -a- [III-W-MIPO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WIDE AFFAIRS

EEC, PRC DISCUSS NUCLMR FUEL COOPERATION
M41207 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 6 Dec 81 p 42
[Report by Alain Cass: "Peking Seeks Nuclear Links"]

[Excerpt] China and BBC are considering wide-ranging cooperation in the exploration,
extraction and processing of nuclear fuel for peaceful purposes.

Detailed proposals have been submitted to the Chinese by the BBC Omission in Brus-

sels. These my lead to an exchange of uranium experts and possibly to sales of
Chinese uranium to the cos-unity.

Although the joint plan is still only a ca-ission proposal and has yet to receive
the backing of nedber govern-eats, its significance lies in the fact that it was
the Chinese who mde the first approach.

Last April a team of BBC officials and geologists fro: several European countries
visited China for talks. They were allowed to inspect uraniun nines and processing
fa:ilities--the first Hesterners ever to do so. The teas was led by Dr Michael
Davies, then the conission's director of uranium.

The teas was received at the highest level and it was indicated according to one
nenber, that the Chinese were keen to establish technical links with the BBC. Such
links were broken off with the Russians in 1960.

That visit was followed three weeks ago by a delegation led by Sir Roy Den-an,
the conission's external affairs chief, which put a series of detailed proposals
to the Chinese.

The Chinese are keen to get European help to convert their existing refining facil-
ities to meet international conercial standards and the BBC delegation was told
China would wish to seell uraniun to the cousunity.

China's uranium operations are a closely guarded secret and cone under direct any
control. Official figures for reserves are not available. Some Western estiutes
put them as high as 800,000 tons, which would make China potentially one of the
world's najcr producers.

The comission will shortly propose to neder governments the exchange of uperts

from Britain. Prence, Italy and Denmark. The British Government is undersmod to be
sympathetic to the idea.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ()NI.\

The Chinese are split over the desirability of inviting foreign help into this

sensitive sector. China also has a strong anti-nuclear lobby, which favours develop-
ing coal reserves instead of pushign ahead with nuclear power.

EEC misgivings may arise following recent reports of the sale of unsafeguarded
Chinese uranium to South Africa. Peking has hotly denied the reports.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1981

C50: 5100/2052

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm (Wt-1‘1“. IFS}. UNI)

ATOMIC-POWER PLANT BUILDING SL098 FROM OBJECTIONS, CONSUMPTION TRBJD

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 980, 10 Nov 81 p 5

[Text]

The Governnent and electric
companies are heir: forced to
slow the pace of nuclear power
plant construction became at
public resistance to atomic
energy projects and the slow
growth ol power consumption
lollou'iiu last April's rate
hike

As a result. the Agency
oi Natural Resources a
Energy. Ministry of Inter-
national ‘n-ade a Industry. is
expected to slash the ﬂanned
expansion of nuclear capacity
by next March By that. ANRE
should have revued the long
term outlook on demand for
electric power. The cut will be
substantial. Until non. the Gov-
ernment has maintained a goal
of 51-53 million kilowatts for
nuclear power generating
capacity by l990 '

The Government saw nuclear
energy as the most important
alternative In its plan to
diversity power sources tonal.
liquefied natural gas. liqueﬁed
petroleum gas. to cite a lew
examples)

As a result. nuclear pow-
rr «is 51 million kilowatts)
accounted tor 12 per cent of the
country‘s lolll electricity
generating capacity at the end
of fiscal 1900 ANRE's hearings
led to an estimate tlnt mclear
capacity would rise to 27.88
million kilowatts tor l5.tl per
cent 0! the total capacity) by
was and so 92 million kilowatts

t2! .7 per cent) by taro.

However. the tempo is likely
toslow down primarily because
of continued public opposition
Japan Atomic Power Co‘s
attempted coverup of its Tau-
ruga plant problems is likely to
cause the Government's Elan
tric Power Sauce Coordination
Council to approve three
projecu with plamed capacity
totaling 5 million kilowatts.

The three projects are an 825.-
ooo-ltilowatt plant of Tohoku
Electric Power Co. at Malti and
two l.l&millionkilowatt plants
of Kyushu Electric Power Co. at
Genltai. .

In addition. the cost at
generating nuclear power is
lower than tor other types but
the difference is narrowing,
ANRE's latent estimate 3:. that
the cost gap has narrowed by
about Vt a kilowatt hour. with
nuclear generating rated at
tllI-lz a kilowatt hour com-
pared to ll ls-m a kilowatt hour
[or an oil-tired plant.

The demand {or electricity
shows no sign 0! test increaaa
after the substantial rate like:
in April. woo Government and
utility dlicials estimate tint
“structural changes are takim
place" in the demand pattern -
a beliet that prompted them to
revise the long-term demand
estimate. The approxlmately 50
per cent electricity rate like
caused consumption to go down
in the summer peak time by
about 20 per cent.

COI’YRICll'I‘: 198l. tllc Nlhun Kclzai Sliimbun. Inc

650: 4120/63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“IR (WFICIAI. l'SF ()Vl‘

GWEN TRIBS TO OBTAIN BEIGE!) URANIUM ILLEGALLY

London NEW AFRIC’N in English No 169 Oct 81 pp 36-37

[Article by Reggie Major: 'llraniun: South Africa Seeks Illegal Pact: with us")

[Text]

SOUTH AFRICA has uked the United
States to use France as a channel of
supply for enriched uranium to the new
nuclear energy plant at Koeberg in Cape
Province. which is scheduled for intitial
fuel loading in March l982.

Such a move would circumvent the
problem of the United States technically
breaking its own laws ageinste sunplying
the fuel directly to South Africa. If. how.
ever. a appears likely. the United States
turnsdown this request. South Africa has
asked America to "melte it known to
France" that it would not imist on the
conditions it originally impoeed unilato
orally at the time the current agreement
was made in 1978; that South Africa
would not be permitted to buy enriched
uranium eleewhere if the United States
could not 'tinnouely" deliver it.

Unpublished

The request is revealed in a 'Iealted"
document hitherto unpublished. released
by Randall Robineon. executive director
of’l‘rensAfrice. an Afro-American lobby«
in; organiiution on African and Carib-
bean all‘aira It in one ofa eeriee ofState
Department papere made public by
Robinson and previoualy reported by
New African (August issue).

The new series include a memorandum
of conversations on Angola and Namibia
between Cheater Crochet. Assistant Sec-
retary of State for African Aﬂain. South
African Foreign Minister Pilt Bot-ha
«referred to familiarly as "Pilt' by
CroclterI and Menus Melon. South

Africa's Defence Minister. The meeting
took place in Pretoria in April this year.
The paper dealing with South Afnca
and US nuclear relations was dated May
14. 1981. and apparently ﬂowed from the
come dicta-lone The apparent ease
with which the South AMcanecen make
such controversial menial: to the_US
implies a much closer working relation-
ahipthanhaebeenpreviouslygueeaedat
between the Reason administration and

pants on the development of atomic
energy since shortly alter World War 11,
when South Africa developed its
uranium minim lnduetry to supply the

0". uvu. to“. "none
ueeaeeuea me one
al. 06865.. me. I'll

rm! ‘e ale-ea“- !y e- noel-e unav-
I- I.” I M ' min-
a'e- ear

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"More restrictive condition? were thus
imposed unilaterally by the US after
conclusion of the contract.‘ claim the
South Africans.

Even so. says the document. South
Africa was prepared to abide by the
principles of the NPI‘ and said so
repeatedly. but it was obvious that the
US would find it ”difﬁcult" to supply the
fuel. South Africa was also prevented. by
US intervention. from obtaining the fuel
from any other source unlees it accepted
the conditions "unilaterally impoaed".

Greateoat

"Koeberg is scheduled for initial fuel
loading in March 1%2. and as no ﬁrm
undertaking for the supply of enriched
uranium could as yet be obtained. the
chances are that the scheduled start-up of
Koeherg would be seriously delayed at
great cost to South Africa." says the
memorandum.

lt maltes the points that South Africa is
not in principle opposed to the NPI‘
provided its basic requirements are met
lit does not enumerate theml: that it will
continue to conduct and administer its
nuclear aﬂ‘airs in a manner in line with
the spirit and the goals of the NW; and
that ita nuclear programme is geared to
the peaceful application of nuclear
energy and "at no time haa she tested a
nuclear device". And it aaya that while
SouthAfricaiathreatenedbytheUSSl‘t
and its aaaoclataa and by certain mm
conntriea with Soviet aupport and
encouragement.itinturnhaanohopeof
UN supporthut itaelfiaheing continually
threatened with UN action.

The final eection is headed "WHAT
SOUTH AFRICA REQUESTS” and

0 That the United Statea Government
give an undertaking that export per»
nits will be tamed for dellvery of
enriched uranium to France:

OlftheUSfaelaltcannotaupplythe
enriched uranium through France
thaeonaly for the Koeberg reactors in
pmtmmus makes
it known to France that lt would not
lnalat on the eondltiona that It
llnpoaed unilaterally on South Afrlea

mmmumm
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000100116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on pplycontracteifl’rancewmto
«mama:

OBOE agrees either to cancel the
preeent contract for the eupply of
enriched uranium to ESCOM at no
coat. or DOB agrees to poetpone
execution of the countact at 'no coat
untileuchtiineaeanagreeuentcan
he reached between the United Statee
and South African authoritiae which
would permit the United Statae to
neunie duliveriee of fuel to South
Africa.

Juetae revealing. in view of the date of
the meeting. the euheequent South Afri-
can invaeion of Angola and the US veto in
the United Natione. are the notee of the
convemtione in Pretoria in April het-
ween Cracker. Pilt Botha and Magnue
Will. The convereatione aleo helie the
popularly accepted view that the US ie
etill “formulating" a policy towarde
Southern Africa. There ie a US policy.
and it ie proSouth African.

ln reaponee to Botha'e view that it
would be difficult for the US to pursue a
policy favourable to South Africa in View
ofdolneetic preeeuree and the poeition of
powerful African atatet ouch as Nigeria
without provoking conetant criticism.
Crocher replied that the preeent
adminietration would have more back-
boneinthefaceofpreeeurethanthe
previoue one. “We will etand up for what
we think right.” he eaid. “Our objective la
to increaee the South African Govern-
ment'e conﬁdence.“

Bathe eaid South Africa was euepicioue
becauee ofthe way the US ”dropped" the
South African Government' in Angola In
1975. He argued that South Africa went
into Angola then with United Statee
Government euppon; and then the US
voted to condemn'South Africa in the
United Natione. He cited many exampl-
ofpaet USdecieione that failed to inepire
conﬁdence— Vietnam. lran US failureto

eupport Hmoderate governmenta in
Africa. while aiding thoee with leftiat
rhetoric. BothaeaidthatinChnd.eone
African leaders hecnnie eo deqiente for
help again: Lihyu'e Colonel Gaddaﬁ
that one of the: even approached South
Africa privately. an a laet reeort

Crocker'e view war that. in epite ofthe
roclty etart. an improvement in USSA
reletione was poeeihle. ”,We are tired of
double think and double talk." he eaid.

Mileaganelecl
anenormouechal
outwith colic:
theput-Vietnan
i th
apparent n e
affaire. Bethe ci
population prnbl
thatAﬁ’icaiaat
Aﬁicane had "I
independence.“
notrenhutlecl
background and
aaid South Afri
thoeewhoadlnit
Hepreeentedl
ofa'conatellatic
Atriuwitheec'
linked by e cent
arguedthatthet
Africa waa cub
collapeee.thefn
willhenowinni
thepartofAfric
can do thinge
Africa."
Crockerreplii
dietinguiehed b
theSovieteand-
enceand thoee
for theirownpt

the US top prit
namehmentil
to deal with tl
eeverelyimpede
inNatnibia. He

no”
nance in Narnih
lead to civil wal

ldalan deelt
Namibia eitnat
problem in eouI
the one place '
hack Soviet-Ci:
Henrgedthene

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R00050001001‘I-3
and to support Ssvimbi' s UN'I'I'A. which
he claimed was growing stronger“
SWAPO grew militaril) weaker. He sell!
the! South Africa sees Savimhi as a
"butter" in Ancols for Namih‘Is. Bevin;
supported him this fur. it would damage
South African honour if Savimhi was
harmed.
Crochet said the US view was that
South Africa was no longer under milw
sryprusstm to lesve Nsmibis and that
the US sought a settlement hosed on
democratic principles He sad the US
woe exploring ways of removing the
SovietCuhen presenceinAncols.“lnt.he
context of a Namiba settlement". There
could he no peace In Angola without a
reconcilIatIon between UNI‘I‘A end the
MPLA. snd movement towards such s
reconciliation could he schieved by play-
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? W

WASTE DISPOSAL SEEN AS OBSTACLE T0 N8" CONSTRUCTION
hamburg STERN in German 12 Nov 81 pp 132, 136, 136
[Article by Sebastian Knauer: "Nuclear Waste, A Nightmare"]

[Text] The “cage sites for radioactive waste from nuclear
power plants, clinics and laboratories are filled to the

brim. Without a solution to the disposal probla, nuclear
plants will have to be shut down as early as next year. In
spite of agreanents with foreign reprocessing facilities, the
nuclear industry is in danger of suffocating in nuclear waste..

The freight train on track 17 had arrived, carrying a hot shipment. The car next
to the last one was loaded with steel containers filled with nuclear waste from
the PRC; it was on its way to the French reprocessing plant of the Cogema in La
Hague. 1n the train station of Mezidon. a small town in Britanny, environmental-
ists were blocking the German-French waste transport with a sit-in strike on the
railroad tracks. They fastened banners to the locomotive and sent a telegram to
French Prime Minister Pierre Hauroy: "He do not want any foreign nuclear waste
in our country."

The blockade in the province at the end of August 1981 was not without effect.

Two weeks later the government in Paris put a temporary stop to the shipment of
burned-out fuel rods from German power plants. Without disposal in the neighboring
country, however. German nuclear plants are in danger of suffocating in their own
waste. As early as neat year, the lights could go out in the nuclear power plants

of Stade, Biblia and Huergassen.

The F36 Ministry of the Interior is still optimistic. A "Report by the Federal
Goveruent on the disposal of waste from nuclear power plants" from the beginning
of October mentions only a "short-term interruption": "At the present time" there
is "no cause to question the reliability of the Cogema agreements with respect to
provisions for waste disposal."

But in reality things look different. Hermann Kraeaer, member of the nautive
couittee of the North-"est German Power Plant: "He do not know any longer where
to put the burned-out uranium rods. Our storage capacities are almost exhausted."
Franz Josef Spalthoff. neaber of the executive couittee of the Rhine-Uestphalia
Electricity Plant: "The danger exists that we may have to shut down."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The disposal question is more and more becoming an "open sore in the energy supply“
(Federation of Chambers of German Industry and Conerce). And in Bonn nuclear-
energy producers are trying to dump their worries about disposal on the shoulders
of the minister of the interior. Gerhart Baum: "Now I'am supposed to take care of
their business." So far there have been only failures:

-The proposed construction of a "nuclear disposal center“ in Gorleben is still
uncertain. In the opinion of Ernst Albrecht, Niedersachsen's sinister-president,
the super solution--reprocessing of fuel rods and final storage of nuclear waste«-
is certainly "technically possible" but it is "politically unfeasible." The report
of the PRC minister of the interior: "The exploration of the site for a final
storage facility at Gorleben is proceeding according to plans." The fact that
Albrecht is refusing to investigate other sites simultaneously--in the event that
experts pronounce Gorleben unsuitable--is kept a secret. Following the conclusion
of five deep drilling sessions-~the radioactive waste is to be enclosed in salt
blocks 600 meters below the surface of the earth--it seems to be possible. Hater
leaks cannot be discounted, the groundwater could be polluted with radioactivity.

--The beginning of the construction of an above-ground interim storage facility
for 1,500 tons of fuel rods was stopped by the courts because of an 'rror in pro-
cedures. Four hundred twenty steel containers (casters) are to be air-cooled in

a giant hall and stored up to 30 years. No experience exists worldwide for the use
of these nuclear barns.

--In Ahaus. North-Rhine-westphalia, a 1,500-ton interim storage facility cannot
be built until 1985. Before licensing the facility, the Land government wants to
make sure that the interim storage facility will not suddenly become a final
storage facility for 500 nuclear waste containers. To meet the total demand of
the PRC nuclear industry. 1,200 special containers of this kind will have to be
produced at a cost of DH 1 million each. To date no more than nine have been
manufactured.

--In September 1981. a court in Darnstadt stopped the long-term storage of burned-
out fuel rod: of Hesse's nuclear power plant in Biblis in a proposed "compact
storage facility." An emergency solution of this kind is a water-cooling basin
that is customary in all nuclear power p1ants-only twice as many fuel rods are

to be packed into it. The Federal Administrative Court still has to rule whether
the high-risk bunching of active rods is even permissible under the Nuclear Law.

--In North Hesse the search for a site for a proposed 350-ton reprocessing facility
led to an unpleasant surprise. In 1981. following many months of investigations,
the German Society for the Reprocessing of Nuclear Fuel (DH!) named the village of
Nethen as the optimal site. But only a short time later Besse's minister of the
interior declared the site that had been found only after much difficulty as un-
suitable. Underground, below the planned nuclear factory, geologists of Hesse's
Land office discovered caverns that were in danger of collapsing.

The present patchwork in disposal policies is striking at the heart of the 12
nuclear energy producers in the PRC, because no new nuclear energy plant has been
licensed since the revision of the Nuclear Law in 1976 without proof of disposal.
Consequently the nuclear industry is counting on the disposal of the dangerous
waste in foreign countries. The energy producers quickly concluded agreements
with reprocessing facilities in France (Le Hague) and England (Windscale).

9
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ferns of delivery. return obligations and prices were f ixed in secret agreaaents,
even parliamentarians were not permitted to see then until 1980 and only after many
years of persistent trying. SPD Bundestag Deputy Harald Schaefer, chair-an of the
Investigative Commission on Nuclear Energy sumarizes: "These agre-mts do not
represent disposal."

As a natter of fact, the agreenents that have been concluded to date are only un-
certain drafts on the future. Agreements were Iade with the French Cogm, a sub-
sidiary of the French Nuclear Energy Autbrity, according to which more than 2,000
tons of burned-out fuel rods are to be shipped tn La Hague by 1985. Beginning with
1990, the firm has the right to return the reprocessed waste to the PKG. In case
the factory in La Hague is to be torn down, even radioactive parts of the polluted
production facilities would have to be stored in Germany. If the return should not
be possible because of a lack of storage facilities, the agreaaent provides for
stiff penalties. According to an internal Cogs-a document of September 1981, a fee
of approximately DH 60,000 will be levied daily.

La Hague is the only facility that can reprocess fuel rods from the light-water
reactor type built in Germany. French managers are exploiting this mnopoly un-
scrupulously (”We have profit margins between 15 and 30 percent"). German energy
concerns are participating in the expansion of the reprocessing facility. They are
spending on 6.15 billion to increase the capacity from its current 1000 tons to' a
proposed 1,600 tons. Oomega Chief Georges Besse: "Nevertheless, there will be no
additional agreements with foreign countries."

0n the other hand, it is still possible to make business deals with the English
reprocessing facility of Windscale on the Irish Sea. To be sure, the facility has
been closed since 1973, following an accident and radioactive pollution, but by
the end of the 1980's the new 1,200-tnn facility "'l‘horp" is to be in operation.
No German nuclear energy operators have secured agreenents for the future.

Nevertheless, even English experts doubt that the construction will be completed

on time, because at the present tine cows are still grazing on the designated build-
ing site. To eliminate the touchy word of Hindscale fron discussions, the (intro--
versial project was renamed for the neighboring village of Sellefield. Halt
Patterson of the English envimnnental organisation "Friends of the Earth" said:

"A disposal in Hindscale is a plpedrean of the German industry."

The nuclear waste pact with foreign countries is to alternative to the disposal
crisis. This is the conclusion of a 300-page study conducted by 30 scientists

of the "Group DIG-350" at the University of Marburg. According to their calculations,
the reprocessing plant in La Hague will be filled to capacity as early as next

year with fuel rods from French reactors. which does not even take into acount all
the breakdowns and shutdowns. During the next [6 years sore than 5,000 tons will

be transported to interim storage facilities from Japan, Sweden, Belgium. Switzer-
land and the PRC. The physicist Gustav Sauer stated: "The present facility in

La ﬂague is only a delusion of a disposal possibility for the PEG.”

In the event of a systematic expansion of German nuclear plants, this radioactive -
dunp will increase tenﬁo ld. Until the year 2000, 15,000 tons of fuel rode will have

to be processed and stored. Their radioactive rays will pasist for 10,000 years-
a nightnare for future generations.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But even those storage sites in the m intended for less dangerous radioactive
waste are filled to overflowing. Consequently, yellow roll barrels filled with
waste of low and medium activity are piling up at nine Land collection points:
polluted coats and tubules, gloves and tools arrive from clinics, laboratories and
nuclear power plants. The waste is radiating caesium 137. iridium 192 and radio.
226; the pile is growing by 30,000 barrels annually. The waiting lists fa.- the
storage of nuclear waste are booked for years to come.

Above-ground storage facilities containing low- and medium-active waste are also
harboring risks for the environment. The radioactive scrap packed in airtight
barrels will radiate between 2 and 100 years. Until 1978, long-term active waste
was stored in the closed salt mine of Asse near "olfsburg, where 126,300 containers
with this kind of waste disappeared below daylight. Subsequently evertbing was
sealed off. There are to plans to reopen the "experimental final storage
facility," which was operated witlout a licensing procedure.

0n the other hand, it is possible that within a few years the Konrad nine might

be reopened to become the nuclear waste dump of the nation. The shut-down mine near
Salzgitter is currently being examined for its suitability for the storage of
radioactive waste and worn-out parts of nuclear reactors. The matter is urgent,
because beginning with the middle of 1982 the pressure-pipe reactor in Nieder-
aichach, Bavaria, will be disassembled. The duolition of the veteran of German
nuclear history will produce 130,000 tons of scrap and 4,000 barrels of radio-
active waste that will have to be stored.

Other countries are burying their nuclear waste on the high seas. Great Britain,
Belgium, Holland and Switzerland, for instance, are dumping their nuclear waste
in the Bay of Biscay. In August 1981, one English freighter alone threw 600 barrels

overboard. If the (Ia-man nuclear power lobby had its way, native nuclear waste
would soon be loaded on ships as well. The German Nuclear Forum is openly demand-
ing the dumping of low-radioactive waste in the deep ocean.

Disposing of nuclear waste in this manner could soon be responsible for its
reappearance in our own environment. Because on the way down to the bottom of the
sea, the containers-~which have been reinforced with concrete-will burst from the
increase in water pressure. The substances escaping from the leaky barrels enter
the food chain by the way of sea animals.

Mackerels and tuna fish from the Bay of Biscay are also sodd in Germany.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner+ Jahr AG 8 Co.

8991
C30: 5100/2036

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDOM

BRIEFS

USSR URANIUM MICW--Britain is sending uranium from Namibia to be enriched
at a plant in the Soviet Union for use as fuel in British nuclear power stations.
The Central Electricity Generating Board says it is due to receive 70,000 lb of
enriched uranium from Russia this year. After being imported into Britain as
yellovcake. uraniun is converted into hexafluoride at the British nuclear fuels
plant at Springfields near Preston. The hexafluoride is then shipped to the Soviet
port of Riga, where it is handled by the state enrichment corporation Techsnab-
export. The Soviet enricment plant is shrouded in secrecy, mainly because it
also produces weapons-grade uranium. Its location is not publicly knoﬁn, although
it is believed to be soaewhere in the Urals. The uranium enriched in the Soviet
Union is sent back to the plant at Springfields to be made into fuel rods for the
nine nuclear power stations that provide 11 per cent of the electricity consulted in
England and Wales. half of the uranium yelloucake imported in its raw state by
Britain comes from the Rossing nine in Nanibia that belongs to the British com-
pany Rio Tinco-Zinc. The yellowcake is processed at Springfields along with in—
ports from Canada. [London THE OBSERVER in English 25 Oct 81 p 1 PM] [COPYRIGHTz
The Observer Ltd 1981]

cs0 : 5100/2030 m

12 \

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY