FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10273
22 January 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST lNFORMATlON SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this Publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. G0vernment.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PULLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

CYBERNETlcs, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2000 1/32)

CONTENTS

HARDWARE

SM-2M Master Computer Complex ....................................

Selection of Structure of One Class of Threshold Element Memories.

Device for Measuring Steady-State Parameters of M18 LSI-circuit
cmnent. .00....OIIOOOOOUOOOUIOOOOOIOOOCIOIOIODOOOOIOOOCCCOOIO

Pulse-Sequence Phase-Shift Indicator .............................
Special-Purpose Processor for Rapid Fourier Tran form ............
Designing Special-Purpose Microprocessor Compute: s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Image-Comparison Processor .......................................

4! Memory Unit Based Upon Plane Magnetic Domains .................

SOFTWARE

POKAL-l975 Algorithmic Language Interpreter for SARATOV-Z Computer

APPLICATIONS

Automation of Scientific Research in Geophysics ..................
Microprocessors in Control Systems of Electric Traction Devices ..
Regulating Subway Train Travel Time Using Microcomputers .........

Searching for Fragments of Section Mnemonic circuit Using a
Microcalculator ................................................

Reconstructing Hexapod Gaits .....................................

- a - [III - USSR - 21C SST

POI? nmnu “CF "N! V
PUBLICATIONS
Modeling and Optimizing Complex Control Systems ..............
Design of Computer Input/Output Systems ......................

Hilbert Optics ...............................................

Abstracts of Articles in Journal 'AUTOMATIC EQUIPMENT AND
COMPUTERS', September-October 1981 .........................

Abstracts of Articles in 'ELBCTRONIC MODELING', November-
December 1981 ....... .......................................

- b -
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
HARDWARE

rs and by the "
mplex automated '
rxmon '

 

scientific ex~
in the top level
PUK UI‘I'ILIAL UBI‘. UNI-I

of the hierarchical control systems managing the work of complex machine units,

shops and production operations. in systems used to test complex equipment, to
process mdical data and so on.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Naukova dumka". Elektronnoye modelirovaniye, .1981

11004
C50: 1863/49

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

UDC 68l.325.6

SELECTION 0? STRUCTURE OF ONE CLASS OF THRESHOLD ELM?! MEMORIES

Kiev ELEKTRONNOYE WSELIROVANIYE in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 31
(manuscript received 20 Feb 81) pp 88-89

[Article by Eduard Yur'yevich Kirsanov, engineer-designer, Kazan']

[Text] Creation of complex information processing systems, computers and computer
systems in particular, has resulted in broader research and development in informa-
tion storage technology. One of the promising methods for creating effective memories
is to develop new memory structures based on threshold logic.

Among the various kinds of memories, there are superoperational memries characterized
by grouped serial recording, small capacity and high speed. In this case the presence
of serial recording and the possibility for both random and serial read-out allow us
to View such superoperational memories as learning pattern recognition systems in
which learning is equivalent to recording and recognition is equivalent to read-out.

Figure l is a general block diagram of such a pattern recognition system; Mr!) is a
multivariate process representing an input sequence of patterns equivalent to the
address signals of superoperational memories. Signal Mn) is defined as the teacher's
statement that the Current pattern belongs to a certain class; in this case code t

is equivalent to the code of the current information word to be recorded. Multi-
variate output vector run) is formed in the form of the pattern recognition system's
data indicating that the current image belongs to a certain point in the solution
EPaCE' and it is equivalent to the information word being read out. In this case

13‘ = c.

Recognition

s stem

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The parameter tuning block outputs vector a(n) of the values of tuneable parameters

of the open pattern recognition systemuthat is, it supports a process equivalent
to recording.

when analyzing the architecture of a superoperational memory, it is convenient to
represent the latter as a system of N' pattern recognition systems falling into two
classes, where N' is the length ofthe recorded information words c. This approach
simplifies analysis in synthesis of a digit recognition system, and it is easier and
more effective to make a modular superoperational mmcry consisting of a set of
identical digit recognition systems recognizing two classes.

A superoperational memory is typified by change in the compasition of the recorded
information in each cycle of grouped recording, which requires each fixed digit
recognition system to realize a universal hypersurface which would satisfy any class
distribution of L points with coordinates represented by N-digit code addresses
(patterns) in a multidimensional address space X, which is impossible. However, the
following assertion may be introduced: 'lhe initial spaceXcan always be transformed
into a secondary space X' with L' vectors of rank N' (L'>L, N’>N), which contains

a set of L patterns divisible by one hypersurface into two classes in the presence
of any 2" combinations of unidimensional vectors of teacher statement a. It
follows from this that the structure of a sigeroperational memory must always contain
a vector code converter transforming a: into a."

From 4 to la information words are usually written for a superoperational memory with
capacity 5. Therefore we can always obtain a secondary space X’ in which there are

L vectors 2', divisible by one linear surface no matter what their distribution, as

we can see below. A superoperational memory would best consist of a digit recogni-
tion system composed of one logical threshold element having the capacity for learning
in response to inputs during formation of the optimum hypersurface, which is a function
of the memory.

The output signal of the logical threshold element is defined as the sum of the
products of the unity digits of the code of vector x' times the weight coefficients
a; of the corresponding inputs (ll—that is, by the size of the logical threshold
element's input,

N.

2%.

III

where i -- 1,2,...,N'. In this case the threshold 0 for a learning logical threshold

clement must be chosen in relation to the initial values of the weight factors a
in such a way as to satisfy the following conditions:

N'
r. - I. if 2 a‘r‘ > 0:
1-:

r. - 0. if 2 art. <0.
(-1

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-Z ONLY

IL rulluwn from these expressions that if there is to be a fixed threshold, all codes
.1" uf Lln- sequence or addresses with length L must have the same constant number of
lullL.$' -leL is, active digits, for example 50 percent of N'. 'mus if we are to

build a superoperational memory out of identical logical threshold elements with a
fixed threshold. addresses 3' must be fed in parallel to all digit logical threshold
elements with N’ learning inputs; in this case the address codes must have a standard
constant active length. This simplifies the structure of the superopsrational

memory and the logical threshold element, making it easier to build them.

 

Figure 2
Key:
1. Address 4. logical threshold element
2. Code converter 5. Parameter tuning block

3. iogicai threshold element layer

with a superoperational memory, the recording and reading of information known

a prion: proceeds in the same time scale and in the same object, and it coincides

in space. A pattern recognition system performing the function of a superoperational .
memry must function in real time; in this case a parameter tuning block must be
included in its physical structure so as to permit tuning in a closed loop system (2).

To support learning in a lmjitrdl threshold element, it would be best to use one-step
learning algorithms, for example like the learning algorithm of perceptrons (3) .

in order to ensure high speed, and particularly to reduce recordinrl time. which is
equivalent to learning time. The correctness with which the optimum hypersurface
dewiops in the course of recording (learning) need not be monitored. since it is
ensured by the structure itself of the learning algorithm. Therefore the tuning block
is built as a one-step learning algorithm, and there is no feedback for monitoring
transmission of a recording from the recognition system's output to the tuning block.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIJ

.rt- .2 snows the basic diagram of a superoperational memory bast on logical three--

:luments accounting for the requirements described above. A model of such a
“owi'utional memory was bui it in the form of a program for a Yes computer.
yrogrnm was written in PL/i. Experiments with this model continued the correct-
. of the premises suggested here concerning structural organization, and made
:cssible to obtain data to be used in further research with the purpose of ii:-
.smq the capacity and speed of the superoperational memory.

BIBILIOGRAPHY

"wile-J, Yc. N., chorov, B. M., Lantsev. V. 5., and Totsen‘rzo, V 6.. “Sintcz
“km-:- na porogovykh elementakh“ [Synthesis of Threshold Element: Circui L93 ,

Mum-uh, Sov. radio, 1970, 368 pp.

ILJI'J .ilkin, n. 1.. "sintez mogosloynykh sistem raspoznavaniya cbrazov"
[Syntncsis of Hultiiayer Pattern Recognition Systems), Moscow, Energiya,

WM , 368 pp.

lvunkimcnko, A. 0. (Editor), "Pertseptron--sistena raspoznavuniyn obrazov"
I'l'he Pcrceptron--a Pattern Recognition System], Kiev, Nauk. dumka, 1975. 432 pp.

(RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", Elektronnoye modelirovaniyc. 1981

1-4

1863/49

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEVICE FOR MEASURING STEADY-STATB PARAMETERS OF HIS LSI-CthUIT COMPONENTS
Moscow PRIBORY 1 SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 26-27

[Article by engineers L. S. Ganopol'skiy. V. V. Zhukov and V. Ye. Novosel'tsev: "Device
for Measuring Steady-State Parameters of HIS LSI-Circuit Components"]

[Text] The instrument-manufacturing industry has now been seeing a sharp increase in

the volume and nomenclature of the integrated circuits (IC) in production. such as. for
example. 318 [large-scale integrated (L51) circuits] used in the production of timepieces
and microcalculators. for which HIS components form the basis.

In designing 1C and monitoring the process of their manufacture it is necessary to have
information on the electrophysicai parameters of the material, the geometry and the dis-
tribution of impurities etc. Unfortunately. however. not all this information can be
obtained by simple and easily employed methods. Host of them require precision physical
procedures and complex apparatus. Indirect methods of measuring the parameters of semi-

conductor structures are therefore assuming particular importance. The electrical mea-
surement method is the simplest of these.

The physical properties and electrophysical parameters of LS! circuits are studied by
electrical methods on specially designed test structures [2]. The results of these
studies then provide the basis for modeling the functioning of an LSI circuit. estab-
lishing the inter-relationship between output parameters and design and production
factors and evaluating its stability with respect to the effect of various operational
factors.

There now exist a variety of control and measuring apparatus for measuring steady-state
and dynamic parameters as well as for functional monitoring [3. a]. The general-purpose
nature of this apparatus. however. and. accordingly. its high cost and the complexity of
its architecture and operation make it unsuitable for use in measuring test structures.

The development of a simple. specialized apparatus has therefore become a matter of
urgent importance.

This category of apparatus would include a digital apparatus for measuring steady-state
1c parameters designed to determine threshold HIS-transistor voltages. leakage currents
and the resistances of the diffusion junctions and contact windows of IC manufactured
on the basis of p- and n-channel HIS technology.

A structural diagram of the instrument is shown in the figure. Breakdown and threshold
voltages are determined by measuring the instantaneous value of the linearly variable
voltage (LVV) applied to the test component (TC) at the moment the current flowing
through component TC reaches the selected value. The master oscillator for the linearly

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Oll (ll-'l-K'IAI. “SI-I ONLY

variable voltage OLVV generates a voltage of constant amplitude, while its polarity

may be either positive or negative. In the absence of component TC. the Oscillator
ntvv nulpul voltage takes the form of an isosceles triangle. A code-controlled divider
ccnl nukes it possible to obtain a discrete series of amplitudes of the voltages sup-
pllld tn the first adder A input. The reference-voltage source RVSl and code-controlled
divider CCDZ form a discrete series of amplitudes of constant voltage, which is supplied
to the second adder input and forms a “pedestal." that is. that level of constant volt-
age at which the LVV pulse begins and ends. Voltage. amplified by amplifier U1. is fed
from adder A output via an output connector to the component TC. The current passing
through the latter becomes the input current to the voltage—current transformer VCT,

the output signal of which is fed to the input of dual comparator C. Fed as reference
vulrdgcs to the comparator from the output of reference—voltage source RUSS are two
signals equal in modulus but apposite in sign.

The comparator changes its state if the ourput sig-
nal of the transformer VCT exceeds with respect to
absolute value the positive or negative reference
voltage depending upon the direction of the current

“slum-1| m: - CLIN through the component under study. Since the input
CC‘ = I ' resistance of the transformer VCT is negligibly low
"9e§’ . . ”' as compared with the resistance of the given compo-

nent TC, it may accurately enough be considered that
the full voltage of amplifier Al is being applied to
the component TC. This voltage is also supplied to
the controlled voltage divider CVD. which breaks the
measured voltage down into ranges. Together with
the reference-voltage shaper RVS, the phase-sensi-
tive rectifier PSR converts the signal to unipolar
voltage. which is then fed to an analog memory unit
AMU. As long as the current across the component

TC is low and the comparator C remains in its ini-
tial state. this unit AHU functions in a follower
mode. When the current across the component Tc
reaches the desired level, the comparator C changes
its state and the memory unit AHU switches to its
storage mode.

 

At the same time, the LVV drops rapidly, while the
time—interval shaper TIS permits pulses to pass
from the voltage frequency converter VFC to a counter Co. Following the counting pro-
ress the result is illuminated on a digital display panel 00?. An amplitude analyzer
AA selects the transmission coefficient of the divider CVD, the time interval of the
shapcr T15 and the position of the point on the display panel DDP. information on the
polarity of the measured voltage is supplied to the display panel DD? from the shaper
RVs. Voltage shaped by reference-voltage source RVSZ. code-controlled divider CCD3 and
amplifier A2 is used to study transistors for current drain.

Frasuroment of resistances does not require the introduction of additional units into
[Lu instrument circuit. When the comparator C is switched on, the output voltage no

of the transformer VCT equals the reference voltage Uc of the comparator: Un - kli -

= ka/Rx - DC. where k is the transformation coefficient of the transformer VCT. I; the
lunut current of the transformer VCT (that is. the current across the component TC) and
u. and Rx the voltage applied to the component TC and its resistance respectively.

6

FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FUR ()FFN'IAI. IISIE ONLY

From this expreasion we obtain Rx - (k/Ucwx.

Accordingly, the measurement of resistances also reduces to calculation of the values

of voltages applied to the component we at the moment the comparator begins to func-
tion.

Specifications of the measuring device The measuring device
has a printer which

Range of LVV control, V . .............. . . —200 to +200 records the digital
LV'v' buildup time. s . . . .. ......... . ..... .. .. 5 result of the measure-
Designated current levels. uA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l; 2; 5; 10 ment, the value mea-
Range of resistance measureaents. k9 ....... 1-10; 10—100 sured and the current
Range of voltage-drain control. V .. . . .. -50 to +50 value at which thresh-
Basic relative error in current-level setting. old voltage (breakdown
Z :5 voltage) is calculated.
Basic reduced measurement error. 1:

resistance :3 It is also possible to

voltage 22.5 control the instrument
Supply voltage ......... . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . 220222 (50 Hz) remotely. "hen made

compatible with a desk-
top computer, the measuring device permits statistical analysis and determination of the
parameters of the distributions of the measured values.

The instrument was developed by the Penza branch of VNITIpribor [All-Union Scientific-
Rescarch Technological Institute of Instrument Making]. Practical experience in using
this measuring device in one of the industry's enterprises has demnstrated its 31.-
plicity and ease of operation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Nosov. Yu. R.. Petrosyanu. K. O. and Shilin. V. A., "Maternaticheskiye aodeli elemen-

tov integral'noy elektroniki” [Mathematical Models of Integrated Electronic Compo-
nents]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1976.

2. Proleyko. V. M. , Abramv. V. A. and Bryunin. V. IL. "Sistemy upravleniys kachestvom
izdeliy mikroelektroniki" [Systems for Controlling the Quality of Micro-electronic
Components]. Moscow. Sov. radio. 1978.

3. Azhatkin. D. 1.. "Automated Systems for Monitoring the Parameters of Integrated
Circuits with a High Level of Integration. Electrical Engineering Abstracts.

Scrics 'Micro-e].ectronics'“. No 3. Moscow. TsNIl "Elektronika." 1973.

la. Saprykin. V. 5.. Kuznetsov. M. 1.. Dokuchayev, M. I. and Ostretsov. B. V.. "Izmere-
nlye dinamicheskikh parametrov integral'nykh skhea" [Measuring the Dynamic Parameters
0! Integrated Circuits]

S. Pctukhov, V. M., Taptygin. V. I. and Khrulev. A. IL, "Tranzistory polevyye" [Field—
Effect Transistors], Moscow. Sov. radio. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sisteny upravleniya". 1981

8963
(250: 1863/36

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘I-‘IUA I. IISI'I ONLY

PULSE—SEQUENCE PHASE-SHIFT INDICATOR
Moscow PRIBORY I SISIEHY UPRAMLBNIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 27-28

[Article by engineers E. V. Rakhov and Yu. 5. Savchenko: "Phase-shift Indicator of
Pulse chuences"]

[Text] imperfections in the design of electromechanical systems of magnetic-tape stor-
age (MTS) constitute one of the most widespread causes of phase distortion in record
channels and in the reproduction of discrete information. Gap scatter, a shift of the
magnetic head unit relative to the axis perpendicular to the direction of tape travel.

tape skew etc. cause impermissible phase shifts of pulse sequences, which distort HTS
information. HTS phase shifts are normally eliminated with the use of control and mea-
suring equipment. which. while offering a number of advantages in adjusting storage
systems under plant conditions [1], proves. however. inconvenient and ineffective in
adjustments connected with checking the phase state of HTS channels.

Pulse-sequence phase indicators may be employed in accomplishing this maintenance. The
literature on phase-measuring equipment describes a number of these devices, but they

either require additional expenditures to insure compatibility with the component base
[2] or have a complex circuit control.

in the present article the authors propose a device indicating pulse-sequence phase
shift having high resolution. A schematic diagram of the indicator is shown in the
figure. The positively polarized pulse sequence Ux under analysis is supplied to the
inputs of shaper $1. a standard positively polarized pulse sequence Us to the inputs

of shaper 82. Short pulses generated along the leading edge of the input pulses are
transmitted from the outputs of components 65-1 and 05-2 to the inputs of phase discrim-
inator PD. uhich'is based upon flip-flops 04-1 and c4—2.

If the pulses of the analyzed sequence lead in phase those of the standard sequence,
then during each period the pulses from the output of component CS-l enter the S-input
uf flip—flop 04-] and the R-input of flip-flop Cb-Z, setting the first in the logical
"I" state . the second in the logical "0“ state. A pulse from the output of component
CE-Z lagging behind by part of a period. a phase shift. is fed to the R-input of flip—
Ilup ca-i and the S-input of flip-flop 66-2, setting them in the opposite states re-
spectively.

The process of comparing phases over the period of a single pulse sequence is thus com-
plete when the phase discriminator PD supplies a resolving voltage to component c1-2
of the sign-indication circuit 512 and an inhibiting voltage to component 61-! of indi-
cator circuit 311. Since to the No. 2 inputs of components Cl-i and 01-2 is fed re-

solving voltage from the inverse output of flip-flop c3-1, which has been set to the

'10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-VIM. USE ONLY

logical "0" state by a positively polarized
pulse from transformer winding Tr2. a current
flows through LED DZ. LED D2 illumination
corresponds to the "lead" indication.

If the pulses in the sequence under analysis
lag behind those in the standard sequence,
the state of the phase-discriminator flip-
flops changes to its opposite; the resolving
voltages are now fed for most of the period
to component Cl-l. the current accordingly
flowing :hrough LED D1. LED D1 illumination
now corresponds to the "lag" indication.

If the analyzed and standard pulse sequences
are in phase and the time characteristics of
the shapers are identical. the pulses from
components 05-1 and 05-2 coincide with respect
to both time of leading-edge formation and
duration. The phase discriminator flip—flops
are therefore to be found in a state which is
characterized as indeterminate; by means of
two AND—NOT gates (components C2-l and 05-2),
the discriminator-state-analysis circuit DSAC
in this instance records the identity of dis-
criminator flip-flop states. while the zero
signal from the output of the analysis circuit
inverter C2-2 is fed to the S-input of flip-

. . flop C3-l switching it to a logical "1" state.
Schematic circuit diagram of pulse- ’
sequence phase shift indicator: Cl, An inhibiting voltage is fed from the inverse

" ‘ ' f f11P'f10P 63-1 to the inputs of com-

01. (.5 and c3. (.1. - KISSLAS, KISSLAZ, output 0

and KlSSTHZ microcircuits respective- ponents Cl'1 and 61-2 and L393 DI and DZ de-

1y- Dl, 02 - ALIOZB L393. D3, 04 _ energized. The absence of LED illumination

KDdO7A LEDs° Trl Tr2 - llH-zb pulse indicates that the analyzed and standard pulse
’ I

transformers; Rl-Ra - OHLT resistors sequences are in phase.
(RI=P2-150 Q; R3'R4-22 k9); Cpl*=CPZ'
= 910 pF - KDM capacitors.

F
l
i
l
I
I .
I
I
I

Jl-J

n
5?

 

The phase-shift indicator functions throughout
a broad range of pulse-sequence frequencies,
the frequency characteristics of the shapers
and flip-flops of the phase discriminator constituting the factors limiting the upper

frequency. The device registers phase shifts from a minimum corresponding to the re-
solving capability of the indicator to 360'. It should be pointed out, however, that

ambiguous indication at low pulse-sequence frequencies and with phase shifts exceeding
30-40° are characteristic of this system. This phenomenon is to be explained by the

indicator's lack of a selection of time intervals corresponding to the magnitudes of
the phase shifts and is being eliminated by minor modification of the circuit control-

ling flip-flop 03-].

The resolution of the device is governed primarily by the identity of channel-former
characteristics, the duration of the pulses fed to the inputs of the phase discriminator
and by the frequency characteristics of the discriminator flip-flops.

This phase-shift indicator design has been developed for a specific application. but
the device's range of functional capabilities is much broader: it may also be employed

. .11 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 comparator for comparing pulse durations. as a component of a direct--conversion

so: mum-r and, given a channel-forming capability, for recording phase shifts in any
n of periodic oscillation.

authors have fabricated a working model of the phase-shift indicator, which has been
:ed on a YeSSOlZ-Ol HTS unit. It has been employed to make preventive checks and ad-
- the azimuth of a magnetic head unit and to test and compensate for phase shift dur-

"record" and "playback" operations. The experimentally established resolution of a
ice incorporating series-155 microcircuits does not exceed 40 ns. that is, less than

‘t a frequency of HTS timing-pulse sequence of 64 kHz.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
GUST l4287-69. "Magnetic-Tape Storage for Conputers. Test Methods."

\'.!’ um', R. A. and Srctenskiy, V. N., "Radiotekhnieheskiye izmereniya" [Radio-Techni-
cal Measurements), Moscow. Sov. radio, 1970.

(RIGHT: izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

3
1853/36

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.325.5z181.48

SPECIAL-PURPOSE PROCESSOR FOR RAPID FOURIER TXANSPORH

Leningrad oacnmzsrsrm VYCHISLITEL'NYKH srnumm I pno'rsrssov: pnorm'novmnr
srsrm WODA-VYVODA EVM in Russian No 8. 1981 (signed to press 31 Dec 80) pp 113-115

[Article by V. I. Gorelik, "Special-Purpose Processor for Rapid Fourier Transform".
from collection "Organizing Computer Structures and Processes: The Design of Computer
Input/Output Systems", edited by Z. l. Tsar'kova, Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universi-
teta, 2449 copies, 184 pages]

[Text] Most rapid Fourier transform algorithms (Kuli-T'yuki, Senda-T'yuki [transliter-
atcd] and others [1, 2]). which are employed to realize rapid spectral decomposition of
signals under study, make it possible to obtain decomposition coefficients whose se-
quence is doubly inverse with respect to the true [sequence]. This slows the research-
er's work considerably, which is most undesirable in real-time problem solving, and in
the case of large blocks makes it impossible (impossible are direct projection of the
spectrum on the oscillograph CRT and use of a plotter to plot the graph of the spectral
function).

The task of sorting the Fourier coefficients obtained from a rapid Fourier transform in
accordance with the double inversion rule is conventionally accomplished as follows.
lndices. the ordinal numbers of the elements of the input blocks, are represented in
the form of n-dimensional binary vectors

”={h’,ﬁ’,...,kn} '
where n = log”! . H - the dimensions of the input block, ﬁ‘-€{0,I} ,
Thus stored in memory is a rectangular matrix with dimensions H X n. The columns of
this matrix are then rearranged in accordance with the rule of the double inversion of

their numbers. that is. to a mirror image with respect to the mean matrix vertical, and
new index values calculated as binary sums

where if is the value of the j-th order of the number of the transformed matrix.

Addresses are then, finally. assigned to the elements of the input block in accordance
with the principle of indirect addressing

9m = 2(1) . i: I,2......a ,

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 7 - an unordered array of 7ourier coefficients,

0 - an ordered array of these coefficients.

rnis algorithm suffers the drawbacks of large memory consumption (both matrices occupy
a volume of M X n cells each) and the extended time required to generate these matrices.

' .e proposed method of ordering coefficients is free of these shortcomings; it requires
that a secondary array of numbers be found of the dimensions 14 X I. This permits a
great reduction in the storage required and an acceleration of the sorting process.
which contributes greatly to accelerating accomplishment of the task of determining

the spectrum of a signal as a whole.

the algorithm far processor operation consists essentially in the followixw. A referenc

block
2m=o, z(2)=2, 2(5):], 2(0)::

is wril.l.ell into memory. The first four elements of the secondary block (ordinal numbers

01 the desired block) are determined as follows:
, a)
(a) = :0)!” .

win-re 1': 1.2.3.” Inna/fl (for a specific M). The next element of the secondary block

is then analyzed:
1(m.j) =20”) '

ulzr-rc m - number in sequence of the element of the secondary block ( m= 5.6,"...4');
j — lhe number of the secondary block element under analysis among the block elements

under analysis.

Let us now look at two cases.
:2). ll 1077.))" the remaining elements of the secondary block are obtained by ad-
lluzp, to each preceding element of the secondary block. beginning with the second, the

units:
1(m.+l):l(2,j)+l,l(ln +2): 2(J,j)+l,...,l(Zm-2)sI(In-I,J')+I .

b). If ‘WJ)""" , then to each preceding element of the secondary block. beginning

with the second. we add the number N:
l(m+l)al(2,j)+ﬂ,l(m¢2)-Z(J,j)-MI,...,l(2m-2)-l(m-l,j)+N

md again analyze the following element of the secondary block (its number among the

vlmmnuzs analyzed will be j+l, while among the elements of the secondary block follow-

ing in order it will be 2m - 2 9 I a 2m - I.)

The formula used to analyze this element is as follows:
(I)

I(2m-I,j+l)=£-(MT"!-)-

I! this analyzed element equals 1. case a) is repeated and computation of the elements

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

of the secondary block discontinued, following which we make the next assignment
(ordering):

=. z(
y“) :( 2)), (2)

x - initial block. y - the unknown block and [a 1.2.3,...“g.

If the analyzed element is not equal to 1. however, we repeat case b). The analyzed
element is then computed in accordance with formula 1. The analysis continues until
the analyzed element does not equal 1. We then repeat variant a) and assign in accor-
dance with (2).

The figure is a structural diagram of the proces-
from rapid Fourier trans- sor performing these operations. Its operation
form processor consists in the following. At a signal from the
control unit (1) the reference block

:(l):0, z(2)-l, 2(J)=l , 2(4)=5-

is written into memory (2). The nonordered coef-
ficients are transferred to the memory of the spe-
cial processor (87,) [as published; possibly (3)

in diagram] from the processor realizing the rapid
Fourier transform of the signal. The control unit
transmits the signal to begin operation and controls
the operation of the microprocessor (4) in accordance with the algorithm presented above.
Thc Faurier coefficients are then ordered as follows:

 

y(l’)-:c(l(¢')) , i-I,:,J.... , ll .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta, 1981

8963
(ISO: [863/42

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3

DESIGNING SPECIAL-PURPOSE MICROPROCESSOR COMPUTERS

Moscow PROYEKTIROVANIYE SPETSIALIZIROVANNYKH MIKROPROTSBSSORNYKH VYCHISLITELEY in Rus-
sian 1981 (signed to press 13 Apr 81) pp 2-8, 160-161

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents from book "Special-Purpose Microproces-
sor Computer Design“. by Yuriy Fedorovich Mukhopad, USSR Academy of Sciences,
Siberian Division. lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 6500 copies. 161 pages]

. [Text] This work deals with theoretical and engineering problems associated with the
design of computers with a specific functional algorithm. A unified LSI circuit or

1C micro-assemblies are the components of execution. The book establishes applicability
for processing information on high-speed processes. real-time production control. signal
filtering and enhancing the productivity of general-purpose computers.

The book is intended for specialists in the fields of computer science and cybernetics
and oculd also be useful to graduate students as well as students in upper-level courses.

Introduction

An orientation toward raising the qualitative level of the planned development of vari-

ous branches of socialist industry. increasing the degree of automation and the achieve-
ment of higher levels of efficiency [1] dictates a comprehensive. integrated development

of computer technology, which is governed not only by the quantity of general-purpose
computers and their accompanying software. but also by the availability of microproces-

sor systems for computer information input and output and by the development of special—
purpose computer equipment and systems.

Present-day high-productivity computer systems incorporate 6-6 general-purpose proces-
sors and l2-20 special-purpose processors [2] to control information input and output.
plotters. displays. “automatic" text editors [3]. automatic readers etc. On the other
hand, the development of powerful associative information-processing systems confronts
designers with the necessity of creating an homogeneous optoelectronic system, each com-
ponent of which should essentially play the role of a special-purpose processor.

The employment of special-purpose computers and systems is also dictated by the need to
develop systems for real-time control of facilities and processes. where even with the
use of special programs the use of general-purpose microprocessors would be impossible
because of the requirements for high operating speeds and, at times, for reliability.
size and availability as well. In these systems, microprocessors may play the auxil-
iary role of an advanced arithmetic-logic unit, although simultaneously with the in-
corporation of parallel systems for high—speed execution of special functions. high-
speed execution of multiplication operations, special interfaces and control devices [6].

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tho availability of microetcclronic lﬁi circuits for working and permanent storage.
programmed logic matrices. microprocessors. analog-digital converters etc. has made it
possible to develop specialized computer hardware and systems with high levels of
standardization. while at the same time maintaining an effective problem orientation

as dictated by a particular sphere of application and requirements for specific fea-
tures [5].

The trend toward specialization has also emerged in consequence of the fact that the
increasing degree of component integration poses the problem of optimizing the correla-
tion of software programs and hardware and permits a number of subsystems (emulators,
translators etc.) to be fabricated in the form of special-purpose LSI-circuits.

Many tasks in the spheres of management and control require no calculations with accu—
racies greater than 0.1-0.5 per cent because of inaccurate raw information or error
characteristic of the particular control servo components involved. A relay or analog-
digital system functionally equivalent to the program as compiled. the general-purpose

structure and its execution proves in this instance to be operationally faster and more
reliable (above all because of the smaller number of components).

The need to search for a more generalized structure for computer hardware without lean~
inn upon general-purpose digital-computer structure has also arisen with the development
of analog-digital devices and their incorporation of the sequential principle of opera-
tion. This trend has now made its appearance in the specialized sphere of analog-to-
dlgitai information conversion. what with the fact that with coding comes the combina-

tion of the analog and digital noise-smoothing functions, functional scaling, informa-
tion storage etc.

The use of functional converters (both analog and digital) in analog-digital and special-
purpose devices eliminates the necessity of indicating the operation code, it being in
this instance sufficient to indicate only the fact of access to the functional converter.
A fundamental change is taking place in conception of the inter-relationship between
converters and memory. In place of the traditional sequence of AU-ZU-AU [arithmetical
unit-memory—arithmetical unit] transfers. the system now under discussion requires only
that we insure the proper transfer of information between functional converters with
storage of only a very limited number of intermediate results.

The concept "computer system" today is probably as broad as that of "computer hardware."
As applied to microelectroe'c equipment this term may be understood to refer to multi-
processor computer systems \particularly those combining 4. 8, 16 or more microproces-
sors) with parallel computers or a system of digital and analog hardware including
microelectronic versions of analog-code and code—analog converters. a microprocessor,
working and permanent storage. an input/output control system and special units con-
trolling the operation of the system as a whole.

Advances in the field of microelectronics permit utilization of the primarily hardware
realization by virtue of the low cost, small dimensions and reliability with a compara-
tively complex circuit in a single crystal. This book therefore deals primarily not
with problems in programming serial microprocessors in special-purpose systems. but
rather with those involving the development of a system of devices employing a variety

of microelectronic LSl-circuits, the principles governing optimum design of functional
expanders for microprocessor systems and with problems in the design of control devices
for special-purpose microprocessor systems.

He will be using the tern "computer" to refer to a physical device consisting of informa—
tion converters linked in a space-time relationship and realizing its functional purpose

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘K'IAI. “SF. ONLY

HI lnlormullnn processing through sequential movement of input information toward out—
nut terminals via converters with switching of converter functions if part of them can
he set to perform a certain set of elementary conversions.

A uumputcr tmst obviously consist of at least two basic units. A device consisting of
only a single unit would be simply an elementnry information converter. in this in—
stance. when the physical form, scale or codes of any two converters interacting in the
process of shifting information from input to output are not compatible. there must be

intermediate information converters matching the varying forms in which the information
is represented.

Tn define the structure of a system as the method of combining and inter-relating parts
within a whole with reference to computers requires that we answer the following ques-
tions: what do we mean by a "part of a system"; what kind of links are there between

those parts; and what law governs the changes in these links in both space and time.
uumputr: components comprise converters of information and the links between them.

An elenwnrary information converter would be a system P performing the function of map-
ping x I lx.xz. ..., xh) into set y - (y1yz. ..., yn}, where m and n are the numbers of

inputs/outputs of the elementary converter. Performing the function of an elementary
convorter may be a flip-flop. a register, an adder, logical m. n terminal. a more com—
plex funcrional converter or any computer, a microprocessor (or microprocessor system),
for example, whose internal structure we are not looking at, that is, it is incorporated
into the computer as a simple component which at this stage of the analysis will not be

broken down into simpler ones. Functional diode converters, components with discretely
Controlled parameters etc. constitute the elementary converters for hybrid computers.

The operator of an elementary converter determines its functional characteristics. in
th" case of the logic circuit this is a system of logical relationships, conversions
of the ex, sin x variety etc.

A unit capable 0f in turns performing the functions of several elementary converters
wu will refer to as a multifunction information converter.

Links between components may be spatial (connections between inputs and outputs). time
links (via memory and reading at the required moment) and space-time links (when the
result of conversion is stored in the converter itself).

The structure of a computer comprises a set of inter-connected information converters.
A structural description would thus include the operators of all elementary information
converters, an enumeration of the input and output variables for each converter and in-
formation on both space and time converter links.

The block diagram would consist of the various converters and the spatial links between
lLem, while the structure emerges with additional information on the time relationships
between the converters, in the form. for example. of the flow diagrams of programs,

mic l uprograms etc .

We will be distinguishing between structures with static and dynamic links. Structures

with static links comprise that number of elementary converters which is sufficient to
represent the entire mapping sequence by means of the elementary converters and the

system of spatial links between them. Structures with static links correspond to the
case of functional decomposition. These would include analog and hybrid systems etc.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Structures with dynamic links have only a limited number elementary converters and
require repeated temporary access to them in the process of computer conversion of
the information.

The process of switching from structural description to operator (analysis) is unambig-
nous. In a number of instances the operator cannot be fully determined. since that de-
pends upon a specific value of a number of parameters (contents of program memory, for
example). In this instance, however. the structure will be taken as given if the com-

ponent operators are given and we know the algorithm for interaction between components
in both space and time.

A reverse switch from the computer operator to the structure (synthesis) is multivalued
and poses the problem of optimizing the switch. the criterion for which is the simplicity
of the resulting structure and the elementary converters. decision time, the minimum of
converters of a specific type etc.

He will be identifying the concept of the structure of a piece of computer hardware with
that of the structure of a computer with dynamic links. The term "special-purpose com-
puter" reflects the optimum adaptation (in terms of operational speed, for example) of

a structure for solution of a specific category of problem.

This work generalizes the experience in designing special-purpose computers gained by
the computer science department of the Eastern Siberian Technological Institute. The
author wrote Sect. 2.4 together with V. K. Popkov and A. I. Fedchenko; 2.5 with V. A.
Molodkin; 3.5 with K. A. Sharov; 4.1 with V. K. Popkov; 5.1 with T. S. Badmayev and 5.6
with L. 0. Berezkov. Professor V. B. Smolov helped to formulate many of the problems
dealt with in the book. This book could not have appeared without many years of sup-
port on the part of A. A. Nerchenko. candidate of technical sciences. The author ex—
presses his deep appreciation to M. V. Hokhosoyev, doctor of technical sciences. and
Professor D. Sh. Frolov for creating conditions favorable for scientific work.

Table of Contents
Introduction . ........ ................................................... 3

Chapter 1. Structural organization and automatic models of special-purpose

computers ................................................... 9
l l Automatic models of discrete information converters .... —
[.2 Models of analog-digital computers ..................... ll
[.3 Generalized model of a special-purpose computer ........ 13
I A Analysis of computer structures based upon automatic models. 22
I 5 Special-purpose processor for solving problems on graphs ... 28
Chapter 2. functional converters ........ ............................... 34
2.l Tabular functional converters ............ .............. -—
2.2 Tabular-algorithmic functional converters .............. 38
2.3 Geometric coding in functional converters for permanent
storage ...... ..................................... ..... 44
2.0 Optimizing functional converters for permanent storage with
geometric coding ............. ..... ..................... 68
2.5 Analog-digital functional converters ........ ......... .. 56

Chapter 3. Method of designing operating units for special -purpose com-

puters . ....... .............. ....... ........................ 69

3. l Methodology of designing special-purpose computer structures --

3.2 Optimizing schedules for the computational process ..... 81
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.] One method of breaking down complex operators algorithmi-
cally ..... .............. .............. ..... ... .........
3.4 Using statistical characteristics of algorithms in designing
special-purpose computers ................... ..... ......
3.5 Evaluating the accuracy of special-purpose computers
Chapter A. control components fbr special-purpose computers ........ ...
4.1 Control of the computational process in analog-digital com-
puters ......... ............................. ...........
4.2 Algorithm for controlling nonordinary commutators ......
4.3 Independent—address organization of control in special-pur-
pose computers ................ ..... .............. ......
4.& Optimizing multiprograu automatic machines .. ..........
4.5 Synthesizing a high-speed system for interacting automatic
machines .................................... ........ ...
Chapter 5. Application of special-purpose computers ..... ....... ....... .
5.1 Automatic realization of a subscriber register .........
5.2 Control of a manipulator robot .........................
5.3 Image-comparison processor ................. ..... .......
5.4 Navigation computers ....... ....... ....................
5.5 Digital filter for a nonsteady-state signal with minimum dy-
namic error ............................................
5.6 Processor for aircraft landing control ..... ............
Hibliogxuphy . ..... .......................................... ............

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981.

8963
cso: 1863/40

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (DI-'II'N'IAI. USE UNI)

UDC 681.3
IMAGE-COMPARISON PROCESSOR

Moscow PROYEKTIROVANIYE SPETSlALIZlROVANNYKH MIKROPROTSBSSORNYKB VYCHISLITELEY in Rus-
sian 1981 (signed to press 13 Apr 81) pp l39-lb0

[Section 5.3 from book "Special-Purpose Microprocessor Computer Design", by
aniy Fedorovich Hukhopad, USSR Academy of Sciences. Siberian Division,
lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 6500 copies. 161 pages]

[Text] The image-comparison system constitutes an important control component in con—
nection with the control of rolling mills. systems automatically navigating ships in
areas of complex bottom relief. aerial photography. in automatic reading machines as
well as in other extreme-correlation systems [96-99]. These systems have two kinds of
storage (a unit storing references and unidentified images), a correlator, an image in—
put and coding system. an address unit and a control unit. Let us look [97-99] at a
version of a processor for comparing images on a photomatrix and using counters (with
reference to coordinates x and y) in a microprocessor (Figure 71).

If the field of an unidentified image A having dimen-
sions m x n is larger than that of reference 8. having
dimensions p x q, p S m, q s n. the problem consists
not only in determining the presence of one of the
standards 3;. 82. ..., B; in the unknown image. but
also in establishing its location (with respect to
coordinates x and y) in field A. In accordance with
one strategy cr another [96], the address unit should
accordingly scan field B with reference to field A;
each time a section of the unidentified image of dimen-
sion 8 is compared with coordinates :k’ yr, the micro-

 

processor ahould compare the value of the correlation

Figure 71: l - input unit; function from the preceding comparison xk—l’ yr_l.

frolaiﬂiijsaug‘ghozomsizg;; By looking at a specific reference Bj it can be decided

5 - analog—digital convert- that it is present in field A if the correlation func—

or; 6 - storage; 7 - u/i tion for Bj has a larger value.

image; 8 - reference; 9 -

- microprocessor; 10 - cor- In this solution the microprocessor performs the func—
relctor. tion of a logic unit (the operation of selecting the

maximum of the correlation function and recording
coordinates xk, yr); the control and address units are realized independently. while

the informatlon component constitues the series of inter-related units from the input
unit to the correlator.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ruulizability of the processor as a whole is governed by successful design of the
structural and functional components of the control and address units, the correlator
and the coding unit. the remaining components being available from industry in the form
of nif—the—shelf LSI-circuita.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

96. Beloglazov, l. N. and Tarasenko. V. P.. "Korrelyetsionno-ekstremal'nyye sistemy"
[Extreme-Correlation Systems]. Moscow, Sov. radio, 197A, 392 pp.

97. Patent 3967261 (US). lss. 1976.
98. Patent 3950635 (US). 138. 1976.

99. Gerbunov. V. L., Gorpushenkov. A. N.. Lapenko, V. N. et a1, "Device for Determining
the Coordinates of an Object", ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIRA, Ser. 10 Mikroelektronnyye
ustroystva, 1979, No 5(17). pp 35-60.

100. Kruglikov. S. V.. "Integral'nyye fotochuvstvitel'nyye koordinatnyye matritsy"
[Integral Photosensitive Coordinate Matrices], Moscow, 1978. 40 pp.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'Stvo “Neuka”, 1981.

8963
CSO: 1863/40

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IlSI-i ONLY

4K MEMORY UNIT BASED UPON PLANE MAGNETIC DOHAINS

Moscow IDDBLIROVANIYE I OPTIMIZATSIYA SLOZHNYKH SISTEH UPRAVLENIYA in Russian
1981 (signed to press 8 Jun 81) PP 2117—250

[Article by S. I. Kasatkin from collection "Modeling and Optimizing Complex Control
Systems" edited by Ya. Z. Tsypkin. USSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks".
2350 copies. 265 pages]

[Text] The device here proposed is a memory unit on plane magnetic domains. the memories
on which are being developed by the Institute of Problems in Control. The magnetic ma-
trix in which information is written. transferred and read is a thin permalloy ferromag-
netic film applied to a glass substrate.

in the magnetic matrix are formed regions of weaker coercive force (channels) relative
to the primary region (array). The information carriers are plane magnetic domains (PHD).
which are formed. propagated and then destroyed in the low-coercivity channels. All
these operations occur as a result of external magnetic fields generated by conductor
systems etched in foil or wound coils. A number of methods of transferring information
within the matrix have now been proposed. and each naturally has its drawbacks and ad-
vantages. The method upon which is based the device proposed here offers the following
features: high information density, high operational clock frequency, lower power con-
sumption, no wound shift coil, simpler conductor and matrix topology and, accordingly.
greater technological efficiency and ease of integration. The open registers. which
require the rewriting of information read, mat be considered a drawback. Its basic
elements include write selection. domain shift and read selection. These operations
are described below.

General description. The chip consists of a magnetic matrix on a glass substrate with
two layers of conductors on two-sided foil integrated with the matrix. All of this is

contained in a standard package.

Chip capacity I. kbits Maximum input (f I 50 kHz) 4 w
Number or registers 32 Maximum current 600 M
length of l register l28 bits Redundancy 5-fold
Maximum clock frequency 50 kHz Read signal 1 mV
Maximum data-transmission 1.6 mbit/s Package dimensions 30x48 m3
s eed

NEmher of contact-s (.6 Substrate dimensions 30146 on“

The registers are open; reading therefore requires rewriting. Information is preserved
when power is disconnected.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI-It'Ml. UNI: ONLY

A method similar to the Broadbent method is employed to shift domains in the matrix.
It consists in the following: it uses two layers of conductors having the form of a
meander and shifted relative to one another the width of “re conductor. Selection of
the pulse sequence makes it possible to obtain unidirectional domain movement while
generating traveling waves of the transfer and erase fields along the channel.

Let us assume we have a domain in a low-coercivity channel and equal in length to the
width of two buses. If we supply a positive pulse to the l+ bus and a negative pulse

to the 2+ bus. the part of the domain under the 2+ bus is erased; the part of the do-
main under the 1+ bus is preserved and the domain is shifted under the 2' bus (in this
part of the 2' bus the current has the opposite direction because of the shape of the
conductor). The domain is not shifted further, since the magnetic field in bus 1' holds
the domain. We see after the [st cycle that, having preserved its dimensions. the do-
nmin has been shifted one bus width. The second cycle requires negative pulses to buses

1+ and 2+, the 3d cycle a negative pulse to bus 1+ and a positive pulse to bus 2*. Fi-
nally. in the 4th cycle positive pulses are supplied to both buses 1+ and 2*, This 13

a ﬁ-cycle system.

The chip has 32 registers. write-read selection is employed because of the large number

of contacts and the impossibility of accommodating 32 induction read coils. All regis-
ters are combined into groups of a. For each group there is 1 write bus and 1 read
coil.

Four selection buses (for the entire chip) are required for read selection. This works
as follows. write and selection bus currents are selected such that to write a domain
in a channel is possible only if the currents in both buses coincide (the selection bus
lies above the write bus). The topology of the channels is such that the domain write
regions are shifted with respect to one another within each group of four; above each
write region is only one selection bus and a common write bus for the group as a whole.
Immediately behind the selection buses are the shift meanders. For clarity's sake let
us designate the selection bus nearest the meanders 81. the one behind it 52 etc. Do-
main write occurs initially in the register above which lies an 81 bus. A positive
pulse is supplied to Si (see figure). If i is to be written. a positive pulse is sup-
plied to the write bus. The points coincide. and the domain, which constitutes an in-
formational unit, is written. If 0 must be written, no pulse is fed to the write bus
and the domain is not written. This channel state corresponds to an informational null.
Nothing occurs in the remaining registers, since in these registers the write bus does
not coincide with Si. A positive pulse is then fed to 82 as well. The write bus func-
tions in the same way as described above. Information is written in the 2d register.
Once again. nothing changes in the remaining registers. Following termination of the
write pulse a positive pulse is fed to $1 (the pulse continues to give effect in 52).

By the pulse supplied to 82 the domain reaches the shift meanders. In the 3d cycle a
positive pulse is fed to S3. while following the termination of the write pulse positive
pulses are supplied to both 51 and $2. In the 4th cycle. a positive pulse is fed to Sb,
while following termination of the write pulse positive pulses are fed to s). 82 and S3.
Then. as the domains reach the regions of the shift meanders, shift pulses are supplied
to these meanders. The magnetic fields draw the domains under the buses, that is, the
information-transfer process now begins.

As has been pointed out above, 1 group of registers (6 registers) has I read coil. Read
signals are selected by means of the difference in the length of the channels from the
meander to the read coils and, accordingly. by the different path traveled by the do-
mains in the different registers of the grOup. (The read signal is induced in the read
coil by the demagnetizing fields of the top of the domain; it is therefore clear that
the presence of the signal corresponds to l.'its absence to 0.) The delay time between

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-1('IAI. “SI-I ONLY

 

” signals on one coil is approximately
’"‘ 2 u and nay vary in either direction.
4. Induced in the read coil each cycle
is a packet of faur pulses. each of
4; which lags behind its neighbor by some
2 us.
4: -
‘7 h_um_~__ | | The magnetic matrix consists of direct
“ low-coercivity channels expanded to
/; write and read domains. Each register
comprises 5 identical channels, which
“1 makes it possible to increase the read
” signal and enhance the operational re-
" liability of the device, since it will
I," A A ______LA__ still be able to function with faulty

t channels. (The read portions are sep—
arated.) The low—coercivity channels
are 25 u wide.

The layer of conductors nearest the matrix consists of write buses. a shift meander and

read coils. This layer has 34 contacts. The repetition interval of the meander buses
is 300 u

The second layer of conductors has selection buses, a shift meander and a read shift

and erase coil. This layer has 12 contact area. Their dimensions are approximately
I new .

Part of the [oil is bent aside so as to destroy the vertical component of the shift
magnetic field in the read coil. which produces interference. The topology of the coil
is such that this bending forms two identical portions with vertical components of op-
posite directionality. -

The chip has 15 control circuits: 8 write circuits. 4 selection circuits, 2 shift meanders

and 1 shift coil for reading. There are 8 read channels functioning simultaneously. in
addition to the write circuits. each circuit requires the generation of doublet pulses
up to 0.6 A in amplitude. A pulse diagram for f - 50 kHz is shown in the figure. To
function the chip requires 8 read amplifiers with a sensitivity of 0.5-1 mV.

COPYRIGHT: IzdaLel'stvo "Nauka". 1981

8903
C50: I863/39

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'T'IHAI. "SI-I ONLY

SOFTUIRB

UDC 681.3.068
FOKAL-l975 ALGORITHHIC LANGUAGE INTERPRETER FOR SARATOV-Z COMPUTER

Leningrad ORGANIZATSIYA VYCHISLITEL'NYKH STRUKTUR I PROTSESSOV: PROYEKTIROVANIYE
SISTEH VVODA-VYVODA BVM in Russian No 8. 1981 (signed to press 31 Dec 80) pp 34-41

[Article by P. c. Kolin'ko. "FOKAL-l975 Interpreter of FOKAL Algorithmic Language for
SAkATOV—Z Computer". from collection "Organizing Computer Structures and Processes:
The Design of Computer Input/Output Systems", edited by Z. l. Tsar'kova. Izdatel'stvo
Leningradskogo universiteta, 2469 copies. 184 pages]

[Text] Introduction. The FOKAL—l975 interpreter is an improved modification of the

FOKAL-l969 interpreter and the POKAL-8K version of it which has been developed to maxi-
mize exploitation of the capabilities offered by the SARATOV-Z computer:

individual devices to control the high-speed punched-tape reader, tape punch and 1/0
via an electric typewriter;
an auxiliary arithmetical unit performing the operations of fixed-decimal multiplica-

tion and division;
an internal storage capacity of 32K words (eight fields).

The individual addresses for exchange with the punched-tape reader. tape punch and
electric typewriter. which make it difficult to operate the FOKAL-l969 interpreter
with the SARATOV-Z. are used in the FOKAL-l975 to organize the simultaneous operation
of these devices.

With comparatively minor modifications in the unit interpreting floating—decimal opera-
tions, the auxiliary arithmetical unit has made possible substantial reductions in com—
puting time. reaching 40 per cent in the case of some tasks.

The internal storage capacity. which has been enlarged eight-fold as compared with
earlier models of the SARATOV computer. makes it possible to allocate individual 6K-
flclds not only for the FOKAL program. as is done in the POKAL-8K interpreter. but also

for the variable table and the set of programs interrupting and operating the computer's
external devices. The volume of the variable table in the FOKAL-l975 interpreter can
thus be enlarged to 817. that is. more than four-fold as compared with the FOKAL-8K.

The place freed in the memory field occupied by the FOKAL interpreter has been used to

augment the capacity of the latter.

Hark on improvement of the FOKAL interpreter has proceeded in three directions:

1) expansion of the input language;

2) modernization of the set of programs handling interruptions with a view to more ef-
ficient utilization of the external devices of the basic system;

3) providing a capability for unlimited extension of the number of service peripherals.
means of processing information from them etc. without intervention in the interpreter

(an "external function" device).
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The FOKAL-l975 interpreter may be operated with the SARATOV-Z or an analogous compu-

ter with an internal memory capacity of at least [6K in the absence of external func-
tions. at least 32K with use of the latter; the set of 1/0 devices includes the elec-
triv typewriter (address 03 for input, 04 for output, the high-speed reader (address

0|) and the tape punch (address 02).

For full utilization of the capabilities of the interpreter it is also desirable to
have an alphanumeric plot printer (ATsPU) (address 66) and a timer with a 0.2 s pulse
transmission frequency (address 15).

The interpreter capabilities and features described below are given in accordance with
the version of this device dating from 25 July 1977.

Expansion of input language. The input language of the POKAL-l975 interpreter has been
expanded over that of the FOKAL-l969 by introducing an auxiliary operator L in twelve
modifications and additional control symbols and capabilities in a number of other lan-
guage operators. Program compatibility was insured so as to permit programs prepared
for the FOKAL-l969 interpreter to be executed by the FOKAL-l975 without any modifica—
tions. The following are the major modifications and additions to the input language:

a) modifications making it more convenient to work with the interpreter. These include:
operator L:. which cuts off the computer's colon print with number input by operator
ASK; operator L-. which cuts off output of the equal sign with number print by operator
TYPE; a capability for printing parts of the variable table. which is provided by oper-
ator TSA, where A is the name of the variable (with index, perhaps) beginning with which
the table is to be printed; a capability for translating lines of the electric typewriter
print without return of the carriage. which is delayed by the control symbol I in opera-
tor TYPE or ASK and a capability for preserving a previous variable value by executing
input operator ASK. Rather than inputting a number. this now requires input of the syn-
bol "TABULATOR" and the interpreter prints out the value of the stored variable in the
operative format; if operator ASK inputs a number. the interpreter will ignore all sym-
bols up to the first decimal point, digit or "minus" sign; the FOKAL—l969 interpreter.
on the other hand. accepts these symbols as an input bOundary and takes zero as a vari-
able, and it is impossible to correct an error without repeating the orecution nf oper-
ator ASK from the beginning. This capability offered by the FOKAL-l975 interpreter not
only neutralizes the effect of extended user error due to the printing of numbers in the
wrong register. but also permits the input from punched tape of numbers supplied it by
operator TYPE. Operator L N is used to establish the number input mode to be employed
in the FOKAL-l9ﬁ9 interpreter. which is necessary to input information in text form;
operator L (without suboperators) Supplies the electric typewriter the current storage
dllnruiiun of the FOKAL program and the variable table; the symbol "TRANSLATB LINE"

must he entered twice to print a line to the end while working with operator MODIFY.

The new number which will be assigned the line in storage may be printed in the space
between the two translations of the line. The line with the former number in the form
in which it was before it was changed is at the same time preserved in program storage.
This nnkes it possible to renumber lines. reproduce them. divide them into parts etc;

operators L, D and u may each have a number of arguments divided by commas, which is
equivalent to executing a sequence of operators with one argument. "hen the program
lines and line groups indicated in it are fed to the keypunch machine. the operator

u “. l.3. 8.4. 17 thus formulates the output in the form of a single region set off
by an asterisk. whereas operators H 2; H 1.3; H 8.6; H 17 cannot. first. be written in
a single line and second, they formulate the output in the form of four separate regions;

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘I-‘N'IM. NSF. "NIX

h) Tiuur operation. The timer is controlled by the operators

L Z - time counter reset;

L T - time counter print and

L T A - assigment of current time value in seconds to indicated variable A.

The time counter is operated by the program handling interrupts from the timer. The

counter functions only when the interpreter performs calculations in accordance with

the program and stops if the interpreter is waiting for a free output or the next in—
struction from the user;

c) Actual-output unit setting. The FOKAL—l975 language has no special means of supply-

ing information to any unit other than the electric typewriter. But by switching the

address of the actual output. the operators controlling output to the electric typewriter

will supply information to other units of the computer system.

Th following operators are used to switch these units:

— set output to keypunch machine;

- set output to alphanumeric plotter;

— set output to display (reserve);

- set output to electric typewriter with simultaneous cancellation of the result of
Operator action L =,L: and L N (see above)-

I.
I.

e
P
A
Ll)
[K

Regardless of which of these devices has been designated the output unit. the electric
typewriter will be supplied an echo print of input information. an asterisk indicating
transfer of control to the user. a colon indicating anticipation of number input by
operator ASK; results of MODIFY operator functioning and information that computation
has been interrupted because of user error.

Following a report of information on an error, the electric typewriter will always be
the actual output unit.

Operators L K and L A have modification L K n and L A n, where n is a whole decimal
-4:;-: -nd regulate the width of the print field ‘or n positions. If n is not specified

the field is set for the standard width: 80 symbols for the electric typewriter. on sym-
bols for the alphanumeric plotter;

d) Access to external functions. This is controlled by the operators

L R name (arguments) or
L H name (arguments). These are described below in a separate section.

interrupt handling. A set of interrupt-handling programs services the peripheral de-
vices of the basic computer system. Information is exchanged with all peripheral de-
vices vla cyclic buffers specially allocated in internal storage. when information is
transferred to several buffers. the corresponding components function simultaneously.
When information is fed to the electric typewriter and alphanumeric plotter, a count is

made of the number of symbols printed in a line. If the number of symbols exceeds the
width of the print field. they automatically advance to a new line.

Timer operation consists in adding the value of the timer interval to a special counter

recording the expenditure of machine time. The computer reacts to interruptions from
the timer only if it is performing program calculations. An interrupt from the timer
is blocked during waits for a peripheral unit to be freed in the case of buffer over-
flow or for instructions from the user. Time counter capacity is approximately 37

hours.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
During the processing of input from the electric typewriter. the program handling inter-
rupts identifies and processes the directive symbol codes. Directives are given from
the electric typewriter in the form of Latin-register letters with the "kontrol'" key
depressed. In addition to the kontr./s directive. which indicates an interruption of

calculation from the control console. FOKAL-l975 also accepts the following directives:
l) Kontr./S - determine status of computer.

The machine prints information on its status at the moment the directive is given:
SChET - program computations;

STOP - awaiting user instructions;

ATsPU - hung up on ATsPU flag query; awaiting free ATsPU buffer;

PFL - same - for PFL [tape punch].

Printed in the line following one of these reports is the number of the program line to
be executed and the last symbol scanned in this line. The directive permits determina-
tion of the status of the machine without interrupting computation;
2) Kontr./Z - (equivalent to operator L z);
3) Kontr./T - print time counter contents (equivalent to L T);

Kontr./P - start tape punch;

Kontr./A - start alphanumeric plotter.

The last two directives are used in the case of hangup in querying the flag of the cor-
responding units, which frequently occurs when they are switched on in the process of
interpreter operation.

The interrupt-handling program also identifies unrecognized interruptions with printout
of the addresses of the units corresponding to them. resets flags and inhibits interrup-
tion from all peripheral units except system components and controls the restart.

Together with the facilities for expanding the FOKAL language, the interrupt-handling
program permits the functioning of the interpreter without any correction of its contents
from the computer console. This is a condition necessary for several users to use the
FOKAL-l975 interpreter in the time-sharing mode, which requires only the replacement of

several blocks of the interrupt-handling program.

External functions unit. The unit connecting external functions is the most important
and essential feature of the FOKAL-l975 interpreter. one making it indispensable for
automating scientific experiments with external devices developed for use with the Sara-
tov computers and machines identical to them. With a minimum of limitations and given
certain arrangements for communications. the external functions unit permits users to
compile and switch to the FOKAL-l975 interpreter programs providing exchange of informa-
tion with the widest variety of units and exploit the full potential of FOKAL language

to compile programs to process information obtained from these devices.

The FOKAL program makes external functions available with the use of the operators
L R name (argument I. argument 2. ..., argument n) or

L w name (argument I. argument 2. ..., argument n).
The number of arguments is arbitrary. but it will be not less that 2 and no greater than

22. The first argument must be a variable (with or without index). It is the first com-
ponent of the exchange file. The second and subsequent arguments must be expressions.

A zero argunent may be omitted and only the comma following it retained. The second
argument gives the number of elements in the exchange file. If it equals zero, the ex-
change [ile consists of a single element. When operator L R calls up a function. the
exchange file is transferred from a special buffer zone to variable-table storage (read
function); with a call by operator L w it is transferred from variable storage to the
buffer zone (write function). The FOKAL-l975 interpreter handles both forms of access

in an identical manner in all other instances as well.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The name of the function. consisting of any electric typewriter symbols. with the excep-
tion of the signs for arithmetical operations, spaces. brackets. periods. commas and
uqunl signs (expression limiters). is converted to a lZ—character binary code. which is
transmitted to the first cell of the argument buffer. Values of the second and subse-
quent function arguments are transferred to the remaining cells. As are the elements
of the exchange file. these values are transmitted in a form with a floating decimal
point in another code. The interpreter analyzes neither the name of the function not
the meaning of the arguments. After transmission of the arguments (and for the write
function. of the exchange file). control is transferred to the first cell of the zone
of external function mediums. where must be initiated the program identifying the name
of the function and transferring control to it. Two interpreter inputs are provided
for return from a functional medium: one for normal return, the other for emergency re-
turn. in the case of normal return. the interpreter accepts the exchange file (for the
read function) and continues with that pass of the program. In an emergency return the
interpreter gives the standard error message. The program executing the external func-
tion must transmit a code symbol via the computer accumulator. which will be printed on
lhu electric typewriter and serve to specify the error detected. In particular, if the
function called up is not on the list of those available in memory. the code for symbol
2 must be transmitted to the interpreter.

One of the names reserved for a null function is the name ARR. when it finds this name
the noun-recognition program should immediately return control to the interpreter. The
functions L RARR (name, quantity) and L “ARR (name. quantity) thus generated enlarge
interpreter capacity. They can be used to provide functions employing the exchange file
as both input and output information. Buffer exchange—file storage may also be used to
expand variable-table capacity. to store informatiOn when the variable table is erased.
to rename files. to reduce two files to one and vice versa etc.

The greatest limitation imposed upon the use of external devices in external-function
mediums is the need to take into account the specific nature of the operation of the
computer interrupt system: any device which can cause interruption must be serviced
during an illegal interruption. After leaving the external function the interrupt must
be permitted. while the device is brought to a state in which it cannot cause interrup-
tions. Use of basic system components is not recoammnded.

The interpreter places two subprograms at the disposal of developers of external function
programs: one for output of a symbol for actual output and one for freeing output buf-
fers. The latter program has to be called up if interruption has to be inhibited for
comparatively long periods of time.

To identify possible departures from the interface convention on the part of external
function library developers. the interpreter provides a capability for diagnosing the
correctness of store-indicated transfers and an instruction to stop at the first cell of
the interpreter memory field. A stop or identification of an illegal store—indicated

transfer means that there has been an improper return to the interpreter or a malfunc-
tion of it. Departures from the rules governing use of the interrupt mode are identi-
liud by the interrupt-handling program. which prints out on the electric typewriter the
address of the units causing the illegal interrupts. after which it inhibits interrupts

from all units except those of the basic system.

The FOKAL-i975 interpreter described here thus substantially enhances the possibilities
offered by the use of the SARATOV-Z computer. which is becoming not simply an autonomous
computer. but a fairly powerful scientific research tool for developing automated con-
trol systems as well.

COPYRLCHT: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universitets. I981

8963 30

C50: 1863/42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1M. I'Sl-i UNIS

APPLICATIONS

press 26 Dec 80) pp 3-19

[Article by I. A. Kuz'min from collection "Automation of Geophysical Research",
edited by Candidate of Physicomathemeticel Sciences I. A. Kuz'min. Kol'skiy filial

increase of the amount of data.

The problem of digital recording and storage of geophysical data is now becoming
acute. It should he noted that tine-sharing of the data gathering process and
data processing frequently leads to the fact that these data are not generally
processed. Therefore. the probleu of data gathering and processing in real time
using measuring-calculating systems based on computers arises in geophysics in
automation of scientific research.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘K'IM. NSF ONLY

Besides development of real-time information gathering and processing systems,
autonomous intonation recorders for gathering data under field expeditionary con-
ditions should be developed. These recorders should be used as magnetic tape in-
formation carriers and should have the capability of processing this information
with a high time-transformation factor at the regional center [2).

The problem of tying measurements to a single accurate time is of important signif-
icance to the entire automated data gathering network.

Existing systems for automation of experimental investigations. There are new dif-
ferent versions of organization of systeas for automation of scientific research of
large academic institutes. in example of the branched structure based on a
multimachine complex is the Collective-Use Experimental Computer system (EVS KP),
Latvian SSR Academy of Sciences, which is a multilevel hierarchical system that
combines programing and specialized macro-, mini- and micromachines into a unified
computer complex that makes available all equipment, information support and soft-
ware for collective use by scientific workers of the Latvian SSR Academy of Sci-
ences [3]. The svs KP consists of three main parts (Figure l): a central computer
complex, communications channels and subsystems of the institutes.

.7
8
I
I
I
l
I
I
I
I
I
I
l
.I

tc-wo tc-wo um [1m

'2‘: .e

F
I
|
l
l
l
|
I.
I.
|
I
I
I

In W WWW (”WW

Figure 1. Experimental Collective-Use Computer System of Latvian SSR Academy
of Sciences

[Key on following page]

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. External storage 5. Up to one million bands
2. Central measuring complex 6. Sweystess of institutes
3. Up to 9.600 baud: 7. Miscellaneous institutes
4. Communications channels 8. Institutes of Akademgorodok

The central computer complex (TsVK) includes an information-computer and buffer
subsystem. The basis of the first subsystem are four macromachines: two Yes-1030
type computers and two #4030 ASVT (mdular system of computer technology) type
computers. The presence of these two types of computers permits the system nucleus
to work with any type of operating systems or even with two operating systans
simultaneously. The capability of the 31-4030 mter to work both with the DOS
[Disk operating system) of the ASVT and the uses [Cperating system of the unified
computer system] provides this possibility. The buffer part of the complex con-
sists of two minimachines of type 14-400 and makes connections through the conun-
ications channels of the institute subsystem. The macrcmachines are joined to each
other by the common field of the external storage and to the buffer linimachines by
means of special multichannel adapters (A) .

The institute subsystems are the lower level of hierarchy of the zvs KP and are
developed on the basis of mini- and micromachine cosplexes (m). connection is

plex. It may consist both of a simple user console with display and of a multi-
machine complex of mini- and micmcoeputers. The main characteristic of the lower

operators and programers. As indicated by practice. a dialogue is extremely
effective in practice in all problems at any level (debugging, calculation check-
ing, printout of results and interpretation and so on).

The multimachine system of the LIYaP [Leningrad Institute of Nuclear Physics] ,
USSR Academy of Sciences, is also organized on the hierarchical principle [41.
The first measuring-cowuter multimachine complexes were put into operation in
1969. A design for a multimachine automated complex has now been developed and
introduced. The project will require 8-10 years for total fulfillment. The sub-

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The multinachine automated comlex being designed will also have a hierarchical
structure with the capability of even greater autonomy of collective—use multi-
machine laboratory systems (SKP) that service experiments in the basic directions
of fundamental research at the institute. All the SKP will be connected through
a computer-concentrator to the main computers of the complex (DESK-6 and Yes—1060
conputers). Each SKP includes remote measuring stations (015) and terminals for
operational work with data banks (TOP). A typical UIS consists of mini- or micro-
computers. integration apparatus in the cmc standard and information display de-
vices. An example of a collectives-use system based on the “-4030 ASVT is the SKP
for servicing experiments conducted using a type WR-H type reactor (Figure 2).
The existing system (Ms-67) that supports a group of experiments in nuclear
physics and solid-state physics has been connected directly to the baseline com-
puter. The measuring stations (015) are connected to the baseline M-4030 conputer
by apparatus in the CANAC standard and a buffer minicomputer of type ”-400. This
organization of communications with the lower level of the system is independent
of the type of computer of the remote station and provides the capability of easy
expansion of the system. A subsystem based on the Yes-1010 conputer is designed
for input and editing of information related to the activity of the data center
of LIYaF.

 

Figure 2. Collective-Use System of Neutron Research Laboratory, Leningrad
Institute of Nuclear Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences

[Key on following page]

310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Key continued from preceding page]:

1. To LIYaF network 4. Sid
2. Computer 5. Graph
3. Graph plotter

The automatic scientific research systems of the Physics Institute, USSR Academy

of Sciences, are constructed on this principle [5, 6]. The computer system is cre-
ated on the basis of a mini- and microcomputer network without the use of a central
computer complex based on macrocomuters. All the processors of the system are
equivalent and calculations are exchanged and organized through an exchange main-
line by comunications controlled by special processor. A model of the system for
automation of large research installations, where the two remote subsystems con-
structed on the principle of a sequential ring mainline are shown, is shown in
Figure 3. The message exchange mainline and sequential ring mainline were realized
in the CMAC standard. The processors of individual subsystems are connected to
each other on the "driving—driving" principle, thus forming a multiprocessor system
operating with a common user field. The computer resources are distributed by se-
quential. data-transmission mainlines. The considered model is the basis of the
design on which a system for automation of the powerful laser installation Del'fin
was developed at FIAN [Physics Institute imeni P. N. laebedev, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences] to investigate problems of thermonuclear fusion {7].

The principle of constructing the typical structure of scientific research automa-
tion complexes based on the use of a standardized machine-independent mainline in-
formation exchange system (UMSO) between the computers, specialized external de-
vices and experimental data gathering equipment contained in the complex [8, 9] was
developed at the Institute of Automatics and Electrometry (nit) and the Special
Design Office for Scientific Instrument Building (SKB NP), Siberian Department,
USSR Academy of Sciences. The UHSO consists of a communications processor that
supports interaction between users. Each user is represented in the mso by a
standardized user controller and by his own user interface. The system Emotions
on the "request-answer" principle in the systems-user controller interaction mode.
According to (9], the use of the UHSO has the following advantages:

adoption of the machine-independent standard made it possible to limit one-
self to development of a single version of the system structure:

use of the UMSO makes it possible to simplify development of systems software
since any of the computers contained in this system regards the entire aggregate
of remaining components as a single active external device, the rules of exchange
with which have been standardiZech

the use of UMSO to organize multimachine complexes permits step by step de-
velopment of systems with gradual build-up of specialized equipment and software;

the system is "homogeneous" in hardware with data gathering systems fulfilled
in the CAMAC stamard since it utilizes the design principles of this standard.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Model of Autanation Weteln of Physics Institute imeni P. N.

QQQMBHNH
.

9.
10.

Iabedev. USSR Academy of Sciences

Sequential ring nainline

cam portable data gathering and control stations
CAMAC of remote computer resources

Optical communications

Driver

Exchange control processor

Message exchange mainline

Mini-computer processor

Terminator

Device for communicating with investigator

of Terrestrial Magnetism, the Ionosphere and Radio Wave Propagation, USSR Academy
of Sciences] [10, ll]. The KIM mum ionosphere diagnostic couple: (10!):
which is based on two Yes-1010 and Yes-1020 canputers, has been developed there.
The designation of the ID)! is partial or complete automation of such processes as
digitization and entry of the data tron complex sensors into the computer, filtra-
tion, spectral and correlation analysis of signals, calculation of convolutions,
threshold processing and control of data gathering and processing. observatory
service for standard processing of observational data (calculation of indices and
generalized parameters), calculation of diagnostic parameters on the converted

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signals of sensors and preparation of measurement results for comparison to cal-
culations. The IDK includes a measuring complex of sensors , observational data
gathering and computer-entry device, a computer and its software.

Purposeful work was begun in 1973 on automation of scientific research at the
Arctic Geophysics Institute. The experimental geophysical information gathering.
processing. storage and operational printout system LAM-1 (Laboratory for Auto-
mation of Scientific Research) was developed as a result of the investigations

[12, 13, 14]. The system consists of a real-time geophysical information gather-
ing and preliminary processing subsystem based on the Nairi-3 computer. Moderniza-
tion of this real-time subsystem is described in [15]. The second subsystem, de-
signed for information storage, sorting and recording to the geophysical data base,
was realized on the basis of the Rota-110 computer complex. The system was con-
nected to the user channel of a long-distance line through a data transmission
multiplexer which was contained in the complex and could be connected to terminals,
as which teletypes were used. The number of terminals could be brought up to 30.
The processed geophysical data could be printed out on request in the form of
tables and graphs. The Rota-110 computer complex has now been replaced by a more
powerful 31-4030 computer and a regional center for geophysical data gathering and
processing has been developed on its basis. which will be discussed in more detail
below.

The system for real-time observation of phenomena in solar-terrestrial communica-
tions SELDADS, developed in the United States, is of great interest [16].

SBLDADS (The SEL Data Acquisition and Display System) is a space laboratory data
gathering and display system. The system itself and the information sources are
shown in Figure 4. A large information flow about the parameters of interplanetary
space and the earth's magnetosphere come in from satellites of the SMS/GOBS system.
ITOS and TIROS-N weather satellites and from satellites of the SOLRAD a]: program.
Part of the interaction arrives by telemetry directly to the laboratory. is de-
coded,processed in real time and entered into the data base of the system. Data

on the network of magnetometers operating by the MI“ program are transmitted to

the system via weather satellites. Messages about solar activity in the optical
and radio band come in directly from observatories. Data on high-latitude stations
on the components of the geomagnetic field are also transmitted from a network of
riometers by teletype every 15 minutes. Both special air force communications
systems and ordinary commercial channels are used for data transmission. All data
come into the computer system of the data base, which performs all functions of
information gathering, processing, storage and display both directly to the duty
operator of the forecasting center and to remote users over communications channels.

The data base computer system consists of three computers. 'No minicomputers of
type Nova-1200 joined to each other by a special multiprocessor communications
adapter is med to gather data and to organize the real-time data base. Each com-
puter has an internal storage with capacity of 32 K words, magnetic disk external
storage with capacity of 58 megabytes and a nine-track magnetic tape store. Both
computers have the capability of data transmission and reception over telephone
and standard telegraph communications channels. The basic language for the ex-
ternal users of the system connected through communications channels is BASIC

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll OFF“ 'IAI. US". ONLY

     
  
  
    
    

. -—._- - . _.-.__. —-— .——..~—_—

_- lira/3‘2"“- w —h: Inn-mm ——/i’ Mrs-m:
(1’ (2) 42W“

i y
6‘3? 3, // \
ﬁmwm; 9203;. I

mm @2\ ’1" ﬂ/ /

M~

ﬁlm-my
(Mrvma 112/1;on

F=zxﬁ

gig I I cmﬁfgumun

  

  

Figure 4. Data Gathering and Display systse

Xe :
y 1. Sensors on satellites 6. Radio patrol
2. Ground sensors 7. Archives
3. MIN magnetometers 8. Data base oomuter system
4. Optical solar patrol 9. External users
5. Oomunications systems 10. Duty observer

programing language. The third computer is coapatible in language and data for-
nets with the NOVA-1200 minicosputer, but has expanded arithmetic due to realize-
tion of operations with floating decimal by the schematic method, higher speed,
larger internal storage and a large set of information display devices. This con-
puter is designed for organizing work by different users with the data base. It
is used to display information on displays, to print tables, to display infom-
tion in graphical form and also to print out intonation to reacts users over
connunications channels. Commications with a large computer system based on

computers of CDC 6600 type are maintained through a third computer.

38

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The entire system functions in the following manner. Information on different
communications channels comes into the system in real time. After preliminary
processing, the information is fed to a data base (BD) and is simultaneously re-
corded on magnetic tape in the data archives. A specific lifetime of the data in
the data base, during which data can be obtained operationally both directly in the
forecasting center and over communications channels, has been established for each
type of data. The one-minute values of data are usually stored for four days and
five-minute and higher values are stored for one calendar month. At the end of
this deadline. the data can be obtained only through the archives with a time de-
lay. Formats for printing out data and methods of data display on paper. teletype,
on a display screen and so on have been developed for all types of data.

Structure of the system for automation of scientific research at the Arctic Geo-
physical Institute. Taking the specifics of geophysical research, the experience
of developing experimental and geophysical information gathering and processing
systems and reconnendations of the oomcil on Automation attached to Presidium of
the USSR Academy of Sciences into account [17] , a project for automation of scien-
tific research was developed at the Arctic Geophysical Institute, Kola Branch, USSR
Academy of Sciences. Selection of the structure of the automation system for PGI
[Arctic Geophysical Institute] is related to the configuration for location of
automatic facilities. The geophysical observatories and observation stations of
P6! are located tens and hundreds of kilometers from each other and from the re-
gional center. A subsystem consisting of measuring-computer complex designed for
gathering, preliminary processing and display of recorded information in real time,
has been established at each observatory and complex observation station due to
the absences of special communications equipment between these stations to transmit
digital information at a high speed. Operational information is transmitted over a
standard telegraph subscriber channel (AT) to the regional geophysical data center
upon the initiative of the regional center. The main volume of geophysical data
comes into the data base of the subsystem on magnetic disks and is recorded on
magnetic tape. The entire volume of data is transmitted to the regional center by
transmission of magnetic tape during specific periods. Bach information gathering
subsystem can store all the data on magnetic tapes (the subsystem archive) and has
operational access to the data base of the subsystem, the period of data storage
to which comprises one week (a different storage period can also be selected).
Thus, the researcher, being in the observatory or at the observation station, has
the capability of analyzing the data coming in both in real time and all the data
received up to this mount of time. Any data stored in the subsystem can be trans-
mitted operationally from the regional center when required and the amount of data
is limited only by the carrying capacity of the telegraph channel. Thus, for ex-
ample, the telegraph channel must be occupied for one minute to transmit the minute
values of the hourly interval of a single magnetic field component: the daily in-
terval is transmitted within 24 minutes and so on. Instructions to convert the
subsystems to other information gathering modes and to transmit them to the re-
gional. center can be transmitted to the subsystems over the same channel at the
initiative of the regional center. There is also the capability of transmitting
information from a central data base upon the initiative of the subsystem, but the
priority of communications remains with the regional center. A version of service
and scientific information exchange is possible between subsystems over the same
subscriber telephone channel. It is desirable to have two subscriber telegraph
channels in each subsystem but this is not obligatory.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the part of equivalent partners. The regional center has uinicomputers to provide
communications with subsystems over subscriber telegraph, ainicosputers with ex-
ternal magnetic disk and magnetic tape storage for organization of the data ar-
chive and the central data base (1'38) , minicomputers for decoding and processing
of telemetry information coming from drifting balloons and satellites and also to
digitize and enter intonation into the central data base from autonomous inforaa-
tion recording devices and other digital devices (for exasple, digitizers or de-
vices for reading intonation from movie film) and mediue- or high-productivity
computers to carry out calculating operations on data, for numerical modelling and
for working in a collective-use system and so on. The regional center should have
good information display equipment both in alphanumeric and in graphical displays,
on graph plotters and on digital printers.

The hardware of the system. A sumy of existing systems for automation of exper-
imental information gathering showed that apparatus in the cam standard is most
promising and simplest to use for these purposes. Taking the requirements placed
on the experimental information gathering and processing system into account, ser-
ially standardized measuring-computer complexes (IVK-l and Nit-2), which contain

a full set of minicomputers of the Sid-3 or sM-4 type and apparatus in CAHAC stan-
dard already integrated with computers, were developed and produced [18]. Soft-

ware which consists of the following parts is delivered together with the complex:

papertape operating system (P105) ;

disk operating system (Dos) with Fortran-IV, Assenbler and Macroassembler
programming languages;

real-time disk operating system (005 RV) with program preparation in Assem-
bler, Macmassembler, Fortran-IV and real-time Pbrtran and so on;

software for access to CAMAC modules.
A typical CAHAC crate contains the fol lowing functional modules:

input register (type 305) that permits entry of digital information in paral-
lel code;

output register (type 350) that permits Output of digital information to any
device:

analog-digital converter (type 711) for entry of analog information into the
complex:

digital-analog converter 2'rsAPlo for output of information in analog form,
for example, on a graph plotter or automatic recorder;

teletype interface (type 500A) which can be used to transmit information over
subscriber telegraph lines:

1.0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relay multiplxer (type 750) for connection of several analog signals to the
analog-digital converter:

pulse counter (type 401):
timing pulse generator or timer and so on.

Moreover, several hundred different modules which can be used in any system have al-
ready been developed in the cam standard.

The given set of nodules satisfies most requirements on information converters to
digital form in geophysical investigations. Thus, an information-computer complex
of type va-l or va-Z is selected at observatories and observation stations as the
basis of the data gathering subsystems. no difference of these two complexes in-
cludes different productivity of the proaessors.

The structure of the information gathering, preliminary processing and display sub-
system ts shown in Figure 5. The geophysical infatuation sensors are connected
through CAMAC models. The additional external devices not contained in the IV! set
are connected by special modules. The subsystem is joined to the subscriber tele-
graph channel by an integration module. M magnetic tape stores (m) and an ad-
ditional magnetic disk store are connected to the complex in addition to the mag-
netic disk store (MID). me (or several) microcomputer of the Blektronika-GO
type: used as especialprOcessor to calculate statistical and spectral characteris-
tics of geophysical processes. is connected by the cause apparatus to expand the
calculating capabilities of the complex. Incoming date are recorded on magnetic
tape for subsequent transmission to the regional center and on ugnetic disk for
transmission to the data base of the subsystem (SD). The data stored on disk are
accessible for operational review. The data storage time in the data base can-
prises no more than one week. The subsystem has the capability of reviewing the
information data available in the base simultaneously with information gathering
and also of displaying the information in the form of graphs on a graph plotter or
graph display (if it is available). Moreover, information about current time and
the state of the system is shown on the duty operator's display and instructions
to the operator can essentially be issued.

A block diagram of a regional center is shown in Figure 6. According to the se~
lected structure. the regional center consists of four subsystems joined to each
other by a machine-independent standardized mainline exchange system (UHSO) con-
trolled by a communications processor KP. The first subsystem based on the IVK-l
is used to organize ccmunications and information reception from the information
gathering and preliminary processing subsystems. It also exchanges information
with all remote users. The second subsystem based on the m-z is used for entry
and preliminary processing of telemetry information through the telemetry informa-
tion decoder (URN), for processing geophysical information recorded on a slow
analog tape recorder. to digitize oscn signals, for digitization and preliminary
processing of intonation presented on movie file and so on. The second subsystem
has a direct communications channel with the telemetry information receiving sta-

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

III/mu u)

,- ._ .._A_

     
    

ﬂ

  

Figure 5. structure of Real-Time Data Gathering Subsystem

l. Sensors 5. Hagnetic tape store
2. Graph 6. Printout

3. Display 7. mgnetic disk store
4. CMAC

receiving station is planned in the future. The third subsystem based on a mini-
computer of type 511-1 and graph display (SIGDA) permits the investigator to work
with data presented in graph form. As shown by practice. the effectiveness of
analyzing the results increases when it is displayed in graph form. Historical
data obtained as a result of intonation processing was initially presented on a
digital printer and was then constructed manually and then evaluated. Graph plot-
ters then appeared. Graph displays which in conbination with a couputer with suf-
ticiently high speed display graphical intonation are now used extensively and
they can be controlled by the operator by means of a keyboard and light pen. The
required information is fixed on the graph plotters after review and correction of
the data received. The fourth subsystem is based on the 31-4030 ASV'I' and is the
main computer equipnent of the regional geophysical intonation gathering, proces-
sing, storage and display center.

Besides stationary observation stations and observatories, geophysical observa-
tions are also made under temporary field and expeditionary conditions and also in
difficultly accessible locations where there is no possibility of installing auto-
mated intonation gathering subsystem. Autonomous magnetic tape geophysical infor-
nation recorders have been developed for these purposes jointly with the Institute
of Physics of the Earth. USSR Academy of Sciences [2] . There are two essentially

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

different methods of recording information on magnetic tape. These are recording
an analog signal directly and using different methods of modulation vithout time
quantification and recording information in digital form. Both these methods have
their advantages and disadvantages. The greatest density of information recording
is achieved when an analog signal is recorded on magnetic tape and as a result
longer recording is possible. The accuracy of recording and time resolution can
be regulated during digitization and processing of the information. The record-
ing tape recorder is simpler in mechanical design and electronic circuits and is
more reliable. The disadvantage is that a rather complex information digitizing
and computer entry device is required. Digital recording of information has the
advantage that it is easier to enter into the computer for processing and no spe-
cial input devices are required when information is recorded on magnetic tape in a
computer standard; a magnetic tape cassette need only be installed on a standard
magnetic disk store contained in the computer. The disadvantage of digital tape
recorders is the great complexity of the mechanical and electronic units and the
fact that accuracy and time resolution are limited by the selected quantification
during recording. Both directions are used at P61 in developing autonomous geo-
physical information recorders. A description of a slow analog tape recorder (MAN)
and digital step tape recorder (TsShNML) is given in [2].

 

awumwﬁ qnwn(3)
nuayrqau

Figure 6. Structure of Regional Center

Key :
1. SIGDA 3. Telemetry receiving station
2. Telemetry

A oroject to automate the geophysical research of P61 is in the realizatiOtIstage.
A real-time data gathering and processing system based on the Nairi computer, on

43
FOR OFIICJAI.lEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which geophysical data processing algorithms are being completed, is undergoing
experimental operation. A gathering subsystem based on the measuring-computer
complex IVK-l is now being developed. An n-403o ASVT--the main computer device of
the future regional center-was installed in 1978. A telemetry information decod-
ing device (URTI) operates in combination with the III-4030 ASVT [l9]. Methodical
investigations are being conducted on digitization and spectral-time analysis of
ouch-signals [20]. A new camera has been developed for photographing the aurora
borealis with regard to further processing or intonation from movie film in an
information digitization and input system to a computer [21].

Development and introduction of automation systems in planned in stages by the de-
gree of readiness of the type of observation for entry and processing of data in
real time in the gathering subsystem. Busting systems w.‘ 11 be sodomized by evo-
lution, parallel with the new system being developed prior to its being put into
operation and information will be processed in the old system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Ostapenko, A. A. and V. s. Smirnov, "Modelling of Electromagnetic Processes in
the Auroral Ionosphere by the Numerical Modelling Method," this collection.

2. Deryabin, v. 11., a. N. Kazak, v. I. mkarov et a1, ”Autonomous Geophysical
Information Recorders Based on Magnetic Carrier,“ this collection.

3. Yakubaytis. E. A., "Collective-Use Computer Centers," in ”Struktura, tekhni-
cheskiys sredstva i organizatsiya sistem avtomatizatsii nauchnykh issledovaniy"
[The Structure, hardware and Organization of Systems for Automation of Scien-
tific Research] . Proceedings of the 10th All-Union School for Automation of
Scientific Research, Leningra. Izd-vo LIYaP, 1977.

4. Ryabov, Yu. P. . "Hultimachine Systems of the leningrad Institute of Nuclear
Physics imeni B. P. Konstantinov, USSR Academy of Sciences," in ”Struktura.
tekhnicheskiye stedstva i organizatsiya sistem avtomatizatsii nauchnykh issled-
ovaniy", Proceedings of the 10th All-Union School for Automation of Scientific
Research. Leningrad, Izdovo LIYaP, 1977.

5. Kutsenko, A. v., “Phases in Development of the Hinicomputsr Network of the
Physics Institute imeni 0. Yu. Schmidt. USSR Academy of Sciences" in ”struk-
tura, tekhnicheskiye sredstva i organizatsiya sistem avtomatizatsii nauchnykh
issledovaniy", Proceedings of the 10th All-Union School for Automation of
Scientific Research. Leningrad, Izd-vo LIYaP, 1977.

6. Kutsenko, A. V., "lbdel of System for Complex Automation of large Research In-
stallations Based on a Minicomputer Network?“ in "sistemy avtomatizatsii
nauchnykh iseledovaniy i ikh programoye obespecheniye" [Wetems for Autocla-
tion of Scientific Research and Their Software] (Transactions of PIAN, Vol ll2),
Moscow, Nauka. 1979.

7. Basov, N. 6., 0. N. Krokhin, A. v. Kutsenko et a1, "Hultimachine System for
Automation of Powerful Laser Installation Del'fin to Investigate Themonuclear

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pusion (Draft)," in 'Sistemy avtonatizatsii nauchnykh issledovaniy i ikh pro-
gramoye obespecheniye” (Transactions of PIA“, Vol 112), Moscow, Nauka, 1979.

Bobko, V. D., Yu. H. Zolotukhin, Yu. H. nearer et a1, ”Hainline Intonation
Exchange system,” AvaETRIYA, No 4, 1974.

Vas'kov, S. '1‘., ”asters for Automation of Scientific Research Based on the
CAHAC standard Developed at the Siberian Department, USSR Acadew of Sciences,”
in "Struktura, tekhnicheskiye sredstva i organizatsiya sisten avtouatizetsii
nauchnykh issledovaniy", Proceedings of the 10th All-Union School for Automa-
tion of Scientific Research, Leningrad, Izd-vo LIYaP, 1977.

Ivanov, I. 1., A. P. Iagovskiy, Yu. 5. Sayenko et al, ”Iomspheric Diagnostic
Complex of 10110, IZHIRAN," in 'Diagmstika i nodelirovaniya ionosfernykh voz-

mushcheniy' [Diagnosis and Modelling of Ionospheric Disturbances], Moscow,
Nauka, 1978.

Lagovskiy, A. F. and Yu. s. Saysnko, ”Methods of Processing Geophysical Data
in Real Time," in "Avtomtizatsiya nauchnykh issledovaniy" [Automation of
Scientific Research], Proceedings of Second All-Union School for Autouation

of Scientific Research, Minsk, Izd-vo Instituta tekhnicheskoy kibernetiki AN
BSSR, 1978.

Vetrina, M. A., V. P. Yelistratov, I. A. Kus'nin et a1, ”Geophysical Informa-
tion Gathering and Processing System INK-l," in "Struktura, tekhnioheskiye
sredstva i organisatsiya sistcu avtomatizatsii nauchnykh issledovaniy",

Proceedings of the 10th All-Union School for Automation of Scientific msearch,
Leningrad, Izd-vo LIYaP, 1977.

relistratov, v. P., I. A. Kuz'nin and A. A. Khrushchinskiy, “Real-Tine Geo-
physical Data Gethering and Processing System" in "Polyarnyye siyaniya i
vtorsheniya avroral'nykh chastits" [The Aurora Borealis and Irruption of
Auroral Particles). Leningrad, Nauka.

Yelistratov, v. P., I. A. Kuz'nin, 1.. L. Lasutin et al, "aperience of Oper-
ating Automated Neal-Time Geophysical Data Gathering and Processing System
During SAHBO Experiment," in 'Magnitosfernyye vozmushcheniya i protsessy zony
polyarnykh siyaniy" [Hagnetospheric Disturbances and Process of the Aurora
Borealis Zone], Apatity, Izd-vo Kol'skogo filiale AN SSSR, 1976.

Yelistretov, V. P. and A. A. Negrebetskiy, “Real-Tine Recording and Processing
of Geomagnetic Pluctuationsﬁ this collection.

Williams, D. J., "SEIDADs--An Operational Real-Tine Solar-lierrestiral Environ-
ment Monitoring System," mAA 'nechnical Report 3R1. 357-SEL37, 1976.

Kuklin, G. N., ”Future Trends for Automation of Scientific Research,“ in
”Struktura, tekhnicheskiye sredstva i organizateiya sistem avtoeatizatsii

nauchnykh issledovaniy", Proceedings of the 10th All-Union School for Auto-
mation of Scientific Research, Leningrad, Izd-vo LIYaP, 1977.

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18. 'rsvetkov, B. 1., ”Development of Investigations to Create Measuring-Coupotsr
Complexes,“ PRIBORY I SISTER! UPRAVLENIYA, NO 1, 1980.

19. Radkevich, V. A. and A. M. Perlikov, "Apparatus Complex for Processing Analog
and Telemetry Information Obtained During Geophysical Experiment,” this
collection.

20. Perlikov, A. H. and A. A. Ostapenko, “Analysis of elm-Signals by Digital
. Methods.“ this collection.

21. solov'yev, V. 14., G. v. Starkov and v. P. Yoshchenko. "An Automated Complex
for Recording the Nighttime sky Glow and Processing of the Information Go-
tained,“ this collection.

COPYRIGHT: Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR, 1980

6521
C50: 186 3/18

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MICMPROCESSORS IN MOI. SYSTHS 0? WC MIG! DEVICES

Moscow mm vsssovuzmco omens monovoco mswoeo 2mm: mam-Ismamu
smco INSTIMA zumsooonoztmoco mssom: mmsessonr v storm
umvmum mam usrnovsw in mum No 643. 1981 (signed to press
19 Her 31) pp 3. 7:.

[Preface by Deputy Director of Institute, Doctor of Technical Sciences V. G.
Inozemtsev and Head of Railway Electrification Division, Candidate of technical
Sciences A. L. Lisitsyn and table of contents from the collection "Transactions
of All-union Order of Red Banner of Labor Scientific Research Institute of Railway
Transport: Microprocessors in Control ”stems for Electric Traction Devices”, ed-

ited by Candidate of Technical Sciences G. v. Paminskiy, Izdatel'stvo "Transport“,
820 copies, 80 pages]

[Text] Hicroprocessors and microoosputers nake it poasible to automate the con-
trol of those processes in electric traction devices which were previously impos-
sible to automate due to the extremely high cost of the equipment, its cmbersome-
ness and the cosparatively low reliability for continuous operation. The results
of investigations in this field, conducted at the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Railway Transport (VNIIZh'r) are outlined in the given collection.
The advantages of. using microprocessors and microcomputers for automatic control
are most obvious. Therefore, basic attention is devoted in the collection to de-
velopments in this field. At the same time some possible directions for using
microprocessors and microcalculators to automate the sinpler production processes
in electrical supply devices are investigated.

He request that comments and remarks on the materials of the collection be sent to
the address: 129851, Hoacw, Third Hytishchinskaya ulitea, 10, Editorial-Publish-
ing Department, vunzn'r.

Contents Page

Preface 3

l. Paminskiy, G. V. and N. D. Sukhoprudskiy. Use of Microprocessors

in Automation of Electric haction Devices 4
2. Astrakhan. v. 1., Use of Micro- and Minicomputers for Centralized _
Traffic Control of Subway Trains ll
lo?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

4.

5.

6. Paninskiy, G. V., Controlling a Train on a Section by Using
Microprocessors

7. Bushnenko, Yu. v. and N. s. Nikitorova, Principles of Designing
a Universal Train Control System and Realization of it by Means
of a Microoalculator

8. Sukhoprudskiy. N. D. and V. P. Molchanov, Finding the Pragments
o! a Mnemonic Circuit of an Energy Section Using a Microcalculator

9. Kogan, Yu. L. and v. M. Malinov. using Microprocessors and Micro-
cosputers to Control Train Traffic Abroad

10. Tatarnikov, V. A., Improving the Automatic Machine Operator of
the Central Scientific Research Institute on the Basis of Large
Integrated circuits (81$)

11. Faninskiy, G. V., Prospects for Use of microprocessors for Remote
Control of locomotives

12. Nikiforov, B. 0.. A. Ye. Pyrov, 3. l. Vetlugin and A. A. Drobyshev.
Principles of. Monitoring Pail-Safe Electronic Devices

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut zhelesnodorozhnogo

transporta (Vﬂllzh'l‘). 1981

6521

C50: 1863/17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Astrakhan, V. l. and Ye. G. Paninskaya, Regulating the Travel
Time of Subway Trains by Using Microcomputers

Astrakhan, v. I. and Ye. V. W, Controlling the Braking of
Subway Trains by Means of Microprocessors

Malinov, V. M. . Analyzing Passenger Traffic Volumes of a SIMY
by Means of Microcosputers

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17

22

26

31

38

45

49

56

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGULATING SUBWAY TRAIN TRAVEL THE USING MICROCOHPUTBRS

lbscow TRUDY VSESOYUZBDGO 0mm m msuooo 2mm: nmcmo-Ismm'-
SKOGO ms'rrrun WW TRANSPORT“: MIRROPMSBSSORY V srs'mmca
UPRAVLENIYA BMW USTROYSTV in Runian no 643, 1981 (signed to press

19 Mar 81) pp 17-26

(Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences V. I. Astrakhan and Engineer Ye. G.
Paninskaya from the collection “Transactions of All-Union Order of Red Banner of
Labor Scientific Research Institute of Railway Transport: Microprocessors in
Control Systems for Electric Traction Devices“, edited by Candidate of Technical
Sciences G. V. Faminskiy, Izdatel'stvo “Transport", 820 copies, 80 pages]

[Excerpt] Bringing actual train speed closer to the permissible speed increases
the acceleration reserve compared to existing conditions. To evaluate this re-
serve, comparative traction calculations were made for one of the Moscow subway
lines. The calculations were made on a Yes-1030 cowoter from a program developed
at VZIIT [All-Union Correspondence Institute of Railroad Transportation mgineers]
[l] . The calculated acceleration reserve tine found when one-tine and multiple
connection of traction motors was compared in the case of. fulfilling limitations
on the permissible traffic speed comprises an average of 4-6 seconds per wayside.

The tine expended for train traffic on the deceleration track of the station de-
pends on the rate of the beginning of braking. Tine stability for braking should
be provided under intensive traffic conditions during 'peak" hours by maintaining
a given train speed upon coming into the station by using the ASR [Autouatic
speed control] subsystem. The stability of the length of deceleration does not
play such an important role during hours of a load decrease. Therefore, the
speed of the beginning of deceleration may be different.

Monitoring fulfillment of the train traffic schedule is easy by using microme-
puters which will calculate the required train travel time under traction on a
given block section, obtaining‘ information about the time the train passes the
ends of the block sections. If the length of the sections is sufficiently short
when the difference in travel time with and without current is less than the per-
missible deviation, a microcomputer will determine the train traffic conditions
over the entire section by the sign of deviation alone, i.e., it can determine
only whether the train on the section is under current or is coasting in order to
fulfill the programmed tins of arrival at the next section.

#9
C
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One or several (without regard to redundancy) microcomputers, specifically micro-
computers constructed on a microprocessor of series K589, can be used to control
wayside travel time (2]. This microcomputer is similar in output to universal
couputers of type M6000 and realizes expanded aritmtic instructions and special
instructions introduced by the user so that two control memory files are provided
in it. The microcomputers (overall dimensions of 450 x 482 x 220 II) contain, in
addition to the processor, an interface block and also internal storage blocks,
display block, power supply block and control console. The maximum capacity of
the internal storage is 32,000 words and the time required to fulfill an addition
operation is 3.5 microseconds. The number of input-output devices connected to the
microcomputer may reach 56.

The considered multiprocessor system can be realized either as a concentrated sys-
tem (all universal computers are located on a central control console) or as a
distributed system (the universal computers are installed at each station while a
central universal computer is installed on the central control console). The num-
ber of channels between the central control console and the stations is increased
in the first version, but the following advantages appear: the number of micro-
computers decreases, the capability of simple redundancy upon failure of one of
the machines becomes possible, it becomes possible to organize a canon memory for
the multisystem using magnetic disks, which is very important during power out-
ages and failures of the universal computer, the voluse of peripheral equipment
for the system as a whole is reduced considerably, the problem of documentation
and monitoring of its operation is facilitated, the system servicing conditions
are improved and the operational nature of introducing changes to the program and
operating algoritlun is enhanced.

with the second version of constructing a distributed computer system, each station
central computer can control train traffic on one or several waysides based on in-
formation about actual train traffic on the wayside and information on the traffic
schedule transmitted from the central universal computer. The volume of informa-
tion transmitted between the central control console and the stations to control
train traffic is reduced in this version and it becomes possible to use the central
computer to determine deviations in train traffic by stations and to display these
deviations for the engineers on a display board and also to solve other local con~
trol problems. The second version of designing a computer system achieves addi-
tional advantages when microcomputers of different capacity are used, including
small computers, which may be used effectively both for control purposes and to
process and transmit information, i.e., as specialized programmable
microdispatchers .

Selecting a specific version for designing a multiprocessor system depends on the
characteristics of the lines to be automated, their length, the scope of traffic,
prospects for development and so on.

BIBLIWMPHY

l. Shilovskaya, R. V., "Algorithm for Traction Calculation to Select the Param-
eters of a Subway Energy Supply system," TsNII'l'EI (Central Scientific Research

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Institute of Information and Technical and Economic Research]. MP5 [Ministry
of Railways], "zheleznodorozhnyy transport. Seriye metropolitan. Bksplua-

tatsiye i tekhnicheokiye sredstva' [Railway Transport. Subway Series. (mere-
tion and Hardware], No 1, Moscow. 1979.

2. Berezenko, A. 1., V. I. Berezin, s. Ye. Kalinin and L. N. Koryegin. ”Hiero-

couputers in the Microprocessor Set of Series K589," WMYA pmsam—
NOST'. No 6 (66), 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Vseeoyuznyy nauchm-issledovetel'akiy institut zhelezmdorozhmgo
transporta (VNIIzh'l‘). 1981

6521
C50: 1863/17

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEARCBING FOR mourns OF SECTION HNBMONIC CIRCUIT USING A MICROCALCULA'I‘OR

Moscow TRUDY VSBSOYUZMGO ORDENA TRUDOVGSO msnooo ZNM‘EIII NBUCHNO-ISSLBDOVATEL”
SKOGO INSTITUTA ZHELBZmDOROZHNOGO TRANSPORI'A: HIKROﬂKﬂ‘SBSSORY V 515mm
UPRAVLENIYA BLEKTROTYAGOVYIGI USTROYSTV in Russian No 643, 1981 (signed to press

19 Mar 81) pp 45-49

[Article by Doctor of Technical Sciences II. D. Sukhoprudskiy and Candidate of
Technical Sciences V. P. Molchanov from the collection “Transactions of All-Union
Order of Red Banner of Labor Scientific Research Institute of Railway Transport:
Microprocessors in Control Systems for Electric Traction Devices“, edited by
Candidate of Technical Sciences G. V. Paminskiy. Indetel'etvo "Transport", 820
copies, 80 pages)

[Text] The mnemonic circuit of energy sections on mosaic panels is usually ful-
filled in a very simplified manner. At the one time the energy dispatcher must
have the power supply circuit. nunber of tracks and semaphores in front of him when
organizing work at stations with extensive branching of tracks. A device was de-
veloped for this purpose that reproduces in detail as needed one or another frag-
ment of the memonic circuit. It includes a slide projector with line mechanism
of fragment feed and control unit made on integrated circuits and transistors.
Because the control unit to provide faster search for the fragment should have a
memory device, data input and output device and resolving unit (that determines
the difference of the nuubers of the fragments and its sign), the devices was
rather complex and cumbersome.

It is more effective to use a microcalculator as the basis of the control unit.

It is sufficiently compact and has a built-in resolving device with microprogram
control and memry registers. There should be special input-output devices to
supplement it. In this case the microcalculator can be used by the dispatcher by
direct designation as well (any calculations can be made if needed). Hicrooalcu‘
letors of various types can essentially be used in the device under consideration.
A description of the device (Figure l) is given below, based on the Blektronika
82-26 microcalculator.

The difference and its sign are displayed on a fluorescent display of type P252V
in the Blektronika 82-26 microcalculator and the “minus“ sign is fixed by coinci-
dence of the nine-digit pulses of the output register of the microprocessor and
the anode H of the display. The outputs of the microprocessor to the display
anodes are high—resistance: therefore, taking signals from them to avoid shunting

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~m
, . (l) _
naurasptpyztpurtstaan

-

F----
F----
r-—_—

l———._..

_ t----
)

F I ( 'smlunuﬂuuul '
t“;‘...."““'...'" ..",.."'. |’ - ' }§5-

Figure 1. Energy Dispatcher Intonation Display Device (a) and location of
Display hnodes (b)

 

smart”, yrnpe'ulv Nels-AM

3:

1. Display

2. ”Minus" sign fixation unit

3. Microprocessor, input-output device and display control
4. Mechanism stopping unit

5. Control console

6. Mechanism control unit

7. Static intonation mechanism

of the anodes is possible only if high-resistance logic components are used.
101.3781 and nu‘m microcircuits of series 178 were used in the given device.

A coincidence circuit of the signal from anode M and display and trom the output
of the ninth digit of the microprocessor register (output 9p) based on microcir-
cuit KlLI‘Iel is used to tap the sign “minus" (Figure 2). Since the corresponding
signals of anode M and output 9p have a positive potential, they are first inverted
by means of microcircuit XlLB781.

Positive pulses with length of 0.2 milliseconds appear periodically in sequence at
intervals of 1.9 milliseconds at the outputs of the microprocessor register 9p-lp
(see Figure 1). If segments (anodes) of the nmnbers at the inputs are extinguished,
there are no positive pulses and a zero potential appears at output 7 of microcir-
cuit K1LB781. The AND circuit on microcircuit l of 101.1781 entits a signal that
authorizes movement of the "Forward" mechanism. If a positive signal appears on
anode M and f the corresponding "minus“ sign appears on the display screen, the

coincidence circuit is triggered, issuing instructions to the mechanism control
unit to move the "Backward“ mechanism.

As noted above, the difference of the numbers of previously established and sun-
moned positions must be determined to find the required fragment. This difference
determines the number of steps of moving the mechanism. A one is read at each

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Mlmwbrum n!) E

 

Figure 2. Diagrams of Units for Fixing “minus“ Sign and Realizing Mechanism
Stopping Function

Key:
1. Pros output 9p (ninth digit. class 2)
2. ‘no sechanisn control unit
3. Authorization for stopping sechanisn

step of the derived difference during motion. The nechanisn should be stopped when
a zero is obtained as a result of subtracting the ones. All the display segments,
with the exception of segsent u (see Figure l) which lights up when the nmber 8
appears. light up in the least digit. However, the appearance of the masher 0 in
the least digit is not a sufficient feature to deliver instructions for stopping
the mechanism. It is also necessary that none of the segments be lit up (no in-
formation was reproduced) in the top digits. Thus, a prohibition to step the
mechanism should be provided both when the nuber 8 is displayed only in the least
digit and when the nuuber o is displayed together with masters in the top digits.

Components with high input impedance--nicrocircuits of series 178 that perform
logic functions at negative potentials-~are also used in the circuits for realiz-

ing the function of stopping the mechanism (see Figure 2).

The six display anodes (with the exception of anode H) are connected totvo micro-
circuits 3 (7) and 3 (9) that realize the 03-100? function. The outputs of these
microcircuits are connected to the inputs of sicrocircuit l (6) that perform the
AND-nor function.

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When a number besides the number 0 is lit up in the least digit at the inputs of
microcircuits 3 (7) and 3 (9) connected to unlit anodes, there is one or several
negative potentials. Accordingly, positive potentials that prohibit the operation
of microcircuit 1(6) appear on their outputs 7 and 9. The negative potential on
the output is retained in this case. An authorizing positive potential appears at
output 6 of microcircuit 1 only if the two negative potentials at its input coin-
cide. A positive potential from its output is fed through inverter 4(7) to one of
four inputs of the AND-NOT circuit 5(7). The second input of this circuit is con-
nected to the input of the first digit of the display. Consequently, the forbid
potentials are taken from the corresponding two inputs of microcircuit 5(7) only
at the moment the pulses at the output of the first digit and at the output of
microcircuit 4(7) that fixes the zero display in this digit coincide.

Instructions to stop the mechanism can be issued only if none of the numbers from
1 to 9 do not light up in the second digit. Authorization for stopping is issued
by two groups of components acting on inputs 4 and S of microcircuit 5(7).

1he first group of components is microcircuits 6(7) and 6(9): they are connected
to the anodes of segments B and C of the display since some of them must be lit up
if any of the numbers from 1 to 9 is lit up. The outputs of microcircuits 6(7)
and 6(9) are connected through uncoupling diodes Di and DZ that perform the on
operation to the input of microcircuit 1(10) that performs the AND-NO¢ operation.

Numbers are reproduced on the display by the dynamic principle. Pulse signals al-
ternately detour the outputs of digits of 9 through 1. simultaneously with them,
signals also come into the anodes cf the segments according to the number which
should be reproduced in the given digit. Although the all the segment-displays of
the same type in all the digits are connected in parallel. only those of them
which correspond to the digit having a signal at the input coinciding with the
signals at the outputs of the segments begin to light up. Therefore, a second
group of components--microcircuits 5(9) and 1(10) and delay line Tz--is provided
to forbid stopping of the mechanism it there is a number in the second digit. The
output of the second digit of the display is connected to the second input of
microcircuit 1(10) through inverter 5(9). Thus, a signal appears at the output of
circuit 1(10) only if the signals on segments a and C and at the output of the
second digit coincide.

Each signal arrives alternately at the inputs of the display within 0.2 millisec-
and. A signal initially appears at the output of the top digit and only then ap-
peers in the least digit. Therefore, to record the presence of a zero in the
first digit in the absence of a number in the second digit, these two events must
be combined in time, which is accomplished by means of component T2 that delays

the signal from circuit 1(10) by 0.2 millisecond. An authorizing signal comes from
component T2 to input 4 of microcircuit 5(7). The authorizing signal is fed
through inverter 2(7) to its input 5 only it no segment of anode H lights up in

the least digit (i.e., a 0 rather than an 8 is reproduced).

1f the signals on all four inputs of microcircuit 5(7) coincide, a signal to stop
the ruchanism appears at its output, i.e., a positive pulse from the output of the
u-it for stopping the mechanism (see Figure 1) is fed through the control unit to

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the static information mechanism. The mechanism is stopped and this completes the
total cycle of switching it for finding the object.

Both the keyboard of the nicmcelculator and the control console with buttons, each
of which corresponds to a specific object, can be used as the control console in
the device.

COPYRIGHT: Vseeoyuznyy nauchno-issledovetel'ekiy inetitut zheleznodorozhnogo
transporta (VNIIZh‘r), 1981

6521
C50: 1863/17

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DFFK’MI. llSlI'. ONLY

REﬁONSTRUCTING HEXAPOD GAITS

Moscow HODELIROVANIYE I OPTIMIZATSIYA SLOZHNYKH SYSTEM UPRAVLENIYA in Russian
1981 (signed to press 8 Jun 81) pp 205-216

[Article by D. N. Zhikharev and l. c. Zhestkov from collection "Hodeling and Optimiz-
ing Complex Control Systems" edited by Ya. 2. Tsypkin, USSR Academy of Sciences. Izda-
tel'stvo "Nauka". 2350 copies, 265 pages]

(Text) 1. Brief description of hexupod. In this article the authors examine a number
of the locomotive modes of a hexapod which has been developed at Moscow State Universi-
ty's Institute of Mechanics. The model of this walking machine comprises a body fitted
with six legs. The legs of this machine constitute a kinematic loop with six degrees of
freedom. a diagram of which is presented in Figure l. A leg‘s first three degrees of

freedom, angles of rotation relative to area 1-3. are controlled. Orthogonal and non-

intersecting. angles 1 and 2 form the "hip joint“ of a leg. segments a and 5 its "femur
and "tibia." Axis 3 is parallel to axis 2. An electromechanical servosystem produces

movement through each of the controlled degrees of freedom. A three-degree Cardan foot
suspension fitted with a surface-contact sensor is mounted on the tibia.

The motion-control system generates control signals
producing the machine's movement with automatic adap-

tation to small surface irregularities upon command

from the operator (or a higher level of the control

system) determining the notion of the body of the ma-
’. r chine and the basic characteristics of its locomotion.
Figure 2 is a functional block diagram of the control

system.

 

It consists of the following major components:
’ - the set of controlled stepping-cycle generators (68)

comprises six identical generators forming closed
space-time curves of the stepping cycle (i.e., the

trajectory traced by the end of the leg) of each leg
in the plane of the several auxiliary Cartesian co-

ordinates. The generators are interconnected such
that the desired relationships are maintai' d between

the phases of the stepping cycles, which iusures the
required form of movement. Signals from the foot sur-
e-contnct sensors constitute the inputs into this component. Component parameters

f ac
are assigned by the operator (or a higher level of the control system); component out-

puts are fed to the input of the linear converter;

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- llu- llm-m rum‘rlllmiv rnuvvl'lm‘ (HI) rmwrriu the output Irma ilu- genul’uiur unlt lor
geometrical cuurdlnml Inn nl tlu- stepping cycles with the body and extremities of the
machine as well as their scaling. Converter parameters are assigned_by the operator

(or a higher level of the control system); component outputs are fed to the input of
the maneuvering unit;

- in accordance with commands from the operator (or a higher
level of the control system). the maneuvering unit (MU) modifies
the stepping cycles of the legs so as to produce the required
spatial position and motion of the body of the machine. Outputs
from the linear coordinate converter and the sensor signals con-
stitute the inputs into this unit. Its outputs are fed to the

input of a component set of converters of Cartesian into angular
coordinates;

- the component converting the Cartesian coordinates (CCC) of

the ends of the lags into the angular coordinates of the segments
of the legs consists of six identical three~dimensional nonlinear
servosystems which convert the outputs of the maneuvering and
signal-generation unit into inputs into the servosystem amplifier
unit (SSA) and take into account the limits of the working ranges
of the legs.

In this article the authors study five-legged modes of machine
5w,ﬂ" locomotion and the possibility of designing a control system

7)«uhw~nunm realizing these modes.
0000101711

 

2. The problem frummlbated. He will be looking at the machine
in only uniform rectilinear forward motion such that throughout

Figure 2: l - the period of movement AC I 010; and an I 030‘ (Figure 3). we
- operator panel; will assume that the rectangular body
2 - CS; 3 - LC; of the machine ABRDCM (Figure 4) lies
4 - MU; 5 - ccc; in a plane parallel to horizontal
6 - SSA; 7 - mod- plane 0102030. and at a distance 8
el of walking ma- from it. The six legs of the machine
chine. are attached according to the numera-

tion in Figure 3 at points A181H1N1C1

P. As the machine moves. the projec-
tions of the ends of the legs fall along parallel curves 0102
and O30.H relative to the body the ends of the legs in the
support phase moving along support segments blag. bzaz. ...,
beat. The support segments are symmetrical with respect to
the footholds.

The machine is 0.705 m long (AC - 0.705 m). 0.2l m wide cp
and weighs 18 kg. The mass of a single leg is 1.9 kg. This

mass is distributed as follows: concentrated at point 0 is a
mass of 0.75 kg and at points P and R 1 kg and 0.15 kg re-
spectively (AP I 0.047 n. so - 0.08 m. CR - 0.175 m (see Fig-
ure 1); mass values are measured with an accuracy to within
10 per cent).

 

The projections of the ends of the legs in the support phase
onto horizontal plane 0102030. form a polygon. which we will

refer to as the support polygon. Figure 3.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l‘lw state 0! tlw umchlm- wlll III‘ I'vlc-rrml In an zllJIIIILI II (I prnjc-cl Inn 0! [In m-nlr-r
of gravity unto horizontal plane 010:030. lies within the support polygon. By a let
u» designate the minimum distance the projection of the center of gravity can be from
boundary of the support polygon, that is. the margin of stability.

 

The term "hexapod gait" will be understood to refer to the process by which the machine
moves in a uniform and stable rectilinear manner. in the course of which its legs exe-
cute movements which are identical and periodic but perhaps different in phase. The

interval of time during which all legs of the machine are in the support phase is con-
stant.

Let us now introduce the following parameters:
1h - time during which a leg is in the support phase;

1h - time during which a leg is in the transfer phase;

H - step length;

v0 - nuchiuu velocity. equal to the velocity of the end of a leg relative to the body
in the support phase;

H/7hév, — velocity or the end of a leg in the transfer phase relative to the body of

the machine;

-
t

T, - tine during which all legs are in the support phase; in the case of a hexapod. Ta
is the time for which six legs are in the support phase and, accordingly, for
a five-legged machine five legs. We will take the moment at which the first leg
nmves into the transfer phase as zero. The time elapsing from this moment until the
moment at which the i-th leg passes into the transfer phase we will designate as Ti -
‘01.]: 0).

Let k represent the number of different 7.; in the case of the "treshka" [literally
"three-ruble note") gait. for example, k 3 2; L6 - V075 is the distance the machine
travels over time T5.

Let us now demonstrate that. given these assumptions, the relationship

T,=I.-T.+(k—i)1‘_. (I)

is satisfied for any gait. Formula (I) is easily checked for k - 2 (Figure 4). In

 

Figure 4

Figure 4. time is plotted along the horizontal axis; along the vertical axis, the rela-
livc horizontal coordinates of the ends of the legs; MC = 1;; N8 = T5; CN - T. but To =

Mu , (.‘IHMi'; hence 7'0 - ng-H'n. The proof is analogous for k - 3, lo. 5 and 6.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thv nail of a hexapnd is determined by the set of numbers T2. T0. Th and M. Let us

stipulate that the "type" of gait is governed by the sequence in which legs go into

the transfer phase. He will designate the gaits of a particular type with a series
containing the numbers of the legs of the machine (beginning with any leg) in the order
in which they enter the transfer phase. Thus l.4,5—2,3.6 (following the commas are the
numbers of the legs simultaneously entering the transfer phase) is the notation for the
"treshka" gaits (the notation 2.3.6—l.4,5 would be its equivalent).

Let us now formulate our basic problems.

1. Organization of five-legged locomotion. Finding different types of five-legged loco-
motion.

2. Study of various transitions from one gait to another.

3. Theoretical development of a control-system unit making it possible to maintain the
desired type of gait and then reconstruct it.

3. Organization of five-legged locomotion. construction of various types of five-
Icggcd walking-machine gaits. Let us search for these five-legged gaits assuming that
the legs are weightless and let T; be zero for all types of five-legged gaits.

A. Let leg 1 not participate in the locomotion. Let us now look at gaits involving
the remaining five legs.

I. Let us note that to insure that the desired five-legged gait is stable, the trans-
fer phase of leg 2 may occur only when legs 3 and 4 are in the support phase; the ends
of legs 3 and 4 must then in this instance be on segments b3L3 and but. respectively
(see Figure 6). This observation substantially limits the number of stable types of
the desired gaits. The combination ..., 3. 6—2, ... will appear in the notation for
each of them.

2. If Tg—Tgxo. then lT;-T.|-A=0 and the ends of legs 3 and b are simultaneously on
segments bJL, and thg respectively for time T - o.Sro-ar. If leg 2 is in the transfer
phase for time T, then v" - n/(O.ST.-Ar); Th 5 T to insure stability. Let us note that

the design of the machine imposes substantial limitations upon parameter Vi since the

maximum speed of the joint actuators is limited. So in constructing our five-legged
gaits we will be tfying to decrease Vn‘ Vi will have its lowest value when 61‘0; 1h -

= 0.5To. that is, T; - T“; k - 3 (from formula (i)).

3. Taking into account 1 and 2, let us now write the types of gaits possible using
legs 2—6.

I) 3.4—2.6—5; 2) 3,b—2.5—6 and 3) 3.4-i-5.6.

let us look at the first type. During the interval of time in which legs 2 and 6 are
in the transfer phase. legs 3, 6 and 5 are in the support phase with the ends of legs 3
and a on segments bat; and b.L. (see Figure 6). A projection of point 0 is thus to be
found within a triangle formed by projections of the ends of legs 3.4 and S, that is.
the machine is stable. Supporting legs 2. 3 and 6 provide stability for the period of
time during which leg 5 is in the transfer phase. When legs 3 and a are in the trans-
for phase. the machine loses its stability. since a projection of the end of leg 2

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lulls nu segment Lga, (see Figure 4). n projection of the end of leg 5 falling accord-
ingly on segment Lsas; the stability of gait types 2 and 3 is checked in similar fash-
ion. in the case of both types the machine becoming unstable only when legs 3 and A are
in the transfer phase. To insure the stability of these types of gait it is sufficient
to shift the track of leg 2 to the left Lao-0.15 m (see Figure A). Let us note that
within the limits of our accepted definition, it will be impossible to construct a
stable gait using legs 2—6 without altering the track of some leg.

Let us observe that we have not been looking for gait types in which k - 4. because in
the case of these types of gait Vn is 1.5 times greater than with types where k - 3.

B. Let us now look at gaits employing legs I, 2, a. 5 and 6. He will construct these
types of gait on the basis of analogous considerations.

1. Let us note that for the interval of time during which leg 1 is in the transfer phase,
the end of leg 5 must necessarily be on segment bsLs. and (analogously) when leg 5 is in
the transfer phase the end of leg I must be on segment Llal. As in the previous case,
decreasing Vn requires that k - 3. The ends of legs 6. S and 6 or i, 2 and 4 (see Figure
6), moreover. cannot form a stable support polygon; thus. T; # T2 and T5 = T5. It is
easily shown that if T; - T. or T5 - 1.. the gait types thus obtained are all the more
certainly unstable, that is, there remains one possible type of gait:

2.5-1.6-6.

2. The stability of this type of gait is tested as was done in A3. For the interval of
time in which legs 2 and 5 are in the transfer phase. legs l, b and 6 are in the support
phase; the ends of legs 1 and 6 are in this instance on segments Lia; and Lea. and pro-
vide stability in a manner analogous to that during the period in which legs 1 and 6 are
in the transfer phase. When leg h is in the transfer phase, the support polygon formed
by projections of the ends of legs 1. 2. S and 6 provides stability, that is, this type

of gait is stable.

B. The types of gait obtained thus far are stable assuming that the legs are weightless
for any To and T associated with relationship (I) when k - 3 and T5 - 0. Now let us as-

Sume that the legs have weight. To insure that throughout the time of motion we satisfy
the relationship

3>3

m1“. (2)
we introduce a time interval during which all legs are in support. The specific values
of T5 and he required to satisfy relationship (2) are functions of the dimensions of the
machine. the dimensions of its track. its step, the mass of the machine and its distri-
bution annng the segments of its legs and its required minimum margin of stability.

with a track of the order of 0.2 m, be - 0.05 m when 3min - 0.02 m is sufficient to sat-

isfy relationship (2) for all previously mentioned five-legged gaits. Diagrams of all
these gaits are presented in Figure 5; time is plotted along the horizontal axis. the
Coordinates of the ends of the legs relative to the body of the machine along the verti-
uni.

4. Restructuring the gait. Let us now look at transitions from five-legged gaits to
the "treshki" gait and from the "treshki" gait to five-legged gaits.

Units should be restructured as quickly as possible; relationship (2) must be satisfied

in the course of the restructuring process; and the control algorithm should be simple.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Realization of transitions from one gait to another in the least time possible re-
quires control of the speed of the end of a leg in the transfer phase Va and transi-

tion to the transfer phase from any point of the support phase. To simplify the algo-

rithm controlling the restructuring process we will assume that parameters V. and L5

remain unchanged in the new gait and that the transition of the extremities into the
transfer phase can occur only at mo-
ments 0, run". urn-H"). 3(Tnﬂ"),

.... (time is counted from the begin-
ning of the restructuring process.)

Let us note that. generally speaking.
there are many methods of making the
transition from one gait to another.
The limitations imposed in this section
reduce their number substantially, al-
though. as before. the problem has more
831' 4"4“’ than one solution.

  
   
  
 

5. Realization of proposed gaits and
transitions. Let us note at the out—
set that we can realize only those
gaits. and the transitions of one of
10-2-1, these gaits to another. which we al—
ready know to be stable.

Let us now examine in greater detail
the operation of the step-cycle gener-
ators. As has already been said. the
step-cycle generators form the trajec-
3"¢"‘ tory of the motion of the ends of the
legs of the machine in the plane of
auxiliary coordinates oft) and ogt).
where i is the number of the generator
corresponding to the number of the leg
(see Figure a). A specific type of
Figure 5 step-cycle trajectory is not essential
‘ to the realization of a given gait or
of the transition from one particular
gait to another. What is important is that the movement of the end of a leg with re-
spect to 01 determined by the step-cycle generator is governed by the values of param-
eters T0, 1h. V0, 9%, 1}. a and b; the importance of parameters a and b will become.
clear below. The step-cycle generator is designed such that movement along axis bgt)
is governed by the solution of the differential equation

. ' (i) .
where u(‘) - control; in the transfer phase u(t) > 0. in the 30PP0Y‘ phase u < 0’
Va - component of the velocity of the end of a leg in the support phase along axis 01;
V‘L) - component of the velocity of the e of a leg in the transfer phase along axis

n
0! (these may be different for different legs of the machine). Let us now show that

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(1:)

with our selection of the function u and of V?) in (3) we can reduce the problem

or mintaining a particular type of gait and of realizing the transition of one type
of gait to another to the problem of formulating a timetable for the transitions of
the extremeties of the machine to the transfer phase. Let us assume that

“m =[a - 3‘" (l)I[—T'!ﬂ’-]_[b+?m “”[l —§n um ]

.. if new» (‘0
={-(a+b). 15 l=¢("l,

where a is the programmed value of the maxim extension of the end of a leg of the

machine in the direction of its movement along axis a; (a>0); b - progressed value of
the extension of the end of a leg of the machine in the direction counter to its move-
(11)

ment along axis 01 (b>0); t - previously assigned moments of transition of the ex-

tremities from the support phase to the transfer phase, i being the number of the leg,
(t) will then change
. while the sign of at?)

I’ the number of the step. As can easily be seen. the sign of u
(1')
reaches the desired value (a). To insure that

changes from "+" to "-" at the desired moments It“)

(10:01) ( ) P
P

from to "+" at the previously determined moments 1:

will change from "+" to " -" when a“ )
the sign of a“) + Tn] requires

, + Tn ] the value of V" - coast in equation (3) be

(i)

+ T") - a. We can show that the required value for Vn

that in time segment [t

assigned such that a;

(i) (i)
(t?

may be found from the relationship

Jﬁ"(p)
V9Nn>=v [. ———.+. ]-

where V =1? M"(p)=b+o{‘l(¢(")). (5)

The equation describing the Operation of the step-cycle generator along axis a; may
thus be written in the form

£22=K[1— 5:0(P)__][1+!52u‘”] Vo[|-."g—°um]:
"u. =1“ —°l”l[‘ +.2u u‘ "_] |b +¢m(‘)][_$£ﬂ], (6)
0’ 1r (4- 1‘".
when: WW): ‘ -— (a +5). 1‘ ‘=‘;"'
M" (p) =b+°$"<“;’l-

The problems of maintaining the desired type of gait and of realizing a transition
from one type of gait to another have accordingly been reduced to the problem of formu-

lating a timetable for transitions of the extreneties to the transfer phase ((4’)). If
\1) (i)

for L we assign a certain sequence. 01 (t) will have the form shown in Figure 6.

l

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6
e
r.
u
R
.1
pr

 

vii -J

I, o, ’-.t.u-o.{o

Transitions

7
e
r
U
8

.1

F

 

   

ZJ'UW *6’61’746'

2.1.5

 

(710'

40,!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use: ONLY

Unu of the components of this apparatus is the "rhythm" generator. which generates n
periodic signal with a period of Tr - Tn + 2". Let us note that from Section lo it

follows that Ti - "i (Tn + 1'5) - "it" where n1: - 0..... k-l for all previously de-

(71)

"rhythm" generator. since the movement of each of the machine's extremities is regular
with a period of Ty - kTT (k - gait parameter). while. as pointed out above. the move-

scribed gntts. This allows us to assign a sequence of moments t by means of the

ments of the different extremities vary in relation to one another by values Ti’ which
are multiples of T1" A pulse distribute: is used to assign sequence ts”) in the walking

machine's motion control system. It operates as follows: pulses from the "rhythm" gen-
erator (T7) are fed to one of its inputs. pulses with a period of Ty to the other. From

each of its six outputs come signals with period Ty. TT the time elapsing between the

moments of the occurrence of pulses at its j-th and (j+l)-th outputs. The six outputs
correspond to a maximum value of k - 6.

if t‘-': type of gait has been determined. it is sufficient to realize it to connect the
step-cycle generators to the appropriate pulse-distributer outputs. The output signals

will then regulate the moments at which the sign of u“) of the corresponding step-cycle
generators changes from "+" to "-" (lo); the transition of the extremities from the sup-
port phase to the transfer phase will thus occur in accordance with the timetable corre-
.sptmdlng to the desired type of gait.

Values of the parameters n1: are employed to determine the step-cycle generators corre-
sponding to the various pulse-distributer outputs. Thus N1: - n1: 4» 1 represents the

number of the pulse-distributer output. i the number of the step-cycle generator. Real-
ization of the desired algorithms for transition from one gait to another thus requires:
1) formulation of the values of parameters TT’ Ty and V7: corresponding to the new gait;

2) changing the order in which the inputs of the step-cycle generators are connected to
the pulse-distributer outputs.

6. Deneription of the step-cycle generator control unit. Figure 8 is a block diagram
of the system permitting realization of desired gaits and transitions from one gait to
another.

In developing this block diagram it was proposed that each gait the machine is to execute
and transition from one gait to another be assigned an appropriate value of parameter P.
a gait and transition identifier. The block diagram contains as component I an operator
control panel or an interface with a higher level of the machine's control system. Pa-
meters '10. u. b. u. be and values of gait and transition identifier p are the outputs

of this unit;

- unit 2 conforms the set of values of parameters Al, A2, 33, M. as, A6 and k to the
value of the gait and transition identifier supplied to its input. The values of these
parameters are the signals controlling the switches (components 9-16); It is the gait

parameter;

— unit 3. to the inputs of which are supplied the values of parameters Va, 1! and L;
from the output of unit 1 and of k from the output of unit 2, generates the values of

v“ in accordance with the formula

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1). “-1),

unit 4. to the inputs of which are supplied the values Va. H and L; from the output
f unit 1 and k from the output of unit 2. generates the value of parameter Tn in sc-
urdauce with the formula

1. __ II—L. .
rm-

unit 5 is the rhythm generator. It converts the value of parameter T into a sequence

f pulses with period TT. T
I

unit 6 converts the signal supplied from the output of the rhythm generator into a
ulse sequence of period Ty -' k'l‘ . The value It is supplied from the output of unit 2;

7'
unit 7 is the pulse distributer. Its functioning has been described in Section 5;
units 8-l3 are the switches 6 in 1 controlled by signals from the outputs of unit 2;
units 14—19 are the step-cycle generators.

DPYRICIIT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981

963
30: 1863/39

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-l ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

MODELING AND OPTIMIZING COMPLEX CONTROL SYSTEMS

Moscow MODELIROVANIYE I OPTIMIZATSIYA SLOZHNYKH SISTEH UPRAVLENIYA in Russian 1981
(signed to press 8 Jun 81) pp 2-3. 263-265

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Modeling and Optimizing Complex

Control Systems". edited by Ya. Z. Tsypkin. USSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka". 2350 copies. 265 pages]

[Text] This collection treats the subjects of identification and optimum control.

compute and large industrial robot systems and medical. biological and technical
problems in control.

The book is intended for scientific. technical and engineering personnel.
Foreword

The concepts of automatic control and systems theory have now gained extensive currency
in biology. medicine. economics. sociology etc. New problems generate new theoretical
ideas. which not infrequently lead to advances in control theory. Of interest in this
connection are publications dealing with application of the methods of control theory

to a variety of problems. The present collection is precisely this kind of publication.

The first part of the collection deals with general theoretical problems concerning the
modeling and optimization of systems controlling complex objects. Attention here is de-
voted primarily to problems arising in connection with the study of specific nonstan-
dard tasks. A feature characterizing most of the methods of analysis and synthesis dis-
cussed consists in their orientation toward the employment of computers.

A great deal of attention is given to consideration of such factors as incompleteness
of information and random perturbations of parameters and signals. The modern mathe-
nntical apparatus of random-process theory is employed to develop adaptive algorithms
and (optimum or almost optimum) filtering procedures.

The second part of the collection is devoted to analysis of specific problems. An algo-

rithm for precise or an approximate soLution of a problem is in many instances the re-
sult. The problems studied are among the category of new problems associated with the
planning and design of automatic and man-machine control systems. enhancing control

system reliability, economic and production planning and the development of new control
technologies.

Taken as a whole. the material contained in the collection provides a fairly complete
picture of the present status of a number of central problems as well as of the promise

and basic directions of scientific progress in the field of control.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISI". ONLY

Table of Contents
Identification and Optimum Control

8. M. Aleksandrov

Optimizing the Process of Stabilizing Elastic Oscillations of Deformed Objects
in the Category of Open-Loop Controls ......... .............................

Ye. V. Bauman

Reducing the Problem of Piecewise-Linear Approximation to a Problem in Automat—
ic Classification .. .............. ..........................................

S. V. Culyayev and N. P. Lapchenko
Control of Nonstationary Objects with Predominating Lag ....................

P. P. Cusak and A. I. Okrug

Estimating the Unknown Parameters of a Model of a Multivall Chemical Reactor .

V. V. Cuchuk

Errors in interpolating Functions with a Finite Spectrum ...................

B. l. Kogan and A. G. Satayev

Floating Control of the State of a Parabolic System ........................

0. Yu. Kopysov
Method of Control of Variable-Structure Systems . ..... . ..... ................

l. M. Savoskina

One Method of Modeling the R011 Temperature Fields of a Rolling Mill as an 0b~
jcct with Distributed Parameters ...........................................

K. Ye. Starkov

The Observabllity of Smooth Dynamic Control Systems ........................

Computer Systems

8. A. Genlnsnn

Optimum Control of a Common Diykstra Semaphore .............................

A. S. Clushchenko

The Problem of Centralizing Control of Dependent Processes .................

T. G. Duhordzhginidre

Modvling a Multiprocessor System with a Common Main Circuit ........... .....

V. [. Ivnnov

One Method of Data-Base Management .................... ...... ...............

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. S. thedov and V. Z. Popov

The Possibility of Using a Scanning Algorithm for Computerized Design of LSI-
Circuit Topology ....... ..... .. .......... ............. ..... . ....... ........

V. P. Pelikhov

Determining Optimum Data-File Redundancy Strategies for Markov or Seminarkov
Models of Error Occurence ........... ......................................

V. V. Cuchuk and Ye. A. Kardashin

Correcting the Frequency Characteristics of a Rapid Fourier Transform .....

L. N. Yakubovskaya

Models of the Selection of Exchange Alternatives in Systems Redistributing
Common Resources .... .......... ............................................

S. I. Yavarov

Compiling Schedules for Multiprocessor Computers with a Single Command Plow .

Large Systems

F. T. Aleskerov

Interval Selection .. ..... .................................................

0. A. Get'man and S. K. Murzayev

Analysis of Modern Stimulus Mechanisms ....................................

E. N. Gordeyev

New Studies in the Coating Problem ........................................

V. A. Kirsanova. A. B. Lagutin. and Yu. M. Shurayts

Developing a Method of Full Optimization of the Control of Rolled-Product Cut-
out on a Continuous-Billet M111 ...................... ..... ................

V. V. Kondrat'yev and A. A. Prokopenko

Planning Finance Flows in a Construction-Installation Organization . .......

V. A. Bol'shnkov
Adaptive Resource-Management Algorithms in a Ramified Supply System .......

S. A. Kosyachenko and A. V. Lyudvig
Optimizing the Development of Functional Flow-Charts of the Solution of ACS

Problems .............................................. ........ ............

A. G. Mikhaylov

Games with a Rhomboid Hierarchical Structure ........................ ......

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. G. Mikhaylov and I. A. Timofeyev

Planned Redundancy of Production Capacities ................. .............

G. Ye. Moiseyenko
A Model of Transportation Planning at the Transport-Enterprise Level .....

A. D. Tsvirkun and T. M. Ostrovskaya

A Model of Dynamic Resource Distribution Employing the System-Programming
Method of Planning the Development of Complex Systems ... ...... ...........

A. P. Sher and M. Ya. Zinger

Diffuse Solution of a System of Inequalities and the Matching of Interval
Expert Evaluations .oooo-cocoon-cacouscous-00...a...ssossoooooosooosooooooo

Industrial Robot Systems and
Medical-Biological Problems in Control

V. l. Agafonov

The Problem of locating a Course by Autonomous Mobile Robots .............

V. V. Baranov

Stereotyplc Manipulator Motions ..........................................

L. I. Borodkin

The Informational Structure of Oncological Studies: Probability Analysis of
Communications Networks ...... ............................................
v. S. Gurfinkel'. s. B. Mozhzhevelov. S. A. Anishchenko. A. Yu. Shneyder and
Ye. V. Gurfinkel'

Some Questions Associated with the Sensitization of Robots with Force Sen-
sors ....... ..............................................................
D. N. Zhikharev and l. G. Zhestkov

Reconstructing Hexapod Gaits .. ..... ......................... ...... .......

0. B. Manolov and V. B. Tulepbayev

Modeling Manipulator-Robot Movements along Desired Trajectories ..........

l. i. Tolmasskaya

Using a Linguistic Approach to the Processing of Large Data Files in the Task
uf Analyzing the DeVelnpmcnt of Basic USSR Public Health Resources ...... ..

Control Hardware

Yu. V. Ageyev

Magnetic Semiconductor Device for Operational Forecasting of the Technical
State of Civil Aviation Aircraft Equipment ...... ............. ...... .......

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-'( m (WI-11 1AI . IISI-i ( )N I .Y

C. C. Alcknunyun

Principles of the Design of Radio-Have Sensors of the Location of the
Boundary of Conducting Mediums ....................................

S. l. Kasatkin
Development of a 4K Memory Unit on the Basis of Plane Magnetic Domains

V. Ya. Fateyev

One Method of Measuring Agent Levels in Vessels with a Monbelted

Interior ..... ........ .......... ...................................

0. M. Fioshkina and A. A. Vasil'yev

The Functional Range of Data Read-Write Components in Plane-Magnetic-
Domain Devices ....................................................

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mauka". 1981

8963
680: 1863/39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.3:681.3

DESIGN OF COMPUTER INPUT/OUTPUT SYSTEMS

Leningrad ORGANIZATSIYA VYCHISLITEL'NYKH STRUKTUR I PROTSESSOV: PROYEKTIROVANIYE
SISTEM VVODA-VYVODA EVH in Russian No 8, 1981 (signed to press 31 Dec 80) pp 2. 173-175

[Annotation and table of contents from collection "Organizing Computer Structures and
Processes: The Design of Computer Input/Output Systems". edited by Z. I. Tsar'kova.
lzdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universitets. 2&49 copies. 184 pages]

[Text] This issue of the collection surveys the latest results of studies on structural
development and the organization of external computer devices and channel systems, inter-
faces and converters. It deals vith the organization of computer processes in present-

day special—purpose and minicomputers. The works contained here also discuss the prob-
lems of the reliability and accuracy of these devices.

The collection is intended for specialists in systems organization and in the planning
and design of computers. facilities and systems.

Table of Contents

Shmidt, V. K. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Problems in the Design of Analog-Digital Computer

Channels noose-noun...eonone...sootoooooeoooooooeoooooooeoooesonoooo 3

Holodtsov, V. I. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V.
l. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). An Analog-Digital Channel for Automating Experi-
ncntal Research Using the SARATOV-Z Computer ....................... 9

Pavlov. S. H. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Analysis of the Interference Resistance of an Analog-
ngiial Accumulator .... ................... ......................... 20

Haltrnshcvich. V. E. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering ime-
nl V. i. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). The Problem of Constructing Analog-Digital
Converters with a Constant Relative Quantization Error ..... ........ 27

Kolin'ko. P. c. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V.
I. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). FOKAL-l975 Interpreter of FOKAL Algorithmic Lan-

guage for the SARATOV-Z Computer ........ ........................... 3k

Vasin. A. H. (Leningrad institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.

Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Software for a SARATOV-Z Analog-Digital Channel .... 42
73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINIOFFKHAI.USE(NVLY

Ryabtscv. K. K. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ui'ynnov (Lenin)). Analog-Digital Channel with Data Compression .....

Kudryavtsev. V. V. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V.
I. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Device for Data Exchange between SARAIOV-Z Computers

Hikhal'ski, A. and Shmidt. V. K. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engi-
neering imeni V. I. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Systematization and Comparative
Analysis of Computer Interfaces .......................................

Nemchenko. M. I. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Organization of a Direct Memory-Access Channel in the
SARATOV-Z Cowuter 0000C.llIt.OI.00.I.0IIIQUOoooosolooaoootooootoiOIII

Tolpyga, S. H. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.

Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Automating Experimental Steady-State Studies of Analog-
Digital Converter Characteristics ....................................

chpener. V. V.. Denisov, D. A.. Korovatakiy, V. P.. Hanokhin. P. S.. Hyg-
lan. s. A. and Tsarev. I. V. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering
imeni V. I. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Digital-Analog System for Analyzing Random

Processes ............................................................

Horavski, R. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Algorithm for Determining the Status of a Linear Net-
work with Switches after Switching ...................................

Konovalov, S. D. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). A Method of Realizing Programmed Switching in an Analog-
Digltal cmmel 0C... ...... IOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOODOOIOIIOIOOOOOCQOOOOOIOO

Bondarenko. A. V. and Svin'in, S. F. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical En-
gineering imeni V. I. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Filtering High-Frequency Compo-
nents in Digital-Analog Generators of Periodic Oscillations ..........

Corelik. V. I. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Special-Purpose Processor for High-Speed Fourier Trans-

form .................................................................

Burov. V. A.. Chichikanov. I. V. and Yalovenko. L. Ya. (UkSSR Academy of
Sciences). Organizing Reliable Control System Operation .............

Barsukov. Yu. 1. and Komshilov. 0. A. (Leningrad Polytechnical Institute
imeni H. I. Kalinin). Error in Measuring a Random Process with Sequen-
tially Computing Analog-Digital Converters ...........................

Kuznetsov, A. s. (Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V. I.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). Quasi-optimum Sequential Algorithm for Smoothing Quan-
tization Errors ......................................................

Solovov, P. V. (Ryazan' Institute of Radio Engineering). Calculating the
Parameters of the Output Signal of a Pulse—Frequency Subtracter ......

Rud‘ko, V. P. and Chichiknnov, I. V. (Institute of Electrodynamics of the
UkSSR Academy of Sciences). Application of the Informational Approach to
Evaluation of Digital—Computer Input/Output Devices ......... ...... ..

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1M. IISF. ONLY

Dorbunvv. V. N. (Leningrad institute of Electrical Engineering iueni V. l.
Ul'yanov (Lenin)). The Problem of Evaluating the Efficiency of Executing

a Dynamic Filtering Algorithm on a Digital Control Computer Solving the
Problem of Optimum Terminal Control of a Moving Object ...............

Vladimirova, T. V., Tentiyeva, S. M. and Shunilov, L. A. (Leningrad Insti—
tute of Electrical Engineering ineni V. I. Ul'yanov (Lenin)). High-Speed
Matrix Dividers .............. ...... ..................................

naykov, V. D. and Pikulin. V. V. Analysis of the Convergence of Iteration
Processes in Computing the Eucntions arcain! and area Y by the 'Digit-by-
Digit' Method ..... ...................................................

Shumilov, L. A., Volkogonov. V. A., Stepanov, V. S. and Zaykova. L. A.
(Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering iueni V. I. Ul'yanov
(Lcnin)). Hardware for Executing the Operations of Coding and Decoding
Information in 3 Cyclic Code .........................................

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta. 1981

8963
cso: 1863/42

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 535.5

HILBERT OPTICS
Moscow GIL‘BERT-OPTIKA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 13 Mar 81) pp 2-6

lAnnotntion. table of contents and foreword from book "Hilbert Optics",
by Lev Markovich Soroko, Izdatel'stvo "Hanks". 3400 copies, 160 pages]

[Text] This monograph is devoted to Hilbert optics, which constitutes an independent
branch of Fourier optics. Following the mathematical introduction it sets forth the
theory underlying methods of visualizing optical irregularities; it describes the oper-
ating principles and categorization of shadowbindication instruments and presents algo-
rithms employed in computer modeling of Hilbert optical systems and in analyzing the
results of measurements. The Hilbert optical instruments described in the book. part
of which the author helped to develop. provide high image contrast and make maximum use
of light flux; they are characterized by uniform sensitivity throughout the range of

spatial frequencies; they are simple to use and and may be combined with holographic
devices.

A book on Hilbert optics fills the gap in the scientific literature between books on
optical theory and texts of an applied nature.

Illustrations - 80; tables - 1; bibliography - 82 titles.

Table of Contents

Foreword ... ............. ..... ........ ... ...... ........................ 4
Chapter 1. The Hilbert transform ..................................... 7
5 1.1. Introduction .............................................. 7
5 1.2. The Hilbert transform ..................................... 14
§ 1 3 Causal signals in optics .................................. 21
Chapter 2. "tlbert Optics pooooooooooooconsonants.ooooooooooooao-ooooo 26
s 2.1. Fourier optics ............................................ 26
s 2.2. Shadow-indication instruments ............................. 36

Tsernike [transliterated] filter (36). Foucault knife (38).
Phase knife (42) Defocussed diaphragm (46). Absorbing filter
with three gradations (51). Defocussed visualization of gases

(53).
S 2.3. Diffraction grating with irregularity ..................... 57
5 2.6. Hilbert transform in white light .......... .............. .. 69
5 2.5. Isotropic Hilbert transform ............................... 75
S 2.6. Classification of Hilbert optical methods ................. 84

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR mm 1“. USE ()Nlh’

Lhnptcr J Hilbert optical instruments ................................ 91
5 3.1. Shadow-indication instrument with phase knife .............. 91

5 3 2. Shadow—indication instrument containing a diffraction grating
with irregularity .......................................... 96
5 3.3. Hultiwave shadow-indication instrument ..................... 105
S 3.5. Optical spectrum analyzer .................................. 113
S 3.5. Image classifier ........................................... 116
5 3.6. High-speed Hilbert filter .................................. 123
S 3.7. The history of Hilbert optics .............................. 126
Chapter 6. Computer algorithms ........................................ 135
S 4.1. Discrete Hilbert transform ................................. 135
5 4.2 Cotangent form of discrete Hilbert transform ............... 139
5 4.3. Digital Hilbert filter ..................................... 163
5 4.4. Digital Hilbert filter with frequency reading .............. 1&7
S 4.5. High-speed Hilbert-transform algorithm ..................... 150
5 4.6. Analog Hilbert transform ................................... 152
Bibliography ........................................................... 157

Foreword

visualization of optical irregularities with a maximum degree of contrast simultaneously
for all spatial frequencies transmitted by the optical system [1]. Realization of the
Hilbert transform in optics involves the use of Fourier optical devices, as well as de-
vices unique to Hilbert optics: optical plates with a step whose height corresponds to

a phase jump of 180° for a certain light wavelength. diffraction gratings with irregu-
larity and composite double-refracting plates. Like Fourier optics [2]. the field of
Hilbert optics is still quite new. Neither Fourier nor Hilbert were opticists and

David Hilbert (1862-1943) was the leading mathematician of his day. His name has been
given to many discoveries made in mathematics: the Hilbert space, the Hilbert transform.
the Hilbert subgroup and others [3]. His work exerciced an influence on many branches
of science allied with mathematics: on the spectral theory of signals [4]. statistical
radio engineering and in physics. In the field of integral equations he generalized

the theory of spectral decomposition. The Hilbert transform. which constitutes only a
small Hilbert's mathematical legacy, is widely employed in signals theory. linear cir-
cuit theory as well as in optics and physics. -

composite double-refracting plates. which were positioned in the plane of the spatial
Frequencies of an achromatlc Fourier-optical system. In 1971 L. H. Soroko and V. A.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suyvilu I7| fabricated and studied a now npticnl device for work in Hilbert upllcs:

a diffraction grating with an irregularity. or phase Jump. A diffraction grating of
this construction is a universal half-wave phase filter of Hilbert-optical spatial
frequencies and permits realization of the Hilbert transform for any wavelength of
light from a monochromatic source without any further adjustment. This is what dis-
tinguishes it from the conventional half-wave phase optical filter. the step in which
corresponds to a phase shift of 180' for only a specific light wavelength. In 1973

Eu and Lohmann [8] realized an isotropic Hilbert transform using a ring light source

by averaging the unidimensional Hilbert transforms with respect to an angle in coherent
and noncoherent light. In [974 L. H. Soroko and V. A. Suyetin [9] showed that a dif-
fraction grating with a number of phase discontinuities distributed across the visual
field of a shadow-indicating device with a defocussed diaphragm gives a contrasting a
easily interpreted picture simultaneous visualization of optical irregularities for a
number of narrow spectral lines fairly widely distributed throughout the spectrum. In
1975 V. A. Arbuzov and V. A. Fedorov [10] realized an isotropic Hilbert transform using
point and cruciform light sources. This work concluded the first phase in the develop-
ment of Hilbert optics.

The possibilities offered by Hilbert optics have yet to be adequately understood, and
the sphere of application of Hilbert optics is not limited only to systems for visual-
izing optical irregularities. The present book illustrates the application of Hilbert
optics in image-recognition systems and in the solution of other problems in information
theory using the example of an optical system for recognizing characters in standard
type. the number of whose optical channels has been increased from one to eight. To-
gether with the Fourier transform, several types of Hilbert transforms [11] and combined
Hilbert-Fourier transforms are employed for this purpose.

Hilbert-optical devices are simple in construction; they offer high levels of immunity
to interference with indifferent use. while the pictures of the visualization of opti-

cal irregularities can be easily interpreted by an operator having no special training.
Systems controlling optical-component quality which incorporate Hilbert—optical devices
should see extensive utilization in research institutes as well as in plant laboratories

and shops.

In conclusion the author expresses his deep appreciation to V. A. Suyetin. together
with whom he conducted his studies in Hilbert optics, to T. A. Strizh for computer
calculations. to Yu. V. Chuguy for creative collaboration and to V. A. Pedorov for

discussing achromatic Hilbert optical systems.

The author is also grateful to V. A. Zverev. corresponding member of the USSR Academy
at Sciences,for his valuable comments in reviewing the manuscript.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-natematicheskoy
literatury. [981

8963
C80: 1863/61

78

F0!:0FFKJAI.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABSTRACTS OF ARTICLES IN JOURNAL 'AUTOMATIC EQUIPMENT AND COHPUTERS',
Sl-Zl'TFNBER—OCTOBER 1981

Riga AV'i‘OHA‘l‘IKA I VYCHISLITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 5. Sep-Oct 81 pp 95. 97. 99
um 681.324

INTEGRATED OPTIMIZATION OF THE LOCATION OF COMPUTER CENTERS AND INTERCENTER DATA-
TRANSNISSION NETWORKS

[Abstract of article by Bober, V. I. and Yanbykh, G. 15.]

[Text] This article defines the problem and oroposes an algorithm employing the

"branch and bound" technique for optimizing the location of interlinked computer cen-
ters (LC) and an intercenter data-transmision network (IDI'N). Subscribers are linked

to a CC via radial data-transmission networks. Minimum expenditures for setting up

and operating the network constitutes the criterion of optimization. The work proposes
a three-level system of strategies to be emplOyed in the branching process. Strategy ‘
Sl w0uld be employed to select the location of the CC. 82 the configuration of the mm
and $3 the number of commnication channels on each branch of the ID‘i'il. The results of
a computerized machine experiment are also presented. Illustrations - l; bibliography -

- 5 titles.

UDC 68l.325.5

ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECT OF COMBINING PROCESSOR AND “DIORY FUNCTIONS IN NULTIPROCESSOR
SYSTEMS

lAbstract of article by Sokol. Yu. 31.]

[Text] A multiprocessor system with a common memory module in which processor opera—
tion is partially combined with that of the memory module is discussed. Determinate
and stochastic mathematical models, for which are obtained expressions making it pos-
sible to calculate the efficiency ,of a multiprocessor system. are used to study the
efficiency of this system. On the basis of the relationships established. comparative
analysis is undertaken of the operational efficiency of a system with combined proces-
sor and memory functions and of a system without this combination. The work studies
the effect obtained with combination as a function of the number of processors in the
system, the degree of the combination ano of memory loading by a single processor.
Parameter relationships are obtained which yield the maximum effect. It is shown that

the maximum effect is achieved with the determinate model and equals 100 per cent.
while in the stochastic model the effect does not exceed 33 per cent. Illustrations -

- 6; bibliography - lo titles.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" 1“. “SF. ONLY

WK25l7.9
ADAPTIVb ALhURlTHH FUR SYNTHESIZING LINEAR-THRESHOLD NETWORKS

[Abstract of article by Sychev, A. “.1

[Text] An algorithm for synthesizing linear-threshold networks is proposed which per-
mits realization of an arbitrary Boolean function on a single threshold element with
the addition of a simple linear unit comprising the aggregate of module-2 adders. The
algorithm permits the use for synthesis of threshold elements realizing strictly thresh-
old functions. It employs only arithmetical operations on coefficients of the spectra
of the given functions and matrix operations. The article describes a method of factor-
ing a matrix constituting an orthonormal basis for Walsh functions ordered in a Carnot
basis. The proposed algorithm therefore requires only minimal computer resources and
may have good machine interpretation. Illustrations - 5; bibliography - 5 titles.

UDC 681.324
STUDY OF THE EFFICIENCY OF HULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS WITH INTERNAL MEMORY UNITS

[Abstract of article by Kornev. M. D.. Kreynin, A. Ya.. Sokol, Yu. H. and Kazantsev.
P. N.[

[Text] A multiprocessor system including common memory modules and homogeneous-proces-
sor modules is examined. The modules are linked together via a common bus. Each proces
Sor has an internal memory unit accessible via the common bus to any system processor
and. via another output, to its own processor. The system's entire memory constitutes
a single address space. 0n the basis of analytical calculations and the results of
statistical modeling. the work establishes the operational efficiency of the system as

a function of the number of processors in the system, the probability of reference to

an individual internal memory and the probability of reference to common memory modules
as well as of the relationship between servicing times in an individual internal memory
unit and in the common bus. It is shown that an important gain in efficiency is achieve
by an increase in the frequency with which individual memory units are queried and a de-
crease in the time required to service these queries. Combination of proceSJor and mem-
ory functions also yields a substantial advantage. Tables - l; illustrations - 5; bib—
liography - 7 titles.

UDC 681.324
USE OF NUMERICAL PROGRAMMED CONTROL DEVICES IN HULTIHICROFROCESSOR SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Mazilkin, I. 6., Petrov. G. A. and Pulkis, G. 0.]

[Text] This work examines the possibility of employing numerical programmed control
systems (NFC) with multimicroprocessor systems (HMPS). It proposes parallel NPC algo-
rithms and evaluates their productivity. It discusses the design of one version of an
MHPS along with algorithms controlling the realization of subtasks and selecting the
data required for their execution. Illustrations - 6; bibliography - 6 titles.

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 519.7

EQUIVALENT CONVERSIONS FOR A SYSTEM OF DIRECT-COUPLING EQUATIONS

[Abstract of article by Matroaova, A. Yu.]

[Text] A special category of systems of direct-coupling equations is examined. The
concept of the equivalence of these systems is introduced. The complexity of a system
is determined and an algorithm proposed for changing from a given system to an equiva-
lent system of lesser complexity. This task may find application in modeling asynchro-
nous series-connected devices. Bibliography — 2 titles.

UDC 519.718
AN ESSENTIAL CRITERION FOR A TEST SEQUENCE

[Abstract of article by Sklyarevich. A. N.)

[Text] it is shown that a given sequence of input sets of combination automatic equip-
ment is a test of the check of its operating efficiency in the case of a given category

of malfunctions if because of malfunctions of this type the automatic equipment cannot
realize a single one of the functions. the values of which differ from corresponding
values of the output function of a properly operating machine only on part or all input
sets in the given sequence. The work presents examples of the use of the criterion for
direct determination of a test or to establish the possibility of using the test found
for a broader category of malfunctions. Bibliography - 1 title.

UDC 68l.322:519.854
A METHOD OF FORMING PSEUDORANDOH BINOMIAL SEQUENCES
[Abstract of article by Litikov. I. P.]

[Text] Digital frequency computers belonging to a category of digital analogs find ap-
plication in control of stepwise motion along continuous trajectories: in controlling
metal-cutting machines, robots. graph plotters and gas cutting machines. Development of
an effective system of test diagnostics, which must include a pseudorandom binomial se-
quence generator. plays an important role in insuring the operational effectiveness of
these devices. The task of synthesizing such a generator as a basis for digital-frequen-

cy decision elements is complicated by the fact that they have no shift register. This
work proposes a method of forming pseudorandom binomial sequences by a generator, the

basis for whose design is the basic component of digital-frequency equipment--the binary
denmdulator. Elements of probability theory. Galois fields and finite automatons are

employed to prove the analogy of the analyzed with random sequences. The following con-
clusions are accordingly drawn. Realization of the generator design does not require
the incorporation of shift registers, which substantially preserves the uniformity of
design of digital frequency structures, while. in contrast to the H-sequences in the
period 220(1-2‘“), the sequences formed by this generator have an equal number of zeros
and ones. The generation_and then "jumbling" of n independent Musequences makes it pos-
sible. with the use of additional equipment. to obtain analogs of known schemes on shift
registers. Illustrations - 2; bibliography - 2 titles.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘FK'IM. USE ONLY
UDC 519.713

SYNTHESIS OF GENERAL-PURPOSE SYMMETRICAL SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Dulepov. Ye. 6.]

[Text] A method of synthesizing general—purpose symmetrical systems with parallel ad-
Justment--a triad method--is set forth. This method consists essentially in the use as
elements of the function-adjustment code in the multinumber single-digit adder system.
The aggregate of the sets of adder function values is broken down into triads; each
triad has three sets; the code distance between any of the sets of a triad is 2. The
Gray code is employed to break the sets down into triads. It is shown that the use of
this method simplifies the system and reduces the number of external poles in it.

Tables — 2: illustrations - l; bibliography - 5 titles.

UDC 519.832
SYMMETRICAL—LEXICOGRAPHICAL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS AND ANTAGONISTIC GAMES
[Abstract of article by Podinovskiy. V. V.]

[Text] This work is a study of decision-making problems involving a number of criteria
K7,...,ﬁ". when for comparison of preferability strategies inLtially are compared the

:1 of the corresponding criteria values, the best strategy being considered the one for
which this value is greater; if these values are equal. the n2 values are compared in

similar fashion etc. where x - (n1. n2,..., mm) is a permutation of set (i, 2,.... m}.
It is shown that discrete symmetricai-iexicographical optimization problems reduce to

problems of maximizing a single numerical function. A number of specific characteristics
and features of symmetrital-lexicographic antagonistic games are established. Among
other things. it is shown that in a combined expansion of this game. the guaranteed
average gain for one of the players may prove worse than the corresponding value for

an initial game in pure strategies. Tables - 2; bibliography - 11 titles.

UDC 519.832

ADAPTIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF AUTOHATA WITH REGULAR TACTICS

[Abstract of article by Eydel'man. S. D. and Ezrokhi, A. 1.]

[Text] The possible behavior of a broad category of stochastic multi-output automata
with regular tactics in random steady-state environments is studied. It is shown that
the probability characteristics of the behavior of a sequence of finite automata con-
verge with those of the corresponding limited-infinite automaton (with a denumerable
number of states). The work defines the conditions under which. regardless of their
initial state. automata with a probability of 1 go into a stable optimum regime (the
latter (the latter is adaptive). In conclusion the article discusses the possibility

of employing this category of automata for adaptive control of computer-system servicing

modes. Bibliography - 15 titles.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IJSE ONLY

UDC 681.51:519.872
METHOD OF DETERMINING THE MEAN OPERATING INDICATOR OF A VARIABLE-MODE NETWORK FRAGMENT

[Abstract of article by Sklyarevich, A. N. and Sclyarevich, F. A.]

[Text] This work discusses a network fragment with two operating modes. Each mode has
its own responses and its own system of first-order linear differential equations de-
fining the laws governing the change in Operating indicators. One-time mode change oc-
curs at a constant rate. A system of first-order linear differential equations for mean
efficiency indicators is found without the use of Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equations;

the authors establish the validity of an algorithm for obtaining it directly by modifying
system operating equations in each mode. The article presents an example of the applica-
tion of this method involving calculation of the average throughput capacity of a vari-
able-mode network fragment. Bibliography - 4 titles.

UDC 681.518.54
ESTABLISHING OPTIMUM DIAGNOSTIC CONTROL-SYSTEM PAXAMETERS WITH DICHOTOMY

[Abstract of article by RatushnyY. B. A.]

[Text] The problem of establishing optimum control-system parameters with differential
diagnostics (dichotomy) is discussed. Hith normal distribution of control parameter x

in regions of functioning D; and malfunctioning D1 of the states of the object. with
estimates of the mean value of m, and M2 and of the mean quadratic deviation O1 and 02

obtained on the basis of statistical analysis of the results of measurements. and with

satisfaction of the relationships 2‘ z 313. the author obtains a simple formula for

61
m102+mzdi
the optimum value for parameter 1 X - ---—-—-- . in the case of which the proba-
OPt 61+B2

bilities of correct diagnosis of DI and D, are equal as are, accordingly. the probabil-
ities of errors in categorizing the states of the object. Illustrations - l; bibliogra-
phy - 3 titles.

UDC 621.317.3hl
USE OF DISCRETE METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING DIFFERENTIAL MODELS BY MEASURING SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Andriyanov, A. V. and Ponomarev, D. M.)

[Text] This work discusses a method of identifying the parameters of linear differential
models of signals and systems. 3y breaking signals down in accordance with a system of
orthogonal multiplicative base functions. the problem reduces to the identification of
difference models. The authors propose an effective algorithm making it possible to
determine the parameters of differential models and present the results of experimental

studies an an automated pulse measuring system. Tables - l; illustrations - 4; bibliog—
rnphy - 7 titles.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 68l.327:5l9.7l3

THE POSSIBILITY OF KEALIZING AN ASYNCHRONOUS INTERFACE USING A SELF-SYNCHRONIZING
CODE HIT“ AN IDENTIFIER

[Abstract of article by Vatshavskiy. V. 1., Harakhovskiy, V. 3.. Peschanskiy, V. A.
and Rozenblyum, L. Ya.)

[Text] A method of establishing asynchronous interface not critical to the occurence of

junction-bar delay distortion is demonstrated using the example of an interface for byte-
by-byte data transmission. The interface is realized in a category of aperiodic systems,
that is, systems whose behavior is invariant with respect to magnitudes of component de-

lay. Tables - l; illustrations - 1; bibliography - 4 titles.

UDC 681.326.012.001.63
STATISTICAL MODELING OF CONFLICT SITUATIONS IN HULTIPROCESSOR SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Koryachku. V. P. and Smolyarov, N. A.]
[Text] The authors discuss statistical modeling of conflict situations in multiproces-
sor systems. They propose an algorithm for modeling conflict situations and present the
results of calcu.ations for a specific example. Tables - l; illustrations - 2; bibliog-

raphy - 3 titles.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Zinatne", "Avtomatika i vychislitel'naya tekhnika", [981

8963
050: 1863/35

84
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABSTRACTS OF ARTICLE IN 'EI.E(.'I'RONIC MODI'ZIJNC', NOVBIBBR-DECEMBBR 1981
Kiev BLEKTRONNOYE MDELIIDVANIYE in Russian NO 6, NowDec 81 pg. 109-112

[Text] UDC 518517.948

sizikov, v. 5., "Application of Similitude Principles to simulation of Some In-
correctly Posed Problems.“

New correlations are derived for the error in solving a first-order equation by
Tikhonov's regularization method. Definitions of the estimate V and similar W

examples (problems, equations) are introduced relative to a certain practical
example (original) P. Refs: 11 titles.

UDC 681 . 3+519 . 2

Babordin, K. A. . "A Method for Solving the Dirichlet Problem for a Poisson
Equation by the Monte—Carlo Method Using a Hybrid Couputer System.”

A method is examined for organizing the calculations associated with solving a
la‘rechlet problem for a Poisson equation using a probabilistic hybrid computer

system consisting of an alphanumerical special processor and a digital comuter.
10 figs. Refs: 10 titles.

UDC 681. 322.06+681.3. 323

Korneyev, v. v.. and Honakhov, o. G. , ”Decentralized Task Allocation in Computer
Systems with a Programable Structure."

A method is suggested for isolating coswnicating subsystems intended to solve

parallel problems. me method does not require complete information on the state
of the computer system and of the problems introduced into the system. 5 tables.
1 fig. Refs: 9 titles.

UDC 681. 325. 5

Levine, A. 1., “Organization of the Structure and Computation Process of a Special-
ized Computer for Analysis of Regular Nets by the Method of Praguentary Simulation."

This paper examines a new approach to organizing a specialized computer intended
for analysis of regular nets in fragments, based on multiple use of a reprogramable
fragment model. 5 tables. lo figs. Refs: 4 titles.

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI Ufl'lLlAl. var. UI‘LI

UDC 681. 306

Polyakov, A. K., and Lyashko, H. EL, "Languages for simulation of Computer System
structures."

This paper examines some specialized languages and simulation systems oriented on
problens associated with analyzing the structure of computer systems and their
software (with evaluating productivity, time delays, bottlenecks and queues;

debugging control algorithms; analyzing interaction of program modules, etc.).
1 fig. Refs: 10 titles.

UDC 621.3.01

Demirchyan, K. 3., and Butyrin, P. A., "Solution of the Problems of Parametric
Synthesis by the Methods of Electric Circuit Analysis."

A relationship is established between the problems of parametric synthesis and
electric circuit analysis. his relationship is used as the basis for proving a
nunber of theorems making it possible to use, in solving problems of the first
type, a more-profoundly developed and well tested apparatus for solving problems
of the second type. 2 figs. lets: 4 titles.

UDC 621. 382. 3

Korolev, Yu. V., and Yushchenko, I. A" "hn Algebraic Method for Synthesis of Macro-
models of Complex Electric Circuits.”

h formalized method is presented for synthesis of macromodels of complex electronic
circuits within the framwork of the algebraic systems provided by the theory of
electric circuits. me process of constructing macromodels at different levels

of complexity is examined with an analog-digital converter as an example. 7 figs.
Refs: 4 titles.

UDC 621. 39:681. 3

Norenkov, I. P., and Zinov'yev, P. A., "Multilevel Optimization of Complex Technical
SyStems."

This paper examines the statement of problems associated with optimizing complex
technical systems and the solution methods using, as the example, large integrated
circuits subjected to descending design in automatic programmed design systems.
The end result of optimization is the serviceability conditions for the element
parameters. 4 tables. 2 figs. Refs: 5 titles.

UDC 681.5:621. 372.5
Takhvanov, G. 1., Belyanina, N. V., and 'mpitsyn, D. D., "structurally Compensated

Smoothing Devices. "

The basic premises pertaining to structurally compensated smoothing devices are
established, and typical circuits are presented. It is demonstrated that the principle

of structural compensation of systematic output errors extends to many other devices
used to process noisy signals. 6 figs. Refs: ll titles.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 681. 326. 75

Khizhnyak, V. Ya., Serdyuk, G. 3., and Bazutkin, V. V., "A Mathematical Model of
tetection of Failures and Errors in Automatic Process Control System Transducers
Using a General-Purpose Computer.“

The authors propose a mathematical model intended for control, in real time, of a
general-purpose computer's information channel (transducer--commication line--
matching unit-—comunication line--unit converting transducer signals into computer
codc)--that is, controlling the readings of transducers at the input of the processor
of the general-purpose computer. 1 fig. Refs: 11 titles.

UDC 621. 316.71:621.3.0l3.8
Gorskiy, Yu. M., Popov, V. M., and Ushakov, V. A., "Approaches to Applying Adaptation

Principles to Problem Associated With Controlling Synchronous Machine Bxcitations."

The principles of organizing adaptive strong-acting excitation regulators for
synchronous machines are reviewed. The possibilities of building adaptive analytical

and retrieval systems in excitation regulators are discussed. Examples of creating
adaptive excitation regulators are presented. 6 figs. Refs: 13 titles.

UDC 621.107
Ignat'yev, M. 3., and Maksimov. M. I.., "Comutators in Construction of Microprogram
Models."
Application of commutators to the co 1struction of microprograms is examined in
relation to program motion based on differential equations. Refs: 8 titles.

UDC 62-50

Batenko, A. P., “Use of Linear Models in Terminal Control Systems.“

The law of terminal control is proposed as a means for accelerating, braking and
stopping a vessel at a preset point. The control system contains an electronic

model imparting the properties of a linear object to the nonlinear propulsion unit.
7 figs. Refs: 5 titles.

UDC 53.072.681.3

Teplov, N. 1..., Grishin, V. A., and Posokhov, V. P., "Investigation of the Inter-
ference Resistance of Binary and Multiposition Discrete Information Comunication
Systems by the Method of Statistical simulation With a Digital Computer.”

This paper presents the results of research conducted by the method of statistical
computer simulation of the interference resistance of some suboptimal algorithms for
processing cowlex signals on the background of nonstationary correlated noise.

2 figs. Refs: 5 titles.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 51. 001. 57

Shevchenko, Yu. ‘l'., Korobetskiy. v. N., Yakubovich, Yu. V., Lyashchenko, V. K., and
Bus'ko, Ye. 5., "Some Problems in simulating Effective Cutting of Blanks."

A procedure is suggested for planning the cutting of blanks of measured length,
based on the methods of numerical solution of mathematical programming problems.
A set of cutting optimization models and intonation on the developed software
are presented. mfs: 11 titles.

UDC 681.325
Shcherbina, A. A., ”Use of Redundant Numbering Systems to Accelerate So]"‘ion of
Linear Algebraic Equation Systems."

Application of redundant homogenous nunbering systems with integral, rational and
irrationa. bases to accelerate solution of linear algebraic equation systems by
a modified simple iteration method is examined. Refs: 2 titles.

UDC 681.325.6
Kirsanov, ls. Yu., "Selection of the Structure of One Class of Threshold Element

Memrics . "

Superoperational memories employing grouped serial recordings are interpreted as
systems consisting of a‘o" digit recognition systems. Some characteristics of the
structural organization of superoperational memories based on threshold elements
are examined, and their design features are explained. A block diagram of such a
superoperational memory is presented. 2 figs. Refs: 3 titles.

UDC 621. 376. 56+612+577. 3

Dets', G. D.. ”Delta-Modulator Model of Reception.“
The possibility of simulating a biological sensor by a known technical device--
a delta-modulator--is demonstrated. 3 figs. Refs: 4 titles.

UDC 621.372.54
Gurenko, V. N., “Estimation of the Extreme Values of Approxmation Parameters in
the Design of Some Classes of Frequency-Range Filters."

A procedure is described for preliminary estimation of approximation parameters,
obtained as a result of calculating the extreme values, for three basic classes of
filters (Butterwort's, Chebyshev's and elliptic) permitting design of the optimum
filter of the given class, and an example of the calculations is presented. 1 fig.
mfs: 7 titles.

UDC 681.325.5

Simak. l... A., "Construction of Digital-Analog Cathode-Ray Displays."

The method and cirCuit engineering are shown for display of digital-analog informa-
tion, obtained by electronic simulation, on the screen of a cathode-ray tube. 1 fig.
Pnfs: 2 titles. '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 681. 142-523. 8

Gumcu, N. 3., "A Modification Method for Solution of Piecewise-Linear Equations."

A new method is examined for calculating the solutions of piecewise-linear equations
based on solution correction and calculated at previous iterations. The effective-
ness of the method is evaluated, and it is compared with other approaches oriented
at solving problems of this type. 2 tables. 1 fig. Refs: 6 titles.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka“, Elektronnoye modelirovmiye, 1981

11004
cso: 1863/49 any

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY