FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10574
9 June 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 22/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATEON SERVICE

FOR Ol-TIGAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. taterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and mterial enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was smarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIG‘IT LAWS AND REGUIATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OP
“TERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(P000 22/82)

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Old Rivalries Override Recent Agreelent Between rm Yenena
(AL-“HAN All-'MI. 9.15 A9! 82) loco...eonooooeoeooooooooeeoo

Briefs .
Deterrent to Israeli Attack

ALGERIA

Boone-y. 1982 Plan Seen as Pronising Despite Problems
(HARCEBS TROPICAUX E1: HBDITBRBANEBNS. 16 Apr 82) ...............

IRAN
Saddam ﬂuaayn Seen Endangered by Kholeyni
(Jacqms Bub; L'mss, 26 m - 1 Apr 82) enoeooooceoooooooeo
hench Journalist '3 Book on Iran Reviewed
(Bahi Huhamd;AL-RA1‘AN AL-‘ARABI, 26 Mar - 1 Apr 82) . . . . . . . . .
JORDAN
Stock Exchange Developing Rapidly
(AL‘HAIAN All-'MI. 16-22 Apr 82) 000000ooooeoooeeonoeoooooooo.
SUDAN

'Paria Club' Agrees to East Debt Pay-ant Schedule
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX B‘l.‘ mums, Mar 82) ..................

Oil Depoait Potential, Extraction Delay Heighed
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX B‘r mlnmms. 26 Mar 82) ..............

Sugar Refineries to be Overhanled
(HARCHBS TROPICAUX 31' mrmnms. 5 Mar 82) .........-......
FOR 01']?!an USE ONLY

Electrification Program for 15 Provincial Communities Described

Briefs

TUNISIA

'(HARCEBS TROPICAUX swarms, 5 lat 82) ................

Saudi Oil Shipments
Agricultural Projects for North
Egyptian Oil Shipments

Foreign Minister Discusses Hasbro!» International Relations

Briefs

(Baji Caid Basebsi; “ATM AL-‘ABABI, 2-8 Apr 82) ............

Exploitation of Offshore Oilfield

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE OM!

28

29
29
29

35
OLD RIVALRIBS OVHRIDB RECENT mam 3m W0 rm
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic llo 269, 9-15 Apr 82

[Article: "Boundaries of the Haneuvering Between Bullets and Kisses”)

[Text] Just as if the two parts of Yemen are reeffirning their belief in
certain Arab political traditions. just 4 nonths ago President 'Ali Nasir
Huhannad and 'Ali 'Abdullah Salih ended their meetings in San'a by exchanging
fraternal kisses and announcing a new historic step "toward the union of the
two parts of Yenen." During the last week of March arned conflicts broke out
on the border between the north and the south and the situation teetered on
the brink of war once again. A in short weeks between union and fighting

were enough for the kisses to turn into continuous "unionist" shavers of
bullets.

To be fair we must say that Arab traditions are not alone responsible for that
draaatic switch in the course of the dialogue between Ssn'a and Aden. It was
old disputes which exploded recently that the-selves had been carefully erased
among the pages of the historic announcunents. the Joint constitution and the
projected union which had emerged free the previous "unionist" meetings.

The main question constituting the substance of the disagree-en: is the issue
of the National Democratic Front [EDP] in North Yenen. San'a claim that it
is South Yenen that is the prinary source of support for the front that con-
trols areas of North Yemeni territory adjacent to the border and that has
been imposing an uneasy political climate on North Yenen since the spring

of 1979. Adan maneuvers around between announcing its connection with the
front and denying this connection although fron tine to tine it plays up a
statement that the situation in ‘l'a'is is a purely northern affair that is no
business of the South.

Dropped Negligently

During the neeting last Deceaber between President 'Ali Naeir Kuhn-ed and
President 'Ali 'Abdullah Salih, the dialogue took a sonewhat odd course. The
basic issue on the agenda was the need to reach an understanding on bread-
casting the agreensnt that had been signed between the two countries a whole
year earlier. an agreement in which they pledged to abstain fro. supporting
any ailitary, political or informational activity arising from either country
and directed toward the other.

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the conclusion of the negotiations, the two sides agreed on announcing the
earlier agreement and the PDRY radio played the tunes of the lost mien be-
tween the two parts of Yemen throughout a whole month without a hair. while
the North expressed cautious optimism, awaiting Radio Aden'a confirmation that
the South had actually signed an agreement in this regard.

however, this agreement that had been a fundamental issue in the negotiations
between the two presidents was negligently dropped from the statements of
Radio Aden. which again merely played up the statement that the ND? had been
and would continue to be an internal northern affair.

However, why did that issue. which appeared to be merely a matter of form.
assume such major proportions in the dialogue between the two countries
recently?

In urging Adan to unveil the old agreement, the northernera. were trying to
notify the front indirectly that the government of South Yemen was acting
behind its back out of its own interests "as a state," not to mention the

fact that a pledge such as that one the two presidents agreed to announce
tacitly acknowledged that the south was actually supplying the ND? with arms
and supplies and providing it with strategic geographic depth for its military
operations. However, 'Ali Nasir overcame the “lens, for all practical
purposes continuing the double game: make endless promises to San'a to stop
supporting the front so as to keep some room for maneuver for the Aden govern-
ment in its relations with the Gulf countries which were working to call the
situation in the area and, at the same time. continuing to support the front
secretly in its operations against the San'a government, retaining some
maneuvering room in bilateral relations between the two countries.

In other words, 'Ali heir Huber-ad's promises were aimed at preserving Adan'a
relations with the Gulf countries while his support of the front was designed
to continue to put pressure on San'a. Given the division between the two
players of the game, he was actually able to achieve some progress which
appeared encouraging at first glance.

“hence the Conspirators?

0n 1-“. February. the San‘a government and the ND? leadership reached agreement
on a ceasefire which appeared to be a continuation of the "understanding"
which had been rewoven after the meetings of 'Ali Nasir Huhalmmd and 'Ali

'Abdullah Salih. However, after signing the agreement, the front proceeded
to prepare a new plan for moving its operations into San'a this time and

intensive negotiations began between Sultan 'Umar. secretary general of the
front. and the 13 June Popular Forces Front (the Nasirists), an opposition
organization which had broken away from the ND? at an earlier stage.

In mid-March, there was an announcement in San'a about the discovery of a
conspiracy to engage in sabotage inside the country while diplomatic sources.
in Beirut stated that "the conspirators had been launched from South Yemen.’

A week after this. ND? sources announcad the termination of the 14 February
agreement while it was reported that the Yemeni fighter-boaters had been shot
down by SAM missiles while attacking concentrations of front members on the

border between the two Yemens following the death of the conandar of a north

2
FOROFHCIALISEONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Yeneni tank position in Juban, near the town of Dsnat, during an attack
launched by the ND? in the first week of lurch.

The vortex begins anew: operations by the front followed by an sssedlage of
tribes in Dhanar urging the goverusnt to form a people's any to oppose the
activities of the front. Then there are appeals for self-control from

President 'Ali 'Abdullah Salih. perhaps in anticipation of reaching a solution
with Aden.

"Solutions," But. No Solution

However. the proposed "solutions" will not energe with a pouible solution.
The nature of the front's objectives and its Arab relations aore than one
boobytrap sufficient to blast any agreelent along the lines of what happened
to the 14 February agreement or the 31 January 1980 agreement.

This is because the front announced on 16 March 1979 its progren which includes
"working to forn a coalition government in which the front would participate in
ruling North Yenen." The issue then is direct participation in power. Be-
cause it is easy to predict that the forces which govern Sen'a today cannot
coexist in a single coalition governaent with the united NDP, the slogan of
sharing power will. inevitably turn into the slogan of holding power unilater-
ally.

In the case of Yemen. the wisdoa of "going back to the source" does not always
appear to be relevant. In reelity. there are two real sources of the front's
activities: first is the direct southern support and second is the situation
inside North Yemen itself. Because dealing with sourcesof this type always
results in successive frustrations, One has to cope with the results without
touching on the underlying preniaea and here. in a nutshell, lies the Yeneni
political dileusa. Dealing with the South after the talks of last Deceder
resulted in a statement by the North Yemeni prine ninister that union was
certainly on its way and that the new unified entity which would be born would
fall in the middle of the distance between the political thrusts of the two
Yenens. that is. in the middle of the distance between the Marxist directions
of the Aden government and the (at least) non-Marxist directiom of the San'a

goverment .

Hhile talking about "the middle of the distance" is always disreputable
because of the consequences which are divided among both, in the case of Yemen,

it is an ill onen. North Yenen lies between deep currents pulling it in
different directions. It is a neighbor of both Saudi Arabia and Aden whose

differences in political and ideological positions require no introduction.

Inside Yemen, the distance between the intellectuals of the cities and the
labor and professional unions on the one hand and the tribes of the border
areas on the other is also one that is difficult to divide up among the two.
It is true that the issue here is not one of North Yenen alone but when
talking about North Yemen. the violent political currents surrounding it
spring to nind as well as the internal contradictions of Yemeni society es an

issue which will have a decisive priority in determining the course of this
snall country. .
3

son omaAt use om;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This element in particular is responsible for the fact that the tide of doe-
estic political opposition in North Yemen subsides only to become active once
again. Parties exist though they are legally banned. Political organisations
are active and their members nova under the eyes and ears of the authorities.
Nevertheless, any decision for a confrontation is put off for reasons that
would require a lengthy explanation.

Pales tinian Mediation

In brief though the nap of Yemen is small. it carries nore than can be borne
by a small area in "the strategic heartland" between the Red Sea and the Gulf
of Aden. There is no easy, or even possible. solution, at least at the
present moment. for the intractable Yeneni differences.

In its recent nediation efforts, the PLO nay succeed in quieting the situation
on the northern and southern borders but it will not succeed in solving the
Yemeni issues which. in their interneshing and conplexity, resemble "the
antics of Goha." This is precisely what is forcing President .'Ali 'Abdullch
Salih to consider playing all possible cards of pressure on Aden. including
the Gulf card. However, does President Salih really want this?

There is a view that holds that the Yeneni president is not persuaded as to
the necessity of liquidating the leftist opposition because it helps hill to
cover up some of his policies that night not be pleasing to certain Arab
parties. Then there is another view which holds that he cannot wipe out this
opposition. it having strengthened its power to the point that it is untouch-
able militarily. Between these two views. there are those who expect another
nesting between President 'Ali Nasir Mohamed and President 'Ali ‘Abdullah
Salih with the PLO possibly interceding to set it up.

With a neeting of the two 'Ali's be sufficient to resolve the Yemeni enigma
or will it last as long as the Ma'rib Den of old?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

83»;
cso: 4404/437

FOROFFICMLUSEONLY
BRIEFS

031mm 1’0 ISRAELI ATTACK—Intern“ Hestern circles have noted that the
long range artillery which Palestinian and Lebanese nationalist forces
have concentrated in fortified areas in South Lebanon have served as a
deterrent to prevent Israel from undertaking a direct land invasion into
southern Lebanon through Sa'd Haddad's enclave. Numerous Hestern circles
have estimated that the number of long range 130nm and 155nm artillery
pieces in the hands of the PLO has reached at least 48. of which 23 were
there prior to the ceasefire period. The rockets, which include Katyusha
and Grad anong others. have the capability of covering more than 270 sites
and Israeli settlements throughout the western Galilee. Firing can be
varried out at close intervals with the aim of destabilizing the rear
positions of the Israeli army and disrupting its supply lines. Estimates
by Western observers stated that SA}! 7's and SAM 9's, sons of which were
launched against Israeli planes during recent raids, may play an increasing
role in diminishing the damaging effects of such raids. Israeli planes
cannot avoid these advanced types of missiles as they tried to do by
launching balloons filled with hot gas to divert the heat-seeking missiles
from their targets. [Text] [Paris AL-UATAN ALJARABI in Arabic No 272,

30 Apr to 6 May 82 p 18]

CSO: 4404/46?

Fill(ﬂﬂﬂC1Al.U§E(HWLY
ECONOMY, 1982 PLAN SEER AS PROMISING DESPITE PROBLEMS

Paris moans rsoprcwx s1- mrrsnwssns in French No 1901, 16 Apr 02
pp 1018-1019

[Article: "The Algerian Economy in l981-l982--Some Encouraging Outlooks despite
a Disadvantageous International Economic situation"]

[Text] In 1981, the 2nd year of the 5-year plan, the timid start made in 1980
was continued; but it cannot be said that cruising speed has now been reached.*
To be sure, the essential theme of the plan is a redefinition of priorities,
and these 5 years should make possible, in addition to greater fulfillment of
social needs and satisfaction of private consumption demand, a greater mastery
of the production apparatus that Algeria provided itself with during the
1970's; many decisions have been taken in this direction--decentralization, re-
structuring of the enterprises, campaign of reform to combat waste. Some new
projects, with a total value of DA 80 billion, or more than 20 percent of the
5-year program, have been written into the annual plan. But in the sectors
considered the priority ones—-housing, hydraulics, education and occupational
training, health--ss well as in the industrial sector, few of them have been
effectively launched, and the fulfillment rate has remained low, even though

79 percent of the equipment credits has been used. Thus the operations remain4
ing to be carried out under the heading of the previous programs, estimated in
December 1980 at DA 2&3 billion, come to DA 291 billion at the end of 1981 (not
including the rebuilding of El-Asnsm).

In macroeconomic terms, though, the overall results are considered satisfactory
in view of the international situation, even though they are short of the tar-
gets set. Gross domestic product, at current prices, totals DA 158 billion, as
against 138 billion in 1980 and 109 billion in 1979. This growth corresponds
to an increase of 2.9 percent in volume (2 percent in 1980). and its low level
as compared with the 8-percent average growth anticipated by the plan is ex-
plained by the drop in production of hydroaarbons. If it were not for the hy-

__._—__-——-_

* we note that at the end of last year, on the occasion of President Hitter-
rand's visit to Algiers, we published a series of articles dealing with the
Algerian economy and its development within the framework of the 1980-1986
5-year plan as well as with the principal aspects of Franco-Algerian cooper-
ation: the issues of 27 November 1981, pp 3168-3170, and A December, pp
3213-3221.

6

Fill OEGNCJA1.IISIICI'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

drocarbons. growth would be 7 percent, and therefore closer to the targets:
the plan provides that GDP not including hydrocarbons should increase by 9.7
percent per year; in 1980, it had grown by 8.3 percent. Finally, to take just
the production of the transformation industries, the result almost corresponds
to the forecasts: 11.3 percent, as against 12.3 percent.

For the other sectors,rhe production increases announced are as follows:

water, electric power, gas—-9.2 percent; mines and quarries--9 percent; agri-
culture--3.5 percent; building construction and public works--S percent. In
this last-named sector in particular, the accomplishments were not up to the
hopes: of the 90,000 housing units expected per year, only 20,000 were built.
We recall, though, that priority was given to the program to put up 20,000 pre-
fabricated houses to rehouse the victims of Al-Asnsm. 0n the other hand, some
framework agreements were made with various foreign countries-—creat Britain,
Romania, Hungary, Yugoslavia-for construction of about 80,000 housing units,
and as a result of Michel Rocard’s visit to Algiers in January, the possibility
of construction of 50,000 housing units by France has been raised. But the few
contracts signed so far, and relating mainly to construction of prefabricated
buildings, are far from reaching these figures.

with regard to the other macroeconomic variables, it can be said that gross do-
mestic formation of fixed capital as expressed in constant prices has stag-
nated. Nonetheless, it represents 42 percent of available resources. The rise
in retail prices, estimated at 16 percent, eroded the apparent strong growth

of private consumption expenditures: in terms of volume, the latter increased
by a percent. In 1980, this rate was 8 percent. The average rate for the 5
years is supposed to be 8.5 percent. Thus the fight against the rise in prices
remains a primary concern to the Algerian authorities; the finance act for 1982
raises from DA 2.3 billion to 2.9 billion the credits intended for price main-
tenance for basic consumer products.

The voluntary reduction of oil production, in accordance with Algeria's delib-
erate policy to preserve its deposits for a longer time and to decrease sales
of crude so as to increase sales of refined products, was accentuated in the
course of l98l by the refusal to lower the price per barrel despite the inter-
national situation. In the opinion of the specialists, the b-percent decrease
in production in relation to 1980, announced in the daily press on the occasion
of the debates on adoption of the 1982 finance act, is considerably underesti-
mated. Production of crude is evaluated at 37.5 million tons, as against the
45 million tons expected, and production of condensates is evaluated at 8.9
million tons, in conformity with the forecasts. In 1980, the total was $1.5
million tons.

As for production of gas, which is up slightly, it is reported to have reached
45 billion cubic meters, but the exports of LNG [liquified natural gas] were
considerably short of the forecasts: between 8 and 9 billion cubic meters in-
stead of the 20 billion programmed.

Despite the drop in the quantities sold, export revenues, initially estimated
at DA 55 billion, are reported to have actually come to DA 61 billion--a result
lower than the forecasts but more than 20-percent higher than 1980's receipts,

FIﬂICHWHCJAl.lEiE(MVLY
essentially because of the rise in the rate of the dollar. The surplus in the
balance of goods and services is reported as DA 9 billion.

Although no figure is officially cited, Algeria is said to have reduced the to-
tal of its external debt--servicing of which currently represents about 25 per-
cent of its export receipts--for the second consecutive year.

The 1982 Annual Plan Sets Some Ambitious Objectives

The uncertainties currently weighing on the hydrocarbons markets constitute an
additional constraint against fulfillment of the 5-year objectives, and the
forecasts of hydrocarbons export receipts used as an hypothesis in determina-
tion of the 1982 plan remain very circumspect: DA 57 billion. The agreement on
the price of LNG, involving 9.5 billion cubic meters, has been made between
Paris and Algiers since then, to be sure; but the negotiations with Italy, in—
volving 12.5 billion cubic meters, are still at an impasse. And oil produc-
tion, despite the quota increase obtained by Algeria at the last meeting of
OPEC (750,000 barrels per day), in exchange for a price-per-barrel drop from
$37 to $35.50, is reported to have fallen below 500,000 barrels per day
(700,000 barrels per day in 1980).

The general program of imports for 1982 is set at DA 66 billion, which is up

18 percent over 1981. About DA 20 billion is reportedly to be devoted to pur-
chase of equipment goods (including 7 billion for purchase of prefabricated
buildings), 20 billion to intermediate goods, 15 billion to consumer goods, and
the rest to services. If this program is carried out completely, and if the
hypothesis of a decrease in receipts is confirmed, the trade balance will be
negative.

The Algerian authorities, aware of the uncertainties weighing on their external
budget and of the internal bottlenecks--the operators' failure to get projects
under control, long delays in getting things moving, insufficiency of opera-
tional capacities--thst have up to now slowed down the rate of fulfillment--
nonetheless are setting some ambitious objectives for the 1982 annual plan,
which is rightly considered decisive for satisfactory execution of the 5-year
plan. Gross domestic product should increase by 12 percent in volume--which,
in view of the current downward trend in production of hydrocarbons, appears
difficult to achieve. Apart from hydrocarbons, production should increase by
10.5 percent. The rates forecast for the various sectors are as follows:
transformation industries: + 14 percent; building construction and public
works: 0 12 percent; agriculture: + 5 percent. '
As in 1981, 51 percent of available resources will be reserved to private con-
sunption, but 45 percent, rather than 42 percent, will be devoted to capital
formation.

The investment credits provided for the annual plan by the 1982 finance act are
DA 97.8 billion, as against 89.5 billion in 1981. Industry, with DA 36.8 bil-
lion (37.6 percent), obviously takes the lion's share of this program. Next
come the social infrastructures (DA 19.7 billion, 20.1 percent); regional de-
velopment, including the program in aid of the disaster-struck wilayas (11 bil-

IKHICIWHCLALIISEtﬂdLY
mnoaonwo wannaanncnncuou
wan—cnwsw"
non-5:12:03
nowmooﬁgcawnnnmouu
unonnwo nan mwunnmccnwon
mama-nnmop «can.

annsuvonn
nosnnoonwsw mwnsu

menwu— wsmnnunnconcnnu
wanucawsw"
anus: oposswnw can mo<ouovso=n
anus: socamaw
«cu-u socuwnm
macnunmo:
nunmawsw
nocnwua
rnmﬁn:
Onsnn
necessary in order to catch up on the lags in the priority sectors are even
higher.

More than ever, the accent is therefore placed on the search for better effec-
tiVeness of the existing means for realization: multiplication of regional en-
terprises, development of training action, better coordination of supply pro-
grams, and restructuring of the national companies, to which the finance act
devotes DA 8.5 billion.

Each of these companies of considerable size, which resulted from the industri-
alization policy of the 1970's. has been governing, from Algiers, a broad sec-
tor of activity. They will henceforth be split up into smaller units, easier
to manage. The production and marketing functions will be separated; there
will be a new entity for each type of production. Marketing offices will be
established in each of the regions-central, east and west. The Council of
Ministers, in a recent meeting, determined the site of the headquarters of
these new companies, most of which, though, will continue to function in Al-
giers or in the nearby outlying areas, until the new infrastructures to accomo-
date them are installed.

A key year for fulfillment of the 5-year plan, 1982 comes during a difficult
international economic situation. Hhile Algeria has won an initial success by
signing, on 3 February, the agreement that will enable it to deliver, at a
price favorable to it, about 7 billion cubic meters of LNG to France, and later
9.5 billion m3, the uncertainty that weighs on its external revenues is not
thereby eliminated. The negotiation between SONATRACH and the Italian 2N1 [Na-
tional Hydrocarbons Agency], to which the political officials of the two coun-
tries have assigned the closing date of 15 April, remain of the highest impor-
tance. If a price corresponding to its desires is agreed upon, President chad-
li's Algeria will have won its bet on the upgrading of the value of gas. It
will be able to take a more serene view of a reduction in its sales of crude--
corresponding, at any rate, to its medium-term options. The Italian contract,
added to those already signed with Belgium and France, as well as some smaller
supply contracts, will raise gas exports to more than 25 billion m3. These ex-
ports will to a large extent be able to take over from oil in the financing of
development.‘

Meanwhile, in addition to the prudent hypothesis in the matter of external rev-
enues that has prevailed in the working-out of the annual plan, the quest for
greater effectiveness on the internal level and a certain austerity will make
it possible to approach the objectives set.

Already, the first months that have passed in 1982, with, on the external lev-
el, the signing of the agreement on the price of the LNG sold to France, and on
the internal level. the restructuring of the enterprises, together with the
rather favorable balance-sheet for l981--a trade-balance surplus, and a de-
crease in the external debt despite a disadvantageous international economic
situation--augur well for the future.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11267
050: #519/168

10

FOI.OIFIC1AI.IINI(NNLY
SADDAH HUSAYN SEEN ENDANGERED BY KBOHEYNI
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 26 Mar-l Apr 82 p 85
[Article by Jacques Buob: "The Two Fronts of the Hat")

[Text] The Iranians celebrated Nowrua--the Persian New Year-in their own
way: by launching one of their largest offensives since the beginning of the
war against Iraq. In the sector between Dezful and Shush, the Islamic Repub-
lican Army went all out. Tehran, believing it sees a tottering enemy, wants
to press its advantage. Iraqi President Saddan Husayn does have some worries.

In the past 18 months of the fighting, stalemated and deadly, successes have
been rare. Last month, however, Baghdad's troops succeeded in penetrating
the Iranian lines which had been cutting their communications in the border
area of Bustan. A pyrrhic victory, because in exchange for the thousands of
Iranians killed, the Iraqis lost at least as many. A butchery. Moreover,
in the end Bustam stayed in the hands of the Khomeyni faithful.

The time appears to have come for Saddan to have done with a war in which he
had wanted to be victorious, but which is little by little exhausting the
country and eroding his power.

The econonic situation has steadily worsened ever since the beginning of
hostilities. The Iraqi deputy minister for oil admits that it will take at
least 5 years to repair the war destruction. The petroleun industry, particu-
larly the sea terninals, have been heavily damaged. Total damages are "impos-
sible to estimate." Crude oil production has fallen fros 3.6 million barrels
a day to 900,000.

Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, which for 18 months have spent more than
$20 billion to support Iraq's war effort and development projects, are now
dragging their feet. Under the pressure. Iraq has already been forced to
cancel #0 percent of its civilian development program.

Riyadh and the emirates would like to see Saddam Huaayn commit himself to the
path of negotiations. There is a fear in the region that an Iraqi defeat,

or a dragging on of the conflict, could result in the fall of the Baathist
regime and the emergence in Baghdad of an Islamic republic that would be close
to Tehran.

ll

FOIKOIIICJAI.IIIBII‘LY
FOR‘OPFNJAL.U§EZONLY

Such a situation would radically change the very fragile geopolitical equilib-
rium in the area. Riyadh does not want this; neither does Washington, which
is pleased, by the way, with France's policy of selling area to Iraq.

Another topic of concern for Saddam: the Damascus-Tehran axis, strongly
reinforced after the visit to Iran by Syrian Hinisto: of Foreign Affairs 'Abd
al-Halin Khaddam. In addition to agreements on close cooperation, the two
capitals reportedly signed a secret military agreement involving large deliv-
eries of arms to the Iranian regime.

Such an alliance, which would inevitably have Moscow's support, would change
the factors in the conflict considerably. The Iranians would then be able to
depend both on Syria, for a regular supply of Soviet arms, and on Israel, which
looks out for them in the narkets for ammunition and American spare parts.
Moreover, Damascus can at any time apply the threat to close the Iraqi oil
pipeline which runs to the Syrian port of Baniyas. That would mean asphyxi-
ation for Saddam.

First Step Toward Negotiations?

It is in this rather unfavorable context that we approach the fateful date of
6 September, when the seventh summit of nonalined countries is due to open
in Baghdad. Saddam ausayn is due to become president of the movement for a
3-year term, replacing Fidel Castro--an opportunity which the Iraqi head of
state cannot pass up.

But can such a meeting be held in a country at war, and, moreover, a war against
another member of the organization? Iran and Syria are already demanding that
the conference be transferred to Djakarta, in Indonesia. Or simply canceled.

A snub would strike at Saddam's most treasured asset: his prestige. And,
through that, his political future.

Therefore, a first step toward negotiations? Iraq has agreed to the formation
of a commission assigned to decide which of the two opponents took the initia-
tive to start the war. However, this concession obviously will not satisfy
the imam of Tehran, who sticks to his demands: unconditional retreat of the
Iraqi troops and payment of extensive war reparations.

It seems that Iraq officially made proposals to this effect to Sekou Tours
of Guinea, who is chairman of the Islamic good offices commission. However,
would this be enough to persuade Khomeyni? Since he now sees his troops
gradually regaining the ground lost in the first days of the war, he intends
to pursue to the end his political-mystical objective: to bring down Saddam.
So that the war martyrs of Shiism will not have died in vain.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groups Express

9920
680: 4619/86

12

I‘lIIIIIIClAI.llIl(lULY
FIHICHHHCJAL.USEZ(MNLY

IRAN

(RENCH JOURNALIST'S BOOK 0" IRAN RBVIEHBD
Paris AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 267. 26 Mar-l Apr 82 pp 64-66

[Review by Bahi Huhammad of book, "lrano Nox" [The Gloomy Night of Iran] by Marc
Kravets; Grasset; other publication data not available]

[Text] Babies suckle the bullets of Pasdaran.
Opium becomes the new religion of intellectuals.
Khalkhali is the foundation of power.

How far has lran gone after 3 years of being ruled by Khomeyni and his supporters?

Marc Kravetz. a French journalist. who like many people in the Rest was very
enthusiastic about the overthrow of the Shah's regime. provides what is almost a
complete picture of Iran on the inside. After six trips to Tehran during which he
met with lranian leaders and citizens, Kravets provides that picture in a book
entitled “lrano Nox" [The Gloomy Night of iran]. Bahi Muhammad presents a review
of this book that underscores its highlights. -

The death of myths and superstitions is the only death that is never announced
officially and ceremonially. Therefore. it is not curious at all that the myth of
the Khomeyni Revolution is still prevalent in some circles and that clowns and
cheering audiences do not know that they are crowding together around a cadaver.

This was my impression after reading a book by French journalist Marc Kravets. The
book which was recently published in Paris is entitled "lrano Nox" [The Gloomy
Night of Iran].

A brief statement must be made about the author before we go into his equally
awesome and terrifying book. He belongs to the generation of french citisens, who
are now in their forties, who gained political awareness during the Algerian war
of liberation. This observation means a great deal in any attempt that is made to
classify and understand his position.

Marc Kravets was a member of the National Alliance of Students of France. To be
specific. he was a member of that iaction which sided with the Algerian National
Liberation "zont in its demand for full independence. At that time this was con-
sidered high treason. After that he became one of the leaders of the students’ and
workers' uprising in Hay 1968.

13

lUll¢lﬂﬂC1Al.UBE¢HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The author then was at the center of these changes. in the aftermath of
revolutionary dreams being articulated as projects. Kravetz found himself with a
group of his colleagues establishing the daily newspaper, LIBERATION. It was on
behalf of this newspaper that he went to Tehran on 16 January 1979. that is. 1
month before Khomeyni went there. His last trip to Tehran was in the summer of
1981 according to an agreement with the monthly magazine. ACTUEL which is super-
vised by a group of young journalists who belong to the liberal French generation.

"hat is important is that the writer does his best to be objective and impartial.
Therefore we sometimes find him admitting that he cannot understand one phenomenon
or that he is ignorant of another.

The author takes us from the image of crowded processions and the millions who had
come to greet Khomeyni on the day he returned to lran to candlelight processions-
the candlelights of the revolution. These were being extinguished one after the
other, destroying thereby the obsessive dreams and turning the revolution once
again into an illusion.

Through this book we pause in front of a number of figures and ordinary daily
stories to shed light on some facts about this gloomy night of iran.

The author talks about an lranian fighter called Parviz whom he had met during the
uprising that ended with the overthrow of the Shah. At that time Parvis had not
joined the organisation of any of the numerous political and ideological trends
that were then widespread in Iranian youth circles. It was Parvis who led the
French journalist. who had come to Tehran during the days of the popular uprising,
to several places in the capital. Parvis became fond of Kravett, telling him more
than once that he was not aligned [with any organisation] but that his hatred for
the Shah was profound and that he joined others in demonstrating and crying out
against the Shah. Kravetz talks about Parviz because he found no trace of him on
his recent trip to Tehran, and he takes this opportunity to tell us the story

oi this man whose fate became a model for what happened to many people like him

in lran.

The author drew us a picture of the personality of Parvis in two situations.

The first was when this young chemical engineer was spending most of his time
outside work in processions and at rallies. He was taking part in the endless
debates that ended only to begin again depicting a picture of lran's future and
new regime. The life of Parviz during that golden period was a continuous
celebration in the street. at home and with friends. This radiant picture of the
life he was living was identical to that of another: the collective picture of the
lite which millions of Iranians were living after the Shah's departure was no less
radiant. Everyone imagined that he will be living in paradise. and everyone
believed that the age of sanctions and proscriptions had gone forever.

The other side of this young lranian was an expression of the stage of despair
that followed that of enthusiasm which was mixed and charged with hope. The author
sketches for us the following features:

"Parviz invited me once to attend his 30th birthday. He was extremely sad. His
fiancee Sherine had gone to London, and he had not yet decided to join her. I saw

14

I‘ll1DPIIC1Al.lEIi(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this man who had been eager and enthusiastic: worry had turned him into a mere
desperate person. For his birthday Parviz had brought together a group of friends
in the home of one of his friends. There was an artist among them who had been
forbidden during the Shah's administration from holding any art showing. and he is
still forbidden today from doing so. in addition. there were 10 other persons‘.
Then it was time 'for [taking] opium. Although the cultivation of opium is offi-
cially forbidden, it still constitutes one of the primary sources of Iranian
wealth after oil. in the context of the general chaos that prevailed in the
country opium growers were able to produce in the summer of 1981 enough opium to
equal five times the usual annual production. Therefore, pure good heroin‘ is‘
available in large quantities in Tehran's popular neighborhoods for 30 francs per
3h... However, the middle class prefers the opium that is sold in installments for
1.800 riyals (l20 francs)."

At this point the author pauses in the picture he is sketching of this character.
and he lets us imagine that character and imagine others like him surrounded by
clouds of opium smoke, locked into moments of sorrow and disilusionment. Marc
Krevitz then tells us that his iranian friend had said that, "Opium is the new
religion of intellectuals." He find out on this occasion and from a quick
reference made in the course of describing the new daily routine in Tehran that
one kind of kitchen utensil. especially pressure cookers are no longer available
in the iranian capital. People have been grabbing everything that can be used to
distill and make alcohol ever since the regime decided to ban the consumption of
alcohol. We also find out on this occasion that the Khomeyni conittees. which are
supervised by a number of clergymen. are selling thel-alcoholic beverages they
confiscate on the black market and are reaping tremendous amounts of money from
that.

Yasmin: Dashed llopes

The second character that appears in the pages of the book whose physical. psycho-
logical and emotional features are sketched for us by the author is a woman in the
prime of her life called Yasmin. This young, beautiful, ambitious architect was
like Parviz; she was enthusiastic about this revolution that had overthrown the
Shah and his regime.

Here are the passages in which the author describes this lranian woman:

”Yasmin was simultaneously experiencing enthusiasm and despair throughout the days
of the revolution. lier rejection of the Shah's regime was paralleled only by her
fear of the religious parties, especially that of Khomeyni. however. she used to
entertain the hope that the new regime will not prevent her from working and will
not force her to take the veil because it will need all its citizens and its
intellectuals. llowever. her hopes were dashed.

"Yasmin was trembling; she was resentful and depressed. Now she wants to disappear
altogether from the picture. She wants to retire: she does not want to see or hear
anything. Today. she fears for herself and for the future of her country. She
fears for her dreams and her friends. She fears for iranian women and liberal
intellectuals. She was saying. 'They will not let me keep my job.’

'fYasInin used to refuse distinction bestowed upon her among women in the harem.

15

MWLMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. she used to say that it was the harem that allowed women to form a
community where they learned how to live with each other and to create bonds [of
friendship] that would not occur to anyone.

"However, after a lengthy waiting period. Yasmin did not find a single glimer of
hope, so she chose to leave her country despite the fact that she could have lived
in Tehran on her family's fortune. However. after a number of her friends were
arrested. after others were executed and after those who escaped managed to
escape. Yasmin decided to leave because those who were left alive in iran were
dragging their sorrows and their miseries as though they were a strange class of
the human species on its way to extinction.

The Story of a Child
The third image is that of a woman, a poet and a child.

The woman, whose name the author did not declare. was a dancer during the days of
the Shah. Today, in Khomeyni's administration she supervises the torture of
prisoners and detainees in Evan prison in north Tehran.

The poet is Sa'id Sultan Pur who was always in prison in the Shah's administra-
tion. lie and his wife. were arrested on their wedding night by the Revolutionary
Guard, and he was executed 2 months later with a group of young people who were
not over 20 years old.

But the story of the child is as follows:

"The old woman who was our hostess said that the Revolutionary Guard, the Pasdaran
went into a neighboring house to search it. A child had been born in that house.
One of the guards placed the barrel of his gun in front of the new born infant who
began to suckle it_ instinctively. Then the guard pulled the trigger."

Khalkhali Is the Foundation of Power

Among the other incidents related by the author is the story of Sadlq Khalkhali
going to the city of Hahabad, the capital of the Kurdish district in the sunset of
1979. At that time Khalkhali was the chairman of the so~called Islamic Revolu-
tionary Courts. Before his visit the city had been the scene of bloody battles
between Kurdish rebels and government forces. When he arrived surrounded by a
whole crew of executioners, the city was completelyoccupied by the Pasdaran and
by the army. Khalkhali's well-known reputation for bloodshed had preceded him to
Hahabad because he had passed by other Kurdish cities such as (Bawah) and
(Sakzumarban) where he had taken the lives of scores of citizens for different
reasons. llowever. this man's pursuit of his hobby for bloodshed was no easy matter
in the city of Mahabad. The simple reason for that was that before departing from .
the capital or their region and leaving it to the forces of Tehran. the Kurdish
rebels had taken along I400 Pasdaran and army prisoners. They announced that they
would respond in kind to any death sentence issued by Khalkhali and carried out
against any resident of the city. Khallthali understood this talk, and he did not
linger in the city. Instead, he decided he would go back to 'l‘ehran inediately.

16

POI 05110“. [8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M the lust moment. however. Khallzhali thought he would look into some ordinary
illc-s. Mon“ those tiles was one that had to do with a [case of] simple theft from
one oi the stores. The plaintiff was accompanied by a merchant who was his
neighbor and who had gone along as a witness. it seems that at the outset
Khalkhali was bored with his examination of the file until he discovered as he
interrogated the witness that he was a Baha'i. lie then told him imediately. “You
must adopt Islam right away. Otherwise. you will have to pay a head tax of 1.300
(tuman)."

The witness who '-had' suddenly become a defendant refused to adopt Islam and said
that he did not have that sum of money to pay the head tax. Faced with the mer-
chant's refusal to abandon his religion and adopt Islam, Khalkhali ordered his
execution. and the sentence was carried out imdiately.

The author relates that in front of the Islamic Court in Tehran he saw scores of
women standing together near the wall of the court. A little later he reveals that
these women were the wives and sisters of those who had been detained. kidnapped
or missing, people of whom there had been no trace for months. [The author reveals
that] the wall of the court had turned into a scene for protesting arbitrary
kidnapping and executions. [in this respect] it was like May I Square in Argentina
where the wives of people who are missing under the military regime there gather.

Quoting a witness the author adds, "Anyone can go into any house and arrest the
owner of that house on behalf of an imaginary or a real comittee. lie may [even]
execute that person. People who were arrested often refuse to reveal their true
identities to the Revolutionary Courts because they fear that the Revolutionary
Guard will take their revenge on their families and their children."

It may be that the only innovation which Khomeyni's regime contributed to the
classical practices of dictatorships is the fact tnat it exposed its crimes to the
general public.

It would be difficult to find a dictatorship in this age—despite the fact that
this age abounds in horrors--that goes as far as the Islamic Republic has gone. In
its total exposure of the machinery of repression this islamic Republic is Islamic
and a republic only in name. This experience allows us to observe in an experimen-
tal fashion how tyranny is born and how it is fostered and nurtured until it
spreads its influence over all society. Discussions with the opposition are
non-existent in Khomeyni's movement. The only fate for those who oppose is murder.
mutilation and dropping out of existence.

Spy on Your Children

The tyranny of Khomeyni's regime has surpassed that of the worst dictatorships and
Fascist regimes. Not only are execution sentences carried out, they are also shown
on television. People do not disappear from the political scene for "health
reasons." because "they have been charged with other missions," or because they
resigned or conspired as is the case in other well-known dictatorships. People
drop out of sight because they invoked the wrath of "the new god" who cast them
into hell. There is no room here to go into this shift that was introduced by the
Khomeyni movement into the theatrical nature of the crimes of dictatorships. This
was an idea inspired by the story of a young woman called Zahreh who confessed on
the small screen. This young woman admitted that she had been arrested three

17

MWUSBONLY
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

times. She was arrested the lirst time after a traffic accident. She had learned
how to drive a motorcycle in connection with her work in the organization of
freedom fighters. The second time she was surprised by guards who kidnapped her
from an ordinary gathering or demonstration. The third time she was arrested by an
organization called the Anti—Corruption Office. and she was questioned at length
about her unseemly behavior. She said in her confession that she now understood
everything and that she wanted to expose a devilish organization called
Mojahedin-e Khalq because its members wanted to create division between fathers
and sons and between men and their wives. They wanted to prevent people from
praying. and the condition they set for accepting anyone's commitment [to their
organization] was that he kill his brother or one of his relatives who was a
member of Khomeyni's guard. She also accused her colleague of leading her into
sin. This television program went off the air when sentence was pronounced.
Nothing that Zahrah said interceded for herg she was sent to the gallows.

The author casts doubts about the veracity of such confessions and states, "infor-
mation indicates that it is rare for a defendant to be that cooperative with his
executioner." Then he states that weeks after that while the main news bulletin
was being broadcast, another interview was broadcast. This was an interview with a
young man who had been condemned to death. That event culminated the propaganda
campaign that had taken place under the slogan. "Parents. spy on your children!"
That scene which the author of "Irano Nos" talks about toured the world and was
broadcast by all television stations in Europe under the title "Dialogue between
an lslamic "other and Her Son." It is one of the rare images of horror in the
history of the media. By distributing that interview Iranian media agencies wanted
to provide evidence for the popularity of the existing regime. However. many
people still do not believe what is happening in lran because refusing to face the
truth allows one in most cases to maintain a sense of safety and confidence.

The problem actually goes beyond the field of foreign and domestic propaganda; it
constitutes one of the salient landmarks of Khomeyni's policy. lnforming- on
others, which is clearly and unequivocally forbidden by the Koran, becomes a
religious duty in the opinion of iran's ayatollahs. And Mr Hadi Ghafari, who is
described as the primary official for the group, Allah's party relates with pride
and vaingicry to the author that he can give him scores of examples of parents
iniorming on their children.

Ever since Khomeyni turned informing on others into a religious duty and his
propaganda agencies have been publishing daily news about spying opgrations that
take place in a family context. During his term as All Khameyni's successor in the
position of imam of Tehran mosque, Hashemi-Rafsanjani, speaker of the parliament
delivered a speech that was broadcast live. in that speech he praised the virtues
of mothers who do not hesitate to spy on their sons.

The author will indicate that a few days after his arrival in Tehran the Tehran
press talked in detail abOut a bassar merchant who was executed for harboring a
number of freedom fighters and helping them financially. This man was eliminated
because his lather and his brother had informed on him.

Since we are talking about informing on people. let us recall the author's descrip-
tion of Iranian reactions to it. He says briefly, "Iranians realised that each

citizen was under direct observation and that putting a whole city under emergency
measures was not necessary to terrorize it."

18

liliClﬂﬂC1A1.lliB(l1LY
FOB‘DFFK3A|.USE(NVLY

However, the ayatollahs were not satisfied with this; they also used taxicabs:
News spread with lightning speed in Tehran; the news was spread in the form or a
rumor stating that the Khomeyni committees had purchased or confiscated all
taxicabs and given them to members of the Allah party. The authorities had
previously announced more than once that they were dissatisfied and displeased
with the conduct of drivers. They executed scores of them, and people who used
this public means of transportation knew that the driver sitting behind the
steering wheel could be a spy for the regime.

Taxicabs thus ceased to be a means for communicating and exchanging opinions, and
they became only a tool for transportation and espionage.

The author relates the point of view oi persons of all classes, ages, groups and
nationalities. They all agree about one thing: they are critical of the regime. *

Hontazeri: a Talk about Sex

The author relates this [enlightening] picture about Hoseyn Hontaseri. the more
fortunate successor oi Imam Khomeyni. Kravets says. "I saw him for the first time
when he was speaking at the University of Tehran after Khomeyni appointed him imam
oi the Friday prayer in the capital. This was after the death of Ayatollah
Taleqani. l was taken first of all by his stature. I had never seen a clergyman
lead a prayer service while carrying a weapon in his hand. it was later explained
to me that this practice dates back to the early days of lslam. Hontazeri spoke as
he held in his left hand a rifle with a long bayonet.

his motions were somewhat acrobatic, and his words were loud and shrill. Suddenly
the groups oi worshipers broke up in laughter that lasted for quite sone time.

i tried to understand the reason why the worshipers had laughed. Former president
and chiel of staff of lran's forces Abol hasan bani—Sadr was among the worshipers.
However, many of those who were present refused to translate for me what imam
Hontazeri had said. They were bashful; but then one of them dared to translate the
inam's statements. and he told me that he had been talking about sex for half an
hour. He said that he was giving examples from his own personal life to show that
the Wise Almighty God had created needs [in His creatures] and ways for satisfying
those needs. The imam said that sex was natural for creatures. [He said] just as
we lead a ewe to a ram, we must get girls to marry as soon as they reach puberty.

who is (Fardist)?

Perhaps one of the must curious stories mentioned by the author was that about
Khomeyni's intelligence agencies and their bloody struggles for power. in the
author's opinion these intelligence agencies have four or five divisions: SAVAHA
is the lslamic version of SAVAK; the intelligence branch of Pasdaran; the
intelligence [division]of the islamic Republican party; and the intelligence
[division] of the committees. All these intelligence agencies are struggling over
a minelield in which other organisations with mysterious powers are also opera-
ting. Examples oi these organisations are the hojahedin of the islamic Revolution
or the Feda'iyan islan under the leadership of Khalkheli. No one in this or the
other organization knows who his enemy or his friend is; none of them knows the
boundaries that separate anti-terrorist action from the struggle of competing

19

FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

parties ior power. Every agency, every department and every system is taking
precautions against others, and no one knows on whose behalf and in what capacity
an agency operates. Looking at the Iranian authority from its ugly police side we
see the image of a multi-headed monster with these heads always snapping at each
other. Not all the heads are known, but there is one head in their midst in lront
of which we should pause a little. This is that of Hoseyn (Pardist) because he is
truly a bewildering figure.

This man is one of the Shah's oldest servants. he was a palace inspector, and he
was responsible for the emperor's security. The emperor treated him as a member of
the family, and (Fardist) was privy to all the secrets of SAVAK (the iranian
intelligence agency in the days of the Shah). Until the last day of the former
regime he took part in the meeting of the chief of staff which was attended by
U.S. Gen huyser, President Jimmy Carter's envoy who had come to Tehran to find out
about the ability of Iranian generals to withstand the attacks of the Khomeyni
Revolution. 0n the day of the final deieat it was rumored that (Fardist) had
detected with his weapons and his belongings to the enemy's [camp]. it was said
that he had been relaying information to Khomeyni for some time.

Today, however, it is the most curious of stories that is being circulated about
Hoseyn (Pardist). it is being said that he was the one responsible for SAVAHA,
Khomeyni‘s intelligence agency, and that he was the one who supervised assassina-
tion operations against the opposition abroad. One cannot know at this point what
is true and what is ialse. He can at least say that at the point when [slam was
being universalised, when the punitive law was being applied and when the morals
oi the Haktabis (a term used to refer to Khomeyni's followers) were being
commended, it was at this time in particular that we noticed that the old Persia
had not been forgotten at all and that the delirium oi the Middle Ages sometimes
knew how to deal with the most distressing facts of this century.

COPYRlGﬂT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C50: “606/26

20

lllllnﬂﬂ(lhl.USBi0Nlﬂ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JON

smcr mm nmormc mm!
Psris W Inn-um: in Arehic No 270. 16-22 Apr 32 pp 59-60

[Articlez "Jordsn's Stock Enchenge: After e Difficult Birth, rest Growth;
end s New Nucleus For e m Areb kchenge"]

[Tent] Alien AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘MI—Since the esteblishnsot of industries end
corporetions in Jordon ehOut b0 yeers ego tredin in stocks wes linited to
the cospsnies the-selves. inesmeh es en nployee in eech coqeny would
register the noses of those who vented to buy stocks end were looking for
s seller or vice verse;

The procedures were cerried out in sccordsnce with the psrticuler policies
of the conpeny end the responsible enployee.

The procedure developed into e systa of null offices specislising in
stock treding. But these offices treeted the citisens erbitrsrily, end
set whstever prices they considered eppropriste st sny perticulsr tine.

"hen the govern-eat first considered esteblishing e stock exchsnge in 1965
studies indicsted that the win. of trede would be extruely linited, end
there would be no point in estsblishing it.

Despite studies csrried out in the 1970's sons officisls in the field of
benking end econonics were not the lesst bit optimistic shout the success
0‘ this nrhet.

But efter e difficult delivery the sedan wes horn. elthough no one wes
betting thst it would survive for very long. In eerly Jsmry 1910 the
acheoge opeud for business to stockholders end investors. The specisl
offices were closed. end stock treding wes forbidden outside of the
eachsnge.

The infent's growth surprised even the for-sip experts who hed perticipsted
in the studies. The value of trsding- juped frol shout 5.5 ninion
Jordsnisn dinsrs in 1978 to spproxilstely 13.5 million diners in 1981.
Observers expect these figures to jup this yeer to shout 160 nillion diners,
inesmch es the floor of the smchnnge sonstines sees stock trading
sctivities of l nillion diners per dsy. Thet nekss one week's treding
equivelont to s full yesr's worht when the nerhet first opened.

21

“WNW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what has the hrket Accoapliahed?
but what has this entity accosplishad "in four years?

The answer cones froa exchange officials who confirn that the narkat has

participated in the implementation of acoustic developent progress and has
had a series of accoapliahmente.

1. It provides adequate liquidity for both savers and investors, and enables
new and already established coapanies to raise capital by asking data
continually available, and by publishing the prices of the registered

stocks which will be traded on the enchange.

V e of s res edsd Vela of are: Eeded Ya:

5,615,891 2,429,152 1978
15,843,159 6,534,900 1979
81,431,076 17,898,885 1980
75,416,527 29,231,085 1981

Values and Value of Shares Traded on the Stock Exchange in Jordan During
the Last ’0 Years

2. The daily publication of trading prices can help investors and severe
avoid losses. The exchange provides the tins and place for authorised
brokers to announce their customers' buying and selling orders with
canplete clarity to all the other traders, without the right to any kind
of aonopoly. In that way citizens will be treated on an equal footing

and they can base their decisions on the ease data available to everyone
at the sane time.

To accoaplish these two important goals the Amen Stock Exchange operates
within two basic spheres:

[1.] Operating as a traditional stock exchange by providing a suitable
trading floor and continuous publication of information and prices related
to trading in the stocks listed with it.

[2,] Serving as a regulatory organisation with regard to the issuing of
stocks in the kingdoa. This requires the exchange to oversee the information
published by the public stock coapaniss in general, and specifically during
the initial stage, when these companies neke a public stock subscription
offering to the investing public. To accomplish this the exchange has
prepared a form indicating the requireaants for preparing a prospectus for
offering stocks and bonds. Any prospectus for stock or bond issues will
contain iaportant financial and non-financial information which will help

the [potential] subscriber reach a decision which will either justify
investing in these securities or cause his to abstain from tho.

22

mommomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the estsblisheent of the exchange the following features heve been
achieved in stock treding methods:

Corresponding offers to buy end sell heve been introduced on the floor of
the exchange, providing e fsir end eppropriate price for the securities
being traded.

Information 9n the public stock conpenies is continually being releeeed.
This applies to new stock issues through s prospectus which now lust be

prepsred in eccordsnce with the enchange's rewairenents, end to securities
treding, end hes instilled confidence in investors.

Confidence in stocks and liquidity have been echieved inesunch es Jordanian
securities are es good as bsnknotee to owners who can at sny tine exchange
the for cesh.

Investors in stocks ere provided protection through monitoring, regulation,
registretion end stenderdiretion of the stock trsding ectivities which teke
place on the exchsnge floor, end through continuous monitoring of prices.
Brokers, too, are monitored to ascertein the extent of their coepliance
with required treding procedures. end to escertein the quelity end probity
of their ectivities.

Profits heve become available to the largest section of the populetion by
expanding the number of shsreholders in public stock conpeniee.

Liquidity is provided to the public stock conpeniss by fecilitsting the
underwriting of their securities when they float th- for public
subscription.

The Broker Sye tn

There ere 16 brokers on the Amen Stock Exchange authorized to engege in
buying and selling on behslf of their custoners end their portfolios.

The brokers receive coniesions fro. their customers at the rete of 0.65
percent on trsneectins under 20,000 diners, end 0.5 percent of slounts ebove
that. The exchange takes 20 percent of the brokers‘ couaission.

There are 72 public stock conpsniss listed on the Anon Stock Exchange with
declered capital of about 28 million Jordanian diners. These conpaniee ere
clessified by sector es follows:

Industriel conpenies x 32. with declared cepitsl of shout 180 nillion
diners; finenciel conpenies (banks end financial institutions) 3 16, with
declared cepitel of approxisetely 70 million diners; insurance conpenies:
lb, with declered cepitel of approxi-tely lo trillion diners; service
conpenies : 12, with declered cepitel of ebout 27 million diners.

23

MOMMUSBONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is clear that the values of trading during previous years has multiplied
continuously. for example, the volune of trading in 1981 surpassed the
total volume during the 3 previous years.

With regard to the exchange's acconplisheents in regulating invesuaent in
newly issued stocks in what is known as the not-issue urket, the exchange
has in lsrge measure contributed to the successful coverage of new issues
in the new-issue urket. This nay be seen in the success rate public stock
companies have had in covering new stock offerings, inssnuch as at its
highest this rate was 9 tines the value of the offering, scathing the
Jordanian stock exchange had never before seen.

As an indication of that 18 conpanies floated their stock for public
subscription during 1981. Of these, 16 were newly-forbed conpaniee, and
4 were old companies that increased their capital by offering their stock
for public subscription.

A total of 31,625,000 shares were floated by those cospanies at a total
value of 72.74 million diners. these shares were covered for 82 nillion.
Of these conpsnies, 7 are industrial, 6 are service colpanies, and 3 are
insurance companies.

Four existing coepanies have undertaken to increase their capital by
floating stock for public subscription. If the figures for the value of
stock floated during 1981 are coupsred with the figures for stock
offerings in previous years it will be seen that the total value of
stock floated and covered during 1981 is equivalent to the total value
of stock floated during the 3 previous years together.

In conclusion, the exchange will develop, and it will enter the world of
closed circuit television. Citizens will be able to view stock prices one
after another in cos-ercial banks and elsewhere.

The exchange is contacting other Arab stock exchanges about allowing th-
to trade Jordanian stocks, and is expressing readiness to accept Arab
stocks in the Amen Stock Exchange. "111 this step help to create a
COIIIOn Arab stock exchange?

COPYRIGIT: 1982 MANN AL-‘ARABI

9123
080: 44010 I435

26

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
'PARIS CLUB'AGREES T0 EASE DEBT Pm SCHEDULE
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET mama in French No 1898. 1hr 82 p 8‘5

[Text] The western countries have agreed to grant Sudan an "extensive" re-
arrangenent of its state foreig: debt to permit it to achieve econonic recov-
ery. the French sinister of Econony and- Finance announced after a two-day
nesting of the "Paris Club" on 10 and 11 lurch. A' nesting of Sudan's credit-
ors. held at the suggestion of Khartoua and the m. had taken place at the
and of January. The official conunique indicates that the 13 countries "ap-
preciatedthe recovery efforts" undertaken by the government of the Denocratic
Republic of the Sudan. and noted "with satisfaction" theat the Sudanese govern-
ment was inplenenting an econonic and financial progran that had been approved
by the International Monetary Fund on 18 February 1982.

Hith the intention of achieving recovery of a critical econosic situation.
President Ja'far Nunayri had decided in Rove-her 1981 on a 12.5 percent devalu-
ation of the national currency. and a steep increase in the prices of sugar

(+62 percent) and petroleum products (+35 percent).

Sudan's foreign debt is estiaated at around 3 billion dollars. and several vee-
ten countries coanitted the-selves on 28 January to issue 350 million dollars
to Africa’s most extensive country to cake up the deficit in its balance of

payments.

This tine. the rearrangenent decided upon. as specified in the “Paris Club“
official coauunique. applies to the paysents due on the loan originally to run
for over a year. and payable from 1 July 1981 to 31 Dace-bar 1982 under con-
tracts signed before 1 January 1981. Reiabursenent of these pay-ante due will
take place over a 10-year period. with a 6-year grace period.

The "Paris Club" nesting. chaired by the director of the Treasury at the French
Ministry of the Economy. Michel Candessus. included representatives of the
Federal Republic of Gernany. Austria. Belgium. Canada. Dennark. the thited
States. France. Italy. Japan. Norway. the Netherlands. the Ihited Kingdom and
Suizerland. and observers fros Spain and Sweden. as well as the IMF. the World
Bank. the secretariat of UNCTAD. the BBC. and the (BOD.

COPIRIBBT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

12149
060: 519/157

25

MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

OIL DEPOSIT PUI'ENTIAL. EXTRACTION DELAY wsmm
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET NEWS in French No 1898. 26 lit 82 p 8&5

[Text] In our 20 November 1981 issue (page 291.1). we tried to evaluate oil
research in Sudan. but the question of Sudan's real potential in this domain
reaains unanswered.

In the middle of summer. 1980. AFP recently recalled. four wells producing
15.000 barrels a day had been discovered in the southwest Sudan. not hr from
Juba. by the American company Chevron. In an interview published by the daily
Kuwaiti newspaper AIrSIIASAH. the Sudanese oil minister. Manned Sharif
Al-Tuhami. had estimated at the time that his country would be able. 'within

a reasonable period of time. to produce and export the crude oil and thus solve
a certain number of economic problems.‘

Now. 20 months later. certain experts in oil circles are wondering if the mini-
ster's optimism was not too great. while others still think that Sudan has a
great future to look forward to. In support of their reservations. the former
note that construction work on the Kosti refinery. 350 kilometers south of
Khartoum. has still not been started. nor for that matter work on the oil pipe-
line linking the wells that have been discovered to that refinery. The overall
cost of the projected infrastructure is estimated. it is recalled. at nearly

1 billion dollars. of which 800 million is for the refinery alone. With Chev-
ron financing [.0 percent of it.

(kl the other hand. the more optimistic ones think tmt the American company.
having discovered deposits "far greater" than the estimated 30.000 barrels a
day. would now like to give up the Kosti refinery and enlarge the one at Port-
Sudan. to have-good conditions for exporting what will not be consumed locally.
In support of their thesis. the latter experts. on the basis of “reliable in-
formation." point out that the materiel recently brought into Sudan by Chevron
is "considerable." Moreover. about 90 new engineers and technicians are said
to have arrived in the country the last few weeks.

Both groups agree that the American company's real or apparent inertia is also
related to the very poor situation of the oil market. All the oil companies
present in Sudan. and Total Exploration in particular. are complaining about
"very difﬁcult" working conditions. especially poor fuel-oil distribution and
thefts on work-sites. Until the market picks up again. the companies have
therefore chosen to keep a low profile. and are ninly intent upon maintaining
their presence until a better tine comes.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

1 2“" m ennui: us: on“
030: 4519/15?
SUGAR 8391113128 1‘0 33 OVERHAULBD
Paris meats TROPICAUX B‘l‘ MEDITERWBEIIS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 677

[Text] The Sudanese Goverment would require nearly $100 nillion to overhaul
and nodernize the four sugar refineries of the public sector: Sannar, Al-Silsya.
Junayd and has ﬁalfa. This figure is based on a study nade by the large Dutch
firn. HVA [expansion unknown]. According to this study, the investnent to be
nade would be as follows for each refinery (in nillions of dollars):

Sennar: 37.15. with 21.71. for far- and transportation equip-eat for the planta-
tion and 15.“ for plant equip-ent.

Al-Silaya: 37.05, with 20.9 for fern and transportation equipnent. 16 for the
plant and 0.16 for training.

Junayd: 9.13. with 2.73 for fern and lifting equip-cut. 3.52 for nilling equip-
nent. 0.37 for boilers, 2 for spare parts. etc.

New Balfa: 9.67, with 2.62 for fern and lifting equipnent. 2.33 for nilling
equipment. 2.22 for boilers, 2 for spare parts, etc.

Several financial institutions have been approached. including in particular
FADBS (Arab Fund for Econonic and Social Development) and the world Bank.

The German Govern-cut has already allocated DH 33 nillion under its annual aid

to cover the investments required at Junayd and New Halfa. Since the Horld

Bank has stated that it is prepared to finance the hiring of a special consultant
for the Ministry of Industry, FADBS is studying the possibility of taking over
the remaining financing for the refineries of Sennar and Al-Silays (approxinately
$75 million).

The construction site of the fifth refinery. at Helut. should also be taken

over. following an agree-cut node with the Belgian agency for insuring foreign
trade. by the National Office of Guaranty Co-issions. The helut refinery,

whose construction was begun by the Belgian conpany nous [expansion unknovn].
could not be conpleted because of excessive nonpaylaents by the Sudanese Govern-em.

oomtmur: Rene Noreux et c1. Paris 1982

11915
(:80: 6519/1107

27

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

ELECTRIPICATION PW M 15 PROVINCIAL (”51111111188 DBSCRIBED
Paris MARCIIES TROPICAUX ET HEDITWS in French No 1895, 5 Her 82 p 677

[Text] In our issue of 11 Decenher 1981 (p 3299), we listed the najor features
of the electrification projects undamy and the outlook for the year 2000 in
Sudan. To this panorama should be added the develop-cut plans of the Public
Electricity and Hater Corporation. Imich provide for the installation. between
1980 and 1986, of 36 new diesel generators with a total capacity of 106 m
[megawatts] for 15 provincial continuities.

The distribution of these new plants is as follows (m-ber of plants x )9):

 

 

 

Khastn Al-Qirbah 82-83 83-86 84-85 85-86 financing
[mash Al-Qirhah 2 x S 1 x 5 -- - Not Found
Kassala 4 x 1 - - 1 x 3 Partly Danish
'Atharah 2 x 5 -- - 1 x 5 Not found
shandi -- l x l -- - Danish
Dunqulah -- -- -- l x 1 Danish
Port Sudan 3 x S - l x 10 - French
Al-Qutaynah 2 x 0.5 - - -- Not Found
Halakai 2 x 1 1 x l - -- Blot Pound
Raw 1 x l - .. l x 1 Danish
Juha -- — 1 x 3 l x 3 World Bank
Al-Ubayyid l x 3 -- -- - Areb African Bank
lull-Rwabah 2 x l - -- -- Not Found
Al-Fashir 2 x 1 l x l - -— Danish
Nyala 2 x 3 - 1 x 3 - Prench’
Kuraynah-Heroue 2 x 3 -- - - Gem
2 x 1.5 - - -
Total (NJ) 66 11 16 13

*The Nyala project (9 m total) is financed for 60 sillion French francs under
the Prench~$udanese agrcelent of 1981. AlstIm-Atlantique and cm [Electro-
nechsnical Equip-eat Conpany] have bid on this project.

comma: .Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11915
080: 10519/1107

28

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

BRIEFS

SAUDI OIL SRIPMENTSnSaudi Arabia will supply free oil to Sudan to cover its
needs for 3 months. These oil shipments. which have already started. are the
first result of the tour just completed by the Sudanese minister of energy and
mining, Hr Huha-Iad Sharif Tuhni. to the Persian Gulf states. The leaders

of those five states have also agreed to consider emergency aid to Sudan to
enable it to overcome its economic problems. [Text] [Paris MARCUS TROPICAUX
ET mums in French No 1891:, 26 Feb 82 p 612] [COPYRIGﬂ'h Rene horeux
st Cie Paris 1982] 11915

AGRICULTURAL PROJECTS FOR NORTH—The $18 million which the International Develop-
ment Association (IDA) granted to Sudan in January is intended. through the
Agricultural Bank of Sudan, to finance the program for outfitting three agri-
cultural areas in the country' a northern province. These three areas, In Rusbs
(86,000 unirrigated hectares). Abu named (6, 720 irrigated hectares) and Dongola
(16. 600 irrigsted hectares) are composed of call private farms. The project

will have the folloving main features: Irrigation equipment ($3. 8 million):

Abu Based, 780 diesel engines (b-16 horsepower). 390 pups; Dongola. 680 diesel
engines end 360 pups. Perm equipment ($500,000): 30 tractors (30-50 horsepower).
30 disk barrows, 650 hacked herrowe, 50 platform scales. Vehicles (81 million):

8 care. 3 lo a: lo station wagons. 35 lo x lo pickups. 12 S-ton trucks. Office and
residential buildings and equipment ($2.2 million). Technical assistance and
training ($1.9 million): 168 experts/month. Other operational purchases ($5.6
million): insecticides, seeds, sacks, fertiliser, spare parts. etc. The project's
total cost, including the local portion. is $35 million. [Text] [Paris mucus
TROPICAUX ET norms in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 730] [COPYRIﬂ'h

Rene More“: et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

EGYPTIAN OIL SHIPIENTSnEgypt has supplied Sudan with 150,000 tons of oil in
the last 2 months. These shipments were made when Sudan was experiencing a
serious shortage of fuel, whose prices have increased from 30 to 60 percent
following the elimination of budget subsidies for these products on 10 November.
According to Sudanese President limeiry. one-third of the country's foreign
exchange revenues were used to pay the oil bill and Sudan's balance of trade
showed a deficit of $65 million in 1981. [Text] Paris W TROPICAUX 8T
mnmmms in French No 1896, 12 Her 82 p 730] [comical-z Rene Horeux

et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

090: 4519/147

29

MOMUSEONLY
FOREIGN MINISTER DISCUSSBS mm, INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Paris Ala-“ATM Ali-’ARABI in Arabic “0 268, 2-8 Apr 82 pp 36-37

[Interview with baji Caid Bssebsi, Tunisian sinister of foreign affairs, by
al-Habib al-Salimi: "Baji Caid Esaebsi. to Ala-"ATM AL-'ARABI: There is No Use
in Returning to Fe: at Present; Iranian Intransigence Behind Continued “ar"]

[Text] Tunis-What would Tunisia's position be should the DAB finally approve
seabership of a Sahara Republic and how does Tunisia draw up the features of
its new foreign policy anidst the feverish international polarization carpet-
ing for the Arab Maghreb? Baji Caid Basebsi. the Tunisian minister of foreign
affairs, says: Re are concerned about the OAU and we cannot approve its en—
croach-ants. We stand stubbornly agath any foreign military presence in the
area. We have had this interview with the sinister:

The OAU, with the major rift from which it is suffering, was the subject of the
first question. The Tunisian ninister of foreign affairs said: ‘hmisia is one
of the founding members of the GAO. Naturally. Tunisia is strongly attached to
this organization and to its survival so that it can render the services for
which it was founded. There is no doubt that this organization has gone
through difficult periods in the recent past and has experienced internal dif-
ferences, some of then marginal and sons fundamental. I believe that you are
referring to the differences of opinion that energed in Addis Abeba recently

at the convocation of the latest session of the 0A!) Council of Ministers.
Tunisia's position has been clear. Inasmch as it is attached to the organiza-
tion, Tunisia is also eager for the proceedings of this organisation to take
place in accordance with the charter and according to the spirit of this char-
ter. I believe that this is an ethic that not exist along all of the organi-
zation members so that the organisation‘s activities will be beneficial and
clear. It is our belief that the latest 0A0 Council of Ministers session, held
in Addis Ababa. witnessed a deviation froll this rule and a resort to offhanded
and crooked ways that do not honor the organization and that even dalage its
credibility, its influence and its role. This is why Tunisia adopted a firm
stance, first by advocating the use of reason and the adoption of a wise posi-
tion to protect the organisation from treats and upheavals, and perhaps even
from disintegration. Tunisia pointed out all the infractions it had noticed in
the actions of this organisation's General Secretariat. Because the appeal
voiced by Tunisia fell on deaf ears. Tunisia decided to suspend its participa-
tion in the session held in Addis Ababa out of its desire to draw attention to
the serious situation and to express its political resolve not to be carried
away by the currents that do not serve the organisation's interests.

30

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

[Question] There are indications that the Arab Maghreb has begun to draw the
min attention of the superpowers. Can Tunisia. by virtue of its relations
with the area's states and by virtue of its neutral policy, protect the area
fron the international conflict?

[Answer] Tunisia is well known as a nonaligned country. It is against polari-
ration because it believes that polarization is harmful. But this does not seen
that Tunisia has no friendships with the western and Eastern countries. A
strong friendship binds us to the United States and to European countries be-
cause we have interests with these countries. We are also tied by friendship

to the Soviet Union, with which we have economic dealings and diplomatic ex-
change. Our relationship with the Soviet Union is based on mutual respect.

This is our political line. Tunisia is an Arab country with African and Hedi-
terranean dinensions and it always seeks to act within this franework through
the friendships it has, be they friendships within this or that sphere. What
remains to be said is that Tunisia works to keep its political decisions inde-
pendent. These political decisions must. of course, be realistic. A states-
man's decisions Inst be effective and purposeful. We have been extremely suc-
cessful in this regard.

This is our viewpoint in Tunisia. We will safeguard it and will seek to follow
the same policy at the level of the greater Arab Maghreb. However, the presence
of certain hot issues. whether we like it or not, is bound to attract the inter-
est of the two superpowers and of the major powers. The struggle of the two
superpowers is everywhere. This struggle can, of course, find in our regional
differences a sphere of competition embodied in the struggle for our area. This
is what has happened.

Special Sensitivities

[Question] Tunisia is aware of the dangers of a foreign military presence in
the Arab Maghreb and is exerting efforts to bring the views closer to each
other. But these efforts have been rejected by Algeria (Algeria's position
toward Mohamed Hzali's statements in Paris regarding the Western Sahara).
Will Tunisia alter its efforts to bring about the rapprochement or will it
stand by its previous proposals?

[Answer] First, there is no [foreign] nilitary presence in this area, God be
thanked—not in Tunisia, in Morocco, in Algeria or in Mauritania. There is no
foreign military presence. There is an attempt at polarization. We acknowledge
this but hope that our area will remain far from the heat of the international
struggle. This does not lean that there is no foreign nilitary presence in the
Hediterranean basin. Our position toward this presence is clear. But the
Maghreb territories are free of such a presence and we hope this situation will
continue until God inherits the earth and those on it, and lie is the best of
heirs. It remains to be said that there are issues that create special sensi-
tivities, such as the Hestern Sahara issue to which you have referred and which
generates sensitivities among some of the area's states.

In Tunisia, we abide by the principle of nonintervention in the affairs of
others. We also accept no intervention in our affairs. This does not lean that

31

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
we are not interested in what happens in the Arab Maghreb countries. We are, '
interested in the stability of this area and in seeing peace prevail in its
various parts. We hope and strive for amity to dominate the relations of all
of the area's countries. This is one of our duties. Tunisia always seeks to
lessen any tension that may develop in one country's relations with another, and
we will continue to do so because we believe that it is in Tunisia's interest
and in the interest of the area's countries collectively. The rule in politi-
cal action is that this action always evokes viewpoints and reactions because
of numerous considerations. Special sensitivities develop from time to time.
Be regret this and assert that we have no wish to play any leadership role in
this area. What we do is always for the good of all. The future will show
that Tunisia gets involved only for the sake of what is good and out of its
desire to serve the general interest of the area.

Relations with France

[Question] It seems that the French premier's visit has not achieved the goals
expected by Tunisia and that French-Tunisian relations are going through a
critical phase. "as the recent French-Tunisian meeting in Paris, in which you
participated, able to restore relations between the two countries to their pre-
vious condition?

{Answer} I disagree with what you have said. However, the reports published in
some papers justify what you have conclude . The French premier's visit to
Tunisia was a visit of friendship and a working visit and it did achieve its
goals by the mere fact that it took place. France meant to express its friend-
ship for Tunisia and the importance it attaches to Tunisian~French relations
through that visit. we thanked the French Government for this expression and
appreciated this initiative for it. The first visit made by the French premier
outside of Europe was the visit he paid to Tunisia. Therefore, there is no
place for talking about negative aspects in the meeting. The most important out-
come of the visit is the fact that it did take place. Our relationship with
France is excellent and at a satisfactory level in our opinion, and in the
opinion of France itself. The recent convocation of the Joint Higher Tunisian
French Cousittee in Paris and the talks held on the occasion of the convocation
of this cmittee, whether at the level of the two ninisters of foreign affairs
or with the French premier. are another indication that the relations between the
two countries are at an acceptable level. In every dealing there are aspects
that require dialogue, concerted efforts and profound thinking. Our relation-
ship with France dates way back and, God willing, will continue to be sound.

He are eager to see this relationship prosper. This is what we see at present.

After the talks, I personally returned from France with very good impressions.
I am satisfied with the outcome of the talks, especially since we had not ex-
pecred of the talks more than what could be realistically expected. Our rela-
tionship with France is good, has improved and is likely to improve further in
the coming years. "hat I want to stress now is that we have felt political re-
solution on the part of the French Government to enhance and develop the rela-
tions in all the fields, especially in the sphere of supporting Tunisia in the
struggle for growth and progress that we will continue to wage in thn forthcomr
ing sixth plan.

32

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Will Tunisia play a role to speed up convocation of the Arab eta-it
in Fe: and when will this suit be held?

[Answer] The first round of the Pa: Sl-it has been held. We have thought
about postponing the neeting to strengthen consultations, to crystallize think-
ing and to study the plans that will be presented to the conference. The sun-
nit is an important event that brings together the Arab heads of state. The
Arab and world public expects decisive results fron this emit. Therefore,
it is beneficial to study all points of the agenda carefully before we resins
the meeting. I do not believe that there is any use in convening the confer-
ence under the present circustances. Deliberation, consultation and study
are a must. When all the circulstances for the success of the second round of
the emit are present, then the tile will be right for convening it. I see
no benefit in holding this sun-nib at present or in the next few months.

Iranian Intransigence

[Question] The efforts to put an end to the Iraq-Iran war have failed. Do

you think that the mediation being conducted by the Islamic Committee will bear
fruit and what will Tunisia's position vis-a-vis the Iranian intransigence be
in case the Islamic efforts fail?

[Answer] We must not lose hope, especially since a sound solution can be
reached only through the agreesent of the two warring parties. The Iraq-Iran
war is regrettable and we have been pained by it because it is taking place
between two countries that are supposed to coOperate and to unite their forces
to confront the Zionist enemy. We have great hope that each side will find
its way to a dialogue and that reason will prevail over enotion. Tunisia has
encouraged all of the conciliation efforts exerted in this regard, be they
efforts exerted at the level of the Islamic Organization, of the nonaligned
countries or of the international calamity. It is regrettable that none of
these efforts has borne fruit. To tell the truth, there is intransigence on
the part of the Iranian side because Iraq has repeatedly expressed its readi-
ness for dialogue and for a conpronise and has agreed to all these mediation
efforts. But the Iranian side has clung to its position of rejection. What
is also regrettable is that the continued war has created distressing compli-
cations, such as Israel's support for Iran. It is the duty of all of the Arab
countries that can influence Iran, and I am not going to name any particular
country, to exert efforts to push Iran toward negotiation and a peaceful solu-
tion, especially since nobody wants the solution to cone at the expense of
this or that side. The heped for solution is the solution that guarantees the
legitimate rights of each of the two sides.

[Question] Do you think that Egypt will return to the Arab family after
25 April?

[Amwer] It is difficult to say. But what we can assert is that we welcae
such a return. This is the duty of every sincere Arab who regrets Egypt's
withdrawal and departure from Arab consensus because Egypt is the biggest Arab
country, whether in terns of population or of cultural and civilization. It
is the duty of every Arab to hope for Egypt's return to the Arab ranks because

33

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such a return constitutes a great gain for the Arab nation and strengthens
this nation in all respects. But the circmstances for this return must be
present. It is only being realistic to admit that Egypt's recognition of
Israel and its conclusion of peace with Israel pose a problem for which a
solution nus: be found, because we should create the proper circumstances for

this return.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

8496
080: 6504/2715

MOMMUSEONLY
P03 OHICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

BRIEFS

EXPLORATION 0P OFFSHORE OILPIELD—In a cmique issued in Rotterdam at the
beginning of the month, the Shell conpany indicated that it would begin produc-
tion at an oilfield in the Mediterranean 62 in iron the Tunisian coast fron the
aupertanker "Hut-ex" (210,000 tons). which will be permanently looted along the
Tunisian coast. Shell stated that it opted for this tanker, equipped with
necessary facilities and installations. because a platform linked to the coast
by a pipeline would have made exploitation of the field unprofitable. Produc-
tion will amount to 10,000 barrels (1 barrel - 159 litres) a day, according to
Shell, which will be cooperating with the Italian company Agip, and the Tunisian
firn ETAP ('hmieian Petroleum Activities Enterprise) on this project. Shell
also stated that the reserves of this oilfield are estinted to be 10 aillion
barrels. [Text] [Paris mcuss TROPICAUX 81' mums in French llo 1905.
16 May 82 p 1265]

COPYRIGHT: Rene Harem: et Cie Paris 1982

C50: 6519/186 3ND

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY