FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10410

26 March 1982

Translation
SATELLITE HYDROPHYSICS

Ed. by

B.A. Nelepo

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain informtion primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 01’
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10410
25 March 1982

SATELLITE HYDROPHYSICS

Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROPIZIKA in Russian 1980 (signed to press
4 Dec 80) pp l-lSZ

[Collection of articles edited by B. A. Nelepo. Izdatel'stvo Horskoy
gidrofizicheskiy institut, 250 copies, 152 pages]

Comems

Annotation loose...Oeooeoeoooooeseosolcoooooooooeoleeoeosooeeesoonoose... 1

Problems in Investigating the Ocean From Space
(B. A. “elem, Yu. v. Terekhin) 0..OOOOOOOOOIOOOIIOOOOOOOOloco-IO. 2

Experiment for Investigating Internal Haves in Ocean by Remote Methods
(Yu. H. KurtarkOV) .OOOOOOOOIOIIIOIOOQOOOIOOCOOOCCOOOOOOO0.0.0.... 8

Determination of Parameters of Internal Waves by Renate Methods
(v. N. Kumavtsev) .0....OOO.....OOOOOIIOOOOOICOOOOOOOOIO_IOOOOOOO 1“

Remote Measurement of Ocean Temperature in IR Range Using Reference

Points
(V. 3. alyatin) OOOOOOOOOOCOOO...O.00......OOOOIDODOQOIIOOOOOCOOOO 22

Features of Radar Determination of Sea Have Parameters
(V. v. mstovoytenko) OOOOICOCCOOOOOOOOOOOOODQOIOOOOOOOCO-00...... 27

Effect of External Illumination Conditions on Remote Measurement of

Color Index .
(VI 16. slamshura’ o. v. mtynOV) OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO'OO0.0.0.0.... 36

Investigation of the Ice Cover of Seas From Artifical Earth Satellites
(A. v. BuBhwev) .QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOIOIOIIIOOOOOOIDO00.0.0... bl

Assimilation of Satellite Data in Numerical Models of Ocean Dynamics
(I. Ye. Timchmko, 8t.81.).OOOODOOODOOOOGOIOOOI0......CIOOOOOOOOOO 51

Hultiepectral Method for Determining Ocean Surface Temperature
(v. A. GOIOVkO, 1‘. A. Pmmv) ...‘O.......OO.II.O....O..‘00....0 s9

- a - [I - USSR - E FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spatial Resolution of Instruments Hith Stipulated Field Measurement

Error
(So Vo mtsenko, Me Go POplavskaUa) ooaoooooooc-~cooo-oaaoaocaooo

Calibration of Remote Instruments on the Basis of Polygon

, Measurements
(50 v. mtsenko) 00.000.000.0000000.000IOOOCCOOOOOOOOIIIOOOOOCOQO

Choice of Some Design Parameters of a Satellite Data System for
Remote Sounding of the Ocean

(5. So Kavelin) 0......IOOOOOIOOOOOCO0.0...OOOOIO'OOOOOOOIOOIIOOI

Problems inthe Quantitative Distinguishability of Rydraneteorological
Situations
(BI Ye. WV) 00.0.0...IOIDOOOOC.DOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOIII...

Quantitative Characteristics of Distinguishability of a Physical System
with Continuous States
(B. Ye. Wov) OIOOCIOOODOIOO...'0I.COO...DOOOOOOIOOOOOOCOUO...

Parametric Invariance of Multichannel Excess Remote Measurement
Systems

(v. A. cushy) 000......0.0.0.0...CO0......OOOICOOOOIOOOOOIOOCCC

Autonomous Buoy Complex for Use in Subsatellite Polygon
(I. B. PaVIOVSki-y, at 81.) 00.0.0.0...00....DOOOOOOOOI'ODOOOOO'OI

Determination of Vertical Temperature Profile Prom Drifting Buoys
(I. L. IsWGV’ at all) OOOOOOIOOOIOQ0.0....IOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOI

Effectiveness of Remote Methods for Investigating the World Ocean
(I. K. Iva->hc;1enko, at 31.) 0..0.0...OOOOOQIOCOOOCOO.IOOOCOOIIOOO

FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY
ANNOTATION

The collected papers cover basic ideas about remote sensing of the sea surface
from Satellites. Data on the determination of temperature, colour, waves and
ice-cover of the sea-surface are listed. Also analysed is the relationship
between surface radiation variations and internal waves. Theoretical problems
and methodology of remote sensing are discussed. Information on automatic buoy

systems of subsatellite observational regions and data processing systems are
presented.

The collected papers are intended for specialists in ocean physics, students and
post-graduates of relevant specialities.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIII(IFF1CIAI.IISE‘OhﬂUY

PROBLEMS IN INVESTIGATING THE OCEAN PROM SPACE
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKAYA GIDROPIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 5-11
[Article by B. A. Nelepo and Yu. V. Terekhin]

[Text] Abstract: The article examines the fundamental
prcblems involved in remote determination of
the informative hydrophysical parameters of
the ocean for their use in prognostic models
of the ocean. The authors discuss the features
of measurement of oceanic characteristics in
the 13-53? and visible ranges of the radia-
tion spectrum. The requirements on the accuracy
in measuring hydrophysical parameters and their
spatial resolution are formulated. The prospects
for the use of space vehicles in investigations
of the world ocean are pointed out.

The world ocean. always playing a considerable role in the life of mankind, has
now become the sphere of man's economic activity. This has predetermined the ever-
increasing attention being given to its investigation, especially since today sci-
entists comprehend the role of the ocean in the formation of weather and climate
on the earth. understand that the earth's resources are not unlimited and that the
ecosystem is quite brittle relative to the onslaughts of modern civilization.

The eyes of scientists are turning toward the ocean: does it have such a self—regul-
ating system which would enable it to cope with the irreversible effects caused by
man's active intervention? In order to answer this question it is necessary to have
prognostic models or schemes taking into account the entire complex system of rela-
tionships regulating the state of the atmosphere and ocean.

In order to formulate physicomathematical models on the basis of which it is pos-
sible to carry out prognostic computations it is necessary to make detailed inves-
tigations of the boundary layers of the ocean.and atmosphere. It is precisely in
these layers that the greatest temperature gradients are formed, these arising as
a result of the absorption of solar radiation, contact heat exchange and evapora-
tion. The heat fluxes, directed into the ocean from the atmosphere, or vice versa,
create in it a complex circulation of air masses, thus forming the weather. Simul-
taneously. atmospheric processes (especially wind) exert an extremely important
influence on the upper layer of the ocean, leading to a corresponding exchange of

2
IOI1OIFMJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR‘OI?ICIA1.UEIICM¢LY .

thermal energy between the atmosphere and ocean. The diversity of conditions at the
boundary between the gaseous and fluid media also leads to a great diversity of
circulatory systems in the ocean and atmosphere, forming against the background

of macroscale dynamics of the ocean.

In this connection the key problem in modern oceanography is a study of synoptic
phenomena in the ocean, among which the most important are oceanic eddies. zones

of upwelling and subsidence of abyssal waters, fronts and thermal anomalies. Syn-
optic eddy movements of water masses affect a thickness of the ocean of several
kilometers; their horizontal extent is hundreds of kilometers; the spatial velocity
of movement attains several kilometers each day. The energy concentrated in such
formations is comparable in quantity to the energy of macroscale ocean currents.

In addition to the development of fundamental concepts concerning ocean dynamics,
investigations of ocean eddies are of interest from the point of view of the pos-
sibility of formation of productive zones in the open ocean. Sufficiently powerful
(with respect to intensity and scale) synoptic eddies of a cyclonic character, ex-
isting for two years or more, are capable under definite conditions of maintaining
a powerful upwelling of deep waters ensuring the transport of nutrients from the
ocean depths to its surface.

Thus, formulation of the problems in prediction essentially involves large-scale
(and for the ocean - at an oceanic scale), operational and regular observations

of the transpiring of processes with a periodicity of renewal of information not
less than the time scales of synoptic variability (10-15 days). No reasonable num-
ber of research ships and buoy stations can ensure such a possibility. Accordingly,
the above-mentioned problems can be solved only using instrumentation for the re-
mote sensing of the ocean carried aboard space vehicles, with development of tech-
niques, methods and procedures in space oceanography as a new method for investi-
gating the ocean.

There is a rather great number of theoretical models making it possible to descxibe
the processes transpiring in the ocean. The input parameters of such models are
water and air temperature, radiant energy flux, height of waves and wind velocity
in the near-water layer of the atmosphere, humidity and atmospheric pressure, ex-
tent of cloud cover, depth and intensity of the jump layer, ice characteristics

and others. Temperature of the ocean surface is the most informative of these.

The most important tasks of oceanography, whose solution is possible with use of the
temperature characteristics of the ocean surface, are: study of mesoscale variabil-
ity of the ocean, discrimination of frontal zones and zones of strong currents and
prediction of structure of the active layer in the ocean.

Data from observations of mesoscale variability in the ocean show that the temper-
ature field of the ocean surface is formed not only under the influence of atmosph-
eric processes, but also to a considerable degree conforms to the character of eddy
movement in the main ocean thermocline. The principal features in the distribution
of this parameter were caused by eddy advective currents disturbing the principal
zonal distribution of temperature. In contrast to the circulatory character of eddy
movement in the main ocean thermocline the distribution of temperature at the ocean
surface is characterized by an intrusional character of the movement of isotherms.

liliC“ﬂﬂC1Al.lEiB(ﬂﬂLY
INJR‘U!‘!L1AL.U§II(MNLY

The characteristic scales of formations in the upper layer of the ocean are 40-400
km; the mean velocity of spatial movement is 5-8 km/day, the temperature drops are
0.2-2.0°C in zones of influence of deep meeoscale eddies and up to 2-3°c in zones

of intensive formations of the type of Gulf Stream rings. A not less important role
in the general dynamics of the ocean is played by its variability at scales of 15-50
km, which is associated with the high energy level at these scales. The temperature
drops in these formations usually fall in the range 0.2-l.0°c. Accordingly, for a
study of synoptic variability in the ocean the required accuracy in determining tem-

perature falls in the range 0.1-0.2°C with an in situ resolution not worse than
3-5 km.

Temperature anomalies are traced against the mean climatic background as formations
with characteristic spatial scales from hundreds to thousands of kilometers and
time intervals from a month to tens of months and a thickness in depth attaining
tens of metersu The amplitude (extremal deviation from the climatic norm) of such
formations is not more than 2-3°C. As a result of the great thermal inertia of the

ocean in comparison with the atmosphere they exert a considerable influence on
planetary weather at global scales.

The principal requirements on data from remote sensing, making it possible to trace
the evolution of these anomalies, is the breadth of coverage of ocean regions and
the frequency of receipt of information. It is best to obtain surface temperature
maps at ocean scales with a frequency of once or twice in a 10-day period. In this

case the allowable spatial resolution is 20-30 km; the accuracy in determining tem-
perature is not less than 0.5°C.

The position of the principal frontal zones in the world ocean and zones of intensive
currents has been determined quite well. Accordingly, the principal task to be solved
in this direction is a study of the variability of such factors as the position of
the axis of currents and fronts, meandering and stability. The principal indicator
for the identification of "images" of ocean fronts and boundaries of intensive cur-
rents is a temperature drop at their boundaries which can amount to as much as 2-
10°C. This makes possible its reliable detection by instrumentation operating in

the IR range. With such great temperature drops the acceptable accuracy of its de-
termination will be O.5°C (sometimes 1°C) and the principal requirement related to
the determination of the boundaries of frontal zones is related to spatial resolu-
tion. It appears that the optimum value of such resolution is about 1-2 km. We add
that information on the position of the boundaries of frontal zones carries data on
the color index of water, the nature of cloud cover over the ocean and other data.

A highly important task of oceanography is prediction of the vertical structure of
the active layer of the ocean, which is the principal intermediate link in the
processes of interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere. The prediction in-
cludes a determination of temperature of the ocean surface, the position of the
lower boundary of the homogeneous layer (layers), the position (depth) of the dens-
ity jump. The temperature and depth of the homogeneous layer determine the intensity
of the temperature anomalies (heat content and lifetime), allowance for which is
necessary in prediction problems; the position of the jump layer determines the
lower boundary of the zone of active photosynthesis in the upper layer of the ocean.

FOIiOFFﬂJAl.U§E(NVLY
There are now quite a few theoretical models making it possible to compute the men-
tioned parameters of the vertical structure of the active layer in the ocean. The
input parameters of such models are air temperature, radiant energy flux, wind vel-
ocity, humidity, pressure, cloud cover, which can be measured by remote methods
from artificial earth satellites. Computations with the use of these models make

it possible to use the temperature of the ocean surface, measured with an accuracy
to 0.l°C, depth of the mixed layer and the position of the jump layer with an ac-
curacy to 1-2 m. It is understandable that the attainment of this same accuracy

in measurements by remote methods is a task of the future and therefore the temper-
ature of the ocean surface, measured with the accuracy attained up to now, can
serve only as a calibration parameter in choosing the empirical parameters of this
type of model. By the time when the necessary accuracy in measuring ocean surface
temperature is attained (0.1-0.2°C), the assimilation of this parameter in theoret-
ical models will make it possible to proceed to computation of the heat fluxes at
the boundary of the jump layer and thus determine the receipt of heat in the main
ocean thermocline.

The attainment of the required accuracy in measuring temperature of the ocean sur-
face from aboard an artificial earth satellite is held back by two principal fac-
tors. One of these is related to an increase in the accuracy in determining the
atmospheric transfer function. In actuality, investigation of the characteristics
of the ocean surface by passive methods in the IR and SE? ranges involves measure-
ments of reflected solar radiation and the characteristic radiation of the ocean.
Since the latter are transformed during transmission through the atmosphere, the
accuracy in determining the degree of this transformation enters directly into the
total error in determining the temperature of the underlying surface. The accurac-
ies in the evaluations of the atmospheric transfer function attained at the present
time introduce an error into the measured temperatures at the level i(0.S-l) .

The surface temperature measured with remote sensing instrumentation, which we as-
sign as a characteristic of the mixed upper layer of the ocean, strictly speak-
ing, relates to the uppermost emitting layer, the so-called skin layer of the ocean.
However, in this layer the properties of the medium differ substantially from the
characteristics of the homogeneous layer, and in particular, the temperature gradi-
ents in it attain tenths of a degree per centimeter. The state of this layer, very
much dependent on the general hydrometeorological situation, is an important fac—
tor. to a considerable degree exerting an influence on the accuracy in determining
temperature of the ocean surface. It can be assumed that the existence of a cold
surface film is a universal phenomenon and for the most part it is stable with
time. In such a case, since IR radiometers measure the brightness temperature of
the very thin (micron) water film, whereas the temperature of the underlying homo-
geneous layer is of practical interest for researchers, the problem of the legit-
imacy of identifying the temperatures of the quasihomogeneous layer and the surv
face film or the methods for correction of the measured brightness temperature is
of great importance. As long as we do not know the true temperature in the skin
layer, and also the pattern of horizontal distribution of the characteristics of
this layer, the inaccuracy in determining the temperature of the homogeneous layer
will substantially reduce the information content of these data. The reduction in
information content will be as follows. First of all, since the characteristic
time for the carrying out of IR surveys from a satellite is comparable with the
characteristic time of existence of the skin layer, the uncertainty in measurement

It!!(lﬂﬂ€1&l.llﬂi(lﬂlﬂ
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY

of the temperature of the homogeneous layer can attain the level of the temperature
drop in the skin layer. Second, the temperature of the skin layer exerts a substan-
tial influence on the energy characteristics of the processes of interaction be-
tween the ocean and the atmosphere. Since the thickness of the skin layer is very
small, its direct role in the energy budget of the upper layer of the ocean is in-
significant. For example, the skin layer in a certain sense is "optically trans-
parent" for incident solar radiation. With respect to other heat balance compon-
ents, such as heat expenditures in evaporation, contact heat exchange and outgoing
long-wave radiation, here the skin layer can change these characteristics by 10

or 151.

Thus, it can be stated that the creation of an adequately correct thermohydrody-
namic model of the surface skin layer, together with improvement in methods for
taking into account the influence of the atmosphere, opens the way for a substan-
tial increase in the accuracy in determining the temperature of the ocean surface.

Considerable experimental data have now been accumulated from remote sensing of the
earth's surface (including the ocean) which have been obtained from Soviet satel-
lites of the "Cosmos" series and also from American meteorological satellites us-
ing individual systems operating in the visible, IR and microwave ranges. These
data indicated great potentialities for the use of space technology in investigat-
ing the ocean and brought to the forefront the task of creating a specialized
oceanographic earth satellite supplied with a complex of research apparatus making
it possible to obtain evaluations of the informative physical parameters of the
ocean and atmosphere.

The artificial earth satellite "Cosmos-1078," launched on 12 February 1979, was our
country's first satellite intended for perfecting methods for solving the above-
mentioned problems.

One of the additional sources of data on the world ocean is measurement in the vis-
ible range (wavelengths 0.4-0.7}Lm), in which the greatest amount of information

is carried by the spectral composition of the ascending light flux. In the open
parts of the ocean it carries information on the biological productivity of waters
and their hydrooptical characteristics. This is making it possible to discriminate
different water masses, determine their boundaries, detect eddies, zones of upwell-
ing of water and other dynamic formations. In coastal regions, on the basis of
water color, it is easy to differentiate waters of the continental runoff, their
distribution and interaction with waters of the open sea. We note that investiga-
tions of the ascending light flux over the ocean in this range have two peculiar-
ities in comparison with measurements over the continents. It is well known that
the diversity of colors, hues and contrasts on the continents is incomparably
broader than at the ocean surface. For the most part different natural formations
haVe quite distinct and sharp boundaries. In ocean waters all these characteristics
are tens of times less clearly expressed and the problems of geographical "tie-in"
of the results of observations are more complex to solve. Accordingly, on the one
hand, the requirements on the resolution of instrumentation in situ are not so rig-
orous for oceanological investigations as for the land, but on the other hand, the
response of instrumentation for detecting differences in water masses must be high-
er. A considerably higher spectral resolution is also required. Accordingly, the
visible-range instrumentation carried aboard the "Cosmos-1078" oceanographic

6
B08'0FIIC1A1.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

satellite has transmission bands not exceeding a few nanometers. Instnnentation
with such a high spectral resolution was carried on a satellite for the first time.

One of the most important elaents in the investigation of the ocean from space is a
system of calibration points at which there are direct measurements of the character-
istics of the ocean surface layer. In experiments with the "Cosmos-1076" satellite.

use was made of automatic buoy stations and shipboard data systems for these pur-
poses.

The instrumentation placed on automatic buoy stations and a satellite makes it pos-
sible to carry out a regular read-out of the data accuulated on the automatic buoy
station and transmit it to the corresponding reception centers for joint processing.
In addition to solution of methodological problems and the problems involved in the
calibration of remote sensing sensors, the use of a system of automatic buoy stations
in the ocean, determining the hydrophysical characteristics with depth, makes it pos-
sible to pose the problem of the relationship of surface fields (measured from a

satellite) with processes in the deep layers of the ocean, at least within the lim-
its of the active layer.

The launching of the "Seasat-l" and "Cosmos-1078" space vehicles marks a new stage

in the study of the ocean. It must be hoped that the processing and analysis of the
collected data will enable oceanologists to make considerable progress in compre-

hending both the methods for organizing observations and the essence of the process-
es transpiring in the ocean-atmosphere system.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI'DILIAL 03!. ONLY

EXPERIMENT FOR INVESTIGATING INTERNAL NAVES IN OCEAN BY REMOTE METHODS
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GEOPIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 12-18
[Article by Yu. H. Kuftarkov]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of
an experiment for ascertaining the interre-
lationship of temperature fluctuations in
the thermocline and radiation temperature at
the free surface of the ocean. It is shown
that on the basis of the characteristic
thermal radiation of the ocean in the IR spec-
tral range it is possible to reconstruct the
scales of internal waves in the ocean.

Studies have appeared recently which have been devoted to the remote sensing of in-
ternal waves. Considerable successes in solution of this problem have been at-
tained for the most part due to use of optical methods [1]. However. their use

is possible only during the daytime under definite hydrometeorological conditions.

In order to investigate the possibility of the sensing of internal waves in the 1R
range within the framework of the international program JASIN-78 an experiment

was planned which was implemented in September-October 1978 on the expedition on
the 18th voyage of the scientific research ship "Akademik Vernadskiy."

We will describe the method for carrying out the experiment.

Variant 1. Observations of ;he field of internal gravitational waves were made from
a drifting ship using an array of three sets of distributed temperature sensors
(5RD). Two sets were lowered from the ship's stern and prow and the third was plac-
ed on a buoy at a distance of 100 m from the middle of the ship perpendicular to
its side. The sets of sensors were made up of links of different scales and occup-
ied the upper quasihomogeneous layer of the ocean and the seasonal thermocline. The
distribution of sensors with depth was as follows: the SRD-l consisted of seven
decimeter temperature sensors (RDT) and one sensor 100 m in length. Three SRD-3
sensors, two of which were each 10 m in length and one which was 50 m in length.
were lowered from the ship's prow. The SRD-Z, placed on the buoy, consisted of six
distributed sensors: two of 50 m each, two of 25 m in length, and two with a length
of 10 m. A set of current meters was suspended from the stern for determining the

ship's drift relative to the water; these occupied the upper 70-m layer of the

8
FOI‘OIFICIAI.IEHE(I§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ocean and consisted of five DISK instruments and three BPV current meters.

This scheme for the placement of RDT made possible a detailed investigation of the
vertical structure of the temperature field and made it possible to give an answer
to the question as to whether we are dealing with a random group of internal gravi-
tational waves or with mesoscale turbulence.

In order to compute the mean profile of the ViisalsL-Brent frequency characterizing
the field of internal waves we carried out measurements with ISTOK instrunents
and a sinking probe to ascertain the fine structure. Directly at the free surface
we made observations of the microstructure of the temperature field using a float-
ing-up probe.

The radiation temperature of the ocean surface was measured using an IR radiometer
in the range 8-12pm with a time constant of 3 sec and a response of not less than
0.03’C. The radiometer was mounted on a boom at the ship's prow and was directed
vertically downward. The angle of view of 5° ensured averaging of the radiation

temperature 1‘, in a circle with a radius of 1 m. In the analysis use was made of
data for an 8-Bour measurunent interval in the evening and nighttime hours as be-

ing the most favorable for observing the radiation taperature of the ocean sur-
face.

Variant 2. The ship was at anchor (at a depth of 120 m) in the region of Ampere
Bank (near Gibraltar). The steep slopes of this bank (the horizontal scale along
the isobath 2500 m is 30-40 km) make it a natural generator of internal waves. 0b-
servations of the wave field were made using the system of distributed tempera-
ture sensors described above with the single difference that it included only two
sets of sensors which occupied almost the entire thickness of the water from the
surface to the top of Ampere Bank. The distribution of the sensors with depth
was as follows: the first EDT-100, lowered from the ship's prow, occupied the
water layer from the surface to a depth of 100 m; on this same vertical there
were seven other lO—m RUE-10 sensors placed successively one under the other be-
ginning with a depth of 10 In; three sensors (two each 10 m in length and one 50 m

in length) were lowered from the ship's prow.

As in variant 1, here we used measurements of the temperature profile obtained
with STD instrunents, sinking and floating-up probes.

Variant 3. Attention was given to a determination of the interrelationship of the
spatial scales of t-perature inhomogeneities in the thermocline and at the free
ocean surface. The results of observations made while the ship was proceeding on
course make it possible to evaluate the influence of the ship's hull on measure-
ments of radiation temperature 'tp obtained in variant 2.

The horizontal structure of the temperature field in the thermocline was investig—

ated using the SRD-l; it was towed by a ship at a speed of 5 knots. Four runs were
made of 5 miles each in different directions. At the same time observations were

made of the radiation temperature of the ocean surface. The length of the runs

does not make it possible to carry out a joint statistical processing of the
initial records at the time scales of interest to us but makes it possible to

9
MOWIISEONLY
IIUI 0!le USE ONLY

compare the characteristic phase shifts and scales of temperature inhomogeneities

in the thermocline and at the free surface .

Mi) 90435“
”9‘ degree2~n1n

m"

 

Ia"

I

minutes

 

90 II [I I5 _ II ”an
Fig. 2.

   

’04 . .
#IJW 2,}? AV 5 7'ku

Table 1 gives the designations and characteristics of some series of measurements
obtained in the experiment in variants 1 and 2. Figure 1 gives the spectral densit-

ies of temperature in the thermocline and the radiation temperature of the free
surface.A1] the spectra in the region of time scales 10-20 min are characterized

*
The observational data obtained at drift, while at anchor and while the ship was

proceeding on course are identical with respect to the effect of the interrelation-
ship of temperature fluctuations in the upper thermocline and at the ocean surface
and therefore only some results of the experiment will be presented below.

10
FIHICMNNCIAI.U§E|NULY
FOI1DFUKJA1.USE(MVLY

by a rather steep (f‘3 and f“) dropoff from the low frequencies to the high fre-

quencies, which gives basis for postulating a wave character of the investigated
phenomenon.

Table 1
Variant Instrument Number of Depth, Duration Discrete- Number of
series m T, hours ness. min terms in
series
1 IR radio- 1 0 7.93 0.62 772
meter
EDT-10 2 40-50 7.93 0.82 772
2 IR radio-
meter 3 0 7.8 0.82 760
EDT-10 4 50-60 7.8 0.82 760

The degree of interrelationship of internal waves and radiation temperature of the
ocean surface at time scales from 10 to 37 min is illustrated by the coherence
spectra (Fig. 2,a) and the phase spectra (Fig. 2,b) of series 1.2 and 3,6. If the
series were not correlated, then with a number of degrees of freedom 30 the evalu-
ations of coherence with 952 guaranteed probability would not exceed the level of
the random errors 0.36. The stability of the phase shifts in periods from 37 to

10 min also indicates a correlation of the temperature fluctuations in the thermo-
cline and at the free surface of the ocean.

It was found from an analysis of the phase spectrum that the fluctuations of effect-
ive temperature in the thermocline with an accuracy to the registry and processing
of data are almost in antiphase with the radiation temperature of the free surface
of the ocean. Due to the limited nature of the observation series the cited stat-
istical analysis relates to time fluctuations with a period not more than 40 min.

In order to establish the degree of correlation between the radiation temperature
of the ocean surface and the field of internal gravitational waves at all the time

scales of interest to us (up to 8 hours) we used special processing methods based
on the expansion of the initial fields in a system of empirical orthogonal func-
Ctions [2] e

The expansion of the investigated field in empirical orthogonal functions is desir-
able only when the first two or three eigenvalues in the sum are much greater than
the others. In this case there is discrimination of the energy-significant fluctu-

ations; the other nonenergy-carrying disturbances are suppressed or are filtered
out o

A special practical advantage of the empirical functions approach is that as a re-

sult of expansion of the initial field in these functions on the one hand there
is discrimination of the coherent part of the fluctuations from each horizon, and

on the other hand, there is information on the distribution of the particular hor-
izon by empirical modes.

ll
ROI OFFICIAI.IIIB(IULN
FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

G 15 -l! -d‘ 3 l? -¢& 0

 

;'[v—T—r—' —v——r—|-—'—F-«
”[ 1
I 2

JV

:1 L

In

Fig. 3.
Table 2
Percentage Content of Total Energy
Modes Depths, m
0 20-30 30—40 40-50 50-60

1 39 30 79 92 86
2 41 36 20 7 12

Therefore it is possible to propose the following processing procedure. First. on
the basis of data for RDT situated on one vertical we obtain the vertical and tem-
poral structure of the significant energy nodes of the wave field and then to the
initial data we add a ‘tp series and again construct empirical orthogonal functions.

If in this case a large part of the energy £9 is distributed in energy-significant
modes of a purely wave field. this will mean that fluctuations of the radiation tem-
perature correlate with the field of internal waves.

As the initial mass of data we used data on temperature fluctuations obtained using
four RBI and an IR radiometer. Computations were made for these cases: 1) the em-
pirical modes were obtained solely on the basis of data from the distributed sen-
sors; 2) using RDT and IR—radioneter data. An analysis indicated that in both cases

the first node is energy-significant. The two lover nodes together contain about
902 of the total energy of pulsation movement. Figure 3 shows curves of the ver-
tical distribution of the empirical functions of the first (curves 1. 3) and sec-
ond (curves 2, 4) modes characterizing the intensity of temperature fluctuations
with depth. Curves l, 2 describe the vertical structure of temperature fluctua-
tions of the wave field without the "radiation" horizon (a - 0), curves 3, 4 char-

acterize the vertical structure. including the horizon r - 0. It can be seen that
the presence of the "radiation" horizon does not impair the vertical structure and

12
FOI‘OFFKJA1.UBE(HVLY
liltt”ﬂﬂ(1Al-USB(MVLY

the profiles of the corresponding nodes with exclusion of this horizon are sim-
ilar to one another. The telpersture fluctuations in the second mode at the ocean
surface and in the seasonal thermocline (30 ms 2(40 :1) are in antiphaae, that 13,
the rising of the isotherms in the seasonal theraocline is accompanied by an in-

crease in te-pereture of the ocean surface.

The first two modes (Table 2) contain more than 901 of the energy at the individual
horizons where the RDT are placed, with the exception of the horizon 10-20 I. and
801 of the energy of the radiation series (2 - 0). This gives basis for speaking
of a high degree of correlation of fluctuations of radiation temperature of the
free surface and internal gravitational waves. The energy contribution to the em-
pirical nodes from a depth of 10-20 n is determined very inexactly, since less than
12 of the total energy is accounted for by this depth

Thus, the cross-statistical analysis cited above and a special analysis based on an
expansion of the initial fields in a system of empirical orthogonal functions indi-
cated that on the basis of IR photographs of the free ocean surface it is in prin-

ciple possible to "reconstruct" the scales of internal waves and determine the
zones of their convergence and divergence.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Apel, J. R., er al., "Observations of Oceanic Internal and Surface Haves From

the Earth Resources Technology Satellite," J. GEOPH. RES., Vol 80, No 6, pp 865-
881, 1975.

2. Moore, 0., "Empirical Orthogonal Functions - a Nonstatistical Vieu," HOT LINE
KENS, No 67, pp 1-9, 1974.

13
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USI(INLY
I'UI WI‘IVMI: we. UNI-I

DETERMINATION OF-PARAHETERS OF INTERNAL WAVES BY REMOTE METHODS
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GEOFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 19-27

[Article by V. N. Kudryavtsev]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the problems
involved in the sensing of internal waves
from the characteristic IR radiation of
the ocean. The author proposes a very simple
model of the appearance of internal waves
in the radiation temperature field of the
surface based on a redistribution by the
field of induced velocity of the concentra-
tion of surface active substances having
an emissivity differing from sea water.
Computations using the formulated model are
compared with experimental data. An expres-
sion is proposed which makes it possible to
reconstruct the energy spectrum of internal
waves on the basis of the radiation tempera-
ture spectrum.

Introduction. Recently the formulation of the problem of determining the parameters
of dynamic processes in the ocean by remote methods has become timely [l]. A solu-
tion of such a problem primarily involves an analysis of the effect of the inves-
tigated phenomenon on the physical parameters of the ocean surface, whose varia—
tions are registered by remote apparatus. For example, the authors of [2] examined the
the problem of the appearance of a synoptic eddy formation in the thermal structure
of the upper quasihomogeneous layer. The mentioned model can have application to
determination of the scales and intensity of an eddy on the basis of data from IR
sensing of the ocean‘surface from aboard flightcraft. Only the first steps have
been taken in the investigation of internal waves by remote methods. Using the ef-
fects of suppression of ripples in definite zones of a current induced by internal
waves the authors of [8] were able to observe internal waves in the Gulf of Calif-
ornia from space. However, the use of optical methods is possible only during the
daytime under definite hydrometeorological conditions. Source [3] gave the results
of an experiment for ascertaining the interrelationship between the field of IR
radiation temperature_and displacements of the thermocline. An analysis of the ex-
perimental data indicated that the radiation temperature field can be a valuable
source of information on the scales and energy of internal waves.

FOI'OlIlCIAl.lIIE(MVLY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY

The purpose of this article is the formulation of a very simple model for deter-
mining the spatial-temporal and energy characteristics of internal waves on the

basis of the field of radiation temperature of the ocean surface.

Determination of Radiation Temperature

in the IR range the radiation temperature of the ocean is determined from the ener-
gy brightness <e> , averaged for the surface so viewed by the radiometer,

(0-34 5 60000,.» 45.. (1)
0 J

llere 8 (40) is the emissivity of the sea surface in the direction 1?; Via the
angle between the normal to an element of the free surface and the direction into
the radiometer objective; 3 is the energy brightness of an ideally black Surface,

In the near-IR spectral region of thermal radiation for the function 8 the Uien
asymptotic function 91 -
«a.» - 5%- e “W:

is correct, where h, k, c are universal constants; Ts is temperature; V' is spectral

frequency. With real slopes of the free surface of the sea 5 (17) is not dependent
on the angle l? and is determined only by the surface properties, especially the de-
gree and type of its contamination [lo].

He will call the radiation temperature of the ocean surface TP the temperature of
an ideally black surface whose energy brightness is <9) . From this definition it
follows that

_’-_/-'L[n5_ (2)
7} 7.; ’19

Taking into account the fact that in the IR range 5 is close to unity. we finally
obtain an expression for variations of the radiation temperature

9

C'i’tz' (3)

Here the wavy line at top denotes fluctuation of the parameter; 1:- kT2/h V; with a
radiation wavelength 3- 10pm (5 60 K. Since the IR radiation is formed by the
surface water layer ~10pm, by the term thermodynamic temperature of the surface
we understand the mean temperature of this very thin layer — the so-called skin
temperature.

Correlation of Variations of f, and TP with Field of Internal Waves

He will evaluate the contribution of the terms on the right-hand side of (3) to TIP.
The skin temperature of the surface is less than the temperature of the underlying

mixed water layer by from several tenths of a degree to a degree; the entire
temperature drop AT is concentrated in a layer of several millimeters. The ther-

mal structure of the skin layer is essentally dependent on the heat transfer prop-
erties of the surface and the degree of development of capillary waves [5].

15
FOIOWIOALIEONLY
9W UI'I'ILIAL 03'. Wk.

Acmrdingly. a change in the intensity of capillary waves and a redistribution

of surface active substances (on which the rate of evaporation is dependent)

by the field of internal waves leads to the appearance of 1's anomalies which in
any «use will he a maximum of about AT. Emissivity is also dependent on the type
and concentration of surface active substances. For example, according to the data
it. [6], films of petroleun and its products, depending on the concentration, are
capable of changing 5 by several hundredths. As can be seen from (3). the varia-
tion é” - 0.01 leads to Tp - 0.6 K. This estimate indicates a potentially high con-
tribution of films of surface active substances to the formation of TI, contrasts.
Thus, investigation of problems relating to redistribution of the concentration

I' of surface active substances by the field of internal waves and a knowledge

of the functional dependence 6- g (r) for different really encountered types of
surface active substances is the central problem in formulating theoretical mod-

Now we will examine a very simple model. We will assme that for the field of in-
ternal waves the ratio of the induced surface velocity U to the phase velocity

C is a small value, that is, U/C4‘l. Under the condition that the surface active
substance is a passive admixture, the linearized equation for describing the var-

iability of the concentration I” has the form [7]

E~Cﬂ-‘--0~ (a)
at 0a

where r is the undisturbed value F ; U“, are the components of horizontal velo-
city. He will expand 8 into a series in the neighborhood 8 ( F0)

:76
e(/' - 6/; + — I'. s
) . ( ) or . ( )
In a case when the (a: lal”)9 is known, the system of equations (4), (5) makes it

possible from the known fiel U0, to determine the field of anomalies of ocean
surface emissivity.

Assume that the field of internal waves is statistically stationary and horizont-
nliy homogeneous. This makes it possible to represent the components of orbital

velocity of the internal wave, displacement of the thermocline and sought-for
funcI ions in the form of a Fourier-Stieltjes (F—S) integral

n. . «Man
I J l) o
YQ‘JJ) S: «I (6)
whun- f" is an arbitrary function; d1 is an F-s component; k andaJ is the ele-

mentary wave number and the frequency of the corresponding component. Substituting
(6) into equations (lo), (5), we obtain

d/‘a clef-(1:. (13-11%4“ (7)
. e
llere 9‘ {‘0 “fa—(.0)

l2: .1 parameter characterizing the emissivity of the film of surface active substance.
ll full-ms from (3) that an expression can be derived for the P-S component of vari-
ations of radiation temperature caused by variability of ocean surface emissivity

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
d7;- rxiLZ’fL. (8)

within the framework of ordinary approximations of the linear theory of internal
gravitational waves the F-S component of induced surface velocity is expressed
through the vertical velocity component d“ in the following way:

:10 .. a is. .41. 4 (9
“ 1’ d, W [2-0 ' )
If the thickness of the homogeneous layer ho<< k'l. then
id": iii/u.
Then 42 It. '

df--(/:/Ac)d4h. ' (5"63/40) 40‘. 0
that is, the maximum of the concentration of the surface active substance is situ-
ated over the bottom of displacements of the thermocline and the position of the
' maximum is dependent on the sign on)( , With2(< 0 the crest of thermocline dis-

pYacements corresponds to the maximum of the surface radiation temperature, and
vice versa, with )8) 0.

We will give a siwle evaluation. For a film of easily spreading petroleum within
the range of its thickness l-lOy-m ae/3r~-1o-2,in-1 [6].

Assume that )f- Foeg- 5-10-2, di/ho - 10-1. Then with c- 60 K d’r'; - 0.3 x. but
the To maximum is si‘tuated above the crests of thermocline displacements.

Interpretation of Experimental Data

With the above taken into account, an attempt will be made at an interpretation 0f
thu results of a cross-spectral analysis of series of fluctuations of radiation
temperature and the temperature of a distributed sensor situated in the thermo-

cl Inc [3]. The observations were made at nighttime when there was a weak wind

~ 3 mvsec‘l. At the time of implementation of the experiment it was impossible to
determine the presence of a surface active substance. However, during the daytime
the authors of the experiment visually observed "slic " on the ocean surface
(regions with a smoothed short-wave part of the wave spectrum) which were asso-
eluted with the presence of a surface active substance.

llmler the conditions under which the experiment was carried out there can be no sig-
nificant contrasts of the skin temperature. In actuality, with a wind ~3 m-sec'l
capillary waves are far from saturation and the dynamic contrasts of capillary-
gmvitatinnnl ripples between the slick and the "unsmoothed" part of the surface
are capable of giving a considerable contrast of skin temperature [5]. Moreover,

If it is assumed that the variations of the evaporation rate in order of magnitude
correspond to variations in the concentration of surface active substance, the ex-
pected“ skin temperature anomalies will be Ts~ATU/C. With AT~0.1—0.S K we will
have 1‘sw10'2.5°10"2 K. The experimental mean square values of the fluctuations TP

——2 1/2
(‘13.) ~ 0.2 K.

17
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"QIK \I'U‘l‘ IAI. Ik‘f. \lNI.‘

Thus, the observed Sip were caused by variations in ocean surface emissivity.

For rompnrison of the results of the theoretical analysis and experimental data
we will approximate the vertical distribution of temperature in the homogeneous
layer and the thermocline by a model in which the temperature in the layer O-ho
(40 m) ls cons.t_ant, whereas when z>h the mean temperature gradient is constant
and equal to ar/D z - -0.l degree-m’ . In a case when the level of placement of

the distributed sensor h* differs little from ho, the P-S component of fluctua-
t‘lons of temperature of the sensor and the component of displacements of the upper
hnundary of the thermocline are related by the expression

‘15“: {1—2— dgh . (10)

It follows from expressions (8)-(10) that there is a correlation between the F-S
components of variation of radiation temperature and temperature fluctuations in

the thermocline

~ — u, M
dT -- (11- d7 .
P (fie/k.) 01 It. (11)

Now we will proceed to the writing of spectral expressions. We will determine the
spatial-temporal spectral densities using the formula

F.7(I‘J'U) '——'—-- (12)

where the line at top denotes theoretical probabilistic averaging, the asterisk de-
notes a couplexly conjugate value. It follows from this definition and from ear

presslon (11) that there is a correlation and similarity of the spectra FTP and

Tllt
37' 1

This result corresponds qualitatively with t e experimental result. We will evalu-
ate the theoretical similarity coefficient R I P1- /FTh*. Selecting, as before,

:1 surface active substance in she form of a film 0? spreading petroleum the emis-
sion steepness IJU'VIO‘Z-S'lO' , with h* - 60 m we obtain the evaluation R2~
«mu-0.25. with h. - 55 m the experimental value 32 is equal to 0.2, and with h* -
M m —— equal to 0.06 [3]. The difference in the expe_r_imenta1 values one from the
other can be attributed to the nonlinearity of the 31/) 2. profile. But at the

some time the agreement of R2 values in order of magnitude in the experimental and
theoretical evaluations is obvious.

It is easy to confirm that in the model Im FTths - o and 318“ Re FTp.Th* . sign
3‘. Accordingly, the theoretical phase spectrum 6-1- ,rMex. 1f sisnx - -1 (as
for petroleum spreading out freely), and 613,31": , if sign .ll- +1. The experi-
mental value QTp.Th* in the range of periods 100-15 minutes on the average has a
stable value close to If, that is. displacements of the thermocline and variations
3!! the radiation temperature of the ocean surface are in phase (in antiphase with
1"”). A comparison of the results of the theoretical analysis with the experimental

18
FOB 0mm USE ONLY
FOR‘0F1NCJAI.UGIZ(NQLV

duln gave satisfactory qualitative and quantitative agreement.

Duturmlnution of Energy Spectrum of Internal Haves Prom Radiation Temperature Spec-
tl'llll

It follows from the results cited above that the radiation temperature field can
he a valuable source of infatuation on the scales and energy of internal waves.

It is therefore desirable to derive an expression relating the radiation tempera-
ture spectrum and the energy spectrum of internal waves, which to a certain degree
will be diagnostic with reconstruction of the parameters of internal waves from the
TP field.

It is known that the vertical structure of the field of short-period internal waves
in the ocean is determined by solution of the equation

 

d: #1-“:
— .. b
112 db’ at ﬂaw. 0 (1 )

with the boundary conditions dw(0) - dw(H) - 0. Here H is the ocean depth; N is the
Vsis5la-Brent frequency; «land k are the elementary frequency and wave number, which
are determined from the conditions of existence of a nontrivial solution of equa-
Lion (14). without losing universality, we will assume that In dH - 0. He multiply
equation (14) by d

”a dw,

and then we integrate it from 0 to R. Then, taking the second integral once by parts
and taking the boundary conditions into account, we obtain.
1
e313)?- ,’ Evita-.4711; (15)
one, .1 ‘ '

Herc dU is the F-8 component of the modulus of horizontal velocity; 3/; is the mean
weighted radius of curvature of the vertical density distribution,P (2), determined
as a '

RP" §w2(dw)‘11"5.-."(:WJ’3” cI‘M-"2‘5"
J

 

'.-, I \ 1
[do] _

1 (16)
Under real ocean conditions [dU(H)12/[dU(0)]2~(ho/ha)2<<l, where ha is the thick-
ness of the abyssal layers. Then, taking into account that dw I iuJ dt , we obtain

' I .2 ' ’ /
lama;fe._2_5 —P.N’\d¢)’dz. (17)
(use! 5 Z
The integral in expression (17) represents the doubled potential energy of the ele-
mentary harmonic component of internal waves, which within the framework of the lin-
ear theory of internal waves is equal to the total energy dB. Taking into account
expressions (8), (12), (17). we obtain a final expression for the correlation of

the spatial-temporal spectra of the energy of internal waves E - dB/dkldkzdcd and

the radiation temperature of the ocean surface

I I C
F-_ __ (18)
_ 2 MPH. 1-: >213.

l9

FOI!OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
0““ 1".“ QC. "‘0 ||NI \

Hurv C is the phase velocity of internal waves. SincerJ and k are related by a dis-
persion relationship, expression (8) is correct both for the spectra of wave num-
bers and for the frequency spectra.

For a determination of the radius Rf> it is necessary to know in advance the modal
composition of the internal waves. However, with a known “2(2) profile having a set
of dispersion curves of internal waves it is possible from «land K of the FTP spec-
trum to determine the number of the mode, and accordingly, compute Rf>and recon-
struct the level of spectral density of ane energy. For rough diagnostic evalua-
tions the vertical stratification can be approximated by a two-layer model with a

density drop 4}" Then, if kho<<1, Id») 1, then

C2 " 8 ea ho,
APo
gltpi - h0/2 and expression (18) assumes the form

5’ .. \z
—— -uzgolfz E - no)

4 .- ~ ,' :2

-
-=

Summary

The results of the cited analyses show the fundamental possibility of determining
the dynamic structure of internal waves by the method of remote registry of the
characteristic IR radiation of the ocean surface. An important point in the con-
sidered theoretical model is the need for the presence of a surface active sub-
stance differing with respect to its emission properties from sea water. This cir-
cumstance does not reduce the model proposed here to a special case since the ocean
surface is virtually always contaminated by surface active substances as a result
of vital functions and decomposition of marine organisms, and also as a result of
man's activity. The redistribution of the concentration of surface active sub-
stances by the field of internal waves leads, on the one hand, to modulation of

the coefficient of attenuation of capillary-gravitational ripples and the forma-
tion of slicks, and on the other hand, to modulation of ocean surface emissivity.
The first effect was used in [8] for sensing of internal waves in the visible range
from slicks on the surface; the second lies at the basis of sensing internal waves

in the IR range.

In conclusion we note that the possibility of practical use of the method of IR
sensing of internal waves is related to an investigation of the capability of the
atmospheric layer to transmit the contrasts of characteristic emission of the ocean.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Nuiepo, B. A., Khmyrov, B. Ye., Terekhin. Yu. V., et al.. PROBLEHY, VOZHOZHNOSTI

I PERSPEKTIVY KOSMICHESKOY OKEANOGRAFII (Problems, Possibilities and Prospects
of Space Oceanography), Preprint No b, Sevastopol', Izd-vo MCI AN UkSSR, 1979,

52 pages.

20
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
3.

IO.

6.

7.

Nclcpo, B. A., Kuftarkov, Yu. H. and Kosnyrav, V. K., "On the Problem of
Determining the Paranetera of Synoptic Eddies in the Ocean From Artificial
Earth Satellites," DAN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol
242, No 6, pp 1289-1292, 1978.

Nelepo, B. A. and Kuftarkov, Yu. M., "Experimental Investigation of the Chat--
acteristics of Internal Waves in the Ocean by Rerote Methods," DAN AN SSSR, Vol
249, No lo, pp 980-983 [year not given].

Bronson, H. A., Zel'mnnovich, I. L. and Kuleahova, G. I., "Bniasivity of Water
in the Spectral IR Region," TEDDY GOO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical
Observatory), No 152, Leningrad, pp 31-67, 1964.

Kudryavtsev, V. N., "Evaluation of the Temperature Contrast Between a Slick and
the Clean Surface," in press.

Bogorodskiy, V. V., Kropotkin, H. A. and Sheveleva, 1. Yu., "Investigation of
the Influence of Petroleum Contamination. Salinity and Some Other Factors on
the Optical Properties of Hater in the IR Spectral Region," METEOROLOGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 12, pp 3-9. 1971..

Levich, V. 6., FIZIKO-KEIHICHESKAYA GIDRODINAHIKA (Physicochemical Hydrodynaar
ics), Moscow, GIFHL, 1959, 699 pages.

Apel, J. R., et a1., "Observation of Oceanic Internal and Surface Haves From
the Earth Resources Technology Satellite," J. GBOPHYS. 1138., V01 80, No 6, pp
865-881, 1975.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REMOTE MEASUREMENT 0? OCEAN TEMPERATURE IN IR RANGE USING REFERENCE POINTS
Sevnstopol' SPUTNIKOVAXA GEOFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 28-32
[Article by V. S. Suyetin]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the possib-
ility of interpreting multichannel remote
measurements of IR radiation of the ocean
under conditions of cloud cover with gaps
having unknown characteristics for the pur-
pose of obtaining the temperature field of
the ocean surface. As additional informa-
tion the author proposes_use of data from
direct measurements of surface temperature
at individual reference points.

Modern oceanology is imposing extremely high requirements on the accuracy and de-
tail of measurements of the temperature field of the ocean surface [1]. These re-
quirements can in principle be satisfied by remote measurement methods in the IR
range by means of high-resolution scanning radiometers. One of the principal rea-
sons for the substantial errors in determining ocean temperature on the basis of
data from IR measurements is cloud cover, in part covering the radiometer field of
view (resolution element) [2] and leading to an apparent temperature decrease.

A rigorous solution of the problem of allowance for clouds is complicated by the
fact that their temperature and optical characteristics can vary in a wide range.
This leads to an increase in the number of undetermined factors and accordingly
requires the use of additional initial information and the adoption of simplify-
ing uSSumptions.

For example. the authors of [3, 4] proposed a method for the interpretation of
simultaneous measurements of the radiation at two wavelengths (A1 = 2.7, 5\2 .
ll.lllm) on the assumption that ocean temperature and the characteristics of
clouds are constant within the limits of some area considerably greater than the
the size of a resolution element. Only the relative error «Jof clouds entering
into the radiometer field of view is considered variable.

In solving problems in study of variability of the ocean [1] the assumption of a
constancy of its temperature is unacceptable. In this article a study is made of
the possibility of taking clouds into account under conditions of a substantial
spatial variability of the temperature field by use of multichannel remote

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘K'MI. USE ONLY

measurements in the IR range and use of direct measurements of the ocean surface
at individual reference points.

In the case of translucent clouds it is proposed that measurements be made at not
103:4 than three wavelengths in the windows of atmospheric transparency. In the

case of opaque clouds two wavelengths can be adequate. As a siwlification we
will assume that the directional diagram for each measurement channel are iden-
tical and have a right-angle configuration. Within the limits of a resolution
element the temperature T of the ocean surface will be considered constant.

The intensity of the measured radiation of the wavelength )1 will be represented

in the following way: )
17-04%" + uz‘”.

where .71 (1) a J (2) is the radiation with 0- O and a“ 1 respectively. Assume
31'? ) ‘
that 111' are fixed radiation values measured at the point for which the

surface temperature is known and equal to To. The corresponding ‘4 value (unknown)
will be denoted 00. Taking into account that the variations of surface tempera-
ture 'I‘ do 0not exceed several degrees, for a description of the deviations 3 )1-

11 - )1“) )it is possible to use the approximate expression
d8 (1:30 [f . /5( r)_
Jg=ﬁ-'f—77v——9* ('Q *‘7: A!“

38 -.7'
-149: (A; 1.)] (hi-0494474? )Xz 7(7):“) 9“ '
where M) . T) is the Planck function; .
a (u) . 50,; + M” 0:

9- T - TO' ,1.‘ is the sea surface blackness coefficient; P1 is the transmission
toefficient with U = 0 (cloudless atmosphere); ['1 is the atmospheric transmis-
9: ion function with a) - 1. Here we used the following expressions:

ya me (100%: . z-“qu-MMW

there F1 is atmospheric radiation with al- 1 (including solar radiation reflected
l-I' scattered by clouds); 61 is atmospheric radiation with d- 0.

(1)

In vector for- model (1) assumes the form
F-oi,+(y-a,) &;+9aa;, ' (2)
where

(‘°=£.;-: 232-46 “2“" ;

5;)"’?’4i*"!’25()i'§)"?55(‘i'75)3 45" (4’9"? ”17%;,"

for i - l..... n; n is the number of the measurement channels.

we will assume that for the analyzed set of remote measurements at a number of
points (scanning elements) only 6 anda’ are variable factors. The problem essen- '
tiuliy involves a search for the 6", k - 1,...,N values; N is the full number of
analyzed measurement points.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As Is wc-Il known, the X and Pi values can be stipulated a priori with an accur-
acy no worse than several percent. In seeking the absolute T values exclusively
on the basis of remote measurements such an accuracy is too low, but in an analy-
sis of the values of the deviations dJi and 6 the solution errors associated with
errors in stipulating the 3’1 and P1 values will evidently be negligible. We note
that for a more precise stipulation of these values it is possible to employ con-
tact measurements at reference points and also remote measurements of microwave
radiation. Thus, the vector 31 can be considered fully stipulated. Hith respect to
32 and 33, they must be considered unknown because the corresponding cloud cover
characteristics F1 and ['1 can be stipulated a priori only extrnely approximate-

ly.
the will examine the following two characteristic cases.

l. The vectors 5’, 5’2, '33 are linearly independent. In this case F, If 0 (with F,
n 0 the vectors 1 and 33 are proportional), that is, the cloud cover is trans-
lucent. In addition, the number of measurement channels is n) 3.

2!. The_.vector 53 is proportional to 3'1. that is, there is some coefficient 5 with
which :13 - 83.1. In the case of opaque clouds ['1 I 0 and E - -1.

A situation when 33 and 31 are not proportional and nevertheless the system of vec-

tors 33, 32, a3 is linearly dependent is degenerate and is not examined hereafter.

(ase l. A solution can be obtained directly gram (2) in. the form 6- (hi) if one
linds such a h vector that (h, 31) - l and (h, 32) - (h, 3'3) - 0 (the scalar pro-
duct is denoted by parentheses). Since n>3 and the vectors 51, 3’2, 5'3 are linear-
ly independent, such an h evidently exists. In order for it to be determined we
will use direct measurements of surface temperature at two other reference points
in addition to the point taken as the reckoning level Jim). The corresponding
9 values are denoted by 91 = T1 - To and 92 - 1'2 - To.

He will rewrite (2) for these points (k - l, 2) in the form

- .. _ \ - _
:I-ilaI-Lf-(a’ragj 42+0’d’a). (3)
The vectors 31.1 and 3' are known. If the reference points are representative, it
can he assumed that 1 and 32 are nonproportional; then these vectors generate a
plane in n-dimensional space, which according to (3) contains the vectors 5’2 and

53. Accordingly, if we take some vector orthogonal to I: and 3.2, with the corres-
ponding normalization it will be the sought-for vector .

:n this case use is made of reference measurements of temperature at three points:
one measurement (To) is for establishing the absolute level and two measurements

(T1 and T2) are for eliminating the uncertainty related to the cloud cover charac-
lcrlstics.

C:|se_.2. In this case the h vector does not exist and any vector orthogonal to 371
and w2 is orthogonal to 3'1 and 't'. Accordingly, for seeking 9 a different approach
is necessary. Model (2) with 5'3 - a a1 undergoes transition into

21;
ron omcm USE ONLY
FOR Ol-1-1CIAL USE ONLY

i-(H-(U) 00., +(0-0,) )Ez~ . (lo)

He will represent a2 in the form of the linear combination a2 - 0:31 4- Pb, where
at. and ,8 are unknown coe ficients; b is a vector of a unit length orthogonal to a.
that is (3’, b) - o; (5', b) -||b' ll 2 - 1. with n - the ‘5’ vector is easily stipulat-
ed on the basis of known a1. In the case n>2 the vector can be found using the

formula _ .
1-?“ 3n" . ?- T—(m’) u in" a,

Thereafter, from (/6) for k - 1,...,N we obtain

(3, Ola" II [10072) g)"+¢g]p‘,(f;)"-! (5)

If the expression in brackets is different from zero and the values 99- HEﬂ'l V-
eda and x-“ﬂ'l are known. the values 9k can be determined.

In order to determine the 9’. 9/, (f values we will use three reference points for
which the 91, 62, 93 are known. He will write (5) for these points in the follow—

r'wr‘h” "2’ 3’ <£€->e-v+&r+(lt;)x-<c-§)m-'x-

This expression represents a system of three linear algebraic equations relative to
the unknown parameters ‘1’, (,J, 5’. The matrix of coefficients of this system is

known and has the form _
$04 a @0
u- (we. 9: (Dz)

{GT-9')! 6} (It?)

In a general case U is nondegenerate and therefore the )9 9/. J values can be found
at all points at which

}+ (If) (,9" +0, [- o.

For the case of ideally opaque clouds (8 - -1) this means that a! + 1, since
(i‘ m.) ﬂ'l -w- wo-

In this case use is made of reference measurements of tmerature at four points:
three measurements for determining the 9’, 9/, (parameters, a fourth (To) for de-
termining the absolute values 1;. - 8 k + To.

The described approach to interpretation of remote measurement data can be used
in carrying out complex investigations in combination with shipboard and buoy meas-
urements. This approach is also convenient in joint remote observations in the IR

nnd microwave ranges. As is well known, a high response and resolution of a scann-

lng microwave radiometer are difficult to attain. In addition, microwave neasure—
ments of ocean temperature can be carried out along the flight path of a carrier in
the presence of clouds and have been used with the proposed method as reference and

25
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control data in the interpretation of observations with a scanning IR radiometer.

In order to obtain evaluations of the errors in solution which can arise due to de-
viation from the adopted assumptions and for choice of the optimun measurement

channels it is necessary to carry out special investigations taking the specific
m-usurenent conditions into account.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Nelepo, B. A., IGIIerV, B. Ye., Terekhin, Yu. V., et a1., PROBLM, VOZHOZHv
NOSTI I PBRSPBK'IIVY KOSHICHBSKOY OKEANOGRAPII (Problem, Possibilities and

Prospects of Space Oceanography). Preprint No lo, Sevastopol', Izd. HGI AN
Ukrainskoy SSR, 1979, 52 pages.

2. Novogrudskiy, B. V., Sklyarov. V. Ye., Fedorov, K. N. and Shiftin, K. 8.,
ISSLEDOVANIYE OKEANA I2 KOSMOSA (Investigations of the Ocean Fron Space).
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1978, 51. pages.

3. Kondrat'yev, K. Ya. and Timfeyev, ‘lu. H.. HETEOROLOGICHESKOYE ZONDIROVANIYB
ATMOSFERY IZ KOSHOSA (Meteorological Sounding of the Atmosphere From Space),
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1978, 280 pages.

10. Smith, H. L., Hilleary, D. ‘l'., Fischer, J. (2., Howell, H. B. and Wolf, a. H.,
"NIHBUS-S ITPR Experiment," APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 13, No 3, pp 1099-506, 1974.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEATURES OF RADAR DETERMINATION OF SEA HAVE PARAMETERS
chastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA caomm in Russian 1980 pp 33-61
[Article by V. V. Pustovoytenko]

[Text] Abstract: The features of remote determina-
tion of the time parameters of sea waves

are determined using radar wave-measurement

apparatus operating at small glancing angles
(lﬂ< 10°). The author investigates the influ-

ence of the characteristics of this apparatus
and the conditions for making measurements on
the statistical characteristics of the envelope
of a radio signal scattered by the sea surface.
It is shown that the best results in determining
the time parameters of sea waves are attained
with angles of incidence 1.559hg 5'.

0n the basis of the results obtained in an investigation of the characteristics
of scattering of radio waves by the sea surface, methods are now being intensive-
ly developed for the remote determination of the parameters of the sea surface
and wind in the near-water layer of the atmosphere. In this connection it is of
interest to investigate the possibilities of the radar method for determining the
spatial-temporal characteristics of waves.

1. Principal Characteristics of Backscuttering of Radio Haves by Sea Surface

Theoretical and experimental investigations carried out on the selective character
of the scattering of radio waves by the wave-covered sea surface made it possible
to create an electrodynamic model of a scattering surface [8, 9] and within its
limits explain the principal patterns of scattering.

The backscattering of radio waves is caused by the presence at the sea surface of
"rvsonance" components of waves with the wave number

x,- 21’ cos y . (1)
where k - 231/) is the wave number of the radio wave; 3 is its length; 3(0 is the

wave number of the scattering sea wave; 9’- are sin hIR is the glancing angle,
reckoned from the calm sea surface; h is the height of antenna system placement; R

FOR OFFICIZXL USE ONLY
ms m'wm. rm: om \

is the slant range to the scattering sector of the sea surface.

It follows from (1) that in the centimeter range of radio waves the scattering
element on the sea surface is ripple waves. Since the height of these waves is
h<< I10. the field scattered by them is computed by the perturbations method.

The specific effective scattering area (7° in vertical (BB) and horizontal (r I')
polarizations of the radiation is determined by the expressions

~ . 2
§;‘./57rﬂ.56 5‘U‘§"f(co’ﬂ)5"\‘rs)' ()
ﬂi-Iift-i‘JM‘ a": (8.3-- (3)

where 8 is the dielectric constant of sea water
I ' . ' z 1 . 3. '2
‘(t-V)'[(” 7,594.1) +71 .5649] . 7,.(7:- VI!
57.5130) is the spectral density of sea waves in the region of wave numbers if.

The angular dependences 6 °(¢P) (2), (3) in the region of small glancing angles
9’s? 5-8 have a high steepness, which causes amplitude modulation of the scattered

signal.

During the scattering of radio waves by the sea surface there is a Doppler fre-
quency shift of the scattered signal by the value [1]

.7.” mm
-\V 42 aPAJ

where n is a whole number determining the order of the diffraction spectrum; 0‘ is
the surface tension coefficient; P is the density of sea water.

 

(4)

As. demonstrated in [2], the characteristics of the scattered signal are determined
for the most part by the first-order (n - l) diffraction spectrum. It follows from
(1) that large sea waves do not directly participate in the scattering of radio
waves in the centimeter range but cause amplitude (2). (3) and phase (4) modula-
tion of the signal scattered by ripples.

Figure l,b shows a part of the record of the envelope of a signal scattered by the
sea surface corresponding to the passage of one sea wave through the irradiated
area I). The record was obtained during irradiation of the sea surface by a radio

wave with .A- 3. 2 cm. having vertical polarization of radiation at a glancing angle

9" -= 2° and with a duration of the sounding pulse “‘5 p'ulse 0. Oégsec. Here also
(Fig. .lr) we have shown a series of "instantaneous" "’spectra of the fluctuations

5(a)) of the scattered signal rm"

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corresponding to the observation time ulse‘T' The numbers 1-10 denote segments
of the B(t) record for which 50’) was c uted.

Radar

 

Fig. l.

The "slow" change in the mean level E of the envelope of the scattered signal is
attributable to a change in the irradiation angle Vin: (Pig. l,a) of the irradi-
ated area by a large sea wave. The B maximum corresponds to reflection from the
frontal slope of a wave for which the angle ‘Pirr - 9’+ J is maximum.

"Rapid" high-frequency fluctuations of the envelope are caused by the presence in
the "pulse volume" of reflectors (1) moving with different velocities as a re-

sult of the modulation of the phase velocity of ripples by the orbital velocity of
wave movement. With a high resolution in coordinates the width of the spectrum of

fluctuations A!" also changes in time. attaining its maximum value APmax with
reflection from the frontal slope of the wave at which the maximum orbital Velocity
gradients are observed.

2. Apparatus and Methods for Radiooceanographic Measurements

An experimental investigation of the characteristics of radar determination of the
spatial-temporal characteristics of sea waves was made using models of a multifre-

quc-ncy radar measurement system [3] and a wave-measuring attachment [4] in the
Caspian Sea (Neftyanyye Kami) and Black Sea (Xatsiveli) with sea waves in classes

2-5. The principal characteristics of the apparatus are given in Table 1.

These characteristics made it possible to carry out investigations in the range of
glancing angles 0.5-8' in the .sector of azimuthal angles 49- 160°.

In the measurements a study was made of the influence exerted on the characteristics
of the scattered signal by wavelength, resolution and polarization of radar radia-
tion, glancing angle t/and azimuthal angle y between the direction of sighting

am the direction of sea wave propagation.

29
son omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1

Parameters Caspian Sea Black Sea
Wavelength, A 3.2 cm 32 and 10.0 cm
Pulse duration { pulse 0.0lop.sec 0.05-1.0psec
Width of directional diagram 90 5 10.1 1.1 and 1'.8
Polarization of radiation P Plane
Antenna height h 12 m 8 m
Wind velocity H 5-15 alsec 5-15 m/sec
Sea depth at measurement point H 60 a 20-25 m

The envelope of the signals scattered by the sea surface was registered using high-
speed H-iOO and “-327-5 automatic recorders.

In the statistical processing of the records we determined: the mean period of
fluctuations of the envelope
¥ I lzrio
N i
i

the dispersion of the periods of fluctuations

the variation coefficient K1- ‘- 6-1-5: the asymetry coefficient

7’; (5-? )’

 

Ir'f‘J/aJ'

a

'3 . Measurement Results

It was noted in [5] that with a high spatial resolution of the radar the time char-
acteristics of the mean level of the envelope of the scattered signal E are deter-

mined by the change of the "effective" slope of the irradiated sector of the sea
surface by large sea waves.

1
It is obvious that the principal statistical characteristics of the envelope, de-
termined by the magnitude of the resolved sea surface element D, with identical

conditions of irradiation and reception at several wavelengths, should he iden-
Lical.

Figure 2 shows a sector of a synchronous record of the mean level I? of the enve-
lopes oi the scattered signal at wavelengths A1 - 3. 2 and A2 - 10 cm during sur-
face irradiation toward large sea waves (Fig. ,2a) and along the crests of sea

waves (Fig. 2 ,.b) The upper part of the figure shows the time scale of the record.
rhe period of the marks is 1 sec. In the left part of the figure, by the corres-

punding' 'signalograms," we have shown the scale of the record of the scattered
signal level in relative units. Similar notations have also been adopted for the

subsequent figures. In both signals there is a synchronous low-frequency modula-
lion with a period T54 sec; the "signalograns" are well correlated. The cross-
correlation coefficient varies in the range r - 0. 85-0. 95. With irradiation of

the sea surface along the line of crests the correlation of the fluctuations B

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
weakens. 1n 20-252 of the cases there is no correspondence between the extremal
points of the envelopes. This then leads to a noticeable decrease in the cross-

correlation coefficient.to r - 0.65-0.6 and to a change in the statistical char-
acteristics of the.envelopes.

mum

IxMcn 9-0

:0

-25

”-JL
:3

   
 

Fig. 2.

Table 2 gives the characteristics of the distribution functions for the periods of

fluctuations of the envelope of a signal scattered by the sea surface at radio
waves 3.2 and 10 cm.

I
With the irradiation of the sea surface in the direction toward the wave the char-
acteristics of the envelopes at both radio waves are virtually identical, whereas
with irradiation along the wave crests they differ substantially.

By the use of radar wave-measuring apparatus it is possible to determine quite pre-
cisely both the mean period and the distribution function of the wave periods [5].

Mvr this procedure it is of considerable importance to make a proper choice of the
parameters of the measurement apparatus and measurement conditions.

For example, with irradiation of the sea surface at a glancing angle exceeding
the critical value VQ, 2;S-6‘ there is a marked decrease in the dependence
C7°(“), uhich leads to a decrease in the intensity of amplitude modulation of

the scattered signal. This effect is manifested particularly strongly in the case
of a vertical polarization of the radiation.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l‘SF (INI.\

Table 2
Parameter Toward wave Along crests
A. 3.2 cm 1- 10 cm A - 3.2 cm A'- 10 cu
Mean period T, sec 4.14 4.12 3.7 4.25
Standard deviation 61' sec 1.16 1.14 0.83 1.52
Variation coefficient K1- 0.281 0.278 0.22 0.36

 

Pig. 3.

With a decrease in the glancing angle there is first an increase in the intensity
of modulation of the scattered signal. then a sharp decrease in its absolute val-
u<~ and a shading of lower waves by higher waves, which leads to a difference be-
tween the radar and true relief of the sea surface. In this case the radar re-
ceives signals scattered only on the steepest of the irradiated sea waves.

Figure 3 shows the transformation of the envelope of a signal in the 13-min range
s-rattered by the sea surface, caused by a change in the glancing angle 91. In
the region of angles 5": 0°.lo there is a considerable influence of the consider-
ml effects, leading to the omission of individual sea waves and accordingly a
distortion in the determined characteristics of sea waves. With an increase in
0 the influence of these effects weakens and in the region 9’: 2°.5 is virtually
nut sensed at all.

Table 3 gives a comparison of the parameters of the distribution functions of per-
iuds determined from the corresponding "signalograma" (traces) of the scattered

signal.

With an increase in the glancing angle 9’ there is a decrease in the variation co-
efficient lol- and, accordingly, an increase in the degree of reliability in deter-
mining the mean period of the waves; the distribution curves <p(‘r) acquire

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a small asymmetry and in their shape approach the curves described by a normal
distribution law.

Table 3
Parameter A- 0°.4 1- 0°.8 A- 2°.5
Mean value I sec 5.77 4.64 4.24
Standard deviation 61- sec 5.03 1.67 0.95
Variation coefficient KT 0.871 0.36 0.22
Asymmetry coefficient RT 1.33 1.72 0.94
Excess coefficient E 13.72 3.09 1.52

The determined values 011. and KT with glancing angles 9"? agree satisfactorily
with the results of direct measurements of similar characteristics of sea waves

in the measurement regions [5, 6].

With an increase in the duration of the sounding pulse there is a simultaneous
irradiation of several slopes of sea waves. In this case the characteristics of
the scattered signal are determined by the totality of the "luminescent points"
present in a resolved surface element and the fluctuations of the envelope of
the scattered signal are described by a Rayleigh distribution law [7].

The decrease in the intensity of modulation of the mean level of the scattered
signal occurring in this case precludes the possibilit; of determining the stat-
istical characteristics of the waves.

An analysis of the fine structure of the scattered signal in the case of a plane
polarization of the radiation indicated the presence of powerful, little-fluctuat-
ing bursts of a signal caused by the scattering of radio waves on the crests of
sea waves prior to their collapse [10]. Since the bursts are observed both in

the region of the peak and in the region of a foot of a wave, and their number
varies from 1 to 4 in the period of a large wave, there can he errors in de-
termining the time parameters of such waves. In order to eliminate the influence

of bursts envelope filtering was introduced in such a way as to bring about
this goal [4]. No_differences were observed in the statistical characteristics

of the envelopes E of the scattered signal in the cases of vertical and horizon-
tal polarizations of radiation in the described experiments.

However, in the radar determination of the parameters of the energy-carrying part

of the sea waves in the case of a small glancing angle, due to the energy advan-
tages (6° >>O °rr), it is preferable to use radar systems having a vertical

polarizatggn of radiation.

Conclusion

Investigations of features of radar determination of the time parameters of sea
waves indicated:

1. With assurance of identical conditions for irradiation of the sea surface the
statistical characteristics of the envelope of scattered signals at wavelengths'
)‘1 - 3.2 and 22 - 10 cm coincide well with irradiation toward the sea waves;

33
FOI:0I1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with irradiation of the surface along the line of crests the statistical character-
istics do not coincide.

2. With an increase in the duration of the sounding pulse the dispersion of fluc-
tuations of the mean level of the scattered signal decreases and the fluctuations
acquire a random character, which considerably complicates the problem of deter-

mining the time characteristics of the waves.

3. The proper choice of the glancing angle exerts a great influence on the ac-
curacy in determining the parameters of sea waves. It is preferable to have it
in the range 1.569" 5°.

4. The type of polarization of radiation exerts no significant influence on the
accuracy in determining the statistical parameters of waves, but due to the en-

ergy advantages it is better to use vertical polarization of radiation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. RADIOOKEANOGRAPICHESKIYE ISSLEDJVANIYA MORSKOGO VOLNBNIYA (Radiooceanograph-
ic Investigations of Sea Haves), edited by 5. Ya. Brande, Kiev, Izd-vo AN
UkrSSR, 1962, 116 pages.

2. Rosenberg, A. D., Kalmykov, A. I. and Zel'dis, V. 1., "Backscsttering of
Acoustic waves on Regular Ripples," IZV. VUZov SSSR: RADIOFIZIKA (News of
USSR Institutions of Higher Education), 9, No 2, pp 234-240, 1966.

3. Galayev, Yu. M., Kalmykov, A. 1., Kurekin, A. S., et al., "Radar Detection
of Petroleum Contaminations of the Sea Surface," IZV. AN SSSR: FAD (News of
the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), 13, Mo
4, pp 406-414, 1976.

A. Kalmykov, A. I. and Pustovoytenko, V. V., "Radar Apparatus for Measuring the
Spatial-Temporal Characteristics of Sea Haves," NBKONTAKTNYYB METODY IZMER-
ENIYA OKEANOGRAPICHESKIKH PARAMETROV (Noncontact Methods for Measuring

Oceanographic.Parameters), Moscow, Gidrometeoizdat, pp 27-30, 1977.

5. Zamarayev, B. D., Kalmykov, A. 1., Kireyev, I. V., et al., "Methods for De-
termining the characteristics of Waves by the Radar Method," NBKONTAKTNYYB
METODY IZMERENIYA OKEANOGRAFICHESKIKH PARAMETROV, Moscow, Cidrometeoizdat,
pp 7-16, 1975.

6. Kroneva, L. A., "Statistical Characteristics of Have Elements in the Coastal
Zone of an Abyssal Sea," TRUDY MEI AN SSSR (Transactions of the Marine Hy-

drophysical Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, Vol 23, Moscow, pp 46-65,
1961.

7. Barton, D. and Vard, G., SPRAVOCHNIK P0 RADIOLOKATSIONNYH IZHBRENIYAM (Hand-
book on Radar Measurements), Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1976, 392 pages.

8. Bass, F. 0., Fuks, I. M., Kalmykov, A. 1., Ostrovskiy, I. Ye. and Rosenberg,
A. D., "Very High Frequency Radio Have Scattering by a Disturbed Sea Sur-
face," IBEE TRANS. ANTENNAS, PROPAG., AP-16, No 5, pp 556-565, 1968.

3h
non OFF1C1A1.USI:(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Wright, J. 11., "A New Model for Sea Clutter," IBEB TRANS. ANTENNAS, PROPAG.,
”-16, No 2, pp 217-223, 1968.

10. Kainykov. A. I. and Puatovoytenko, V. V.. “011 Polarization Features of Radio
Signals Scattered From the Sea Surface at Small Grazing Angles," JOURN. 0F
GEOPHYS. RBS., Vol 81. No 12, pp 1960-1966,1976.

3
POI OFFICIASI. USE ONLY
FINI¢JFF1CJAI.USFI(MNLY

EFFECT OF EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION CONDITIONS 0N REMOTE MEASUREMENT or COLOR INDEX
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA caonzru in Russian 1980 pp 1.2-1.6
[Article by V. Ye. Shemshura and 0. V. Martynov]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the effect

of external illumination conditions on the
results of remote measurement of the color
index of the sea. It is shown that the data
obtained by contact and noncontact methods
correlate well. The color index of the sea
is greater in the presence of cloud cover
in comparison with clear weather.

Remote optical methods have recently been considerably developed for investigat-
ing the natural resources of the world ocean which are based on registry of the
spectral brightnesses of radiation emanating from the sea. A knowledge of the
corresponding brightnesses makes it possible to determine parameters making it
possible to estimate the content of substances dissolved and suspended in water,
including those of biological origin. These include the color index of the water
layer, by which is meant. in accordance with the adopted terminology [5], the
ratio of radiation brightness in the green part of the spectrum to the brightness
in the blue part, measured at the nadir under the water-air discontinuity

_ 31 551.0 mu)
5 B1 (1.60 am).

As the color index it is possible to use the ratio of the radiation brightnesses
in other parts of the spectrum, so that in a general case

”3- In -ALL.
J 0'02) (1)

In the Optics Section of the Marine Hvdrnphysical Institute of the Ukrainian
Avudcmv ur Sciences specialists have recently designed an instrument which now

nmlkus it possible to determine the value J' - k J, where k - count. The operat-
ing principle of the instrument and the results of the first investigations were
given in [1]. In remote measurements the registered value will be dependent

primarily on the external illumination conditions.

36
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the purpose of clarifying the influence of this factor on the results of non-
contact measurements of the color index specialists on the 31st voyage of the
scientific research ship "Mikhail Lomonosov" carried out observations with deepen-
ing of an instrument similar to [l] by 5-6 m and then at a height of 3-“ m from
the water surface. It is evident that in the latter case there will be registry

of the value J'sea = kJsea: where
a? (m
.838—

33‘W M)

Jsea

is the color index of the sea, equal to the ratio of the two spectral sea bright-
nesses. For the direction to the nadir we can write

3.9.0) - :5. 3%» + r 34%)), (2)

where ng (A) is the spectral brightness of the sky in the zenith; t and X are

the coefficients of transmission and reflection of light by the water surface re-

spectively (surface free of foam); n is the refractive index. Simultaneously with
' and J'sea there was also registry of the value Jsc' . ngc, where

_ 83421)
”ictiiz)
is the color index of a horizontally'placed white screen isotropically reflecting

solar radiation and sky radiation (Bsc(lk) is the spectral brightness of the
screen), )1 and A2 in the index meter are equal to 568 and 648 nm respectively.

JBC

In order to compare the data obtained with different instruments it is necessary
to normalize the J' and J'ea values to the color index of a standard object, us-
ing a white screen for this purpose. It can be seen that the normalized color

/

-ndices for the water layer and sea, that is, J'ky - J'IJ'SC and Jggz - Jsee
J's“ are equal to the ratio of the corresponding spectral brightness coefficients
ask? - Pap/m A2).
Jsky ' Psea()l)/Psea( A2»

8 ea

(3)

't is known that the spectral brightness coefficients for the water layer, and
accordingly, also their ratio, are dependent in this case only on the primary
hydrooptical characteristics. Table 1 gives the values of the parameters J',
J' Jsky and Jsky obtained at one of the stations during sunny weather and

, I
nfggr asﬁglf-hour when there was a continuous cloud cover. It can be seen that

Ihe normalized color index of the water layer J'ky is not dependent on the ex-
ternal illumination conditions.

Figure 1 shows the dependence of J' on JSkY under different meteorological con-
ditions: from a full sun in a clouafgss sky (0) to continuous low cloud cover
and a sun in the haze (0). There were 32 series of measurements, of which 10 were
in clear weather. The presence of cloud covers of different character lead to a

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considerable scatter of the experimental points. Table 2 gives the correlation co-
efficients rxy' The upper lines in Table 2 correspond to the results obtained in
sunny weather; the lower lines correspond to cloudy weather. The high value of

_the correlation coefficient between J; and Jsky in the case of a clear sun and

a relatively low value of the correlatign coefficient in the presence of a cloud
cover is evidently attributable to the fact that the spectral composition of the
radiation incident on the sea surface in the first case (with a not very low sun)
changes insignificantly, but in the second case was subject to considerable vari-
ations [2], which leads to fluctuations B; a(}), and accordingly. fluctuations

of the color index of the sea. The value of the J' parameter is also dependent

on meteorological conditions: as a rule, it is grgﬁfer when a cloud cover is
present than when there is a clear day. This means that the fraction of green light
in the radiation of the cloudy sky is greater than in the radiation of a clear sky,
since the Jéea measurements were made at the nadir and the direct sunlight reflect-
ed from the sea surface did not enter the instrument field of view. Sun flashes
arising due to the waves were excluded. In actuality, using the data in Table 11.3
from [2] we find that the ratio 3* (568 nm)/B§ky (446 nm) for the cloudy and
clear sky is equal to 0.92 and 0.3gyrespectively.

I
J4 Jsea

 

4/0 410 1'
Fig. 1. Table 1
c v sky
Type of illumination Measurement time J Jsea Jsea Jsky
Sunny 1000 0.092 0.23 0.38 0.15
Continuous clouds 1430 0.075 0.30 0.59 0.15

The dependence of the normalized color index of the sea on the normalized color

index of the water layer as a whole is similar to the functional relationship
Jsea = f(J3kY). The normalization of the Jsea to ch leads to some decrease in the
scatter of points and an increase in the correlation coefficient in comparison

with the data considered earlier. However, the r value for the cloudy sky never-
theless remains low (Table 2).

Accordingly, with the use of an instrument registering radiation of the sea layer
some uncertainty is introduced into the color index. making it impossible to make
full allowance for the spectral composition of skylight reflected from the sea
surface.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIWCJA1.USE‘0NLY

3.1
4;" s .s
I s e .
. s .o g
. s s
a a-
205i .z-. --

l .' - J...

w M 4/: ml".

Fig. 2.
Table 2
Type of dependence rxy
J; - £08k!) 0.972
8:“ a 0.611
Jsez - f(J y) 0.982
0.762
3' - mm) 0.996
0.869

It is interesting to clarify the degree of influence of external illumination con-
ditions on the J' value, measured by the contact method. Figure 2 represents the
dependence of J' on J'ky. Here the rxy values in both cases are quite high. It can

be seen that the color index of the water layer is slightly dependent on the
changes in the spectral composition of the incident radiation, as was denonstrat-
ed earlier in [6].

Conclusions

1. The results of measurements made by contact and noncontact methods correlate
with one another. The numerical value of the correlation coefficient is dependent

on the conditions of external illumination: it is greater in the case of a cloud-
less sky.

2. The values of the normalised color index of the sea 3:2: are greater in the
presence of a cloud cover than during clear weather.

3. The color index of the water layer J' is slightly dependent on the external 11-
lmination conditions.

The results obtained in this study are of a pralininary character since the inves-
tigations were made in regions of the Atlantic Ocean characterised by a high '

transparency [3] and a low biological productivity (the concentration of‘chloro—
phyll "a" in the upper layer of the ocean is s; 0.2 mg/m3). In the future, for a
more complete analysis, it is necessary to carry out such measurements in waters
with a high level of the light attenuation index and biological productivity.

39
FOR‘OFFICJAI.USE(NNLY
1.

2.

3C

4.

5‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Li, H. Ye. and Hartynov, 0. V., "Sone Results of Investigations of the Color
Index in the Sea," HORSKIYB GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSIJEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophys-

ical Investigation), No 1, Sevastopol', Izd-vo “61 AN UkrSSR, pp 133-138,
1976.

Senenchenko, I. V., "See Brightness," PRIHBNBNIYB AERWB‘I'ODOV DLYA ISSLEDOVAN—
IYA HORYA (Application of Aerial Methods for Investigating the Sea), Moscow-
Leningrad, Izd-vo AN 38311, p 15, 1963.

Voskresenskiy, V. N., Hertynov, 0. V. and Shemurs, V. Ye., “Nydroopticsl In-
vestigations During the 31st Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Hikhail
Lononosov',” NORSKIYE GIDROPIZICHBSKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, No_2, Sevascopol',
Izd-vo HGI AN UkrSSR, pp 180-186, 1974.

Neuynin, G. 6., Solov'yev, H. V. and Martynov, 0. V., "Sane Results of Measure-
ments of the Color Index of Waters of Different Regions in the World Ocean,"
OPTICHESKIYE HETODY IZUC’HENIYA OKEANOV I VNUTRENNIKH VOW (Optical Meth-
ods for Studying the Oceans and Internal Hater Bodies), Novosibirsk, "Nauka,"
pp 27-33, 1979. -

Clarke, 6. l.., Ewing, G. C. and lorenzen, D. J., "Remote Measurements of Ocean

Color as an Index of Biological Productivity," PROC. 01’ VI SYMPOSIIH 0N 8.191013
SENSING OF ENVIRONMENT, Univ. of Michigan, Oct 69.

non omcﬂ’n. USE ONLY
FOI¢0FFIJA1.UBE(”NLY

INVESTIGATION OF THE ICE COVER OF SEAS PROM AIIIFICIAL EARTH SATELLITBS
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKAYA GIDROPIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 47-57

[Article by A. V. Bushuyev]

[Text] Abstract: The article describes the character-
istics of the ice cover, which can be determined
from television photographs of artificial earth
satellites, and also methods for finding the
boundaries of zones of different compaction
and ice drift vectors. The effectiveness of use
of the analytical method for studying the ice
cover and supporting the navigation of ships de-
veloped at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute is demonstrated. Also consid-
ered are the prospects for further improvement
of methods for obtaining and processing satel-
lite information from ice cover observations.

From the moment of launching of the first meteorological artificial earth satel-
lites it became obvious that they can be an effective means for studying not only
meteorological elements, but also sea ice. Already in 1968 the first satellite maps
of ice distribution in Antarctica were compiled and satellite photographs came into
regular use for refining and supplementing ice maps compiled on the basis of data
from aircraft ice reconnaissance [3].

In the initial stage only frame TV systems which made a survey in the visible range
were used for ice observations. Artificial earth satellites are outfitted with
scanning systems which are used in a survey in the blue or several spectral ranges
and have a higher resolution and constant light distribution over the frame field,
as a result of which the photographs have measurement properties.

The collection of information in the visible range (TV information) is possible
when the survey region is adequately illuminated by the sum. Such a survey is us-
ed for ice observations in arctic seas from March through October, in Antarctica
-- from September through April.

Hith development of remote sensing techniques it was possible to obtain images of

the earth's surface in the IR (8-12,;m) and microwave or SR? (0.8-3.0 cm) spectral
ranges of electromagnetic waves.

F0.‘0FFI3A1.U8E¢MNLY
INII'UIFICJAI.IEHSC”NLY

Thermal IR radiation is almost not dependent on illumination, but for the detection
of sea ice it is necessary that there be an adequate temperature contrast between
surface ice fields and open water. Since in summer such a contrast is virtually
absent, IR information can be used for ice observations only during winter.

Instruments for the registry of the natural radiation of underlying surfaces in
the microwave part of the spectrum (passive SIP sensors) make it possible to
carry out observations regardless of meteorological conditions and illumination.
This is a substantial advantage of such instruments, but in actual practice ex-
tensive use is made of instruments operating in the visible range, since the
photographs taken with such instruments most precisely transmit the desired in-
formation on the parameters of the ice cover.

The data obtained on ice conditions obtained as a result of the processing of
space videoinformation at sea should be represented in the form of maps at a
stipulated scale and in a stipulated projection. The principal processes used in
the compilation of ice mapsare interpretation and geographic tie-in. By the term
interpretation of sea ice is meant the recognition of different ice features and
determination of the characteristics [4, 8, ll] of the ice cover as a whole.

In order to identify the image peculiarities on a television photograph of a spe-
cific sector of the ice cover with its characteristics it is necessary to have
data on characteristic "stander " sectors. The observations in such polygons,
including radar observations and aerial photographs and other types of remote
sensing, as well as a broad complex of on-ice observations, including with the
use of diving techniques, are being systematically carried out by the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute on the drifting ice in the Arctic Ocean.

The institute has developed a system of interpretation criteria and the possibil-
ities of determination of the characteristics of the ice cover were evaluated on
the basis of its image on the television photographs. Using TV photographs with a
resolution of 1-2 km on the ground. taken in the absence of a cloud cover. it is
possible to determine the compaction of ice in the range of the principal grads-
tions (9-10, 7-8, 4-5, and sometimes also 1-3 scale units), the position of boun-
daries of zones of different compaction, individual ice fields greater than k km
across, channels and leads wider than 0.5-1.0 km. As a result of simultaneous
scanning of the entire sea area the photographs of artificial earth satellites
make it possible to detect a complex pattern of ice distribution, inevitably sim-
plified with the interpolation of conditions between aerial ice reconnaissance
flight lines, to register a system of main channels and leads, to determine the
position and configuration of gigantic ice fields.

The most valuable data can be obtained on the dynamics of ice. If the distribution
of ice has been established by aerial ice reconnaissance, information on drift
was limited to data from two or three drifting stations and data from individual

runs obtained as a result of repeated aerial photographic surveys in individual
straits and in the coastal sectors of the seas.

With the appearance of satellites whose scanning radiometers have the above-men-

tioned resolution, it became possible to determine the drift field within the
limits of the entire sea.

HOI‘OFFKJAI.U§E(MVLY
The plotting of the boundaries of zones with different ice compaction in the com-
pilation of ice maps and the investigation of ice dynamics require a high accur-
acy in geographic tie-in, by which is meant determination of the position on the
earth's surface (and accordingly, on any map) of the features interpreted on the
photograph. Since space photographs cover extensive sectors of the earth's sur--
face (which leads to a need for taking into account the earth's curvature and
the variable scale of the maps) and due to the peculiarities in obtaining images
with scanning systaxs, the transformation of satellite photographs into a stip-
ulated projection requires nonlinear transformations. Such a transformation is
accomplished most precisely by the analytical method with use of digital comput-
era.

The geographic tie-in of IV photographs when they are used for ice and meteorolog-
ical observations was accomplished by a graphic method [5, 7, 10]. Due to the

low accuracy, in this case it was possible to compile only small-scale general ice
naps (1:10,000,000 or smaller); there was virtually no possibility of determin-
ing the ice drift vectors.

During recent years specialists at the Arctic and Antarctic Institute have devel-
oped and introduced a method which provides for the analytical transformation of
coordinates not for all photograph elanents. but only for individual points (the
turning points of ice boundaries, individual ice fields). The process of geograph-
ic tie-in in such cases includes three principal stages: measurement of the coor-
dinates of points on the photograph and the input of data into a computer, analyt-
ical transformation of the measured coordinates and output in digital or graphic
form. In the processing scheae the input units were photogralnetric instruments
for measuring the rectangular coordinates of the photographs; the data output
units are curve plotters and a printout unit. In the future this will make it pos—

sible to introduce the analytical method at most autononous data reception sta-
tions.

It is desirable that the processing systea be developed on the basis of a mini-
computer (an "Iskra-IZS" keyboard electronic computer is used at the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute [9]), but it is also possible to employ
large universal computers ("Minsk-22." "Minsk-32" and others).

Among the most important features of the algorithm for solution of this problem
is that it can be solved using the fortunes of spherical trigonometry without the
introduction of an internediate geodetic coordinate system; the coordinates of
the control points are coaputed after simultaneous measurement (on a stereophoto-
grannetric instruaent) of the coordinates of photograph points and the corres-
pond ing points on the nap diapoeitive; the correction equation along each coordin-

ate axis is a first-degree polynomial.

The data obtained as a result of the processing of a single photograph are ready
for output to a curve plotter (Fig. 1) and for transmission to users in the form
of telegrams (the geographic coordinates of the turning points of ice boundaries).
The developed method provides for the possibility of joint processing of a pair of
photographs for determining the drift vectors during the period between photo-
graphic surveys (Fig. 2,a).

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
INDR'OFFICIAI.1EIB(HHLY

The results of the calculations, in addition to output to the digital printout
unit, are simultaneously registered on the magnetic tape in a cassette. which
makes it possible to carry out further processing (Pig. 2.b).

The analytic geographic tie-in method was developed in 1975 and was used for the
first time on an expedition aboard the scientific research ship "Mikhail Somov"

in May-June 1976. Experience has shown that for the direct support of ship navi-
gation, in addition to the maximum possible accuracy, there must also be a maxi-
mum detail of map representation of individual fields, channels, leads, ice ac-

cumulations and spots.

Due to the impossibility of an analytical determination of coordinates of the
necessary number of points a detailed representation of ice conditions to a con-
siderable degree is impossible. Taking this into account, a method for combined
analytical and optical-mechanical processing of TV photographs of the "Meteor-2"
artificial earth satellite was developed [2]. This method involves essentially
the following: some of the photograph, depicting the navigation region, is brok-
en down into a grid of squares of limited area (or rectangular grid units) and the
geographical and rectangular (on a map of a given scale) coordinates of their cor-
ners are determined analytically. Using these data a grid of quadrilaterals is
constructed on a blank map, after which the photograph is projected by elemen-
tary areas onto the map. In order to exclude the transformation process within
the limits of each quadrilateral there has been a modernization of the "Neva"

FPVP phototelegraphic apparatus, ensuring an approximate reduction of the photo-
graphs to a near-horizontal form.

It has been established that such a combined method, retaining the accuracy of ana-
lytical tie-in, makes it possible to represent far more details of structure of

the ice cover. In order to make use of all the information available on the pho-
tograph we also developed a method for determining the position of the ship di-
rectly on a satellite photograph, which is accomplished using the main program

for a geographic tie-in by the successive approximations method.

The relatively high resolution of the new Soviet artificial earth satellites of
the "Meteor-2" type. their operation in a direct transmission regime, and the
practical introduction of the methods for interpreting and processing of satel-
lite videoinformation developed at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research
Institute have substantially increased the possibility and effectiveness or use
of the latter both for the study of the ice regime of the seas and for routine
support of the navigation of ships.

Under favorable meteorological conditions, using satellite photographs it is pos-
sible to compile maps of the distribution of ice by degree of compactness, which
with respect to detail and accuracy are not inferior to maps prepared on the ba-
sis of aerial ice reconnaissance. There are great possibilities for using these
photographs for investigating the parameters characterizing ice dynamics (dis-
placement of the boundaries and edges, drift of individual components of the ice

cover, formation of polynias, channels and thinnings, breaking off of shore ice,
formation and breakup of ice concentrations, spots and bands).

hh
IIIICHWﬂtlAI.USIICNULY
Fig. 2a. Map of ice drift vectors.

A further increase in the role of satellite ice observations involves an improve-
ment of instrumentation and methods for remote sensing from space. deans for the
processing and interpretation of data.

The principal direction in improvement of instrumentation is an increase in the
accuracy of the measured parameters of electromagnetic fields and the spatial-
temporal resolution of multispectral measurements in the visible, IR and micro-
wave spectral regions. Emphasis must be on the microwave range, observations in

FOR‘OFFHﬂga.USE(IVLY
FOR (WI-1"“ I'Sl'.‘ ONIA

2): ﬂoacprellln
av \\ E petropaoro noun
‘ l
|

 

 

 

Pig. 2,b. Field of

drift at points of
intersection of a

,ular grid and map of

divergence of current
velocities.

KEY:

reg-

1) Ice edge
2) Divergence of

vector field of
drift velocity
F!II(INWCJAL USI!(MVLV

only with the low resolution of videoinlormation. Thus, on the basis of photographs
from the SH? scanning radiometer on the American "Nimbus-5" artificial earth sat-

ellite [13], operating in the range of wavelengths 1.55 cm and having a resolution
at the nadir of about 30 km, for practical purposes it is possible to make a reli-

ter which it loses operational significance and can be employed only for research
purposes. According to established practice, ice information must he sent to the
direct user - the director of sea operations or ship's captain - several hours
after a survey has been made. Accordingly, in the future everything possible must
be done to develop a system for direct radio transmissions from satellites to
autonomous simplified data reception stations servicing individual users [6).

boundaries of the zones. The subsequent determination of ice compactness within the
limits of the zones and construction of histograms of distribution of ice fields by
extent will be accomplished automatically. ‘
I'OK WORML i130. ONLY

However, in the future satellite ice observations cannot replace all the remain-
ing types of observations. In satellite observations it is impossible to deter-
mine the age of hummocking, form and destruction of the ice cover. It is evident
that for investigation of macro-, meso- and microprocesses in the ice cover ob-
servations must be carried out in all spectral ranges of electromagnetic waves
and at all levels, including satellites, aircraft, ships and direct observations
on the ice.

Taking this into account, specialists at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Re-
search Institute have developed a structural scheme and have initiated studies
for the creation of a complex system of an automated type whose subsystems en-
sure the collection of ice information, input, storage and subsequent process-
ing, tie-in of different kinds of flows of data, output in a form suitable for
computer analysis and routine use, preparation of numerical short-range and long-
range ice forecasts, archival storage of data, search and output [1].

In this system satellite ice observations will be used for mapping the distribu-
tion and dynamic state of the ice within the limits of individual seas and the
hemisphere as a whole. Data from aerial and shipboard observations will-then

be plotted on these very same maps, which makes it possible to combine the
breadth of scanning of satellite photographs with the completeness and detail of
ice characteristics on ice aerial reconnaissance maps. The determination of drift
vectors from artificial earth satellite photographs will make it possible to ac-
cumulate data on the age composition, form, hummocking and degree of destruction
of the ice cover.

Even adequately modern measurement complexes cannot provide all the necessary in-
formation concerning the state of the ice cover with the spatial and temporal de-
tail required for practical work. Accordingly, the computation and forecasting
subsystem is of great importance in the created automated ice-information system
for the Arctic (ALISA). The task of this subsystem is as follows:

1) daily computation of the spatial distribution of highly important characteris-
tics of the ice cover: thickness, compactness, hummocking, degree of destruction,
intensity of compression, etc.;

2) correction of the results of computations by data received from the subsystem
for the collection of ice-hydrological information;

3) formulation of ice forecasts for differont times in advance.

Since the matching of the results of computations with observational data will oc-
cupy an important place in the ALISA system, the problem of developing an effec-
tive correction method must be devoted great attention. It is assumed that the
basis for this method will be the principles of modeling of deformations of sur-
faces developed at the Institute of Data Transmission Problems (IPPI, AN SSSR).

The ALISA is being created on the basis of and with the use of the experience with
the existing system for scientific-operational support of navigation. Here satel-
lite observations have been assigned an extremely great and very definite place.

1:8
FOIIOFIICLALIJSEINNLY
Hith the development and inprovenent of technology and methods for remte sens-
ing from space the role and importance of observations from artificial earth sat-
ellites will be increased still more.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Rushuyev, A. V., Volkov, N. A., Gudkovich, Z. M., et al., "Automated Ice-Infor-
mation System for the Arctic (ALISA)," TRUDY AANII (‘h'ansactions of the Arc-
tic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute), Vol 343, Leningrad, pp 8-18,
1977.

2. Bushuyev, A. V.. "Use of Satellite Information in Studying the Ice Regine of
Seas and Support of Ship Navigation," I S'WEZD SOVB'ISIIKH OKEANOLOGOV. TBZISY
DOKLADOV (First Congress of Soviet Oceanologists. Smaries of Reports), No 1,
Moscow, "Naulca," 1977, 181 pages.

3. Bushuyev, A. V. and Volkov, N. A., 'Meteorological Artificial Barth Satellites
as a Means for Observing Ice," PROBLEMY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI (Problems of the
Arctic and Antarctic), No 33, pp 5-12, 1970.

lo. Bushuyev, A. V., Volkov, N. A. and Loshilov, V. 0., ATLAS LEOVYICH OBRAZOVANIY
(Atlas of Ice Formations), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1974, 140 pages.

5. Bushuyev, A. V. and Novikov, Yu. R., METODICRESKIYE UKAZANIYA P0 VOPROSAM
OBRAMKI I ISPOL'ZOVANIYA SPUTNIKOVOY LEDOVOY INFORMATSII (Methodological.
Instructions on the Problems of Processing and Use of Satellite Ice Informa-
tion), Leningrad, AANII, 19710, 810 pages.

6. Vetlov, I. P., "Results of Investigations in the Field of Satellite Meteorol-
ogy," PROBLEMY SOVRDGNNOY GIDROMETEOROLOGII (Problems in Modern Hydrometeor-
olOgy). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, pp 145-166, 1977.

'7. German, M. A., SPUTNIKOVAYA METEOROLOGIYA (Satellite Meteorology), Leningrad,
Gidrometeoizdat, 1975, 367 pages.

8. Yegorov, N. 1., FIZICNBSKAYA OKEANOGRAFIYA (Physical Oceanography). Leningrad,
Cidroneteoizdat, 1971:, 655 pages.

9. Butrin. V. P., Nakul'tsev, G. 8., Bogatyr', B. N. and Novikov, Yu. R., "Con-
plex of Technical Instrumentation for the Collection and Processing of Hydro-
mctcorological Information (KTS ASOGI)." AWA‘IIZATSIYA SBORA I OBRABO‘I'KI
GlDROME‘l'mROL. INFORM. (Automation of Collection and Processing of Hydro-
meteorological Information), 8, Obninak, VNIGMI MTsD, pp 3-8.

10. Leont'yeva, A. V. and Nayshuller, M. 0., ISPOL'ZOVANIYB TELEVIZIONNYKH I
INFRAKRASNYKH SNIMROV V PROGNOSTICHESKIKH ORGANAKH SLUZHBY POGODY (Use of
Television and Infrared Photographs in Pragmatic Agencies of the Weather
Service), Moscow, GMTs, 1969, 39 pages.

I;
momztmouu
FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE(HHLY

11. NOMENKLATURA MORSKIKB L'DOV. USLOVNYYB OBOZNACHENIYA DLYA LEDOVYKB KART
(Nomenclature of Sea Ice. Symbols for Ice Charts), Leningrad, Gidrometeoiz-
dat, 1976, 140 pages.

12. Gloerson, P., Campbell, w. J., Ramsier, R., et al., "Beaufort Sea Ice Zones
by Means of Microwave Imagery," x—91o-so, Goddard Space !light Center, Green-
belt. Maryland, April 1975, p 17.

13. Cloeraon. P., et a1., "Microwave Maps of the Polar Ice of the Earth," BULLE-

TIN OF THE AMERICAN METEOROLOGICAL SOCIETY, Vol 55, No 12, pp 1442-1458,
197‘.

FOI40FHKJA1.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ASSIMILATION 0P SATELLITE DATA IN NUMERICAL MODELS 0? OCEAN DYNAMICS '
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 58-66
[Article by I. Ye. Timchenko, V. D. Ysrin and I. c. Protsenko]

[Text] Abstract: A method is proposed for the
adjustment of remote measurements of
ocean level and contact measurements of
the density field. It is based on use
of a dynamic-stochastic model of state
of the ocean. The article gives the re-
sults of use of this method for the
"POLYMODE" polygon in simulating meas-
urements of the level surface from space.
The method of assimilation of satellite
data is promising for organizing monitor—
ing of state of the ocean.

Remote observation methods make it possible to obtain virtually simultaneous data
on the state of the ocean surface over great areas. Together with contact measure-
ments made from aboard scientific research ships or on autonomous stations, satel-
lite measurements make it possible to trace the evolution of the principal ocean
parameters. Accordingly, it is necessary to develop methods for the assimilation
of satellite observations in theoretical models of the ocean, which, applying
data relating to the upper layer, make it possible to compute the characteristics
of deep layers in the ocean.

One of the possible approaches here is dynamic-stochastic modeling based on the
theory of optimum filtering of systems with distributed parameters [1] and suc-
cessfully developed at the present time both in meteorology [2] and in oceanology
[3]. The basis for such an approach is a description of the physical processes
transpiring in the ocean using variable states. The problem is an optimum evalua-
tion of the vector of state at an arbitrary moment in time, taking into account
ongoing measurements of some components of the vector of state. The method has been
described in adequate detail, for example, in [3, 4]. Here we will cite only a sum-
mary of the formulas necessary for further exposition.

Assume that the evolution of the vector of state 7i(§:t) is described by the equa-
tion

51
INMIOFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

77W 5 =4,- {RIP/(3")-

where L? is a linearized integrodifferential operator; f(x, t) is a random term of
the "wh te" noise type -- a probabilistic model of microscale phenomena, not taken
into account in explicit form by the operator 1.3;. With respect to f(x,t) we will

assume that
4/012 )}-0. [Mao/127:." MW. 0 «2-2).

Applying the operation of taking the mathematical expectation conditional relative
to all past observations to expression (1). we obtain an equation for the optimum

evaluation
w- -4,£1.z(;r, 1)}. (2)

Henceforth the conditional mathematical expectation (optimum evaluation) with re-
spect to past data will be denoted atom t), and with respect to ongoing observ-
ations -- «C(x, t).

(1)

The covariation matrix of the error in the evaluation Pto(x,y,t) satisfies the

equation J (Y?!) -- -
Ldg"'° ' 413.1% )tlyl? Maﬁa-45.921). (3)

The optimum evaluation of the vector; of state is computed using the formula
oz; (I; 0-“. (r, 2) Z 4‘, (zaps; (i’,,e)-a2’,'(i;,:)], (,0

It!
wherezk is the vector of measurements at the point x k; Ak(x. t) is a weighting
function; No is the number of points at which there are observations. In a general
case

A (131)-; am, 0.5420152»; (a), (S)

where g is the kernel of spatial averaging, ”k is measurement noise. The weight-

ing function Zk(x.t) is determined from the expression

.. - o! ' -
4,090.22“ 2 gamma;- My, (6)
m
where k is a matrix formed from the elements
owl] 2512'. Luci-7. 2/5, ’2'. a"! )dzawp, . a)
‘2'?

K"1 15 the inverse matrix.

After assimilation of ongoing meas-arements the covariation matrix of the error in
evaluation is corrected in accordance with the formula

52
roa OFFICIAL use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' I
A: (7.2 mean) .2507: 3; m2: )4; (7,7;- 4?. (8)

(I!

In an investigation of physical processes on a synoptic scale we use as a point of
departure the following system of equations in thermohydrodynamics of the ocean

[S]:

continuity equation for an incompressible fluid

du JV 6'}!
”*W-. l -”, _ (9)
equations of motion
a“. g. ’2‘. da Id a da
:77 “0x "a; ”27"“,"97 2977922744“. ‘10)
3. zip" JV. dv lip 0' JV
a: “a: “3'; ”32 ”"977? ﬂarﬂw. ”1’
equation of statics
J
7? 99, (12)

density diffusion equation
We will use the following boundary conditions:
at the ocean surface with z - -51(x,y,t)

da_ . __ _ ._/ _
909177--§‘3"V’dz= 7"” \dt o’x V07 ’

10,-1.3, ’ gé-ef ' (14)
at the ocean floor with z - H(x,y)
”Vs—"7'77 P '9,“ - (15)
at the fluid lateral boundaries
[r- bound] «4,214,. v,. 9],.9, . (16)

In equations (9)-(l3) and the boundary conditions (lid-(16) u, v, w are the pro-
jections of the velocity vector onto Cartesian coordinates —- the x-, y-, z- coor-
dinates in the direction to the east. north and center of the earth respectively,
vz. Jx, xx. xx are the coefficients of turbulent exchange and diffusion; p1 is
pressure; 3 is the acceleration of gravity; P, [)0 are the anomaly and mean den-
sity of water; L is the Coriolis parameter; pa is atmospheric pressure; 1x, Q,

are wind shearing stresses.

At the initial moment in time the desired functions 2, u. v, V2, 3‘2, P are known.
After integration of the equation of statics (12) with the b0undary condition (14)

the expression for the pressure anomaly has the form

FOR OFFlca USE ONLY
FUR Oﬂ'ICIAL USE ONLY

I
’-9..et'—.e § ydz.

where 2* is the adynamic increment to the level surface of the ocean. Adhering to
the method presented in [8], for the integral function Z * we write a second-degree
c-tpﬁlllun wlth the boundary «.ondltions of the oblique derivatives type. In determin-
ing the coefficients of vertical exchange and diffusion use is made of the formula

[7]
__ e I 133 2 air I I 4! ck
’2 (‘4) (”Mag“) ,9, 7}) '
where c is a proportionality constant; h is the depth of the homogeneous layer.

The system of differential equations closed in this way is solved numerically by
the finite differences method with a second order of approximation in space coor-
dinates [A].

The system of equations (9)-(l3) is too complex, which leads to great difficulties
of a technical nature in attempts to compute the covariation matrix of forecasting
errors in accordance with equation (3). Accordingly, we will attempt to simplify
the problem. The decisive factor in computing currents is the density field, on
the basis of whose known values it is possible to determine other characteristics
of state of the ocean. As a first approximation, in equation (3) we leave only one

component f56’of the covariation matrix of errors - the covaristion function of
the error in predicting the density field.

The corresponding equation has the form

ﬁ‘ﬁa’dlp V’gy,w w’d gmgﬁvﬁewzgc-ad— 2' 44% (17)
‘4442734 géwejo uh... (awoken-u

The covariation of the prediction error is a function of six independent variables.
Due to this circumstance in the numerical solution of equation (17) it is neces-
sary to have a large computer memory. In order to avoid this difficulty, the auth-
ors of [4, 8] proposed an approximation of the correlation function of errors in

predicting the density field taking into account the stratification of the field
with depth. Here we will approximate the covariation function by the expression

”(1.1. Arty: z'. 040', v, z . t) f(r.’y:z: t )5” “iffh‘my‘m (18)

where F is the 2standard deviation of the error in evaluating the density field.
Then for d - F2 (x, y, z, t) we obtain the equation

‘1
'32?! “5": VJJE’WBI— *‘4‘ar-Gvdz—H'x4d‘

3”,?— «43—01—7144.

where c - const, dependent on C11 and 0‘2.

(19)

In the future the creation of operational systems for remote sounding of the ocean
is expected. These will give information on such parameters of the upper layer as
temperature of the ocean surface, salinity, air temperature in the near-water

FOR OFFICﬂ‘L USE ONLY
FTMI()FINCJAI.USIZ(NQLV

layer, wind velocity and direction, level, etc. These characteristics give an eval-
uation of state of the ocean surface and can be used as boundary conditions in
models of interaction between the ocean and atmosphere [7]. By means of use of the
corresponding hydrodynamic models of the ocean they can be used for refining its
state in the deep layers.

Measurements of the level surface are of particular interest because at each point
the level rise carries information on the density field in the entire thickness of
the ocean. Remote measurements of level, like measurement of other surface para-
meters, must be assimilated into the numerical model of dynamics of the ocean
simultaneously with contact measurements. In order to organize the input of satel-
lite data into the numerical model it is necessary to solve the problem of statis-
tical adjustment of satellite and contact observations and ensure successive anal-
ysis of the data in the real time of the experiment [3]. Taking into account the
general requirements on the assimilation of satellite information, we will examine
a specific example -- assimilation of the ocean level surface profile, measured
from a satellite along its trajectory of motion.

In order to assimilate level measurements in a dynamic-stochastic model of state
of the ocean we will make use of the circumstance that with some approximation
the level surface can be represented in the form of a simple formula [6]. [Note:
formula illegible.] Then the covariation function of the error in evaluation is
determined by the expression

‘ Ill
.0 21:17)”? a ,o‘fsz, z ' )lzdz :(ljﬁ-(u, x15”). (21)

0

The assimilation of data on the level surface is broken down into two stages.

First, using equation (19) and formula (18), we will determine the covariation func-
tion of the error in evaluating the density field, from which, using (21) it is pos-
sible to compute Pt 2(x, x', y, y'). Then, using the relationships ((0) and (8) (in
which “-18 replaceagle by a ), we will assimilate the level at each point of a
numerical grid on the surface. The covariation of error after assimilation is de-
termined by formula (8).

In the second stage the refined level values are used for introducing corrections
into the prognostic values for the density field. The level surface readings are
regarded as weighted density measurements in accordance with expression (5). In
this case nk(t) represents the errors in evaluating the level. Then the weighting
function for the nonclosures in computing the level surface assumes the form

, .

.‘I.’ (2,}, z,z')'dz’
40.312)-

. f
00

or with allowance for representation of the covariation function of the error in
predicting density (18)

      
   

(22)
9 I I - +k
,0“ (7,21,: )dzd: k3, ,

F0R40FFK§il.USE(MNLY
F1)R OFFICIAI.IESEZ(MVLY

e ": [047‘047‘1 S'ro, y, z ) IQ: I, .v: z ') 1‘4"")‘4’2 ’
a (f. 7, z)- ____L._————————

II
I): R
dzdz' m; *
1:! '

' (23)
jg for, I. z)‘/(x:.r: 2') e‘ “ ""

Model computations were carried out as an illustration of the proposed approach.
The initial data were materials from hydrological surveys carried out under the
"POLYHODB" program. One of the surveys was used as the initial distribution of

the density field. In accordance with the system (9)-(l3) we computed the prognos—
tic fields for a time corresponding to the final moment of carrying out the next
survey. Due to the absence of remote level measurements over the area of the
"POLYHODB" polygon these measurements were modeled on an electronic computer. The
"true" data employed were the fields obtained on the basis of the results of the
last survey, by means of which we simulated the data from remote observations and
evaluated the accuracy of their assimilation.

 

Fig. 1.

The region in which the computations were made is shown as a rectangle between
27 and 30°N and 68 and 72°H. Observations were made at the points of intersection
of a square grid with an interval of 34 miles. The interval of the computation

grid was 17 miles.

Figure l,a is a map of the level surface obtained using a purely hydrodynamic pre-
diction; Pig. l,b is a refined map prepared as a result of assimilation of remote

observations of level relief along paths 1 and 11; Fig. l,c shows the "true" level
surface. Similar maps for the density field at the 600-m horizon are shown in Fig.
2.

As indicated in Figures l,c and 2,c, in the right part of the polygon there was an
eddy formation which was traced both in the level surface field and in the density
field. It was of interest to determine the influence of remote level measurements
on the "resolution" of such field characteristics by the model.

36
FOR om Al. USE ONLY
zz’u.’ ' zlfu' - 29's)"

27 '13" 28°6J’ 1.9 ‘51’

Pig. 3. Fig. 1..

A comparison of Fig. l,a and Pig. l,c, as well as Fig. 2,a and 2,c,c1ear1y shows
that a purely hydrodynamic prediction, by virtue of imperfection of the model,
differs considerably from the "true" field pattern. Assimilation of the level meas-
urements along the two paths intersecting the area of the polygon connects the lev-

el surface field, and what is especially important. the density field with depth.

Figure 3 shows a curve of the change (along the meridian) of the mean square error
in a hydrodynamic prediction (dashed curve) and a corrected field (solid curve),
normalized to the standard deviation. The corresponding curve for density is shown
in Pig. a.

It follows from this experiment that satellite data on the level surface of the
ocean considerably supplement the information contained in the density surveys in
the polygon. This is especially important for creating operational systems for
tracking the states of the ocean in the investigated regions. Density surveys carr-

ied out from aboard scientific research ships frequently are suspended for tech-
nical reasons (replacement of ships in the polygon, bad weather. etc.).

FOI:0IFICJA1.USEINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without employing the additional information arriving from satellites the pattern
of evolution of oceanic fields in the polygon during these periods of time will be
impaired. Accordingly. the proposed method for the assimilation of satellite data
is promising for organizing monitoring of state of the ocean.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Butkovskiy, A. 6., MY UPRAVLBNIYA SISTMI S RASPREDELENNYHI PARAMETRAHI
(Methods for Control of Systems With Distributed Parameters), Moscow, "Nauka,"

1975, 568 pages.

2. Gandin, L. 8., CHBTYREKHHERNYY ANALIZ METEOROLOGICHBSKIKH FOLEY (Pour-Dimension-
al Analysis of Meteorological Fields), leningrad, Gidroaeteoizdat, 1976, 61

pages.

3. Nelepo, B. A. and Timchenko, I. Ye., SISTEMNYYB PRINTSIPY AMALIZA MABLYUDENIY
V OKEANE (Systemic Principles for Analysis of Observations in the Ocean),
Kiev, "Nauka Dumka," 1978, 222 pages.

4. Timchenko, I. Ye.. Knysh, V. V., Protsenko. I. G. and Yarin, V. 0., "Dynamic-
Stochastic Model for Processing Density Surveys in the Ocean," MORSKIYE
CIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Sea Hydrophysical Investigations), No 4,
chustopol'. pp 50-64, 1979.

S. Kochergin, V. P., TBORIYA I HETODY RASCHEIA OKBANICHBSKIKH TECﬂENIY (Theory and
Methods for Cbnputing Ocean Currents), Moscow, "Nauka," 1978, 127 pages.

6. Snrkisyan, A. 5., CHISLBNNYY ANALIZ I PROGNOZ HORSKIKB TECHENIY (Numerical An-
alysis and Prediction of Sea Currents), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1977, 181

pages.

7. Kochergin, V. P., Klimok, V. I. and Sukhorukov, V. A., "Homogeneous Layer of
the Ocean Within the Framework of 'Differential Models'," CHISLENNYYE MBTODY
NEKHANIKI SPLOSMNOY SREDY (Numerical Methods of Mechanics of a Continuous
Hedium). Vol 8, No 5, Novosibirsk, 30 AN SSSR, pp 102-114. 1977.

8. Protsenko, I. 0., Timchenko, I. Ye. and Yarin, V. 0., "Method for Predicting
the Statistical Characteristics of the Field of a Passive Impurity," MORSKIYB

GIDROFIZICHBSKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophysical Investigations), No 4,
Sevastopol', pp 98-106, 1979.

8
FOR omcat USE ONLY
HULTISPECTRAL METHOD FOR DETERMINING OCEAN SURFACE TEMPERATURE
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GEOFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 67-74
[Article by V. A. Golovko and L. A. Pakhomov]

[Text] Abstract: The authors propose a method
for choosing an optimum scheme for mul-
tichannel IR radiometric measurements
making it possible, to a considerable
extent, to compensate the error in re-
mote determination of the temperature
of a water surface caused by the trans-
formation of IR radiation in the atmo-
sphere. The article gives examples of
experimental checking of the proposed
schemes.

The remote determination of the temperature of the underlying surface on the basis
of measurements of outgoing IR radiation in the atmospheric transparency window
8-14Lim still remains one of the principal types of satellite observations. Data
on t e thermal regime of the surface of oceans and seas are of the greatest inter-
est because the world ocean for the most part determines climatic conditions.

Despite the great experience in such observations, for the time being the required
measurement accuracy has not been attained. The standard (mean square) error in
reconstructing the temperature of the water surface is about 3' [1, 2], whereas
for most problems in oceanology and investigation of the earth's natural resources
there must be an accuracy of about 0.2° [3]. The relatively low accuracy in recon-
structing the temperature field is attributable primarily to the transformation

of IR radiation in the atmosphere.

The influence of the atmosphere under cloudless conditions is manifested, on the
one hand, in an attenuation of radiation of the underlying surface, and on the
other hand, in the attenuation of radiation generated by the atmosphere. As a
rule, allowance for the influence of the atmosphere is accomplished by introduc-
ing the so-celled atmospheric transfer function, to whose computation a great num-
ber of studies have been devoted, such as [4-7]. However, the considerable vari-
ability of the transfer function does not make possible an adequate introduction

. of corrections for radiation transformation in the atmosphere even by the crea-
tion of detailed maps of the geographical distribution of transfer functions for

FIN!(MHH(£§1.IEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

different seasons. Accordingly, when using determined approaches to allowance
for the influence of the atmosphere it is scarcely possible to expect a signif-
icant increase in the accuracy in determining water surface temperature.

Accordingly, it may be more effective to employ methods at whose basis is the
determination of empirical expressions relating the radiation measured on an
artificial earth satellite to the actual water temperature. In obtaining these
empirical relationships it is proposed that the energy brightnesses (radiances)
in a number of spectral intervals, making it possible to take into account the
influence of the atmosphere, that is, proceeding from single- to multichannel
measurements. be used as independent variables. The effectiveness of such an ap-
proach is confirmed by a number of investigations. For example, the authors of
[12] proposed a set of spectral intervals in the region 3-lbflm for solution of
the problem of remote measurement of ocean temperature. However, this optimum
measurement scheme can be realized only in a case when the model of the radiation

transfer process is known and a definite state of the atmosphere is stipulated.
These conditions introduce an uncertainty into the evaluation of the real pos-

sibilities of radiation measurements realising this sort of scheme.

By virtue of the reasons cited above it is necessary to study the possibility of
determining the temperature of the sea surface by a statistical method, using

for this purpose, as independent variables, the spectral radiances of outgoing
radiation not only in the regioa of windows of atmospheric transparency, but also
in the absorption bands of atmospheric gases. The temperature of the water surface
T is found using the correlation equation, predetermined on the basis of a set

of spatially and temporally matched radiation observations and data from direct
measurements of kinetic temperature of the water surface. Below we give the re-
sults of checking a statistical method for the interpretation of spectrometric
measurements obtained using a spectrometer-interferometer on the 28th and 29th

"Meteor" artificial earth satellites. As the ocean surface temperature values use
was made of data obtained by the Hydrometeorologicsl Service on the basis of meas-
urements of the kinetic temperature of water by ships of the merchant marine.

He will assume that the temperature of the sea surface T8 is related by means of
the vector G and the constants T; to the outgoing radiation, stipulated by the
vector R, by the linear equation

73 - 7:.1- GR . (1)

The observed T; and K values~differ from their true values by the magnitude of the
measurement error, that is, T, - Ts +'£, R - R 4-5. The statistical evaluation of
c and T; under the conditions that

£[¢]-9.E{d‘]-0.£[7_',d’180.£[196’]'0 . 5 .9.

where 3 is the zero matrix, is written in the form
‘ ~ . _, . _-a-
5-5.0.». . 4 =7, “- <2)

Evaluation (2) is correct under the condition

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~ 4

-I 47
5‘3-5 5M- as) G -56: >0 (3)

In expressions (21, (3) 5., is the reciprocal covariation matrix of the observed
1's and i values; Srr’ 53; are the covariation matrices of radiation measurements _
and their errors respectively; Stt, 85; are the dispersions of kinetic temperature
of the water surface and the error in its determination respectively.

We will also assume that in the analysis we selected a spectral region in which the
spectral measurements are represented by m spectral radiancss, relating to inter-
vals adjacent to one another with the width.A\!. Such a set of initial spectro-

metric information makes it possible to form from each individual spectrum a mass
of m - 1/2 m(m + l) radiometric measurements (potential predictors) R1,.....Rm,

R’puoossg ﬁns: R‘..""g‘£ s

Included in this mass of potential predictors we have the intensities of radiation
in intervals of different width and localization. By the choice of an optimum meas-
urement scheme we mean the finding of those mentioned N spectral intervals in
which allowance for radiation makes it possible to obtain the best 8;; evaluation
using equation (1). For solving this problem it is convenient to use the multiple-
step regression method. Now we will examine the procedure of step-by-step choice

of the optimum predictors.

In the first step, by trial-and-error, from the M potential predictors we select
that allowance for which minimizes the 8;; evaluation in (3) since 85; directly
characterizes the accuracy of the evaluation

. ‘- “715' _'

' ﬁ-r; + 5-? ' (a)
The determined predictor is fixed, and in the second interv I we add to it from
the others that which jointly with the first minimizes the 55 value. The pro-
cess is repeated until the 3;; evaluation attains the a priori stipulated 8;;
value. With this the choice of the quasioptimum intervals in the first stage is
completed. Then it is possible to refine the optimum measurement scheme by means
of the following procedure. In the N determined quasioptimum intervals we discard
the first and in its‘place among the N - N + 1 remaining intervals we seek that
which minimizes the $25 value. The determined interval is fixed. Then we discard
the second, in place of which we seek a new interval, etc. As a result of many
repetitions of this procedure we obtain a series of sets of quasioptimum inter-
vals which corresponds to a convergent series of evaluations St; , since with re-
placement of the next quasioptimum predictor the 5;: evaluation does not increase
and there is a limit stipulated by condition (3). As the optimum scheme we select
that which corresponds to the minimum of the Sea evaluation.

In the practical realization of the described method. due to limitations of the

initial mass of data. as the criterion for choice of the optimum predictors it is
necessary to minimize not Sgt, but the value 8k. taking into account the number of

degrees of freedom of the sample, that is

61
POR(NHH(1AI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Z5;§n-’)
5 c
It . n-A' . (5)

where n is the volume of the sample; k is the number of selected intervals. Impor-
tant additional information in the step-by-step selection is provided by the so-
called F-ratio [13]. For this purpose, in order that the evaluation (b) can be
considered justified for the purposes of prediction (in the sense that the ampli-
tude of the predicted sample Ts will be considerably greater than its standard
error 5k). the actual P-ratio value must exceed the selected point of the F-dis-
tribution by a factor greater than 4-5 [13].

In order to evaluate the See parameter we will examine the possible sources of
error in forming a set of direct matched measurements T,. For the most part the
discrepancy between the true temperature of the ocean surface at the time of regis-
try of the spectrum and the temperature, obtained by direct measurement from a
ship, is determined by the asynchronicity of shipboard and satellite measurements.
A map of the temperature field of the world ocean is issued by the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Service once each five days. Accordingly, the maximum asynchronicity is five
days. According to data from long-term observations, the dispersion of mesoscale
variability of ocean temperature during this period for the temperate latitudes

is 1.0 K2 [8]. The presence of a depth gradient also leads to an error in measuring
temperature of the water surface. According to data from the "TROPEX-72" experi-
ment [9], the dispersion of this error is evaluated as 0.6 K2. Ha es cause the
appearance of a measurement error whose dispersion is about 0.5 K [10]. The ship's
hull, as well as the discharge of waste water from the ship. introduces an error
whose dispersion can attain 0.3 K2 [11]. Due to the statistical nondependence of

individual components, the 8;; evaluation is egual to the sum of errors of differ-
ent kinds, that 18, 6-2- [5:5 - 1.8 + 0.6 + 005 + 0.35 1.7 K.

The experimental data are represented by spectral radiances in the range 400-1400
cm‘1 with a resolution AI10 cm‘l. This set included 47 spectra for the summer
(July-September) and 15 spectra for the winter (February-March) seasons of 1977
and 1979 respectively. All the spectra were obtained under conditions with few

clouds. The totality of the radiation measurements and the temperatures correspond-
ing to them for each season are called the summer and winter samples.

The choice of the optimum scheme was made using a summer sample; the winter sample,
due to its smallness, was employed as a control. The summer sample was divided into
two parts, one of which was the working part and the other was a control, serving
as an evaluation of the universality of the selected scheme. The natural variabil-
ity of Is for the working sample was 4.7 K.

1he results of choice of the most significant spectral intervals are given in Table
1. At the left side of the table we have given intervals with a width of 10 our1
(first scheme); at the right side - different resolutions. In both cases it is
sufficient to have two spectral intervals; the nonclosure error is 5:: 1.4 K, which
statistically differs insignificantly fromAthe value 6c - 1.7 K. The regression
equations for evaluating Ts have the form T, - 283.682 + 0.675 £1 - 0.307 £2 for
the first scheme and T8 - 52.656 + 0.2137 31 - 0.0780 32 for the second. In these
formulas, as below, 21 is the energy in the i-th spectral range (erg/cmzsec-sr);

Ts is an estimate of ocean temperature on the Kelvin scale.

62
FORl0FT1CJAl.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1
Results of choice of Spectral Predictors
Type of spectral Resolution 10 can"1 Different resolution
measurements
Number of predictors 1 2 3 4 l 2 3 4

Additional speciral 1078.4- 400.5- 1140.8- 650.8- 1057.5- 567.4- 400.5-1026.2-
interval, cm' 1088.8 410.9 1151.2 661.2 1088.8 702.2 410.9 1172.2

Evaluation of regres-

sion error, K 2.38 1.39 1.24 1.21 2.38 1.37 1.32 1.26
Multiple correlation

coefficient 0.87 0.96 0.97 0.97 0.87 0.96 0.96 0.97
F—ratio 71.6 127.9 109.4 86.7 71.8 138.7 102.7 88.4

The derived regression equations were checked using a control sample. It was found
that the mean square errors in the evaluated temperatures differ little from the
data of direct measurements for both schemes (2.2' with a shift of the mean of 0.7°
and 1.9° with a shift of the mean 0.3' for the first and second schemes respective-
ly). It can be seen that allowance for a great number of predictors does not lead
to a substantial decrease in sk; moreover, the value of the F-ratio decreases
(Table 1).

The application of the procedure described above for refining the two selected
quasioptimum spectral intervals of different resolution indicated their absolute
stability. Due to the limitations of the initial set of data the derived correla-
tion equations can reflect only the partial characteristics of the processes of
formation and transfer of IR radiation. Accordingly, we checked the stability of
the established relationships using the winter sample. It was found that Sk was
equal to 1.9° with a shift of the mean by 3.4'.

In addition to a direct evaluation of sea surface temperature on the basis of an
equation of type (1) it is possible to employ a similar statistical approach in
validating the optimum determination of the correction to radiation temperature
measured on the basis of the radiation in the spectral interval falling in the at-
mospheric transparency window. The range 10.5-12.5'LI was selected as such an in-
terval: it is used everywhere in the IR radiometers of artificial earth satel-
lites. It was found that for computing the correction it is entirely adequate to
take into account radiation in the one channel 14.7-17.9}1I. A determination of
sea surface temperature in this case is made using the equation Ts - TR + 101.28
- 0.1007 B , where TR is the radiation temperature measured in the window 10.5-
12.5p.m. Tgis equation was used in determining temperature using the control and
winter samples. In both cases we obtained the value 8k - 1.9°, but with a lesser
systematic shift of the winter sample (0.9' versus 3.4’).

Thus, for determining the temperature of the ocean surface on the basis of meas-
urements of outgoing IR radiation it is sufficient to use radiation in two spec-
tral intervals. It is evidently preferable to use a processing algorithm in the

form of obtaining (on the basis of measurements in the additional channel)

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a correction to the radiation temperature. However, in order to obtain an entire-
ly reliable result for validating standardized additional channels for radiometric
measurements it is necessary to have a more complete set of spectral and matched
direct measurements differentiated by latitude zones and seasons.

Appendix

An evaluation was made of the effectiveness of use of the optimum Kozlov scheme
[12] by means of the already described sample of spectroradiometric information.
First we used the equation cited in [12] for evaluating Th. As a result it was
found that the mean square error in deviation of the Ta evaluation from the real
data was 2.7' with a shift of the mean by 17.6'. Then, using the optimum scheme
as the point of departure, we computed the coefficients of the regression equation
(1) which were then used in determining Ts within the framework of the independent
sample. The results of the regression analysis for this case are cited in Table 2.
It can be seen that the minimum of the regression error is attained when using two
predictors, but it is greater in value than the corresponding minimum error in
Table 1. By means of the step-by-step regression method with the first of these
predictors we selected the radiance in the intervals which in the Rozlov scheme
corresponded to the first channel. The use of the measurement results in the first
channel of this scheme leads to a deterioration in the accuracy of the evaluation.

Table 2
Evaluation of Effectiveness of Optimum Scheme [12]

Number of predictors l 2 3
Spectral interval 8.4 - 10.8 8.0 - 10.8 8.0 - 12.8
Evaluation of regression error,

K 2.80 1.93 2.02
Multiple correlation coefficient 0.82 0.92 0.92
P-ratio 45.6 63.9 41.0

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Gorodetskiy, A. K., Klimchuk, Ye. P. and Malkevich, M. 8., "Method and Some
Results of Determination of Temperature of the Underlying Surface From the

'ihsm08-149' Satellite," 12V. AN SSSR: FAO (News of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), 5, No 4, pp 355-368, 1969.

2. Corodetskiy, A. K., Malkevich. M. 8., Orlov, A. P., et al., "Some Results of
Measurements of the Earth's Radiation in the Spectral Interval 10-12iim From
the 'Cosmos-ZAZ' Satellite," IZV. AN SSSR: PAD, 6, No 5, pp 677-589, 1970.

3. PROGRAMMA GLOBAL'NYKH ATMOSPERNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY. VSEMIRNAYA METROROLOGICHESK—
AYA ORGANIZATSIYA. KOMITET P0 ATMOSFERNYM NAUKAH I KOSPAR (Program of Global
Atmospheric Research. World Meteorological Organization. Committee on Atmo-
spheric Sciences and CDSPAR. Report of the Scientific Conference), Stockholm,

June-July, 1967, 269 pages.

61;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lo.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Galkin, A. N. and Haksimikhin, D. 1., "Use of Satellite Information for De-
termining the Temperature Field at the Ocean Surface From 1R Radiation,"
SPUTNIKOVAYA OKEANOLCXIIYA (Satellite Oceanology), Issue 26, No 379, UCHBNYYB
ZAPISKI LGU (Scientific Notes of Leningrad State University), pp 326—331.

Halkevich, H. 5., Georgiyevskiy, Yu. S., et 81., "Atmospheric Transparency in
the 1R Spectral Region," 12V. AN SSSR: FAO, Vol 9, No 12, pp 1257-1269, 1973.

Halkevich, H. S. and Potrenko, B. 2., "Influence of Aerosol Attenuation on
Accuracy in Determining Temperature of the Ocean and Atmosphere by Remote
Methods," 12V. AN SSSR: FAD, Vol 110, No 7, pp 723-733, 1978.

Boldyrev, V. 0., ”Computation of Atmospheric Transfer Functions in the Range
8—12p.m for the Territory of the Northern Hemisphere," IZV. AN SSSR: FAO,

Vol 1, No 7, pp 686-703, 1965.

Clagoleva, H. G. and Skriptunova, L. 1., PROGNOZ TMERATURY VODY V OKEANE

(Prediction of Ocean Hater Temperature), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979,
138 pages.

Vinogradov, V. V., "Results of Measurements of Water Surface Temperature by
an IR Radiometer in the Tropical Zone of the Atlantic," TROPBKS-72 (TROPBX—
72), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1974, 216 pages.

Shifrin, K. S., "Hind Effect on Effective Sea Radiation," 12V. AN SSSR: FAO,
Vol 10, No 7, pp 803-805, 19710.

Vinogradov, V. V. and Mironov, L. V., "Temporal Variability of Water Temper-
ature at the Surface in the Tropical Zone of the Atlantic Ocean," TROPEKS-M
(TROPBX—M), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1976, 162 pages.

Kozlov, V. P., "Exclusion of the Atmospheric Effect in Remote Measurement of
Radiation Temperature of a Water Surface," 12V. AN SSSR: FAO, Vol 16, No 9,
pp 974-982, .1978.

Dreyner, N., Suit, R., PRIKLADNOY REGRESSIONNYY MALIZ (Applied Regression
Analysis), Moscow, "Statistika," 1973, 329 pages.

65
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPATIAL RESOLUTION OF INSTRUMENTS HIT“ STIPULATBD FIELD MEASUREMENT-ERROR
Sevustopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA CIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 75-85
[Article by S. V. Dotsenko and H. G. Poplavskaya]

[Text] Abstract: The authors have derived expres-
sions making it possible with a stipulated
accuracy to compute the intervals between
readings for a scanning apparatus and the
number of detectors in a line in the recon-
struction of a field smoothed by the measure-
ment instrument. The measurement of fields
with bell-shaped and exponential correlation
functions typical in oceanological investiga-
tions is considered.

of satellite motion, that is, by means of creating systems for the successive
scanning of the surface. However, in constructing such systems definite contra-
dictions arise between the requirements of a high response and a high resolu-
tion of the instruments [1]. The time required for inspection of one resolution
element is considerably reduced during scanning and may be much less than the
time ensuring a fluctuation response of the infrared and microwave instruments
necessary for measuring the studied field in this element.

One of the possible ways to overcome such an incompatibility is the creation
of n parallel scanning system, that is, a multichannel system consisting of

a set of simple standard elements forming a line of sensors or detectors and
making simultaneous measurements (Fig. 1). Accordingly, for the promising sys-
tems planned for use in the 1980's mosaic photodetectors are being developed.
These consist of several thousand or tens of thOusands of sensors of photosen-
sitive elements, the totality of which takes in the entire field of view [1,

FORi0FFN]Al.USEiJNLY
multielement detectors. For example, specialists in France are developing the
HVR (Haute Visible Resolution) radiometer on the basis of 3000 detectors form-
ing a line with a scanning width of 30 km and a resolution of 10 m.

   

Plight
direction

Fig. 1. Line of detectors.

The use of such mosaic photodetectors with a number of elements exceeding 1000
makes possible a considerable improvement in the discrimination of inhomogen-
eities of the investigated fields. A line of detector sensors mounted perpen-
dicularly to the trajectory of satellite motion makes simultaneous measurement
of the field along the entired observed line. During motion of the satellite
there is inspection of the entire field in the scanning zone. The complexity,
weight and cost of multichannel systems will evidently increase with an in-
crease in the number of detectors in the line. Accordingly, the problem arises
of constructing such systems as will ensure stipulated meteorological indices
with a minimum number of detectors in the line. The authors of [2] propose
that the number of detector sensors necessary for field_measurement be deter-

mined from the condition
“dot - 9/3““, (1)

whereg? is the extent of the field of view; “view is the instantaneous angle
of the field of view_of one instrument sensor; “det is-the number of detectors
in the line. Formula (1) does not take into account the spatial structure of
the field and the form of the instrument function of the sensor; the number

6
FOR¢0FFKJd&.USE(HNLY
I‘I'K UI'I'N lAI. “3!. UNIJ

"det is dependent only on the width of the latter. However. as indicated by

the investigations presented below, these characteristics play an important
role in the designing of instruments intended for measurement of physical
fields in the ocean. The purpose of this study is a determination of the de-
pendence of the number of sensors in the line and the distance between the
centers of their resolution elements on the form of the instrument function
and the structure of the measured field with a stipulated accuracy of its meas-
urement. The conclusions drawn are correct for both parallel and successive
scanning of the sea surface.

we will investigate the resolution of remote instruments with their measure-
ment of fields distributed in space. He will assume that a line of detectors
with point sensors is used in measuring the field along the observed line.
Since these sensors do not perform spatial averaging, the result of such a
measurement will be the precise values of the process at the points where the
line sensors are situated. The sought-for record of the process along the line
can be reconstructed with any degree of accuracy with corresponding intervals
between the sensors; the values of the latter will be dependent on the method
for interpolation of the process in the intervals between its readings [3, 4].

We will examine step-by-step interpolation which has a simplicity in recon-
structing the record and does not require the use of adjacent readings. Since
the maximum density of field reading points is necessary in order to achieve
the stipulated accuracy, the determined values of the spatial intervals be-
tween point instrument sensors will be less than for other interpolation meth-
ods.

The dispersion of the error 8 3 in step-by-step interpolation of the process,
measured at discrete points, is given by the expression [5]

e v: '

22> -z[r-—3 A’mdx] , (2)
where 6 2 and R(x) are the dispersion and 'the normalized correlation function
of the measured process (or field); xd is the distance between the points of

its measurement (interval of field readings). The mean square relative error

is determined both by the interval of the readings and by the spatial struc-

ture of the measured process. By stipulating the error in reconstructing the

process it is thereby possible to find the reading interval corresponding to

it.

The spatial interval of resolution of instruments with point sensors necessary
for their measurement of physical fields of the ocean surface with a stipulat-
ed reconstruction error' £0 is called the reading interval rp with which

[p = resolution] 9d - 60' ' (3)
The ratio of the necessary spatial interval of resolution and the character-
istic scale of the measured field k1- - r p/rx is called the coefficient of spa-

tial resolution of such instruments. In order to ensure the stipulated accur-
ucy in reconstructing the field on the basis of the results of its measurement

68
FOR 0FF"JA1.USB|JNLY
with point instruments it is necessary that the distance between them be not

greater than rp. Inhomogeneities of a scale less than r0 evidently cannot be
resolved by such a system of sensors.

We will determine the spatial resolution of instruments with point sensors

when they are used in measuring fields with a one-dimensional spectrum having
a bell shape,

4‘» ‘
6 (“0‘4" PQ—z-A' ' (a)

where rx and 0'2 are the characteristic scale and dispersion of this field.
Such a model is used in approximating the real spectra of physical fields in

the ocean [6, 7]. He will ascertain the error in reconstructing this field
along the line of detector point sensors. Taking into account that the correl-

ation function of this field has the form .
J! x
’(X)-!&P[ 9 (“)2]'
and using formula (2), we obtain [8]
64 _ _ (R u) £_X(__ :1)
(a) 2[’ 1’9: 0 1 24

where 49(x) is (the probability integral. Hence, also from condition (3) we
find the resolution coefficient for the instruments

6 c '
kr-Zgj - 2.754 ‘5‘- - . - (5)

He will compute the k}- value for the square of the relative error (8. /O')2'
0.1 (or 8 0/6 . 0.316 which in practice is considered the maximum agm is-

sible. From formula (5) for this case we have kt - 0.874. Accordingly, with

(E o/O’)2 - 0.1 it is possible to resolve inhomogeneities of the scale rp a
0- 874 tx-

Uith a decrease in the measurement error the magnitude of the inhomogeneities
which can be resolved also decreases.

We will find the spatial resolution of point instruments when they are used
in measuring fields whose one-dimensional spectrum has the form [6]

G, (of)- —PL/[ «(Kr-)2 1" (6)

In contrast to the fields considered earlier, differentiable an infinite num-

ber of times, these fields are not differentiable. They have a more clearly
expressed high-frequency component. Substituting the expression for the cor-

relation function of this field R(x) - exp (-x/rx) into formula (2), after
computing the integral under condition (3) and with sufficiently small meas~

urement errors we obtain C 2
,,r _ 2(4) .
J (7)

6
FI”!(IﬂﬁC]21.USE¢DNLY
DUN UI'I'ILIAL Ubl'. ONLY

It can be seen from a comparison of expressions (5) and (7) that for less
smooth fields (6) the resolution coefficient with an increase in 59/ 6 in-

creases more slowly than for the fields (6). For example, with (80 6 )2 -

0.1 for the fields (6) kT = 0.20. This means that when measuring fields having
a more clearly expressed high-frequency component inhomogeneities with smaller
scales must be resolved in order to attain a stipulated accuracy.

Hith the measurement of physical fields of the ocean surface by remote instru-
ments with nonpoint sensors there is a smoothing of these fields with the
weight set by the instrument function of the sensor. He will assume that the
measurement line consists of such sensors and the purpose of the measurement

is a determination of the field smoothed in space by these sensors. The pat-
tern of such a field would be obtained directly if the smoothing instrument
scanned it continuously in space. But in the considered case the field is meas-
ured in a discrete set of spatially separated points. Accordingly, here it is
necessary to solve the problem of reconstructing fields smoothed by measure-
ment instruments forming the line with the stipulated accuracy. For this pur-
pose we will find the distance between the centers of the resolution elements
for the detectors in the line that will ensure a stipulated accuracy in recon-
structing the smoothed field. Measurement of the true field with an instrument
with a spatially averaging sensor is equivalent to measurement of the output
signal of this instrument by some hypothetical instrument with a point sensor.
Accordingly, we will use the concept, introduced above, of the necessary spa-
tial resolution, but applied to the output signal of a remote instrument.

If the measured X(F3 field is homogeneous, isotropic, stationary and "frozen-
in," and the instrument sensor is linear and inertialess, the instrument out-
put signal Y(§5 is related to this field by the expression [9]

1m- 5 x(r-§)/Z<p)dp' .

where h(7?) is the instrument function of the instrument sensor. Denoting the
normalized correlation function of the instrument output signal by Ry(x), its
dispersion by Crz, we obtain, in accordance with expression (2) a formula for
the dispersion of error in reconstructing the smoothed field in the case of
step-by-step interpolation

NH!
-—>[—; W1

The field smoothed by the remote instrument can be restored with the stipulated
error if the interval between its readings does not exceed the Xd value deter-
mined using formula (8).

The spatial interval of resolution of the averaging instruments necessary for
their measurement of physical fields of the ocean surface with the stipulated
accuracy in reconstructing 60 of the latter is the value of the reading in-

terval r with which 8d =1 80. The ratio of the spatial resolution interval
to the characteristic radius of the instrument resolution element hp - rp/Rx
is called the relative resolution interval of these instruments. In order to
ensure the stipulated accuracy in reconstructing the smoothed field on the
basis of the results of its measurement by an averaging instrument it is

0
l1)l.(ﬂﬂﬂ(;kl.USHE(MVLY
necessary that the distance between the centers of their resolution elements
not exceed the Value rp. Inhomogeneities with a scale less than rp cannot be
resolved by these instrunents.

We will find an expression for the square of the error in reconstructing
smoothed fields on the basis of the results of their measurement in a dis-
crete set of equally distant points. For this purpose we derive a formula for
the correlation function of the Output signal and its dispersion. According

to [10], the sy (x) spectrum of the output signal of measurements with an :Ixi-
symmetric sensor when they are used in measuring an isotropic field is express-

ed through the two-dimensional field spectrum and the h(°‘) spectrum- of the in-
strument function as

.J;(¢()|= inigﬁé<f'rzgfwgz‘) Z'Z(LI$‘Z4_d;Z )‘t‘:. (9)

hence the autocorrelation function of the output signal is

5'(x)‘- {ti-fl? (W) Z‘W)555@x)dagu

Substituting this expression into formula (8), we obtain

is.) - 14% m (mmm) Elven}

The resulting expression is analytically difficult to compute even in the most
simple cases. Accordingly, we will expand it into a series in powers of Xd

51):.2[ .L2 4% (—J: “44], (10)

4, J,’ 545 (2hr)!

aka“. q,-<‘/.<Z+.(,Z>5(‘/4’e.<,-2)«’*dd,do<. (m

The dispersion of the instrument output signal is 5y 2 - kao. In computing the
integral (11) we will replace the variables oL- Bcos 9’,a(1-,8sin 9’. After

the integration of [8] and several transformations expression (11) is reduced

to the form
_ I (II-I} ’! 62 um d
a“ 2 Or)” J; ("GM ’6); ﬂ

Then formula (10) is written in the following way:
id. 1 '1',
<—-—-- —: ##1— J (12)
0;. '

5. aw (AVG/(+015

where

where

FOR OIIWC;}1.USE¢I'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. . . ‘ r: \ zio:
Cr - i. “Z (‘3 'l '2' (.5) ﬁ
a

da-

Formula (12) makes it possible with any degree of accuracy to find the inter-

val of spatial resolution by a remote instrument corresponding to a stipulated
reconstruction error. This interval is dependent on the form of the measured
field and the instrument function.

we will find the spatial resolution of remote instruments whose sensors have
a bell-shaped instrument function

’ [ 4 " z 1 (13)
x ex - — — .
h(. ).‘IR3 P I RX
Formula (13) is used in the approximation of the instrument functions of sen-
sors of IR radiometers and the directional diagram of the antennas of micro-

wave radioneters which are used extensively at the present time in remote
sounding of the ocean surface [11, 12].

We will ascertain the resolution interval of these instruments when they are
used in measuring fields with a bell-shaped spectrum (4). The substitution of

the instrument function spectrum (13)
5(4)- "PEI—{@101}

and the two-dimensional field spectrum corresponding to its one-dimensional
spectrum (a) into formula (12) gives

2 k
’64“: , " or xa M 12)
~‘I. -, —- ’
w if f a) ~<2k+0w<w+d
The approximate value of the relative error with an accuracy to 10'3 for 0 S7:
-S l is written in the form

£4.sz ta

‘4
'.= _ z — ‘
0', NEW/+21! 3; c,( ) R, (11.)

where z = Rx/rx. From expression (In) we express the resolution coefficient
for the considered instrument through the radius of its resolution element for

a reconstruction error 6d - 80

C
/g-_r£- 5. Lie-22 Lad 1 —°-.
,, ﬂ. 26,\/x< 9, ,m,’ .

The dependence dl(z) - l/c1(z) is represented by curve 1 (Fig. 2). With an in-
crease in 2 it decreases, most steeply for 0<z< 0.2.

He will find the spatial resolution of an instrument with the instrument
function (13) when it is used in measuring a field with an exponential correl-
ation function. For this we will determine the error in reconstructing the
smoothed field. By substituting the two-dimensional field spectrum correspond-

ing to the spectrum (6) and the spectrum of the instrument function into for-
muln (12) we find

2
FOR‘OFFKJKI.USE1DNLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040056-1

FI”!(HWW(JAI.USE(NVLY

UT“) :"x r-z¢ze”";}?;;@7271)] A
' 2:: $6125 (—21 )"(iﬁf)" "-m-w. «ﬂu/965:)

where "1,»(1) is the Hhittaker function [8]. The approximating expression for
the relative reconstruction error has the form

it. est,
a” ‘10)”:

where

 

Hence the relative instrument resolution interval for the reconstruction error
8d - 60 of the smoothed field

(15)
y

where 42(2)“ 21“?)-

A graph of the coefficient d2(z) is given as Fig. 2 (curve 2). The d2(z) curve
decreases with an increase in 2. Thus, for.this error in reconstructing the
smoothed field the distance between the centers of the resolution elements of
the line detectors is dependent on the type of field and on the z value. For

example. with z - 0.1 for a field with a bell-shaped correlation function with
- (5 l6 )2 - 0.1 the distance between these centers is equal to 8.71 Rx; for a

f ieYd with an exponential correlation function - (9.30 Rx. With a decrease in

z the difference between these values increases; with an increase it decreases.

In actuality, with z = 0.8 for the first field r0 - 1.88 Rx; for the second
’- 1.37 Rx.

He will apply these results to specific instruments. We will determine the res-

olution intervals of a five-channel radiometer and a descent vehicle (DV) [13,
14].

He will assume that from an altitude of 300 In these instruments measure the
field of surface temperature, whose spatial correlation function can be approx-

imated by the expression
In
KAPHK'T

where r" - 130 km [7].

First we will find the spatial resolution of a five-channel radiometer. The

characteristic radius of its instrument function R for the indicated altitude
is 13.05 km and the value 2 - 0.1. We find from formula (15) that for the

FOROFHCIABLUSONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

square of the relative reconstruction error (SO/Gy)2 - 0.1 rp - 4.364!x -
57 km.

If the line consists of detectors whose
sensors are radiometere of the DV type
for which at this same altitude is
equal to 6. km, then the 2 value for
the considered field is equal to 0.05.
Using formula (15) we find that for
this error the distance between the
centers of the elements of detectors

in the line is rp - 5.8141,, - 38.4 km.

When measuring a field with a bell-shap-
ed correlation function with the same

r - 130 km for this error the resolu-
tion interval for a five-channel radio-

meter is 113.65 km and for the DV radio-
meter -- 115.35 km.

If formula (1) is used in computations
of the resolution elements, we find
that r is equal to 23x, regardless of
the tyBe of field and variety of instru-
ment. Then the relative error in recon-
structing the smoothed field with an
exponential correlation function. meas-
ured with a five-channel radiometer, is
0.145, with the DV radiometer -- 0.106.
In the case of measurement of fields
with a bell-shaped correlation function
the relative error is much less: for
the first radiometer it is 0.072, for
the second - 0.038. However, due to
the influence of the atmosphere the
striving for such a high accuracy in

F1 , , - the measurements is scarcely feasible.
fizieitanﬁzesgizzezof ::/:2? d2 coef with satigfaction of the condition

(E o/Cry) - 0.1 the distance between

the centers of the resolution elements
or detectors whose sensors are the antennas of a five-channel radiometer must

be 2.18 times greater than follows from formula (1) and three times greater

than for detectors with sensors of the type of the antennas of the DV radio—
meter.

 

4‘9 46' 462

The expressions derived above are applicable not only for designing lines of
nonstanning apparatus, but also in computing the intervals between readings
of scanning instruments having an adequately high response.

14
FOR OFFICI7AI. USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

(h

S.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

INHIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Khodarev, Yu. K., Bespalova, Ye. A., Pashin, Yu. M., et a1., VOPROSY PRI-
MENENIYA RADIOPIZICHBSKIKH METODOV DLYA IZUCMZNIYA ATMOSPERY I POVBRKH-
NOSTI ZEMLI S POMOSHCM'YU KOSMICHBSKIKM APPARATOV (Problems in the Use

of Radiophysical Methods for Study of the Earth's Atmosphere and Surface

Using Space Vehicles), Preprint 112, Moscow, IKI AN SSSR, 1972, 50 pages.

Safronov, Yu. P. and Andrianov, Yu. G., INFRAKRASNAIA TBKHNIKA I KOSMOS
(Infrared Technology and Space), Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1978, 248 pages.

Karandeyev, K. B. and Tsanenko, M. P., "Problems in the Theory and Prac-
tice of Data Measurement Systens," KIBERMETIKU - NA SLUZHBU KOMMUNIZMU
(Cybernetics in the Service of Communism), Vol 5, Moscow, "Bnergiya,"
pp 87-118, 1967.

Kava1arov, G. I. and Mandel'ehtam, S. M., VVBDENIYE V INPORMATSIONNUYU
TBORIYU IZMERENIY (Introduction to the Information Theory of Measure-

ments), Moscow, "Energiya," 1974, 376 pages.

Dotsenko, S. V. and Khudyekov, Yu. A., "Optimum Discretization and Quant-
ization of a Measured Physical Process," MORSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYB Is-
SLEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophysical Investigations), No 3, Sevastopol',

pp 86-99, 1973.

Honin, A. S. and Yaglom, A. M., STATISTICHBSKAYA GIDROMBKHANIKA (Stat-
istical Mydromechanics), Part 2, Moscow, "Nauka," 1967, 720 pages.

Belyayev, V. I., OBRABOTKA I TEORBTICMESKIY AMALIZ OKBANOGRAPICHESKIKH
NABLYUDEMIY (Processing and Theoretical Analysis of Oceanographic Obser-
vations), Kiev, "Naukova Dunks," 1973, 296 pages.

Gradshteyn, I. S. and Ryzhik, I. M., TABLITSY INTEGRALOV, SUMM, RYADOV
I PROIZVEDEHIY (Tables of Integrals, Sums, Series and Products), Moscow,
"Hanks." 1971, 1108 pages.

Dotsenko, s. V., TBORETICHBSKIYE OSNOVY IZMBRENIYA PIZICHBSKIKR POLEY
OKEANA (Theoretical Principles for the Measurement of Physical Fields
in the Ocean), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1976, 152 pages.

Dotsenko, S. V., et al., "Spatial-Spectral Characteristics of Remote Sen-

sors," uonsxrvn GIDROFIZICHBSKIYE Issnsnovanxra, no 2, Sevastopol',
pp 162-173, 1974.

Korzun, V. A., "Apparatus for Surveying the Ocean Prom Great Altitudes,"
PROMYSLOVAYA OKBANOLOGIYA (Commercial Oceanology), Series 9, No 6, Nos-
cow, TsNIITBIRKh, pp 1-22, 1976.

Zubkovich, S. G., STATISTICHBSKIYB KHARAKTBRISTIKI RADIOSIGNALOV, 0T-
RAZHENNYKH 0T ZBHNOY POVERKHNOSTI (Statistical Characteristics of Radio
Signals Reflected From the Earth's Surface), Moscow, "Sov. Radio," 1968,
224 pages.

5
Inas‘osinciam.l15i:cn1Lv
FOR‘OFFﬂJAl.USE‘ONLY

13. Astkheymer, R., de Vaard, R. and Dzhekson, Ye.. "Infrared Radiometers
of the 'TIROS-P' Satellite," RAKETY I ISKUSSTVBNNYYB SPUTNIKI V METEOROL-
OGII (Rockets and Artificial Satellites in Meteorology), Moscow, 1L, pp
158-170, 1963.

14. Gorodetskiy, A. K., et al., "Methods and Some Results of Determination
of Temperature of the Underlying Surface From the 'COsmos-lb9' Satellite,"

12V. AN SSSR: FAQ (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the
Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 5, No 6, pp 358-381, 1969.

76
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USB(NWLY
CALIBRATION 0? REMOTE INSTRUMENTS ON THE BASIS OF POLYGON MEASUREMENTS

Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAXA GIDROPIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 86-96

[Article by S. V. Dotsenko]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the possibility
of calibrating remote instruments on the basis
of the results of measurement of a physical
field in a sea polygon by a direct contact meas-
urement instrument. The author has determined
the configuration and extent of a polygon ensur—
ing a stipulated calibration accuracy. It is shown
that for large resolution elements a substantial
improvement in accuracy is obtained by optimum
calibration.

The use of remote instruments carried in flight vehicles is affording great pos-
sibilities for study of physical fields in the ocean. However, at the present

time investigators have met with difficulties in using remote sounding data because
in the study of one and the same physical field the results of measurements may be
different in dependence on the operating regime of the vehicle, state of the atmo-
sphere, sighting angles, etc. Accordingly, there must be a regular comparison (in
time) of the readings of a remote instrument and the values of the measured para-
meter in the ocean, whose absolute value is found using direct-measurement instru-
ments in sea polygons. In the future such a procedure will be called calibration.

Any contact instrument used under marine conditions has a much lesser field averag-
ing scale than a remote instrument. For this reason on the basis of signals of con-
tact instruments containing a very broad spectrum of high-frequency fluctuations

it is impossible, with the necessary accuracy, to evaluate the variation of a low-
frequency signal at the output of the remote instrument, considerably smoothed by
its resolution element. In order to increase the evaluation accuracy it is neces-
sary to average the output signals of contact instruments.

The authors of [1] proposed and investigated optimum time averaging of signals of
a contact instrument for direct measurement work for obtaining the best evalua-
tion of the field value measured by the remote instrument. The measurement scheme

was as follows. The center of a resolution element of the remote instrument moves
along a linear trajectory which includes the point 0, the place where the direct
contact measurement instrument was situated. By means of optimum averaging of the

77
FOR<OFFKJAJ.U§E(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signal of a contact instrument it is possible to find the best evaluation of the

field measured by the remote instrument at the time when the center of its reso-
lution element coincides with the point 0 [1].

However, due to different factors, the flight trajectory of the flight vehicle, and
this means, the trajectory of the center of a resolution element of the remote in-
strument,may not pass directly through the site of the contact measurement instru-
ment. Evidently, in this case as well the data from field measurements with a con-
tact instrument can be used in calibration work, but the accuracy of the latter
will be the worse the farther the centers of these instruments are from one anoth-
er. By stipulating a definite accuracy it is possible to compute the configuration

and extent of the polygon within whose limits calibration on the basis of one con-
tact instrument can be carried out.

Assume that there is a direct contact measurement instrument at the point 0 (Fig.
1), adopted as the origin of coordinates. This instrument registers values of the
field 2(rgt) whose changes at the fixed point 0 are related both to the movement

of the field relative to its mean velocity Vb and to its temporal evolution, de-

termined by the "non-frozen-in" character of this field.

The point 0', at which it is necessary that the instrument be calibrated, lies on
the trajectory of motion of the remote instrument. The vector‘ﬁrb connects the
points 0 and 0'. The angle between the vectors $6 and TI}, is equal to 9; the
angle between the vector-VB and the x-sxis 081 is equal to 0.

0!

    

[g - remote]

Fig. 1. Diagram representing field measurements during calibration. The center of

a resolution element of the remote instrument (point 0') does not coincide with
the contact instrument (point 0).

The sensor of the remote instrument performs spatial averaging of the measured
field. Assuming that this instrument is inertialess, the signal at its output can

be registered as [2]
J; (a..- t')-I I‘m-wound;

where hQﬁ?) is the instrument function of the remote instrument characterizing this
averaging; jyb is the radius-vector of the center of a resolution element for this
instrument; t is the time of field measurement by this instrument. Integration is
carried out in all of two-dimensional space. including a surface resolution element
of the remote instrument. Assume that the center of the resolution element of the

remote instrument is situated at the calibration point with the radius—vector 750

8
FORloilﬂcthlﬂSEilNlN
at the time t' I 0. In this case the signal at its output is

Yremote - 450)-} x(g,-p;o)a(§')4;. (1)

At the point 0 the field changes with time as (t) - 3(36t; t); the first argument
of the expression on the right-hand side deter es the field transfer with the
constant velocity v and the second determines its temporal evolution, unrelated
to this transfer. 8 nce the sensors of the direct measurement instruments are much
smaller than the extent of the resolution elements for the remote sensors, we

will assume that the first are points. In addition. the contact instruments will

be regarded as inertialess. In this case the xo(t) value is a signal at the output
of the contact instrument.

Using some temporal weighting function u(1§), at each moment in time t it is pos-
sible to obtain the time-averaged signal at the output of the direct measurement

instrument. At the calibration time t - 0 this value is equal to
I

yinstw) '1" ('Vozi't)u(t)dt. (2)

Optimum calibration of a remote instrument essentially involves obtaining (by use
Of PYOCEdUTE (2)) the yins (0) values differing least from the Yremote value de-

.termincd by formula (1) a its use for comparison with the real signal value at

the output of the remote instrument at the time t - 0.

We will find the weighting function u(f0 ensuring the minimum mean difference

y nst(0) from yremote’ that is, the minimum calibration error. The mean square of
this error is

[Tfp - inst] (3)

Assuming that the measured field is also centered uniformly and applying formulas
(l). (2), we obtain

)4, (9).“ 5 [245-5) ; 4-6 14(6)“?94’ 7,4": .

 

‘ . (1.)
[WP ' instzg- remote] y; '5‘ 6(E'ﬁ’”)’7(it) ”(AM/9.11.0: . (5)
.‘gCé’g-S 6(§-.,-Z:,--t)/z (§)a(t)d53'dr, (6)

where B(i§;'£) is the generalized autocorrelation function for the x(r;t) field.

We will find the averaging function u(€ ) minimizing the 5.2 value. For this we
will equate the variation of the functional 8 2[u(t )]to zero. We obtain an inte-
gral equation for determining the optimum weighting function

[OTYT = optimum] I 5

n.

r I- v.-- .-_\ Ins -.
Zn(t-?,);t-r,1“”.(G)d{-'j5~f'fo 5" -.’/’\F)"’? (7,

v—'\

The generalized autocorrelation functions present in formula (7) are dependent on

two spatial shifts and one temporal shift. We will assume that the measured field
is anisotropic and not "frozen—in" and that its surfaces of equal correlation are

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hi I lpsnlds in the coordinates of the spatial-temporal shifts [1. general iz-

cd rorrvlulion function for such a field can be written as B( s A s), where
A is a matrix of quadratic form of its argument;"'sr - ﬂ x1, x2, Vc‘ "is the matrix-

row of the shifts. The "relaxation rate" for the field entering into the last ele-
ment of this row is vc = pc/fc, where the PC and ‘Lc values are the character-

istic spatial and temporal field scales respectively. The generalized autocorrel-

organ function can be expressed through the three-dimensional field spectrum G3

(3) in the following way [5]: ,

5(V"—).rwr 7511164va )e/“'"“I5‘W’du,d«,dal. (s)
«o

where the matrix-row of wave numbers is

75"“7-“1'é’u'

We will assume that the measured field is spatially isotropic but is not "frozen-
in." In this case the A matrix is transformed into a unit matrix [4] and the auto-

correlation function has the structure
a(P.-r)-6[VIF‘I*+(% 10" l.

and its representation (8) through the three-dimensional spectrum assimes the form

3(7-.-r)'v:'l@( V77) I ’""‘""4’~W- <9)

We will substitute this expression into equation (7) and we will express the in-
strument function of the instrument entering here and the weighting function of
nvvrnging through their spectra EYE) and aopt‘” ). Then multiplying both sides
of the derived equation by exp(-ja’11:), integrating for '5 in infinite limits and

carrying out simple transforms, we find the spectrum of the optimum weighting func-

tion
Wog! " I — .E 0.35732 ‘5. (ya-58¢:
ﬁ’opt(w) ' 69—, 7?)!“ M, ‘9 (z) a (10)

I .7

where '2 - v8/vc is the parameter corresponding to the "non-frozen-in" character of

the field; (at) is a one-dimensional field spectrum. Hence the optimum weighting
function is ound by use of the inverse Fourier transform

.. / I"
103;] “mm - ,-,- Iamm e «0- (ll)

Through the field spectra of the instrument and weighting (not necessarily optimum)
functions we will express the mean square of the calibration error. This value is
found by the substitution of expression (9) into formulas (4)-(6) and by the use
or the derived expressions in formula (3)

657’} 6[ VWhEﬂ [Wm-r2) I'—2i'<=)a7(ws)r’“°‘« (12,
45(2) |' Van».

Two cases of the latter expression are of interest. Their comparison makes it pos-
sible to clarify the effectiveness of use of optimum averaging in time for calibra-

tion when employing the considered scheme. First we will find the calibration

FOR OFFICI’ 'SE ONLY
error on the basis of one instantaneous reading of the output signal of a direct
measurement instrument obtained some time t after the remote measurement. In this
case the calibration weighting function is a delta function of time u(1:) - J (t - _

1.“). IIilh I: n Ihv rulillrnl inn ls carried out using the reading of a contact In-
nnumm obtained later than the reading of the remote instruaent. In this case
the spectrum of the weighting function of averaging G(¢J) - exp(-jaJt) and expres-
sion ([2) assumes the form

‘I’(’)'r’1@[i’|_'_(17’l 1m» (x)
+ In" (c‘OI ’}a’-E'da.

Then we find the error in optimum calibration which by definition is the minimum'
possible. For this purpose we substitute the spectrum “opt(“') into (12)

I" WT I upt] 5:47!- 'IELI61[H;"‘(%) ”It?” (0 0:71;) g:— (11.)

-2n‘- (z) a.» (Ma) w"’-« W) V} dam.

He will analyze the determined values in the example of calibration of a remote in-
strument with an axisynmetric bell-shaped field instrument function whose energy
spectrum also has a bell-shaped form. In this case

 

- ' 15
5.(:)-5,,(¢)-£;f_‘ m [Jid']. ( )

wheru rx is the characteristic spatial field scale (rx - 52),(72 is field disper-

sion. In this case the instrument function spectrum is also axisynnetric and has
a bell-shaped form

 

. J(€)-3(¢)-ﬂﬂ [_(ﬂ‘,'a¢)']' . (16)

where Rx is the characteristic radius of the instrument function. The substitution
of expressions (15) and (16) into formula (13) gives

/ .,z, -.r/ 5?’ ‘0? etc“?
wad-H7937?- [:22 ”pi-37;? (n'z’+—"’7';;§"———,>l}' (1”

whore V is the angle between the vectors :E;and )56; z - Rx/rx is the ratio of the

characteristic radius of a resolution element for the remote instrument to the
ChﬂtUCLerlﬁtlc field scale (Pig. 1).

 

If the calibration is carried out using a reading of a contact instrument obtained

 

nl th limv hr rcmolu measurement, that is. with t - O,we obtain
('(0) 1+2! _ I .r I”
‘47-" [W m: W62- 757)} “8’
81

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR Oﬂ'll IA]. USE ONLY

where q - Po/rx is a value characterizing the relative distance between the cen—
ters of the instrument sensors whose signals are compared. If for a particular
instrument (a - count) the stipulated relative measurement error is 5§(0)/°'2 -
const. we also have q . qo - const. This means that in the case of synchronous
calibration in an isotropic field on the basis of one signal reading of a contact
instrument an equal calibration accuracy for a remote instrument is realized at
points in the polygon situated at equal distances from the contact instrument.
Accordingly, here a polygon ensuring a stipulated calibration accuracy has the
form of a circle (curve 1, Fig. 2).

According to formula (17), the magnitude of the error in very simple calibration
is dependent on the interval between field readings by remote and contact instru-

ments. It is minimum if this interval is equal to

2‘2 603
:,-=- )2 77:11. .4 ‘ (19)
The mean square error in such calibration is given by the expression
cf (:2) 2+2! / J 2: loZ’o/fsin’g
a: ‘z[/~zz?'/oz"”°(’4- #2 AIM?! )l (20)

Comparison with formula (18) shows that 8f (to) differs from £2 (0) to the great-
est degree when the Y’angie between the'va and '6 vectors is equal to 0 or 180°
since field inhomogeneities. measured at the t me t - -to by a contact instrument.
with:¢'- 0° due to field transfer at the time t - 0 will be situated at the center
of a resolution element of the remote instrument. Since the field is not "frozen
in," the form of these inhomogeneities will to some degree be distorted, which in
expression (20) is taken into account by the q parameter. However, if 9’- t90°,
then to = 0 and formula (20) undergoes transition into (18). The results of com-
putations of the calibration error with use of the last formula are given in Fig.
la. Nith z:>0.5 the accuracy of such calibration may be inadequate even in the
case of coincidence of the center of a resolution element of the remote instru-
ment with the position of the contact instrument sensor.

0 1.0 1,0 M 9/9.

 

Fin. 2. Form of calibration polygon: 1) X- 0; 2) 3f - 0.5; 3)“ = 1.0; 4) 3’ I
2.0; 1.) 97- 3.0; 6) Jf- l..0; 7).x- 5.0; 8) )f- 6.0; 9)a(- 8.0; 10);,1 -_ 10.0.

82
FORiOFTﬂCJAl.USEI(NVLY
a

  

. . .o..— I N 3 3.0 I N A... 3.0 I N C. 3.0 I u
an .~.o I u 3 .o I u 3 .3 I v :3": 5.33.... no no .. a gun: .5...“qu 3 Bu 2:» 5
uconoa .5330 am 35390 9:23.“ 28 no 363 may no 3 38.5 538338 .n .muh

‘8” v Q a» Q

 

6
FOR OFFIClgL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equations for the boundaries of the polygons q(9), corresponding to the con-
dition of a constancy of the calibration error £f(ta)/O‘2 - const. have the form

‘J'
9-9. V ”31,12? ' (21)

where )V- VIZ/(1 + 7.2); qo is the radius of a polygon ensuring the same calibra-
tion accuracy with t - 0. In Cartesian coordinates they are written as

x¢.(/QAO) y! - (’0’) 9:.

Accordingly, the curves (21) have the shape of ellipses with a center at the point
0 (Fig. 1). Their large axes are directed along the v vector. The ratio of the
longer axis of each ellipse to the shorter axis is J10+at . The shorter axis co-
incides with the radius of the circle limiting the polygon during synchronous
calibration (Fig. 2).

 

The area S - J1 +3! so occupied by such a polygon is greater than the area so -
1T(qorx)2 of the polygon used in synchronous calibration. The X parameter is
greater in value the larger the "frozen-in" field. The area of the polygon suit-
able for the calibration of remote instruments increases with an increase in the
"frozen-in" character of the measured physical field. This increas: is attributable
to an elongation of the polygon along the direction of the velocity of field trans-
fer both in the direction of transfer and in the opposite direction with retention
of a constant width of the polygon.

Now we will proceed to study of optimum calibration. We will select such a coordin-
ate system that the direction of the x-axis will coincide with the direction of
velocity ‘70. In accordance with Fig. l formula (10) can be written in the form

[011T ' opt] dur(”)"£/7L-y- I
‘ «V»? 7)
'§ GI '7 *“}'("7’ )u,’ +: %4x, I7 1014‘, )e ""“mﬂ'm'ﬁfagdtf

Substituting here the expressions (15), (16) and carrying out the corresponding
transforms. we obtain,

11° (to) - 3 (0) x
M opt "MP; (I'.q’$E/i;'z'oz’)(%) I‘J'T'ﬁgT'c'awa'

(22)
where

~ ’M’ _1 1.1911.“an
“ur( (’91,S\:/O?I+ZI)-’xpo[ 4 (/.z:)(/.lr.¢¢) 9’1'

Carrying out the transform (11), we find that the optimum weighting function also
has :1 hull-like shape

I. I I
“opt‘ﬂ ' “‘m ”4' "246% 1M (“I'VE . (23)

8’:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the position of its maximum to is given by formula (19). Its maximum value 18

v 0.4! .17 1.3.2: 30211 .1
“-m' 5%;— “pl'lr- (1.2:)(14'o71) 4 J’

Accordingly, in the considered case in the case of optimum calibration the averag-
ing of the signal (2) at the output of the contact instrument must be accomplished

with the weighting function (23).

We will find the magnitude of the error in optimum calibration. Substituting ex-
pressions (15), (16) and (22) into (114), we obtain
~12

d" / A I
a! -Iq-[zl 'le: [(l‘l‘)‘ (/.¢l)2 -ybzb ] ,

ex [ J i In! lam! }

I - - .

a 2 (my 1.2 g -57 '1

A comparison of this expression with formula (20) shows that the curves (JO-P; cor-

responding to the condition of a constancy of the calibration error 8 sin/6 -
const are given by the same equation (21) as for very simple calibration at the
optimum moment in time to. Accordingly, in these cases the form of the polygon
has an identical form. However, with a stipulated 82 value the absolute dimen-
signs of these polygons will be different, since the dependences of 8§(to) and
8 on q, found in formulas (20) and (24), are different. The families of 6 2
(qawa 2 curves for different rz and 2 values are given in Pig. 3,b,c, from whlié“
it follows that the 6% value with finite z and identical q is substantially

less than the 8 EQO) value, especially for more "frozen-in" ields.

 

(2’0)

Optimum calibration is desirable in the case of large flight altitudes. In this
case calibration on the basis of one reading in general cannot ensure the requir-
ed accuracy. In this case it is necessary to select for the polygons those ocean
areas for which the investigated field to the highest degree satisfies the "frozen-
in" condition. Since the polygons are elongated along the mean direction of field
transfer, their position in the ocean must be selected in such a way that the
probability of intersection of the trajectories of motion of the remote instru-
ment with the polygon will be maximum. It follows from the preceding computations

that the velocity of transfer of the physical field in the polygon must be ortho-
gonal to the velocity of instrument movement.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Dotsenko, S. V. and Salivon, L. 6., "Optimum Calibration of Remote Instruments
Using Time Averaging," MORSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Sea llydrophys-
ical Investigations), No Is, Sevastopol', pp 92-99, 1978.

2. Docsenko, S. V., TEORETICHBSKIYE OSNOVY IZHERZNIYA PIZICHESKIKH FOLEY OKEANA
(Theoretical Principles of Measurement of Physical Fields in the Ocean),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1971., 152 pages.

3. El'sgol'ts, L. 3., VARIATSIONNOYB ISCIIISLBNIYE (Variational Calculus), Moscow,
Ci'i‘TL, 1958, 162 pages.

8
FOR OFFICIASL USE ONLY
lo.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Docscnko, s. V., "Mathematical Description of Random Scalar Anisotropic

Fields." mRSKIYE GIDROPIZICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA, No 1, Sevastopol', pp
100-123, 1971.

Dotsenko, S. V., "Spectra of Random Scalar Anisotropic Hydrophysical Fields."
HORSKIYF. cmnonzxcnzsxnz ISSLBDOVANIYA, No 3, Sevastopol', pp 65-82, 1971.

86
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
CHOICE OF SOME DESIGN PARAMETERS OF A SATELLITE DATA SYSTEM FOR REMOTE
SOUNDIHC OF THE OCEAN

Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROPIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 97-104
[Article by S. S. Kavelin]

[Text] Abstract: The article discusses some para-
meters determining the output characteris-
tics of the system: mean information content,
readiness factor, efficiency factor and relia-
bility of elements. The correct choice and al-
lowance for the considered parameters in the
stage of designing of satellite data systems
for remote sounding of the ocean will make it
possible to attain a definite efficiency.

The experience of use of experimental space vehicles ("Cosmos-1076," "Seasat,"
"Meteor," NOAA) has indicated the possibility of use of space vehicles as
carriers of special measurement apparatus for remote sounding of the ocean

in an adequately wide spectral range. The gradual complication of tasks, with
transition from construction of the diagnostic fields of physical parameters
to prognostic fields, will make it possible to proceed to solution of major
fundamental problems of physics of the ocean and practical problems in ocean-
ography in the interests of the national economy.

The solution of this problem is related primarily to the development of re-
search apparatus of the necessary resolution and measurement accuracy, with
the choice of a complex of instruments, with the development of methods for
collecting and interpreting information, and a number of others. On the other
hand, the successful solution of the formulated problems is unthinkable with-
out improvements in space technology.

As noted in [2], the most important characteristics of space oceanographic in-
formation, determining its quality and effectiveness of employ-ant by users,
are the makeup of the measured oceanographic parameters and the accuracy in
their determination, the accuracy of tie-in of the collected data to the ter-
rain, resolution at the surface, periodicity in revision of information, rou-
tineness in the delivery of data to users, possibility of continuous or per-
iodic global scanning of the surface of the world ocean. Assuranc- of these
parameters predetermines the choice of the on-board measurement instruments
and corresponding space vehicle service (support) systems and also the choice
of the principal system parameters because the solution of different problems

8
FIIICIﬂﬂC1z1.lEﬂi(HQLY
I'UII UI'I'ILIAI. 03!. ONLY

in this global remote sensing of the ocean with the necessary time period-
icity is unthinkable when making use only of individual space vehicles.

A problem of interest in this connection is the choice of the parameters of

a space system for the remote sounding of the ocean because its solution pre-
determines the effectiveness of use of space vehicles for this purpose.

A satellite system for remote sounding of the ocean can be put into the most
numerous class of space systems -- satellite data systems (153). With complica-
tion of the problems to be solved using these systems there will be an increase
in the requirements both on individual elements (space vehicles, carrier rock-
ets, etc.) and on the system as a whole. The development of such systems is

a multistage process with characteristic technical and organizational measures.
Designing as a stage in the development of a space system has a number of sub-
stages which include both functional-structural problems and the designing of
the elements of the system as physical units, in particular, the designing of
one of the most important elements of the system -- the space vehicle. The
rapid development and complication of the ISS and the introduction of automa-
tion leads to the necessity for a quantitative analysis of their functioning
from the point of view of optimum organization of their structure and control

processes. This also relates to the choice of the principal design parameters
for an oceanographic 183 (188 -- informatsionnaya sputnikovaya sistema).

The existence of several partially contradictory tasks imposed on the system,
the great number of structural components, their diversity, the complexity of
their interrelationships in the functioning process and the presence of a whole
series of factors of different physical nature which must be taken into account
in the designing of the system, to which quite limited times are allocated.

all this requires the optimization of the design parameters of the system with
respect to definite criteria.

We will call the totality of jointly functioning technical apparatuses intend-
ed for solving the tasks of collection and transmission of oceanographic infor-

mation with the use of several simultaneously functioning space vehicles a
"satellite data system."

Such an ISS consists of a large number of diverse, interrelated elements inter-
acting with one another in the functioning process. The overall result of oper-
ation of the system is determined by the result of performance of functions by

all its elements, including all the space vehicles included in the system.

A block diagram of such a system is shown in Fig. 1. Its elements are the space

vehicle system, launching complex, complex for placement in orbit, complex for
the reception. processing and distribution of information,network of underwater
(surface) data sensors, system control center and measurement complex.

we will examine some parameters determining the system output characteristics.
1. Mean Information Content

In the course of functioning of an ISS for remote sounding of the ocean the
system can be in different states determined by the number of working ele-

ments of the system and the place in its structure. Each state is characteriz-
ed by a definite information content (data yield) of the system. He will

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
assume that the set of all possible states of the system is a finite set C:

Efﬁe} km"... a. ' (1.1)

where q, is an element of G; No is the total number of possible states of the
system.

’_\, crml

/i 3)|
‘ L¥__l

 
 

Fig. 1. Block diagram of system.

1) complex for placement in orbit

2) space vehicle system

3) network of underwater (surface) data sensors

6) launching complex

5) measurement complex

6) complex for the reception, processing and distribution of information

7) data processing center
8) system control center

Assume that 13.1“) is a function characterizing the state of the system, where
V is the sequence number of the state.

1, if the system at a particular moment t is
/gy(t)’ precisely in the V-th state,

0, in the opposite case.

Each state of the system unambiguously corresponds to a definite value of the
relative information content by of the system.

8
FOR¢Mﬂﬂ€l I.USE(MNLY
I'UK UI'I‘ILIAI. 03f. ONLY

Under the condition that the system functioning regime is stationary and has
an ergodic property, the mean information conS’ent is found using the formula

J - m; _’_ I : (1.2)
mean r... 7 l2») ’0’(£) d3
whe. e 0<hy<1. 0. The statistical evaluation ‘3 this information content is

I J“) I
* ——
Jmn- , ,2; r, 2: We
I ml

where 3;! is a criterion characterizing the state of the system in the t-th

time interval (1; 131 is the duration of the [-th time interval between two suc-
Ceesive changes in the state of the system; out) is the number of changes in
the state of the system during the time '1'. For sufficiently large '1' we obtain

Jmean' :h hgj’a- (1.4)
H

Y
I
4%-: ”ti—£1500)“

and has the sense of the probability of presence of the system in the V-th
state at an arbitrary moment in time.

whe re

2. System Readiness Factor

This is one of the principal indices of the system, which is defined as the
probability that the system at an arbitrary moment in time is in one of the
states satisfying the requirements imposed n it and characterizes the reli-
ability of the satellite system. If G - “JV. 1 2 3 .N6 is the total
set of states of the system, A66 is the subset of stafes being in which the
system satisfies the requirements imposed on it, then

sap - Prob {”0061} . (2.1)

where q y (t) is the state of the system at the time ‘1'. Since each state of the
system unambiguously corresponds to a definite information content value J y,

then
sat - Prob {1w 31. } - (2.2)

where Jo is the information content level corresponding to the minimum of all
the levels of the set of states A. The statistical readiness factor of the

system can be determined as [“9
SM" - ‘— 7H:
90/

where fy is the duration of the V- th stage in the process of functioning of
the system in which it satisfies the requirements imposed on it; A, is the num-
ber of intervals 1, during the time T of system functioning.

3. System Efficiency Index

FOR OFI'ICBR. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the designing process the need arises for a final evaluation of the corres-
pondence between the selected variant of the system to those problems for whose
solution it is intended. The system efficiency index is introduced for evaluat-
ing the efficiency of a particular variant. It is a functional of the princi-
pal technical (operational) and economic indices of the system. The determina-
tion of the efficiency index of a complex system is one of the most difficult
tasks in systems analysis, on whose solution is dependent not only the result
of the investigations, but also the employed method. Since any system is an
element of a higher level, that is, represents an element of a complex hier-
archical structure, as the efficiency index based on such an approach it is
possible to use the expression

I
w. - M. Uﬁhli‘lﬂ, (3.1)
L Vie]
where "i is the efficiency of the considered system U1;: 0; “1+1 is the ef-
ficiency of the system for the next level in the hierarchy, which includes
the considered system; “3+1 is the efficiency of the system of the next hier-

urchical level under the condition of the absence of the considered system in
it.

A shortcoming of such an approach, in addition to its complexity. is the dif-
ficulty in determining the efficiency of the system of the next (1+ l)-st hier-
archical level and the small response of this index to a change in structure

of the system and the technical characteristics of the elements of lower lev-
els. 0n the other hand, the principal index of an ISS for remote sounding of
the ocean is its mean information productivity Jmean'

The satellite system will be the more efficient the higher its mean informa-
tion content and the lesser the expenditures c5 (Jmean'AT) on collecting this
information. The value

A _ Caulnean AT)

Jmean '

determining the price of a unit of information supplied by the system cannot,
however, fully serve as an index of system efficiency because for the user it
is important to know both the price of the information and its volume. Since

the efficiency of the system is characterized by its information content and

the price of a unit of this information, as an index of system efficiency it

is possible to use the expression

 

2
Jm" - _._J“£‘£_ ’ (3.2)
H a A czumean, AT)

where A is the price of the information.
4. Reliability of System Elements
One of the principal factors unconditionally determining the operational and

economic characteristics of an 15$ for remote sounding of the ocean is the
reliability of its elements. An increase in the reliability of any element of

91
FIII(MHHCJA1.USEIDNLY
I'D“ UI‘I'ILIAI. UN. ONLY

155 structure (space vehicle, data reception stations, etc.) as a rule con-
stitutes a complex scientific and technical problem whose solution involves
an expenditure of time and money.

The influence of a low reliability of system elements on its information con-
tent and reliability indices can be compensated by the introduction of an ex-
cess into its structure at all levels, but this operation results in increased
cost and complication of the system. Thus, the problem arises, customary in
the investigation of operations, of seeking a compromise between the opera-
tional efficiency of a system (in this case its information content) and its
cost.

One of the principal elements of an 188 is the space vehicle, whose operation-
al characteristics to a considerable degree determine the appearance of the 155

as a whole.

The most important characteristic of a space vehicle is its reliability. The
principal index of reliability of a space vehicle entering into the 15$ for
remote sounding of the ocean can be assumed to be the mean time of its active
existence (ac: which is determined as the duration of use of the space
vehicle for a definite purpose as part of the 188. As a result of the appear-
ance of different random factors (failure of space vehicle elements in the
course of functioning, consumption of supplies of on-board power, etc.) the
duration of use of the space vehicle within the system is a random parameter,

whose most complete numerical characteristic is its mathematical expectation
Tac ' "[‘acL

An ISS is characterized by the fact that as a result of failure of one or even
several space vehicles the system does not completely break down, but only
experiences a decrease in its information yield.

Since the space vehicle is the principal element of the ISS and its reliabil-
ity characteristics directly determine system efficiency, at the present time

the task of increasing the time of existence is extremely timely.

An increase in space vehicle reliability requires considerable expenditures
and these expenditures usually increase more rapidly than reliability increas-
es. Accordingly, an increase in space vehicle reiiability above a definite
limit without increasing the information yield of the system significantly

can sharply increase its cost and accordingly decrease the efficiency of the
system as a whole. Accordingly, validation of the requirements on reliability
of one of its most impo tant elements, the space vehicle, is an extremely
timely important problem.

The value of the mean information content Jmean is a function of Tac

' J T; ).

J1mm mean (

If the mean information content of the system Jﬁgn’ 0<Jﬁggn$L0 is deter-

mined in advance (stipulated), but the cost requirements have not been for-
mulated, the ngq value is determined from the expression

92
FORIDFHKJAI.USEIMVLY
J5: n ' Jmean (Tac) (4.1)

The expenditures on the system are determined from the expression

c0 - c0 (12?). (4.2)

 

Fig. 2. 7;:

In this case the '1‘a characteristics for different variants of the system and
the informational characteristics of the on-board measurement apparatus of
a space vehicle can be given in the form of the dependences represented in
Fig. 2. In another case, if it is possible to formulate in advance the re-
quirements on the mean information content of the system JReQ and its cost
Cgeq, the requirement on the reliability of the space vehigignin this case

is determined as . u
TReq I ”x That] ' TReq (6 0 3)
ac ac ac

.1 n
w ere Tth 3:8 determined from Jgggn = Jae," (Tac)' Tﬁgge "88 de£§:ﬂ1n2d from
C0cq ' 0 (T C9) under the condit on that both indices mega and C0 q are de-
pendent on the very same parameters of the system and are contradictory in

the sense that assurance of one of them does not mandatorily ensure the other.

If the requirements on the information content and cost are not stipulated in
the stage of designing of a satellite system and the problem involves formul-
ating them. the determination of the most desirable relationship between the
mean information productivity of the system Jmean and its cost Co with stipul-
ated limitations constitutes the problem of optimization of a satellite data
system with respect to several (in this case two) indices. The problem is sub-
stantially simplified if it is possible to form an index determined as a
functional for the Jmean and Co, H - "(Jmeanv Co) indices. Since Jmean and

Co are dependent on space vehicle reliability, it is possible to obtain a
functional dependence H = H (Tac)'

As the efficiency index w (Tee) in this case it is desirable to use an index

relating the mean information content of the system Jmean and the cost of an
information unit A- CO/Jmean by the expression

9
FOR OFFICIAE USE ONLY
FUR UFHCIAI. USE ONLY

u a“) - 3m, (rag/A (rec). (4.4)

The function Jmean (Tac) increases monotonically with an increase in The.
approaching some J“:xn value. If the dependence Co(Ta¢) decreases monoton—
ically, the W (Tac, function will increase monotonically with the asymptote
"IBEX

a“! - amnz (mo/co (Tee-'00) - Jmanzlco", (4.5)

where c0* are the expenditures on a system with an ideal reliability of the
space vehicle.

However, due to the fact that an increase in T;c involves an increase in the
weight and cost of the space vehicle, the system cost function Co (Tao) has
an inflection in the region of practical Tac values. As a result, the H (Tac)
function also has a minimum, which means an increase in the reliability of
the space vehicle above some TReq value without substantially increasing the
Information content of this sygfem; there is a marked increase in its cost,
and accordingly, a decrease in its efficiency.

Thus, the proper choice and allowance for the parameters considered above in
the stage of designing of a satellite data system for remote sensing of the
ocean will make it possible to achieve a definite level of its efficiency.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Nelepo, B. A. and Timchenko, I. Ye., SISTEHNYYE PRINTSIPY ANALIZA
NABLYUDENIY V OKEANB (Systemic Principles for Analysis of Observations
in the Ocean), Kiev, "Naukova Dumks," 1978, 222 pages.

2. Nelepo, B. A., Khmyrov, B. Ye., Terekhin, Yu. V., et a1., PROBLEMY, V02-
HOZHNOSTI I PERSPEKTIVY KOSHICHBSKOY OKEANOGRAFII (Problems, Possibil-
ities and Prospects of Space Oceanography), Preprint No 6. Sevastopol',
Izd. MCI AN Ukrainskoy SSR, 1979, 52 pages.

9h
IN)Ri0FF1C1AI.lﬂSE2(HNLY
PROBLEMS IN THE QUANTITATIVE DISTINCUISHABILITY 0F HYDROHETEOROLOGICAL
SITUATIONS

Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 105-112

[Article by B. Ye. Khmyrov]

[Text] Abstract: Special problems in the de-
velopment of a theory of quantitative
distinguishnbility of hydrometeorolog-
ical situations are examined on the ba-
sis of a generalization of the existing
theory of information. The fundamental
principles of the theory of distinguish-
ubility are examined applicable to a
case when the hydrophysical parameters
of the "ocean-atmosphere" system are
discrete functions of a denumerable
set of states of the modeling physical
system.

The modern development of space oceanography already in the not distant future
will make it possible to plan the systematic and quite routine operational de-
termination of the hydrophysical characteristics of the world ocean. These data
will be used in solution of both fundamental scientific and practical problems
in oceanography. However, for the further development of methods for remote
sounding it is desirable to create a theory making it possible to evaluate the
quantitative characteristics of informational relationships in both the "ocean-
atmosphere" system and in the "ocean-observer" system [1]. Among the leading
problems requiring development of such a theory we should mention the problems
of choosing (planning) the characteristics of systems for remote sensing and
identification of hydrometeorological situations in the ocean-atmosphere sys—
tem as multidimensional images with respect to which existing theories do not
give satisfactory results. As the meteorological basis of this theory it is
possible to use the presently contemplated approach to the concept of informa-
tion as the characteristics of the difference in physical phenomena [2].

In this article we examine the possibility of development of such a theory ap-
plicable to a case when as a model of the "ocean-atmosphere" system it is pos-
sible to use a physical system whose number of states is denumerable and they
are not dependent on time and change only under the influence of a complex of

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'D" UI'I'ILIAL oar. UI‘LI

external factors. Such a physical system is an idealized model of behavior
of the "ocean-atmosphere" system in a limited region of the ocean.

We will assure that the states of the investigated physical system can be char-
acterized both qualitatively and quantitatively either on the basis of individ-
ual physical characteristics -- criteria or on the basis of their totality. A
knowledge of such a characteristic makes it possible to compare, and accord-
ingly differentiate states only with the introduction of a unit of measure-
ment and the scale of change of this parameter. As such a characteristic it
seems desirable to use a limited, normalized measure, henceforth called the
significance of state.

We will examine the possible axiomatics of the significance measure. Assuming
the set of elementary states of the physical system 5? to be not greater than
the denumerable set, we introduce the significance of state measure relative to
the selected criterion V051) in the algebra of events R and we will require
that it satisfy the following conditions:

0(9)-I, eon-o, °Z‘:'Z°(‘~‘) with gnaw-1. <1)
I I

We will establish a correspondence of the number x, the value of the physical
criterion 1, to each element of the space? .. This is adequate for construct-
ing a mathematical model of the investigated physical system as a variable
parameter -- the function of events introduced in linear space with a measure
characterizing the physical system with respect to the selected criterion.

As follows from what has been set forth above, the axiomatics [1] coincides
with the axiomatics of the probability measure, which thereafter makes it pos-
sible to use probability theory. At the same time, the difference between the
significance and probability measures lies in their physical essence. By the
term "probability" we mean the normalized limiting value of the frequency of
appearance of the investigated phenomenon, being only one of the physical cri-
teria of this phenomenon [3]. The significance measure is introduced as a nor-
malized characteristic of the studied phenomenon relative to any of the quan-
titative physical criteria. As a result, the probability measure is the sig-
nificance of this phenomenon with respect to the frequency criterion, if such
objectively exists. In a more general case we introduce the concept of signif-
icance of mates with respect to the totality of its criteria. For this purpose
we will divide the possible criteria of state into two classes and it will be

required that in each of them the following corresponding conditions be satis-
fled:

a) the significance of state with respect to the totality of the class of cri-
teria with a reciprocally ambiguous representation of the spaces is determined
by the product of the measures of these spaces, taking into account the limit-

ations imposed by the criteria on one another in the sequence of their selec-
tion.

0U}(B‘) 3r," oj/I...../‘I (6i) . f5 m L (2)

)6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where VJ/l,....j'1 is the significance of the j criterion, taking into ac-

count thellimitations imposed on the space :3 by the existence of the criteria
1,-0.1-
X ’ o

For the independent criteria it follows from (2) that

~ ; 3)
{.{J} 15‘) . .7 \“ 'f 3,. [E In: (
b) the significance of state with respect to the totality of the class of func-
tionally dependent criteria with reciprocally unambiguous representation of
spaces is characterized by the significance of any criterion. In the case of
a linear dependence of the criteria their reciprocal representation occurs with
retention of the measure, as a result of which the significances of state with
respect to these criteria are equal and the criteria are indistinguishable

o V3039 a 0107,) . (4)

Thus, in a general case, when the physical system is characterized by the total-
ity of the criteria,it is regarded as a multidimensional vector-image whose
dimensionality is determined by the number of linearly independent criteria.

Proceeding to the characteristic of distinguishability of states, we will make
the space9? normalized using the measure y as the norm of its elements and we

will introduce the simplest metrics into it

5 (5i ' 5m) ' II J‘- ' (.1 “49-05)" Kai") I' (5)

making it possible to differentiate its elements on the basis of the distance
between them. For practical purposes it is more convenient to employ a log-

arithmic scale for reading the significance of states of the physical system.
For this it is adequate to proceed from discrimination on the basis of the
metrics (5) to discrimination on the basis of the difference in the logarithms
of the measures; this leads to a characteristic called information and deter-
mined by the expression

JV} - log “{1} . (6)
J“ .a‘”: 9 1 (am)
In essence this parameter is an element of the space of informational charac-
teristics, obtained with representation of pairs of elements in significance

space by means of the operator (6); its norm follows fromI t e metrics of this
space for the case of comparison with the zero element Jo mi

N - J“ -l-
12,150 J M...

As follows from (6), information is a characteristic of the quantitative dis-
tinguishability of the states entering into any paired association, as a result
of which in the space of informational characteristics there will be as many
norms as desired, following from (6). Among all these norms it is desirable to

%—‘ (7)

97
FINICHHHCLAL USEIDNIN
FOR OI-‘I‘K'IAI. “SI-I ONLY

discriminate some as the most important. or standard, among which it is most
important to include the characteristic of the difference of this state from
the most distinguishable state.

By the term "maximum distinguishable state" we will mean one whose signifi-

cance is equal to unity, that is. a physical system with one state; from (6)
we obtain

”(ﬂag - - (09 05 {j} . (3)

Since (8) determines the difference between this state and the maximum dis-
tinguishable state, this characteristic henceforth is called the special
indistinguishability of the state of the physical system.

The averaging of (8) with the use of the v measure as a weighting function
leads to the mean indistinguishability of state

I U} {i}
(‘9

This characteristic is a generalization of the mean characteristic of uncer-
tainty of state introduced by Shannon in [6] -- entropy; this, as follows from
(9), is an informational characteristic of the difference in state with re-
spect to the probability of a reliable event. As a result of this (8) and (9)
have all the properties of Shannon entropy, understood in a broader physical
sense. By analogy with the classical theory of information we will consider
the unit of measurement of these parameters to be the special and mean indis-

tinguishability of the state of a physical system having two equivalent
states, as follows from (8) and (9),w1th a logarithmic base of 2.

He will introduce the concept of the maximum indistinguishable state as an
element of the set 9?, the mean and special indistinguishahility of which are
equal. As a result, the elements of the set are distinguishable only qualita-
tively. whereas for a finite number of states n their significance is equal
to 1/n. Comparing such a state with any i“, from (8) we obtain

Wkab.) - (09a - ”mag. (10)

we will call this characteristic the special information content of the phys-
ical system, since due to its physical essence it determines the difference
between this state and the maximum indistinguishable state. Similarly it is
possible to obtain the mean characteristic of information content in the form

.f{"}(5) ' (39,1 — HULj) . (11)

These expressions can be rewritten in the form of a dependence determining
the constancy of the properties of standard information characteristics

. - / - (1') ‘ a II
”{1}.\5‘./-~R (6i; -.J.5$. (12)

98
FOR OFFKﬂ/I.USE(NVLY
FOR¢HHHCJAI.USE(HNBV

gala) . RU}@, - 50/13: . (13)

He will introduce the integral quantitative characteristic of uniformity of
a physical system as the sum of its information contents in individual states

:‘J'Rm-Zﬂmmmew-ZN“)- ' ‘1"
i _

The second term of expression (14) also has a very definite physical sense
and can be interpreted as the diversity of the physical system

74/76) - Z M” (50- us)

4
As a result, (16) can be rewritten in the form of a law of constancy of the

properties of these information characteristics

501(9) * rh’CP) - 60/135 . (16)

The material considered above shows that both the indistinguishability and
information content of states of the physical system are equally valid in-
formation characteristics. as a result of which an informational description
of a physical system can be made using any of them. In this connection we
will discuss some properties of the characteristics and the corollaries fol-
lowing from them.

It follows from (3), (8), (10) that with the discrimination of the states of
the physical system on the basis of the totality of independent criteria the

indistinguishability and information content of the state according to indi-
vidual criteria are additive

Mo»- 2 no».
.' j -
lemon): Z R’(8‘-). (13)

j
By virtue of the positiveness of (8) the special indistinguishability of
state always increases. whereas the special information content can change

arbitrarily as a result of the sign-variability of (10).

It follows from (A), (8), (10) that with discrimination of the stares of a
physical system on the basis of the totality of linearly dependent criteria

the special indistinguishability and information content of the state remain
constant

”(1)00 .. ﬂjUi) . (19)

9
FOR(Mﬂﬂ(121.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY ‘

RUIU‘.) - Rj (0;) - (20)

The totality of the independent criteria can have the property of asymptotic
stability of the special and mean indistinguishability and information con-
tent, by which, by analogy with [S], we mean satisfaction of the conditions

”M“. a
TMES)‘ -" ’ with 01- ' . - (21)
Rm(s-)-0. Amen—a “1th ”1-... (22)

A result of this is an asymptotic tendency of the information to zero (6), as'

a result of which the states of the physical system become the most indis-
tinguishable.

Thus, the use of the measure of both independent and linearly dependent cri-
teria does not lead to an improvement in the discrimination of states in com-
parison with discrimination on the basis of a single criterion. In a general
case the presence of the totality of criteria of state makes it possible to
select the most informative in accordance with (6). In the special case of
the totality of linearly dependent criteria this possibility does not exist.
However, the totalities of criteria are used extensively and successfully in
practical work for improving the discrimination and identification of images
and this assertion will not contradict the conclusions drawn above if one
adopts as axioms the possibility of introducing the functions of totalities
of criteria which can be used for the purposes of discriminating images. The
set of such functions giving rise to a corresponding set of distinguishabil-
ity models evidently is limited only by their physical sense and practical
feasibility. In this article we limit ourselves to an investigation of only
one such case - a model of the distinguishability of states on the basis of
a functional of criteria. In a general case of such distinguishability the
significance of the state of a physical system can be introduced as a normal-
ized semilinear functional n -

W109 - ﬂ. ,
Z n of (a‘-) (23)

[0!

corresponding to the axiomatics (1) and making it possible to introduce the
norm of distinguishability of states (7) in the form

IIJ'“ ll -\Z‘1 l.
Hi‘i'!

It follows from (24) that the distinguishability of states on the basis of
the functional of criteria is always equal to the sum of distinguishabilities
on the basis of individual criteria. In the case of nondependence or stochas-
tic dependence of criteria, then those special operators standing under

 

 

100
FOR OFFNJAI,USE(NNLY
FOR‘07FKJALIEEEONLY

the sum sign, in a general case are sign—variable, as a result of which with
adherence to (21) the norm (24) asymptotically tends to zero. This confirms

the conclusion drawn above that it is desirable to use the totality of such

criteria.

In the presence of a functional dependence of the criteria it is possible to
choose criteria ensuring satisfaction of the inequality

0

1‘” “> V:

. 2
,I‘ In” 3' . ".0, ( S)

 

 

 

that is, the change in the norms of the space of informational characteris-
tics in the direction of an improvement in distinguishability. In this case
it is desirable that the choice be guided by considerations of noncontradic-
tion and specific information content of the criteria. We will consider the
criteria to be noncontradictory if in a physical system with indices of state
which are ordered and arranged in an increasing sequence with a transition
from the state i to the state i + l the information (6) has one and the same
sign for each of the criteria. The concept of specific information content of
the criterion can be introduced as the normalized distinguishability para-
meter, introduced by the criterion into the general norm (2‘). As a reSult,
the principles of choice of the functionally dependent criteria, improving
the distinguishability of states of the physical system, applicable to the
considered model, are reduced to the use for these purposes of the totality
of the noncontradictory criteria, the specific information content of which
has the same order of magnitude. In the theory of image recognition the prob-
lem of the choice of criteria ensuring the best recognition is yet to be
solved. This is only natural since such a choice must be made on the basis

of the physical essence of the considered phenomenon. The merit of the con-
sidered method specifically is that here the decisive role of the physical
aspect can be seen more clearly than in the statistical-stochastic approach.

The materials cited above can be considered only as the general principles of
the quantitative theory of distinguishability applicable to the investigated
model of a physical system. Its application to the specific tasks of space
Oceanography can be useful not only for the recognition of hydrometeorological
situations, but also for a quantitative characteristic of the process of re-
mote measurements because the problem of ensuring reliable measurements is
first and foremost the problem of ensuring an admissible difference between
the investigated physical phenomenon and the observation result.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Nelepo, B. A., Khmyrov, B. Ye., Terekhin, Yu. V., Kavelin, S. S., Koro-
tayev, C. K., Vdovichenko, I. A., Kosnyrev, V. K., Bushuyev, Ye. I. and

Tolkachenko, G. A., PROBLEHY, VOZHOZHNOSTI I PBRSPBKTIVY KOSHICHBSKOY
OKEANOGRAFII (Problems, Possibilities and Prospects of Space Oceanography),
Preprint No 4, Sevastopol', Izd. MOI AN Ukrainskoy SSR, 1979, 65 pages.

2. Hazur, H., KACHESTVENNAYA TBORIYA INPORHATSII (Qualitative Theory of In-
formation), Hoecow, "Hir,"'l97é, 125 pages.

101
IN)R‘0F1ﬂ(1AI.lEﬂE(M§LV
3.

[00

S.

'0! UI'I‘ILIAL USE. UIVLI

ﬂizes, R.. VEROYATNOST' I STATISTIKA (Probability and Statistics), Hos-
cow—Leningrad, Gosizdat, 1930. 84 pages.

Shannon, C., RABOTY P0 TBORII INPORHAISII I KIBERNBTIKE (Studies in the
Theory of Information and Cybernetics), Moscow, IL, 1963. 1&1 pages.

Stratonovich, R. L., TBORIYA INFORMATSII (Theory of Information), Moscow,
"Sov. Radio," 1975, 63 pages.

102
FOR(NHHKJAI.USB(MVLY
QUANTITATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF DISTINGUISHABILITY OF A PHYSICAL SYSTEM WITH
CONTINUOUS STATES

Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 113-119

[Article by B. Ye. Khmyrov]

[Text] Abstract: The fundamental principles of
the theory of quantitative distinguish—
ubility of hydrometeorological situations
of a physical system with continuous

states are examined.

In [1] the author examined the fundamental principles of the theory of quan-
titative distinguishability of hydroneteorological situations applicable to
a very simple case when the hydrophysical parameters of the "ocean-atmo-
sphere" system are discrete functions of some denumerable set of states of

a modeling physical system. In a more general case as such a model we use a
physical system with continuous states whose number is nondenumerable.

In this connection, by analogy with the axiomatics proposed in [1], we intro-
duce the significance measure (in CT-algebra) of elementary states character-

ized by a linear space (everywhere by the dense set 5?) and the conjugate
space of the value of the x criterion). At the same time it is possible to
introduce a real, continuous on the left function of the value of the x cri-

terion, called the significance distribution function
'/'(x)-0 (MAX). (1)

Since the set Sfis everywhere dense, there is a probability density function
of significance which we introduce as the Radon-Nikodym derivative of the

Lebesgue measure m
/(x>-—f§§@- (2)

using the property of absolute continuity of these measures in the form of
the condition v(81)<g m (Bi), if

”2(4') ‘0'.” (40—0. (3)

103
FillilFFIC1A1.llﬂE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From which follnwa an expression for the linear functional for the signifi-
cuncu measure

9(a,-)-f/(1)dm-jau. (a,
4:3 gs:
showing that in the considered case the elements of significance space, dif-

ferent from zero, are functions of events whose Lebesgue measure is greater
than zero. The simplest metrics of this state can be written in the form

. : r .. r ‘
59.1. 45)-; JS‘I-J 4"}. (5)
{1‘2 35., {.5
Since (5) does not make it possible to differentiate elementary states, the
Lesbegue measure of which is equal to zero, by analogy with [1] we will con-

vert to the space of informational characteristics. introducing the concept

of information as an absolute characteristic of the difference of events in
accordance with the significance measure

5 a»
- c2 .
th’r" ' "’3’ do

‘iu‘ 9

The modulus (6) determines the information norm as the distance between the
element (6) and the zero element of space, as which we use the distance be-
tween two equivalent events.

(6)

Among the great number of types of information and their norms we will first
examine the absolute indistinguishability and absolute information content

[1]. In a comparison of any element with the maximum distinguishable element

V (31) = 1, from expression (6) we derive an expression for the vector of
special indistinguishability and its norm

s

”(01%- 40, j w (7)
0,19 -

and its limiting value _
(1m I/(Ji) - oo .
In Ob) -0. (8)

A similar situation also arises when determining the mean indistinguishability
of an elementary state since for nonintersecting events it is determined by

the expression
.4 (5)": ‘d0- (.993 an

0,29 9,12 (9)

and its limiting value with m(31)4-0 is equal to infinity. With a uniform div-
ision of criterial space into equal semi-intervals Axi - (a1, b1) expression

(9) can be rewritten in the form

”(5 ) ' 'JI/ C1) Joy/(x )ldx 141172 lo)“. (10)

10h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A similar expression applicable to the probability measure and its probability
density function is used extensively in studies in the classical theory of
information. In some studies the authors have used only the first part of
(10), having a finite value and called reduced entropy. This characteristic
is without independent importance because it is dimensional and is an element
of the space of informational characteristics. By analogy with [l] we intro-

duce the concept of special information content of state of the physical sys-
tea

I \ s ‘9 ,
£15,) - x/ .4.) m-i (49-4., 7552—. (m

where V“ mx is the value of the measure maximizing the mean indistinguishabil-
ity of state. With an absolute continuity of the measures Hm x<spl the ex-
pression under the logarithm sign is a Radon-Nikodym derivative and (11) de-
termines the difference of these measures for an elementary state. The mean in-

formation content of the state follows from (11) with its priority in conform—
ity to the measure

,o(a)= -i |e€o.%'m_x|du. I (12)

As follows from (11), (12) the values of these characteristics are finite,
this being their essential advantage in comparison with the special and mean
indistinguishability. At the same time, the already considered peculiarities
of the absolute informational characteristics make difficult their use and
make it desirable to proceed to the relative characteristics. determined by
analogy with the proposal of C. Shannon [2] in comparison with some standard.

In the most general form, applicable to the probability measure, this problem
was examined in [3].

We will introduce into the set}? the auxiliary dimensionless limited measure
[1-, for which #49)? 1, and we will use it as such a standard. In this case
we will assume that with the exception of the normalization property, the axi-

omatics of the p.measure corresponds to the axiomatics of the x/ll lmeasure
(l). and with satisfaction of the absolute continuity condition V<<fi the
property of multiplicativity is correct for the totality of criteria relating
to a class with an ambiguous representation. We will determine the informa-

tional characteristic of the event B. from (6) as a result of comparison of
two functionally dependent criteria -- the Vand ,1 measures.

.5“
J‘i-—’09 (P . (13)
qcl’
Its limiting value follows from (9) with m(31)-vo
(in: .7. ”(yd—i -I (4-‘). (110)
1:7 (69-0

The expression under the logarithm sign is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of

the 9 measure relative to the blueasure, as a result of which the following
norms of the setg? are correct:

105
FORtoFFKﬂA1,USE|M§LY
0'0“ ("I'M IAI. I'M. UNLV

iég-dv-wO?) - (16)

Expression (16) can be interpreted as the relative special indistinguishabil-
ity of state, which makes it possible to introduce the similar mean charac-

teristic —- the measure (a) I (9'
l/ ' - - lay d v.
§ ml (1,,
The derived expression can be written in the form of the difference of two in-

finite measures
I/(J) 0-.) [tag 49 IdOjl/qdﬂ lav, (18)

as a result of which (17) is a generalized measure. He will examine the impor-

tant special case (17). If the measure is stipulated by a probability density
function in the form

I
X (‘)"_(,) i (19)
the norm of the setS? for the,4 measure
4
ﬂ (9 - S l—(:) (20)

9
determines some dimensionless number which we will call the number of dis-

tinguishable states. This concept is equivalent to the concept known in the
classical theory of information as the zero of the 2x(x) reading -- the in-
tervul within whose limits the states of the physical system can be consider-

ed indistinguishable, that is, equivalent. Substituting (19) into (17), we ob-
tain the expression

”(4).-.qu /(x)4(') It". (21)

in particular, with Px(x) - const the dependence

/" C4 ' " 3 WW!) law-4’! 4. (22)
9
follows from (21), being a generalization of the classical determination by

Shannon [2]. With stipulation of the probability density function of the
V andfl measures in a deltalike form

/(I) ' X °t “”1')’ (23)
X (x‘ 3 60 -X )
. I Z ‘

(24)

106
FOI»OFFK]Al.lﬂiE(MULY
('ZIIIUT‘HIUII \I.I} WILL UVSCKJIII: Llle Ill-'6" llluLlLLllsuLlIl-ULLLL, UL I yuyaauaa

system with u denumeruble number of states [1] in the classical Shannon form

no): i M? °r~ ‘2”

As a result, (17) is really the most general expression determining the mean
relative indistinguishability of the state of the physical system: in par-

ticular, from this expression it is possible to obtain a generalized inter-
pretation of the norm (6) in the form

I /(x-) 4‘14? ,

”ah.” ”=ltay m x (1") I'nKJ“)-II(4;,) 'J. (26)
Thus, in the considered case the elementary states of the physical system
differ with respect to the significance of the reading zeroes within which
they are situated. The relative indistinguishability of the state (14), (17)

has virtually all the properties of absolute indistinguishability introduced

in [11- The difference 18 that (17) is not mandatorily positive. As a result,

from (22) it is possible to determine the origin of the reading with which
this characteristic becomes equal to zero

4. -2 1V") 439/60 Wt_ (27)

We also note the property of extremality (17), which follows from the limita-
tions (15). (16) with the investigation of (17) by the method of indeterminate
Lagrange factors in the form of the maximum condition

dv I

___.- - 28

all #39) ( )
Similarly it is possible to investigate the special extrema (21) using the
Fraud V measures, which leads to the conditions of special maxima

 

 

 

/
' f“) max' ’ (29)
A!
40‘)?“ 216:)
I
4 (X) r '
”a /(X)§ 3a) (30)

However, for practical purposes it is of considerable importance to choose a
reading zero making it possible to minimize (22). Such a conditional minimum
can be found with the introduction of additional limitations in the form

A); (ow-o (31,

S 4(X)41=0. (32)

P

107
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"M Ilf'l‘ IRI. t'N'. \DI‘I .

in particular, with the satisfaction of (31) the 11(3)‘ measure has a minimum
with satisfaction of the condition

(10):"): -5, (33)
that is, with a constant reading zero equal to its mean weighted value.

Now we will briefly examine other relative informational characteristics of
state of the physical system. For this purpose we introduce the concept of
special and mean relative information content as the dependences

R (5i)'=//(ﬁ‘-)'ual-l/(ﬁi)' , (36)

p(a)'-//w)'.,,-//<d)' - (35)
Using the extremum condition (28) and taking (15). (16) into account, we re-
write (31;), (35) in the form
- (v (36)
P'wi) T"! 27; s

.. .n'(a)-j|zay7%|do, ' ' (37)
9

where P'n is the normalized measure

A; (an-5%. (as)

The results make it possible to obtain from (310), (35) a law of constancy of
the sum of the principal informational characteristics

’99,.) 5/44.)- - to; {4 (P). (39)
19(6) WW) " =30! ,u (P). (40)

making it possible to consider the relative information content and indis-
tinguishability to be equivalent characteristics of state. In conclusion we
will introduce the relative characteristics of diversity and uniformity of
the physical system as Radon integrals of the special relative indistinguish-
ubility on the basis of the ylmeasure

7'02 mjvoyfpvldy. ' ‘ (1.1)

4N 1.2

Summing (I01) and (1.2), we obtain the characteristic of the property of the
constancy of the sum of these parameters in the form of the dependence

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7(p)-.s(9)'-,u(9) (arm?) - (,3,

Thus, the introduction of the auxiliary limited measure made possible its use
as a standard for determining the relative informational characteristics. As
the standard for a system with the maximum indistinguishable states use has
been made of a system whose mean and special indistinguishability are equal to
log IMQ ), that is, a discrete system the significances of whose states

are equal to 1/H(Q).

As the standard for a system with the maximua different state use was made of
a system whose mean and special indistinguishability are equal to log #62)“.
that is, a system with one state. The introduction of these standards made it
possible to make the principal informational characteristics finite, which is
equivalent to the replacement of the investigated physical system with contin-
uous states by some discrete equivalent. As a result, the materials in this
article constitute a further development and generalization of the fundamental
principles of the theory of distinguishability considered in [1] applicable
to a physical system with a denumerable set of states.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

1. Khmyrov, B. Ye., "Problems in the Quantitative Distinguishability of ﬂy-
drometeorological Situations," in this collection of articles, pp 105-
112.

2. Shannon, C., RABOTY P0 TBORII INPORHATSII I KIBERNBTIKB (Studies in the
Theory of Information and Cybernetics), lbscow, IL, 1963, 350 pages.

3. Stratonovich, R. L., TBORIYA INPORHATSII (Theory of Information), Moscow,
"Sov. Radio," 1975, 250 pages.

109
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARAMETRIC INVARIANCB 0F MULTICHANNEL EXCESS REMOTE MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROPIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 120-125
[Article by V. A. Gayskiy]

[Text] Abstract: A method for the processing of
data in a system with remote nonlinear,

nonstationary measurement channels is exam-
ined. It ensures the nondependence of the
measurement result on the parameters of
channels with definite limitations.

The problem of excluding the influence of the passive parameters of the medium
through which a signal is propagated on the measurement result is timely for
remote measurement systems.

If a nonlinear nonstationary inertialess link is used as a modal of the channel,
in a multichannel excess system under definite conditions it is possible to ex-

clude the parameters of the link from the measurement result and identify them.

We will assume that the object of measurement is characterized by the vector of
primary physical parameters ‘ _ -
X-{xi}. £-I.n.

forming electromagnetic radiation in a definite spectral range as the measurable
signal in the ﬂ-th channel in accordance with the expression

’2 - ”(1') . (1)
where 4’; (3-6 is an a priori known function.

For example, the measurable signal ya can be the electromagnetic radiation of
the ocean surface in dependence on temperature. waves and the quantity of foam.

we introduce a time argument into expression (1) and for small time increments we

write a.

,‘ (we) - “cl Km] +; anemia), (2)

where

110
NI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

av
d . a: ___L.
5‘ ix; . Km (3)

are the coefficients of channel response to the measurable parameters x1 at the
point Tat).

If the signal propagation channel, including the medium and the instrument channel,

has a transfer function ('1'?) which can be approximated with an adequate accuracy
by a power-law polynomial

- a a.

.’ - ) C .- 3’; . (4)
.'—i ‘0 o -
§ [I0

then for the inverse 11’, using an unambiguous inversion of the series [I], we

can write [2] m .
f \ - ‘ 3’
ye \tl ; 6‘1. (0)2: Lt) , (S)

where 851 are the channel parameters; 22 is the output signal.

Using expressions (2) and (5), for a multichannel system we obtain
m u a —
3‘ 5”. (Ht,- 2" (mo-ﬁx W] -:J“. (Hui-(t) -ﬁ.€'I./r. (6)
7:! "l t-

For the excess system k; n + 1.

In the regime of system calibration the vector of primry parameters is known, for
example, on the basis of data from contact measurements. In this case we write

I.” i - _

gd‘J-(t)l‘;(t)-q<[)&(t)]. g- 1.1:. (7)
The system (7) contains k equations and (m + 1)k unknown 35:, parameters of the
channels.

Additional equations can be derived when using t groups of readings at different
moments in time t . l,‘$ on the assumption that during this time the parameters
ng remain unchanged. In this case 1:; m + 1 and expression (7) is transformed to

the form In 6 j ..
. ( . . . '-
12.; J l: (t) q‘[x(t)]. 4 1.7, t 1.2". (a)

In order that the system (8) have a solution, all Y(t) for t - 17 must be differ-
ent. Accordingly, fo_r_-’ calibration work it is necessary to have not less than 1: -
m + 1 known vectors X. The solution of system (8) relative to 851 makes it pos.

sible to identify the channels for some segment of time in which they can be con-
sidered stationary.

0n the other hand, for a discrete time the calibration regime ensures a tie-in of
the origin of readings and the possibility of using the system of equations (6) in
‘the form

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:2 . ,
F J ‘ , ‘_ _—
,. {U 1‘ “"im‘ﬁ‘” qe[X(m].< 1.x. (9)

where there are n unknown increments Ax(t), (m + 1)k unknown parameters 38;} of
the channels (for nonstationary channels) and I: equations. We will take t groups

of readings and with
’.. o k _
t. 32L. 5 — I. t
k -1; (10)

we obtain the necessary broadening of system (9). The matrix and the column of
free terms of system (9) will have the form

=2,\t)i {as} ' I?! i
1 _; : (11)
law! Idgl lie! .
leI-‘a! |3~|
12,0) .. . 2”" (I) (12)
where | Z‘ (t) I - 72,“) . .. . afﬂt') .
14(1) .. z,“ (r)
dun—s“.
I “‘4 I ' .":I“-°‘¢n, ° (13)
Lawn-.2“
0. KM)
‘5‘ I " :£[ ] - (14)
q‘ [XQW]

The number of working cycles f determines the speed of the system.

In a system with minimum excess k - n + 1 and t - (m + 1)k. Hith an increase in
the number k of channels the maximum speed of the system will tend to t - m + 2.
Accordingly. with a great excess of the channels the gain in speed will not exceed
more than the factor k.

The speed of a system has importance in the sense that the parameters [331] and
{org—1] in system (9) should remain constant during the time 10f the working
cycles, which we will call the correction time.

Thus, with allowance for t groups of readings system (9) will contain ‘tk unknowns
and equations and also can be solved relative to the increments of the primary
physical parameters {4x1} of the object and also relative to the unknown

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parameters {88:1} of the channels for a new moment in time.

Z(!;-Z;2, . . . _ ImRvZZ)

 

 

 

 

 

a
few-I) . t'
'—_—~—— .
X0492) . . . t

Fig. l. Diagrams representing data processing in a parametrically invariant system:
a) in a regime of accumulation of blocks, b) in a loving regime.

Since the solution of system (9) for {Ax} is not dependent on {38 land vice versa,
the system as a whole is parametrically invariant with the above- ntioned limita-
tions.

We will examine the two principal possible operating regimen of the system. The
sequence of operations in a regime with accumulation o_f,a block of readings 7'13
shown in the figure (Fig. 1,a). First the values{(f,: [x(0)]} and «31], coqmted
using express one (1). (8), are introduced in the calibration reg using the
known vector?(0). Then—in a working regime there is accumulation of a block cf
‘t reading: (0. t id of output signals which are used in computing the co-
efficients 2g , j - 0.m of the system (9). Since it is necessary to satisfy the
condition

113
M OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2‘0) 1‘ Z‘ c-0521“: . (15)

so that there will not be identical equations in the system, either the measured

parameters [xi] or the parameters of the channels {3:1 must change in the time
correction segment. If these parameters do not change, the val s of the measured
vector—{(t) are equal to the values of the calibration vector (0). He will regard
as improbable mutually compensating changes {x1} and [353] with which the 2 vector
remains unchanged. '

Thus, by virtue of the nonstationarity of the {xi} and [3:3] parameters the set of
1 readings will be a random value.

After obtaining 1 groups of readings the s stem (9) is solved relative to [Ag] ,

usinuhich the value of the vector?(0)-r (t) is corrected, new values $30K: )]
8 - 1,k are determined using (1) and the response coefficients “31 are determined
from (3). Then the correction cycle is multiply repeated.

’

In the moving correction regime (Pig. l,b) the block is formed from the current 1‘,
readings of the ?(t) vector at each discrete moment in time by a shift of one in-
terval to the right.

The system of equations (9) in this case is transformed to the form

‘ZI‘, 23:4}; ‘:i("°"i> .1140- a: [X (90-1)]. (16)
697.7. 9-1-7.

The matrix and column of free terms in systel (16) have the form

Izrl I‘IF‘I ”If“ . 97’
Izz-l, l‘é‘" “I?" '
|z,| Mu} liml

where

71, t-r)... z,"'(c- r.)

llgl- "At-0m 2mm) (1s)
12, (t) 1;“ (t)

111:
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
roe omen. use on“
J” (bf-I)... - 4 (e-r-I)
|J‘(t) | - “er (a-v-1)...- {a 0-0-1)

-gs,(t-I)...-°'¢n(t")l (19)

I've. <3:t")l
-f‘ I ' .
MN") - large-.0 I): .
° . (20)

System (16) is solved relative to {43:1} and then the current values-Kit), ‘fsl-latn,
(“51(0) are computed.

The moving correction method has a more rapid adaptation to the measurable para-
meters, but requires a greater number of computations in comparison with the meth-
od for accumulation of blocks of readings.

In both cases if at any ment in time the system receives calibration information
on the vector—i, the 9K}! and 95,] values are computed on its basis. not using cor-
rection data.

The [Be J'Iparameters can also be determined by solution of systems (9) and (16). If

some of.1 the [3: lparameters of the channels are Imam and are constant, the terms
containing them in equations (9) and (16) can be shifted to the right part for
forming a column of free terms for the purpose of reducing the order of the system.

We note in conclusion that the realisation of the considered method for attaining
parametric invariance in multichannel excess remote measurement systems provides
for the solution of slightly conditional systems of linear inhomogeneous algebraic
equations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ram, G. and Kern, ‘l'., SPRAVOCHNIK P0 MATEHATIKE (Handbook on Mathematics), Hos-
cow, "Nauka," 1973, 831 pages.

2. Guyskiy, V. .A., "Measurement-Computation Channels With Automatic Correction of
the Transfer Function for Hydrophysical Instrumentation," HORSKIYE GIDROFIZ-
ICHESKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophysical Renearch), No 2, Sevastopol', pp
136-143, 1977.

115
FOR OFFICIAL (.8! ONLY
I‘ll UI‘I‘ILIAL Us," Ul‘hl

AUTONOHOUS BUOY COMPLEX FOR USE IN SUBSATELLITE POLYGON
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 126-132

[Article by I. B. Pavlovskiy, A. F. Petrukhnov, Ye. M. Bpshteyn and G. A.
Abra-son]

[Text] Abstract: The technical specifications,
block diagram and design principle for
an autonomous (self-contained) buoy com~
plex intended for stationary observations
of physical processes in a subsatellite

polygon in the ocean are examined.

Autonomous buoy complexes (ABC) are used in oceanographic investigations. These
complexes are outfitted with modern electronic instrumentation and means for
the distant transmission of data, this making it possible to carry out sta-
tionary observations of physical processes in the range of temporal and spa-
tial scales [2]. Buoy complexes are used as independent (self-contained) meas-
urement systems collecting the necessary volume of hydrophysical information.
The development of satellite oceanography provides for both the development

of methods and instrumentation for remote measurements and the development of
contact measurements necessary for the calibration and interpretation of data
obtained by remote instruments with the use of artificial earth satellites.
Accordingly, buoy complexes are being used at the present time in higher-order
measurement systems consisting of artificial earth satellites, autonomous buoy
complexes and a center for the reception and processing of information. The
use of buoy complexes in subsatellite polygons provides a new approach to de-
velopment of the structure of a measurement system and the organization of
work in a polygon and imposes increased requirements on the technical spec-
ifications of the complex.

At the Marine Hydrophyaical Institute, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, special-
ists are carrying out work for creating different measurement facilities for
suhsntellite polygons, one of which is the "Okean" autonomous buoy complex
developed in collaboration with specialists of the institutes of the Ministry
of Higher and Specialized Secondary Education of the USSR and the Ukrainian

SSR. The experience accumulated in the USSR and United States in the creation

of buoy complexes [3-9] determines a new approach to development of the "Okean"
autonomous buoy complex.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1WC1AL.USIZ(MNLY

 

Fig. 1. Diagram of Wokean" autonomous buoy complex.

The buoy complex (Fig. 1) consists of a diskrshaped surface buoy l with four
hermetically sealed compartments for the placement of on-board electronic in-

strumentation, anchored in the polygon to be investigated by means of an an-
chor line 2 formed by a steel cable of variable diameter. The anchor line has
two cable pivots 3 and an anchor 6. Beneath the bottom of the buoy there is an
assembly with power modules 5. Attached to the buoy is a measurement line con-
sisting of eight hydrological measurement containers 6, connected by a sup-
porting-electrical communication line 7. The line is supported by a float 8.
Parallel to the measurement line is a steel cable 9 connected to it by clamps.
Mounted on the buoy deck are antennas for short- and ultrashort-wavelength
radio lines, a meteorological block with sensors and signaling lamps. The
buoy has the following technical specifications: displacement 7.7 m3; hull
diameter 3.5 m; height of hull 1.1 m; height with antennas 8 m; fully out-
fitted weight 3300 kg; depth of placement up to 5000 m; limit of self-contain-
ed operation 30 days.

The structure of a buoy anchor line rated for placement at a depth of 6700 m
is given in Table 1.

The deflection of the anchor line corresponds to 51 of the depth of placement.
A sixth link of the anchor line runs between anchors with a mass of 300 and

500 kg.

The measurement system of the "okean" complex (Fig. 2) includes a measurement
line. a block for the reception and storage of hydrophysical information, a
meteorological measurement container with sensors, apparatus for the storage

lﬂ)!‘0lﬂﬂ(%%l.lﬁ§ll(ﬂ§l¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and transmission of hydrophysical information, unit for signaling the ship,
elements of the short-wave command-information radio linkup and an electric
power system. This complex ensures the measurement of the following hydro-
metcorological parameters: hydrostatic pressure in the range 0-2 MPa with an
error not greater than 0.8% of the upper measurement limit; water temperature
at different depths in the range -2 - +83°C with an error not greater than
0.05°C; specific conductivity of water in the range 17-70 mmho/cm with an
error not greater than 0.02 mmho/cm; air temperature in the range -10 - +35°c
with an error not greater than o.os°c; air humidity in the range 30-982 with
an error not greater than 7%; wind velocity in the range 1.5-30 m/sec with an
error not greater than (0.5+0.05 V) m/sec; wind direction in the range 0-2
Jlrad with an error not greater than 0.15 rad; buoy listing in the range 0-
0.5 rad with an error not greater than 0.08 rad.

Table 1
Number of link Cable diameter, Mass 100 m, Length, Mass of
mm kg m link, kg
1 13.0 55 300 165
2 11.5 43 2000 360
3 9.1 32 1000 320
4 8.5 25 1400 350
5 11.5 43 235 103
6 13.0 55 75 42
Sums 5010 1840

The system provides for outputs of the measured parameters in the form of a
successive binary code with a repetition rate of 100 and 600 “2.

The measurement system of the autonomous buoy complex is a multichannel system

for the collection, storage, processing and transmission of hydrometeorological
information. It includes sensors with a frequency output in the range 0-120
KB: and sensors with a resistive output in the range 100-2000 ohm. Temperature
is measured by a transducer whose operating principle involves the discrimina-
tion of the difference frequency of two generators with temperature-dependent
and temperature-stable quartz resonators [1]. Hydrostatic pressure is measured
by use of vibrating-reed pressure frequency converters of the DDV-A type. The
conductivity of sea water is measured by the combined contact-induction method.
Meteorological parameters are measured using sensors of an “-49 meteorological
station and a PDK—J sensor-compass. The outputs of these sensors are matched
by signals from the measurement system. The apparatus operates on the prin-
ciple of time separation of signals from the sensors and is designed for the
successive interrogation of 64 measurement sensors. In accordance with a pre-
stipuluted program, for example, each ten minutes, by means of a quartz pro-
gramming unit, a device is cut in for the collection of information and this
shapes command signals arriving simultaneously at the inputs of decoders dis-
tributed in all the measurement containers. After decoding of the address of
the corresponding channel each sensor is connected to the input of a converter,
and then, with the arrival of the next address, the next sensor is connected.

118
FOR‘OFTNCJAI.USE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

IS.
I.- h: .0: a:
59L

   

era—3:23 a1: . A
{ﬂipsaoznz as: E m

:00..:L::o._:a.—

chem

   

_II II AM~I gxﬂuﬂgo-nllﬂ Sync—Wm]- 3a
A: .

 
  

— 90.3050..- (3..
Lunch—56.4.": as:
loaf-5.595....—

    

 

~AQN a!

33:3‘q01 9- A0
I f #03055.
9:00 aghcﬂ

 

94.30.53 c3.
33.2.55.on- can
3 52.353383:

     

 

  

‘ ma mu.»
.3302»:

a 3:23: .3839 _
an sang—SEE

ll‘lll

aux-5.1!; 3." w
kﬁumm. mu u
n

     
     

”U
N
3
an
m:
H

1.0
md
.19
«has uaodoxo
l-‘(lR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KEY TO FIG. 2:

1) Temperature sensor

2) Humidity sensor

3) Hind velocity sensor

4) Wind direction sensor

5) Compass sensor

6) Atmospheric pressure sensor

7) Meteorological measurement container
8) Sensor...

9) Telemetric monitoring sensors
10) Hydrological measurement container 1
11) Hydrological measurement container 8
12) Ultrashort-wave antenna

13) Short-wave antenna
14) Apparatus of informational ultrashort-wave radio links
15) Ultrashort-wave transmitter

16) Memory unit

17) Data collection unit

18) Apparatus for signaling ship
19) Ultrashort-wave receiver

20) Address decoder

21) Data storage unit

22) 8" receiver

23) Command decoder

24) Short-wave transmitter

25) PINGI unit for data reception and storage
26) Electric power system

27) Battery of chemical elements

28) Converter

29) Storage battery

 

Thus, there is successive connection of a11 the sensors to the converters. The
interrogation cycle lasts 22 seconds. Information in the form of a frequency
or resistance is fed into a unit for the collection of data where it is con-
verted into a digital-pulse form and then into a binary code which is fed into
a data storage unit. The latter consists of a summator, operational memory de-
vice and transmitter of codes to the buoy memory unit. using the summator and
memory unit there is accumulation of the results of measurements separately

for any channel and storage of the averaging results. After a definite number
of averaging cycles, set by the program, the result is sent to the buoy mem-
ory unit where there is excess coding of information. There data are stored
over the course of 26 hours. The interrogation apparatus, after the reception
and decoding of the buoy address, cuts in the buoy memory unit for the repro-
duction or data and transmission through an ultrashort-wave radio link during
one communication session to an artificial earth satellite. In necessary cases
there can be repeated reproduction of the information, which is transmitted

in a 32-digit code. The word must first give the number of the channel and then
the measurement result. Each measurement cycle, consisting of 66 words, is sep-
arated at the beginning and end by marker words. The number of the particular
huuy is transmitted in the zero channel.

120
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
In case of necessity, upon command, the information at a real time scale can
be transmitted through the short-wave radio link to a shipboard radio center.
In addition, the short-wave radio link ensures the reception and decoding of
the 12 control cor-sands transmitted from the radio center.

The supplying of power to the buoy instrumentation is ensured by a power system
whose primary power source is a battery of chemical elements on the basis of an
Hg-CuCl electrochemical system with an electrolyte in sea water. A battery of
26 elements ensures self-contained operation of the autonomous buoy complex

for a month. The primary voltage of the battery is transformed into the ratings
necessary for supplying of the electronic instrumentation.

In 1979 our country's first specialized oceanographic satellite, the "Cosmos-
1076," was launched into orbit. Its purpose was the perfecting of a method for
multisided synchronous measurements of hydrophysical parameters of the ocean
surface using remote sounding instrumentation. A control-calibration subsatel-
lite polygon was created in the eastern part of the tropical Atlantic Ocean
for matching the data from remote measurements with direct measurements of
physical parameters. There, using the "Okean" autonomous buoy complex and
other technical apparatus, contact measurements were made of atmospheric and
oceanic parameters. The buoy complex was used in making around-the-clock meas-
urements of the parameters and storing data in the memory unit. With the ap-
pearance of an artificial earth satellite in the zone of radio visibility

upon receipt of a call signal data are transmitted from the autonomous buoy com-
plex to the satellite. Then it is communicated to a surface reception station
in the general flow of satellite scientific information. A radio center was
organized on the scientific research ship carrying out the hydrological survey
of the polygon and this center monitored the functioning of the autonomous
buoy complex and the satellite command radio line.

The transmitted data are registered on magnetic tape and in analog form are
plotted on a paper tape for speedy analysis and evaluation of functioning of
the autonomous buoy complex. Data are transmitted on the level of the signals,
the numbers of the measurement channels (64) and data proper in a binary code.

The experience of work with the autonomous buoy complex in the ocean, function-
ing in an active regime for 18 days, during which there were 16 communication
sessions, demonstrated that the principles adopted in constructing the complex
make its use possible for long-term placement in the ocean and the routine col-
lection of a great volume of scientific information which cannot be obtained
with traditionally used measurement apparatus.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Colombo, V. A.. Kotlyarov, V. L. and Shchvetskiy, B. 1., P'YBZOKVARTSEVYYE
ANALOGO-TSIFROVYYE PREOBRAZOVATELI TEMPERATURY (Piezoquartz Analog-Digital
Temperature Converters), L'vov, "Vysshaya Shkola," 1970, 170 pages.

2. Monin, A. s., Kamenkovich, v. H. and Kort, v. 6., Immcmvosr' MIROVOGO
OKEANA (Variability of the Horld Ocean), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, pp
31-33. 1974.

121
FIHICNHHCJAI.USBINVLY
3.

7.

9.

f‘ll‘ urrsusnu DO“. Ul‘lgl

RUKOVODSTVO P0 GIDROLOCICHESKIM RABOTAM V OKBANAKH I HORYAKN (Manual on
Hydrological Nork in the Oceans and Seas), Second Edition, Leningrad,
Gidrometeoizdat, pp 505-511, 1977.

United States Patent No 3828380, "Fixed Columnar Surface Buoy," Published
13 Aug 74. um V63V 21/52, NKI 9/8.

United States Patent No 3906565, "Drifting Oceanic Buoy," Published
1971.. “XI V63V 35/00, NKI 9/8.

Sukhovey, V. P. and Sukhovey, A. 6., "Nydrochemical Processes and Problems
in the Network of Automatic Buoy Stations in the Ocean," HETBOROIDGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 3, pp 106-111, 1974.

Winchester, S. 14., "Development of Environmental Data Buoys," NAV. ENG. S.,
86, No 4, pp 97-106, 1976; Discussion, pp 106-109.

Vonbun, P. 0., "Earth and Ocean Applications Physics Program (EOPHP). An
Overview," 1833 INTERCOM. TECHN. PROGRESS PAP. INT. CONP. AND BXPOSIT.,
New York City, Sec 34, pp 31/1, 1974.

Erochko, A. A. and Koulechoft', s. V., "Group de mesure a commando automat-
ique sur bonee, svec transmission des infomtions par radio," COLLOQUB
INTERNATIONAL SUR L'EXPIDITATION DES OCEANS, Bordeaux (France), Mars, 1971,
Theme V, Tome N, Paris, pp 202-203, 1971.

122
l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DETERMINATION OF VERTICAL TEMPERATURE PROFILE FROM DRIFTING BUOYS
Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 pp 133-141
[Article by I. L. Isayev, Yu. P. Lomanov and Yu. V. Terekhin]

[Text] Abstract: The results of simultaneous
measurements of temperature at three
horizons and data from measurements with
a distributed detector make it possible
to derive an analytical expression for
temperature distribution at depths 0-150
m. The mean accuracy in determining the
depth of isotherms 181v3 m. In making
measurements it is proposed that use be
made of drifting buoy stations. Satel-
lites can be used in tracking the posi-
tion of drifting stations. It is assumed
that information from the stations will
be transmitted via satellite.

The use of space technology has afforded new possibilities for determining and
monitoring the state of the ocean on a global scale [1]. In addition to improve-
ment of the remote sensing sensors, within the framework of the "artificial earth
satellite-subsatellite measurement facilities" complex there has been development
of new methods for studying the ocean, among which bne of the most promising is the
use of drifting buoys, especially surface buoys.

Employing such a complex it is possible to investigate the structure of strong cur-
rents in the upper layer of the ocean, advective heat transfer, transformation and
movement of temperature anomalies, geography of the seasonal thermocline and posi-

tion of the jump layer, movement of rings in the Gulf Stream and synoptic eddies,
etc.

The launching of drifting buoys into the nucleus of an eddy at different distances
from its center makes it possible to determine the volume of the water masses which
participates in the translational movement of the eddy and estimate the velocity of
the waters present in its nucleus. The parallel use of measurements made on drift-
ing buoys, general scanning data from artificial earth satellites and the results

of polygon surveys of eddies from ships vill make it possible to estimate the trans-
fer of heat and mass by synoptic eddies.

123
FOR10FFHJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OI-‘I'ICIAI. USE ONLY

The principal elements of the buoy are a float, radio equipment for communication
with the artificial earth satellite or ship, coordination devices and units for
measuring water temperature with depth T(z).

Buoy position can be determined by several methods [2]. of which the most acceptable
are radio direction finders (passive or active) or coordination by means of a radio-
navigation system installed on the buoy with the subsequent transmission of data
through a radio link to a satellite or ship. The accuracy in radio direction find-
ing is determined to a considerable degree (especially for satellite systems) by

the accuracy of information on the position of the direction finder, which over the
ocean is not always satisfactory.

For surface buoys it is more effective to use radionavigation systems designed in a
simplified variant and performing a minimum volume of operations adequate for sub-
sequent determination of the coordinates of buoys at the data processing point.
There are definite possibilities for the use of superdistant radionavigation systems
of the ”Omega" type and the relaying of data from a buoy via a satellite. The error
in determining the position of such a system will be about 1-2 miles with an unlim-
ited effective range. The length of time that it can operate independently is de-
termined exclusively by the supply of electric power aboard the buoy.

He will examine the possibility of estimating the temperature distribution. In or-
der to know the temperature distribution with depth T(Z) it is possible to carry
out measurements with a sounding instrument or make a quite detailed hydrological
series. The measurements will contain methodological and instrument errors which
can be estimated. Such measurements are necessary if there is no a priori informa-
tion concerning the T(Z\ distribution.

If it is known in advance that within the limits of accuracy in measurement by one
instrument or another the dependence T(Z) satisfies the relationship

r(z)./ (2.4;) . H, .n. (1)

containing the empirical coefficients s1, it is sufficient to carry out only n
measurements for determining the a1 parameters and thereby obtain the evaluation
f(Z. “1) of the T(Z\ distribution.

Bearing in mind the large-scale use of buoys, the possibility of their loss and the
requirement of a high reliability, an effort must be made at maximum simplification
and lessening of the cost of the instrumentation installed aboard them. It is also
desirable to limit the volume of data transmitted through the communication chan-
nels. From this point of view it is desirable to construct the function f(Z. a1)
containing a small number of a1 parameters. The possibility of using a function

with a small number of parameters for finding the depth of the upper boundary of
the thermocline was demonstrated in [3].

The results of measurements with the ISTOK complex, obtained during the 37th voyage
of the scientific research ship "Mikhail Lomonosov," were used in checking the
suitability of one of the possible dependences of the type (1) for determining the

mean course of T(Z) and in making an evaluation of the necessary measurement accur-
acy.

12h
FOR!OFFKJALI£HEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we wlll assume that measurements with the ISTOK complex give true 1(2) profiles.
Assume that ‘l' is the temperature at one of the points in the layer over’ the ther-
mocline, Zou 9s the position of the upper boundary of the thermocline, T is the
temperature at a fixed horizon 22> 20, T2 is the temerature at a fixed orizon
22>7'1’ 1' is the mean temperature in the layer from the surface to the depth 7.2.
As the experimental boundary lo“ we use the depth determined by the intersection
of the straight line '1' =- const - '1' (Z - 0) with the tangent to T(z) drawn through
the "inflection point" closest to the isothermal layer.

As an approximtion of the real temperature distribution we will examine the func-

tion
7,212
/(z.az-)- ' "
75-(5'7; ) £325 win-2:2,.

where 7. is u still unknown estimate of the depth zou of the upper boundary of the
thermoc ine. A dependence of such a type was proposed in [4]. The function (2) con-
tains four parameters: To, a, b/ (To - T2), c/(‘l‘o - 12), to be determined.

(2)

If To, 1‘ . T2, ¥ are measured, which can be done using three point temperature sen-
sors. sifuated in the subsurface layer and at the known horizons 21, 22, and one

distributed temperature sensor from the surface to 22. the conditions for determin-
ing the parameters a, b, c, 20 have the form

 

U l - 3
4-7; (22-4) :“‘3- "
6-5- (a— c) 32%; (’0
6-4-(4-6) ,1}: ~ <5)
7--’ S’fdz-r (r 7') 1—1:" 7,—‘4" art—’1 “), (6)
hence
(7)
any,
,. (8)
1-1
I. 6-5 (Irv-(r2)
r U

leaf (4-2,) (9)

125
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(10)

Table 1

 

In order to check the possibility of approximating 1(2) by Deans of £(2,a,b,c) from
the experimental values T(21) obtained during sounding with the ISTOK complex and
cited in the table for z - i 5 n, 0‘ 1(30, we took To (Z - 10- n), 1‘1 (2 - 80 I),

12 (z - 150 m) and 1 a
f-gf- {-ﬂrag .7 (qu L; (20}, (n,
- - :I

i’rurmsim; in accordance with (7)-(10) and construction of NZ) and f(7.) curves was
currlod out for 30 soundings in the region )5 23°" and ¢§8°IL

Figure 1 shows experimental ‘1'(Z) dependences with the maximal 20“ (solid curve),
ninimun Zou (long dashes) and computed (short dash-dot curve) approxilations of
these curves. Using the criterion 1‘

s l r-fl 42

I

the quality of the approximation in the first case is lower, and in the second case

ls higher than the mean for all 30 soundings. The depth of the upper boundary of
the thermocline varies from 20 to 38 I.

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-'~’ /7_ II ' z: r‘;

 

Pig. 1.

He will denote by br(Tj) and Zf(1' ) the depths corruponding to the temperature '1‘)
on the basis of the dependences 142) and f(2). For the isotherms 26, 21;, 22, 20,
18, 16 and 110' we found the dispersions of the computed depth from the experiaental

value '
II

the results are given in the table, where Er (T1) is the mean depth of the isotherm;

A is the experimentally registerad range of change in depth of the isotherms;
O z is the standard deviation of the evaluation. The distribution of the mentioned

deviations is given in Pig. 2. Along the horizontal axis we have plotted the modu-
li of the deviations with an interval of one meter; along the vertical axis —- the
mean probability of the deviations for the intervals.

The dispersion of the deviations (2f - 21) for all the isotherms was 0’: - 12.14

“2 ( 0' - 3.5 m); the nean value of the moduli of the deviations is 2.8 m, which
is the éharacteristic of approximation accuracy. since the displacements of the iso-
therms are «’25 m, it must be assmed that the registry of these displacements by
the proposed method is accomplished with a mean accuracy 10-152. The computed eval-
uation 20 was shifted by 3.2 m in the direction of greater depths in comparison with
Zou' The dispersion of the evaluation is

I} 'i’ :2 [(’o’t"('~)i 1"

the standard deviation is 4.7 m.

The correlation coefficient

12?
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
lNDR‘OFFICJAI.lEﬂE(NHLY’

[LVN-7:39] [DUE-2’30);

VizAQ-cwﬂ‘l'lew-zm; i (13>

is not dependent on the bias of the evaluations.

The values of the correlation coefficients
1) for different isotherms, indicated in the
0' last column of the table, in 6 out of 7
cases erceed 0.9. The amplitudes of the
changes in L1. and z are virtually iden-
tical. The correlation coefficient for zo
and 2 u is equal to 0.836. These results
give gasis for seaming that the approxim-
ation (2) makes it easy to trace the changes
in depth of the isotherms with time, espec-
12 ially internal waves.

He will proceed to an evaluation of the role
of measurement accuracy .

7;, 5.7331" 7: (1’0)
under the asaulption that the real tempera—
ture profile T(z) coincides with the func-

9/ tion f(2), determined by expression (2) with
o
6 - 5-27.15 .7;- ',r‘ -14.e7°.
7: -7§ ' 12W. (7)-17.92°.
I I, '80 u, 12.150 x, (15)
0 _ -

Z where averaging was taken for all 30 sound-
4 ~ ings taken into account. Then 20 - 33.5 In,
b I 00883. C - -1509 I.

Fig. 2. Histogram of accuracy of eval-
uations of depth of isotherms.

It is desirable to evaluate the error in determining the depth 2 of the isotherm '1‘

in dependence on the accuracy of information on the parameters (14). Taking into
account the assuwtion T- f and formlas (7)-(9), we solve (2) relative to Z

 

us ‘ -
.,z:(r 7;,(7l 7.1 . (16)

The results of measurement of the parameters can differ from their real values (14).
Varying these parameters in (16), we obtain a formal evaluation 21““ of the accur-
acy in determining the depth of the isotherm '1' in the first approximation.

128
FOR m1. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bxpressign (16) contains both explicit and implicit (through 20) dependences on 1'0.
1'1. 1‘2, 1', 21, zz, and therefore in the computations we used the expression
’ 3.1.2.2. in: a £1. ‘ £1 21 11;.
‘ ’r'km; a, pr, “’0; "dz, ":5'3"7*(ar ‘dz, o;)"7‘
-a 6’: *1/15 d: #2‘\ Id: d d
7?, —"’, " (afar, 2'2”" ‘ z, ‘94" 2'21, 75:)“1'

He will cite the result relating to the 1(2) distribution corresponding to the
adopted set of parameters (16)

I“ " 1““ ”’"~{-0.073(f,-7)- 41520-7; gay/(1:7,) } '

- ( [4165(7-6) (r.- rmm (M) (7-5) 142,.

(17)

(18)
’ [-0.021 (II-7X7- 6) + M! (r- axr-s ]4 2r

+ m (r-er—c) a r 45.700377) 0-4) -

- 14.0; {7-5) (7-7)]432 [4w Lama-7;)-

- 17.95.? (7-7,) (7-,; ) 14 5 + mm (74,-) (7.7,) 4 r ).

In formulas (18) and (19) it is necessary to substitute the temperature values,
measured in degrees. and the length of the segments is represented in meters. The
instrument error Alia“ 19 dependent on the '1' parameter. in particular, for the

isotherm 1' . 24° I4 z” (29°)|-aa: Ia z,|+o,52|42( [+3.5 [5 | +

*2; In; M3147, I #2: pf} -' (19)

with an accuracy in measurements (32151322 3' 0.5 m, ATozAle ATz z 0.01°, ATS

0.03° the instrument error does not exceed 1.2 m. For the other isotherms A Zing:
has close values.

Now we will discuss some peculiarities of measurement of T(2) using sounding and
distributed sensors. The possibility of approximating the real T(Z) distribution"l
is analyzed by a comparison of m), stipulated by the formula (2), with the tem-
perature profiles T1(Z) obtained during sounding with the 1810K complex. This means
that the error l'l'(z) - f(z)| in approximating the real T(2) profiles by the func-
tions f(Z) does not exceed the sun of the errors |r(z) - TI(Z) | obtained during
measurement with the ISTOK apparatus and the errors [11(2) - f(2)| in representa-
tion of the results of measurements 11(2) by the f functions

[1- - fl‘IT-TII+|TI - £|. (20)

129
FOR m1. [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An important and unmonitorable component of the error IT - TI lcan be excluded if_
in place of the data obtained with the ISTOK complex, the parameters T0, T1, T

, T
are determined using measurements from drifting buoys made simultaneously at aIl
horizons.

The use of sounding instruments has the advantage that the measurements are made
at all horizons but these measurements are not simultaneous at different depths.
The sounding time to a depth of 150 m is about 3 minutes, which is not always ac-
ceptable. in particular. in investigations of short-period internal waves.

In actuality, the internal waves can have a period 10-20 minutes and a height pals
m [5]. In such a case. coinciding with the instantaneous real T(Z) profile, for ex-
ample, near the upper boundary of the thermocline, 11(2) may be deformed by 5-10

m (with respect to the position of the isotherm) in the lower part of the seasonal
thermocline. The drift of the vessel from which the soundings are made and the hor-
izontal propagation of the internal waves lead to distortions of the same charac-
ter. The noted errors in measurements with the sounding instrument are random; in
individual cases they can lead to the registry of isotherms displaced both upward
and downward relative to their position determined by the real instantaneous pro-
file. The limitation on sounding frequency is also important.

Thus, for solution of a number of problems in oceanic physics associated with an

investigation of the structure of intensive currents in the upper layer, transfer
of heat and mass by synoptic eddies, direct measurements of heat content in the
layer 0—150 m, determination of the position of the seasonal thermocline, invest-
igation of the characteristics of internal waves, etc., the use of drifting buoys
is virtually the only correct investigation method. The physical and methodological
principles for determining the vertical temperature profile, set forth in the ar-
ticle. can serve as the basis for a sensor system on drifting buoys.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Nelepo. B. A., Khmyrov, B. Ye., Terekhin, Yu. V., et al., PROBLEHY, VOZHOZH—
NOSTI I PERSPEKTIVY KOSHICHESKOY OKEANOGRAFII (Problems, Possibilities and
Prospects of Space Oceanography), Preprint No 4, Sevastopol', Izd. MCI AN
Ukrainskoy SSR, 1979, 52 pages.

2. Greku, R. Kh., Ostrepov, 6. A., Puchkin. V. A. and Cherkasova, A. V., DREYP-
UYUSHCHIYE BUI DLYA ISSLEDOVANIYA TECHENIY V OKEANB (Drifting Buoys for In-

vestigating Oceanic Currents), Preprint, No 2, Sevastopol', Izd. HGI AN
Ukrainskoy SSR, 1978, 19 pages.

3. Isayev, I. L., Lomanov, Yu. P. and Paramonov, A. N., "Interpretation of Hess-
urements Made with a Distributed Temperature Sensor," EKSPERIHENTAL'NYYE IS-
SLEDOVANIYA P0 MEZHDUNARODNOY PROGRAMME "POLIHODB" (REZUL'TATY 17-30 REYSA
NIS "AKADEHIK VERNADSKIY" I 33-30 REYSA NIS "HIKHAIL LOHONOSOV") (Experimen-
tal Investigations Under the International "POLXHODE" Program (Results of the
(17th Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship "Akademik Vernadskiy" and the 33d

Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship "Mikhail Lomonosov")), Sevastopol', Iad.
MCI AN Ukrainskoy SSR, pp 166-170, 1978.

130
FOR10FHKJAI.USE(NVLY
lo.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kituygorodskiy. S. A., PIZIKA VZAIHODEYSTVIYA ADIOSFERY I OKEANA (Physics of

Interaction Between the Atmosphere and Ocean), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat,
1970, 286 pages.

Isayeva, L. 8., Naunenko, H. P., Rotenberg, V. A. and Yachnenev, V. Ye.,
"Features of Structure of the Tenperature Field of the Upper Layer of the
Ocean in the Northeastern Part of the Tropical Atlantic," REZUL'TATY ISSLBDO-
VANIY SEVERMY CHASTI TROPICHBSKOY ZONY ATLANTICHESKWO OKEANA P0 PROGRAHIE
"DBKALANT" (Results of Investigations Carried Out in the Northern Sector

of the Tropical Zone of the Atlantic Ocean Under the "DBKALANT" [illegible]
Program), Sevastopol', Izd. m1 AN Ukrainskoy 883, pp 66-81, 1975.

131
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
I‘UK UI'I'ILIAL USE. UNIJ

EFFECTIVENESS 0? REMOTE METHODS FOR INVESTIGATING THE WORLD OCEAN

Sevastopol' SPUTNIKOVAYA GIDROFIZIKA in Russian 1980 (manuscript received 30 Jun 80)
pp 162-167

[Article by I. K. Ivashchenko, A. S. Lezhen and N. I. Havrenko]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the problem
of determining the effectiveness of remote
methods for investigating the world ocean.
It is proposed that a special efficiency
criterion be formed using as a point of de-
parture the generalized criterion of effic-
iency of large information systems, a class
to which remote measurement complexes on
different carriers belong. It is shown that
the problem of evaluating efficiency is one
of the fundamental tasks in the forming of
promising optimum systems and oceanological
research programs.

Remote methods for investigating the ocean are now coming into wide use in solution
of different problems in oceanology, related to the necessity for obtaining regular
operational information on the state of the world ocean and the dynamics of its de-
velopment on a global scale. Their use is possible and desirable only with the,
broad introduction into sea research of automated oceanographic systems based on
modern electronic computers carried aboard surface and underwater scientific re-
search ships, with the use of apparatus for the remote sensing of the ocean on
aircraft and artificial earth satellites. Satellites can be used both for carrying
out direct measurements and in the collection and relaying of information from a net-
work of buoy stations. Since the carrying out of such global experiments requires
considerable expenditures of all types of resources the need arises for carrying out
special investigations, as a result of which it should be possible to obtain evalua-
tions of the alternatives for the development of remote methods and recommendations
can be formulated concerning the rational spheres of their application. A special
place is allocated to the problems of planning of an experiment and evaluating the
anticipated efficiency of use of remote methods.

The great many such problems involved in evaluating the feasibility of creating and
using noncontact research methods in general and with the employment of space tech-
nology, in particular, can be broken down into three classes.

132
FIHI(MHHC1A1.USE(N‘LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEGMVLY

Finally, a third class of problems which must be solved in the development of re-
mote instrumentation for investigating the world ocean are the problems of validat-

ing the economically optimum structures of measurement (data) systems and evalua-
tion of their operational efficiency.

It is already clear that not one of the known research methods independently is
capable of ensuring solution of all oceanological problems in the required volume.
This can be handled only using a complex system which includes both contact (trad-
itional) and remote (nontraditional) instrumentation.

The central problem in the economic validation of use of any type of instruments—

tion is the choice of an economic evaluation criterion. In a general case the type
of criterion is determined: purpose of the investigations; characteristics of the

investigated object; stage of the life cycle in which the investigation is carried
out; research problems. Since a complex system belongs to the class of large tech-
nical systems and the end product of its functioning is information with stipulat-
ed characteristics, such a system can be classified as a large information (data)

system.

Since reference is to an evaluation of the efficiency of operation of instruments-
tion in the stage of its development. an integrated approach requires allowance
for expenditures in all stages of the life cycle with the time reduction factor
taken into account.

In order to evaluate a complex system it is necessary to have such a criterion as
would reflect the principal characteristics of its structure and functioning;
assignment to a class of information (data) systems; presence of different types
of subsystems (scientific research ships, serial and space carriers of instrumen—
tation); interaction of differelt subsystems; features of determination of at-
penditures on elements of the system.

with allowance for the considerations cited above, the criterial function can be

represented in the form In! v
<—‘ , - 1 .
as - L. 5"! ﬂu” '
‘0: ’q'/ u

where (:81 is the cost of a unit of information supplied by different types of in-
strumenggtion for the j-th problem (task) or in the form [6]

I
__ If C '
- ‘- F“ p .
Cop: 4’ W ? tr. /' —. m‘p‘ (in rubks/bit)
’12.", £0". ._ lJ-D

where C33} (rubles/kmz) is the cost of obtaining information on a work unit (cost of
a unit work) carried out by the P-th instrument for the j-th problem; "E 91 (in
bits) is the total annual volume of information supplied by the ,D-th instrument
for the j-th problem; Ayear (kmz) is the annual volume of work carried out by the
,O-th instrument for thlpj-th problem; "yup/Ar" is the information content of a
work unit; Bud: indicates that the formula tak B into accomt expenditures in a
reduced expenditures sdleme.

1
son “03.3088 ONLY
I'UI VIPILML USI- UNI-I

/

As limitations we have:

operational: with respect to the number of carriers of information; with respect to
the computation time for data collection; with respect to the number of types of
information; with respect to the quality and quantity of collected intonation;
with respect to work volumes;

resource: with respect to upenditures on transport, remote measurement instrumen-
tation, control, interbranch and branch data processing.

The principal difficulty in use of the criterion "mat of a unit of information"
in practical computations is usually a quantitative evaluation of the pragmatic
information, but the form of the criterion proposed in [6] give approximately
such an evaluation through the index (2:1.

1
In order to adopt a- decision conaerning the feasibility of creating and operating
a system it is necessary to have an evaluation of its efficiency. If the system
belongs to the class of large information systems, as in our case, the gemra lized
efficiency criterion can be represented as the minimax of the man gain in the
broad sense, represented as the excess of the positive effect over the negative

effect [6], _ _
cm- aimo) 4“,," (x).

where 8 (x) is the generalized efficiency criterion; with 5 (1-)) 0 it is desirable
to create and use a new system; 8(1) - O correponds to the "thredlold" of feas-
ibility; QI is the positive component of the effect; OH is the negative component
of the effect.

The great uncertainty caused by the absence of the necessary statistical data and
peculiarities of the system do not make it possible to evaluate the economic effect
for all research problems on the basis of available methods.

For some percentage of the problems involved in investigating the ocean, whose so-
lution is possible by both traditional and nontraditional means, the economic effect
can be determined in accordance with a standard method using the index "annual econ-

omic effect," determined from the difference in reduced expenditures and being a
special case of the generalized efficiency criterion.

For problems not having an analogue, the author of [2] proposes an approach based
on use of discrete analysis methods. It must also be remembered, first of all,

that the use of remote methods for the solution of unique problems may not give a
direcc economic effect but their solution is sought for social, political or other
reasons, and secondly, the total effect from the use of new instrumentation must be
calculated for all spheres of use of the results of their functioning.

Thus, the development of predictions of the development of scientific research and
measurement instrumentation and formation of optimum systems for investigating and
evaluating the anticipated efficiency of their operation -- these are the principal
tasks whose solution will make it possible to form optimum promising programs for
occanological research, including scientifically validated long-range space pro-
grams, and in the last analysis, solve the problem of increasing the efficiency

of the investigations made and the quality of their control.

13h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The first class of problems is related to the development and choice of promising

directions in investigations of the ocean from the point of view of use of remote
methods.

The basis of these studies is the development of a forecast of the development of
oceanology, a component part of which is an analysis of promising means and meth-
ods for studying the world ocean.

For the formulation of a prediction of scientific research the authors of [1] pro-
posed use of a combination of statistical and heuristic methods. In a probailistic
model (information-logic scheme with "loops") the sequence of states of the object
-- the scientific research process -- is represented in the form of levels of the
"life cycle“ of the project and forms a spatially-temporally discrete Markov chain.
It is assumed that at any moment in time in state space there is determination of

an n-dimensional vector of state whose coordinates are the quantitative and qualit-
ative characteristics of the project stages. All the conditions necessary for use

of analysis of the Markov chain are considered satisfied, that is, stochasticity

and ergodicity of the process, uniqueness of presence in a state with a given set of
vector coordinates, discreteness of transitions, etc. In some cases, in addition to
these general assumptions, special simplifying assumptions can be introduced into
the model: uniformity of the process (the matrix is not dependent on time), irrevers-
ibility (loopless model), presence of "absorbing" states, etc. The developed method
for prediction on the basis of a dynamic-stochastic model. formulated using a com-
bination of factographic and heuristic methods with subsequent verification of the
forecast evaluations, makes it possible to make the necessary choice of alternatives
of development and accomplish a redistribution of resources in the optimum way.

The problem of the choice of the range of problems (directions) in investigations of
the ocean, for whose solution it is best to use remote methods. can be solved by the
logical—substantive analysis method, and also with the use of formalized procedures

-- discrete analysis methods [2).

A second class of problems involves the choice of an optimum (or quasioptimum)
structure of technical research equipment. It should be noted that virtually all
remote measurement equipment for investigating the world ocean (IR radiometers, SHF
scatterometers, spectrophotometers, lasers, etc.) are multipurpose instruments, by
means of which it is possible to solve a whole series of scientific—technical,
national economic and other problems. In this connection it is proposed that a
study be made of the real remote measurement instrumentation as a system having some
ordered set of classification criteria, characterizing the system as a whole. As
such criteria it is possible to propose energy consumption, autonomy. cost, inertia,
universality, homogeneity, immanence, reliability, size, compatibility, etc. The
"instrument-criteria" matrix table unambiguously describing the system is coded in
a special way in a binary reckoning system and is processed in accordance with
spectral or test algorithms proposed in [2, 4]. Such a procedure makes it possible
to carry out an effective choice of the apparatus (on the basis of its characteris-
tics) necessary for installation on artificial earth satellites or other carriers.
At the same time, such a classification of the instrumentation makes it possible

to group it with respect to types of statistical plans for experimental research

[S].

135
ms omen. use ONLY
1.

6.

f0“ UN'ILIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ivashenko, I. K., Lezhen, A. s. and Mavrenko, N. 1., "Methodological Prin-

ciples for Developing a Prediction of Fundamental Scientific Investigations

in the Academic Scientific Research Institutes With Specialization in Ocean-
ogrephy," MATERIALY KONFERENTSII "UPRAVLENIYE NAUCHNYMI ISSLEDOVANIYAMI I RAZRAB-
OTKHAHI" (Materials of the Conference "Control of Scientific Research and De-
velopment"), Moscow, pp 38-42, 1979.

Mavrenko, N. I., "On Determining the Economic Effect Under Uncertainty Condi-
tions," TRUDY MAI. VOPROSY UPRAVLENIYA RAZRABOI'KAMI I PROIZVODSTVOM LETATBL'-
NYKM APPARATOV (Transactions of the Moscow Aviation Institute. Problems in
Control of Development and Production of Flight Vehicles), No 393, Moscow, pp
34-37, 1977.

Berzhicakiy, M. l... SISTEMNYY ANALIZ I STAIISTICHESKOYB PLANIROVANIYE EKSPERI-
MEHTA V ISSLEDOVANIXAKH PRI SOZDANII OB”YEKIOV NOVOY TEKHNIKI (Systems Analysis
and Statistical Planning of Experiments in Investigations for the Creation of
New Instrumentation). Kiev, "Znaniye," pp 9-10, 1979.

Lezhen, A. S. and Mavrenko, N. 1., "Spectral Approach to the Classification of
Oceanologicnl Investigations," AVTOMATIZATSIYA MAUCHNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY MOREY I

OKEANOV (TEZISY DOKLADOV V VSESOYUZNOY SHKOLY) (Automation of Scientific Inves-
tigations of the Seas and Oceans (Summaries of Reports at the Fifth All—Union

School)), Sevastopol', Izd-vo MCI AN UkSSR, pp 34-35, 1980.

anymov, V. V. and Chernova, I. A., STATISTICHESKIYE MBTODY PLANIROVANII EK-

STREMAL'NYKH EKSPERIMENTOV (Statistical Methods in the Planning of Extremal
Experiments), Moscow, "Nauka," pp 10-15, 1965.

Mavrenko, N. I., "Criteria and Methods for Evaluating the Efficiency of Space
Vehicles and Methods for Investigating the Ocean," AVTCMATIZATSIYA MAUCHNYKH

ISSLEDOVANIY HOREY I OKEANOV (TEZISY DOKLADOV V VSBSOYUZNOY SHKOLY), Sevastopol',
Izd-vo AN UkSSR, pp 161-162, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Morskoy gidrofizicheskiy institut AN USSR (M61 AN USSR) 1980

5303
680:

81hh/1936 END

136
FOI10FHKJA1.USE(MULY