FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10239
7 January 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from Englishslanguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TRAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/102

7 January

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 1/82)

Coursurs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOWICAL

Prime Minister Suzuki's Strategy for Election
(Takehiko Takehashi; MAINICHI DAILY NM, 9 Dec 81) .......

Suzuki's Choice of Sakurauchi as Foreign Minister Analysed
("J-nor“ "1rm03m DAILY YMURI, 6 Ibo 81) oeeeooooeeoeoo

Two New Ministerial Appointments Exanined
(SvadeSh m Roy; THE mm rm, 6 me 81) ouccoeoeeeeoe

Chmges in Komeito Policy Examined
(Editorial; HAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 6 Dec 81) ................

Ministers Still Split Over Defense Cost
(mn‘ICHI DAILY NM, 5 me 81) 0.0.0.000....OOOOIOOOOOOOOO

Moscow Disappointed by Japan's Passivity
(THE DAILY YmIURI, 8M 81) 0.0.0.0...IOOOOOOOIOIOOOIOOI.

Tokuma Utsunomiya Criticizes 0.8.4188]! Arms Race
(THE DAILY lem, 9% 81) 0.0.0.0...IOOCOOOOOOOOCOIIIOI

SDF Pay Boost Not in 7.5 Percent Ceiling
(TI'E JAPAN Tm, 2 me 81) ............I..................

ECONGJIC

Japan, Singapore Strengthen Economic Ties
(Akita Kas‘lya; BUsImS Jun, "0V 81) OOICODIOOIIOOIOOOOC.

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

Role of Robots in Industry Viewed
(Shozo HOChi, BUSINESS JAPAN, NOV 81) 00.00.00.000000000000

-a- [In-asn-iur

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

International Cooperation Promoted To Boost Plant Exports
(mhiko Matsuda; BUSINESS J‘PAN’ NOV 81) oo-ooooooouoooo

Chemical Industry Hurt by Continuing Recession
(Aldra Suzuki; BUSINESS JAPM, Nov 81) ...................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PM MINISTER SUZUKI'S STRAW NR ELECTION

Tokyo MIC!!! DAILY N518 in English 9 Doc 81 p 2

[quntacho Doings Colman by Takehiko Tnkahaahlt

Strategy” 1

[Text]

'l'hereisasaying.“taikahout

nextyearmdthedevilvilt

laugh." The meaning is that
since no one knows what will
happen tomorrow. it is non»
sensetotaikaboutnestyesr.

‘i'hedevilmaylaughhutletus-

think tor a moment ahotn
politics nest year. The biggest
political event scheduled tor
nextyearistheeieetionoithe
Liberal-Democratic Party's
president

Pt'imeMlnisierZettkoSunlki‘

hasstrengthenedhiscnnﬂdence
in holding on to the reins oi
administration. He is thinking

about continuing to remain in,

the premiership by winnhgthe

LDP presidential election next'
year. The cabinet reshultie and.‘

mappoinimentsoiparty

oiiiciais were steps taken ior.

that purpose.

Susumu Nikaido has been.

appointed by Prime alinister
Suzuki as the LDP secretary
general. Nikaido is a person on
whom the label oi "a grey bin
oiiicial" has been placed in
connection with the Lockheed

incident. This may have raised .
eyebrows but in order ior Prime '

Minister Suzuki to maintain the

reins oi administration. the.

cooperation oi the Tanalta
inction.thelarnestintheLDP.
is necessary. To reiuse the

Tanaka iaction's demand that
lealdo he made the secretary
general would have shaken the
inundation oi the Sinuki ad-
ministration Suzuiti thereiore
made Nikaido the party's
secretary penerﬂ.

in doing so. Prime Minister
Suzuki kept in mind the
atrategyohturning misinrtune
hitnlorume."iiNikaidovereto
more the poet oi secretary
general. the Pukuda (action
would iind it necessary to push
tor the entry oi liutsuki Kain
into the cabinet. For a party
man. the post oi secretary
general is much more im-
portantthanaeahinetpost.

‘Gl'ey Oiilcial’

ii leaido. a "grey oiitcial."
were to be appointed to that
important post. ihereshouldbe
no problem in selecting Kain.
similarly a "grey oiiiciai." to
the timer post oi cabinet
minister. This was the thinking
that had to onrne from the
Pukuda iactinn. considering its
internal situation.

Former Prime Minister
Taken t-‘ultuda must have
personally thought that Kate's

entry into the cabinet n-otild be
inappropriate (or the time
being. Nevertheless. because
Nikaido became the secretary

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Prime innate:- Suzuki's Clem

general. it became necessary to
ask ior Kate's entry into the
cabinet. This demand was
made toSuauki.
Primemhsiinister Stuct’tek'iﬂad-
vanced strategy y.
Suzuki said: "The party and the
cabinet are diiierent. One who.
iscailed a ‘greyoilicial’ canhe
appointed a party oillcial but it

B inappropriate tor a 'grey
oiiicial' toenterthecahinet."

Thiswasthereasonpiven senior
rejectinaitato'sinentry tothe
cabinet

‘i'hisattitudeiam byPrime
Ministersimtkivilihrinahim

bigpolitical beneﬁts lain nut
year's party presidentla al
election. ii the Tanaka laction
were to enter someone as a
eandidaiethnuidloglcaliybe
Nikaidthisatsuchatimethat
Prime hiinister Suzuki's
strategy taken at this time will
display itseiiect
Rejecting Kate's entry into
the cabinet while

saying "Iir. Niltaido. a party
post is the best that you can
hope to obtain. A person who is
called a 'grey oiiiciai"eannot
hope to become a cabinet
minister. Even more so. it is
:32 23 p “.2328.
2589 93.8.3 388 :3
29 5:895— 3333 8
282... 2.83:». 9::
<~a=EZ 2:. 2::
£335.. = 33:. 803»
:5: 5: :6 .335 88.8
a... an out 8 BE 2: 2 98a
§< E .3: «8.... 33.
9383.5 .825...

93.62. @852.

=8.5~8€95u§390
9.85 882. 8: 8 w 8.
23...: meg? m. :8 ans-w»

. .58... :8 783 1.95 :3
3:3 .33 .5 2.32...
9.2:; 23:2. 1.: co
3.33.82. §§3£<. =

83.53:? .36 sawing 9.5% 226 $3.

in). .3 03}:
SUZUXI'S CHOICE O? SWCHI A8 PORSIQI mm mm

mm m DAILY mum in nagnah 6 Dec 91 p 3

[Rhino the Scheme Columby Mime-n aim:

[Text]

' ‘. ewe-.-

Ammctmeneneeovee'ﬂ
thetotelenmnleunnlpweeheldlntnel
mmmmn.uu
tollowlnctneeehlnetuebnme.0ntcotnc
tmlpﬂnbterhneoaonodnwhowu

3

cheap In the totem: Inlnleteteht
unintelligible to the people In three .weye.
Hm, why wee Sonode removed tune
once? Too-the: wtth on»: menu: Sece-
tery men! mean. Bonodn en
m mm: mm foreign
mum: on Independent oonne of action
onthebeele-oltheepmtotthewex-
renoundnc constitution. toe their unit,
the tune men wen «lied the
Weave-Boned: mo. It made the
am of the Min Ministry eeknowlh
dce the euoenomy or pounce end et the
eune ulna. hept e eerteln dletenoe from
US Meat Reeann'e hewlden foreign
poﬂeytowerdtbeeoﬂetumonjhepewle
eopleuded sound: {or man; Walnu-
lon'e mutate for lncreeeed detenee epend-
lne by noon end for My macaw;
South Route met lot so billion In Je-
peneee old.

aonode’e outeoounneee mad the us
end Booth Koeee. however. Inﬂted onu-
clem “one eoene maul-Demon. pert:-
colorly thoee belonune to the mkude tec-
Uon. Pm meter 81mm. who deﬁne
to be reelected LDP president In the el'ec~
“on to he held erm- one ”or, bully neede
eopponﬂoen thehnenendmknde rec-
mmmummmmmm.
For thle reeeon. he emlnted Sauna

E3

£3

meadomttbe'rnnmteouomtothepoet.

5 .

“my Sekunuohlr']

or ID? mruana “mm
the wlehee o!

mud-um

 

sonooe and mean no W
diaerent tn chenctee. wan. Sonode loote‘
Into Ne neunet'e one when he '9
Munch! epeeke without emotion

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-6

MIMI/SEMY

mm3m0 Santana-l
w
«aw-mmmmw
my cum m-mwrm
mmmmmmmum
mm “1066'..me
Wm“com”‘mwm
nmnmd.’ “vnhout may." ole.
The «ma annual: I. III“?
(WWI-combs».
din mum-mu.»-
mlm.mm.wunum~p—
mammamm.mme
MM W's policy to am Inh-
wlw'ommmmmw

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yomiuri 1981

C80! 4120/ 93

h
“mt/SEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-0
mo NEW MINISTERIAL APPOIWS m

mayomoanrvonrmmmqusheoecetpz

[mcus on Asia Column by Swodeah be any:

[Text]

Symbolism is often used in Oriental com-
munication: and quite a bit of it is to be
found in Prime Minister Suzuki's recent
choice of ministers for his second cabinet
in lo months

Externally at least. his selection of Yo-
shio Saturauchi as foreign and Shintaro
Abe as International trade and industry
ministers. hoth regarded unfamiliar to the
tasks given them. perhaps symbolically
seeks to convey something that words for
obvious reasons must not spell out.

A word of warning though: Failure to
correctly read it may lead to dangerous
misunderstanding.

Both men are well-versed with the ruling
Liberal-Democratic Party's policies, both
having been closely associated with the
party's policy-making processes. They have
extensive government experiences too.
though not in the areas of their new re-
sponsibilities. What perhaps they lack is an
“American background" to he recognised
immediately in Washington.

Observers were initially surprised; but
theyanewhetterthannottoreadthe
message which. when deciphered. should
read somewhat like this: The new govern-
ment like all the past ones considers the
USasltsprinclpalandbyfartbemost
important partner: but unlike so often in
the past it does not propose to exhaust
all its-talent manaung the problems of
Japan-vs relations. intending instead to
employ its resources so that other areas
of concern will not only he not neglected
but be adequately cultivated.

Sources in Washington. according to re-
ports. were surprised at these two appoint-
ments. Americans natume will be closely
watching with some concern how the two
men handle the tin-Japan problems. An-
other report quoted an ASIAN source in
Southeast Asia as having exprsned doubt

'h ilaasuze of Independence”!

if the new foreign minister will support
We position on Cambodia as before.

At the Brussels headquarters of the lac

oniciala were blunt: “What we need now
is action. not words" to improve trade re-
lations. And comments from Seoul were
mild. limited to an expression of hope
that the new foreign minister and the
government would attend to the problems
of South Korea.

None in Chins said anything. But the
ChinesewillbethenrsttomeetbothSa-
kurauehi and Abe in about a week's time
in ‘llohyo at a ministerial conference.

Bakurauohihassaidhehasnopiansto
visit Washington in the next few months
and is said to prefer the pending problems
between Japan and the 08 to be tackled
st ofhclals' level. Obviously. he believes his
time will be better spent on issues that
really need political handling. If he is
going to South Korea next month the
message is he wants to start Norseman
Asia like the prime minister himself did
earlier this year visiting ABEAN capitals
before even dating a date for his trip to
Washington.

lie is also known for his repeated sug-
gestion to the prime minister that the
fraese on aid to Vietnam be at least relax-
ed to allow humanitarian assistance to be
resumed. This may be the cause oi concern
in ABEAN. But Bakurauchi's personal posi-
tion will hardly alter a government po-
licy. though his known sympathies may
inﬂuence or prompt actions not neces-
i1:3;in incompatible with the oiilclal po-

8akurauchi Is not alone when he sym-
pathises with Vietnam‘s needs. Japanese
businessmen. intellectuals and critics are
opposed to economic sanction against
Vietnam. There is a growing clamor that
Japan begin to try and inﬂuence others

.
roe omc'w. use ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rather than rennin “prisoner" of m com-
mitment to Anetta. China. or ASEAN.

It I! Is no longer to hue "me ride" on
use us or {or am miter anyone else.
It should mo not. he mam e mum
or Independence. This my Indeed he 1
new policy In development.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yomiuri 1981

C80: 4120/93

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-8
m5 1)! MIN POLICY WIRED

‘iioltyo airmen: DAILY ms in Witch 6 Dec 81 p 2

[Editorial 3

[Text]

"New mute Policy")

The moderate opposition Komeito Party has
drastically changed its policy line which is now ap-
proaching that of the Liberal-Democratic Party.
Frankly speaking. we would like to ask the party:
“Where are you going?"

The party opened its three-day 19th convention in
Tokyo and adopted its action policy and basic policy
for the coming year. Since its inauguration 17 years
ago. the Komeito policy-line pendulum has swung
rapidly from left to right and vice versa. The con-
vention has disclosed that the policy line has now
made a drastic right turn. it may be a realistic policy
line but it has given us an impression that the
Komeito Party is now standing closer to the govern-
ment party.

The Komeito has made a drastic change in such
basic aspects as its foreign and defense policies and
also its concept on the possible formation of a
coalition government among opposition parties. 0n
foreign and defense policies. the party. based on the
idea that "Japan is a member of the Western world."
admitted the existence of the Soviet threat and the
tension on the Korean Peninsula. the virtual con-
stitutionality of the Self-Defense Forces and. for the
first time. announced its support of the U.S.Japan
Security Treaty.

0n the formation of a coalition government. the
Komelto shifted its emphasis toward a possible
aiiiance with the Mural-Democratic Party “as a new
choice” while adhering to its original idea to attain a
coalition among the Komeito. Japan Socialist and
Democratic Socialist parties.

in his opening address to the convention.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chairman Yoshikatsu Takeiri referred to the party's
new foreign and defense policies and said: "We can
no longer ignore the reality in our efiorts to attain our
ideal." He thus criticized the unarmed neutrality
advocated by the Japan Socialist Party as unrealistic
under the present international circumstances. Dur-
ing the convention. some Komeito members express-
ed their doubt and anxiety on the advisability oi a new
party stance on such important problems when
criticisms are being heard on the governaient party's
"shift to the right" and its military expansion policy.

In the representatives doubt and anxiety. we
could perceive their impatience toward the new
policy. in short. representatives sensed a con-
tradiction in Takeiri'a determination to pursue anti-
war and peacetoving policy line and the policy
change. We can share the common feeling. The
Komeito leadership did not answer the question:
“Why do you have to adopt the new policy at this
specific time?" What is prompting the Komeito Party ‘
to side with the government party?

We can notice. in the background. the party's
deep attachment to political power. This was in.
dlcated in the change of the party’s concept on a
coalition government. The party can make a choice
out of the three possibilities: a coalition among the
Komeito. Socialist and Democratic Socialist parties;
'a coalition among the middle-of-the-roaders in ad-
dition to the above three; and a new road.

The Komeito leadership seems to prefer the third
idea — a coalition with the Liberal-Democratic Party.
to the other two. The change in foreign and defense
policies has widened the gap between the Socialist
and Komeito parties and narrowed the gap with the
LDP. Accordingly. the preparation has been made for
a coalition with theLDP.

We feel some apprehensions about the hasty
policy change of the Komeito Party. The ideal form of
coalition can be attained by a thoroughly ironed out
compromise which will bring about a common
feeling. and not by an easygoing union or arbitrary
absorption. Clarification of difference with the part-
ner of a coalition isesaential.

The Komeito’s critical attitudes toward the 1.0?
has become less clear. in his speech. Takeiri has
failed to refer to the appointment of a "grey official"
to an executive post of the government party which
became a target of public criticism toward Prime
Minister Zenlto Suzuki. indicating Komeito’s leniency

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
toward the LDP.

We want the Kometto Party to have another look
at the raison d'etre of opposition parttes. We regret
that the sense at cleanliness and justice that the
Komeito once pqgsessed has waned.

COPYRIGHT: The Mainichi Daily News

CSO: 4120/93
POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

MINISTERS ST 3. SPLIT OVER DEFENSE COST

mkyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 5 Doc 81 p 1

[Text]

COPYRIGHT t

CSO:

Cabinet ministers still
remained divided Friday
whether the proposed 7.5 per-
cent increase in Japan’s I982
deiensespendingshouid include
a boost inpersonnei expensesor

not.

At a meeting oi the National
Deiense Council. Defense
Agency Chief Soichiro ito said
the general deiense spending
increase and a cost
hike should be two separate
things.

"I think it is necessary to
achieve the current deiense
buildup program at the earliest
possible date althouai i now
our national budget h in
trouble." iiosaid

ii the gov nt lens to
suhstantiaii increase its
deienseapendinwtowenton."
might "undermine the cor-

4120/93

lto's View was slum by
Toshio Komoto. director
general oi the Economic
Planning Agency. and ichtro
Nakagawa. chieioitheScience
and TechnologApncy.
Finance Minister Michio
Watanahe, however. said. “i
want to have the (proposed 7.5
percenthtcresaxinithedeieme

'mie‘pereonnel .cont hike
should he included in
deienee budget increase." be
added.

Defense Agency oiiicials told
the thepetsonneiooets
oi WOW-man Seii-Delenne
Forces iSDiI‘).wiiigoinhy2.4
percentorS‘Ibiilion yen (about
mmiiiioninextyear.

The oiiieiais also said the

The Hainichi Daily News 1981

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

purchased ahead at adiewe
during the iiscai year-to wd
up the current deiane buildup'
Prom tiieoiiicialsadded.
Foreign Minister Yoohio
Saimrauchi iatersaid. “i an: in

iavoroitheeeparation"oithe

liesaidbisideampmnp-
ted by percent 0.5.

congressional moves tor a
larger Japanese deiense

W
MOSCOW DISAPPOIN’I'BD BY JAPM'S PASSIVITY

Nkyo TEE DAILY YOHIURI in 31911811 8 Doc 81 p 5

‘(Report on a discussion
and Dr. Christoph Bertram,

Studios in hondonl

(Text!

'I‘IIII II "I. and“ II-
etolneﬂt o! a three-II."

mhenged
nucleor W.
lune ram toeelen

Q t t
Yum»: On this op-
portnnlty ot welcoming two
authorities on lntemettonel
problem or AMtov end
Dr Bertrun. we oordlnlly
would like to ask you to dis-
cuee the current world sltu-
etlon. eepedouy relauom
between upon and the Son
vlet Unlon end ChmesevSo-

pen or o mlutaty elly or
themlntheeemewuu
the “A70 oountrlee.

I also have to a! “I“ I
an much dleappolnted . by
Jepeneee pudvlty. “Pm
dtd not respond to our pro-

between Dr. Georgi

poeel that we meet to du-
cuee mutuel eecnﬂty u-
mumente. 1 on not sure
whet relation thte bore to
the 0mm rem-e1 to per-
tlclpete. Anywey. Japan
should have been tandem»
lyreeponelble to think ebout
Mdptdon. But don't
thlnk we we end-Chloe“.
We cennot enMe any
security mengemente with-
out Chine hem: Involved.
Mun. et the 26th Petty
Gonna. President-Beeth-
nev put Iomrd some mod-
est conﬁdence—humus pro-
poeele. There we: no te-
trorn upon.

Japan'e Reluctance

Mun: But whet do
you went upon to do "1
addition to whet It to do
"My dolnﬂ It spends leee
on delense met my other
mduuulmd country: the
uu-detenee forces ere
under-equipped: the! m
"madly peemthed b1
the 08 to lactate that: do.

them
tullycaedced unitary power.
I: then we: eye! 3 non-
Wye ooumﬂ. 1'- II he

pen.
My: 1 on not blem-
m. Japan for bung gate:-

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arbetov, Soviet expert on media policy
director of the International Instlt

elvetblenethemfor'beo'

Bertram: It you were In
the titration 0! Japan with
tour Islands accepted by a.
country whlch then cell:
to: conﬁdence - mud!“

mm: This le 3 coun-
ter-product!" emu.

mm: Wouldn't one
Important conﬁdence-unki-
In: mum hen
unple. to reduce the me
o! the Korea on thoee u-
londs even to hold out the
wepectofthelrreturn...
The Jepeneee but very
reason: tor not re-
Somt over-

ute for Strategtc
is com»;
:r-lxuur-

[glim—

mama.
a. Pin-

rwpoint
by to ex-
Territo-
polemic”
”Dealt to'
from on-
t of View.
very dil-
0 under-
zicei eon-
own hu-
ent."
3! Chin:
I dismiss-
doesn't
it makes
notion o:
.- 1: ﬁght
in carry-
omm 0
1111 help

I. Weltorn:

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY

--«. w» v." .. ._ ‘

Europe.

Bum: The , Soviet .-

Union is no lomr the re-
:londi power it was et the
end 0! the Second World
War end no you unnot ex-
plun it. preemt policies in.
tern:- or the historical con-
text of thnt time. In it not
now dine for this super-
power to reel sumciently u-
sured of its own security to
be Lblo to make more
generous gestures—tor ex-
unple. to recognise thet the
northern mend: no im-
portnnt to “pan?

Arbotov: Achievlncmto-
sic parity hu they: been
e condition oi bola: trend
u on equel by the us We
hue to come to term with
the reality thet my Amer-
ican: record on an illegiti-
male child of history. a an
abnormality which he: to
be corrected.

Recognizing Reality
Yunnan“: but no not
the ﬁnal auction. Dr Arm—-
tov end Dr Bertrun. about:
your view: on the prospect.
or Mather the ongoing

toward.
rhetoric l
token pl
drew oe
am. that
reluctent
incense:
ing: noon
beck to
neyotintit
sentinl; ‘
Mrs?
of its :1
M1
power ro
my cont
policy. it
serous I
tremendo

 

12
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT :

C50:

In_mr§cnm. "we loan
lunchtime: Miranda"
mummavelom and‘
the nuclear club mum
norm-unborn. ,
m: Tumm-
ennudtoholhlewm
oom- ot each
other. mama;
ntmncautortpcnonu
mean: batman the two
pnudonh.

muunmumunec
1m.thompemmnm
umdo'nuOcnovoto
dulwlth reticulum
anzbocbuchothum
munulnmnh-
rope ud than in Mt.

4120/ 92

The Daily Yomiuri 1981
POLITICAL AND SOCIOImICAL

POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY

TOKUMA UTSUNCHIYA CRITICIZE U.S.-USSR ARMS RACE

Myo m DAILY roam: in English 9 Doc 81 p 5

(Pope:- givon at the International Symposium on "Security, Peace and Survival“ hold

in 1'0le

[Text]

A paper given by hi!-
neee politiclen “roman.
Utsunomiyo at o specie!
evening open session of last
week's intomtionsi em-
poeium on international
peooe Ind survive! prompt-
ed eome or the most 11%|!
debote seen ot the mun
posium.

Aithouh msny oi the
European delecetu hed

spoken out eninst whet
they perceived es soviet ex-

pensionism. utennoeoiye wen
one of the most com
aitlos o! the psesent u-ms
nee between the 30"”
Onion and the us.

Utmnomiyn it o format

member at the nuns Ulr-

eni-Dcmoeutic My- 30
lat the My mm! you'-
no one to diﬂerencee an
opinion over reletione with
ChIDn end Rom.

ae hes consistently Men
the view thet Jopsn should
come to terms with M
two undone vithout nooes-

Utsonomiye ha! been 5
{sequent visita- to Chine

no as sssocioteo with
tho pen-Chino notion vith-
in the UhenI-Demoontie
Petty.

Utsnnouiyo led "10 d1"
cuesion otth hit POP“ 0"
”crisis monument” In
which he pointod out thst

whereas the us his! once-
perceived Chino u o threat.
Jenn. become of its goo-
!!!th mum» to
Chins. w more immediste—
ly obliged to see: me or
developing Madly rela-
tions with Chins.

Ropproehancnl

He went on to m thot

the some repptochement,
bet'een the us end th~
Soviet Union could eventu-
euy be it both on-
tions not pines so much
emphasis on n mutuei Inns
nee.
3?". 6.9." W when m.
as to look onb'et mﬂitu'y
one-menu.” he ssid. “rhls
contain s denser or over-
reoetion. '

“rho us today seem to
be domino!“ by the ten-
dency to believe the: crisis
connol. in other words the
mointenenoe’ 0! pence. con
only be achieved throw
power tether thou meson-

question.

"In the pneent dtuetioo.
the Soviet that in em-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

poeedminv
minent ptoblens tor the
region.

“Recently then has been
tell of s Russian that to
“warhead.

"But viewed from our
position, e throot is me.
thins thst mu when
these is n will out! o osp-
obiiity so [nude soother
country.

“A winter! buildupiser
potent. bntit is not deer
thot ‘shhh o um eds“ in‘
other countries."

um” dudthexo-
resn peninsula es on ex-
envied onlotive oheenoe
o: o.3ueeien threot of in-
terim in the our in-

. ...- ...;_
“In my thie year. i’ met.
with Den; Xiao Pins.” he.
said.

“Dene aid that American
policy yie-e-yia the Korean
penineuia la very lootiah.

"He said Kim 11 Sun: is
only eight hours dying tune
to Hoecow end yet he hasn’t
been to Russia tor eight
yeu'e. But It the US con-
tinuea its present poetune
over Koren. it could drive
Kim a Sun: toward the
Russians."

M a counselor o: the
Jepeheae Parliamentary AI-
eocietion tor the Promotion
of International Diama-
meht. Uteunomiya voiced hie
complete coupon (or inter-
national 10mm which neo-
yide an opportunity for die-
cuaeing dieamunent.

"Some oouhttiea are be-
hevihc as It they are livine
in an mute store-
honee.“ Uteunorniye eaid.

"War it a competition in
in“ murder. aimed et do.
Mutation of other counttiea.

"In recent yeue. la in:~
ticuler. the development of,
new weapons haa em a
new (intention to nut
murder. and mOdem were
hrihg cruel injuries and
death to counties mm~
oomhetentl."

Civilian Dealte

These eentiinente were
echoed by Profane: Shim-
pei Wilma of Total Oni~

vereity who noted that in
all were since Wotld War

II. cit/man casualties hhd

enrpeaeed the death toll'

among military pereonnel.
miimaki. e tome:- sec-
retai-y in the eecretariat or
the socialiet Petty. eeid 95
percent oi thoee killed in
future were would be an».

Role. eeid it tee unpoeeible
not to tote aides morally
over the Soviet Unioh'e in-
tention internationally.

try to tehe." Bertram eeid.

"But hietorieai experience
than that such decisions do
no! "09009393990 mu
tiona in othere. to! t8. lin-
ple M thet othee ma
triee have diﬂeeeht 'eye at
mine thinu."

Finlegijeﬁon
duetrelien deleute Pull

ooede. the evi-
dence poihte to en unremit-
ting buildup in m min-
tery etnennh,’ he eaid.
In concluding hie contri-
bution to the debete. Uten-
mmnterzd to recent
u If nonatfulom
in Mae ea a mute-

Medan
wdingtheUS.aoounti-y

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yomiuri 1981

(:80 t 4120/91

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

F0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.m

party members.” Scum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WC

JAPAN, SIMAPORB m MIC TIES
'noltyo BUSIIESS JAPAN in 31911811 tbv 81 pp 31, 35. 39, 43, 46

[Article by Akira Kaeuya, Director, South Mia-mt: Bumpe Division. International
Trade Policy Bureau, Ministry of Intonation“. Trade and Inductry]

[reset] ECONOMIC relations between Japan and Singapore are

becoming closer every year. and trade benveen the two

countries is showing stabilized growth. Private capital

miments are in a process of recovery on a moderate

Some pending problems naturally exist between the two

countries. such as the trade imbalance and the import of

specific Singapore products by Japan. but they can be

solved through mutual efforts and cooperation. and they do

not menace the permanent friendship between Singapore
and Japan.

Japan's position has again become the theme of heated
discussion concerning peace and stability in the Southeast
Asiatic region. Needless to say. a strong economic structure
for ASEAN countries is essential for attaining stability irt
Southeast Asia.

Japan must re nd to Singapore's hopes Ill various
aspects of economc cooperation now that Sin apore has
established itself firmly as a member of t e newlv-
industrialized countries (Nle). Singapore must receive help
and encouragement to become the hub of strong collective
self-reliance aimed at fosterim the economic expansion of
countries in Southeast Asia and surrounding regions.

Stngapore maintained a two-digit economic growth
record in I980 when almost all industrially advanced
countries were suffering from the protracted recession. The
country’s economic growth in the ﬁrst half of l98l seems
to have remained on the same hidt level. National produc-
tivity in this riod grew Giover the corresponding period
in I980. At t e same time. Singapore succuded in curbing
the rise of commodity prices to 6%.

Such a favorable econorntc trend. in parallel with the
stability of the present administration. is continuously
stimulating foreign investments in Singapore.

The volume of t'oreign investments in Singapore in the
first half of l98l amounted to 70% of the amount for the
same period a year earlier. However. the incentive for
investments in the new sectors remained strong thanks to
the country's policy of modernizing its industrial structure.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The future is bright. especial! for manufacturing indus-
tries. Securing skilled labor is t greatest current problem.

Singapore‘s guideline for economic independence.
mapped otst with the advice of the U.N.. has sucoeafully
passed the take-off “moi promoting transit trade and
ttnancial business. and entered the pitase of actively
creatin or expanding various secondary industries with
high ded value. inciud the petroleum industry. This
policy is embodied in the conornic Promotion Expansion
law. and specifically in various measures enacted to
encourage the inﬂow of foreign capital. including preferen-
tial duties. which have proved extremely effective.

Most of these huge foreign investments. which accom-
panied the smooth changeover to heavy and chemical
industries. assumed the form of direct investments in fixed
assets. Foreign enterprises including Japan's seem to have
accounted for 15% of the added value produced by all
industries in Singapore in 1971. These factors have enabled
Singapore to escape the common fate of newly indus-
trialised countries - the accumulation of foreign debts.

Although soaring oil prices have increased the country’s
trade deﬁcit. they have simultaneously pushed up the
export revenue derived from oil products. Singapore,
among non~oii producing nations. has attained an unusually
high trade share with non-ASEAN countries. which climbed
from 53% in 1960 to 81% in 1979.

Hitherto Singapore has successfully expanded its eco-
nomy by avoiding trade conflicts with neidtbori coun-
tries and specializing in oil-derived products wi their
wide marketability. What irnpiications the industrialization
of neighboring countries will have on Singapore remains to
be seen. Likewise. Singapore’s contribution to the solidarity
of ASEAN conununity is of interest. These are decisive
factors for making medium-term and long-term predictions
concerning the economy of this nation.

What is the attitude of Singapore to its medium-term
and long-term economic prospects? We can read it in the
message of Prime Minister Lee Kwan Yew commemorating
the National Day on August 9. l98i. in which he
emphasized l i the importance of education. skills. working
moral. team spirit and higher productivity for the future
economic development of the nation. 2) the importance of
mutual cooperation with the ASEAN Community so as to
achieve high and stabilized economic growth and J) the

omotion of industries with higher added value to trans-
orm Singapore into the “information arid brain center” of
ASEAN or Southeast Asiatic region as the target for the
1980s. According to Prime Minister Lee. the immediate
tasks of the nation were the easing of the labor market and
lugher productivity.

Along with its policy to modernize the industrial
structure. the government of Singapore is expected to
out steps for improving labor productivity and for higher
wages. as well as steps for encouraging foreipt capital
inflow including tax reduction for specific equipment
investments.

in this article the ,writer wishes to make some predic-
tions concerning Japan's role in the creating of a high-
productivity society in Singapore mainly from the stand-
point of investments.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Oirect Overseas Investments by Japan

Following is a part of the conversation wltich tools place
when Singapore's Permanent Secretary of Commerce and
Industry visited the leaders of Japan's Ministry of Inter-
national Trade a Industry last summer:

S: “We expect Japan's assistance in mak‘mg Singapore
the center of the information industry in the future.”

I: “The Information industry has an extremely wide
scope. The same thingican be said ofsoftware. Sings re
must decide ﬁrst whi sectors it will give priority to. t
data will serve as a guideline for the future actions of
Japanese enterprises."

S: “We will naturally bear in mind your s stion.”

J: “ls Singapore interested in techn ogy-oriented
sectors other than the information industry?"

S: “Singapore is also interested in the technology service
indus including engineering.”

1: " e feel that mutual cooperation in specific projects.
in which the assets of both nattons can be combined to the
highest advantage. may be profitable. “Die government of
Singapore is 'conducting a campaign to promote labor
productivity. We are wondering whether the entrepreneurs
themselves are switching their thought patterns as quickly
as the government desires."

s: “The government of Sin re must act on the
assumption that entre reneurs w' oliow its intention."

As can be surmise from this conversation. ASEAN and
its neighboring countnes are pinning an ever mounting hope
on the role of Japan in overseas investments and in
particular. technology transfer as well as on policy aimed at
structural reform through furnishing guidance and know-
how.

Direct overseas investments by private Japanese enter-
prises recetved a fresh impetus tn I972 through the
intematlonal adjustment of exchange rates. It was followed
by a period of protracted stagnation unleashed by the oil
crisis and ensuing turmoil in domestic and overseas invest-
tnents in late I973.

Overseas investments surged up again in I978 reﬂecting
the growing potential of enterprises for such ventures and
the influence of long-term management strategy.

The importance of developing countries in Japan‘s
overseas investments has increased further. When regional
shares of direct investments are analyzed. the increase in
investments for transferring production bases. motivated by
less expensive labor cons. and investments for natural
resources development With comparatively hiui unit con-
tract amount is conspicuous.

Tite change tn shares by industrial sector and region.
highli ted by the uptrend in direct investments tn the
manu acturing sector. indicates the extent of the inter-
national activity by Japanese industries and their domestic
structural adjustments. It further points to the expansion of
overseas tnvestments through the direct incentive of
management diversification and internationalization center-
ing on developing countries.

Asia. and especially the ASEAN region. is highly
signiﬁcant as the receptacle for Japan's overseas invest-
me;tts. 56": of which flowed into this region from I951 to
I9 9.

However. the progress of economic development in

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

newly industrialised countries of Asia and other regions. led
by Singapore. is causing fundamental changes in the
motivation of private Japanese investors. Various advan-
tages such as preferential duties and protective measures for
foreign investments by local governments are no longer to
be expected as in the past. For Japanese enterprises. foreign
investments have come to assume the same degree of
strategic importance as domestic investments. Future in-
vestments must he guided by higher recognition such as the
deepening of economic interdependence among nations.

n this connection. business circles in Japan are analyz-
ing the positive and negative sides to fore investments
from the standpoint of an investing nation. apan’s role in
pursuit of a fair international division of labor on a world-
widebasis-withtheernphasisonhidieraddedvaluein
industry and trade - is being seriously discussed. reflecting

the higher share of manufacturing industries in the foreigt
investment balance.

The recognition is pining ground that private fo
investments must serve as art important leverage for
division of labor. An increasing number of Japanese
enterprises are accepting this point of View.

Private Japanese Enterprises

The overall amount of committed investments in
Singapore during l980 stood at US$690 million. down
33% from a year earlier. investments by Japanese enter-
prises (commitment base) decreased from SISO million in
I979 to $70 million irt l980.

The chief cause of this decline was naturally the
influence of the economic ciltnate in Japan. At the same
time. it cannot be denied that the response to the
switchover in Singapore‘s industrial policy caused a con-
siderable delay.

Positive implementation of a fairly drastic antiprotec-
tive policy by Singapore. based on the thinking that “only
free competition can strengthen the structure of enter-
prises.” constituted radical therapy for creating a new
dimension in Singapore's industry.

Only enterprises promising high added value and clearing
this hurdle will have a chance in Singapore in the future.
Yet the feeling in general is optimistic.

Let us take as an example a Japanese electronic enter-
prise which has recently moved into Singapore. The
amounts of fixed assets and added value per employe have
increased “10% and 30%. reretively. compared with the
average ﬁgures of the same in ustry in 1980. .

Singapore's powerful campaign for higher productivity.
aimed at the growth of industries with higher added value.
appears to promise a steep economic growth. Capital-
intensive and technology-intensive sectors have become
attractive for foreign investors.

This trend confomrs to Singapore‘s basic policy of
higher productivity and wages to break the bottleneck of
the chronic shortage of labor. On the other hand. there are
some apprehensions about the inevitable flight of a part of
its foreign capital during the transition period and the
possible implications in Singapore's economy.

The balance of investments in Singapore by Japanese
enterprises stood at over $500 million as of the end of
mm. Over 1.000 Japanese companies maintain at least

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
representative unit“ in Singapore. Among them. about
300 companies were registered later than 1978. The
advance of Japanese enterprises in Singapore is apparently
rlrzaérataining a substantial level in spite of a slight setback in

Broken down by industry. manufacturing industries.
which are the most active. accounted for about half of the
enterprises that have moved into Sinppote in the past four
years. Notrceable is the recent increase in the invesunents
by makers of electronic and electric devices.

This trend is ascribed to the wholehearted cornpllance of
Japanese enterprises to Singapore's policy in this sector.
Extensive local surveys have enabled the participation of
numerous medium and small enterprises as subcontractors
sup ying parts.

se moves conform to the growth of supporting
industries around the nucleus or ltey industries in the
process of industrial modernization stressed by Singapore.
and are regarded as a desirable enornenon. Against this
background. a sharp growth of oreign investments in the
form of full subsidiaries has become a conspicuous trend.

Whereas the percentage of manufacturing industries far
exceeds 50% of Japanese investments in the Asian region
tin number of individual investments). this ratio is less than
34% in case of spore. In contrast; weight of Japanese
investments has re lively risen in :rvice sectors including
trade. construction and engineering compared with neigh-
boring countries in Asia. Thus thing are moving in favor of
S' pore's national policy.

facts show that Japanese capital is making a vital
contribution to establishing Singapore as an international
business center. Observing macroscopically the desirable
effects which Japanese enterprises have brought to
Sinnoore bv their locating in that country, we can cite
increased employment opportunities centering on mutufac-
tuning industries (some one-sixth of the workers in the
manufacturing sector being employed by Japanese enter-
prises' )and growinxnrfevenue from exports. '

Japanese and rican enterprises have offered oppor-
tunities to newcomers to the labor market. This may be the
reason why Singapore maintained a very low ratio of
unemployment during the l970s in spite of the oil crisis.

However. the creation of new em oyment opportunities
has ceased to be an urgent task or Singapore. in other
words. full employment has served as the direct motive for
Singapore‘s policy change regarding the induction of
foreign capital.

As mentioned earlier. Singapore is seelting a way of
survival in the export market through fostering industries
with higher added value while its neighboring countries are
rapidly catching up with Singapore by virtue of their
labor-intensive industries. Japanese investors have obviously
contributed in a substantial way in technol transfer to
Singapore. although this fact tends to be over lted owing
to the difficulty of ascertaining details of such agreements.

Technological transforrnatlon has become a common

task for all developing countries. and especially so for such
newly industrialized countries as Singapore.

Responsibility of Jnanese Enterprises
The changeover to products with high marketability is

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imperative for Singapore at present. Additional investments
and reinvestments for this purpose are processing fairly
smoothly. As a whole. Japanese enterprises are endeavoring
to entrust Singapore with the manufacture of certain types
of products and to make available automated processes to
Sings re for the production of diversiﬁed. reliable mer-
chan ' of high quality.

Japanese investors are also working patiently to establish
harmonious man nt-iabor relationships in mum-racial
Singapore. There ve been inevitable minor troubles. but
deep-rooted antagonism has been avoided so far. Some
enterprises have given up investments mainly because of the
abolishing of preferential import duties and not because of
racial problems.

Such a normal state of investments. however. seems to
lave arrived at a turning point. If the adequate growth of
sectors with lower maturity than the service sector is the
real task for Singapore. the acquiring country. then Japan.
the supplying country. must concentrate on dtanges in
sectors where technology transfers promise the most
opportunity. The risk can be alleviated by involving
Singapore's own capital

Japan should preferably encourage. at the same time.
Singapore's expertise in consulting and engineering actors
among non-manufacturing activities. and actively extend
investments and technological aadstance accompanying or
preceding such investments.

Consc‘lrsion pl _ J in J

' 's import sur us against apan anuary -
June gm. i981. reportedzngretv 24% over the same
period in the vious year. gapore's exports to Japan
increased 6%. apen has now lifm into Singapore's No. l
trade partner surpassingeven aiaysia.

Wlule we are not indifferent to the trade imbalance
between the countries. the growth of imports from Japan
can be interpreted as a sure sign that private Japanese
investments ere being reﬂected in the growing trade volume
between Japan and Singapore. It is an indication of the
healthy growth of industries in the host country. _

This observation is supported by the fact that Singa-
pore's exports to Japan. too. are slowly but steadily
increasing. Economic relations in general and trade relations
in particular between Japan and Singapore are expected to
become ever closer with time.

Japan's attitude on coo ration in Southeast Asiatic
countries was made clear in ntemational Trade a; Industry
Minister Tanalra‘s vision (the socalled '“l'analta Doctrine")
explalned last fall. and the “Welt speech” presented by
PremierSuzultiwhenheviaitedSoutheast Asiaearlythis
year.emphasizingsuchthemesasthesolutlon oftheenergy
problem. increased exports of ﬁnished products and promo-
tion of medium and small enterprises.

Japan is in a position to offer cooperation based on its
accumulated ex rtlse. The Japanese government is imple-
menting steps or adequate counselling of smaller enter-
prises in various stages of development and for information
exchange among developing and industrially advanced
countries through various experts. The importance of
overseas investments by smaller enterprises is emphasized
since such investments mean a direct transfer of manage-

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT:

C90:

4120/ 95

ment resources and knowhow to the host country. Various
measures are being mapped out for the [surface of
encouraging the cooperation of medium and small apanese
enterprises. including training and advisory businesses. in
this age of internationalization.

Singapore's expectations from direct private investments
love not abated a bit. The Economic Development Board
(EDD) of Singapore is fully aware of the difﬁculty of
assuring a smooth inﬂow of foreign capital into the nation
as in the past. beset :n it is with soaring wages. inﬂation and
labor shortage.

Singapore. now committed to steep economic growth. is
making a total input for the induction of Japanese capital.
in this connection. it is interesting that an investment
seminar is going to be held in Japan in November with the
co-sponsorship of JETRO (Japan Export Trade Organiza-
tion) and EDD.

Japan has been somewhat behind other advanced
Western countries in overseas investments. However. the
country has at last attained leadership in the field of
vanguard technology, and Japan‘s overseas investments in
advanced countries. centering on manufacturing industries.
are rapidly expanding. partly stimulated by the resurgence
of protectionism.

Investments in developing countries must be viewed
from a different angle. Using the receptive attitude of host
countries as a powerful incentive. such investments are
expected to grow in the future with medium and small
enterprises as the nucleus.

1981 The Button Koqyo shinbun
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND Tmm

none 0? ROBUI‘S IN INDUSTRY VIEWED
1bkyo BUSINESS JAPAN in English Nov 81 pp 21-23

[Article by Shozo Hochi, Editor-1n drier, ausnmss JAPAN: "tnxanmd Photon”
Relentlonsly Producing Computer-Controlled Products“!

[Text] Nexible manufacturing factory (FMF) has been recently
completed at the headquarters of Yamazaki Machin-
ery Works. Japan‘s largest machine tool manufacturer based
itt Oguchi-cho near Nagoya. and is now in operation. Many
people are visiting tlte factory to see how the new
unmanned system works. including a large number who are
coming from abroad.

A factory irt which “robots produce robors" was
completed by Fujitsu Fanuc Co. last year in Fuji City.
Shizuoka Prefecture and came irtto production from this
January. The factory is also attracting many visitors as the
first unmanned factory of its kind.

The factory that has been built as the first unmanned
factory adopting a full-fledged flexible manufacturing
system (FMS) in the machine tool industry has a floor
space of 2.790 square meters. Equipped with 18 machine
centers (MC) that an do various cutting operations and
two pallet-loader robots that any work pieces. the factory
can process major parts of machine tools on an almost fully
automatic basis.

What the factory processes includes main cylinder bases.
beds and cabinets for numerically-controlled (NC) iathes.
and machining centers. the company's mainstay products.
The factory produces as many as 23 different items of main
tylirtder bases. and the total number of different items it
produces amounts to as ntany as 84. The factory bouts of
its capability to process such a great number of different
parts.

Yamazaki Machinery Works has long been adopting a
lwoshil'f work system. but here at the factory. a three-shift
system has been adopted for around-theclock tion.
But only six persons work the 8 am. to 4 p.m. shi t and the
4 p.m. to l2 p.m. shift. From midnight to 8 arm. no
human works at the factory. but automatic machining
centers and pellet loader robots continue their pr ammed
movements. Any abnorntal operations of the ma ines can
be detected by various kinds of monitoring equipment such
as self-diagnosing devices. and tool defect detecting and
repairing devices attached to each machining center.

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Though the average working hours of Japanese workers

account for less than 2,000 hours a year. an annual average
of working hours at the factory is expected to reach some
8.600 hours. almost 45 times. When compared with a
similar sized conventional factory with existing types of
machines. the factory ts said to correspond in capability to
68 general-purpose machine tools and NS workers. When
expressed as a sales price. the new factory isestimated at a
value of H.000 million. According to Tsuneltiko Yarns-
zaki. the company's managing director. when calculating
the factory‘s capability. personnel expenses. and other
expenses. the orignal investment can be returned within
two years. More than 10 inquiries for purchasing similar
plants from the company are said to have been received.
_ As the above example indicates. the flexible manufactur-
ing system. combining NC machine tools. auto transfer
rmchinea. industrial robots and the software to operate
them. has entered the stage of practical use in Japan. This is
an achievement of the nation's highly advanmd machine
industry which exports nearly 40% of its products. The new
factory symbolizes the first milestone toward complete
unmanned operation of factories. As for forging machines.
alon with the recent advancement of technologies to
pr uce dice. those with pressing functions with less losses
and safety mechanisms have been developed. Markets for
industrial robots. indispensable for unmanned operation.
are also rapidly expanding.

Immediately after World War ll. nobody could anticl-
pate that the Japanese machine industry. that had been
almost completely destroyed during the war, could grow
and develop to such a great extent. in I980. Japan's
tmchlne tool industry claimed the third highest position in
the world in output after su easing the Soviet Union.
Japan started the production 0 industrial robots in 1967
with imported robots as models and achieved the world‘s
largest output of ¥6O billion last year.

This outstanding achievement by Japanese industries can
be witnessed not only in the machine industry but also in
such ﬁelds as steel. automobiles and household electrical
appliances. Against the background of their No. 1 position
in the world. many industrial products made in Japan are
oeg'ng exported to almost all regions of the world.

This tremendous achievement can be ascribed to the
dilligence and high educational level of the Japanese people.
Other factors that also contribute to this may include the
unity of the labor force. the lifelong employment system
and the homogeneity of the Japanese people.

But what we should not overlook in this respect is the
fact that the technological level of Japan's machine
industry. particularly that of the machine tool industry. is
very high. When a trade problem developed in connection
with Japan's rapidly increasing auto exports. the president
of a leading Japanese machine tool manufacturer said. “It is
quite natural that Japanesemade cars are high irt quality
arid low ll'l production cost. Japan‘s technology for produc-
tion of transfer machines used in mass producton ot' autos
is more advanced than in other countries."

There have been some noteworthy features in the
development of the nation's machine industry since the
ﬁrst oi crisis in I973.

First of all. efforts toward making not only automatic

25
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

machine tools but also automating other machines have
been eittenstve. Secondly. in coping with the diversiﬁcation
of consumers' needs. manufacturers have changed their
Views on mass production and ceased to rely only on mass
production technologies. They have realized the importance
of developing various ways of production to meet various
needs of consumers. Thirdly. such new concepts as computo
et-atded manufacturing (CAD) and flexible manufacturing
systems (FMS). that are completely different from conven-
tional concepts of production. have been introduced.
Fourthly and finally. the nation's machine industry has
become more and more export-oriented.

“test: new trends indicate that the final target of the
machine industry is to achieve complete unmanned produc-
tion of machines and equipment.

One of the methods to achieve unmanned operation is
adopting NC machines. Such tools made their debut about
30 years ago. Now more than half the machine tools
produced in Japan are automated NC machines. The most
remarkable advantage of NC machine tools is that products
that are exactly alike can be manufactured regardless of the
"skill" of their operators.

The nuchtne tool industry used to be subject to
fluctuations in business activities. But. thanks to the
appearance ofNC machine tools and general demand for
replacements of machines following the oil crisis. Japan's
machine tool industry has been drawing a constant upward
curve in output since I975.

During the past several depressions. the machine tool
industry has been well able to compensate for stagnant
domestic demand with exports. Now. the machine tool
industry has firmly established its foothold as an export
industry by exporting nearly 40%0f its total output.

Though thereeanbewitnessedsomedeclinlngtrendin
order acceptances. the order bacitlog surpasses ¥300
billion. This means that the irtdustry can continue full
operation for half a year without any new orders.

It is furthermore expected tint there will be large
investments in other industries in plants and equipment

from next year on. The machine industry will be called
upon to supply many of the required goods. Now the
nation's machine tool industry is on the crest of the wave
of FMS and automation.

Those tn Japan's robot industrial circles regard I980 as
the first year of the widespread diffusion of industrial
robots. it was in l980 that the total output reached the
#60 billion level. It is assumed that the maritet for robots
will rapidly expand.

Up until sometime ago. robots were creatures only in the
world of the imagination. ﬁguring large! in science fiction.
Robots will be producing robots on a ar larger scale titan
what is being done in the Fujitsu Fanuc factory within a
few years.

Seiemon inaba. President of Fujitsu Fanuc. says. “Mar-
kets for robots are within easy reach of our operation.
Markets develop first and then our development activities
follow. in the ease of NC machine tools and other
equipment. we spent more than l0 years developing them
before maritets were created.“

As everyone concerned with the ittdustrlal robot indus-

26
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

try admits. markets for industrial robots precede what the
industry can do at that time.

Unmanned operation of a factory becomes a reality
when robots are combined with NC machine tools and
work pieces are fed from machine to machine by means of
automatic transfer machines.

In the case of NC machine tools. they helped the
recovery of the machine tool industry which had been
suffering from a longaerm depression. When a depression
hit the Japanese economy in I975. demands for NC
machine tools became stagnant. but the out t of NC
rttachine tools started to increase spectacularly rom I978.
The output of industnal robots has drawn a similar upward
curve over the past several years.

Until I975. the output of industrial robots in Japan was
only ¥I0 billion or so. but it started to show an upward
trend from I976 and its rising curve after I978 indicates
how rapidly demands for industrial robots will increase
from now.

Fields in which industrial robots are extensively used are
mainly the auto industry and the electric machine industry.
Nevertheless. along with the development of “intelligent"
robots and the expansion of their uses. the output of
industrial robots is expected to sharply increase as in the
case of NC nuchine tools.

The development of the industrial robot industry is most
likely to bring a qualitative change to the machine industry
in general. The progress of FMS consisting of industrial
robots will free workers from undesirable working environ-
ments and simple operations. but could bring on the
problem of unemployment. But most of the people
concerned with the machine industry insist that there is no
stich possibility. Workers will be transferred to more
satisfying work and their working hours will be shortened.
they say.

itt Japan. industrial robots are used extensively for
repetitive work in the auto industry. Spot welding opera-
tion at Nissan Motor's factories is done by some 400
robots. which contribute to 90% of the company's spot
welding operations on car bodies. Toyora Motor also began
using spot welding robots from last year. Kawasaki Heavy
Industries Co. produced more than l.000 Unintate spot
welding robots. with 90% of them having been delivered to
the auto industry. In the production of arc weldin robots.
Yasukawa Electric Works has a market share 0 .7095 to
301.. most of wluch are destined for the auto industry.
Painting robots are not so widely diffused yet. but Kobe
Steel Corp.. which introduced technology from Norway in
I973. has so far sold more than I.000 units. mostly to the

auto industry.

At the I‘Ith international Symposium on Industrial
Robots held in Milan. italy. in March I980. a US. delegate
described how industrial robots were diffused in major
countries of the world. According to the report. while the
us. held I310 programmable servocontrolled point-to.
point (FTP) robots. 345 programmable servo-controlled
continuous path tCP) robots. and I.l00 programmable
general-purpose non-servo robots in operation as of Decem-
ber I979. and West Germany 300 programmable servo-
controlled P1? robots. ISO programmable servocontrolled

2
FOR OFl-‘ICIXL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cl’ robots. 200 programmable general-purpose nun-servo
robots. 200 programmable diecasting and molding non-
servo robots and 5.000 units of mechanical transfer
equipment. Japan held as many as 3.000 programmable
servo-controlled m and CP robots. 11.000 programmable
general-purpose non-servo robors and pr mmable die-
casting and molding non~servo robots and 3.000 units of
mechanical transfer equipment. These ﬁgures well demon-
strate that Japan has the largest number of various
industrial robots in operation.

According to another survey by a Japanese economic
research institute. industrial robots are mainly used in such
industries as transportation machines. electric machinery.
synthetic resin. metal products and general machines. The
auto industry and the electric machinery industry assume
more than 60% ot‘ industrial robots delivered. The number
of industrial robots delivered irt I980 was estimated to have
reached more than 75.000. One survey revealed that as of
December l°79. 7.190 manual manipulators were in use in
lapan. while there were as many as 45.760 fixed sequence
robots and variable sequence robots in operation. There
were 3.-l|0 play-back robots and 1.340 “intel ' t" robots
in use. Even two years ago. there were 56 industrial
robots of various types in use in Japan.

Industrial robots can easily cope with changes in
products to be processed by changing programs. This is a
revolutionary role industrial robots can play in the modern-
isation or" industries. When NC rrtachine tools made their
debut. they prompted a large stimulus to plant and
equipment investments in the nation‘s machine industry.
Plant and equipment investments assume a large weight in
Japan‘s gross natronal product. and their trends should not
be overlooked when one tries to see how domesttc business
activities move. Then what inﬂuence will industrial robots
give to such plant and equipment investments?

First of all. industrial robot manufacturers increase their
plant and equipment investment in order to increase their
output of industrial robots. Then. on the part of industrial
mhm users. they unease such investments by replacing
obsolete facilities with industrial robots.

Prices ot‘ industrial robots range from some ¥l million
per unit to ¥l2 to ¥l3 million. Judging from this price
range. it' a factory tries to fully use industrial robots.
amounts to be invested for such a put will range from
several million yen in small cases to 2 to #3 billion for
large undertakinﬁ.

Industrial robots also decrease enterprises‘ investments
rn other plants and equipment. if the rates of operation of
facilities are enhanced to a maximum point by introducing
industrial robots. enterprises do not have to purchase
ttrachincs and equipment in addition to industrial robots.
Then they can save money for investment.

In the ease of conventional types ot‘ machines. they must
be either improved or remodelled as new requirements
develop. Otherwise. new machines must be purchased. in
the case of robots. however. changes in programming are
usually sufﬁcient when changes are demanded. Unlike
human beings. industrial robots demand no speciallighting
nor airconditioning facilities.

Mrrttaturizatiort of industrial robots is also an important
subject matter to be studied in the l980s. Their miniaturi-

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT t

080:

4120/ 95

ration is expected to come about in the middle of the
current decade. Then. small industrial robots will be
efﬁciently arranged along the production line in a factory.
improving production etﬁciency to the maximum in both
spaoe usage and output. Land is very expensive in Japan. so
a decrease tn required space for factories is a big advantage
for management.

As seen above. industrial robots can both increase and
decrease plant and equipment investments. Installations of
industrial robors will have a great impact on the trend of an
industry's plant and equipment investments in the future.

Japan‘s machine industry has achieved tremendous
results in the past three decades: it induced a great variety
of modern technologies from abroad in the l950s. it
developed various applied technologies on the basis of such
induced technologies through the 1960s and l970s. and
now it is facing a new industrlal revolution through the
adoption of numerical controls and ﬂexible manufacturing
systems.

Industrial robots can be called the crystallization ot‘ the
most advanced industrial technologies. They can play the
most vital role in the new industrial revolution.

1981 The “than Koqyo strum
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020008-8

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIBJC! AND mummy

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIOR man TO 8006? mm mom's

mokyo wsmss JAPAN in English Nov 81 pp 69-75, 81

[Article by Ptmihiko Mateudal

[Text I

CCORDING to some experts. the
export of plants.which.t ther
with automobiles and househo elec-
trical appliances. have formed tlte
three main pillars supporting the Japa-
nese export industry. has reached a
crisis 'nt. Plant exports. which had
steadi y es ended to top 510 billion in
ﬁscal l9 . decreased for the ﬁrst
time irt fiscal l980 to fall below that
level again. This was due larpely to
such factors as (l) the war between
Iran and lraq, which forced Japan to
interrupt plant construction and sus-
pend negotiations. (2) ancellation of
construction of large plants irt China.
and (3) economic sanctions against the
Soviet Union after its invasion of
Afghanistan.

Now. however. it has been said that
plant exports have passed the crisis
thanks to the orders received this fiscal
year for lants t'or largeecale projects.
Neverthe . with increased country
risk and intensifying international
competition in the shrinking export
market for large plants. the outlook
for plant ex ts remains questiona-
ble. in the ollowing paragraphs. we
will t:y to outline the future prospects

and problems of Japan‘s plant exports.

According to statistics compiled by
the Ministry of lntemational Trade
and Industry (MITI). licensed plant
exports (excluding heavy machinery
exports exceeding 5500.000 per case)
totaled $8.932 million (rou ly uiv-
aient to #2.000billion)in ll 0.
down 34.2% from Sll.785 million
(roughly equivalent to ¥2.oO0 billion)

in ﬁscal I979. 1hi
shock to industrial
plant export irtdt
grown since the 1
through the first oi
other industries we
slowdown. Moreovt
attained the no I
previous ﬁscal year.

There are varior.
this lapse in plant
be boiled down to t

(1) Worldwide n
der;t‘a;'tdI for plugs.

.. apm‘s art
developing countrir
market. were testri
ble political situati
ing debts and. ti
country risk of thes

(3) Japanese pk
ly in international
was intensifying an
irig countries. In
plant exports to cc
declined by as in
consequence of or
against the Soviet I
invasion of Afghan
tion of plant cons
and Poland‘s acct.
debts.

Considering the
plant exports and t.'
vation of the on
plant exports. it
plattt-ex‘mrting lirt
crisis. govern
industries were cot
forts to worit out at

POROFI'ICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02I09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plant exports. , m East 5.

However. the situation ha reversed . demand {0, F
itself since the current ﬁscal year new ﬁve-year
started. A preliminary report for the economic Pu
ﬁrst quarter of the year (the ﬁscal year ria and N
begins in April) revealed that licensed . plant ma
plant exports totaled 53.99.170.000 moves to ”I
in value. a whopping increase of SI.7% Wt the S
over the like period of the previous the 03.9de
year. Some people were optimistic texportt
enough to remark that if this growth ran and Ira
rate was maintained. plant exports irt worst Pm
ﬁscal I981 could total 515 billion or stabilization
more. The udtieth.lhowever.nis that demand for
amongtheorrs apmeae rmsre- ‘tswas
oeived during the ﬁrst quarter of ﬁscal m”
I98l were such largevseale ones as Theabove
LNG plants from Indonesia and oil ported by Ml
reﬁnery Plants from knit. and deals with oté
these contributed greatlyt the overall 5., of mg.
increase in plant exports. After negoti- ”we“, p3.
ations for a certain project are started. indicator f0} 1
it is usually several years before orders to in. mm d
are actually placed. The b the for plants tot
project. the longer it takes or it to at... will b.
materialize. The orders received in the ﬁrm; in am]
current ﬁscal year are the outcome of of “a"; rem
negotiations which were started a long am] 1930 (1
time ago. Therefore. one cannot be value 31.0w, ;
too optimistic about the trend of plant ﬁscal I980 (
exports. As many people have ac- increase is es
knowledped. good performance in the m. mm. 5
ﬁrst quarter of the year does not mum) and
necessarily mean a good performance ders. $20,100
for the entire year. It is ,1”

The current plant export situation ports will sho
was clearly foreseen by the Planr of 34% in n
Export Policy Committee (a private ﬁve years (up
advtsory‘ tom: I: Mr". rchaireltl by be difﬁcult f
Renzo a i. irector o t e span r
Federatioml' Machinery Manufactur- e? £82112:
ers). in its report compiledin April this world plant
year when measures to revitalize plant share further.
exports were widely discussed. The man to “y.
report says that. as the causes of the ”do is torn
plant export slowdown will remain Measurest
mostly unchanged. the difﬁcult situa- are being stu
tion will continue except for a tempo- industries c
rary recovery in ﬁscal l98l. Because I intend:
the report proved right as regards the “:3; res ai'te
temporary recovery. we may as well be mentl nteas
prepared for difﬁcult times ahead as risk 2d ana
anticipated by the committee. count .5 set

wint. then. were the grounds for m trition .
predicting some improvement tn plant ( ) Ado 'u
exports in ﬁscal l98l'.’ First. the reper- mp
cussions of the second oil shock sub- (2 Bstabli
sided and many countries. in particular neerin and
developing ones. started to invest in . ‘ P
new energy sources and industrializa- ”“233"5'
ttun. Secondly. tn the Soviet Union "W

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020008-6
COPYRIGB’I':

C80:

power to export plants to resume-
related areas.

(4) Expanding yen credits.

(5) Technology transfer and other
forms of assistance to developing
countries.

(6) Consolidating an international
setup by organizing international con-
sortiums.

In particular. it is essential for the
Japanese plant export industry to ac-
complish structural reforms to increase
its exports related to overseas re-
source-related projects. it is said that
the Japanese plant industry. which has
developed malnl in the area of chemi-
cal plants. fails at behind its counter-
parts in other industrialized countries
in the area of energy and social engr-
neering. Now that full-scale efforts
have been launched in this area. it is
possible for Japan to promote exports
of plants and machinery and tools to
those countries where resource devel-
opment projects related to energy.
natural gas. urantunt. iron ore and
nonferrous metals are being carried
out.

Efforts at international cooperation
have also been started. Bemuse plant
negotiations for huge projects invoIV-
ing over $100 billion would involve
too great a risk tobe taken by aslngle
corporation. it has become a common
practice to form a consortium jointly
with European or American plant
makers to sponsor such projects in
third countries.

Apart from the activities of individ-
ual corporations. the Japanese plant

4120/95

1981 the Nihon Kogyo Slit-bun
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY HURT BY COMIWING RECESSION
'Doiryo BUSINESS JAPAN in 319118)) NOV 81 pp 82, 84, 85, 87

[Article by Akin Suzuki, Director, Clio-ion]. Products Division. Basic Industries
Bureau. Ministry of International Trade and Industry]

[Toast] THE international economy in in l980ate shown in Table l.

I980 t‘loundered in recession ow-

ing to soaring oil prices and general
economic stagnation in industrially ad-
vanced countries.

The Japanese economy continued
to maintain a moderate growth from
the previous year. The situation in the
first quarter wa favorable under the
inﬂuence of the expansion experienc-
ed in i979. But the economy began to
cool after the second quarter because
of declining domestic demand and the
[836th to the earlier demand up-
surge.

The cool summer in I980 exerted
an adverse Inﬂuence on production in
manufacturing and mining industries.
But the economy recovered gradually
afterwards. mainly through the boom
to sales of automobiles and electric
equipment.

The chemical industry. however.
was affected far more extensively.
After registering a peak in the first
quarter. chemical production and ship-
ment plummeted from the level or
l070 and did not show recovery in the
latter half of the year. As a result.
production (excepting pharmaceutic-
aisi dropped 4.3": and shipments drop-
ped 5.557 compared with a year earlier.

In particular. synthetic dyes. sur-
face active agents and plasttciters were
hit ltard by the recession tn the textile
and housing industries and the slump
of agriculture and ﬁsheries due to the
cool summer. Production. exports and
imports of principal chemical products

33

Exports of chemical products grew
10.9% in dollar value over a year eailer
but dropped in volume.

Following is a brief description of
the main categories of chemical prod-
ucts in I980.

Synthetic Dyes

The synthetic dye industry is plung- '
ing deeper into recession. reﬂecting
Japan's slumping textile industry. The
demand for dyes as a whole has been
on a steady downtrend after a peak in
l972-73. The consumer preference
for thinner textiles. lighter color tones.
the progress in dyeing techniques and
the resultant economizlng of dyes have
accelerated the decrease in demand.
Imported dyes have also contributed
to stagnation in the domestic market.

The recession of Japan‘s synthetic
dye industry ts aggravated by soaring
costs due to high oil prices and by the
overproduction which necessitates the
lowering of product prices.

In order to rationalize fundamental-
Iy the structure of the synthetic dye
industry. a rationalization cartel was
organized in January "’80 to carry
out concentrated production of dis-
perse dyes and some cationic dyes for
synthetic textiles. A distribution sur-
vey was conducted for the purpose of
rationalizing and modernizing the dis-
tribution structure.

The output of synthetic dyes in
I980 totaled SIMS tons. down me
from a year earlier. The production
decrease was ascribed to the reaction

FOIOWICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Production, Exports and Imports of Chemical Products (1980)

   
   
 

       

       
   

 

l "I (OM)

       

        

 

' llcm ' Production I Exports 3 hit us '
Synthetic dyes , SIMS «86) 16.391 (85) 10.513 r69)
impingement. ' tom l95) 9.513 «a!» mutton
-Pimntteaincoiorbal 6.346 t“) l.94l (36) 22 r73)
IOmnicrubbercomponents 45.596l103) LIZBllOOI : i337 r90)
Phalldzers 406.947 i9l) I l9.“7ll05) i 5.0mm»
Surfactants “SJ" (9]) 60.454 r83) ' 9.603 t83i

   

 

     

Sore: Figures :n parentheses are comparisons in percentage with the previous year.

to the demand upsurge in W79 antici-
pating the rise or oil prices. stagnating
personal consumption and the cool
summer of I080.

Almost all dyes registered a produc-
tion decrease of about IO'T' compared
with a year earlier excepting reactive
dyes which maintained the 1979 level.

On the other hand. sulﬁde dyes.
sulfide vat dyes. direct dyes. mordant
dyes and acid mordant dyes recorded
production drops of over 20¢. C lassi-
fied by type. the shares of disperse
dyes and reactive dyes are yearly
growing. whtle those of sulﬁde dyes.
sulﬁde vat dyes and direct dyes are
decreasing.

Some l6.3°7 tons of dyes were
exported in “’80. down ”'1 from a
year earlier. Broken down by region.
Asia accounted for 05‘? of exports
from Japan. However. Asia‘s share is

decreasing. Exports to Europe. and
North and Central America were on
the increase.

Main ex rt destinations were the
Republic 0 Korea. Taiwat. the U.S..
Indonesia. Hort Kong and Thailand.
Shipments to a regions excepting the
US. and Thailand dro ped 10-20%
compared with a year ear ier.

Particularly noticeable was a 50%
drop in exports to China. when is
Japan's main overseas market. Ship-
ments to Oiina had been growing
steadily in the past.

Chssil‘ted by type. exports of reac-
tive dyes increased while naphthol.
ﬂuorescent whitening and sulfide dye
exports dropped considerably.

Imports in 1980 stood at 10,651
tone. down 31% from a year earlier.
This drastic import decrease was

Table 2. Production, Exports and Imports of Synthetic Dyes (19m)

 

Direct dyea

Acid dyes

Basic dyes

Mordant A acid mordarit dyes
Sulfide a sulﬁde vat dyes

Vat dyes

Naphthol dyes l pickling saints)
Naphthol dyes tdeveiop'ng agents)
Rapid dyes

Disperse dyes

Fluorescent dyea

Reactive dyes

Otprle solvents I. solvtna dydes
Other dyes

Comparison with previous year l’H

3h

(in tons)

  

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
cursed by surplus inventory in I979
and slump‘lsgdydemand in I980. h'l’ain
exporters es to an were eat
Germ-1y. Switzerland 3.: Great Brit.
aln. which together accounwd for over
70% of the yes imported by Japan.
They still enjoy an overwhelming share
in the Japanese market. alth their
share is gradually decreasing. ' rae
dyes. reactive dyes. acid dyes lid
direct dyes occupied a large percean
of ltnported dyes.

Table 2 shows production. exports
and imports of synthetic dyes in I980
dasiiied by item.

Oranic Pigments

The organic pigment industry had
been growing steadily In the past
several years against the background of
an expanding domestic market and
exports. However. the output of or-

ic pigments in I980 dropped 5%
rom the 1979 peak of 20.946 tons.
The main cause of this decline was
that the production of printing inks
and paints. two rincipaI consuming
ssctbrs. were at ected by recession.
Shipments to these sectors dropped by
2% and 4%. respectively.

Furthermore. exports of organic
‘ ts suffered from the recession
tn overseas markets. and Japan's inter-

national competitive power 1
erred by rising costs of fuei
materials. Heated competit
European piunent manufact
wasat’actot.

The combination of the:
causedtheexports of organic
from Japan to drop |6%in I
ayearearlier.

Imports of omnic pig!
1980 rose 5% over I979.
made in West Germany and
public of Korea made deer
into the Japanese market.
shows production of organic
overthepastfour years.

Omnlc Rubber Components
dust“: organic ﬁber comp
ts re a norma
reﬂecting agon- in rubber
for the auto industry. The r
organic rubber components
stood at 45,596 tons. up 3
year earlier and constituting
est record In Nstor .
Shipments fort manufar
automobile rubber products
auto tire tubes. seat belts :
vibration pads were extrem
and covered- the recessed dei
footwur. Exports stayed at it
some level as a year ealier. Pr

chle 3. Production of Organic Plgnants

 
   

(in tons)

 

me I 1919 .
Neo-sohrble aao planents 4.601 4.881 5.340 I 5.024
Soluble no pigtltenta 4.463 4.120 3.343 ! 5.294
Phthnlocyanlne mos 8.931 I 10.469 : 9.166 I

231 234 w | 245 ;

lLalte

Others 496 I 524 m ' 5n 3
.10... two Imam-1m- mu :

Table 4. Production at Organic Rubber Components

(In tons)

   
  

   

1919

[3.131
23.214

I97! I 1980

tests .
22.626 i
is:

 
   

 

   
    
 

  

35
roe omaat. use ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of organic rubber components lsgiven
in Table 4.

Plasticiun .

Production of plasticizers increased
with that of soft polyvinyl chloride
{WC} The output of plasticizers in
I980 decreased through low produc-
tion of PVC. which in turn was caused
by the cool summer and the reaction
to the dematd upsurge in 1979. Pro-
duction stood at 338.004 tons. down
9% from a year earlier.

Classified by type. the output of
DB? and DIDP belonging to ‘ the
phthalic acid family dropped consider-
ably. whereas Dl-l increased sli tly
over a year earlier. Special ph alic
acid type plasticizers excepting DOP
registered some pins. Among other
plasticizers. the fatty acid category
irtcreased somewhat while adipic acid
and epoxy t declined.

Exports 0 plasticizers with l9.067
tons stayed on nearly the same level as
in the previous year. Main ex rt
destination was Southeast Asia. m-
petition with American and European
makers intensified. Production of plas-
ticizers from 1977 to 1980 is shown in

Table 5.

 

‘

Surface Active Agents
Surface active agents (surfactants)
are used in all industries as auxiliary
agents. Recesa'on and the especially
cool ntrnmerin l980putaperiodtoa
trend of steady production growth
since i975.‘l'heout tirt l980stood
at 475,200 tons, creasing 49.000
tonsor9$frornayearearlien
Classiﬁed by ion type. anionic and
non-ionic surfactants dropped by l0!»
and l2% respectively whereas cationic

and am oteric
“ch. Ph was new about 10%

Demand in the main consuming
sectors such rrthe textile industry,
agricu ture an many. and cleaning
decreased about 10%. Consumption in
the follow-tn; sectors increased in

l980: cosmetic and phannaceutlcals .

(+ 7%). petroleum and fuel indust
(+ 3%) and dial engineering mums
tion and the ceramic indusz (+ 3%).
.Exports. centering on Southeast
Asia, stood at 60.454 tons. down 17%
frorna year earlier. One ofthe reasons
for this decline is believed to be the
owth of local industries in the
theast Asian regions Table 6
shows production of industrial surface
active agents over the past four years.

Tabla 5. Production of Plastieiurs

 
  
    

Phthalic acid family
Fatty acid fanttly
Phosphoric acad fallIIIY
Adlpic add family
Polyester family
Epoxy family

  

 
 

    
   
    
 
  

   

363.5“

 

l.6|2 1.11: i
5.214 um i
21.802 19.299 '

me !

  

9.933

Table 6. Production of industrial Surface Active Merits

  

COPYRIGHT:

C80:

201 .968

 
    
   
  
  

   
      
   

Anionic

1981 The union Kogyo Sham

4120/ 95

  
   

”9.275

    
   

BID

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(in tone)

 
   
     
   
  

Cationic 22.634 23,759

Non-ionic l9lAl2 309.4” 200.132

Amphoteric 1.300 3.558

Othersauxilhry agents [4.111 ”.950
“mums-Ima-