FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10096
4 November 1981

Wes? Europe Report

(FOUO 57/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ll

4 Novembt

WEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 57/81)

CONTENTS

ENERGY ECONOMICS

FRANCE

Energy Self-Sufficiency Seen 'Inacceaaible'
(Jacques Ferry; VALEURS ACTUBLLBS, 5 Oct 81) .............

Kinetic Energy Storage "heel Use Planned
(AIR & COSMOS, 19 Sep 81) ................................
POLITICAL
BEWIUM

Role of Spitaels in Steel Issue, Government Pall
(POURQUOI PAS‘I, 210 Sep 81) ...............................

SPAIN

Basque Commiste Divided on Merger with Other Leftiata
(Ander Lendeburu; CAMBIO 16. 28 Sep 81) ..................

Business Interest. Seen as Backing Calvo Sote1o in UCD
(Anxton Seraoqueta; CAHBIO 16, 21 Sep 81) ................

Suarez Vs Calvo Satelo: Assets and Liabilities
(Anxton Saruqueta; CAHBIO 16, 28 Sep 81) . . ..... . . . . . . . . .
FORIOFFK3A1.058(MNLY

ENERGY ECONOMICS FRANCE

ENERGY SELF-SUFFICIENCY SEEN 'INACCESSIBLE'

Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 5 Oct 81 pp 39-40
[Article by Jacques Ferry: "The Nuclear luperative"]

[Text] As a prelude to the discussion that is to take place
beginning this Tuesday in Parliaaent, the Economic and Social
Council, meeting in plenary session on Tuesday and Wednesday,
debated the energy record. The report that gave rise to a
draft opinion had been prepared by Rene Le GUen (the general
secretary to the CGT staff). The report was preceded by work
done in the industrial section. The president of that sec-
tion, Jacques Ferry, comments here, personally and for VAL-
EURS ACTUELLES, on the national debate proposed by the gov-
ernnent.

It appears to be a simple question: how can France’s energy needs be met in the
next 20 or 30 years; and how can it be done so that at the sale tine she will ac-
quire total energy independence?

But that question brings up two others: what criteria are to be used to deter-inc
the needs that will have to be met by 1990 or 2000? How should we define national
energy independence?

Energy consunption is naturally a function of the gross domestic product (P18). But
it does not vary in proportion to the P13. It is the result of the type of growth
and specific savings that are realized. In the 1960's, which were years of great
expansion and cheap energy, what was called the elasticity coefficient, that is the
relationship between the respective growth rates of energy consulption and the P18,
was in the neighborhood of 1. It has been around 0.8 for several years. How low
can it be made to go?

The answer depends both on the extent of realizable energy conservation and the ex-
pected growth rate of the P18. In this regard voluntarisu is of cOurse indispen-
sable; nevertheless it does not remove all the uncertainties.

Does anyone really believe, to take just one example, that the most voluntarist pol-

icies, leaving aside their cost, will lead to less than 0.4 in 8 years, as indicated
by the electoral program of the PS, the elasticity coefficient?

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is also necessary to agree on the idea of energy independence. To understand it

as a possible way for France to meet all of its energy needs without resorting to
importation comes under the heading of utopia. At least for a very long time.

Although it has increased slightly since 1973, the part played by national resources
in the total consumption of energy comes to barely 30%. with a deadline of a quarter
of a century, self-sufficiency for our country is an inaccessible objective, as
spectacular as the results to be obtained by exploiting new energy sources may be.
including nuclear sources. or by increasing coal production.

In reality, energy independence means only as strong as possible a diminution, in

relative value, of importations, accompanied by greater security of supply, whatever
its origin.

To put it plainly, this means that priority must be given to oil, which is imported
in its totality at almost 2 or 3 percent, as much to save foreign currency as to
better diversify sources and quality. Currently, the oil we are importing still
comes, up to at least 70 percent, from the Middle East, Saudi Arabia alone account-
ing for half of our total supply. It is not necessary to emphasize the risks of all
kinds that accompany such a purchase structure.

Among the primary energy sources that can be substituted for oil, basically for the
production of electricity (the most significant share of the final energy delivered
for consumption), is nuclear energy, which must be given priority.

For all kinds of reasons: the mastery of its technology that we have acquired; the
existence of important reserves of natural uranium in the national subsoil, which
are maximized by the superregeneration technique; its storage facilities; its utili-
zation cost, which is very much lower than the cost of coal and even farther below
the cost of oil and even farther than that below the cost of the new types of ener-
gy, whose marginal cost is becoming prohibitive.

For all that, the nuclear choice does not rule the others out. In the first place
is coal, provided that sufficiently diversified importation channels are maintained
and that national production is resumed under technically and commercially accep-
table conditions. The sun and the biomass, among other things, can also contribute
significantly to our energy supply. There as elsewhere the field for discoveries is
immense.

This is no reason to surrender too quickly to the promises of a scarcely-explored
future; one part of public opinion, moreover, is deceiving itself, or being misled,
when it characterizes the French energy program as "all nuclear." In 8 to 10 years
nuclear energy will represent at the maximum 30 percent of our total energy re-
sources.

It is still necessary that there be no additional delay in starting certain pro-
jects. Otherwise, neither energy conservation, which is probably already overesti-
mated, nor new energy sources will make up the difference. The difference will be
made up by imported oil and coal. Our "energy independence" will be diminished ac-
cordingly.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valcurs actuelles"
8946
C80: 3100/32

2
IN)! 0FF1CLAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

ENERGY ECONOMICS FRANCE

KINETIC ENERGY STORAGE WHEEL USE PLANNED
Paris AIR 45 (1)8108 in French 19 Sep 81 p 55
lArticle: "First Kinetic Energy Storage Device"]

{Text} The National Center for Telecomications Studies (GET) recently began
using the first kinetic energy storage device (accumulator) on an experimental basis
in its Rochefort-en-Yvelines telephone exchange. This device was developed by
Aerospatiale's Ballistic and Space Systeas Division fron the magnetic-bearing
reaction wheels it has developed for stabilization of satellites (Spot, etc.).

It is the world's first such device.

The kinetic energy storage unit is installed in an underground tank near the
telephone exchange. It consists mainly of a steel wheel 60 centimeters in diaseter
and 50 centimeters in height. The wheel veighs approxilately 600 kilogram and
rotates at 12,000 rpm in a frictionless sanner, thanks to its Iagnetic-bcaring
suspension. In addition, the flywheel is honed in a small vacuun case. As thus
installed, the device can supply 3 Kit for 20 minutes.

This kinetic energy storage device's advantages over chenical batteries are as
follows. according to Aerospatiale: pollution-free. sore flexible and quicker
recharge, instant deternination of anount of energy actually stored, relatively
compact, no special maintenance required. and a service life of 10 to 20 years.

Aerospatiale now intends to expand its line of such devices with units capable

of storing l to 2 K" for 10-15 minutes as emergency power sources for electronic
data processing centers. Hore powerful storage units of 5 to 10 K" are also under
study. These kinetic energy storage devices are being marketed in France by
Thonson-Auxilex, the supplier of the system's electronics.

mPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1981

8061
080: 3100/ 43

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL 38151 UM

ROLE OF SPITAELS IN STEEL ISSUE, GOVERNMENT FALL
Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 24 Sep 81 pp 4-7
LXrticle: "Guy Spitaels: The Man of Steelg7

[Text/ And there it is: Mark Eyskens' brilliant team has packed its
bags. We will hardly weep for it. In 5 months. it had offered us
only resignatious and retreats, hesitations and widespread ossifica-
tion, with, as a final climax, a scandalous budget. completely

riddled with accommodations and lack of imagination, but also inspired
by a tax-minded. sterilizing spirit with a bureaucratic, socialist

tint. Implicitly: an end to freedom of enterprise and all social
assistance.

The hostility to the budgetary monster was surprising in its extent,
which drove the PSCVPISocial Christian Party] to revise the bad joke.

To its great surprise, the PS [Socialist Party/ did not succeed in
imposing its wishes, and from that time on, it tried to slip away.

A debate on the issues, in fact. would have brought to light its deep
conservatism, especially with regard to the well known production
costs and index reform, as well as its complete and voluntary aliena-
tion frgm the needs of the FGTB [General Rederation of Labor of

Belgium/.

Always cold and realistic. Mr Spitaels has wanted to look for a more
sensational point of fall: the steel industry in an autonomist and
community setting. Following his upward dream, he chose to become

the first in the single Walloon. Which walloon, moreover? The future.

in any event, will judge what was essentially a tactical, personal
step.

These days Mr Spitaels is claiming to have acted in perfect agreement
with his party. To be sure, nobody at the Office dared complain
either Monday or Tuesday, but how can one explain the curious fluctuations of the
Kernkabinet on Thursday. when a solution for the steel industry was accepted by

the Socialist vice-premier, Hr Hathot and by the minister of justice, Philippe
Hourcaux?

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Later, and after having been blasted by the president of the party.
they backed out without false pride. After all, it was just a
question of habit for them. To Mr Martens IV's anguish. the vice
premiers, one of them the same Hr Mathot, had accepted a relative
modification in price-indexing. The Spitaelian ax took away all his
illusions on this subject.

Thus, we repeat, the desire for a split was, again this time, Guy
Spitael's prerogative.

In truth the president of the PS seems to have calculated perfectly
the risk of the undertaking. How could he not know that in the case
of a split, he would be isolated from the PSC [Christian Social Party/
and the CVP [Social Christian Party/, and also from the Flemish
socialists? No matter, Mr Spitaels has now many other winning cards
on his side. Is he not comforted by the support of the Walloon unions
who wish to cross swords, a question of stirring up a demoralized
rank-and-file? The Walloon Festivals will take a curious turn . . .
And then, he will have the satisfactign of also being supported by
self-administrating RH [Valloon Rally/ of Henri Mordant . . .

So what: Since Monday, and with the political politicking, the
Belgians scarcely know what has happened. other than noting that the
gap between the two communities is widening more and more, thus
making the task even harder for those who, like those in the Psc or
the Flemish socialists, are still trying to put up some ridiculous
footbridge.

Having said this, the major turn taken by Mr Spitaels could perhaps
have the advantage of clarifying things definitively.

A last question, finally: what will happen tomorrow? What formula
can we think of in order to save the little we still have left? A
non-traditional government such as Henri Simonet wished for in
POURQUOI PAS? of 10 September? It is too early, and everyone does not
yet see clearly the extent of the wreck.

Elections, then?

To be realistic, this solution would be no less dangerous. Public
opinion, in fact, is fed up to the teeth with politicians‘ politics,
their schemes, and their settlements of account. The anonymity of
the polling booth could permit it to avenge itself cruelly on the
puppets of the Rue de la Loi by favoring to the hilt the makeshift
and chance parties.

After all, would that not be justice? How can one accept without
revolt these "partycratic" jokes, these demagogic defiances of which
all are capable and which have left this poor country in a complete
structural, economic, and social crisis, without even a coherent plan
for the 1982 budget? This scandalous exhibition will sooner or later
receive its just retribution.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But we are not there yet. and the farce will continue in full swing
in the days to come. For these men. no lesson is ever profitable.
Nevertheless, it would be in their interest to read the following
pages. where Paul Colson describes the financial mechanism of the
steel crisis. For his part, Jacques Schepmans is concerned with
another mechanism. The one that is stirring up Guy Spitaels . . .

"For 15 years I visited Dr Jekyll. Today at noon I met Mr Hyde."
This is how an impudent socialist. one quite close to Mr Spitaels.
however, summarized the Sunday debate between the president of the PS
and Leo Tindemans.

And, in fact, tense. fascinated by himself. dry as a stick.

Mr Spitaels presented the extraordinary picture of a cold demagogue.
To be sure, he was not wrong in letting the CV? know that the time
for compromise had long since passed, but behind his Savonarde and
destroying angel act, it was easy to perceive other intentions.

Having arrived at a summit meeting of his "marketing" personnel.

Mr Spitaels was already preparing for a new level in his frunionsl
ascent.

This confrontation was a most haunting experience. On the right, a
Tindemans still not calmed down from his million European votes.
opposite a Spitaels. fascinated by the results of the "Political
Barometer"* and persuaded that. this time, he could take the liberty
of doing anything.

A marvelous performance of a "political show" with these two men who
have or had evil advisers who led them into these demagogic excesses
to which their basic personalities already made them so vulnerable.

On this Sunday, Mr Spitaels did not do things in a small way. Full
of the Apocalypse and hellfire, alternating with threats and sub-
nationalistic chauvinism, he was exemplary.

He left nothing to chance. Not even blackmail. The community
aggressiveness was there. for the use of the voter. but also to
impress the Palais, where he has tried for so long to be thought of
as the highest recourse. This was very clever insofar as Laeken.
by definition, is somewhat traumatized by this kind of outlook.
Finally: Mr Spitaels took refuge in the old and always effective
trick. street blackmail.

This style of threat has always been part of the socialist weaponry.
In 1950, in 1960. in short, each time that the socialists were
dismissed to obscurity. they caused strikes and demonstrations with

 

*See POURQUOI PAS? of 17 September. where our Barometer designated
Mr Spitaels as Mister Wallonia.

6

BIND OBEVFVA! "CF an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the temperament of a band of rioters who: having been assembled
from nothing. are even more formidable.

Today, with the gravity of a licentious sexton, Mr Spitaels is doing
the same thing. By pretending, of course, to deplore it, and by
giving numerous warnings, he is succeeding in raising those specters
which will cause the socialists to be persuaded to impose their law:
a community escalade descending immediately upon the followers of
separatism, and, as a bonus, the violence of accial disturbances.

At least we are warned:

Let's be accurate. If, behind all this, this socialist condottiere
[captain of a band of adventurerg/ had no underhanded, ulterior
motives, we would be quite satisfied to see the CVP, and particularly
Leo Tindemans, made fun of in this way.

It is true that today's Flanders is domineering, sure of itself,
brutal, and arrogant. It is true that for a long time the political.
as well as the financial, power has wanted to impose on Wallonia an
unbearable economic dependence.

But is the extreme radicalism of Mr Spitaels the solution? And how
can we not doubt his disinterestedness? Everything, in fact. proves
to us that the president of the PS wants to stir up, then exploit.
the steel crisis, in order to strengthen both his own and his party's
identification, which, moreover, have become confused in his eyes.

Let us analyze the tactics of this senator-mayor of Ath:

Mr Spitaels is now raging about the lack of reSpect for the promises
made regarding applying the Financial Plan for the steel industry.
Correct: But why does he maintain a similar silence as soon as it
comes to applying the Social Plan?

Among the conditions for rectifying the steel industry. there were,
in fact, provisions for a release for 5,000 jobs and a decrease in
the total wages of 10 percent.

Between 1 January and 1 June 1981, personnel increased in Lieges by
73, and decreased only by 354 in Charleroi. As for the total wage
figure, it has not decreased but increased by 9 percent.

Thus, we bet that Mr Spitaels, while staying firm on his positions
and holding a sacred cow in addition, ought not to be unhappy to lay
today's failure at the door of the Flemish, the PSC, the bankers . . .
It will permit him to gloss over the troubling Social Plan and above

all not to have to confront Jean Gayetot or the happy Gillon. the
bridges of walloon trade unionism over this slippery ground.

From this point on, the purety of socialist intentions, and also
their desire to succeed, leave us somewhat skeptical. Other examples?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whereas it had been agreed that the proceedings of the management
committee of Cockerill-Sambre would remain strictly confidential, so
as to separate the purely economic factors from the political concerns.
the PS leadership was informed of these proceedings and called a
secret (sic) meeting on Thursday, 10 September of all the socialist
leaders. It was then--and under pressure from the "boss" of the
Lieges metalworkers, Mr. Gillon, who knows that if the steel industry
slows down. he will lose his power--that the PS made its decision to
demand that the production level be maintained at 8.5 million tons,
exactly as--it must be admitted--the government plan specified.

From this point on, with absolute duplicity, the socialists pretended
to confuse production capacity and production level.

To be Sure, everyone agreed that, for Cockerill-Sambre, it was
necessary to maintain the passibility of producing 8.5 million tons
of raw steel. in order to be able to meet all requests. in case of a
cyclical revival.

On the other hand, as a purely administrative matter. it was necessary
to organize production in such a way that the industrial entity lost
the least amount of money possible. while still taking into account
the economic and social concerns. To lose the least amount of money
possible? When the socialists hear the words stabilization or reduc-
tion of finances, they bring out their Spitaels. Which did not fail
to happen.

It was from then on a flight forward. Wanting to leave no stone
unturned, the socialists pulled out all the stops. Attacking

Mr Davignon, who looks at the problem on a European level. bombing

the European People's Party for being guilty of wanting to rationalize
the steel idnustry, calling upon the excited Anne-Marie Lizin to do
this, blaming the government for the decision of the Swiss banks not
to bring in the money to breath a little life into Cockerill-Sambre
until the end of October, these men from the Boulevard de l'Empereur
are indulging in a frenzied mixture of conditioning public Opinion.

In truth. if it had not been the steel industry. Mr Spitaels would
have found something else. Let us simply say that today. these
circumstances seemed to him more favorable.

He is convinced, first of all, that his all-round radicalism and his
constant ultimatums have a bearing on the Walloon public. Our
Political Barometer has no doubt been able to reassure him on this

subject.

By causing a crisis that could lead to elections. he thinks he has
found the best combat ground. Thus he will do everything to stir up
a community passion among the crowd.

By hiding behind the steel question, he will avoid taking responsibil-
ity in the economic and social areas regarding the necessary

FOR OFPTPI’AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

financial stabilization. government expenses, or production costs.
By making the debate into a passionate issue. he hopes to succeed
in erasing all those real problems to which the PS, in the spirit
of one-upmanship which it has now made its own, cannot give a
satisfactory answer.

Thus, this identifying image of an uncompromising Halloon nationalist.
of a Saints-Genevieve facing the Flemish barbarians, and of an
unwavering protector of the trade unions can only, according to him,
strengthen his position as head of the PS and later (at least he
hopes so) as head of a Walloon state.

But wait: Would not an autonomous Wallonia, in the hands of an
unshared government, run the risk from then on of becoming totally
subject to these favorite fantasies of the socialists?

When Mr Spitaels attacks the bankers, he does indeed take the pre-
caution of rejecting the outright nationalization of credit, but . . .

It is now permissible to imagine a wallonia that would humor the Rosenksvalier
under the pretext of autonomism. Therefore, Hallonia must seek out a desper-
ately fragile balance.

If we must wish it to be resolute, strong, aware of itself and its
destiny, and resolved not to yield to certain Flemish demands, as

a thoroughly-understood regionalism would require, will it also be
able to spurn this intense adventure into which it is in danger of
being led by the confused ambition of one man and one dominerring

party?

Mr Spitaels' spectacular offensive will. in any event, have had the
advantage of opening the eyes of some people as to the future of
this surprising, Spitaelian regional-socialism. And for that reason.
at least, it will not have been useless.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 POURQUOI PAS?

11550
C50: 3100

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

BASQUE COMMUNIS‘I‘S DIVIDE) 0N MERGER VIII! OTHER LBP‘I'IS‘IS
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Sep 81 pp 31-32
[Article by Ander Landaburu: ”Basque Conunists, Unite!"]

[Text] The rapprochement between the BIA [Basque Revolutionary Party] and the DR
[Basque Communist Party] was known, especially after their respective congresses
last spring. However, no observer anticipated such a rapid convergence process.
The unification of the Basque co-unists with the purpose of creating a new party
of the Basque "Marxist" and "nondogaatic" left had the effect of a bombshell in
Basque political circles.

Events picked up aonentun in 68 hours. Thus. when the leaders of the PCB-[Spanish
Comunist Partyl-EPK were notified that the Biltaar Tipia--central comittea of the
BIA-was to neet right away to plan a session of the Constituent Congress of the
projected political party by the end of the year, the secretary general of the
Basque comnists, Roberto Lerxchundi, urgently sunnonsd the party's executive.

After several hours of discussion and by a vote of 36 in favor and 13 against with
one abstention, the coununists decided to ask the patriots of the BIA for a stint
of negotiations with the firm resolve of helping create a new political group "out
of this party which we seek, one that will be an independent party. of a fully
sovereign Basque character, in order to establish the necessary links with like-
minded political forces in the whole of Spain and Europe."

This surprising document was sent urgently to the capital of Guipuzcoa Province
where the EIA's executive met a few hours later. In the face of the commist re-
quest, it decided to postpone its Constituent Congress to a new date. In its reply
the executive explained to the Basque co-unists that it did so in the face of "the
need to bring other forces into the Constituent Congress of the Basque Left [£8]

for the creation of a class party that would be bread, of the assess and nondognatic,
that would overcoae in theory and practice the historic division between Socialists
and comnists in the working calss."

Even though it was executed in its nearly final phase hurriedly, this agree-ant is
nevertheless the result of a long process of reflection within which both the EIA
and the PCB-BPK have strived to overcome the historic division between nationalists
and columnists. Following the elections to the Basque parliament in 1980 where the
unquestionable hegemony of the Basque right was brought out and, especially. the
large electoral abstention of imigrant workersnpotentially leftist voters-sona

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0\'I.Y

of these organizations, together with intellectuals and independent professionals
brought up the possibility of creating a new dynamic to face this division and
fragmentation of the left in the Basque Country.

Accordingly, in their respective congresses held last spring, both the PCB-EEK and
the BIA already suggested the need to strive in this direction, as Mario Onaindia,
the head of the BIA, confirmed recently. "In this process the historic divisions
between nationalists and non-nationalists and between Socialists and commists mat
be overcome to endow this possible unity with a new dimension that may be transformed
into the revised platform of a nondogmatic left."

On its part, in the Basque Communist Party congress, a faction dubbed "nationalist"
and headed by Roberto herxchundi achieved signifith success in receiving a comfort-
able majority vis—a-vis the "working class" faction represented by the veteran

leader Ramon Ormazabal and the head of the Workers Cosnittees [66.00.]. Tomes ‘l‘ueroe.
who follows the line of Santiago Carrillo.

It is with the two congresses that the rapprochement was initiated between the two
parties which considered that the overlapping points in their political strategy

for the Basque Country were more iwortant than the divergences. "This overlap is
understood," Lerachundi told CAMBIO 16, "in the sense that Basque national freedom
itself is linked to the emancipation of the workers."

Differences with the adherents of Euroconmnism and the Workers Comittees

However, in the parallel paths covered by the two political organizations these past
few months and now with the merger plan, there is no agreement on everything. Thus,
the theme of Eurocommnisa and the labor union problem can become the major issues
of the forthcoming discussions.

For Mario Onaindia, Eurocomnism has failed to the extent that it has strived to
struggle for democratic socialism with a party tied to "laninist or Stalinist
defects" even though he recognized later that the Basque Communist Party has recently
evolved considerably in this field, moving closer to the BIA's line.

Neither does it escape anyone's notice that this process of unity or fusion can have
important consequences in the labor union policy which both parties are promoting
now, one of them backing the Workers Comittees and the other the $17 [Solidarity

of Basque Workers].

Both Onaindia and Lerxchundi avoided at this time coming out clearly on the issue
even though the secretary general of the PCB-EPK noted that "no one will neglect
the securing of instrumentalities which the working class has acquired. In every
way, we shall avoid a break in the labor union movement and shall aim at defending
those means that would make it possible to secure unity without coneerting symbols
into patriotism."

No matter what the final result, the agreement between the two leftist parties has
generated for now an enormous degree of expectation in the Basque political world.
Its impact has become evident. among all the other political groupings which, with
interest or concern, are very mindful of the progress in the negotiations.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In UCD [Democratic Center Union] circles, both in Madrid and in the Basque County,
the fact is viewed with interest and positively despite ideological differences.
For the Basque members of the UCD this convergence can allow a significant explica‘
tion of the Basque political process, a clarification. But above all, it is an
important advance in the pacification of the Basque Country.

In this respect a UCD parliamentarian from Vizcaya Province, on recalling the words
of the minister of interior, Juan Jose Boson. on his recent trip to Bilbao, told
this periodical: "For the minister and for the 0CD here, a stable Basque left is
fundamental and the key to peace. Both the truce af the police and militia and

the recent and constant charges or denunciations by the Basque Left against violence
are a major effort for the normalization of life in the Basque Country.

This plan for the merger of the PCB-BPK and the BIA nevertheless preoccupied other
important sectors of Basque political life, such as the Socialist sector and the
nationalist majority of the PNV [Basque Nationalist Party]. Hhile the Socialists
refused to make declarations and went into a profound silence, thereby demonstrating
their surprise and fear before this new leftist pact which can deny them electoral
strength, the nationalists of the PNV, also preoccupied, stressed the Marxist
character of the convergence and started to maneuver to prevent a sizable loss of
influence in the BLA (STV) [Solidarity of Basque Workers] trade union.

A place where this process is being followed with genuine interest is among parties
of the Basque left such as ARV [Basque Nationalist Action], 3831 [Basque Socialist
Coordinating Force], and others which, despite their scant electoral success,
continue to have influence in the cultural and intellectual life of the Basque
Country. These are typical parties that could see themselves become integrated in

this aggregating process spearheaded for the time being only by the Basque Communist
Party and the BIA.

However, this minieuphoria of some groups of the Basque left is not shared by all
the communists of the Basque Country. The challenge in the party was not long in
coming. .The minority faction, called "unionist," loyal to the veteran of the

apparatus, Ramon Ormazabal, targeted its initial arrows at Roberto Lerxchundi and
his allies.

while this faction, which enjoys no more than about 30 percent of the votes in the
party, does not represent the majority, its influence continues to be significant
among the leftist fringe of the Estuary of Bilbao where Tomas Tusros and his
colleagues control the Workers Committees and where many former activitst have
always maintained a critical posture vis-a-vis anything that was redolent of the
Basque movement.

For Ramon Ormazabal the decision and the document of his party's central committee
represent a flagrant infringement of the agreements of the Fourth Congress and 'h
deceit of the party's grassroots." Visibly displeased and pained by what he called

haste, the old communist leader noted that "in the preceding congress no one was

authorized to anticipate or promote the separation of the Basque Communist Party
from its Spanish counterpart.

In this respect the critics in this faction have been numerous, strongly represented
among the left in Alava Province and in a group from Guipurcoa Province headed by
Ignacio Latierro.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Disciplinary Measures

Bar was declared between the two factions, and while the pro-Santiago Carrillo
faction of the EPK proposes the urgent need for a special congress with the purpose
of clarifying the positions in the party and seeing to what extent the steps taken
by the central committee for a convergence with the Basque Left or the BIA enjoy
support among the grassroots. the individuals connected with Roberto Lerxchundi
have announced that they will not tolerate lack of discipline and that they will
make the appropriate decisions when they summon the provincial committees.

0n reasserting its posture, the central committee of the Basque communists plans
to move the process forward "no matter what." In this purpose it has been encouraged
by the historic Basque leader, Juan de Aatigarrabia, who lives in Cuba today.

Minister of government of the Basque region in 1936, Astigarrabia was expelled free
the communist party at the beginning of the war because of his "nationalist
sympathies" even though he was subsequently reinstated. Today, according to PCB-
EPK sources, he would be prepared to return to the Basque Country and confront his
old party adversary, Ramon Ormazabal.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Information y Revistss, S.A.

2662
CSO: 3110/19

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL [SE ONLY

PJLITICAL
SPAIN

BUSINESS INTERESTS SEEN AS BACKING CALVO SOTELO IN UCD
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 21 Sep 81 pp 31, 33
[Article by Anxton Sarasqueta]

[Text] The situation of the Democratic Center Union (UCD) and the government has
entered a delicate phase in the vicious circle in which the different centrist
forces are moving, without finding any way out of the crisis.

The "war" being waged among centrists has aborted the first moves by President
Calvo Sotelo to solve the crisis.

Given this internal situation, and the offensive by the opposition in the first
parliamentary debates. the head of the government has been forced to delay the
press conference that he had publicly announced on 31 August for when he returned
from vacation.

Amid the parliamentary debates on such key issues as colza and NATO, and as the
kickoff of the electoral campaign in Calicia approaches, the president is con-
fronted with two immediate problem: which will have a decisive impact not only on
his own future, but also on the collective political life of the country.

The problems are the government crisis, and the dilemma of whether Leopoldo Calvo
Sotelo will receive full UCD support when it comes time to take the reins of govern-
ment and prepare for the upcoming general elections.

The members of the cabinet have begun a feverish race to present their respective
reports on their activities, which is interpreted as an unequivocal sign of an
impending cabinet shake-up.

Ministers such as Rodolfo Martin Villa, miniSter of territorial administration,
Education Minister Juan Antonio Ortega, and Minister of Culture Inigo Cavero (the
latter bearing "Cuernica") have done so in recent days; Minister of Public Works
and Urbanism Luis Ortiz will attain his principal objective this 21 September with
the signing of the framework agreement on construction.

It was Ortiz himself, in .1 conversation with CAHBIO 16, who interpreted the words

of the chief of government as meaning a postponement of the shake-up to "sometime
soon."

This crisis will undoubtedly be influenced (with the resultant tossing around of
names, which has already begun) by the internal conflicts of the UCD, and clearly

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the resistance and opposition Calvo Sotelo has encountered among Suarez' follow-
ers and some men with Social Democratic leanings.

The Duke Suarez emerged from the shadows this week to state publicly his position
of continuity with respect to the tack that triumphed in the centrist congresses,
and with respect to the pressure for change emanating from the president's office
and those surrounding him. '

This is a struggle for change in the UCD, between the pragmatic elements who set
the pace for the transition of power, and the ideological currents that are rising
up out of the ashes.

Liberals and Christian Democrats support a plan devised by Calvo Sotelo to place
the center in a liberal, rightist position. This support implies access to some
positions of power within the party and the government, and the pragmatic elements
such as former President Adolfo Suarez and other leaders in his area, who hold the
principal offices of the party. are reluctant to give up that power.

This confrontation. in view of the prospect of a Socialist victory predicted by
the latest opinion polls. has gone beyond the UCD's sphere of influence and has
sparked a strong reaction by an economic power within the business sector.

Thus, using the platform provided by his reelection as president of the employers'
association CEOE [expansion unknown], Carlos Ferrer Salat did not hesitate to make
a serious and severe warning to the government, its president and his party, assert-
ing among other things that if the centrist leaders do not succeed in overcoming
"the illogical concept of the center as a mixture of disparate and sometimes oppos—
ing ideologies, . . . we foresee an inevitable and quick electoral defeat."

Ferer Solat, who has no doubt that "many, many Spanish businessmen and their fami-
lies, using their undeniable social influence, brought many of the voters to the
polls to hand (the UCD) its victory on two occasions," dialectically excoriated
the centrist leaders who “are trying to fill Socialist or Communist positions."

The attack by the CEOE president on those of the center-left has two targets:
Adolfo Suarez and Francisco Fernandez Ordonez.

Thus no one was surprised at Adolfo Suarez' response to Ferrer Salat's idea of a
possible Socialist victory and the need for a swing to the right in the government

party.

The CEOE has the option, according to its top leader, of pursuing a liberal-con-
servative political objective. At the same time, Ferrer Salat is trying to uproot
the middle—of—the-road Socialists by accusing them of false moderation.

But Ferrer Salat's political rally is just the beginning of a formal offensive for
the reorganization of the right by party members and the business sector "in view
of the upcoming autonomy and legislative elections." Hours later, after hearing
this analysis in more measured tones, as befits the atmosphere of the Palace of
Honcloa, President Calvo Sotclo received repeated assurances of support from

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ferrer Salat. At the same time. within the UCD a strategy was devised with two
objectives: to fence in Adolfo Suarez and his men, and to strengthen the position
of the chief executive as the undisputed leader of the center.

To bring together liberals. Social Democrats, Martin Villa followers, men who have
moved in Social Democratic circles. groups such as the so-called “young Turks" and
other independents. and get them to back Calvo Sotelo, is one of the schemes afoot
to limit Suarez' influence on the executive committee and the party leadership.

It is within this context that one should consider. for example, the meetings held
recently between Marcelino Oreja, the government‘s current delegate to the Basque
Country and a prominent member of the Christian Democrat family, and the "young
Turks.“ a group which includes about 30 parliamentarians.

This operation involves drawing in relevant independent centrists through the gov-
ernment. a change in the distribution of government posts to provide incentives
for supporting Calvo Sotelo, and guaranteeing at least neutrality on the part of
Agustin Rodriguez Sahagun and Rafael Calvo. party president and secretary general,
respectively. Either they have come under Suarist influence, or they have not had
enough authority to ensure total party support for the president of the government.

Martin Villa, a man who appears to be a key figure in tipping the centrist scales,
has maintained a subtle position on the inclusion of independents in the govern-
ment. as a function of their names; he has a sort of wait-and-see attitude.

The mechanisms being considered by Calvo Sotelo to turn the terms of influence
toward the groups that support the chief exeCutive, involve achieving a consensus
among the centrist "barons" or. in a bolder move. holding a special congress.

Distinguished members of what was termed the "critical sector" at last January's
congress in Palma de Mallorca, made up of Christian Democrats and liberals, are
betting on the latter alternative.

Christian Democrats such as Jose Luis Alvarez, Oscar Alzaga, Marcelino Oreja. . .
(some of them have expressly confirmed this to CAMBIO 16) do not believe the commit-
tees oi prominent figures provide a viable solution, and are opting for a special
congress to be held before the general elections.

Three Keys

Movertheless. during recent weeks the centrist "barons" have held intense negotia-
tions to achieve some points of agreement among the different tendencies. They
have not reached a delinitivc consensus, although in the words of a minister close
to Calvo Sotelo, there are promising signs.

But the linal solution to the crisis in the upper echelons of the government party
will not be confirmed objectively until the results are in on the three key tests
that Calvo Sotelo will have to take during the next 30 days.

After the «weting of the political council of 18 September, the date selected for
the oliicial release of the results of negotiations among the centrist leaders.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

according to party President Agustin Rodriguez Sahagun, the regional elections for
the Galician parliament will be at hand, and sooner or later (depending on when
the NATO debate in Cortes ends) there will be a cabinet shake—up.

These events will determine the outcome of the centrist crisis, which is anxiously
awaited by all politicians because of its impact on democratic stability and on
all other forces.

Even the opposition leader, Felipe Gonzalez (see interview on page 36), recognizes
the political importance oi solving the centrist crisis. After the most recent
meeting oi the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) federal comittee, that
party's secretary general reiterated the Socialists“ decision not to force the

[all of the government and to maintain the pacts to cover the legislature until
the end. in 1983.

This promise not to harass the government until the ultimate consequences (with
the exception of the dialectical confrontations from the benches in Parliament) is
really a margin 01 confidence which Calvo Sotelo can rely on to give him an

opportunity to turn to his party and repair the cracks in the system created by
attempted coups and terrorist acts.

Ilowever. in the long range. the Socialist strategy is designed to undermine the
government. it is within this context that they have harassed seven ministers in
the coin and NATO debates, while trying to prevent changes in the cabinet.

COPYRIGHT: 1981. lutormacion y Revistas. Sm.

8926
C50: 3110/15

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

SUAREZ VS CALVO SOTELO: ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Sep 81 pp 210-29
[Article by Anxton Sarasqueta]

lTextI The Duke ol Suarez does not think the trajectory of his successor, Leopoldo
Calvo Sotelo, is clear; without great confrontations, he has launched a discreet
oiiensive against the current resident of the Palace of Honcloa. He did meet with
Calvo Sotelo this week in another effort to reconcile their positions.

Adolfo Suarez, who will turn 109 this week (on 9-25-81), has political aspirations
for the 1987 elections. lie discovered Calvo Sotelo as his successor, and now has
control over the party at local levels as well as within the party apparat. He
wants to make sure that the current president does not deviate from the center
left, where the decisive votes will be in the 1983 elections. Suarez, who has
gotten progressively further away from Calvo Sotelo, although the two maintain
appearances. is certain that the key to the political future lies in his hands.
with the control of a large part of the Executive Branch; with the support of
Party President Agustin Rodriguez Sahagun and Secretary General Rafael Calvo
Ortega (known in political circles as the "Dynamic Duo"); with decisive influence
in the majority of local and provincial connittees in the party, Adolfo Suarez is
convinced that if the current structure of the party is maintained he will once
again become the key man in Spanish politics in 1983. According to a basic
analysis, the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) will not be able to obtain an
absolute majority in the coming elections, and will have to govern with a sector
oi the Democratic Center Union (UCD). That sector will be the one headed by
Suarez, with 60 or 70 indispensable deputies who are loyal to the duke and not to
Calvo Sotelo.

The people at Arlaban, headquarters of the government party in Madrid, where the
leaders oi the UCD and what has become known as "the machine" can be found, are
convinced that the center is populist.

And they are convinced that populism is embodied in Adolfo Suarez, now a duke,
honorary president of the U60 and, for the past 5 years, executor of the
transition policy in the Palace oi Honcloa.

Populism is not a definite ideology. but one which stems from the charismatic
ligure of a leader.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Today, between visits to Latin America and rest periods at his home in Avila,
Suarez is ensconced in his law office on Calle Antonio Maura in Madrid, around the
corner from the historic Ritz Hotel and 200 meters from the Congress of Deputies.

with bodyguards situated in the cars parked by the kiosk on the street, and two
National Police officers guarding the entrance at the front door, the former presi-
dent's office is on the first floor, decorated with modern furniture in light hues
and predominantly abstract paintings on the walls.

His personality, which embodies centrist populism, places Suarez at the service of
a political sector known as the center-left. According to Party President Agustin
Rodriguez Sahagun, he is assured of 20 percent of the vote, a figure which could

account for 50 deputies. one-third of the number the UCD currently has in the
lower house. ‘

The offensive by the rightist sectors of recent weeks, however, demanding that the
UCD and the government take a step to the right to place the party in' a
center-right position and even form an alliance with the "great right," with
Manuel Fraga's party, has forced Suarez' men to define their situation at this
point in the Spanish political spectrum known as the center-center. It is quite
undecipherable now.

Cent er-Center

Rodriguez Sahagun, at his press conference last week, stated that another result
of the scores of surveys conducted recently was that 23.5 percent of the
electorate would vore in favor of the center-center.

Suarez and his most loyal followers, such as former Vice-President Fernando Abril
and former Minister Rafael Arias, as well as the party "machine," have a majority
on the party's executive bodies (the executive committee and the political
council) and thus control them. They defend that leftist area of the center which
borders on socialism and could at times be confused with it.

The fact that a recent survey indicated that the highest number of UCD voters were
between the lower-middle and lower classes (see CAMBIO 16 No. 509), below the
Socialists, explains these intrusions into the left.

However. it is generally agreed that Suarez was responsible for the UCD's victory
in the last elections of I979. thanks to his appearance on television a few hours
before the polls opened with a message of terror in view of the threat posed to
the country by the possibility of the Socialist and Marxist "reds" reaching power.

So what is populism? How is populism applied in political practice? Can populism
represent the Spanish right in democratic institutions?

Along with the charismatic figure of Suarez, the self-made man, the brave man with
hard lines in his face, we have the voter who is over 30, low—income. Catholic and
very Catholic in more than 80 percent of all cases, and the party activist placed
in some job or professional post because of his loyalty to the party apparat.
There is a whole network of interests that in most cases stem from the administra-
tion and the old machine of the movement, from top to bottom.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This political-social spectrum is equivalent to that of the Argentine Justicialist
movement led by Juan Domingo Peron until his death; or that of the Institutional
Revolutionary Party (Pill) of Mexico. There is no equivalent in Hestern Europe.

The present UCD is not the modern, advanced right of classical lines that exists
in Western European countries.

Actually. it is a far cry from the Labourites and Conservatives of England, or the
German Social Democrats, much less the Christian Democrats of the land of beer and
sausages. it is even distant from the French farmer who votes for Hitterrand and
the Renault executive who goes for Giscard or Chirac.

when the issue of the DOD joining an ideological international, whether liberal or
Christian Democrat. has been brought up on a European level, Suarez has rejected
the idea, despite internal and external pressures. The current president of the
European Commission of the EEC, liberal Gaston ‘morn, laments that the then chief
oi the Spanish Government tried to convince him that the trend in Europe in the
coming years would be toward the center.

Spanish populism not only lacks a definite ideology. but it also manifests a
certain repugnance for all ideologies, whether because of low levels of education
among most people, or due to other factors inherent in the social structure and
the environment, as well as the historical context.

Thus we have the paradox that the Spanish democratic right, which is included in
the two classical ideologies of Christian Democracy and liberalism, supported a
party and a leader that are in another orbit; a leader, Suarez, whom they later
abandoned and pressured from all sides until he had to step down.

Some of the centrist "barons" who know Suarez best and who have worked with him in
his governments, say that one of his principal qualities is that "he knows his job
like no one else."

To know one's job means, in Suarez' case, to know the workings of the administra-
tion inside and out, to spend more hours than anyone else studying political
adversaries, planning strategies, winning people with personal charm, and buying
loyalty. Audacity is one of his essential traits, which explains his surprise
move to legalize the Communist Party to set an example during the transition
period. his lack of commitment to a set ideology gives him greater room to
maneuver with his adversaries, which has sometimes provoked scorn and disdain

among them; such has been the case with people ranging from Felipe Gonzalez to
Oscar Alzaga.

Knowing his job led him to plan his departure from government while maintaining
control of the party, taking advantage of one of the maneuvers of his party adver-
saries, who were then known as the "critical sector." They advocated the separation
oi the party presidency from the government presidency, trying to isolate Suarez
in Honclon and control him from the party machine. Indeed, that is what Suarez has
done to Calvo Sorelo in trying to divert him from the center which embodies
populism.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But it is obvious that Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, because of his personality,
education. background and ties, is alienated from Suarez—style populism, despite
the union that has kept them working together in the government and the party in
the past few years. Those who know Calvo Sotelo in real life say that not only is
he alienated from populism. but he feels a basic scorn for it.

Calvo Sotelo is the person who today embodies the interests of the more or less
progressive right which treads the line between liberal and conservative. l: is
obliged to be more reformist than progressive in a country like Spain, which
remains aloof from the progress of the European powers.

0n the extremes, liberals and Christian Democrats who support Calvo Sotelo
launched a genuine offensive against Suarez nearly a year ago, when the "critical
sector" began its operation and managed to defeat Suarez. Suarez and his men,
allied sometimes with the Social Democrats, have not-given an inch in control of
the party, and have not been afraid to tell the Christian Democrats to leave the
party if they don't like it.

Two Spains

In the middle of all this, Calvo Sotelo is faced with the dilemma of having to
prepare and lead a cohesive electoral campaign for 1983, with progressive rightist
features (rejecting the "great right"), and coming to grips with the possibility
of a successful and forceful Socialist Party, as indicated by the polls. A right
without Francoist complexes. with an unequivocally democratic image, economically
effective, and socially progressive, modern and imaginative. An ideological right,
not obscured by Suarez' populism. At the same time, however, it is certain that a
division of the party would mean the crashing defeat of the right.

Reconciling all those interests is the challenge that faces Calvo Sotelo in his
struggle with Suarez. This confrontation holds the key to the centrist crisis. and
sooner or later will force the current president to enter the political arena and
put his cards on the table.

Suarez is an avid player of poker and "mus" (Socialist Maria Izquierdo jokingly
calls him the "Mississippi Gambler"), and those who have sat at the table with him
assert that he plays hard and takes high risks. Suarez applies this practice to
politics, especially in pursuit operations.

This reporter has heard first-hand Suarez' ideas about the need to keep the
current political spectrum, with two large national parties and two other extremist
minorities. also on a national scale, such as the Popular Alliance and the
Communist Party. For Suarez. to move these pieces toward a more accentuated

bipartisanism is to create tensions that are hard to contain, and to return to the
two Spains.

Based on this analysis, and with the conviction that neither Christian Democrats
nor liberals have the remotest possibility of winning general elections on their
own, Suarez and his men feel they can be inflexible in many situations.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He is also certain that in a minority system such as the present one, in which he
could without too much trouble garner that figure which represents over 50 depu-
ties. he could control the most valuable votes in Parliament. In de facto terms,
and from within, this party can beconie the linchpin that can tip the scales one
way or another. The P802 would need his support for a coalition government, as
would the rightist parties.

How will Calvo Sotelo react to this situation? will the backing of the Church,
capital, the Christian Democrats, the liberals, some converted Social Democrats
and the independents won over by the promise of a new plan or the guarantee of
power, in addition to the political capital he has built up during his time in
office, be sufficient?

The weakness of Spanish democracy and the threats posed by possible coups and ter-
rorism, demand that political leaders have a sense of responsiblity, which trans-
lates into avoiding radical stands that could become destabilizing feetors.

This assumes some unity within the UCD, and limits the risks of a falling out.

Calvo Sutelo's strategy for making a pact with Suarez involves reversing the
present terms of force, based on the support he has, and opening up the UCD to a
system of ideological currents (where he has greater support), bringing into the
party men of his ilk, from the economy, from the university. . ., who would
proteCL him before, during and after the elections.

The middlemen. possibly Rodolfo Hartin Villa, Landelino Lavilla or Francisco Fernan-
dez Ordonez, can form alliances with Suarez if they do not receive the trust and
compensation they demand from Moncloa. This is particularly true of the present
minister of territorial administration, judging by the stance he took when he was
excluded from the president‘s intimate circle during the crisis that led to the
resignation of Fernandez Ordonez.

This is a dramatic duel between two personalities, one of whom (Suarez) recalls
that he has won two elections and engineered the transition, and that his party
has ridden in his saddle and then named another successor.

Thus, Calvo Sotelo must use what he has in the present to play in the future.

In view of events such as the coin and NATO debates, the Galician elections of
20 October, and the general state budgets, Calvo Sotelo will have to prove his
ability to place his own men and set forth guidelines in three key tests in the
coming months: the election oi the centrist parliamentary spokesman, the cabinet
shake-up and the party electoral committee, which is responsible for the slates in
the upcoming elections.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Iniormacion y Revistas, S.A.

8926
C50: '31 l()/l 5

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

NUCLEAR "All CIVIL DBMS! STUDIES SUGGESTED
Paris AIR 8 COSDDS in French 19 Sep 81 p 61
[Article: "Civil Defense System"!

[Text] Hue Florence d'ﬂarcourt. a selber of the National Assembly, requested that
the sinister of state for interior and decentralization furnish her details of a
civil defense system “against the new threats steaming fros the adoption of
increasingly advanced strategic and tactical weapon systess. and also against the
dangers likely to result fros the me of enhanced radiation weapons." She also aaked
the minister "whether it would not be advisable to establish a study group charged
with the task of preparing and proposing technical solutions to civil defense
problems."

In his reply. the sinister explained that, as the official responsible for protection
of the civilian population. he makes sure that this protection is taken into account
in the formrlation of general defense policy. "It is necessary. in fact, to allocate
defense outlays equitably and efficiently within an overall budget. the burden of
which is acceptable to the nation."

The minister of state revealed that the senior defense official attached to his
ministry and his own staff were currently conducting studies on the inventory of
existing shelters. construction standards for new buildings. and evacuation of
people living near key targets. "Hence establishmt of a study group does not
appear necessary," the minister concluded.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 (1)908 1981

80ch
cso: 3100/43 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY