FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10441

9 April 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 16/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
more

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3

~.~.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUG

(F000 16/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

AUSTRALIA

Report Proposes Secret Phone Taps on Drug Dealers
(Stephen Hills; 11!! AGE, 2 Feb 82) ...... .

Briefs
Sydney Hashish Seizure
Opposition to Marijuana Legalization

BURMA

Opiun, Carrier Seized on Lsshio Train
(HYANHAALIN, 2Fcb 82) ......... ..........

MALAYSIA

narcotics Arrests, Seizures in January 1981
(NEW STRAITS TIES, 23 Feb 82) ............

Custom Officers Seize Raw lleroin
(NEH STRAITS TIMES, 20 Feb 82) ..... .......

PHILIPPINES

Briefs
Hari juana Farm Destroyed

SINGAPORE

Briefs
Fight Against Drug Use

- a - [II]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3
THAILAND

Khan SA Bends Letters to Pren. Other Officials
(Hartman, 12 Mar 82)

Amphetamine Use Said To Be Growing
(www. 20 J.“ 82) COO...OIUCOO...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOO

Heroin Snuggler. Hired by Malaysian. Arrested
(THAN 8m. 1J.n82) 0.000.000.0000!OOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.

Hong Kong Man Arrested With Heroin
(“Anon m1“. 9Peb 82) 00......OODOOOOIOOOOOOQIOIIOOOO

Colulnist Blasts Effectiveness of Anti-Sua Raid
(Tobi Chaophraya; DAO S'AN, 9 Feb 82) ...................

Harihusn: Seized in Chechoengsao
(DAD SI“, 1’. Feb 82) assesssssssssascssssssocosoocosssas

Irregular Troops Said To Be Misused in Ban Bin Taek Raid
(mrtcmn’ 7peb 82) 0.00.00.0'CCODOOIOOOOOOUIO'IU‘DOOO‘.

Briefs
Drug Seminar
CANADA

Conviction for Cocaine, Marijuana Trafficking
(Gary Rennie; THE WINDSOR STAR, 26 Feb 82) ..............

Han Jailed on Drug Charges Called Major Niagara Seller
(THE GLOBE AND NAIL, WEEKEND EDITION, 6 Feb 82) .........

Five Imprisoned for Narcotics Trafficking
(THE SATURDAY WINDSOR STAR, 27 Feb 82) ..................

Briefs
Heroin Seized
Drugs Spur Crime Wave
LATIN AMERICA

ARGENTINA

Briefs
Addicts Arrested
Traffickers Arrested
Traffickers Killed, Arrested

- b -

FINICHHﬂC1A1.USE10NLY
BOLIVIA

Briefs
Traffickers Escape Prison
Cocaine Factory Dismantled
Officer Discharged for Trafficking
Official Convicted on Drug Trafficking

BRAZIL

Briefs
Cocaine Seized

COLOMBIA

Mexican Cocaine Dealer Achieves Freedom
(31. TIMO, 28 Feb 82) ..................................

Briefs
Harihusns Seized in Cesar

MEXICO

Smugglers of Electronic Good: Captured with Cocaine
(Bl. MARIANA, 18 Feb 82) ..................................

Briefs
Heroin Ring Suspects Arrested
Harihusna Shipment Seized
Nine Drug Plantations Destroyed
Customs Guard, Trafficker Killed
Harihuana Traffickers Jailed

PANAMA

Routes, Hethods of Colombian Cocaine Traffickers Discussed
(John Alius; 0 ESTADO DB 8A0 PAUID, 7 Mar 82) ...........

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA'
IRAN

Briefs

Quchan Drug Seizure
Torbst-e Jam Opium Seizure
Neyshabur Opium Seizure
Thhran Drug Seizures

Drugs Seized in Nehavand
Opium Seized in Darreh Caz
Opium Seizure in Ssrakhs

Finl(nﬂﬂ(1A1.USE(N¢LY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3

. 9.. . . .e—meu soul“ v. on.

Hamodan Heroin Seizure
Shiraz Opium Trafficking
Doscenebsd Opium Seizure
Opium Discovery in Sabrvar
Bsfehen Drug Discovery
Opium Seized in 'Aligudarz
Shirven Opium Discovery
Opium Seized in Chabuksar
Pars Drug Seizure
Massive Drug Snoop
Hamedan Heroin Heul
Mashhad Opium Seizure
Smugglers Arrested
Huge Drug Haul

‘ Gun, Heroin Seized
Opium Seizure
Hare Drug Haul

SUB-SAHARA” AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Briefs
Warning on Drugs
"EST EUROPE

AUSTRIA

Three Nigerians Sentenced for Smuggling Herihusna
(WIENER ZEITUNG, 23 Feb 82) ................

BELGIUM

Netherlander Held for Smuggling Hashish, Arms
(on STANDAAHD,18 Feb 82)

CYPRUS

Briefs
Narcotics in Femeguste

DENMARK

Interior Minister would Prohibit Growing of Hemp PL
(BERLINCSKE TIDENDE, 19 Mar 82) ............

Death-Dealing Heroin Seized by Police in Copenhagen
(BERLINGSKE TIDBNDB, 18 Her 82) ............

- d -

FOR(ﬂﬂﬁ(1Al,USE1HNLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600050017-3
Official: Sixteen Tons of Methadone Used Annally by Addicts
(INFORMATION. 23 Feb 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOICCOCO...

Danish. Norwegian Police: Over a Ton of Mashish Pron Nepal
(Helge Aanotabakken; ARBEIDBRBLADBT, 3 Mar 82) ..............

welfare Director: Stop Uneaploynent. Disability Aid to Users
(sanmcsxn rmmn, 16 Mar 82)

Folketing Majority Prevents Action To Close Christiania
(nulmsn unsung, 17 Mar 82)

Reporter Visits Christiania, Finds Mashish Sold Openly
(Henrik Grunnet; BERLINCSKB TIDEMDE, 16 Mar 82) .............

Police Assert Christiania Is Denmark's Mashish Center
(Anders "iig; BERLINGSKB TIDENDB, 7 HI! 82) .................

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

ITALY

NORWAY

SWEDEN

Leader of Frankfurt Drug Ring Goes on Trial
(DER SPIEGEL,1 Mar 82)

Italy's Growing Role in Narcotics Reported
(“8" 15 hr 82) .00....0.0.000000000000II...OCOOOOCOOOCOOO8

Physician Sees Increasing Brutality in Drug Environment
(Jan 0. Melgesen; ARBBIDBRDLADET, 2 Mar 82) .................

Narcotics Police Methods Described
(Leif Dahlin; DACENS NYHBTER, 27 Feb 82) ....................

National Police Chief Defends Use of Drug Gang Infiltrators
(Do 6. Andersson, Cecilia Steen-Johnsson; DAGBNS NYMBTER,
27 Feb 82) IO8..0000...OO0IOQDOO...OOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Danes Protest Svedes' Leaking of News on Gang Infiltration
(DAGENS mun. 27 yeb 82) 0.0...0.0000080008000000...COD...

Minister Promises Tougher Prison Regimen for Drug Convicts
("illy Silberstein; SVBNSKA DACBLADET, 22 Feb 82) ...........

Dutch Truck Driver Snuggles 62 Kilograns of Hashish
(Claes von Hofsten; SVENSKA DACDLADBT, 17 Feb 82) ...........

Ft"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.lﬂﬂE(NVlY

53

SS

56

57

59

63

65

69

7O

72

75

78

83
UNITED KINGDOM

Cemetery Note. Use of Drug. by Middle Cleu
(Roderick Junor; m DAILY 12mm, 2 Me: 82) ........

“one Office Note. Increue in Number of Drug Addicts
(David Pletcher; '1'!!! DAILY TELEGRAPH, 26 Feb 82)

Drug Snuggle: Marla Jailed for Three Years
(1m Henry; m DAILY TELEGRAPII, 17 Feb 82) .............

Court Hears Police 'Turned Blind Bye' on Drug Ring Couple
(THE DAILY TELEGRAPH, 20 Feb 82) ........................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BBIB!8

SYDNEY HASHISH SEIZURE--Custons officials and federal policy in Sydney have
seized sore than 2 tons of high grade hashish-the largest haul ever detccted
in Australia. The hashish was seized after a search of a container aboard a
ship containing Middle East foodstuffs. The business and consumer affairs
minister, Mr Morre, said in Canberra. the ship first arrived in Melbourne
fron Marseilles but was then redirected to Sydney. He said the high quality
hashish was individually wrapped in calico cloth and steeped with a trade
nark. [Text] [BK260202 Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 GMT 24
Mar 82 BK]

OPPOSITION T0 MARIJUANA LEGALIZATIOM--Australian police con-issioners have
come strongly against any aoves to make the use of narijuana legal. The
commissioners. who have been neeting in Canberra, say they did not endorse
the decriminalization of the drug. They say a recent discussion paper by
the Australian foundation of alcoholise and drug dependence on marijuana
lacks conclusive data on the long-tern effects of using it. There has been
an increasing debate by proainent Australians recently on changing the laws
relating to Marijuana. [Text] [BK260202 Melbourne Overseas Service in
English 0830 GMT 23 Mar 82 BK]

CSO: 5300/5688
OPIUM, CARRIER SEIZED 0N LASHIO TRAIN

Rangoon HYANMA ALIN in Burmese 2 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] At 1000 on 22 January. acting on information, a Lashio railways
police squad headed by K0 Sein Maung and K0 K0 Aye searched passenger car-
riage No A of the Lashio—Mandalay train as the train entered Haipaw station.
The team found from Nan Mya U of Shwe Chedi Ward No 8. Kyaukme, six balls

of raw opium, weighing 6 viss [about 22 pounds] and worth about 20.000 kyat,

hidden among the vacuum flasks in a rattan bag together with other contra-
band goods.

 

[Photo caption] Nan Mya U of Kyaukme seen together with 6 balls of raw

Opium seized from her on Lashio-Mandalay train at Haipaw station on
22 January.
NARCOTICS ARRﬁSTS, SEIZURES IN JANUARY 1981

Koala lunpur NEH STRAITS TIMES 1n Englteh 23 Feb 82 p 19

[Text]

and n for
Dtrector etIk Abdul
Ramon lemon sold to-

do}.
He sold Ice carried
out an and at our.

pet-o chute.
Dotutt A Mann

odd that except tor rev
optuln. then m on In-
ereue to tho more at

other types at tit-up.
Briefcase
About I It 0! rev

optmul
“tuberous.
el jeme

The [allowing day. pa
ltce tn Penn; octtl; one

Intermetlon ote n
men at the end
netted o Wee-e. ’h the

lobe bottom at the be;
they lound 0.1 “other
Iu number a.

In teller-up ep'euo
“one. tout not! people
were attested.

“On Joe. 0.93.119:

madame. tun -
men Ton Abdul [teak
or?" end edudm t. ottelu

elutf 11.11: I’m
po Ice teun another
three landle- at gen}-

«Quantum

to ttn and two nee

were detained. Mter
mhlngthetoxﬂum
“git! . J ﬂpolloe
once on!

detolnod o mend
her not! when they loud
moo stick: at Me In
tbelr (out! “I.

On Jen. at. at Join

no) a Bot tun. “lice
[whatnot you]:

on We MW
ttcewottedleonmbut
I0 one come to take the

0» Jen. at potlce
ntded o home In John
Deltmo here And de~
tllncd two ”NOD-III
oetsedtuotleluetgmo.
“’0". Fri. — Customs oiiicel'e ee-
teeday melted MOO gm oi b “to
grade raw heroin. worth about $1
million on tine street. during on
which on a how in Sense! -
up, Province Weiieeiey.

The boom is believed to love
been need an a transit point in
drug; entangled in lrom north.
weet Miami's “Bolde- Triengie'.

A 40-year-oid suspect iron:
Province Wellceley and e Rondo
Accord car were detained.

The eelrure. the biggest by the
Customs here so iur title . tree
the result oi two mo. e oi II~
veetigotioee on the activities oi e
locel dru syndicate believed to be
buedin rovince Welleoley.

The “lied herein In ca able oi
being converted into 200 eheto.

A shot. ct rrevaiiing street price.
coete than $6

Perelt Cuxtoms Director. "all

'8321

‘Wben the car Ito

Wen Yeop Abdel Shaker. eeid the
wheel: was ieid on o near o
mooqee about 5 sun by e nine-m
Ouetome art; led by Senior Oeu-
tonu So Ch a: it“: um.
About no an. e llolido Accord
beerle Pear-nu sregiatrotion
rove to on lake.
iron: the north. it forced late
3 men lane indie: to the been.
A Ceetome' cor loliowed. old
eﬂlcere at other stations cleeed ll.
d to trout oi
tine house. the river tree 3;:
hreheeded by Oinetome otiioere
economy and dill bin
"chained You“.

miractionwneoqelchibe

driver did not eve. have tlme'to

unueten his not belt." eeid lull
We: Yeop.

The driver threw out o rung
iron the car which we: cued
main the high-grade row heroin.
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA FARM DBSTROYBD—-Tinglayam. Kalinga-Apayao-The government has found a
vast marijuana plantation in this mountain area rm by armed regulars of the

New People's Army. Believed to be a source of funds of rebels for buying arms, the
farm eluded detection for many months as it was hidden in thickly forested hills.
When raided by the elements of the armed forces' Northern Command six NPA members
were still tending the farm. Also found in the plantation was a 20-bed rebel hos-
pital stocked with assorted medical supplies and preserved food. The marijuana
farmers who were captured told investigators they had been operating the plants-
tion to help shore up NPA finances. Brig. Gen. Romeo Gatan, Northcom commander,
said about 30,000 marijuana plants worth P6 million were uprOOted and burned by

the troopers. The farmers also admitted that a good part of their earnings were
used in buying guns. According to intelligence agents, the marijuana is sold in
school campuses and some urban villages. Military regional cor-anders told Defense
Minister Juan Ponce Enrile and Gen. Fabian C. Var, APP chief of staff, that the

10 bulldozers seized by rebels last week in Pamplona, Kalinga-Apayao, were recovered
yesterday by government troOpers after a fierce gunbsttle. Some 30 rebels guarded
the heavy equipment, the regional couanders said. The dissidents earlier demanded
a P500.000 ransom for the return of the bulldozers taken from the Pamplona Redwood
Veneer Enterprises. The regional military comand said no ransom was paid. ‘Ihe
troopers said the dissidents, who withdrew after engaging troop enforcements in a
one-hour firefight, were armed with srmslites and other assorted guns. [Text]
[Manila PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS in English 13 Mar 82 pp 1, 2]

080: 5300/10929
BRIEFS

FIGHT AGAINST DRUG USE--The minister of state for law and home affairs told
Parliament that the measures adopted by the government to combat drug addic-
tion and drug trafficking in Singapore have set with considerable success.
It was estimated that the addicted population had dropped from 13,000 in
1977 to 6,100 last year. Between 1976 and 1978, 50 persons were charged

fur drug trafficking offenses which could carry the death penalty, but the
number dropped to 15 between 1979 and 1981. The prices of drugs on the
street had risen as the result from $7 for a 0.2 gram straw of heroin a

few years ago to $20 for 0.05 gram of heroin. He said that hardcored

addicts remained a problem. [BK260202 Singapore Domestic Service in English
1100 GMT 19 Mar 82 BK]

C50: 5300/5688
KEUN SA SENDS LETTERS 1'0 Pm, OTHER OFFICIALS

31020350 Bangkok HATICHOII in Thai 12 Mar 82 pp 1, 12

[Excerpt] In his report on 11 March, the MATICHON reporter in Chiang Rai
said Khun Sa, leader of the Shan State United Any, whose headquarters at
Ban Hin Taek was destroyed by the Thai armed forces in February, has written
letters to several senior Thai officials. Last week he sent more letters to

such officials again through local Thai officials in Mae Gian District.
Chiang Rai.

According to the reporter, Khun Sa's letters were written in Thai Yai
dialect and were addressed to Prime Minister Gen Prem Tinsulanon, Deputy
Prime Minister Prachuap Suntharangkun, Director of Army Operations Maj Gen
Chawalit Yongchaiyut, Cniang Bai Governor Sakda 0-phong and Public "elfare
Department Director General Prawn Chanchamong. In the letter to Pram,
Khun Sa asked Pramun to deliver a separate letter to the king.

The contents of the letters were similar in that they say that the Thai king
is revered as the king of the Thai Yai minority group since the Thai Yai and

lowland Thai people are from the same origins. The incident at Ban Kin Taelt
is over and done and took place as a result of a misunderstanding. The Shan
State United Army holds no grudge over the incident.

The letters say that regarding the Thai Government's allegation that Khun 8a
is a narcotics trafficker and that his death or arrest would make opium dis-

appear from the Golden Triangle, Rhun 8a is willing to surrender himself to
the Thai Government. Rhun 8a also proposes to the Thai Government that he

put the entire Shan State lbited Army under col-and of the Thai military in
any operation, including operations against the communist terrorists or other
minority groups.

According to the reporter, Khun Sa did not set any conditions on his pro-

posal. It is believed, however, that Khun Sa will ask for permission to set
up a sanctuary in Thailand like the one he had at Ben Bin Taek.

630: 5300/5689
MPHE‘PAHINE USE SAID TO BE GROHING
Bangkok BAN HUANG in Thai 20 Jan 82 pp 1, 16
[Article: "Police Asked to Cooperate In Order to Quickly Suppress Amphetamines“!

[Text] Dr Sem has admitted that [the use of] amphetamines is spreading seriously.
About 99 percent of the truck drivers use these drugs. These drugs are dangerous
to the body and mind but they can be purchased easily from drugstores everywhere.

0n the morning of 19 January, Dr Sem Phringphuangkaeo, the minister of public
health. granted an interview before a cabinet meeting. He said that, at present,
after people take amphetamines, they feel very alert. This is a very popular
type of drug, especially among workers such as 10-wheel truck drivers. It

is thought that up to 90 [sic] percent of these drivers take these drugs.

At present, these drugs can be purchased very easily at various drugstores.
Another reason for the popularity of this type of drug is that, at present,
there are many factories. In Bangkok alone there are approximately 70 factories
that employ approximately 80,000 to 90,000 workers. It is probable that the
factory owners or others bring in these drugs and give them to the workers

in order to increase their work performance.

The minister of public health emphasized that amphetamines are dangerous

to the mental health of the people. He has tried to inform the people of
the fact that this type of drug can destroy [a person's] health. During the
first 4 hours after ingestion, the person will feel good, but after 8 hours,
it will begin to have a bad effect on the body and mind. If a person uses
this drug for a long time, he will become addicted.

Mr Amnuai Yotsuk. the deputy minister of public health, talked with reporters
about factories giving the workers amphetamines in order to increase their
work performance. He said that he had ordered drug inspections and officials
from the Department of Health to go inspect the factories in order to take
samples of the food and water and check the urine. If such drugs are being
used, it is believed that the factories are in violation of many things,

based on the drug and labor acts. The employers are also at fault. At present,
activities are being coordinated with several government units.

11943
CSO: 5300/5666
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3

HEEOIN SMUGCLFR, HIRED BY MALAYSIAN, ARRESTED

Bangkok TANAN SIAM in Thai 1 Jan 82 p 1

[Photo caption]

(MUD IAINSKOVQ

1.x «momk urge/511 ms wind;

 

mmnmuu much; '5 next-m
um £7 0 Lomm Jaw/m C‘s.)
IM&|!1U€1¥U\1,JD«§L ka
($1-3M: WIULUJ: Ham: \l
g.)uW\‘\3 ,

"‘-~. ~...

:‘mxtl Destructive heroin: Mr Pitikorn Saetanq and the 2C
wmqhmq 9.6 pounds and valued at. 80 million baht. that we

{mm Llu: Phahoyothin Police Station. He confessed that 8
Lo transport the heroin.

1191.3
CSO: 5300/5666

10

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3
[Text] A nose Kong-Chinese men wee

yoeterdey apprehended um
Crlme Suppression Dlvlelon po-
Hce relded hle eperunent and el~
leacdly found 8.) Knommmu o!
high-IredeNoOheroln.

The emu of Chen; m Rang,
.uu Peter. :4. et Chemchen
Conn In Sol Thonclor. Sukhumvu
Road. followed Intensive lnmtlo

the hero“
allegedly edud M

L...). ____...._.

HONG KONG HAN ARRESTED WITH REROIN

Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 9 Feb 82 p 3

[won by Inmate police at the
(:80 am the eehun of our
men Kilogram of heroin end
ihe capture of e TheLmovle
produce! end No ectreeeee et
Don linen; Airport over I week
I80-

Pol Col Runuo] Yemexul.
euperlalcndenl o! the Seventh
Subdlvldon of the C80. eeld the!

Chen: ha been living In Thellend
(or N yeen. Be eeld Chen.
worked In I mlnlnc buuneee In
htthebuﬂ for 1 to 8 yeere and
later Matted to e roed construc-
tion budneee.

The heroln wee lound In so
enll elude hue hldden In two
mltcuee In Chute room. the
aollcecolomlelieced.
COLUMNIST BLASTS EFFECTIVENESS OF ANTI-50A RAID
Bangkok DAO SIAM in Thai 9 Feb 82 p 5
[Please Wait, Sun column by Tabi Chaophraya: I"Thoughts Before Sunrise"!

[Text] The poppies are still dazzling. I think people are correct when they
say that even if Khun Sa dies, poppies will never die.

It is said that Khun Sa does not grow poppies but purchases raw opium, refines
it into heroin and sells it. just like the 93rd Division, which does not

grow poppies but makes money by running opium caravans. Even if Khun Sa leaves
Thailand, the poppies will still be beautiful and dazzling. About 4 kilometers
from Ban Hin Tuck in the nountainous terrain, there are still very large

areas planted in poppy. just as there is on Doi Hae Salong.

In short, on both Doi Mae Salong and in the mountains about 4 kilometers
from Ban Hin Taek, on thousands of rai the poppies are blooming dazzingly
and waiting for the day that they will turn into dangerous narcotics. This
product is produced by the various hill tribe groups that live on alnost
all the mountains here. Such groups include the Hussah, Ikaw and Lisu.

The irregulars [thahan phran] that drove Khun Sa out have confirmed that
when they reached this area they smelled the strong smell of this plant.

But they were not ordered to destroy the poppies! This say have been because
the various hill tribes lake their living growing peppy. That is, another

group was encountered, one that much thought must be given to. This is what
Thailand is like!

This is our country but others come and settle down here. They [should] not

be above the law but it seems like they are. They [should not] have any rights
but it seems that they do. We can only claim this and that. It is even necessary
to ”accept" then and give them comfort depending on the “reasons.” Take the
case of the United Nations refugees in Thailand, of which (only) 190,000

remain. Mr William Samaiser, the deputy high counissioner for refugees, has
said that these refugees should be given Thai citizenship and allowed to
settle down permanently in Thailand.

12
They know this is not right. Thailand is the one who has given these refugees
a place to stay. But, as everyone knows, the Nobel Prize for Peace was given
to the U.N. office of the High Commissioner for Refugees. Yes. Thailand cannot

get away from the word 'nust.‘ We must accept these stateless people for
humanitarian reasons and so on.

we probably cannot take any strong action against those who come to stay

in Thailand for various reasons, and this includes the hill tribes who grow
poppies for a living because of the various ”reasons." But when everything
is added up, it cannot be said that the Thais are the ones who "profit.“

I an not blaming the Free government for all these accumulated problems because
the various diseases afflicting Thailand are like a chronic cancer than cannot
be cured or that have been ignored so long that we are now in a coca.

In the report the “Smell of the Poppies," it is well known, isn't it, that
300,000 to 600,000 Thais between the ages of 16 and 24 are slaves to narcotics.
They spend approximately 9.8 to 19.7 billion baht a year on drugs. How can

we suppress narcotics? The only ones we can suppress are the small pushers!

Or is there some way to "eliminate the weeds by digging up the roots?“

11943
CSO: 5300/5666

13
HARIHUANA $81280 IN CHACHOENGSAO
Bangkok DAO SIAM in Thai 14 Feb 82 p 16

[Article: “Young Man Transporting 1 Million Baht worth of Harihuana By Truck
to Bangkok lls Arrestedl”l

[Text] A 0A0 SIAH reporter assigned to Chachoengsao Province has reported

that at 2200 hours on 12 February, Police Captain Hattana charoensak, the

deputy chief inspector at the Chachoengsao provincial police station in Bangnam-
prieu District, together with Police Sublieutenant Thirachai chineadathien,

the head of the investigation section of the Special Operations Unit, and

a force of officials went and inspected an unlicensed 6-wheel Hino truck
belonging to Mr Michal chaiwangsap, age 23, who lives at 128 Village 1, Tharae
Commune, Huang District. Sakon Nakhon Province. The truck was parked in front

of a Shell gasoline station opposite the Khlong chao market along the Chachoengsao-
Minburi highway in Bangnanprieu District, chachoengsao Province.

During their search, the officials found 293 bags of marihuana, each weighing 6
kilograms, valued at approximately 1 million baht hidden in the compartment

in the rear of the truck. The bags had been covered with bricks to keep them
concealed from officials. The officials placed Hr Hichai, the driver of the
truck. under arrest, seized the marihuana as evidence and turned the suspect
and evidence over to Police Sublieutenant Chaiyong Kritsanachinda, the officer
on duty at the provincial police station in Bangnamprieu District for further
investigation. Hr Hichai stated that this uarihuana did not belong to him

but to Mr Noi (surname unknown). who, he said, had paid his 2,000 baht to
transport it to Bangkok. But while Mr Hichai was parked in front of the gasoline
station waiting for another person to come and drive the marihuana the rest

of the way into Bangkok, the officials came and arrested hie. While they

were searching the truck of Mr Michai, they noticed two pickup trucks drive

up and survey the scene in front of the gasoline station. It is thought that
these pickup trucks were the ones that were to meet the truck of Mr eichai

but the two pickup trucks then sped off. After the investigation was completed,
the officials placed Hr Hichai under arrest for further handling of the case.

11943
C50: 5300/5666

14
IRREGULAR TROOPS SAID TO 83 “180830 IN BAN HIM TABK RAID
Bangkok HATICRON in Thai 7 Feb 82 p 6
[Article: ”The Secret 25 Billion Baht Operation to Eliminate Khun Sa']

[Text] “Last October, we received an intelligence report that a large shipment

of opium would be transported into Thailand. The government ordered the irregulars
[thahan phran] to intercept this shipment of opium. They did so and were

also ab e to destroy three heroin refineries near the border,‘ stated Major
General Chaowalit Yongchaiyut, the director of the Directorate of Operations,

on the ”Conversations About the Country's Problems” program on the evening

of 31 January.

He stated that in this operation, we lost one lieutenant and six warrant
officers. The aim was to draw Khun Sa's forces away to the west so that the
other 32 members of the [government's] force could escape.

MATICRON has checked the report file and it appears that this is exactly
the opposite of what the Information office of Supreme Command Headquarters
reported on 8 October 1981. It reported that soldiers from the Third Army
Area clashed with about 700 soldiers of unknown nationality on 7 October

in the area of Ko Samakhi Village, which is located along the Thai-Burmese
border in Chiang Rai Province. The fight continued through 8 October.

Thirty nine irregulars were ordered to go intercept a shipment of opium that
was being guarded by 700 men (according to estimates of Supreme Command Heed-
quarters). This does not make sense. First, how could just 39 irregulars
engage a drug caravan since each caravan is escorted by hundreds of men.
Second, these irregulars came from the Pak Thongchai camp in Nakhon Rstchasima.
Most of then were northeasterners who were unfamiliar with the terrain. And
what is important is that intercepting and destroying such caravans is the
duly of the border patrol police.

Thus, there was probably something secret behind the venture of these 39
fearless irregulars.

15
A high-rankinv news source of the border patrol police told HATICHON that
the task of these irregulars was not to intercept the opium shipment but
rather to kill khun Sa, for whom a 500,000 baht reward has been offered.

Reports have stated that the army's Special Operations Center was the unit
that coordinated things and formed the force. The government of one great-
power country that has a policy of suppressing narcotics supported this by
giving 25 million baht.

of this 25 million baht, 13 million was used to purchase Hlés with infrared
[scopes] for the 39 irregulars, who underwent rigorous selection, and two
pieces of infrared equipment. As for the remaining 12 million baht. it was
used for the “personal expenses“ of this unit that was to carry out a very
risky operation. Each person received an average of approximately 400,000 baht.

This small Operations unit was led by Lieutenant Athaphon (surname unknown).
It was composed of eight warrant officers and 30 irregulars.

This brave unit travelled from the Pak Thongchai irregular camp in Nakhon
Ratchasima to the Pratu Pha camp in Chiang Rai Province at the beginning

of October 1981. Then at 0400 hours one morning they were dropped off in

the Ban Sansai area, which is approximately 8 kilometers from Mae Sai District.
From there, they walked through the jungle into the area of influence of

Khun Sa in Burma. They clashed with forces of Khun Sa for the first time

in an area about 4 kilometers from the Thai border. The news source stated
that, during this clash, the irregulars killed 70 of Khun Se's men when they
attacked in the night in order to wipe out the irregulars. After this clash,
this brave unit tried to make its way south. It had two more clashes with

the forces of Khun 8a at Ban Hussar Puna-Chati. The news source stated that

the unit killed about 100 of Khun Sa's men. This brave unit fled and re-entered
Thailand at Ban Aku on 7 October. Forces of Khun Sa were moved in to eliminate
it from both Burma and Thailand, that is, from the Dan Hin Taek area. Finding
himself in this situation, Lieutenant Athaphon ordered his force to disband
so that they could escape.

A special report in the 8-14 1981 issue of Prachamit on this top secret operation.
an operation so secret that even Border Patrol Police Company 508. which

is stationed near San Hin Taek, did not learn of the operation until after

the clash, said that Border Patrol police Company 508 aided the eight irregulars
whowere wounded, which is in addition to the 10 who were killed. As for the
others, the report stated that it is understoodthat they were captured by

Khun Sa's forces. In this clash, inside Burma, Khun Sa's forces numbered

at least 2.000 men.

It is not known whether this operation by this breve unit was carried out
in order to intercept the shipment of opium or to kill Khun 8a and receive
the 500,000 baht reward, or even the 25 million baht. But in any event it
was a heroic operation and it should be publicized much more than it has
been instead of being hushed up as if there was something hateful behind it.

11963
cso: 5300/5666

16
BRIEFS

DRUG SMMnDeputy Prime Minister Gen Prachuap Suntharangkun. who in 1180
chairman of the Office of the Narcotice Control Board [ONCE]. declared open
the 5-day aeoinar on the prevention and treat-ant of drug dependence. Some
100 delegatea fro. Milena and abroad. including international organise-
tiona, attended the conference jointly aponaored by the International
Comcil on Alcohol and Addiction. ONCE, end the Coloabo Plan. The confer-
ence nine to hold wide discussions on drug dependence, including alcohol and
other druga. aa well ea legal and law enforcement intervention, therapeutic
intervention. treatnnt and rehabilitation. [Bangkok Voice of Free Asia in
English 1100 can 22 Mar 32 BK]

cso: 5300/5689

17
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3

CONVICTION FOR COCAINB, MARIJUANA TRAFFICKING
Windsor THE WINDSOR STAR in English 26 Feb 82 9 A8

[Article by Gary Rennie]

a .e“

[Text]

Joseph Bowyer was convict-
ed by an Essex County Court
jury yThursday of possession
for the purpose of trafﬁcking
ineocaineandmarijuana.

The 59-year-old Windsor
businessman will be sen-
tenced April 5 by visiting
County Court Judge Frank
Dunlap.

He was remanded out of
custody pending sentencing
but will report oneea weeho
Windsorpoliee.

Bowyer testiﬁed that oo-
eaine found by RCMP in his
car and other drugs found in
his Windsor apartment be-
longed to a now-downed
business partner and that he
had accepted the drop as
eollateralonaioan.

BOWYER also denied that
records seized from his apart-
ment by RCMP and dealing
with drug transactions were
writtenbyhim.

But federal prosecutor Shel-
don Schwartz told the Jury
Bowyer’astory wasridiculous.

Schwartz said it made no
sense for a businessman of
Bowyer'a experience to ac-
cept drugsvas collateral on a
loan. The drop had no value
unless they weresoid. he poin-
tedout.

THE JURY found Bowyer
guilty Wednesday of,possee
sion of 24 grains of cocaine.
86l grams of marijuana-six.
vials of hash oil and

sionofanun hand-
an.
Theiaaueoftrafﬁckinswas

dealt with ac rateiy by the
jury. Thebu nof proof

the accused toshowthatona
balance of probabilities he
was in pouesion of the drug:
for a purpose other than traf-
flehinc.

The cocaine and two loaded
handguns were found when

wasstopped in his car
by RCMP Marsh l3. I980
not far from his Riverside
Drive East apartment.

A SEARCHMof I’Bowyer‘s
apartment a u arrest
turned up 86l grams of mari-
juana in two plastic bags. six
vials of hash oil. weighing-
scales, and equipment that
can housed to test the purity
ofooeaine.

invested in rnortgat

tndaor under his own

name and a' company name of
St. Clair Investments

Hewaa also a co-owner of a
LaSalle marina with Gary
Parent and Roger Hunter.
who died last year. The three

18

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600050017-3
3.59 5 gm €3.59:
a»... 1:. a 8:8 2. 9.6
53-283

.368 383. 133...»:
coo... 33o 2338. a. :5 5.
L. 3.2 8 - ran 2.53.. a.
53-283 mg 88:3. 38.
8:3. rm? :5. a: 2:.
an..." «5...». .

Magi-an 85 :3 my: 90
3:88 928.. moses. :8
a can can. a. :5 35......
.2 .30.. 2... :5 .18. .98..
MAN JAILED 0N DRUG CHARGES CALLED MAJOR NIAGARA SELLER

Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL, UBEKEND EDITION in English 6 Feb 82 p 5

[Text]

WELLAND — A mm
dosrrlhed as a mint
wpplkr oi Illicit dmgs
in the Niago m Region
was suitaiced in County
Conn yatetdoy to eight
l‘“ hmﬁﬁ

”8 C arses.

ol 800.00
worth oi cocaine lot the
purposes oi tnlﬂchha.

David Gordon t-
chell. moi Fort Erie.

pieoded ity
cmzeinoddi-m
Ionchortiongeolpoe-

seaming lo pounds oi
man no vented at
9. lot the W
tillnlﬂcking.
Thechargeswereloid
in September. ill, by
the Niagara Resume!
Police drug quad.
which had stoked out
Mr. Mitchell's secluded
wintry home lor two
“unnamed him
when he retrieved it:-
«layout-lite rem;
ingiI/l oi almost
pure cocaine [run on
elohonte system oi
hidingplooerlneloreet

MK! ”MIM-

(ESO: 5320/23

Court was told that
hit. Mitchell was seen to
enter the loreet and pull
the cocaine lrorn n rot-
ten l . He had I Ger-
man dog with
him, but the animal
loiled to notice them hid-
den watchers.
thoudt it once posed
within ﬁve feel oi M

policemen.

Mr. Mitcheiiendhis
dogoboieiledtonotioe
wopolicenienﬂleeiup
etne.hiddenbehlndo

roughhlindoltwi .

Whine iceco to
tum i.hennnnd
oneolllcerﬂrednmrn-
in shotlntotheolrJlr.
Michell fell to the

will and threw the
(leeway.

In a search oi his
in“: :“CI' the em.
ound watchdogs
53m nrotnd the

to the home. Mr. Illi-

chelloleo gaggle
oi geese. 0'3"». worn-

in the world.
”.mrya said.
layer

Charles Ryell told
Judge 6.6. Nicholle
thotllr.litdiellwuo

good neiahhor.

lnpueingoentence.
Judge Nicholle noted
unthinhiitchellcont-
mlttedtheimollenceo
while out at hell on

prevlotsdrug charges.

20
FIVE IMPRISONED FOR NARCOTICS TRAFFICKING

Windsor THE SATURDAY WINDSOR STAR in English 27 Feb 82 9 A3

[Text]

Five men were sentenced in Essex
Count Court to long prison terms this
week or possession of narcotics for the
parposeof trafficking.

Patrick Beniey. 21. of Montreal was
sentenced to 42 months in prison. and co-
accused. Anthony Andreoni. 23.of Plan-
tation. Fla. received an 18-month sen-

tenee.

Both men pleaded guilty to possession
of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.
Rey were arrested Nov. I J on the Cana-
dian side of the Windsor-Detroit tunnel
attempting to smuggle in lo ounces of
cocaine worth more than $200,000 when
Meadow and sold on thestrcet.

At the timeof their arrest. the two men
were under surveillance by a combined
force of RCMP and US. drug enforce-
ment administration agents.

Bcnicy and Andreoni were seen by
agents leaving a car togetheron the US.
of the tunnel and then get on a tunnel
bus. ‘

THEY SAT IN separate seats on the
bus and approached Canadian immigra-
tion ofﬁcials separately as well. After

they were detained. the cocaine was
.fottndonBeniey.

In an unrelated case. three area men
received prison terms after they pleaded
guilty to conspiracy to trafﬁc in marijua-

na.

Gary Frelsinger. 23. and Graaiano
Callcgari. 27, both of Windsor. were
sentenwd to 30 months in prison. and a
ctr-accused. Mike Gillis. 21. of Coleheet-
er. received a 2+month sentence. '

Thethrce men were arrested July 7.
1980. in Wyandotte. Michigan. as they
were leading a boot with 106 pounds of
marijuana worth more than ”00.000
when sold on the street.

THE THREE WERE also under sur-
veillance by RCMP. Michigan State
police. and US. drug enforcement ad-
ministrationagentsat the time.

They were observed picking up the
marijuana in Riverside. Mich. and trans-
porting it to a Wyandottc marina.

All five men were originally charged
with importing narcotics. which carries a
minimum sentence of seven years in pris-
on. but pleaded guilty to the lesser
charges.
BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZED—A 28-year-old Prince George nan has been charged following

the seizure at Vancouver International Airport of 95 gram of heroin with a
street sale value of about $1 million. Jerelly Edward Nelson-Kent appeared

Monday in Richmond provincial court and was renanded in custody to today.
Nelson-Kent is charged with iuporting a narcotic and possession of heroin

for the purpose of trafficking. [Text] [Vancouver THE VANCOUVER SUN in
English 26 Jan 82 p P8]

DRUGS SPUR CRIME HAVE—Montreal (Cm—The illegal drug trade has reached an

all-time high in Montreal high schools and many students are turning to crime
to support their habits including establishing their own drug-selling ring,

says the head of the lbntreal police drug squad. Robbery is the most con-on
method used by teenagers to obtain noney to purchase drugs, Det.-Capt. Henri

Harchessault said. Police statistics indicate 66 per cent of arsed robberies
in Hontresl are conitted by teenagers. "The authors of these crimes often

use the Ioney they obtain as capital to set up their own trafficking busi-
nesses," the detective says. Because of the illicit nature of the trade,
statistics are hard to formulate, but Marchessault esti-ates that the con-
bined marijuana and hashish Iarket in the city is worth hundreds of nillions

of dollars. Once sccustoeed to trafficking in eo-celled soft drugs. young
people confidently turn to involvenent in networks inorting hard drugs such

as cocaine and heroin, adds ROI? Insp. A1 Breau. [Text] [Vancouver THE
VANCOUVER SUN in English 3 Feb 82 p 32]

050: 5320/23

22
BRIEFS

ADDICTS ARRESTED—La Plate, 21 Mar—The Narcotics Department has arrested drug
addicts Jose Alberto Martin, Argentina, 36; and Uruguayan citizens Miguel
Angel Ber-saga, 21; Kartin Alves Lopez. 25; and nomlo Adarosio Vales Viera.
26. During the operation 250 gram of cocaine were seized. 0&6le Buenos
Aires CRONICA in Spanish 22 Mar 82 p 8]

TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED-«Juana Aires, 23 Mar (TELAH)-Police Officer Lucas Belich
reported today on the arrest of 18 nei>ers of two drug trafficking organiza-
tions and on the seizure of 10 and 1/2 kg of narihuana worth 141,500,000 Argen-
tine pesos. The arrested persons are: Jose Serafin Aiello, also known as

Pepe; Ruben Armando Moreno, also known as 31 Jspones; Juan Carlos Perez, also
known as Pingui; Carlos Alberto Ropano; Luis Roberto Gellino; Jorge B. Pillon;
Nestor Angel Mentrina; Alberto Daniel Sosa; Mario Manuel Nunez; Raul E. Cairo;
Adolfo Javier Aquilino; Enrique Juan Scamni; Jose Angel Gentile; Jose Duaasco
Fernandez; Alejandro Biardini; Bugo Guillermo Nenervini; Eduardo Daniel Brener.
and a minor whose identity has not been disclosed for legal reasons. [M61664
Buenos Aires ELAN in Spanish 1715 Off 23 list 82]

TRAFFICKBRS nu... ARRESTED-~Sa1ta. 17 Mar (mum—Authorized sources re-
ported here today that one unidentified drug trafficker was shot dead and 10
others were arrested in an operation staged yesterday earning on Route 36 be-
tween the border town of Pocitos and the city of Tartegal, north of Salts.
About 1,000 kg of coca leaves and 6 kg of cocaine, allegedly mufactured in
Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia. were seized in the operation. ["201813
Buenos Aires ELAN in Spanish 1363 GMT 17 Mar 82]

C50: 5 ”0/22“

23
BRIEFS

TRAFFICKERS ESCAPE PRISON—La Pat, 9 Mar (AFP)-It was reported here today

that six drug traffickers [as received] have escaped tron the prison in the
city of Cochdaalba. No of then have been recaptured. one was wounded in a
confrontation. and Emilio Orellana, Andres quues, Pedro Tapia. Pedro Villarosl
and Pedro Bsquivel are in hiding. Sinilarly, the Cochabanba police authorities
reported that several hooded nan, who passed theneelves off as officials of the
narcotics department. robbed a home located near the city of Cochabaﬂn and
killed one person. [Pnélloblo Paris AFP in Spanish 2206 CHI 9 Mar 82]

COCAINE FACTORY WWW-Santa Cruz. 15 Mar (HEREIN—According to an of-
ficial report, the artsy has dismantled a cocaine factory near the Japanese
colony of Okinawa. 3 kn from Santa Cruz. Thirty people were arrested and 5‘ kg

of cocaine base were seized during the operation. [Pnélblolo La Paz PRESENCIA in
Spanish 16 Mar 82 p 1.]

OFFICER DISCHARGE!) POR mama-La Pet, 17 Mar (AFP)--It was reported here
today that Bolivian Artsy C91 (Pet) Angel Garcia Ricaldi, has been dishonor-ably
discharged for having been discovered transporting five trucks loaded with coca
toward San Borja, in the north of the country. [PYZGIMA Paris APP in Spanish
0000 an 18 Her 82]

OFFICIAL COHVICTI ON DRUG TRAFFICKING-411m, 11.8., 22 Mar (Arm—Former Sec-
retary General of the Bolivian Agriculture Ministry Marcilio Ibanez Velez

was sentencd by a federal court here today to 2 years iqrisonnnt for having
tried to snuggle $8.5 million worth of cocaine into the United States. Federal
Judge Eugene Spellnsn said when he pronounced the verdict that the defendant
could be released on his own cognizance after completing at least one-third

of the sentence. u.s. authorities were not able to capture Ibanes Velez, 35.
when the crime took place. but he traveled voluntarily to the United States

in January and confessed his guilt. [Text] [P1231340 Paris APP in Spanish

0307 our 23 bar 82]

C50: 5300/22“

240
BRIEFS

COCAINB SEIZEDnThe police seized 2.65 kg of cocaine in Rio de Jeneiro yester-
day. The following persons were arrested: Joan Candide de Silva, Jose
Quintino Pereira (S7) and his some Aldo Quincino Berreto (22) and Francisco

Jose Pereira (34). [PYZBIMIO Rio do Janoiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese
19 Mar 82 p 18]

cso: 5300/2241.

25
MEXICAN COCAINB DEALER MIMS ransom

Bogota El. T1990 in Spanish 28 Feb 82 p 2-A
[Article: "A Mexican Irafficker Scoffed at Everyone and Is Pree"]

[ Text] The ”cock-and-bull story" of a lawyer. the apparent venality of a
Legal Medicine official. and also the apparent ingenuousnaas of a criminal

court judge nade it possible for a powerful and dangerous international drug
trafficker to scoff at the Colombian authorities and to go to Mexico, his native
country.

David Enrique Kuri Mercader, a cocaine trafficking "leader," nade use of every
kind of trick to regain his freedom, after his arrest in Bogota on this past

6 Decesber. when atteqts at bribery of officials failed, his lawyer. with the
help of alleged relatives, resorted to one of the legal provisions of the Legal
Procedure Code and it turned out that the arrested person calmly flaw of: to his
country.

The odd but not unusual episode began some days before 14 December 1981, when
the Judicial Police of Bldorado received confidential infornation concerning the

1-inch: arrival in Bogota of the Mexican drug trafficker. David Enrique Kuri
Mercader, who was to arrive from Lima.

Detectives waited patiently until the arrival of the individual, who entered the
country. seemingly in conformity with legal procedures. Then the suspected per-
son was carefully followed. On 16 December he arrived at the Bldorado airport,
to board a plane for Miami.

Kuri ' a Version

When the detectives searched David Enrique Kuri, they found lo kilos of cocaine
hidden on his body. On being analyzed at the Legal Medicine Institute, the
cocaine was declared 98 percent pure.

At first Kuri Mercader gave a fantastic version, which obviOusly was not accepted
by the authorities. lie said that when he was in Unicentro he became acquainted
with acne unknown persons, and that they soon afterward put him in an automobile
and told him that if he did not take a shipment of drugs to the United States,
they would retaliate against Kuri's relatives in Mexico. And that, being

26
pressured by this threat, he had decided to carry out the orders of the gang-
stera.

when Kuri Mercsder realized how skeptical the Judicial Police were of his
"story," he changed tactics and offered money to the investigators if they
wOuld provide him with a favorable version. He told them that they should say

that when he, Kuri, was arrested, he told the police that they had saved him
from the threats of gangsters. ,

But the officials refused the offer. reported the fact, and placed the Mexican
at the disposition of Judge 66 of the criminal court, Margot de Barragan. This
officer ordered that Kuri be detained.

In the face of the failure of the above mentioned tricks, Kuri's lawyer decided
to change his strategy. A powerful Mexican millionaire industrialist, Jose
David Kuri haddade, then appeared at the trial. as said that he was David
Enrique' a father and, in support of this, he presented a civil record to
establish the relationship.

Then the industrialist said that his health was affected by the altitude of
Bogota and went to Cartagena "on an emergency basis." There, Algio de Leon.

a physician in the service of the Legal Medicine Institute, diagnosed Kuri
Msddade as being in imminent danger of death. Kuri's lawyer used this certifi-
cation snd referred to article 452 of the Penal Procedure Code, which allows

the suspension of preventive detention if the arrested person "is afflicted
with a serious illness or when one of his immediate relatives or offspring, or v
the person's husband or wife, is in imminent danger of death in the judgment of
official doctors."

Judge 66 of the criminal court, Margot de Barragan, heard the petition of the
lawyer, decreed suspension of the detention, and returned Kuri's passport to
him. She abstained, however, from obtaining authentication through consular
channels of the civil record that presumably established that the "sick person"
was really Kuri's father. Also, she omitted legal arrangements regarding sur-
veillance for the person who had been granted the previously mentioned suspen-
sion.

Judge Margot de Barragan's decision produced a "miraculous cure" in the health
of industrialist Jose David Kuri Eaddade and the latter, accompanied by his

alleged son, "as soon as he was free" flew up and away to Mexico, very much out
of reach of the hands of Colombian authorities.

In the face of such mockery, the legal department of Bogota, headed by lawyer
Fernando Nsvss Talero and the Attorney General's Office of the Nation, and through
the Judicial Police, started an investigation, according to which it was
established that Kuri Maddade had never been sick and that, in addition, it

was never fully verified that he wms the father of the drug trafficker.

27
One of the indignant investigators of this case told EL TIEMPO that the gangsters
are right when they say that in Colombia "when the judicial authorities are not
stupid, thcycan be bought." And international drug trafficking organizations
make good use of this circumstance. They coldly calculate everything..."

 

David Enrique Kuri

8255
C00: 5300/2215

28
BRIEFS

HARIRUANA sum IN CESAR—Seven tone of urihuene ready for export were

seized by the Coloﬁien narcotice police in Becerri]. end Godeui, Cesar
Depertmnt. ‘me drug treffickere fled before the police errived. A

clendeetiue eiretrip with geeoline for refueling eirplenee need for trans-
porting urihuene we: diecovered in u Pinuele, (Pidijey). Magdalene

Department. [PAZ61809 Bogota Radio Cedene Necionel in Spanish 1730 err
24 Her 82]

630: 5300/2221

29
admiru Vazquez Garza. Edwiges Enrique Martinez Vazquez. Abraham Martinez
Vquucz, Santos Vazquez Garza and Pedro Villarreal Trevino were arrested by
the Federal Police in a gully running from Guerrero to Sabinas, with a large

shipment of smuggled electronic items. The latter was found to have half a

gram of cocaine in his possession.
SHUGGLERS OF ELECTRONIC GOODS CAPTURED H113 COCAINB
Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 18 Feb 82 Sec D p 9

[Text] Agents of the Federal Judicial Police confiscated television sets and
all types of electronic items in a gully between Guerrero and Sabinas Bidalgo.
and succeeded in arresting five individuals. one of whom had with him half a
gram of cocaine, which he claimed to be for his personal consumption.

Ramiro Vazquez Garza, Edwiges Enrique Martinez Vazquez, Abraham Martinez
Vazquez. Santos Vazquez Carts and Pedro Villarreal Trevino are the individu-
als who were captured by the Federal Police and taken to this port to be
placed at the disposal of the federal prosecutor on charges of smuggling.

Villarreal Trevino is the one found to have in his possession a small piece
of paper containing a substance that was said to be cocaine, to which he
claimed to be addicted. Now, the police will question him concerning the
manner in which that drug was supplied to him.

The contraband. valued at 300,000 pesos, will be turned over to the customs
authorities. according to the Federal Public Ministry, together with two
vehicles. a pickup truck and a Vblkswagen in which they were carrying the
smuggled goods. They stated that they were attempting to carry the latter
to Sabinas ﬂidalgo, Nuevo Leon, where they wouldseek the means of shipping
them farther south.

As has been noted, the Federal Judicial Police have been dealing heavy blows
to the smuggling of goods all along the border strip.
BRIEFS

HEROIN RING SUSPECTS ARRESTED-0ne of the major figures in the border drug
traffic. considered to have had this status for years, was captured by the
Federal Judicial Police yesterday in this town, in an operation carried out

to arrest the ringleader of the drug trafficking group that has been active

in this region. The foregoing was reported to BL DIARIO yesterday by Federal
Judicial Police sources. in connection with others allegedly arrested with
Enrique Campos. The information provided last night was brief, and no offi-
cial report or bulletin was issued announcing this important arrest. As may
be recalled, Gustavo Campos (Enrique's brother), an individual who had been
arrested with Beto Rodriguez, in Guadalajara, with over 8 ounces of pure
cocaine. was released a few months ago. The trail of a presumed heroin distri-
bution in this port is being followed, as is a purchase and sale contact which
reportedly took place within the past few days. It is not known whether
Enrique Campos was captured with any drugs, and it has been claimed that

some more information regarding this arrest may be provided today. [Text]
[Piedrss Negrss EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 5 Mar 82 Sec A p 2]
2909

MARIHUANA SHIPMENT SBIZED—-A total of 250 kilograms of marihuana concealed in
the double bottom of a tank-type truck coming from Nayarit was seized by
Federal Judicial Police forces at the Benjamin Hill plant health station.

The drugs are worth 11.5 million pesos on the black market in the United
States, the country to which they were enroute. The Federal Public Ministry
agent, Pablo Ernesto Avila Trians, announced that the arrests of those
responsible took place in two parts. The first one occurred on the Altar—
Caborcs highway, where the federal agents arrested Jesus Hector Lopez Beltran
and Leonido Noriega Lopez, who were traveling in a 1977 Ford pickup truck with
State of Mexico license plates. When they were subjected to close questioning
those arrested stated that they had been driving in-orderftofindthe tank-type
truck driven by Manuel Vazquez Torres, to obtain the marihuana shipment that
was later to be taken into the United States for sale. A few moments later,
those responsible for the aforementioned drugs gave the names of two other
individuals implicated in this drug traffic, namely, the following: Jose

Cruz Felix and Miguel Orozco, who were also arrested and placed at the
disposal of the agent of the Federal Public Ministry. Avila Triana also
reported that the 250 kilograms carried in the lower section of the tank-

type truck, which had been divided into 43 cardboard boxes, is the largest
marihusna seizure made this year. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish
11 Mar 82 Sec A p 2] 2909

32
and narihuana were being grown, located in the Alamos mountain area, on Cajon
de Guirocosa, a communal farm belonging to the municipality of Alamos, Sonora,
were burned by forces from the Fourth Military Zone, affiliated with the
Canador lHarihuana-Poppy] Plan. The agent of the Federal Public Ministry,
Pablo Ernesto Avila Triana, stated that on these plantations, which covered
an area of approximately 5 hectares, two persons answering to the names of
Gregorio Leon Ochoa and Luciano Apodaca Cebreros were arrested. Both were
communal farmers, who were responsible for tending four plantations in that
area. He added that, when these individuals were questioned, they gave the
names of other subjects who are more directly involved in the planting of
these types of drugs, and who will not be mentioned for purposes relating to
the investigation, since it is intended to capture the ringleaders of this
organized gang. As for the value of the drugs which were burned, Avila Triana

2 million pesos on the black market. He said that the most important aspect
of this case is the fact that, when these drug plantations are destroyed, the

CUSTOMS GUARD, TRAFFICKER KILLED-—A drug trafficker with a sinister record in
this town was killed early Tuesday morning during a gun battle with customs
guards in a gully before he could reach Monterrey, Nuevo Leon. According to
the reports supplied from Monterrey by the commander of the Seventh Customs
Zone, Jesus Avalos Ficschi, the deceased answered to the name of Rodolfo
Garza Cortez, alias "E1 Opi"; however, the name of the guard killed in the
skirmish was not provided, because the Nuevo Leon authorities are continuing
Lhe Invvstigation. It was said that Garza Cortes was driving a small truck
through the gully, where a checkpoint had been established by the customs
officials, who ordered the trafficker to halt; but the latter, instead of
“haying the command, responded by firing a pistol. One of the bullets aimed
at the group of cusLoms officials hit a member of the latter, and hence they
returned the fire, killing the drug trafficker. This individual had been
incarcerated in the La Loma prison on several occasions, on charges of crimes
against health; and his criminal career began in 1971. The latest action
taken against Garza Cortes was brought by the penal judge of the first
instance, for the commission of a crime of stealing livestock; and he was
released in that case on 29 June of last year. Thus far, the reasons for
lhc deceased's firing at the guards are unknown, but it is presumed that the
lrurk which he was driving was stolen, and that at the same time he was
carrying foreign goods brought into the country illegally. [Text] [Nuevo
Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 4 Mar 82 Sec A p 8] 2909

33
individuals presumed guilty of a crime against health in the degree of mari-
huana transportation. Following their release from jail, the two subjects
heard the decision of the judge in whose jurisdiction the action to be taken
against them for the crime committed previously will be continued. The
Federal Judicial Police arrested "La Escalera" and his wife, Griselda Zamudio,
as well as Francisco, when they were traveling in a Mexican Airlines plane
last Wednesday, carrying with them three suitcases filled with marihuana,
having a total weight of 30 kilograms. Naturally, "La Escalera" and Galvan
Urbina denied the charges. particularly the statements that they had made

to the State Judicial Police guard, claiming that they had been pressured to
declare themselves guilty. The release of Griselda Zanudio took place at
the agency of the Federal Public Ministry, according to the legal reserva—
tions, after the other two had stated that she had nothing to do with this
case. "La Escalera". a subject with a police record in this town, had been
watched for some time. when it was found that he was trafficking with grass,
using the Mexican Airlines plane arriving from Hexico City. At first. this
subject confessed that he had been engaged in this illegal business for some
time. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo BL HANANA in Spanish 3 Mar 82 Sec B p 7] 2909

C50: 5330/73

3!;
ROUTES, METHODS 01' comm (”GAINS TRAFFICKBRS DISCUSSED
Sao Paulo 0 BSTADO D‘B SAD PAULO in Portuguese 7 Mar 82 p 180

[Article by John Alius]

[Text] Panama, by virtue of its strategic position as the
hub of air traffic in the Western Hemisphere, is today an
important point of intersection in international drug
smuggling. Although precise statistics are unavailable

on the volume of traffic in the country. it is estimated
that about $20 billion annually in cocaine, marijuana and
other narcotics destined for consumer countries pass
through Panama. The narcotics originate primarily in
Colombia. which in recent years has become notorious for
its cocaine; they arrive in the Caribbean aboard co-ercial
and private aircraft, freighters or small vessels and are
subsequently reshipped from Panama City. Increasingly, the
preferred route is via Brazil. At first glance, to ship
Colombian cocaine from Panama to the United States via
Brazil night seem senseless. However, the narcotics
syndicates are opting for "circuitous" routes to confuse
drug enforcement agencies and throw them off the track.

In this highly lucrative trade, which has become the most
serious criminal problem in the United States, the

Colombians are the cruelest and most ruthless murderers
in this hemisphere.

Panama City--It only took a long afternoon asking questions in certain places
to obtain several names and telephone numbers, but then it took 3 1/2 days of
patient flattery and cajoling to arrange a meeting. This is not surprising;

the matter at hand was an illegal business which, in the United States alone,

annually represents more money than the Gross Domestic Product of most
countries.

From the outset, we made no attempt whatever to deceive the professionals in
the field. We never said we were new to the business and wanted, if possible,
to negotiate with them--a lie which they would have seen through imdiately.
we said simply that Panama is known as an important crossroad for
international narcotics traffic and that there must be someone, on the wrong

35
side of the law. who was willing to discuss the matter.

That someone, as we had already predicted, was a Colombian. Some years ago
the Panamanians were deeply involved in durg traffic. but today. although
Panama is considered the major exchange post for illegal drug traffic to the
United States and other countries, it is the Colombians who are directing the
Operations. This is primarily for two reasons. The first is that the
Colombians control the flourishing production fo cocaine, which has become the
world's preferred narcotic. and the Colombians are extremely ruthless when it
comes to insuring their control over the wholesale and even the retail
distribution of the product.

The second reason is that Panama's former strong man Omar Torrijos instilled an
intense fear of drug traffic in his countrymen. This does not mean that

money from the drug trade is no longer circulating among Panamanians. Generally,
however, the amounts are small.

The Colombian had the egotistical air of someone who knows he is an important
figure, ableit in a closed circle of outlaws. Curiously, however. he did not
dress at all ostentatiously; the only jewelry he wore was a gold watch with

a gold band. Our meeting, arranged through a local journalist, took place

in the dimness of one of the countless nightclubs on Avenida Bepana in

Panama City. These establishments charge exorbitant prices to the tourists
who venture out from their luxury hotels to frequent them.

"You can call me Sanchez." the Colombian said. "Roberto Sanchez. My wife, my
lovers. the Panamanian authorities and the 0.8. drug enforcement agents know
my real name. But you can call me Sanchez.

"The problem for the police." he added. "is that they know who I am and what
I do. but they have no evidence to prove it." This is because. although
Sanchez annually deals in billions of dollars in drug trade, he has never had
any physical contact with the cocaine, heroin. marijuana or narcotics in pill
form that pass through Panama.

”Th: people who deal in this material or. as in my case. ship it are smart and
rich." he said pioudly at one point. "The people who use it are dumb and. for
the most part, poor. 1 have never personally used any of the drugs that come
through here because i am known and I do not want to be caught with drugs in
my possession. I only arrange contacts between couriers and make and revise
travel plans-things like that."

Sanchez describes himself as a combination of dispatcher and. occasionally.
bill payer and collector for one of the five or six Colombian syndicates that
use Panama as a redistribution point. "Host of the money changes hands in
Colombia. Miami and New York--some of it in Frankfurt and some other European
rilles," he adds. "Even so. a few million passes through my hands every year
and I enjoy the feel of it.”

According to Sanchez. his syndicate generally usea commercial flights. but also
uses small private planes. one or two freighters and small ships. The

36
The syndicata's cocaine shipments through Panama last year was between $3.5
billion and $6.5 billion--the "street" value of the product.

"This year the figure will be much higher," he added. "In the first place,
the prices will be higher. and in the second place, with the disappearance of
Torrijos. we foresee a relaxation of the vigilance against us here in

Panama. which will enable us to use this area on a much larger scale than
before."

Tbrrijos was killed in an air disaster at the end of last year. .Some 10 years
ago, disturbed by reports in the world press about the involvement of
Panamanian government officials and diplomats (who were said to include his
older brother Moises). Torrijos ordered a campaign against drug traffic,
especially against the participation of Panamanian citizens, and he
maintained his concern in the matter until his death.

Even so. only a small part of the drugs that pass through Panama is confiscated.
In 1981. $10 million worth of drugs was confiscated. As astronomical as that
figure seems. it becomes almost insignificant when it is estimated that about

$20 billion in cocaine and other narcotics goes to consumer countries via
Panama.

Billions at Stake

The DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration), the U.S. agency for the control of
drug traffic. has a branch in Panama, with offices in the Embassy of the
United States. A DEA agent said that no one has reliable statistics on the
volume of traffic through Panama. "To know the exact amount, it would be
necessary to detain every trafficker and check out his bag. but we have an
approximate idea. based on the quantity of drugs actually seized and on the
estimated consumption of these products in the United States. According to
these calculations, between $15 billion and $20 billion in narcotics passed
through Panama last year, owing to the strategic location of the country."
The figure mentioned by the American agent is generally consistent with the
information supplied by Sanchez. since the Colombian said his syndicate was
only one of five or six syndicates that use Panama in their operations.

According to DEA estimates (based on "street" prices), over $32 billion in
cocaine and $27 billion in marijuana was smuggled into the United States last
year. over all routes.

Panamanian authorities dispute the figures supplied by the DEA regarding the
drug traffic through Panama. According to one of these sources. based on
street prices, the traffic was "more or less on the order of $1 billion;"

another source put the figure much higher: $12 billion. Like the DEA agent.
however. these sources admit they have no concrete evidence on which to base
their estimates.

For the drug smugglers, Panama's value lies in the fact that the country is at
the center of the air traffic in the western Hemisphere and is located close
to northern Colombia. In recent years. Colombia has become so notorious as

a cocaine producer that customs inspectors all over the world go on the

37
alert when planes or ships arrive directly from that country.

Consequently. the syndicates ship their cocaine. marijuana and illegally
manufactured drugs, such as quaaludes by all the routes at their disposal,
preferring Panama as the point of reshipment. The cocaine is almost always
shipped by air. frequently on private planes that fly only short distances and
land on clandestine fields. but also aboard commercial flights and on small
vessels that unload their cargo on the Caribbean coast. Whatever the means of
their arrival in the country, the cocaine and pills are almost always rerouted
through Panama City. The marijuana frequently goes through the region of
Colon.

"An increasingly popular route," the DEA agent said. is from Panama via Brazil.
To ship Colombian cocaine to the United States from Panama via Brazil does not
make much sense, at first glance. but when you are dealing in a product worth
billions of dollars, a few extra hours of flight time, a little added

expense, ceases to be important.

"There is almost as little inclination to ship the drug directly from Panama

to Miami of New York as there is to ship it directly from Bogota or Medellin.
Those responsible for suppression of drug smuggling are already expecting this.
but. in the past. who would have expected cocaine to arrive in New York from
Rio de Janeiro? The U.S. customs inspectors certainly were not expecting it,
and many of them do not consider such a possibility even today. Nor were the
Brazilians expecting cocaine from Panama, because there is not much demand for
it in Brazil."

Sanchez confirms this: "It is no secret to the narcotics agents (otherwise I
would not be telling you. obviously) that we are using the most circuitous
and confusing routes we can think of to get the material out of Panama.

Cost is not an important factor. Last year we moved regular amounts of the
material through Brazil."

Creating a Profession

Drugs are transported. for the most part, by "couriers" who fly on commercial
planes.

"Many of these couriers." Sanchez said. "are individuals who are prepared to
take the risk just one time. to earn what seems to them to be a 'huge bundle."
But there are a surprising number of people. at least in our organization,

who make a career of it. They are not at all worried about the risk."

Sanchez prefers good-looking women to serve as one-time couriers. "when we
recruit a woman with good legs and a pretty face, there is every likelihood
that she will succeed in getting a few kilos of the drug through customs
without any problem. The custom: officers are just like any other men; they
are a little shy around a pretty woman and are not inclined to suspect her,
much less give her a hard time."

38
Besides Brazil, Mexico has also become increasingly popular as an intermediate
point in shipping cocaine from Panama to the United States. A half-dozen
airlines fly between Panama and Mexico, and the Mexicans, more hospitable to
tourists than any other Latin American people, almost always allow passengers
through customs without any problems. From Mexico City, the couriers may
choose among various airlines with connecting flights to several North American
cities besides New York and Miami, such as Lon Angeles, San Antonio and Chicago.
Some of them rent cars at Mexico City's international airport and drive to

the American border. At some points--Tijuana, Nuevo Laredo, Ciudad Juarez and
Matamoros-the U.s. customs inspectors have been on the alert for drug
smugglers for some time, but in many other locations it is almost as easy to

cross the border as it is to travel from one state to another in the United
States.

"It is a long trip from Mexico City to the border, but it is worth the trouble,"
said Sanchez, "because it pays off."

The DEA agenst are disappointed that they are not intercepting as much cocaine
in Panama as they think they should. "But if you think about it," said one
agent, "why should the Panamanians, Mexicans and others be concerned about
drugs passing through their countries destined for the United States? The

fact is that in their own countries, even in Colombia, they have few problems
with narcotics, so they feel it is up to the consumer, i.e., the United States.
to stop the drug traffic. They see little reason to do our work for us."

Sanchez agrees that there is little demand for drugs in Panama. "If we had to
live off the sale of cocaine and marijuana to the Panamanians. we would starve
to death. There is a certain demand for cocaine here in Panama City--by high
society, on one hand, and poor people on the other--and a certain market for
marijuana. In Colon, more marijuana is sold than cocaine, because the people
there are poorer. But is is so little that it is not worth discussing."

Panama City, with its bustling international airport, is the transfer point for

cocaine; Colon, an important port on the Atlantic side of the isthmus, is
tmed for marijuana.

Pure cocaine does not travel well under himid conditions; therefore, given the
great value of the product, it is usually transported by air. A quantity of
cocaine with a retail value of $1 million in New York City can easily be
concealed between the shirts and socks in a man's hand luggage.

Production of this incredible substance begins in Colombia, Peru and Bolivia.
It starts with coca, in the form of small, thick green leaves that grow in
clusters. The leaves, which were once chewed by the Indians in those

countries as a mild stimulant, are gathered. boiled and sold to primary
processors for less than $20 per kg. The processors place the leaves in open
pits in the ground or in ZOO—liter barrels. They cover them with a mixture of
kerosene, sulfuric acid, potassium carbonate and water, and let them "cook" for
several days to extract the cocaine hydrochlorate. The resulting precipitate
is a thick pasty substance, ashy-white in color, with a kerosene ordor. It is
known as cocaine paste. The paste. worth $6,000 to $8,000 per kg. is sent to

39
laboratories—-most of which are located in Colombia but some of them are in
Peru and Amazoni.a--where it is refined and turned into what is customarily
called "pure cocaine." At this point-the stage at which the material reaches
Panama—-it is worth $20,000 per kg, and it will be worth $50,000 when it
reaches its destination in the United States or, sometimes, in Europe.

There it is combined with various other material in a mixture containing about
10 percent pure cocaine, packaged in tiny envelopes and sold on the retail
market for $100 to $125 per gram, that is, over $80,000 per kg. This is the
so-called "street value" of the drug.

Bribery Part of the Business

"The idea," said Sanchez, "is to reduce the volume of the material as much as
possible before shipping it. One of the beauties of the business is that you
start with a huge volume of coca leaves; these are reduced to practically
nothing-~the phase in which the material is shipped to the market--and then
you expand the volume again by adulterating. Marvelous!"

According to the Panamanian police. there are several small operators in the
country. They get the refined cocaine from the syndicates that use Panama as
a transfer point and prepare it for sale on the local retail market. There
are no laboratories in Panama for production of refined cocaine. however, much
less for cocaine paste, the initial phase of production.

Even if it were practical to set up laboratories in Panama, the Colombian
syndicates would hardly have done so, for two reasons. according to Sanchez.
"The laboratories would certainly have been discovered and they would have

had to pay huge bribes to keep them in operation. And if the bribes didn't
work--which would probably have been the case in Torrijos' time--the punishment
here would have been swift and harsh."

Nonetheless. Sanchez said that he and his colleagues from other syndicates
bribe officials of Panama's air and sea ports. which costs them thousands of
dollars a year. "It's part of the business. You think we don't bribe North
Amurican airport employees? If I didn't buy off certain people here, before
long we would not have any “pack mules" (couriers)."

In Panama the penalticn for drug smuggling could amount to several years in
prison, and they are imposed after summary trials. As an indication of how
Panamanian justice can be "swift and harsh." there is the example of a
purse-snatching on a recent Sunday afternoon. The theft occurred at 1630
hours. The thief was arrested after a swift chase, booked at a police station.
taken to a local court, tried and sentenced to a year in prison at 1630 hours
that same afternoon.

"Omar said to us before he died that we must put a stop to crime in this
country." a policeman said. Torrijos was so disturbed by the reports
involving Panama in drug traffic that he declared he was even prepared to
order the arrest of his own brother.

when Moises Torrijos was a Panamanian ambassador. in 1972, 0.8. Government
officials accused him of being involved in smuggling heroin into the United

60
States. Other Panamanian diplomats were also accused. (her Torrijos "begged"
them to present evidence that the accusations against his brother were founded
in fact. "because. if he is guilty, I will send him to prison." No evidence
was ever forthcoming against Moises, but other prominent Panamanians were
arrested. One of them was the former chief of the international transit
department of ‘l‘ocumen Airport in Panama City.

, ..
Since then. noises Torrijoa has been on the fringes of political life in
Panama. None of the Panamanian political parties is inclined to take him

very seriously and, at least in recent years, no prominent Panamanian appears-
to have been involved in drug smuggling.

"I could talk about some ’small fish,” Sanchez said. "in both civilian and
military sectors. but it would be very risky for me."

The American DEA office in Panama is one of the largest existing in foreign
countries. but its agents will not_talk.

"All our investigations are secret and. actually, everything we do is to
assist our Panamanian colleagues," said a DEA spokesman. "You can be sure
that there are very good reasons for the existence of a DEA office in Panama."

One of the reasons is that known and suspected couriers and traffickers who
pass through Panama can be reported to DEA colleagues in the United States.

Cruelest Assassins

Paco Sepulveda and Marta Lidia Cardona are two Colombians who visit Panama from
time to time to keep the business wheels running smoothly.

It is known that Sepulveda ships cocaine from Colombia to New York via Panama
and Mexico. Cardona ships his merchandise mainly to Miami and other northern
points in the United States. using South American routes.

Sepulveda is living in Mexico. Cardona, who occupied a luxurious residence
in Miami before he was obliged to flee the country last year, is now directing
his operations from Colombia. Be was arrested "in flagrante" by the DEA in
the United States and, since his trial was coming up, he posted bond of

$200,000 to obtain his release and fled the country. For him, this was a
pittance.

Before he moved to Mexico, Sepulvsds had his cor-land post in New York. He left
the United States because he had tried to take over another syndicate's
territory and the climate in New York was very sticky for him. Justice
officials the world over consider Colombian drug traffickers to be the most
ruthless criminals in the hemisphere. In New York and Miami, where various
syndicates and even independent traffickers are always trying to "cut each
other's throats," there are several killings every month.

Sepulveda left New York after he narrowly escaped being shot to death by a
gunman who killed one of his assistants. Since then, killers seeking to take

bl
over the operations he directs from abroad have already murdered a half-dozen
members of Sepuiveds's ring. One of them was a 32-year-old Colombian named
Jose Martinez, who carried six false passports. He. his wife and two daughters
were recently killed on a New York street. A shotgun and a 0.9 caliber

Beretta were the murder weapons. The two adults and the b-year-old daughter.
who were inside a car. were killed instantly. "hen the gunmen saw that the
other child. aged 16 months, was still alive, they pulled her from the car by
her feet and put six bullets in her back.

Police who inspected the Martinez apartment after the killing found $1 million
in cash, 70 kg of cocaine and several plastic bags containing gold jewelry.

"Nothing like that happens in Panama," said a police official. "we know
perfectly well that the drugs come through here. although we feel that the
volume is not as high as is thought. He do what we can to interrupt the flow.
but we have limited resources. I can say. however, that if these murders
occurred in Panama we would probably punish some people first and ask questions
later."

"There is no reason for bloodshed in Panama." Sanchez said. "He just work
here as dispatchers. The killings happen at the end of the line. It has
never occurred to me to rip off some courier on his way to the hotel. We
Colombians here live and let live."

The drug-related crimes in Panama seem to occur mainly in Colon and are
generally the result of squabblea between local operators over the sale of
marijuana.

Grass is easily obtained in Colon. Some transoceanic freighters that dock at
this large port are used in marijuana traffic. but most of the marijuana, like
the small amount of cocaine transported by sea. is carried on smaller ships.

According to information from sailors in Colon, a method often used to take
drugs out of Colombia consists in loading them on "fishing" boats which
rcndevous in Panamanian waters. to the north. with high-speed American

luxury yachts. Drug smuggling is so lucrative that when the yachts' owners

are in danger of being apprehended they do not hesitate to abandon their boats,
which are worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. Many of these yachts are
amored at Florida ports. confiscated by the Coast Guard.

It is extremely difficult to detect these boats entering and leaving

Panamanian waters and even more difficult to catch them. because of the limited
number of patrol boats available. "It is only the airports that we can make
any real progress in combating drug traffic," said a Colon inspector.

The FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) also has agents in the 0.8. Embassy

in Panama. It is probable that they will soon join with their colleagues in the
DEA and the Panamania authorities in an effort to cut off the passage of drugs
through this country. ".8. Attorney General Uilliam French Smith recently
called narcotics the "most serious criminal problem" in the United States.

6362
CSO: 5300/2223

02
BRIEFS

QUCHAN DRUG SEIZURE--The anti-drug squad has announced that during the
past week they have seized 8 kg of heroin and 151.960 kg of opium from
a number of persons in Quchsn, Kashnar and Ray. [GP2‘1806 Tehran
ETTELA'AT in Persian 22 Feb 82 p 2 GF]

TORBAT-B JAM OPIUN SEIZURE--The Torbat-e Jan anti-drug squad has seized

450 kg of opium from a number of persons. [Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian
22 Feb 82 p 1. CF]

NEYSHABUR OPIUH SBIZURBP-The Neyshabur Islamic Revolution Committee has
seized 10 kg of opium and arrested the members of a smuggling band.
[Tehran ETTELA‘AT in Persian 22 Feb 82 p 6 GP]

TBHRAN DRUG SEIZURES--Members of anti-drug squad have seized 1.3 kg of
heroin in Tehran. The public relations official of this squad announced
its activities between 22 November and 19 February as fol1ovs: a) the
Khorasan gendarmerie has seized 20b.850 kg of opium; b) the Gorgan anti-
drug squad has seized 2.45 kg of heroin; c) in Sistan va Baluchestan
Province the anti-drug squad has seized 79.5 kg of hashish from a number

of persons; d) the East Azarbayjsn gendsrmerie has seized 148 kg of opium.
and 26,053 kg of heroin; e) the Yazd gendarmerie has seized 1.5 kg of opium
and similarly, the Ramadan anti-drug squad has seized 3.750 kg of opium.
[Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 22 Feb 82 p 13 GP]

DRUGS SEIZED.IN NEHAVAND-—The Nehavand Islamic Revolution Court has sentenced
two persons to death for possession of 22.6 kg of opium. The Esfahan

Islamic Revolution Court has sentenced one person to death for possession

and sale of 20.8 kg of opium juice and 106 kg of opium and for hiding

another 32 kg of opium. [Tehran JOHHURI-YE BSLAHI in Persian 21 Feb 82 p 2 CF]

OPIUN SEIZED IN DARRBH GA2--The Darreh Caz anti-drug squad has seized

5 kg of opium from one person. [Tehran JOHHURI-YE ESLAHI in Persian
22 Feb 82 p 4 GP]

OPIUH SEIZURE IN SARAKHS--The Sarakhs gendarmerie has seized 25 kg of opium
from two persons. [Tehran JOHHURI-YB ESLAHI in Persian 29 Feb 82 p 4 CF]

43
RAMADAN HEROIN SEIZURE—-The Hamadan anti-drug squad has seized 26.591 kg
of heroin. [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 28 Feb 82 p 15 CF]

SHIRAZ OPIUH TRAPPICKING--The Islamic revolution court of Shiraz sentenced

a woman and man to life imprisonment on charges of trafficking 25.5 kg of
opium. [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 27 Feb 82 p 7 GP]

BOSTANABAD OPIUM SEIZURE--Committee guards of Bostanabad seized 25 roll

opium weighing 0.500 grams from an individual. [Tehran KEYHAN in Persian
27 Feb 82 p 7 GF]

OPIUH DISCOVERY IN SABZVAR-Islamic revolutionary guards in Sabzvar seized
22.200 kg of opium and 30 roll opium from two professional traffickers.
[Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 27 Feb 82 p 7 GP]

ESFARAN DRUG DISCOVERY--The Esfahan police seized the following quantities
of drugs between 21 January and 19 February: 1.743 kg heroin, 3.266 kg
opium. 0.97 gram burned opium, 0.505 grams opium juice, 22 grams of

(jouhar-e naghari) and 105 tablets of hallucinogin. [Tehran KEYHAN
in Persian 27 Feb 82 p 8 GP]

OPIUH SEIZED IN 'ALIGUDARZ--Brother members of resistance headquarters of

Deh Now village of 'Aligudarz seized 2 kg of opium from several traffickers.
[Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 27 Feb 82 p 8 GP]

SHIRVAN OPIUH DISCOVERY-—The Islamic revolutionary guards patrol of Faruj

discovered 3 kg of opium in an individual's possession. [Tehran
JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI in Persian 7 Mar 82 p 4 GP]

OPIUM SEIZED IN CHABUKSAR-Hembers of Chabuksar mobilization seized 1 kg

opium from an individual. [Tehran JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI in Persian 7 Mar 82
thF]

FARS DRUG SEIZURE-«The Sapidan Islamic Revolution Guards patrol has seized
l kg opium from a Peykan car. The four passengers of the car were arrested
nnu handed over to the authorities. [CF301835 Shiraz Domestic Service in
Persian 1500 GMT 29 Mar 82 GP]

MASSIVE DRUP SHOOP--A grOup of drug peddlers has been arrested in Larestan
and 25 kg of opium was seized from their possession. Pass Islamic Revolution
Guards recovered 2.2 kg of opium from two persons who were later handed to

the authorities. [CF301834 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT
30 Mar 82 CF]
MM nnom IIAUL-n‘l‘he Ramadan sntidrug squad has seized 26.591 kg of
heroin from a welding workshop in Ramadan and arrested four persons in
this connection. [@261800 Tehran ETIEIA'AT in Persian 1 Her 82 p 6]

HASEHAD OPIIDI SEIZURE—The vigilant gendarnerie of Gonabad District has
recovered 95.2 kg of opium from inside the tires of a pickup truck. Four
traffickers were arrested. [6132101800 Tehran BTTBIA'AT in Persian 1 Mar 82

pk]

SHUGGLBRS ARRESTED-mews“ of the "Ahnad Hostajab" group of international
drug smugglers have been arrested near Kashan, and 225 kg of opium vere

seized from then. Sons nesbers of the group were killed in the encounter.
[01’241800 Tehran BTTBLA'AT in Persian 1 Her 82 p 6]

HUGE DRUG HAUL-Jute gendarnsrie officials of Sistan vs Baluchestan Province
have seized 126 kg of opiun and opium residue during the past 3 days. The
guilty persons have been handed over to the authorities. [GFZHMO Tehran
ETTELA'AT in Persian 1’. Mar 82 p 2]

GUN, HEROIN SEIZED—The officials of the antidrug squad of Quchan recovered
35 kg of opium, 5 kg heroin and s Colt revolver frol a group of smugglers

in the hilly areas of Tayyehat. [GF27lloloO Tehran BTTELA'AT in Persian
1!. Mar 82 p 2]

OPIUM SEIZURB--According to IRNA, the Guards Corps clashed with sons snug-

glera yesterday in Qal'eh-Kobra village in Torbat~e Jan and seized 97.5
kilos of opius. [Text] [13230242 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian

1630 GMT 22 Mar 82]

PARS DRUG HAUL--The Central Comittee of Tara and Borazjan has seized 9 kg
of opium. The guilty persons have been handed over to the Dushehr Islamic
Court. [613281969 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 28 Mar 82]

C30: 5300/5377

165
BRIEFS

HARNING 0N DRUGS-~6ape TovnuSouth Africa was experiencing a serious drug

problen which was getting worse, the head of the Narcotics Bureau, Colonel
Vssie Suit, said yesterday. There had been a swing away tron dagga to note
dangerous drugs, like Welconel, Kendra: and Cocaine. It was iqossible for
the police to fight the problen alone and there was an urgent need for the

col-unity to adopt a more positive and aggressive attitude.--8epa [Text]
[Johannesburg ma CITIZDI in English 17 Her 82 p 12]

680: 5300/5685

106
THREE NIGERIANS SENTENCE!) FOR SHUGGLING MARIHUANA
Vienna HIENBR znmmc in Germn 23 Feb 82 p 6

[Text] Three dark-skinned defendants—two nan and a woman whose varicolored
head-scarf made her seen exotic-who had been in detention pending trial,
were brought before a jury on Honday. They had tried to snuggle 84 kg of
marihuana from Lagos, Nigeria, to Vienna by air. and then on to London, on
1!. Noveuber 1981. Although the shipment of drugs was concealed with moth
balls in all four of their pieces of luggage, a dog used for detecting nar-
cotics discovered the drug. All three of then were called upon by Public
Prosecutor Dr Ernst Kloyber yesterday to defend themselves against charges
--I violating the narcotics law and. in view of the tremendous quantity
lnvolved. endangering the public weal, and of attenpted smggling.

All three of the Nigerians, who were defended by Dr Peter Philipp and Dr

Achin Maurer, admitted that they were guilty to a certain extent. The
44—year-old merchant Sulaimn Ayoade may have been the one who took the lead.
ile persuaded his friend Afolorunso Adebowale, who is also 44, to acconpany

him on a snuggling trip to Europe. Adebowale said yesterday that he had not
been aware of the gigantic swat involved until the bags filled full of
narihuana were checked in at the Lagos airport. He paid additional charges

of the overweight bags. Ayoade asserted that he only transported the narihuana
to Europe as a favor for his friend and that he had had nothing to do with
buying it.

The third defendant, the 28-year-old Mulikat Fasaanski, Ayoade's wife. had kept
the keys to the bags used for drug mggling in her handbag. Nevertheless,

her husband, Ayoade. claimed that his wife had not known anything about the
drug snuggling and that she only wanted to buy clothes in London. That claim

was refuted by a teletype message from Interpol which was presented to the
court during the trial.

The confiscated narcotics represent a value of about 1 million schillings.

Adebowale was sentenced to 3 years in prison and Ayoade and Mrs. Pasaanski
were both sentenced to 3 and a half years.

9258
C80: 5300/2220

47
NETHERLANDER HELD FOR SHUGGLING HASHISH, ARMS
Brussels DE STANDAARD in Dutch 18 Feb 82 p 9
[Article by D.H.: "Drug Merchant Now Also Suspected of Arms Sauggling"]

[Text] Deurne--The Netherlander Johannes Pasen (31) from
Breda. who was arrested together with his girlfriend Anthonia
Lambragts (29) at the Deurne airport by the state police

when 260 kg very pure hashish was found in hie private air-
plane. at a market value of about 30 million [Belgian] francs.
is regarded to be an important drug smuggler. It had been
established that he regularly made similar trips between
Morocco and the Netherlands. It is said that the reason he
landed in Deurne was that there was trouble at the airfield
in Seppe (the Netherlands), his usual destination. The
detained Netherlander now has also been found to be under
suspicion for arms smuggling.

The aircraft, an Air Commander TClb with Dutch registration PH-RBL, landed
Saturday evening at the Deurne airfield. The state police assigned to guard the
airfield subjected the airplane to a close inspection and asked the pilot
Johannes Paser. who was accompanied by his girlfriend and compatriot Anthonia
Lanbregts, where they had come from and what their destination was. In answer
they received a series of coordinates which was not an adequate explanation.

The airplane was subjected to a sharp inspection with surprising success.

The police found eight packages packed in jute. each weighing 30 kg.
consisting of four bricks of very highly refined hashish in plastic bags in
each jute package. The trade value on the "market” for this quantity of
narcotic is about 30 million [Belgian] francs, since it is known that drug
users pay about 125 francs per gram.

According to ruaor. the man promptly arrested was to have been paid a
commission of 10 million francs. The airplane. the drugs and an orange

Alfa Romeo Alfasud with Dutch license plates which was parked near the Deurne
airfield were impounded by the police. Jerrycans full of flight fuel were
also found in the airplane.

The machine was said to have already landed several times with similar cargo
at Deurne. 0n the basis of the logbook. flight plans and the like, it was

48
established that Pesen. who provided a regular connection between Morocco and

Seppe, an airfield between Roosendaal and Breda in the Netherlands, followed
the coastline on his flights.

The detained pilot is a member of a flying club based at Seppe. and had
obviously intended to land there last weekend. Presumably he had a message
from the Netherlands that the coast was not clear there. and he landed in
Duerne, where. as a safety precaution, a csr--the Alfa-Romeo--was ready to
finish out the drug shipment over solid ground.

The Deurne state police brigade,directed by Deputy Chief Van De Steen.in close
cooperation with the detective services of Customs and Communications. is
now pursuing an investigation into the business and travels of the Dutch

detainees. A trail is also said to be being followed which could lead to the
--Horoccan?--producers of the narcotics.

The drugs impounded will probably wind up in the ovens of the Court in Antwerp.

69b0
CSO: 5300/2219

69
BRIEFS

NARCUIICS IN PAHAGUS‘I‘A-dhile social unrest eta-sing from the unjust distri-
bution of income in our country is mounting. the emggling and marketing of

narcotics has assumed enormous proportions as a result or the government's
failure to take the necessary preventive measures. As we have stated in

our previous issues. those selling narcotics have even managed to infiltrate
our high schools. According to information we have obtained, 20 kilogram of

narcotics were seized in nylon bags in the Kat-pas region of Famgusta on
26 Hatch 1982. Meanwhile. another 5 kilogram of narcotics were found last

week in the same region. The authorities are expected to make a statement on
the quantity and nature of the narcotics seized. [Excerpt] [NC300900 hefkosa

[Nicosia] $02 in Turkish 29 Her 82 p 1]

C80: 5300/5378

50
INTERIOR MINISTER WOULD PROHIBIT GROWING OF'HEHP PLANTS
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 19 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] Interior Minister Henning Rasmussen plans a frontal attack on the
Danish production of hashish.

This will take place by way of a regular prohibition of the cultivation
of hemp plants, which may be used tor the production of hashish.

The background is reports from the police districts around the country.
stating that the police are unable to prosecute hashish producers because the
growing of hemp plants is not prohibited,and hemp plants may, moreover, be
used as cattle fodder and ornamental plants. So far, the courts have
acquitted several persons whom the police suspected of producing hashiah.

The police, therefore. complain that it is impossible to prove that the

hemp plant is being grown with a view to hashish production.

Minister of Justice Ole Espersen over 1 year ago requested all of the police
districts in the country to register hemp growers everywhere in Denmark.
Apparently, the Interior Minister is not aware of this. At any rate, he
said yesterday to the daily AKTUELT that the Minister of Justice will now
activate the local police authorities throughout the country with a view

to registering the entire hemp cultivation. The Ministry of Justice confirms
to BERLINGSKE TIDENDE that such registration took place long ago.

It would be the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Justice which
would have to get together to work out a proposal for legislation to prohibit
the growing of hemp plants.

7262
cso: 5300/2235

51
DEAN-mm HEROIN SEIZED BY POLICE IN COPENHAGEN
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 18 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] The Trouble Spotters have saved a Zh-year-old narcotics addict from
dying after having a highly dangerous heroin shock. Other drug addicts are
in danger of their lives. the Trouble Spotters state. Yesterday, the alarm
was given when the Police Forensic Science Laboratory round a concentration
of bk percent heroin in a sample sent in for analysis by the Trouble Spotters.

It was a question of 1.2 grams of heroin found by the police last Monday in
three cannular tubes. so-caJled straws. on a 24-year-old male drug addict
in a flat in Saxo Street. The Trouble Spotters call the place a "fixing
joint." where several persons were present when the police appeared. The
three cannular tubes were seized from the male drug addict. who explained
that he had bought them for 2.h00 kroner from an unknown pusher in Isted
Street.

The Trouble Spotters have just introduced weekly control analyses. paid for
by the police. The heroin from Saxo Street was the first drug to be sent
in for such an analysis. Ove Nielsen. police superintendent states. He
introduced this "service" for drug addicts and treatment centers after at
lea t 3 deaths in August of 1981 resulting from the taking of 56 percent
heroin. The normal concentration of heroin sold for injection is 5-10
n'"cent. and the hh percent of the heroin from Saxo Street may be death-
dealing.

Yesterday. the Trouble Spotters arrested the Ph-year-old drug addict, who
was subjected to a prolonged investigation in an attempt to find out who
was his supplier. The police assume that the highly concentrated drug was
put on the market by mistake. perhaps by some ignorant dealer. The tragedy
in August was partly solved. and there were no indications of any intent to
kill in connection with the sale of the death-dealing heroin. which was
nmde to completely accidental drug addicts.

Last night. the police suspected a drug-related death at Frederiksberg and
two cases of suspended heart action among narcotics addicts at Vanlose to
be due to the newly detected death-dealing heroin.

796?
cso: 5300/2235

52
OFFICIAL: 8m TONS 0? Will: USED WALL! BY ADDICTS
Copenhagen INFORMATION in Danish 23 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] The consumption of methadone is at least 16 tons a year, distributed
on mixture and pills. me consumption also includes methadone for treatment

of non-drug abusers who suffer from chronic pain, and this group is on the
increase.

This appears from a reply from Dr. Michael von Hagnus. chief physician of the
National Health Service, printed in the most recent issue of UGEBKRIFI‘ FOR Leon.
The reply follows a provocative article in the same issue in which Karl Vogt-
Nielsen of the Anti-Drug Movement challenges the National Health Service. lie
assumed that the consumption by the 800 drug abusers on methadone maintenance
alone was 18 tons, corresponding to a dope effect of well over 250 kilos of 15

percent heroin, or half the total Danish heroin consumption, according to
estimates of the police.

Vogt-Nielsen refers to the report by the liaison committee in which it is

stated that only in extremely exceptional cases shall methadone be used for
prolonged treatment, and that methadone maintenance for more than 2 years should
be avoided. He states. at the same time, that the number of people on methadone
maintenance over a prolonged period of time is. at the moment, larger than the
number of patients being treated without drugs, and that more than half of the
drug abusers in Copenhagen have received methadone for more than 2 years.

He also points out that there are departures from the purposes contained in the
circular of the National Health Service, according to which circular methadone
shall be taken under supervision. regular uroscopies shall be undertaken to
ensure that methadone does not end up in the illegal market, and that the

drug addict does not take other drugs simultaneously with methadone.

"Defeats Its Own Purpose"

Vogy-Nielsen thus maintains that physicians leave it to drug abusers themselves
to administer the methadone. that there are permanent places in Copenhagen
where the drug is being traded, and that the methadone may be purchased
practically everywhere, and at fixed prices. Furthermore, he states that drug
abusers often cheat on their urine specimens by adding ascorbic acid, that not
a single urine specimen analysis has been undertaken in Copenhagen. and that the

53
Municipal Council of Copenhagen has voted down a proposal to undertake such
analyses at regular intervals.

"In our opinion, the administration of methadone has completely defeated its own
purpose," he writes.

Dr. Michael von Magnus, chief physician, maintains that methadone is a “valuable
supplement" in the treatment of certain drug abusers, that the number of drug
abusers on methadone maintenance for a short or a longer period of time has not
increased since 1979. and that the number of drug addicts who have been on
methadone for more than 6 months is the same as in 1979.

As for the circular of the National Health Service, the chief physician states
that the most important thing has been to stress the responsibility on the part

of the general practitioner to ensure proper treatment. The rest is a question of
guidelinee--uhich, however, in the circular, are provided with a modest "should."
But none of these points may be conceived as absolutes. The National Health
Service has previously informed physicians that urine specimens may be omitted,

as there have been problems having them performed at a reasonable cost.

Von Magnus states that the fact that methadone is not being used in Norway--nor
in the county of Ribe-—as pointed out by Vogt-Nielsen, is not comparable with the
general Danish problems in the area. He states that the problems of insufficient
resources for treatment are not being solved either by "unilaterally criticizing
the use of methadone in the treatment of drug abusers in cases where this is the
only realistic possibility in the specific situation."

Unjustified Criticism

The National Health Service, moreover, finds it unjustified to criticize the
general practitioner for using methadone in the treatment of drug abusers, seeing
that "the treatment institutions, to a large extent, have refused to use any
methadone at all in their treatment of patients, and seeing that, in the individ-
unl cases. there have been no other relevant possibilities of treating the
patients, and where prescribing methadone for use during a prolonged period of
tine might be relevant," the chief physician writes.

7262
csc: 5300/2228

5b
DANISH, NORHEGIAN POLICE: OVER A TON 0P RASEISH FROM NEPAL
Oslo ARBEIDBRBLADBT in Norwegian 3 Mar 82 p 9
[Article by Helge Aamotsbekken]

[Text] Norwegian and Danish narcotics police believe that an international
gang has smuggled 1.1 ton hashish into the Nordic countries since last summer.

Presumably, the total amount never will become known. Customs officers are
unable to check the enormous amount of freight sent by way of Kastrup Airport.

The hashish has been sent by air freight from Karachi, Pakistan. It originates
in Nepal and is of the finest quality on the market.

So far, Danish police have made three hashish seizures at Kastrup Airport
outside Copenhagen. The first seizure, which was in a crate addressed to

the saw Shipyard, weighed 216 kg. Last January narcotics police seized another
35“ crate. This time 100 kg hashish was confiscated.

Last weekend the police and customs officers made yet another seizure, again
weighing 216 kg.

Norwegian narcotics police have made few comments on this case. Chief of
narcotics police, inspector Arne Huuse, told DAGBLADBT, however, that the
case has been given high priority.

"Apart from the fact that last Tuesday we arrested a 26 year old Norwegian

man in connection with this case, that he is charged with hashish smuggling,
and that the quantity smuggled to Norway is relatively small by the standards
of this case, I will not discuss the case further, due to the ongoing investi-
gation," Arne ﬂuuse said.

Commissioner Bent Hansen of the narcotics police in Copenhagen told DAGBLADBT:

"We aade the arrest after a long and intense investigation with 10 men in the
field," counissioner Bent Nansen of the Danish narcotics police in Copenhagen
told DAGBLADBT. "So far we have made three seizures, but our investigation
has revealed that at least six shipments have arrived."

"The invoices, which were falsified, indicate three other shipments."

9336
CSO: 5300/2216

55
WELFARE DIRECTOR: STOP UNEMPLOYMENT, DISABILITY AID TO USERS
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 16 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] "Drug abusers should neither have unemployment benefits nor sick
leave benefits. It will have to be a hell to be a drug addict so that it
becomes attractive to receive slow withdrawal treatment."

The above statement was made by Iars Lundgaard, county welfare director and
chairman of the government's youth committee, at the annual meeting yester-
day of the Crime Prevention Council. He warned against the so-called
"silver platter principle":

"Kindliness and half-heartedness toward drug abusers often become a
hindrance in the treatment. I would welcome consistent application of the

rules and regulations on the part of thewelfareand labor market authori-
ties.

In this way, 75 percent of the drug abusers will within a reasonable time
get in touch with a treatment center. And they will carry through the
slow withdrawal treatment."

Lara Lundgaard presented his views during the debate on perspectives in the
cumming years' anti-drug efforts. The chief of the Copenhagen Narcotics
U1|ice. Bent Ejlerskov Petersen, criticized the politicians for lacking

the will to eradicate narcotics:

"What is the use for the police to be allocated additional resources. when,
for example, the customs authorities are unable to make an effort to put an
end to the smuggling of drugs into the country? These responsible do not
plan any joint action. and the politicians have not laid down any superior
objectives. Denmark is without any anti-drug policy. Each krone, each
million spent in the efforts of the police to fight narcotics crimes are
wasted. like the money thrown into the vessel of the Danaides."

The council yesterday presented a comprehensive information campaign fi-
nanced for 800,000 kroner. granted by the Society of Insurers.

7262
cso: 5300/2235

56
mmmm MAJORITY man's ACTION ‘1'0 cross csRIs'rIMIA
Copenhagen mm mm in Danish 1? hr 82 p 2

[Text] There is every indication that "the Free City of Christiania" will
remain in existence as an "alternative urban society” for an indeﬁnite
period of time. Proposals for its liquidation and clearance cannot be
carried through for political reasons. However, the debate in the Folks—
ting yesterday continued wishes on the part of the government and the
Folketing for what they call a "legalization” of the conditions. and this
will be the basis for the continued existence of Christiania.

A majority in the Folketing take notice of Minister for the Environment
Erik Bolst's report on the Christiania area. In the said report. which
makes use of the draft by the consulting firm of Heller 8: Grenborg for the
future use of Christiania, the minister assumes that plans will be made of
the area. and that this will take place in a process concurrently with,

and integrated in, an attempt to change the society of Christiania. The
idea is thus that the general rules of the Danish society shall apply to
the area. The hashish market will be removed, it is stated. The licensing
and value-added-tax conditions of the pubs must be put in order. Buildings
and installations must become legalized, and the health and environmental
regulations must be complied with. The dangerous ramshackle buildings must
be demolished. and the houses worth preserving must be restored.

In the course of the very long debate yesterday in the Folketing. Agnete
Iaustsen (Conservative Party) stated in response to the report by the
minister that the statement now being made that Christiania was to continue
but subject to the general laws of the society was reminiscent of statements
made earlier. The legalization of the area which was to be the basis had
not been fulfilled-an the contrary. There was no reason whatever to be-
lieve that it would now really happen. and that the government would take
action.

During the debate. Minister for the Environment Erik Holst made it quite
clear that the government cannot advocate clearing of Christiania. and his
views were supported by the Social Democratic Party. as well as by the
Socialist People's Party and the Radical Liberal Party. Ebba Strange

57
(Socialist People's Party) found it valuable to operate with alternative
ways of life and forms of society, and Tags Dnnbye (Radical Liberal Party)
stated that Christiania will have to be supported, but that certain demands
will also have to be made of Christiania.

The spokesman for the Progressive Party, Knud Lind, who said that the govern-
ment had, for a decade, been cheriehing a vipor in its bosom, moved the
following resolution on behalf of five parties (the Conservative Party. the
Liberal Party, the Progressive Party, the Center Democrats and the Christian
People's Party): "As the conditions in the Christiania area must still be
regarded as unacceptable. especially with regard to the social and crime-
producing conditions, the Fblketing requests the government-in accordance
with the Judgement of the Supreme Court passed on 2 February 19?8—-to take
the necessary steps immediately for closing of Christiania by the end of

This resolution was defeated as the majority adopted the resolution taking
cognizance of the report by the minister.

7262
cs0: 5300/2255

58
REPORTER VISITS CHRISTIANIA, FINN WISH SOLD OPEL!

Copenhagen BERLIMSKE TIDEN'DE in ﬁnish 16 Mar 82 Sec II p 1
[Article by Henrik Grunnet]

[Text] Bashish is being sold openly, even by 13-year-old girls,
in the free city which likes to call itself "the village of the
big city," but which has become a village with all of the weak-
nesses of the big city.

The air is suddenly pierced by the shrill blasts of 20-30 boatswain's
pipes. It is the internal alarm signal of Christiania, which means that
the police are on their way: In a matter of seconds. the entire Pusher
Street, as this part of Christiania's only actual street is called, is
cleared. Left are the unsuspecting buyers of hashish, who now become the
only people caught by the police.

It is h o'clock in the afternoon. It is a weekend, and spring has come to
Christiania. Pusher Street, the name of which clearly implies what happens
on this street, has been marked by brisk activity since the early morning
hours. A crowd of schoolboys has gathered around a seller, evaluating his
"wares." They feel and smell at the hashish before deciding to buy it.
"Have you also got black aphan." asks one of the boys who has heard that
black aphan is the strongest kind of hashish on the market. The pusher
answers in the negative by shaking his head but refers to a colleague who.
at the moment, is in the process of selling a large quantity to a Swede,
"but you should rather buy from me, for the black aphan is full of plastic
and is bad to make," the pusher says. They do not hide anything. The
traffic in hashish is taking place quite openly, and they pay no attention
to the fact that it is actually prohibited in the Ihnish society.

The fact that the alarm signal has been sounded does not mean that the

traffic has been interrupted but only that the pushers now disappear from
Pusher Street, withdrawing to the pubs around the street where the traffic
continues as briskly as before. If the police enter one of the pubs, the
pushers disappear out of the back doors to continue the traffic in another

pub.

59
Woodstock is one of the pubs at Christiania where the traffic in hashish
may run into several hundred thousand kroner a day.

13-Year-Old Pusher

The sweet smell of hashish mixes with the stench of beer and vomit. Dogs
of undefinable breeds dart in and out among the legs of the customers on
the filthy floor. But nobody seems to pay any attention to them or to the
surroundings for that matter. Most of the regular customers of the pub
sit, a dull expression in their eyes, looking vacantly into the air. They
are waiting for the next pipe of hashish. Only the pushers seem to be
interested in what is going on around them. As soon as a new customer
enters the room, he/she is being showered with offers of all kinds oi
hashish.

In a corner of the pub, a 13-year-old girl is sitting. On her lap is her
5—year-old sister, who slurps a coke. On the table in front of the girl
is a big sheet of hashish. A piece is broken off and is carefully weighed
on a small spring balance before the girl hands it to the customer. Out
of her pocket she pulls a big bundle of 100 kroner notes, and with an
indifference as if it were a bag of candy, she counts the notes and gives
back on a 1,000 kroncr note.

The current price for 1 gram of hashish is 50 kroner. Around the room

one notices several hundred grams of hashish changing hands. It is
primarily Swedes and Norwegians who purchase such large quantities, and
these purchases take place with a view to resale in the home countries.

In most places, only 2-3 grams are sold at a time, and the buyers are
young people who have clubbed together for a weekend of fun and escape

from reality. Roth the police and the politicians recognize the fact that
only hashish is being sold at Christiania today. Taking the law into

their own hands and through strict measures, the inhabitants of Christiania
have managed to put a stop to all traffic in hard drugs in the free city.
Hurd drug dealers who turn up at Christiania are being thrown bodily out
again. However, the problem has not moved far away. At the pubs immediate-
-.; ortside Christianin, the traffic in hard drugs is taking place nearly
an openly as the traffic in hashish in the free city.

Everywhere within Christiania one sees more or less ramshackle houses, the
former military barracks. These now hold the permanent residents of
Christiania who each of them have arranged their own flats or who live
together in collectives. It is not as previously possible for just any-
Iody to visit these flats. The doors are locked, and the private owner-
rhip is strictly observed. But, at the same time. this has meant that
many flats are in a condition fully corresponding to what one will find at
ﬂnrrehro and @sterbro. All occupants reported (BOO-1,000) pay 250 kroner
in rent, which goes toward Christiania's water, power and heat bills.

The many Greenlanders at Christiania have to live in their own building,
"the Star Ship." A ghetto within the ghetto, one might feel, but the

60
residents of Christiania are of the opinion that the Greenland culture,
in too many respects, is incompatible with their own.

However, Christiania is more than old military barracks. 0n the ramparts
of Christianshavn, one may experience an environment which comes close to
real village idyl. Here are some of the most beautiful areas in Copen-
hagen, and, at this late afternoon hour. people of all ages are sitting
or lying down, enjoying the last rays of sunshine of the day.

Restaurant Life

Outside a ramshackle house is an enormous heap of old, rusty bicycle parts
as well as a few complete bicycles. Above the door is a board explaining
the presence of the bicycles: "Have the cops taken your bicycle? Buy
completely honest bicycles here. We make them ourselves." ”ext to the
bicycle maker is a grocery store, and here the residents of Christiania
buy all of their daily needs right from curative apricot juice to
Christiania's own weekly newspaper. The goods are expensive, but one has
a cozy time, and the people all talk with one another.

In a corner of the free city is a combined pub and restaurant with the
imaginative name of"the Moonrisher." Here, food is being served between
6 p.m. and 9 p.m. At a first glance. the environment is the same as in
the pubs around Pusher Street. but on examining the place more closely.
one notices important differences. The floor and the tables are clean,
and the>hcge, home-made wrought-iron fire place in the center of the room
is actually something of an architectural master piece. On the plentifully
equipped bar are the papers of the day (including BERLINGSKE TIDENDE).

The menu card. with which one is presented as soon as one has sat down, is
varied. Right from vegetable soup at 15 kroner to sirloin steak at 50
kroner.

During moments when one succeeds in forgetting that the kitchen has never
been inspected by the health control authorities, the sirloin steak tastes
excellently and the Beaujolais wine at 50 kroner is splendid.

No wonder that the food is cheap,fbr here they pay no taxes. value-added-
taxes or duties. After a quick calculation, one arrives at the conclusion
that if the pubs were to pay these taxes and duties, and still make the
name profits, the prices would have to be more than twice as high. It is
not only through hashish traffic that easy money is made.

Christiania which once was a free city for hopeful young people with
alternative ideas of society. has become a ghetto with enormous problems
of sanitation and restorat-on, with a just as big class division as the
society outside and where buses filled with tourists are an equally daily

event to the residents of Christiania as to the animals in the Copenhagen
Zoo.

61
Al the exit of Christiania are around a dozen booths, selling everything,
right from handcerved hashish pipes to picture postcards of Christiania.
with or without the willingness of the residents, the free city of
Christiania has become a market for commercial interests. "A village with-
in the big city," the residents of Christiania like to call the area, but
it is a village with all of the weaknesses of the big city.

7262
080: 5300/2235

62
POLICE ASSERT CHRISTIANIA IS DENMARK'S HASHISH CENTER
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 7 Mar 82 p 3
[Article by Anders Hiig]

[Text] The traffic in hashish at Christiania is a business involving
millions of kroner. The extent of the traffic may be known by the principals
controlling it and fetching the huge profits. Minister of Justice Ole
Espersen estimates that 3-“ kilos are traded on a daily basis. That gives

an annual turnover of 5h-73 million kroner. According to the "Architect's
Report," a group of residents of Christiania estimate that there is a daily
turnover of 20 kilos-at 50 kroner per gram, this becomes 365 million kroner
annually. The Trouble Spotters estimate the daily turnover at 10-15 kilos--
an annual turnover of between 182 and 273 million kroner.

"I do not know on what the minister bases his estimate. But regardless of
when we get out there, from the early morning to the late night hours, we
invariably find a brisk turnover of hashish. He base our estimate of 10-15
kilos on the seizures which we manage to make when undertaking our 15-20
minutes of spot checks 2-} times a week, at a maximum. In order to get
hold of the hashish, we have to get into Christiania without being noticed.
The residents of Christiania have got an efficient alarm system, involving
boatswain's pipes, which may be heard everywhere as soon as we are observed.
That gives the pushers enough time to remove the hashish from Pusher Street
and about a dozen pubs. He, typically, seize ZOO-“00 grams per spot check,
seized on several people. It would be unrealistic to assume that these
figures would be an indication of the actual turnover," Ove Nielsen, police
superintendent of the Trouble Spotters, states with reference to the claim
from the chairman of the legal committee, Jimmy Stahr, to the effect that
only 10 percent of the traffic in hashish in Copenhagen is taking place at
Christiania. In the news broadcast on the radio last night, Jimmy Stahr
attacked Ole Norgaard, deputy commissioner of the Copenhagen Police for
dabbling in politics and using an unpleasant tone in maintaining that Jimmy

Stahr had misunderstood the situation with regard to the traffic in hashish
at Christiania.

Ove Nielsen, police superintendent. has no hesitation in referring to
Christiania as the only hashish market of Copenhagen. 0n the traffic

63
taking place in other areas, he says: "It is not at all on the same scale.
It may be a question of minor transactions among friends, involving 10-20
grams of hashish traded in a pub--and often this hashish originates in
Christiania. Some months ago, we had a bit of hashish traffic in the Saxo
fhrk at Vesterhro, but we put an end to that in 2 weeks."

Question: why, then, do you not put a stop to the traffic at Christiania?

Answer: It is impossible to check the area effectively. It is a closed
society with extremely efficient alarm systems. The working conditions of
the police are hopeless--l6 police officers were injured out there in 1981.
It is the most difficult area for the police to work in of all of the
Copenhagen areas. As things are. we cannot stop the traffic through normal
checks in the area. That would require enormous resources. Each time that
we check the area we need to send 25 officers out there, including two groups
held in readiness to have the rear covered. It is almost impossible for the
police to penetrate into a closed criminal community.

Question: Would you describe Christiania as a closed criminal community?

Answer. Definitely: For one thing. there is the large traffic in hashish.
for the other. there is the traffic in stolen goods. One may ask oneself
'he question: Who makes all the money on the hashieh traffic? I do not be-
lieve that the big money is made by the small dealer and the semi-criminals
round out there.

7:6.“
C120: 5500/3235

64
i 4-).“ Ur' SRAHKFURT DRUG RING GOES ON TRIAL

limo-an; DIR éi’Il-Ci-J. in German l Mar 82 pp 66,69

[ft-x3] Joseph "Big Joe" Amiel, an Israeli, is on trial in Frank-
furt. Iic. is regarded as the leader of the largest drug ring ever
broken up on the l-fain.

Young female addicts who smuggled the.
dope from Amsterdam across the border
obeyed his every command. Investigators
listened in on these orders over the tale-
phone: "a few grains in some paper, "

"a small packet in the mouth," "the [truth
ones on the body under the panties"; or
even "six like a tampon, internally."

Others obeyed Joseph "Big Joe" Amicl as
well. His brother Nissiu, for instance,
sold the heroin in and around the Frank-
furt railroad station to support his own
habit, because "he didn't give him any-
thing," as a prostitute told the polic-‘.

And if anyone ever entertained any ldl-D!‘
about doing business on his oun, thought:
of terrible things kept him from it.

"I'd get a bullet in the head," was. what
Simon "Kuschi" Rinon feared, so he stayed

' 1' n 'c'. -_ .
mm c dant‘Ami , on with the boss.
:Jrver used a gram'

 

The tavern owner from 'E'cl Aviv had risen
to the position of "king of drugs" on the
Main (mmeURTI-n RUNDSCHAU). As bef‘lttcd

nix : mien in life, he acquired a villa for his family in Harbella, Spain, key-t
Mir 4 ..-;: in Holland and Frankfurt and put what was left over into a numbered bank
;:-- mum. in th- "(ichueizerischc Creditanstalt" in Zurich.

:\ v-.:1 guvrr Later Lin femur bum: of the underworld is boning and scraping at the
“rankl‘urt-rrvunguuiwim institution for pretrial detention. His hands clasped

65
behind his back and his head bent, he is cbsequious toward the guards. Public
Prosecutor Peter [ox-neck describes him this way: ”He's trying to be very ingratia-
ting." "He's a broken man," claims his defense lawyer, Fritz Sauer.

The Israeli says his condition is the result of torture and 5 years in prison in
Buenos Aires, where Interpol caught up with him a year after his escape from the
penitentiary in Diemrg. Amiel reports that he was "tortured with electric shocks,"

with the wires attached "to my tongue, penis and anus“; "I was impotent for half a
year."

Scheduled for this week at the Frankfurt District court is the belated trial of
Joseph Amiel, who was turned over to the west German justice syatqs last fall. He
is charged with having "built a full-blown organization for the sale of heroin" in
Frankfurt in 1971.. According to the findings, he took charge of "purchasing and
paying for the heroin in Amsterdan' himself, and he directed "from behind the
scenes" the transport across the border and the sales operation in southern Germany.

The other mabers of the ring— who were controlled by Aniel, according to the
charges -- have already been tried. In April 1976 they received sentences of up to
9-} years in prison; they have meanwhile all been released, with most of then return-
ing hone to Israel.

The trial poses problems. It will be difficult to get around having once again to
take a criminal court, replete with public prosecutor and defense attorney, on a
long journey to Israel - and possibly to the United States as well -- to take

testimony from the mubers of the drug-trafficking ring who have already served
their sentences.

For if the court does not want to run the risk of grounds for an appeal, it must
accede to a defense request to question witnesses on the spot if necessary. And
defense attorney Sauer considers testimony from those convicted to be urgently
necessary in support of the defendant's case, because "at that time, when their
freedom was at stake, they placed all the blame on my fugitive client.ll

The only prospect for a speedy trial is if the defendant pleads guilty, but Amiel
has been indicating that he would be willing to testify concerning the organization
and lodus operandi of the drug business only if his 5-year prison stay in Argentina
is counted toward his expected sentence — a request that would be very difficult
to grant.

Cn strictly legal grounds, this could not be done because the Argentine courts
convicted the Israeli not of drug trafficking in Europe but of 'expert falsifica-
tion of documents," a simple passport offense that draws a sentence of scarcely
more than 6 months in Argentina.

Defense attorney Sauer is more inclined to see in the severe sentence a "disguised
punishment for what went on here; there was probably also a bit of anti-Semiti-

to it." There remains a possibility of taking the time already served into consid-
eration when determining the length of the sentmce. But at least the prosecuting

authorities do not want to go along with this. Says Public Prosecutor Korneck:
"The risk was all Aniel's."

66
whether dealt with in brief form or in a lengthy procedure, the trial of "Big Joe'I
will provide a replay on a part of organized crime that has been leaving its mark on
Frankfurt'e underworld scene for years: the lucrative herein trade. The confes-
sions of prostitute addicts who get their drugs from Aniel's circle and tape record-
ings of the dealers' telephone calls reveal a picture of a tightly structured opera-
tion.

When it was "very dry," Ania]. the boss boosted imports from Holland. Solstimes he
would give the order to and l'Z)0--250 bottles," and the: it would go back to "2}:-
white shirts." He urged caution when "hell had broke: loose and things were sticky"
in Frankfurt. J eshaja "Gingy'l Fainsilber, a for-er waster butcher, was let in on
all business connections as his deputy. According to the investigations, the in-
presarie Baruch Bar-Ziv took care of transport arrenganents; he also worked with
Aniel ”cutting" the freshly ilported powder.

A streetwalker noticed one time in the ang's apartment that "there was a lot of heat
coming from the kitchen." "All three of the burners on the electric range were on,
and on the table was a blue saucepan in which Aniel was stirring a gray substance
with a spoon." The prostitute estimated that it was I'at least I. kilos of heroin."

An accomplice put nest of the dope —- that had bee: cut with vinegar and powdered
silk -- into small plastic bags which he sealed. The: other people sold the pre-
pared packets to addicts, concealed "in a silver cigarette lighter“ or as 5-gram
packages in "4711" perfume boxes.

After 2 months of telephone surveillance, the criminal police moved in on the gang's
apartnent on Frenkfurt's Diesterweg in March 1975. Once again the eavesdroppers
had heard about an i-pending deal: "Gingy" was eating for "coins for the washing
machine," and "Charly' answered: "I'm weighing right now."

Aniel managed to escape from pretrial detention just in time, right before the trial
started; the break had "apparently been prepared long and well," according to Frank-
furt Public Prosecutor Helfgang Heinrich. It was the beginning of a long flight on
which the drug leader's underworld friends and girlfrimds smoothed the way for
him.

In his cell at the Dieburg penitentiary, “Big Joe" worked for days knotting together
a rope. 0n the appointed day he used it to clinb the prison wall hand over hand

and than wmt ever the barbed wire. He suffered bleeding cuts on his hands in the
process, but he "didn't even feel" then. The getaway car and driver were already
waiting on the other side. They drove off in the direction of Holland.

Near Aachen, just before they got to the border, the fugitive was taken into custody
following a traffic check because he was unable to produce any identification.
Amiel told the police that he had "burned hinself fizdng a tail pipe."

The police dispmsed with fingerprinting, and when a woman to when he had made a
hurried phone call in Holland brought him a passport the next day, the police re-
leased hin - 2 hours before notification arrived at the police station from the
Federal Criminal Police Bureau indicating that he was a fugitive.

67
Amiel went underground at the hole of a girlfriend in Holland, joined his family
in Spain and took off for Brazil. There, he reported, a pregnant woaen offered
"to claim I was the father so I couldn't be deported."

But "Big Joe“ moved in with his wife and Spouse-speaking children whom he had had
brought to Argmtina. In Buenoe Airee he was "taken from the car right in the
middle of the street" after his "children's governess had betrayed him because of
unrequited love," as he believes.

Then, according to the wholesale drug dealer, he was celled a "Jewish eon-of-a-
bitch" by Argmtine narcotics agate and acruelly tortured." In Jail he said he
was beatm and repeatedly strip-searched all over for drugs.

But addicts fro. Frankmrt who‘ obtained drugs fro: the ring report that he himself
"never used a gram."

7453
680: 5300/2230

68
ITALY'S GROWING ROLE IN NARCUI‘ICS REPORTED
AUlSlOOb Rome ANSA in English 0832 CHI 15 Mar 82

[Text] Rome, 15 Mar (ANSA)--Italy's growing importance as a crossroads
(or international narcotics trafficking, and the cost in narcotics-related
deaths that it has brought the country, were highlighted in a report
released here at the weekend by the revenue poi ice.

In its report, the Guardia Di Pinanza Police Corps said that the major
hurdles for controlling the traffic are Italy's long coast and the speed
with which organized crime has switched from traditional smuggling to
narcotics.

According to the report, most opium and morphine [words indistinct] in Italy
comes from Lebanon and Turkey. These raw materials are then processed

in laboratories rm by the Inafia in Sicily and the Camorra in Naples

before being sent on to the end-users, primarily in the United States,
Canada, and West Germany.

In terms of production flow, this makes Italy look like nothing more than a
staging—post. But its curve of narcotics-related deaths has been rising
catastrophically in the last four or five years.

Last year, the Guardia Di Finanza counted about 300 persons. most of them
young, who died from heroin or similar drugs.

One proposal advanced in the report is that international conventions should
be mdified so that narcotics runners can be arrested outside territorial
waters. :1 practice currently reserved for pirates and slave traders.

Another proposal is the offer of massive rewards for those prepared to
denounce drug traffickers and smugglers to the police.

(250: 5300/22/01

69
PHYSICIAN SEES INCREASING BRUTALITY IN DRUG ENVIRONMENT
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 2 Mar 82 p 11

[Article by Jan 0. Helgesen: "Nyhus Strikes Back: Drug Environment More
Brutal Than Ever"]

[Text] "The risk of being seriously injured. stricken
with infectious liver disease, etc., is highly present
when working with young drug abusers. There is no
reason to conce.‘ the fact that in this work very dan-
gerous situations can arise. These problems will not
disappear simply by our not talking about them. Con-
trary to Porno Berntsen, Hork and others, I believe that
criminalization. prostitution and brutalization of the
narcotics environment is creating a well-founded and

realistic fear within exposed groups in the health and
social sectors."

This was said by Medical Director Per Nyhus in a comment on his being ac-
cused of creating "archreactionary fear of drug abusers." Nyhus said that
he has no reason to doubt that Health Director Hork is unfamiliar with the

problems. but remains doubtful that he has given a correct picture of the
facts.

"Last fall we became alarmed at the Youth Psychiatric Clinic by a new trend
in developments. The clinic was attacked from outside. One of our employ-
ees was assaulted and his keys taken. There was an attempt at forcible
entry at one of our branches. Our personnel have had their lives threat-
ened over the telephone. The incident was reported to the police. but un-
fortunately not to the health director. which I deplore."

"Hus this not an isolated incident?”

"No, or we would not have taken it so seriously. Since the youth environment
in the city has become more militant, there have been clear signs of 'lib-
oration actions.‘ The episode I mentioned is one of a number of other sim-
llar events in the health and social services of the city." said Nyhus. He

70
said that these are so well documented in the press that both Health Di-
rector Hork and Formo Berntsen should have noticed them. He mentioned that
City Health Officer Hellbye requested police guards at the city health and
social centers. Brutalization of the narcotics environment, violence
against employees and threats against their families were the reasons given
by the city health officer.

"We are approaching a condition when we must ask whether it is defensible
to request health and social workers to perform their duties. The drug
addicts have obtained their dwelling addresses and information as to where
their smallest children are in day care or which schools the older ones
attend," said Mellbye to an Oslo newspaper. And Director Brling Oyen at
the Oslo health insurance office said to the same newspaper, "There are
tough conditions at the health insurance office in Oslo. Drug addicts in
need of money for drugs threaten insurance employees with razors, break
windows and throw office supplies out on the street. Two professional
security guards are on duty full time to protect the employees. I would
prefer to avoid turning the health insurance office into a fortress," said
Erling Oyen.

"Do Hork and Formo Berntsen believe that these statements are also intended
to spread organized slander against the youth of the city? Honestly, there
are numerous examples of how brutality is growing, regardless of what Mark,
Forno Berntsen and the outside service wants to believe."

Outside Service and the Police

"It is not correct that I have recommended closing down the outside service.
I maintain. however, that the district police in Oslo do a very good job.
even if Formo Berntsen, Hork and the outside service are annoyed by this.

I believe that 0310 could have an effective help service if we brought
together some of the resources of outside service, child care and child and
youth psychiatry. Regardless of what others say, the 'apparatus' that we
havo today does not function well enough together," said Medical Director
Ptﬂ' Nyluls.

9ZQ7
(:50: 5300/2226

71
NARCOTICS POLICE “KNOBS DESCRIBED
Stockholm DAGKNS NYHETBR in Swedish 27 Feb 82 p 5
[Article by Leif Dahlin]

[Text] Each year narcotics police throughout the country undertake surveillance
of hundreds of suspects. Often this surveillance is time-consuming, since
couriers and smugglers themselves are using more and more sophisticated methods,

A recent example of prolonged surveillance, which to be sure resulted in the
confiscation of 1.5 kg heroin but no suspects, is the so-called elevator case
in Rinkeby north of Stockholm. After bags of heroin were found on the roof of
an elevator in a building in mid-November, about 10 narcotics investigators
were involved in the case until Wednesday when police gave up.

A man suspected of being a ringleader was found dead from natural causes in
his hone just as police were about to step in. The remaining gang members
had been warned. -

There are many examples of tine-consuming surveillance that has amounted to
nothing. but the goal is to provide a prosecutor with legally binding evidence.

Wanted
The following is a conceivable scenario in a drug case:

A Swede arrives by plane in Shiphol outside Amsterdam. Customs officers believe
they recognize his appearance. A routine check is made by pressing several
buttons on a computer and certain information appears on the screen. The man

is wanted internationally in connection with an investigation in Sweden.

Unseen by the Swede. the officer presses another button. Near the Shiphol exit
the narcotics squad receives a warning signal.

The Swede gets into a taxi while two Dutch narcotics investigators follow him
in a run-down looking car with a powerful engine.

- Finally, the Swede is seen getting out of the taxi and boarding a canal boat.
When he leaves the boat he is carrying nothing that looks suspicious. The man

72
is shadowed to a hotel.
Amphetamines

The man has taken a room at the hotel for several days. By now narcotics
headquarters in Amsterdam has been alarmed and the liaison of the National
Police Board in The Hague, Bo Johansson, has become involved in the case. If
the case is considered urgent, Bo Johansson contacts the narcotics squad in
Stockholm by telephone or telex. In less urgent cases he contacts the Stock-
holm office of Interpol, which keeps the narcotics squad informed.

The people on the canal boat are checked out. One of them has close contacts
with a suspected amphetamine producer.

The Swede leaves the country. This time he travels by car with another Swede.

They travel through West Germany to Puttgarden. The surveillance is taken
over by German narcotics police. The car continu~s by ferry to Rndbyhavn in
Denmark. The same thing occurs there. Danish police "carry the baton" further.

Phone Tap

The car arrives by ferry in Malmo. Customs officers have been instructed to
observe the car closely, but not to step in. A group of five or six persons
in Stockholm continues to follow the two Swedes. To be sure, one of them is
wanted, but he is allowed to remain "free." Police now are almost certain
that one or both have made a large amphetamine deal in Holland, but it is not
known for sure whether they have narcotics in the car. The head of the
surveillance goes to the national police commissioner or his assistant and
reports verbally on the situation. A written surveillance memo is issued.
The national police commissioner approves a wiretap. Before the tap is made,
n prosecutor is informed. He makes the same recommendation. Be evaluates the
case In thn same way as the national police commissioner.

"0 turns to the court, which approves the wiretap. The chief of the narcotics
sound or the prosecutor contacts a special division of the Security Police,
which contacts the director of telecommunications in the district in which the
suspects live and have their private telephones. The telecommunications
director sees that the telephones are connected to Security Police facilities.

The tape rolls and the line is tapped at regular intervals. The wiretap may
cantinue no longer than 1 month. During this time the investigators continue
:hoir surveillance in rented cars, even on bicycles, in emergency vehicles
such as bloodmobiles, ambulances, taxis, etc. The .ose begins to tighten.
The investigators receive a message in code: The t'.etap has revealed that the
Iwu Swedes purchased a large quantity of amphetamines in Holland and had it
delivered to a hotel in Stockholm! X will be waiting there at 1900.

The investigators are sent to the hotel. They move in just as the drugs are
given to the Swedes in the hotel room.

73
The courier and the two Swedes are apprehended while other investigators arrest
other suspects at locations previously under surveillance. Searches are made
and additional drugs are found. All suspects are apprehended and placed under

arrest. One of many "ordinary" drug rings has been broken.

9336
C80: 5300/2211

74
NATIONAL POLICE CHIEF DEFENDS USE OF DRBG GANG IN?ILTRATORS
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETBR in Swedish 27 Feb 82 p 5
[Article by 30 C. Andersaon and Cecilia Steen-Johnsson]

[Text] "I am disappointed that the politicians have not taken a firm stand
00 this question. it is unfortunate that they did not take a position previ-
uuuly, when the debate was calm, for or against the methods used by police to
-umhnt narcotics. In general. we do not need kind remarks at official

vnthcrings. hut concrete support. Now, instead, the politicians have begun to
shake in their boots after we failed in one case."

This was said by national police commissioner Holger Romandcr after it became
known that the police used Fleming Broman last year to infiltrate a drug ring.
The infiltration was unsuccessful and the police withdrew from the case.

"nlgor Romnnder is disturbed that the mass media are devoting so much attention
In this case.

"EXPRESSEN made a show of sympathy,“ he said. "First it printed long articles
nuuinst narcotics and praised the new methods of the police. Now it is

niluvklng us because we failed in this case, even though EXPRESSEN shares the
enii: fur our failure."

. - ,
l\ I “LV

Rumuﬂdvr refused to elaborate on that point, but his statement may be inter-
prvtcd as confirming reports that a correspondent from EXPRESSEN was kept
informed by a policeman from the narcotics squad the entire time Broman was

involved in the case. Apparently. the police feared that someone from the
mass media would witness Broman's purchase of a large quantity of heroin and

up present when police went to make the arrest. This was one of the reasons
lLv operation was called off.

"nut the entire plan was unrealistic," Holger Romander said. "It was too
::MLV. since the sellers were armed."

Thr national police chief was surprised that some politicians reacted so
alrunuly against the surveillance method itself. Having policemen of former

75
criminals infiltrate drug gangs is by no means new.

"Many of the infiltrators have been extremely successful," Romander said.
"For this reason, it is clear that we will continue to utilize these methods."

He stressed that most often volunteer policemen are used as infiltrators.
Swedish police are used most often abroad and in Holland, among other places,
such operations were extremely successful last year.

Holger Romander would not reveal how many times infiltrators had been used
successfully so far, but he did not hesitate at all to maintain the legality
of the new drug surveillance method.

"We believe that the police are totally free to infiltrate drug gangs and act
as buyers, couriers, and agents," he said.

Well Developed

In other countries the system of infiltrators or “undercover agents” is well
developed. The National Police Board took the idea from abroad, primarily from
the United States. There agents are used as couriers and pilots for trans-
porting drugs or as middlemen.

Holger Romander does not believe any regulation in law or in the constitution
pertaining to such surveillance methods is needed.

"The general police regulations are sufficient. It is difficult to establish
rules, since they would be either too limited or too general."

Justice and personal integrity are not endangered when police use infiltration
in drug surveillance, according to Holger Romander.

”It is a completely different matter if coercive measures are used such as
wiretapping and so-cslled wireless taps, but in that case the integrity of
the individual must be sacrificed to some degree if we are to combat these
crimes."

For the most part, the national police commissioner is satisfied with the
preliminary report of the committee on coercive means entitled "Secret
wiretapping, etc." It recommends that the police be permitted to use hidden
microphones, transmitters, "bugs," and TV cameras to keep suspected narcotics
criminals and others under surveillance.

Secret Wiretaps
"These methods should be used only when other methods fail to produce results,"
Romander said. "I would imagine that secret wiretaps would be used in about

a dozen or so cases each year--at most."

Fleming Broman maintained that in one case in which he was involved the police

76
hml bugged a hotel room where he was to contact a drug dealer.

"he pulled this story out of thin air," holger Romander said. "The police have
no such equipment, nor do we have anyone trained to use it. He obey the law."

Holger Romander stressed that he had no exact information on the Broman case.
"It is not my job as national police commissioner to keep informed of details
involved in individual operations," he said. "I also have no intention of
finding out more. As far as 1 am concerned the case is closed."

Attorney General Investigating

Attorney General Bengt 0. Hamdahl decided on Friday to investigate whether
police acted properly in using former drug king Fleming Broman as an infiltra-
tor last year.

"This case has drawn much attention and the surveillance method used is not
exactly commonplace. I want to know if it is legal," Hamdahl told DAGENS
NYill-ZTER .

"First I want to question the policemen involved in the infiltration."

The attorney general supervises the police. Hamdahl made this decision after
a conversation with national police commissioner Rolger Romander.

9336
C30: 5300/2211

77
DANES PROTEST SHEDBS' LEAKIM OF NEWS ON GANG INPILTRATION
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 27 Feb 82 p 5
[Article: "Danish Protest Against Swedish Police Leak"]

[Text] The National Police Board has received an extranely sharp protest from
its Danish counterpart. A Swedish policeman on assigment in Copenhagen leaked
the contents of a secret Danish surveillance report on a drug case to a Danish
evening paper. The policeman belonged to the committee that hired Planing
Broman as an infiltrator.

The newspaper EXPRESSEN connected Planing Bronan with one of the pol iceaen from
the west coast who was to join the comittee appointed to investigate the
monetary crimes and drug trade of several Yugoslavs. The policanan had worked
with members of the Huddinge Province narcotics squad. The policeman and a
colleague had been assigned to Copenhagen to learn about a drug investigation
related to the case in which they were involved.

Surprisingly, a large Danish newspaper published an inside description of the
investigation. It even revealed the subject of the investigation by the Danish
narcotics police. That same day EXPRESSEN published a similar article.

Danish police found this so rmrkable that they questioned continued coopera-
tion with the RPS (Swedish National Police Board) in certain drug cases.

The RPS has apologized for the incident.

when the Bronan case was concluded in late June, Bronan demanded compensation
of about 60,000 kronor. He received 20,000 for "services rendered" and
7.500 for expenses.

"Later I was called by the newspaper EXPRESSBN which called on the police to

pay Bromon the sun he originally requested," cmissioner Bsbjorn Esbjornsson
told DAGENS NYHETER.

Otherwise the newspaper muld publish details of the surveillance.

According to Bsbjornsson the policeman had been trusted- but when it became
known that he had kept EXPRESSEN informed of the investigation the police

78
became uneasy. Immediately following the Bronan case the policeman was
transferred. he is no longer involved in narcotics investigations.

"Esbjornsson is lying," EXPRESSEN journalist Per Wendel said. "I never
threatened him."

"Broman was terribly disappointed by the police. He felt cheated. He said
the police had agreed to pay him 50,000 kronor. They also promised to help
him obtain a visa to the United States."

"I called Esbjornsson and asked if that were correct. He said he had tried
unsuccessfully to obtain a visa."

"I also asked if they planned to pay Broman his noney. Bsbjornsson said that
this would be taken up at a meeting."

"But I never made any threat." Per Hendel said.

Editor in chief Bo Stromstedt of EXPRESSEN said he found it difficult to
believe that the journalist had been involved in blackmail.

0316
cso: 5300/2211

79
MINISTER PROMISES TOUGHER PRISON REGIME" FOR DRUG CONVICTS
Stockholm SVBNSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 22 Feb 82 p 6
(Article by Willy Silberstein]

[Text] Norrkoping--It will be much more difficult for people convicted of
serious narcotics offences to get out of prison on leave.

Any prisoner refusing urine tests will be denied leave. Prison visitors may
be strip-searched to prevent drug smuggling.

These are several of the harsher regulations Justice Minister Carl Axel Petri

will propose to be included in the criminal justice law, as revealed by his
in a SVENSKA DAGBLADET interview.

"The purpose is to remove drugs from the prisons. This is a serious and
unacceptable problem."

Some time ago Justice Johan Leche presented a report in which he proposed
tougher regulations for the most hardened criminals in the country, between
60 and 80 persons.

Compromise

Following criticism in a committee report, the Justice Ministry chose to
compromise: the regulations will not be as harsh as those proposed in the
study, but they will apply to more prisoners.

Carl Axel Per ; said that the group receiving special treatment probably would
consist of several hundred prisoners: persona convicted of serious narcotics
crimes and others suspected of continued serious offences while in prison.

Special treatment of this group means that these prisoners would be granted
leave only under exceptional circumstances. This means, for example, leave
to attend the funeral of a close relative—~and even then the prisoner must

remain in the presence of a guard during the entire leave.

According to other sp'cial regulations the prisoners would be housed in special
sections of closed correctional facilities that will be converted for this
purpose. which facilities will be involved has not yet been determined.

"By having only 12 to 15 prisoners in each section, we hope to improve the
climate in the prisons and increase supervision at the same time," Justice
Minister Petri said.

Telephones Removed

The telephone booths remaining at the closed correctional facilities will be
removed. Calls will be permitted only in the presence of a guard.

Justice Leche stated in his report that the courts should determine who would
be subjected to the harsher regulations, but Justice Minister Petri stated that
the National Correctional Administration should make the decision since it
could follow the behavior of the prisoner during his term of imprisonment.

Carl Axel Petri also is introducing tougher regulations for all prisoners,
not only those convicted of serious drug offences.

In the future it will be easier for prison personnel to examine letters and
other articles sent to prisoners. Grounds for suspicion no longer will be
required for mail to be examined.

It will also be more difficult to make telephone calls. Prison officials will
attempt to find out if the person the prisoner wishes to call is a drug user
and if he or she has committed serious crimes.

Searches

Today visitors to prisons can have their handbags searched and guards can frisk
their clothing. in the future guards may require visitors to remove their

clothing as part of the battle against drug smuggling.

It aiso will be easier to perform bodily searches on the prisoners, for example,
to look for narcotics hidden in their rectum.

A prisoner caught using drugs will have his leave canceled. This also applies
to anyone refusing urine or alcohol tests.

I\lu‘nh01 Tests

Atcnhol tests are new. Previously the prisons have had no equipment to discover,
lnr example. if a prisoner has been drinking after returning from leave, but

now the institutes will be able to do this.

In order to stop the drug trade in the prisons, prisoners will be allowed only
p-rkut money. If large sums are found, they will be deposited in the prisoner's

hank account.

Petr! was asked if this would improve prison conditions.
"He believe that the smaller sections for the most hardened prisoners will be
more humane than the larger sections. There the pressure is greater,"
Justice Minister Carl Axel Petri said.

Eventually, however, the prisoners must adjust to life outside prison. Petri
was asked if this would not be more difficult if leaves of absence were
eliminated.

"It is correct to some extent that adjustment will become more difficult.
Adjustment to life outside prison is still our goal, but when serious crimes
are committed security must go before readjustment."

While Justice Minister Petri is making regulations at correctional facilities
tougher, he is also shortening prison terms for less serious offences. The
minimum prison term before parole may be granted is being reduced from

3 to 2 months.

Later this year a proposal will be made to improve open correctional facilities.
One Prisoner in Three Takes Drugs

Every third prisoner in our prisons uses drugs. Last year drug use in open
corrective programs increased dramatically.

This was revealed in a study by commissioner Norman Bishop of the National
Correctional Administration.

0f the 4,116 prisoners throughout the country on the day last year the study
was made, 1,168 used drugs. Thus, 28 percent of the country's prisoners are
drug users.

That is a dramatic increase over the first study made in 1966. At that time,
9 percent of the prisoners used drugs.

Constant Figure

The 28 percent found last year is also over the average for the entire study
period of 1966 to 1981.

At the same time, Norman Bishop warned against the interpretation that the
number of drug users was increasing steadily at prisons.

“The number of drug users has been amazingly constant, but since there are
fewer prisoners now the percentage of drug users is greater," he wrote in his
report.

Open correctional care has experienced a sharp rise in the number of drug users.

Of the 15,651 convicts in open corrective programs, 3,364 are drug users, which
amounts to 22 percent. Last year the corresponding figure was 16 percent.

9336
650: 5300/2211

82
DUTCH TRUCK DRIVER SMUCGLES 42 KILOCRAHS 0F HASHISH
Stockholm SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 17 Feb 82 p 6
[Article by Claes von Hofsten]

[Text] A Dutch truck driver was apprehended Tuesday by police after he
attempted to conceal drugs valued at 13 million kronor in a Scanian forest.

The narcotics section of the National Criminal Police succeeded in making the
seizure as a result of closer cooperation with Dutch police.

The Dutch truck driver landed in Trelleborg on Tuesday morning with his truck.
Swedish police had already been informed. They were waiting on the dock when
the ferry arrived. The police had been tipped off, but did not know exactly
which truck was involved.

National Criminal Police investigators suspected the right vehicle, however.
It was followed at a distance. The truck was supposed to deliver merchandise
to a factory in Perstorp. Before the driver arrived in Perstorp, however, he
stopped in a forest.

Hidden Tire

Thvro he removed one of the spare tires and hid it in the forest. All this

was observed by the police investigators. Later, when the driver arrived at
the factory, he was arrested.

Meanwhile, police had searched the hidden tire at a tire workshop. It contained
h2 kg amphetamines valued at about 13 million kronor on the street.

“There must be same organization behind the smuggling of such a large quantity
at narcotics, an organization that is prepared to receive the drugs," said
rummlssioner Hugo Nyberg, chief of the narcotics section of the National
Criminal Police.

‘l'lu- pol ice said they did not know who was expecting the shipment, but the

Investigation is continuing. It is estimated that the recipient of this
shipment must have about 4 million kronor in cash to pay for these amphetamines,

83
which formed the second largest confiscation ever made in Sweden.

Several years ago 52 kg amphetamines was found in a parked car, also from
Holland, in a garage in southern Stockholm.

Manufacture

Hugo Nyberg sees this seizure as evidence that the manufacture of amphetaaines
again is in full swing in Holland. According to comissioner Nyberg, amphet-
amines have been readily available in Sweden during the past 6 months. Previ-
ous seizures also indicate that the quality of the amphetamines is extremely
huh.

Tuesday's confiscation is not the first fruit of the cooperation between
Swedish and Dutch police. Several weeks ago a Swede was apprehended in
Amsterdam. He had 30,000 kronor on his person and over 200,000 kronor in his
car, which was also specially prepared for narcotics smuggling. After he

was apprehended. Dutch police also were able to locate a safe deposit box.

It contained 8 kg amphetamines plus 100,000 kronor in Swedish bills. The Swede
had been convicted previously for drug-related crimes.

Mont Smuggled

Hugo Nyberg believes that most of the amphetamines sold in Sweden are smuggled
into the country. No information is available on any large drug factories in
Sweden. I: is assumed that one reason for this is that the necessary chemicals
are easier to obtain on the continent and that the risk of long prison sentences
is less there.

9336
C80: 5300/2211
COMMENTARY NOTES USE OF DRUGS BY MIDDLE CLASS

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 2 Mar 82 p 14

[Comentary by Roderick Junoc:

[Text]

rl‘llL-L scene is a large detached
house—seven bedrooms,
three bathrooms—on the
oulskirls of a well-known Mid.
lands town. it is 11.30 am. an a
Sunday. A tray containing a
bottle of gin. bottles of tonic
water. an icebucket. glasses and
a decorative tobacco box is
brought into ilie sitting room.
by the host, .1 company irector.

The box contains “grass,"
home-grown in a greenhouse in
the garden. Its appearance is
brown and dried up. and it resem-
bles tobacco although the strands
are longer.

llenl tobacco is then groduced
from another box. alrea y in the
room. and a mixture of 'grass"
aml tobacco—half and hall—is
culled into two King Size Rizla
extra width cigarette papers
joined end to end. The resulting
-- joint." about six inches long and
tun-thirds of an inch thick. is lit
up mth a Dunhill lighter and
passed round for everyone to
\mukl‘ while downing their gin and

—*

“‘lhnn" is one of the mm]: to
:loernbr cannabis. the generic nonri-
[m- lmlion hemp. The [lowering or
[inning tops nl the plant are usually
Lmnru ox moriinono. nnnin or cleans.
the resin obtained (root the tops
liasliisli or chums. Other names in.
rlude charge. lee, pol, weed and
blmao.

tonu-s. A further three " joints "
are rolled before “ Sunday cock-
tails" are at an end and the
guests. a plant manager. an
actress and a barrister drive away.

*

Tlll’. scene is a threeobedroomed

' "town-house" in commuter land
in the southeast. The time early
evening. Guests are parkin thelr
llMWs. Range-Rovers an com-
pany Fords. Each one gets offered
a "ltarvey Wallbanger" (vodka.
orange juice and Galliano) from
a table beside the debt as hats
and coats are taken upstairs by
the wile in the house. Whose birth-
day it is.

Some guests bring the hostess
flowers. some boxes of chocolates.
One. gives her a package which.
on removal of its coloured wrap
ping paper. reveals a small multi-
coloured ceramic jewellery box
inside of which is a quantity of
cannabis resin. it is accepted with
hugs of pleasure and "joints"
are soon being rolled and passed
around.

There are some 40 or so pre-
sent. The “joints" are handed
round the entire company though
some at the party do not inhale
hut pass them to their neighbour
straight away. preferring the
wine and cold turkey which is also
on otTer. The party goes on until
the early hours of the morning
when with a noise of Jangling car
keys. shouts of "goodbye." and
much laughter. the accountants.

85

"The Bourgeoisie Goes to Pot"]

civil servants. publishers. journal-
ists. teachers. lawyers and other
profcssional people present depart.

The scene is a granite house in
Scotland. Eight are seated for din-
ner. The menu is avocado with
prawns. fresh Tar salmon and
Aberdeenshire raspberries. Several

bottles of chateau-bottled French
white wine are served.

Then coffee is brought. With it
comes eight bulbous brandy
glasses. But the lasses do not
contain brandy. hey contain a
white powdery substance: cocaine.
otherwise known as "coke."
“candy" or "snow."

Each of the guests is provided
with a miniature solid-gold spoon.
with which to “snort " the cocaine.

Three of those present are III
the oil business. the executive jet
of one of whom has brou ht in
the drug. One is a local arc tect.
With thorn are their wives.

As one doctor told me: “No
one. but no one, in authority in
Britain today seems to_ under-
stand the scale of what ts going
on behind middle class curtains
up and down the country. It is
nation-wide. -

" We know .about those who
come to surgerteslor help. those
who are found injecting them-
selves in public lavatories. those
who are on the register. But we
delude ourselves if we think these
are anything but a. microscopic
aspect of the true picture: drug-
talting has become a middle class
'imthing.‘ and the majority we
never see.
"Just look at the figure for
seizures by tlte Customs—there's
no way all these massive quanti-
ties could be bound simply for the
human wrecks at Piccadilly Cir-
rus. Remember. seizures are
yel'konf‘d to represent one tenth.
at the absolute outside. of the real
amount getting into the country—
and they take no account ol the
stntf grown or manufactured
here."

finstonts and lixcise have
iepm'tcd that the. amount
of cannabis seized in Britain in
lflﬂl was 2| tons.

An indication of the scale of
smtte individual sinucttling opera-
“MN is provided by just four
roses in four tnonths. ln
tterember. Scotland Yard was
reported to have established that.
Li diplomatic courier bags con-
tttlning a quarter of a ton of can-
nabis had vanished in London.
Later the same. month. when a
Tory candidate at the last general
election who had worked for two
years in Mrs Thatcher‘s " Think
Tank " was sentenced at Middle-
«es Crown (‘.onrt to six yea.-s for
drug smuggling. it emerged that
L868 grants of cocaine ltad been
wired. In January. six men were
tailed at Lewes Crown l‘onit hav-
ing been involved distributing
unaine in London and the south-
east said to be worth £12! million.
.\nd earlier last month. an Oxford
r .idnate who in mm had been
mund not guilty of a plan to im-
not! l5 tons of cannabis. pleaded
:LHHV at the Cenunl Cﬁnﬁnal
l‘nnrl to heint! part of an inter-

03-): "i 320/2?

national 'cannabis smuggling
roup. He claimed to have worked
oerG. ..

As one Customs ofﬁcer told me:
" The only times the general pub-
he gets to hear about drugs are
when there's a big trial. when
someone famous is involved. when
police are accused of planting or
trading in it themselves. or when
a lot of .money is involved—like
the case of the 23-year-old student
who was found last car to have
squandered a [76.003 inheritance
on drugs. But the phenomenon
is in fact strongest where it is
least known about—in middle
class Britain."

There are many different quali-
ties of marijuana amt the types
tend to get talked about in much
the. same way that different wines
—-and differin vintages—get dis-
cussed. In llol and. tltere has even
been a regular radio programme
broadcasting the going rate for
cannabis from its different coun-
tries of origin. One housewde in
Wales told me: " We used to gear
a dinner party around which of
our friends was the most enter.
taining or interesting talker. how
we gear it around who has the
best 'grass '."

" In my view." said one Oxford

expert on lthe .druus scene,
"we are Witnessing m ltritam

what has already happened in
America with drugs. l‘.ven our
armed forces in Germany have,
followed the Americans in the
habit."

Just a year or so ago. America's
Loan-s llosir Johann. reported
that "litany Washington parties

86

serve cocaine and marijuana as
naturally as martinis." Indeed.
the popularity of cocaine is such
that BNT specialists in the
United States are having difficulty
getting professional supplies tor
use in nose surgery. I myself hate
stayed with one surgeon in \'ir-
ginia who was getting supplies
from what the local police seized
in raids.
*

FROM my inquiries. it is clear
that Britain is undergoing a
similar—if tlclnycd—espei-ieinc In
what has happened across the
Atlantic. The difference is that
the British—particularly the Bri-
tish middle class—tend to be.
more tight-lipped than their
American counterparts.

to America, where street sales
of cocaine and marijuana are now
estimated to be running at the.
rate of £19,400 million a year and
1:13.400 million respectively. it is
said that the drugs have become
so fashionable that even Whﬂe
llouse guests have felt free to
indulge in them on the premises.

l have no doubt the Same muld
not be said for Downing Street.
llut I do know that marijuana is
so widespread in Britain that even
in an Inn of Court near to the
High Court Ill London there is a
flat in which some 200 cannabis
plants have been growing—and
they were ttot planted for
decoration.

A survey by the llltft pro-
gramme "Midweek" in llt‘lS
estimated that four million peonle
in Britain had tried cannabis. The
figure. I guess. is about double
that now.
HWE OFFICE NOTES INCREASE IN NUMBER OF DRUG ADDICTS

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 24 Feb 82 p 2

[Article by David Fletcher]

[Text]

YOUNG people caught up in the
unemployment gloom are turning to
heroin to escape their depression, a drug

advice group said

yesterday.

They prefer the “cart:-
free oblivion" the drug
induces to the despair of
the dole queue.

And a continuing increase
in tin. already ' staItliIIg"
number of hard-Ilium users
is Inevitable. the Release
group said.

l'he warning follows the nulr
heat-on oi Home Ofﬁce ﬂxure!
which reveal an increase of
about a third in the number of
notiﬁed addicts in one year.

The Home Olliee. said about
3.300 wen-receiving drugs from
doctors to treat their addidion
at the end of last year. At the
end of [900 the ﬁgure was 2.846
— MGR than at any time over
the. previous 10 years.

iiIIt iteleaue said the true.
number at hard drul addicts
was more like. 30.000“ at a con.
amative estimate."

Mr Bob Nialttinzale. spokes.
man. said: " It's II despair among
Ihe youna which makes oblivion
much more desirable.

" lleroln makes you forget
about things for a while. and
people want that more now be
cauae their life is no' I enlar-
able as it was 10 ye.ra an."

Users. of both aexea. ranged
in axe front around 14 to 40.
and spanned all social daaaea.

hated to theft

Addietlon led to vast cxt'acnsc
said Mr Nightingale. and some
youngsters were having to re-
tort to theft or prostitution to
name the habit“ Othera sold
dru s o pay for heroin. cur-
renty about {80' a gramme.
Addicta used It quarter or half
a plume a day.

The Home' Ofﬁce litureare
corded only thoao addict: who
were notiﬁed to the authorities.

Therefore. said Mr Nix tItin-
ute. they represented only a

proportion of. the real rise in

imam m" “I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00080R000500050017-3

DRUG SHUCGLER MARKS JAILBD FOR THREE YEARS
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 17 Feb 82 p 3
[Article by Ian Henry]

[Text]

UNAWAY drug smuggler Demos 'Howutn
MARKS, who became entangled up in a-

web of international intrigue while working
for British intelligence. was ﬁnally jailed for
three years at the Old Bailey yesterday.

Marks. 56. the Welsh village boy who became an
Oxford graduate and turned to drug smuggling as a
rover [or his M 16 work. smiled and waved to his wife

Judith as he left the court.

Last November Maﬂgs was
cleared oi masterininding
a plot to smuggle 15 tons of
(amiahis. worth £22 million,
In J remote Scottish islaml.

II- was ruled [or two years
lur ;!|~\|‘Il.l trill-MN.

\rdt'rllm, le'I' than ri:ht
\-_.v. .Iltrr being nri:in.1llv
.-.:.~Irt| ut IIUILIIICI IIII' Ilium
\nnghnz. Marks. of (Lithcatl
ltuacl. Fullnant. pleaded :uihv to
tonsil-ram in l913 to evade
Mun-sneak Ian! on drugs impor-
l.lliutl.

I ’0! ieouum'a

 

suicide

the Itemer of Londonnltlr
.lmu \lIsMN. QC. told htnt:
"‘l'hnrr was question oi duress
on your case. la“ greed and a
sum mmmtiv l)‘ to the meter-
tunes oi the drug buyers.“

tiarks' disappearance while
awaiting trial in l914 that led
In .t court ordered report on
his lurtive links with the intel-
hat-nee services.

 

11w “tame: Valle‘epolieeman
who carried out I inquiry.
Snot Philip Fail-weather. com-
mitted suicide after alleledly
contrssing to has-in leaked his
report to a jouraa ist.

Extracts from the report
appeared in the New Sum
mm in 1919. Last December
Supt Falrweatlter stabbed him‘
self to death in the garden ot
his home in Kndliuton. Oxford.

lie had acne ted responsibil-
ity for the . ew Sarcoma
leak. and according to police
source was expectln to be
char: under the 0 dal ace-
rcts Act.

At the inquest last month. it
was said he had been dearest-d
tor. several weeks and had told
‘9'!“ about somthlng worryia:

um.

The tonseeret report. details
embarrassing allegations of
links bemoan the intelligence
services and druu and arms
dealing syndicates.

Supt Falmenther is said to
have been disbusted by some
of the matters he uncovered.

88

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050017-3

In. a I..-

25-21!

la n P. tnf‘a'i 2

2'0 9?:

0 I 17—120 H.

:53 "‘17
vmmtmoliucw run «a... - ~33.
232. :8 .

SEQ .38

. >: 5:. 33.8 .95 .3»
3.2.2.. .5135. 233:2. 2
33.533 bow. «33...:
:8... 18o #3.; .32.... ‘9...
9:5 :56. $3: .5 .33 .5...

2... 2:98..." :5 8r. :6
so so... .5333.— 33 an .13
.58.. S to...» .2, . was»:
33:538. :3 2.5.4:: .32
3.533 2.3 :29:— :3.
:22. :5 En: .35.

{any Pr..r:rb PI {It biull
COURT HEARS POLICE 'TURNED BLIND EYE' 0N DRUG RING COUPLE

London THE DAILY TELECRAPII in English 20 Feb 82 p 3

[Text]

\' COUPLE u-rrr able to

run :1 drugs ring mm-
in: llmusand ol’ paumls a
\u-vk lwcamc some pulicc-
Im-n Inn-nod a blind eye.
Slwﬂ‘lcid Crown Court
hmrd yrstcrday.

Axum" nummm. 23. w.“
Eula-d lnr right vcan fur aim:
"Hum-as aml Linux \VIH'MAN.
.‘I-_ his- mkm-u for 30 llllmllh.
l:.n~lllnrlh. um-mnlm ml of
tum-s: Avnmm Shellirlll Wm-
.::... nnlt-er In nav llrt-v‘ruliun
. ..|\ no! mending [23,5410 and
' WI" hmml lw poliu- in a hm
.n: h;- [M mn- mnlhcsurd.

\i:- .luﬁliro Tuum Inld [Lull-
r...-| ' II N .-.ml \‘oll um in

' \ulll u'll.|u| puliu‘
- .n-l \nur Ilimlnl 'r.ulr
, le- null-«l umm'f II.I|
. . nlnm- ll ru Iluh‘.
"1hr (' un acn-Ivk
: In hr I): -
I. 2 Is no In..n:-.;lium
: |I.Ill."

 

   

 

   
     
 

 

Mr IMVIII S.\v1u.. 0C. pro'o-
«ulin:. said ﬂanslﬂcrlh's l8-
nmnlln-mign ended only who"
nllircrs Imm lhc Humhcnide
rum “me caﬂeul in In
im-mlinal-u.

lln said nathorth and Why-
mun, or 'l‘nplulm Drive. SMI-
l‘u-ld. had a ﬁve-yenr-old child.
They rntnnml rlicnls hy' aller-
in: Iron drugs lmlil the-v
lmmw lumknl and mm m.qu
lIu-m "M.

A man “lm muld am my

Ink drug: bill wt" [cu-WI In
lake part in a mmoura-ullir
lil .uul :1 girl mid In I‘m-u-
lmmlrd over 129.00!) hr hI-rniu
“.p [mu-(l inln prmlilulion lo
pm I‘m her crmiml.
. [\llvr lln- «as-n lit-I Sun! "on
Ram". ll"l|"lV lu-ml of llmnlu-r-
\inlu- (ill). \.I. i'lqnil’im m-H‘.
«onunuinz. llc: rmIId unl saw
Imw mam Sllrllicld Mun-rs
m-ro mun-med In hi< invest!-
r..n nn but no charges had been
"mule.