I-UN ()H-K'ML USE ONLY

'JPRS L/10347
23 February 1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

'(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mateiial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/82)

CONTENTS

PERCEPTIONS, VIEWS, C(WIENTS
Book Excerpts: Hisotiography of the Great Patriotic War
(ISTORIOGRAFIYA VELIKOY OTECIESTVENNOY VOYNY -- SBORNIK
STATEY, 1980) OOOOOOOOOIOQOOOOOOOC.QOODOOO0.000.000.0003...
Book Describes Military Psychology and Education Science

(A. V. Barebanshchikov, N. F. Pcdenko; OSHOVY VOYENNOY
PSIKHOImII I PEDAGNIKI, 19431) ...........................

-a- [III-USSR-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
BOOK EXCERPTS: HISTORIOGRAPBY OF THE GREAT PATRIOTIC WAR

Moscow ISTORIOGRAFIYA VELIKOY OTECHESTVENNOY VOYNY -- SBORNIK STATBY in Russian 1980
(signed to press 10 Jan 80) pp 3-4, 283-285, 5-36, 162-177, 277—282

[Table of contents, Foreword, Zhilin article, theshevskiy article, Conclusion, and
Appendix of book. edited by Academician M. P. Kim, A. 1. Rabin, L. S. Caponenko,
C. A. Kumanev, N. I. Hakarov, A. V. Mitrofanova. V. P. Naumov, and Yu. V. Plotnikov]
[Excerpts] Title Page:
Title: ISTORIOGRAPIYA VELIKOY OTECHESTVENNOY VOYNY -- SBORNIK STATEY
(Historiography of the Great Patriotic Hsr -- Collection of Articles)
Publisher: Voyenizdat
Place and year of publication: Moscow. 1980
Signed to Press Date: 10 January 1980
Number of Copies Published: 6,000
Number of Pages: 285

Table of Contents Page

Foreword (Academician H. P. Kim) ......... .................................. 5
P. A. Zhilin. Current Problems of Investigation of the Great Patriotic Bar 9

The CPSU -- Inspirational Force and Organizer of the Victory of the Soviet
People in the Great Patriotic War

B. S. Tel'pukhovskiy. Soviet Historical Literature on the Leadership Role
of the CPSU in the Great Patriotic Har (Wrief Survey of the Literature.
1965-1977) ...................... .............. ....................... 37

A. P. Yudenkov. The Communist Party -- Organizer and Leader of the
Partisan Movement (Historiography of This Topic) ..................... 52

V. P. Seregin. The Communist Party -- Organizer of the Nation's War
Economy (Historiography of the Problem) .............................. 58

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

T. B. Toman. Party Direction of Socialist Competition During the Years of
the Great Patriotic War (Survey of the Literature) . ......... ........ 68

M. S. Dergach and M. N. Yevlanova. Historiography of Party Supervision
of Governmental and Public Organizations ............................ 75

G. A. Kovalev. Party ideological-Political Work on the Soviet Home Front
(Historiographic Survey) ..................... ......... .............. 81

M. I. Likhomanov. Party Economic Policy in the Village During the Years
of the Great Patriotic War (Historiography of the Topic) . ......... .. 88

N. i. Kondakova. The Communist Party -- Organizer of Rebuilding of the
Economy and Cultural Life in Liberated Areas of the USSR (Historio-
graphic Survey) ............ ....................... ..... ... .......... 90

Armed Struggle of the Soviet People Against the German-Fascist Invaders

A. I. Babin. Soviet Historical Literature on the Armed Struggle With
the German-Fascist Invaders ............... ........ ................. 102

Yu. V. Plotnikov. Historiography of the Battles and Major Operations of
the Great Patriotic Har ............................. ...... .......... 117

V. S. Shumikhin. Contemporary Historiography on the Heroisa of Soviet
Fighting Men in the Great Patriotic War ............................. 127

Yu. K. Strizhkov. Brief Survey of the Literature on Combat Exploits of
Soviet Border Guards During the Years of the Great Patriotic War .... 134

N. P. Azyasskiy and A. S. Knyaz'kov. The Armed Struggle of Soviet
Patriots on Occupied Soviet Territory in the Years of the Great
Patriotic War (Historiographic Survey) .............................. 142

V. M. Gridnev. Historiography of the Struggle of the Soviet Peasantry
Against the German-Fascist Invaders on Temporarily Occupied Soviet
Territory. 1901-1944 ............ ..... ............................... 153

0. A. theshevskiy. Bourgeois Historiography of the Armed Struggle on
the Soviet-German Front (Analysis of Contemporary Trends) ........... 162

The Soviet Home Front in the Great Patriotic War

0. A. Kumanev and A. V. Mitrofanova. Literature of the 1970's on History
of the Soviet Home Front During the Period of the Great Patriotic War 178

A. F. Vasil'yev. Principal Trends in Investigation of the History of
industry. Transportation and the Worker Class During the Har Years at
the Contemporary Stage ....... ........ . ...... ........................ 195

M. K. Kozybayev. Socialist Competition During the Years of the Great
Patriotic war in Soviet Historical Literature ....................... 205

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H. S. Zinich. SOViet historiography on Technological Advance in Industry
During the Hat Yeats .... ...... ....................................... 215

Yu. L. D'yakov. Soviet Historical Literature on Wartime Capital Construc-
tion in Rear Areas of the USSR ....................................... 221

V. T. Aniskov. Status of Scholarly Investigation of History of Agricul-
ture and the Peasantry in the War Years .............................. 229

P. G. Agaryshev and H. F. Molodtsova. Contribution of the Urals to the
Victory Over Fascism (Hisroriographic Survey of the Literature of the
1970's) .............................................................. 240

A. D. Kolesnik. Historiography of the Home Guard During the Period of the
Great Patriotic war .................................................. 246

V. A. Yezhov. Some Aspects of Historiography of Rebuilding of the
Economy During the Years of the Great Patriotic War .................. 252

L. V. Haksakova. Soviet Culture of the Hat Years in Historical Litera—
ture of the l950's~1970's ............................................ 257

E. I. Grakina. Historical Literature of the Mid-l960's-l970's on the
Contribution of Soviet Science to the Victory Over Fascism ........... 266

Conclusion ......... ..... ................................................... 277
Appendix ................................................... ............... . 280
FOREWORD

More than three decades have passed since the terrible events of World War II, of
which the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet people against German fascism and
Japanese militarism was the main component part. This war went down in history as a
great armed conflict between socialism and the shock forces of imperialism and
world reaction.

"The victory of the Soviet Union in the Great Patriotic Har." states the 29
January 1975 CPSU Central Committee Decree entitled "0n the 30th Anniversary of

the Victory of the Soviet People in the Great Patriotic War of 1941-1945,"
”persuasively demonstrated the viability and invincibility of the world's first
socialist state. It constituted the triumph of a new societal and governmental
system engendered by the October Revolution, of the socialist economy, the ideology
of Harxism-Leniuism, the moral—political unity of the Soviet society. and the
indissoluble friendship of the peoples of the USSR."1

The road leading to this Great Victory was increadibly difficult. of unparalleled
hardships and intensity. The Soviet people bore measureless suffering, calamities
and losses during the long days and nights of the battle with fascism. The
struggle with the invaders claimed the lives of 20 million sons and daughters of
the Soviet people.

3
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
l'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And the further the events of the Great Patriotic War recede into the past, the
outstanding contribution made by the Soviet Union to the defeat of Hitlerite Germany
and mllitarist Japan appears increasingly more multifaceted and stands in increasing-
ly higher relief. Time is powerless to weaken in the hearts and minds of genera-
tions the memory of the unprecedented exploit of the peoples of the USSR which,

under the leadership of the Communist Party, smashed the mightiest imperialist pred-
ator and carriedeut their international duty with honor, saving mankind from the
threat of Nazi enslavement.

One of the mos: important focal areas of our historical science is comprehensive
illumination of the events of the past war, the mass heroism and courage of Soviet
citizens, and the leadership role of the CPSU in organizing defeat of the German-
fascist invaders and Japanese militarists.

In the more than 30 years which have passed since the var came to an end. many of
its aspects have become the focus of serious scientific investigation, as a result
of which an extensive, diversified historical literature has been established,
toraling more than 16.000 titles.

The truthful and harsh history of the Great Patriotic War offers a clear answer to
the question why. in spite of the desperate situation in the first months of the
war, the Soviet people were able to stand up, and nor only to stand up but, halting
the advance of the shock forces of world imperialism. to gain a world-historic
victory over them.

Turning to the exciting pages of history, one can easily see the main sources of
the valor and fearlessness of those who strode through the flaming battle fronts
with weapon in hand, and those who forged the weapons of victory on the home front.
They include fervent love of the multinational socialist homeland and total dedicu~
tion to our native land, our great and just Communist cause. United by the will
of the Communist Party, Soviet fighting men and workers on the home front defended
the independence of their homeland, at the cost of enormous efforts and sacrifices
and brought liberation to many peoples of the world.

in addirion to great scientific-cognitive value, historical literature on the

Great Patriotic War is also important for militaryhpatriotic indoctrination of the
masses for the purpose of affirming "in the consciousness of working people, and
particularly the younger generation, of the ideas of Soviet patriotism and socialist
internationalism, pride in the Soviet Union, in our homeland, and readiness and
willingness to stand to the defense of the achievements of socialism."2

in spite of the vast literature on the history of the Great Patriotic War of the
Soviet Union, many aspects of this heroic epic have not yet been investigated, and
as regards some topics, including basic ones, certain publications lack requisite
preciseness and rigorous objectivity of interpretation.

An all-union scientific conference entitled “Historiography of the Great Patriotic
War" was devoted to summarizing the results and achievements of historiography of
the Great Patriotic War and determination of unaccomplished tasks and the most
significant problems which require further elaboration.

I
ran omcn‘at use ONLY
This all-union conference was organized by the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute
of History of the USSR jointly with the CPSU Central Committee Institute of
Harxism-Leninism. the USSR Ministry of Defense Institute of Military History, the
Scientific Cauncil on hiStory of Building Socialism and Commc1ism in the USSR, and
the Scientific Council for Coordination of Research in the Area of Military History.
Holding this conference was an important factor in development of research on im-
portant problems of the past war. Approximately 200 Soviet research scholars took
active part in this conference.

During the two days of the conference the conferees heard ante than 50 scholarly
papers and reports on the most important aspects of Soviet historiography of the
Great Patriotic War. All presentations emphasized that the results of research‘
conducted in this area are rather impressive in a quantitative respect and on the
whole are on a high scholarly level. At the same time a number of problems of his-
tory of the past war have not been discussed, while many have been analyzed far

from adequately. Much also remains to be done for a synthesis ol the most effective
forms and modes of combating bourgeois falsifiers of history.

The ail—union scientific conference helped not only summarize the status of treat-
ment of many current-importance problems dealing with defense of the socialist home-
land but also helped delineate paths of further profound investigation nnd study of
one of the most heroic periods in the history of our homeland.

This volume is based on the materials of the plenary session and the three con-
ference sections, reworked by the authors into the form of scholarly articles and
summaries. The first item is a substantial introductory article by a prominent
Soviet military historian. Lt Gen P. A. Zhilin. corresponding member oi the USSR
Academy of Sciences and head of the USSR Ministry of Deferse institute of Military
History. This article traces in detail the birth and development of Soviet his-
toriography of the past war and presents a general picture of the development status
of this important area oi Soviet hisrorical science.

The first section of this volume (“The CPSU -- Inspirational Force and Organizer of
the Victory of the Soviet People in the Great Patriotic war“) contains articles and
summaries which analyze the principal works dealing with the diversified activities
of the Communist Party pertaining to directing the struggle of the Soviet people
against the German-fascist invaders.

The second section ("Armed Struggle of the Soviet People Against the German-Fascist
Invaders in the Years of the Great Patriotic War") contains articles examining the
status of scientific treatment in Soviet historiography of various aspects of the
armed struggle against the enemy on the battle fronts and behind the Hitlerite lines.

The final section ("The Soviet Hone Front in the Great PatriOLic Her") deals with
analysis of the literature which discusses military-economic problems. aspects of
the labor exploits of the Soviet people and their selfless efforts to gain an
economic victory over the fascist bloc.

This volume, while essentially the first summary historiographic work on the Great
Patriotic Bar, oi course does not claim exhaustive treatment of all the questions
examined.

Academician M. P. Kim

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIFIAI. l'Sl-i ONIA

* 'k *

Technical preparation of the manuscript for publication was performed by scientific
personnel from the USSR history in the period of the Great Patriotic War sector of
the institute of History of the USSR of the USSR Academy of Sciences: L. M. Tsymbal
(coordinator), N. N. Yefimova, Ye. M. Kozlova. and E. N. Revuk. Appended to this
volume is a list of topics recommended by the conference and the indicated scientif-
ic councils for investigation.

The editors would like to express their profound gratitude to twice Hero of the
Soviet Union Mar SU A. N. Vasilevskiy [deceased]. Doctor of Historical Sciences
Professor A. F. Smirnov, Doctor of Historical Sciences N. M. Aleshchenko, all
groups and individuals who contributed conmmnts and suggestions during the prepara-
tion of this volume.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Tridtsatiletiye Pobedy sovetskogo naroda v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne. Dok.
i mater." [30th Anniversary of the Victory of the Soviet People in the Great
Patriotic war. Documents and Materials], Moscow, 1975, page 4.

2. l. I. Brezhnev, "Otchet Tsentrai'nogo Komiteta KP55 1 ocherednyye zadachi partii
v oblasti vnutrenney i vneshney politiki. DokladXXVs"yezdu KPSS 26 fevralya
1976 g." [CPSU Central Committee Report and Current Party Tasks in the Area of
Domestic and Foreign Policy. Report to the 25th CPSU Congress of 2b February
1976], Moscow, 1976, page 91.

P. A. Zhilin. CURRENT PROBLEMS OF INVESTIGATION OF THE GREAT PATRIOTIC WAR

The historic resolutions of the 25th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union are increasingly strongly influencing all aspects of societal affairs -- both
the practical, production activities of Soviet citizens, and scholarly-scientific
activities. The congress documents and materials. and particularly the CPSU Central
Committee Report presented by CPSU Central Committee General Secretary L. i.
Brezhnev, substantiated and validated the party's general policy line -- continued
building of communism in the USSR, a consistent campaign for peace, and firm,
reliable defense of the productive labor of the Soviet people.

The peace-seeking foreign policy of the Soviet Union and its readiness at all times
to offer a rebuff to an aggressor comprise the essence of the political and military
do trinc of the Communist Party. As early as October 1918, during the period of
emergence of the Soviet State, V. i. Lenin said: "No revolution is worth anything
unless it is able to defend itself."1 Guided by Leninist teaching on defense of

the socialist homeland, the CPSU and the Armed Forces succeeded in defending the
achievements of the Great October Socialist Revolution in two bloody vars -- the
civil war and the Great Patriotic War. These outstanding victories demonstrated

in a most convincing manner the invincibiiity of the Soviet governmental and so-
cial system, the vitality of the organizational and theoretical principles of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
defense of the socialist homeland, the unity and unprecedented heroism of our
peoples. The victory by the Soviet Union over German fascism and Japanese mili-
tarism elevated the Soviet nation and enhanced its international prestige. Today
as well the results of this outstanding victory are exerting enormous influence on
the entire international atmosphere.

A glance at the road trod hy mankind during the postwar years shows that many
traits of our time were formed under the influence of the processes which were born
in those days. when the fate of peoples was being decided on the battlefields of
the most savage, mos: destructive and bloody war in history. The victory of the
Soviet Union over fascist Germany and militarist Japan became that point at which
began a new period in the history of mankind. "In the course of the 20th century
our country srood twice at the source of major changes in the countenance of the
world," stated L. I. Brezhnev. "Such was the case in 1917, when the victory of the
October Revolution heralded mankind's entry into a new historical era. This was
the case in 1945, when the defeat of fascism. a decisive role in which was played
by the Soviet Union, raised a mighty wave of sociopolitical changes which rolled
across the entire planet and led to strengthening of the forces of peace throughout
the world.”2

The revolutionary experience of the USSR and the experience of armed defense of the
socialist homzlund constitute a most valuable asset of the Soviet people, the Lenin-
ist party, and the Soviet Armed Forces. It is not only of national significance.

it is important today for all peoples struggling againsr the imperialist aggressors
for their social liberation.

Profound assessments of the events of the Great Patriotic War are contained in CPSU
Central Committee documents. in particular in the decrees on the 30th anniversary
of the Victory Over Fascism and on the 60th anniversary of the Great October
Revolution. in the speeches and reports of L. I. Brezhnev. and in statements by
party and government leaders. All progressive people throughout the world have a
feeling of profound sympathy and respect for the historic exploits and accomplish—
ments of the Soviet nation and its decisive contribution to the victory over
fascism. The lessons of the war are of vitally important significance for the
masses today as well. They enable one to penetrate to the essence. into the so-
cinl nature and character of those worldwide forces the contest between which is
determining the content of the social processes and phenomena which are taking
place in our era.

in their statements at the 25th CPSU Congress, many foreign government and party
leaders highly praised the exploit of the Soviet people. Greeting the congress
delegates on behalf of the Cuban people. F. Castro stated: "Displaying heroic
efforts and abundantly shedding their own blood, the Sovitt working people opened

up the road to the future and were able to defend it. Twenty million noble and
self-sacrificing sons and daughters of the Soviet Union gave their lives in the
Great Patriotic War. This terrible price was paid in order to thwart an attempt

by world reaction to halt the unrelenting advance by mankind toward justice, prosper-
ity and peace."3

We know that in some quarters there is a different attitude toward the outcome of
World War 11. toward its immediate and long-term results. There exists a profound

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I SF ONLY

difference in evaluation of the war's results and consequences. Confirmation of
this is the attitude toward such a date as Victory Over Fascist Germany Day. in
the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries celebration of Victory Day has
aSSuned a truly popular character -- it hsagreat and joyous day in their history, of
triumph of the ideals of peace, democracy and socialism.“ The peoples of the

former colonies celebrate the anniversary of Victory as an event which shook the
colonial system of imperialism to its very foundations and which in the finil
analysis led to its collapse. Progressive forces in the capitalist countries ap—
praise the results of the war as a victory for freedom and democracy. which created
favorable conditions for the struggle for the social and national liberation of
working people. But while for the socialist countries. the peoples of the former
colonies, for the international Communist and worker movement and for all progressive
peoples throughout the world the anniversary of the defeat of fascism is a joyous
holiday, for the representatives of imperialist forces it is cause for bitter
reflections. Certain circles in the West attempt to ignore this date, to muffle its
historic resonance.

it is easy to understand why the consequences and the lessons of World War 11 evoke
the displeasure of imperialist circles, for the immediate results of the war were
far from those which some people in the Most would have liked to see. The collapse
of fascism signified not only the defeat of Hiticrite Germany. it was also the
collapse of the hopes of reactionary forces for defeat of the world's first social-
ist state and for annihilation of the Soviet system. invasion of the USSR by the
Hitlerlte hordes became the logical continuation of that struggle which the old
world had been waging against the new soeietal system from the moment of its
emergence. German fascism was nurtured. supported and encouraged by the tetality of
world reaction in its struggle against the Soviet Union -- bulwark of the interna—
tional revolutionary-liberation movement. Our country was struck with a blow of
enormous force. But the wave of invasion by foreign armies broke against the
staunchness and courage of Soviet citizens, indoctrinated and inspired by the Com-
munist Party. ”In a protracted war, the most difficult war in the history of our
homeland, the Soviet people accomplished a deed unequalled in the history of mankind.‘
states the CPSU Central Committee Decree entitled "0n the 60th Anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution." The Soviet people were able not only to defend
their own freedom and independence but also made a decisive contribution to the
cause of saving European and world civilization from destruction by the fascist
barbarians."5

All this attests to the fact that the events of the Great Patriotic War are of un-
fading significance. This is why our party and its Central Committee constantly
devote great attention to the military experience of defense of our nation, its
study and synthesis. An important role in this is assigned to scholars represent
ing the social sciences. particularly historians.

9: * *

Investigation of any historical event is a process, a protracted proeess which
frequently involves considerable difficulties. This is especially characteristic
of study of Such a complex social phenomenon as war. particularly one such as t..
Croat Patriotic War. in which the entire country and millions of people took par..

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
history of a war also lies in the fact that frequent—
TVud, and some things remain unrecorded, unknown,
istorian who studies a war should possess not only
of the professional scholar, profound general and

J genuinely scientific objectivity of judgements and
:y of the scholarly investigator is particularly
:hinu a broad rtodership, form public opinion on the
ricai figures, the outcome and results oi the war,

icquunt course of world history.

:rse and outcome of World War II and the Great
:ation of many scholars -- historians, economists,
:ists. as well as political and military leaders.
ire has been published, large multivolume works have
ambat Veterans have been widely disseminated, and
iblished in large press runs. Bibliographic lists
yoke and collections of documents dealing with the
:o affirm that the war prriod of modern history oc-
I la Soviet but also in world historiography. And
allratlous has not yet been fully studied. one can
in no country in the world in which hooks on the
: Cteut Patriotic War haVe not been published. The
rticies are published in countries which directly

Patriotic War is quite extensiVe. It has
.-:ntiou. Years and decaees were required to gather
tutorials. and hard work by many scholarly ia-

uvr comprehensively to examine the highly ecaplex
EH5 the war years. Overcoming the difficulties of

at 111 stages Soviet historical science was per-
..:5 light on the Great Patriotic War.

 

 

l h bvrvss. literature on military history was in-
: a :ptrtt of patriotism and noble traditions of
' contribution. which has not yet been adequately
."I'E.li‘-S in forming the fighting and moral quali-
aud staunchnes: in the defenders of the homeland.
:at o: the vile German knights on Lake Peipus, the
ikovo Plain, the Swedish at Lesnaya and Poltava, on
: armEe in Ronnie. as well as pamphlets and articles
irent vatriotic War, which reached the foxholex and
:lsed the spirits of officers and men. Prominent
Grtkov, N. S. Derzhovin, r. M. Druzhlnin, Ye. M.
ikina, A. H. Pankratova, P. N. Pospeiov, B. A.
.khomirov. P. N. l-‘edoseyev, V. N. Khvosrov, and many
! talent to the cause at victory over the aggressors.

 
 

>tic War began to be written while the war was still
’ wartime historians and those of the early postwar
1 "fresh tracks? worked hard and accomplished a great
l-‘(DR ()FFK'IAI. USE ON! Y

deal. Teams of scholars from the General Staff Military Historical Directorate.

the service academies. the military history teams operating under the auspices of
the Ministry of Defense. and specialists at the USSR Academy of Sciences institute
of History were the first to study primary sources. to assemble masses of documents-
ry materials and circulate them within the scholarly community, to form concepts
and lay the foundstions of contemporary views and evaluations of the military-
historicul events of the Great Patriotic War. A large team of historians. under

the direction of l. l. Mints, proceeded to collect and prepare materials on history
or the Great Patriotic War while the war was still in progress.

At that time military scientists stood at the sources of the creation of military-
historieai literature on the armed struggle with fascism and Scholarly treatment

of the major operations conducted by the Soviet Armed Forces in 1941—1965 -- of-
ficers. genera? officers and flag officers l. V. Anisimov. V. I. Achkasov, Ye. A.
Boltin. V. V. Voznenko, F. D. Vorob'yev, S. Colikov. A. l. Gotovtsev, N. M. Zamyatin,
1. s. lsukov, A. N. Krutikov. I. S. Kororkov, c. A. Deborin, V. M. Kravtsov. G. V.
Kuz'min. M. H. Minusyan. N. c. Pavlenko, I. V. Parot'kin, S. P. Platonov, N. A.
Talenokiy. n. S. Tel'pukhovskiy, N. A. Fokin, Ye. A. Shilovskiy. and many others.6
Military historians visited the army in the field, gathered and processed documents
at front and army headquarters. This made it possible to produce major studies in
a short period of time. Suffice it to recall that the first three-volume study of
the defeat of the German-fascist troops at Moscow. under the editorship of Hat SU
H. H. Shaposhnikov. was published in 1943; a book on the battle of Stalingrad came

out in 1944, and in 1950 -- a major study of the Berlin Operation, edited by N. A.
ihlenskiy.7

In subsequent years there was a substantial increase in the scale of scholarly work
being done on the history of the Great Patriotic War. This found reflection in the
organization of a number of scientific research establishments needed for further
study and synthesis of the experience of the war. For example. a department of
history of the Great Patriotic War was established at the CPSU Central Committee
Institute of Harxism-Leninism (1957-1966), which played an important role in
getting scientific cadres together. gathering archival materials, preparation and
publication of a six-volume work on the history of the Great Patriotic Har.8

Publication of VOYENNO—lSTORlCNESKlY ZHURNAL was resumed in 1959; this journal does
a great deal of scientific research work and plays a significant role in treating
the history of the Great Patriotic War and the art of warfare of the Red Army and
Navy. Articles on various aspects of the history of war are regularly published in
the journals KOMHUNIST, VOPROSY lSTORII KPSS, VOPROSY ISTORII. ISTORIYA SSSR, and
NOVAYA l NUVBYSHAYA ISTORIYA. The Newspapers PRAVDA, iZVBSTiYA, KRASNAYA ZVEZDA.
and KoMSOMOL'SKAYA PRAVDA contribute greatly to the elucidation of facts of

heroism by Soviet citizens during the Great Patriotic War. There was a substantial
increase in the work activities of the Central Archives of the Ministry of Defense,
which in essence has become the archives of the Great Patriotic War.

An important contribution to historiography of the Great Patriotic War was made by
the authors of the volumes in the series "World War ii in Studies. Memoirs.
Documents" (Moscow, 1964-1974) (chairman of the board of editors —— USSR Academy
of Sciences Corresponding Member A. H. Samsonov). The books in this series are

prepared by institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, individual historians and
Soviet military commanders.9

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The institute of Military History of the USSR Ministry of Defense was established
in 1966 by decision of the CPSU Central Committee. for the purpose of further
broadening and raising the theoretical level of scholarly investigation in the
field of military history. This institute soon became a center for the study of
combined problems of military history, particularly history of the Great Patriotic
War and World War 11.10 Sectors werealso formed: history of the USSR in the period
of the Great Patriotic War -- at the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of History
of the USSR; history of World War [1 -- at the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute
of World History; history of the CPSU in the prewar and war pt iod -- at the CPSU
Central Committee Institute of Marxism-Leninism.

Considerable work is being done at the institutes of history at the academies of
sciences at the union republics. at branches of the CPSU Central Committee Institute
of Harxlsm—Leninism, in the appropriate departments of service academics and in-
stitutes. and in the humanities faculties at this cOuntry's universities. A con-
tribution toward elaboration of this problem is being made by the Znaniye Society.
the Soviet War Veterans Committee. DOSAAF, as well as scientific, educational and
public organizations. Extensive scientific research work is being conducted in

the USSR on the history of the Great Patriotic War. It encompasses a broad range

of problems connected with comprehensive reflection of the organizing and directing
activities of the CPSU. and the great exploit of the Soviet people and their Armed
Forces. There is a need to establish under the auspices of the USSR Academy of
Sciences Department of History a Scientific Council on iustory of the Great Patriotic
War of the Soviet Union, which would unify the efforts of scholarly researchers
working on this most important area of Soviet historical science, with the aim of
coordination of all this work and elaboration of unified concepts on the most im-
portant scientific problems.

A lZ-volume combined study entitled "istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny. 1939-1955"
[History of World War it, 1939-1965].11 produced by the InStitute of Military His-
tory of the USSR Ministry of Defense jointly with the CPSU Central Coumﬂttee In-
stitute of Marxism-Leninism and the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of History
of the USSR and Institute of World History is an exceptionally valuable study. It
reveals various aspects and processes, features and characteristic traits of the
war, its prehistory. course and outcome, results, consequences and lessons, and
their significance for the present day. Essentially this work is the first major

synthesis of the history of World War ll not only in Soviet but in world historiog-
raphy as well.

Work pertaining to writing the historyof the past war is not only an experience of
collective creativity but also experience in elaboration of a unified concept of
Soviet historlcal science on major problems of the war. As a result of comprehen-
sive. thorough discussion at the Main Editorial Commission by the volume editorial
boards concepts were elaborated on such important aspects of the history of World
War II as its division into periods (which was of importance in determining the
structure of the entire work), the political character of the war, the initial
period of the Great Patriotic War, failure of the plan of "blitzkrieg war." the
radical turning point in the course of the war, the role of external and internal
forces in the liberation of European countries. etc. All of this is of consider-
able significance both for Soviet scholars and for the historians of the socialist
countries and for historical science throughout the world. The 10 volumes of
"History of World War [1" which have already been published have been greeted by

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the public with great interest. This work is being ordered in 37 foreign countries,
while it is being translated and published in its entirety in the GDR, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Bulgaria.

According to the figures of the USSR Council of Ministers State Committee for Pub-
lishing Houses, Printing Plants and the Book Trade, between 1945 and 1973 14,500
books and pamphlets on the history of the Great Patriotic War have been published.
in a total of approximately 600 million copies. And if we include studies pub-
lished in connection with the 30th anniversary of Victory and subsequently, the
total number of titles increases to 16,000, in more than 700 million copies. The
historiography of wars of the past never involved such numbers. This attests to
the fact that in this country military-historical knowledge has acquired broad
social significance.

We must note the large contribution made by Komsomol members and Pioneers to the
finding of documents and relies on the battlefields of the civil war and the Great
Patriotic War. Tens of thousands of young patriots take part in the numerous ex-
cursions organized for this purpose. The Preservation and Utilization of Historical
and Cultural Monuments Law, adopted in October 1976 at the Fifth Session of the USSR
Supreme Soviet, provides for safekeeping and preservation of monuments of the civil
war and the Great PatriOtic War.

There are tens of thousands of such monuments in the USSR, and their number in-
creases with each passing year. New memorials are opened, monuments are erected,
and the memory of local fighting men is perpetuated in this c0untry's cities, towns
and villages. The largest are the memorial complexes on Mamai Hill in Volgograd,

at the Piskarevskoye Cemetery in Leningrad, at the Brest Fortress-Hero and at

Katyn' in Belorussia. etc.1 Memorial complexes are being constructed which im-
mortalize the people's exploits on the battlefields at Kursk, in the hero cities of
Kiev and Novorossiysk. A Victory Monument will be erected in Moscow, on Poklonnaya
Hill.

The great interest in the events of the past war is explained by a number of factors.
It is determined in the first place by the tasks of Soviet historical science, by
the necessity of the fullest possible reflection in the history of the USSR of its
war period, and securement of a solid, reliable foundation for handling the history
of wars in textbooks for secondary schools and higher educational institutions:
secondly, by the necessity of the most active utilization of the heroism of the war
years for instilling in our young people lofty patriotic feelings and love of the
homeland: thirdly, by the fact that the study of military history is assuming great
importance for improving the theory and practice of military affairs, since it
reveals the laws, patterns, mechanisms and trends in their development. warns
against extremes, intrcduces the element of practical experience into theoretical
reasoning, and provides a wealth of material for conclusions and syntheses.

We know that war and the history of war as the object of scholarly investigation
are extremely complex. War encompasses various realms of activity of states,
parties, and classes. The historian is dealing here with an enormous scale of
events taking place in the political, economic, ideological and military areas.
Consequently military history by its very nature is a multibranch science, since it
studies and investigates war as a whole, all its social, economic, and military-
technical aspects.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Study of societal processes during the war years makes it possible to see them

not simply in a special situation but in an aspect which enables one to assess

them more deeply and comprehensively. to compare and examine them in an integrated
form both in peacetime and in wartime. Hence the exceptionally important practical
significance of joint effortsby specialists in the area of solving the main problem
of the present day -- the problem of war and peace, discussed by L. I. Brezhnev in
the Central Committee Report at the 25th CPSU Congress, presenting the principal
areas of fundamental scholarly investigations by Soviet social scientists.13

Not only historians create the history of the Great Patriotic War. It is written
about by political, government and military leaders of that time, thousands of
active participants in the struggle against fascism, writers, playwrights, poets,
and journalists. New areas and new genres in literature were formed -- war documen-
tary fiction.

Har memoirs have become quite popular both in the Soviet Union and abroad. The
memoirs of Mars 50 3. Kb. Bagramyan, A. M. Vasilevskiy, A. A. Grechko, C. K.
Zhukov, I. S. Konev, N. I. Krylov, K. A. Meretskov, K. S. Moskalenko, K. K.
Rokossovskiy. and V. I. Chuykov, Adm N. U. Kuznetsov, Gens P. l. Batov, D. D.
Lelyushenko. and S. M. Shtemenko, Mars Avn A. i. Pokryshkin and S. I. Rudenko,

and others are quite popular.14 The memoirs of war veterans constitute testinwny of
great importance. No documentary materials are capable of recording the entire
complexity and dynamic nature or military events taking place over vast areas or of
conveying the character. intensity and spirit of an engagement or battle. In addi-
tion, frequently very important directives and orders were issued orally, by radio
or telephone, and were not recorded in any written documents. Therefore the
historian of the Great Patriotic War, researching various engagements, battles, and
operations, encounters difficulties which he is unable to resolve without the help
of an eyewitness to those events. While he learns from archival documents how a
given engagement or operation took place, the historian frequently is unable to
obtain information from such documents which gives him an answer to the questions
why given events evolvad precisely as they did and not otherwise. And it is by no
means because the answers are locked tightly away in a safe somewhere, but because
they are preserved only in the memory of the direct participants in the engagements
and battles. It is primarily those who were in the war. who experienced it, who saw
it with their own eyes who are capable of describing most fully and vividly and
transmitting the heroic deeds of Soviet citizens and our fighting men. In this
regard the recollections of eyewitnesses are an important military and historical
source, but no more than that. It is difficult to write the history of a war with-
out the testimony of direct participants, but the history of a war cannot be
learned from memoirs alone.

The broad front of scholarly investigation of the Great Patriotic War attests to

the fact that Soviet historians are successfully accomplishing important tasks ad-
vanced by the 25th CPSU Congress and the CPSU Central Committee Decree entitled

"On Measures for Further Development of the Social Sciences and Enhancement of Their
Role in Building Communism“ (1967).15 They are directing their efforts toward
profound scholarly research on the Great Patriotic War and on comprehensive
examination of the unprecedented exploit of the Soviet people and their Armed Forces,
as well as the decisive role of the Communist Party in achieving victory in the
struggle against the most dangerous foe of all mankind —- German fascism; on

1 .
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

synthesis of the experience of the Soviet State in mobilizing the nation's man-
power and rescurces for repulsing the enemy; on writing major works on the history
of the Great Patriotic War. Showing the superiority of the socialist societal and
governmental system, revealing the powerful sources of the strength of the Soviet
Union and the grandeur of Lenin's ideas on defense of the socialist homeland, and
exposing the prewar policy of the principal capitalist powers, which promoted the
aggression of Hitlerite Germany, scholars are making a positive contribution to the
campaign for resolving the principal question of the present day -- the question
of war and peace.

A detailed analysis of literature published on principal problems is contained in a
number of works.16 Soviet historians have investigated a broad range of questions
connected with all areas of CPSU activity in the war years. have written studies
on the worker class, the kolkhoz peasantry, and intelligentsia, have discussed the
struggle of the Soviet Armed Forces on the battle front, the actions of partisans
behind enemy lines, and the military and labor exploits of women, young people, and
Komsomol.17 One can state with full substantiation that the concrete-historical,
factual side of the history of the Great Patriotic War has been studied in detail
in this country.

Presently the task of historiography is to synthesize and analyze available litera-
ture on the history of the Great Patriotic War in a critical manner and to assess
its significance from the standpoint of the present level of knowledge. in other
words, we must build a historiography of the Great Patriotic War which would
provide answers to at least three questions:

1) with what degree of detail and authenticity is the factual aspect of
the war examined, and does this factual component constitute a solid foundation of
historiography?

2) that are the advantages and drawbacks of all that has been published?

3) what tasks face us as regards future investigation of the history of the
Great Patriotic War?

t k *

One of the most important tasks of future study of the Great Patriotic Har, its
results and consequences lies in further comprehensive elaboration of the interna-
tional significance of the victory of the Soviet Union in the war and its influence
on the state of mankind. This problem is advanced to the forefront primarily be-
cause essentially the emergence of socialism beyond the framework of a single
cauntry, the victory of socialist revolutions in a number of countries in Europe
and Asia, collapse of the colonial system, expansion of the sociopolitical rights

of working people in capitalist countries, and increase in the prestige of the
international Communist movement would all have been impossible without the crushing
defeat of fascism.

The foes of socialism believed that the Soviet nation would be unable to recover

from the wounds which had been inflicted on it, that it would be unable to rebuild
the demolished economy on territory liberated from the enemy, and for a period of

ron omcu'n'.‘ use ONLY
many years would remain impotent vis-a—vis the imperialist powers and would be
forced to seek assistance from them. But the capitalists' hopes of weakening the
Soviet Union proved fruitless. The Soviet people not only rapidly healed the
wounds inflicted on them and overcame the harsh consequences of the war but also
moved their economy forward at an unprecedented pace. There has been occurring in
this country in the postwar years a rapid upSurge of the economy, a flourishing of
culture. education. and science. and a rise in the living standards of the Soviet
people. The Soviet Union became more powerful than before. At the same time world
imperialist reactionary forces were seriously weakened as a result of the collapse
of fascism. This fact was of cardinal significance for the fate of mankind. and
in large measure predetermined the evolution of the contemporary world.

Alongside social changes caused by the victory over fascism. an important role in
the affairs of mankind is played by those changes which have taken place in the
consciousness of peoples. in the minds of millions of persons, and in the revolu-
tionary renewal of the world. Other socialist nations have emerged to take their
place alongside the Soviet Union. No longer the Soviet people alone, but an entire
community of peoples have begun building a new society, implementing the ideas of
scientific communism. The formation of a world socialist system was the second most
important event of modern history. after the October Revolution. The international
Communist and worker movement grew immeasurably and became greatly strengthened.
and the world revolutionary process assumed a new and powerful scope. Communist
parties, which during World War II marched in the front ranks of the fighters
against fascism and Sustained heavy losses in this struggle. gained even greater
prestige and authority than before among the masses. expanded their influence. and
became the world's greatest political force.

Not only different armies. statesand social forces clashed in the course of the
Great Patriotic War. The war also signified a contest between different
ideologies. The thrust of Hitler's strategy. which threw the bulk of the armed
forces eastward. that fury and savageness which were invested in this assault by
fascism. that uncompromising character of the struggle to the death which was as-
sumed by the battles on the Soviet-German front -- all this was due to a single
thing: the fact that Germany's Hitlerite bosses were possessed by anticommunism.
and the social—class essence of all their policies. The bankruptcy of the fascist
ideology also signified the bankruptcy of those ideas which this ideology accepted
from the arsenal of bourgeois political thought.

Consequently, one of the most important historical results of World War II and the
Great Patriotic Hat lies in the fact that progressive democratic forces. thanks to
the victory over fascism, became stronger and laid firm grasp to the forward

line of history. while reaction and imperialism had suffered a cruel loss.

The entire subsequent course of world development. the political and intellectual
life of peoples and nations have been linked with the results and consequences of
World war [1. And as regards the final result and outcome of the war. including

the pOStwar status quo of the borders of the European nations, they are formally
stated most clearly in the Final Act of the 35-nation Helsinki Conference. "The
achieved results are worth the expended efforts." stated L. i. Brezhnev at the 25th
CPSU Congress. "The conference participants collectively affirmed the inviolability
of the established borders. A code of principles of intergovernmental relations has

15.
FOR OFFICIAL iJse ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been drawn up, which is in full conformity -- both in letter and spirit -- with the
demands of peaceful coexistence."18

The task of preserving and consolidating peace requires great efforts, for in-
fluential circles in some Western nations are not showing any particular inclination
genuinely to repudiate the psychology of "cold war"; they are not only failing to
foster strengthening of mutual trust and international cooperation but are making
every effort to encOurage hostility toward the socialist countries. In this connec-
tion a comprehensive analysis of the causes of the past war. of its course and out-
come, and exposure of those who are actually to blame for that war is of not only
scientific but also of political, practical significance in the contemporary cam-
paign for international détente and for preventing another, even more bloody and
devastating war.

This is why the topic "The international significance of the victory of the Soviet
Union in the Gr-at Patriotic War and its influence on the fate of mankind" is of
current vital importance. It requires independent, thorough, comprehensive elabora-
tion. In developing this topic, it is essential to show the influence of Our
victories in the course of the entire war on the policy and strategy of our allies,
on the disintegration of the Hitlerite codiﬁon,and on the upsurge in the national
liberation struggle and the Resistance Movement in those countries which were fight-
ing fascism. Comprehensive elaboration of this topic is also important because our
ideological adversaries are endeavoring to implant in the postwar generation a dis—
torted picture of the past war and to ignore the world—historic significance of the
victory of the Soviet people over fascism. But in spite of all the tricks and
devices of the enemies of the USSR, the great exploit of the Soviet people cannot

be relegated to oblivion.

The Soviet people, defending the world's first socialist state, were at the same
time helping deliver the peoples of other countries from Hitlerite tyranny and were
showing an example of international solidarity. Herein lies the international
significance of the victory of the Soviet Union in the war against fascist Germany.
And it is essential comprehensively to reveal this in the works of Soviet historians.

The Great Patriotic War was a war of all de pends. Thorough investigation of the
popular character of the Great Patriotic Hat is of great importance. At the be in-
ning of the 20th century Lenin stated: "Wars are being waged today by peoples." 9
Our entire people was fighting against the fascist hordes which had invaded the
Soviet Union. Our people gained victory in the military, economic and ideological
struggle against a powerful and crafty foe. It is the duty and obligation of Soviet

historians worthily to reflect the popular epic, the great heroic feat of the Soviet
people.

The topic "People and war" is quite extensive. It encompasses all the activities of
the people during the war years: the battle front, the home front, and the struggle
behind enemy lines. Although a comparatively large amount of attention has been
devoted to the exploit of the Soviet people at the front and their armed struggle
as the main content of the war, with a large number of scholarly studies and memoirs
devoted to this subject, this theme is so deep and broad that it will long remain an
important object of scholarly investigation performed by Soviet historians. This
applies to an even greater degree to treatment of the labor exploit of Soviet

16 '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
citizens, who provided the battle front with weapons, ammunition, everything needed
to defeat the fascist invaders, and to investigation of the selfless struggle by
Soviet patriots behind enemy lines. In recent years scholars have devoted more at-
tention to revealing the broad popular character of the war. Fruitful work in this
area is being done by the people at the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of His-
tory of the USSR. who have produced interesting scholarly studies.20 Much has been
done at republic scientific establishments. Considerable work is being accomplished
by Ukrainian and Belorussian historians.21 Scholarly research is also now being con-
ducted more vigorously in other republics, krays, and oblasts.22 The broad sci-
entific community is taking part in producing these works. All this unquestionably
is expanding the front of scholarly search. A great deal has already been accom-
plished, especially in recent years. But nevertheless the literature which has been
published on this subject does not yet reflect the entire diversity and complexity
of the topic. The actuality of the war years is richer, more vivid and complex than
it sometimes turns out to be in some scholarly studies.

Some foreign historians, analyzing the events on the Soviet—German front, are unable
or unwilling to comprehend how the Soviet people succeeded, in incredibly difficult
conditions of war, in the course of four years of Struggle, in supplying an army of
millions of men with an increasing quantity of the latest combat equipment, ammuni—
tion, provisions, and all other requisite supplies, and to Surpass the enemy, who
had at his disposal the resources of almost the entire continent of Europe, in both
quantity and quality of arms. They consider this to be a "Russian enigma," an
"economic miracle." Many bourgeois historians find an explanation to all this in
”.5. lend-lease, claiming that U.S.-supplied military equipment, strategic raw
materials, and foodstuffs saved the USSR from defeat in the war and that the victory
”on all fronts" was primarily brought about by "American industry. American
resources, and American manpower reserves."23

The solution lies in all preceding activity of the party and Soviet people. in the
creation of a powerful socialist industry during the years of the prewar five-year
plans.and in an ability most fully to mobilize in the course of the war all economic
resources for meeting the needs of the war front. One of the most important tasks

of historians is to show most fully the sources of the soci:l and economic superiori-
ty of the USSR in the struggle against the fascist aggressors and the true meaning

of the economic miracle accomplished by the Soviet people under the guidance of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

The topic of the exploit accomplished by the Soviet citizens behind enemy lines
requires further elaboration and thorough scholarly investigation. Many books have
been published on this problem. But they deal chiefly with the partisan movement
and the activities of underground groups in individual republics and oblasts. At
the same time we lack synthesizing historical-theoretical studies which present the
struggle of the Soviet people behind enemy lines on a scale of the entire territory
under occupation, and the forms of this struggle have been examined in insufficient
detail.

The Communist Party of the Soviet Union was the tried and tested political leader
of the Soviet society and organizer of the struggle by the entire people against

the imperialist aggressors. The party Central Committee was the main headquarters
which exercised supreme political and strategic direction of the armed struggle as

1? .
FORIOFFKJAL.USEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well as the selfless labor of the working people on the home front. All this ensured
a solid, monolithic unity of the entire multinational Soviet people and a victory of
world-historic significance.

Many books have been written about the Communist Party and its guiding and directing
activities during the Great Patriotic War. This topic has found expression in solid
works on the history of the past war.24 The party appears before us in all its or-
ganizational and ideological might. Historical works comprehensively reveal its
colossal efforts in organizing and mobilizing all manpower and material resources
with the aim of achieving victory over the enemy.

New party work forms and methods were required and new, extremely important tasks
were advanced under the conditions of the war. It was essential to reorganize the
entire national economy on a war footing as quickly as possible, to build a power-
ful war economy, to strengthen the Soviet Armed Forces, and to develop an extensive
partisan movement behind enemy lines. It was necessary to strengthen to an even
greater extent the moral-political unity of the Soviet society and the friendship
of the peoples of the USSR; to raise up all Soviet citizens to take part in the
Great Patriotic war against the German-fascist invaders; to ensure the establish-
ment of an anti-Hitler coalition, a united front of freedom-loving peoples against
fascist Germany; to unite all progressive forces for its total defeat.

A central place in party activities was occupied by military-organizational work for
successful conduct of the armed struggle against the aggressor. Here is just one
example. in the first months of the war 5,300,000 men were mobilized into the army
and navy, while by December 1941 more than 300 divisions had been formed and incor-
porated into the army in the field.25 The party raised up the entire Soviet people
for the struggle against the enemy, substantially increased the numerical strength
of the armed forces, trained and indoctrinated military personnel in a spirit of
high moral fiber, organization and discipline. Enlistment of vast masses of people
into active armed struggle in a short period of time, under the extremely difficult
conditions of the first period of the war, is one of the greatest services performed
by our party. This is why party military-organizational activity during the years
of the Great Patriotic War requires further comprehensive scholarly investigations.

There is a need for more thorOugh investigation of party ideological activities
during the war years. This important topic has not been sufficiently addressed,26
although the role of party ideological work during the war years was extrenely
important. The Communist Party attached exceptional importance to ideological ac-
tivities among the soldier masses and workers on the home front. It concentrated
principal attention on instilling in Soviet citizens strong patriotic qualities,
total dedication to the socialist homeland, hatred toward fascism, organization,
discipline, and vigilance. The party tirelessly waged aggressive. militant counter-
propaganda and exposed the fascist lies about the Soviet societal and governmental
system. The enemy did not succeed in shaking the ideological conviction of Soviet
citizens. As the war progressed it became even stronger, and the Soviet people
united even more closely behind the Communisr Party, which was staunchly and con-
sistently upholding the sacred principles of communism.

The high degree of ideological conviction and political awareness on the part of
the masses, achieved as a result of many years of ideological indoctrination work by

18
INJR OFIHCJAI.UEEICMULY
the Coummnist Party, constituted one of the decisive factors in our victory. In an
hour of mortal danger these lofty patriotic qualities were displayed by soldiers
marching into battle against the enemy, and by workers, kolkhoz farmers and all
working people on the home front, who were devoting all their energies toward
achieving victory.

Vigorous party-political work conducted in the line units was a decisive means of
influencing the consciousness of eur fighting men, instilling in them excellent
moral—political and fighting qualities, and ensuring victory over the enemy.27 It
comprised an organic and integral part of all ideological and organizational ac-
tivity by the Communist Party in exercising party leadership of the Armed Forces.
This is why the role of party-political work in combat conditions requires even
more comprehensive treatment. The role of Communists at the front -— commanders,
deputy commanders for political affairs, political section officials, and military
councils has been insufficiently investigated and has not been comprehensively
shown. It is important to reveal concretely and at the same time deeply the nature
of their work, its forms and methods, to investigate how the ideological charge
obtained in the process of party-political work exerted influence on the character
of military obligations and their reSults, to what extent and how it helped over-
come the difficulties of the armed struggle with the enemy.

The topic "Komsomol and Defense of the Homeland" is one of the important problems
of history of the Great Patriotic War. Komsomol -- loyal aSslstant to the party -
made a significant contribution to victory. In the harsh years of the Hitlerite
invasion Soviet young people displayed a high degree of political awareness and
showed outstanding examples of courage and heroism. On the very first days of the
war tens of thousands of Komsomol members volunteered for service in the regular
army. Discussing the exploits of Soviet boys and girls, M. l. Kalinin noted:
"There is not one type of weapon nor one form of combat in the Patriotic War which
did not involve the participation of Komsomol, where Komsomol was not in the front
ranks."28 During the war years Komsomol gave the homeland millions of selfless
fighting men. Eighty to eighty-five percent of the total Komsomol membership
fought with weapon in hand in the regular army or in partisan detachments; ap-
proximately 11 million Komsomol members feught at the front.29 in the flame of
battle many patriots sacredly preserved the revolutionary and fighting traditions
of the peoples of the USSR, adding to and further developing them. They justified
the high degree of confidence bestowed upon them by the homeland and the party -—
selflessly defending the achievements of socialism.

Books, collections of documents, memoirs,30 plays, songs, and motion pictures deal
with the diversified activities of Komsomol during the war years. An extensive
literature on the role of Komsomol in the past war now is making it possible to
produce a large, synthesizing study entitled "Komsomol in the Great Patriotic Hat."

Consequently. future efforts by scholars doing investigative research on the Great
Patriotic War should be concentrated on elaboration and synthesis of the entire
war period of the history of the USSR (1941-1945). all sociopolitical and military
processes which took place during the war, and thorough disclosure of the leader-
ship role of the CPSU in achievement by the Soviet people of the world-historic
victory over fascist Germany and militarist Japan.

19
FOR'OFFNJAL.USB(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

* 'k *

Completeness of historical investigation on the war can be achieved only when we
possess a chronologically sequential examination and analysis of the processes and
phenomena which took place during those years. Only under this condition is it pos-
sible correctly to define the role and place in the war of a given concrete event.
And although general studies on the history of the Great Patriotic War have been
published in this country, its individual aspects have not all been studied and
analyzed equally deeply and thoroughly. The problem of the genesis of World War II
and the Great Patriotic War is one of these important problems. Questions of

origin and causality are central aspects of the study of any war. "It seems to

me," stated Lenin,"that the main thing, which is usually forgotten in the question
of war, which is given inadequate attention, the main thing. which generates so

many arguments and, I would say, empty, hopeless, aimless arguments -- is forgetting
the main question of what class character a war bears, what caused this war to

break out, what classes arﬁlwaging it, and what historical and historical-economic
conditions engendered it." Lenin further emphasized: "If you failed to study

the policies of both groups of belligerent powers over the course of decades... if
you failed to show the link between this war and preceding policies, then you under-
stood nothing in this war!"32

A sharp ideological struggle is in progress and all kinds of lying fabrications are
being concocted in regard to questions pertaining to the causes of World War II and
determination of those to blame for it. As was shown at an international conference
in Weimar (May 1975) and particularly at the 16th International Congress of His-
torical Sciences in San Francisco (August 1975), some bourgeois historians are con-
tinuing to falsify the prehistory of the war and are attempting to whitewash im-
perialism -- the sole culprit and in that world tragedy. Many historians in the
PRC. for example, are distorting the policy of the Communist parties on the eve of
the war. They are attempting to argue that in the prewar years Comintern was
fighting not so much against fascism as against the Social Democrats and that the
USSR and the Red Army allegedly had close, special links with the Reichswehr. They
make every effort to distort the meaning of the treaty of nonaggression entered in-
to on 23 August 1939 by the Soviet Union and Germany, claiming that this treaty was
allegedly the precondition behind Germany's initiation of the war.

Many of our historians are studying the policies of the imperialist nations long
before the beginning of World War II and are analyzing new documents, which revealendx:
one hand the acutertss of cmﬂicts within the capitalist world and, on the other, their
class unity for the purpose of struggle against the world's first socialist state.
The topic of causality behind the war is examined in detail in multivolume studies.33
These and other studies perSuasively demonstrate, backed up by extensive documenta-
ry materials, that it was imperialism which prepared for and unleashed World War II,
and they expose numerous falsifications of bourgeois propaganda, which endeavors to
muddle and confuse the complex and contradictory prewar processes, to distort events,
and to remove responsibility from those who are genuinely guilty of monstrous

crimes.

The origin of a war is first and foremost a political question. Why did World War
ii take place? What are the reasons and causes? What must be done to ensure that
a like or even more terrible tragedy is not repeated? These questions are of con-
cern today as well to millions of people in all countries. Marxist historians have

P0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
elaborated well constructed, profoundly scientific concepts of the origin of Horld
War II and the criminal, misanthropic substance of fascism as the result of extreme
imperialist reaction. The works of Soviet historians are helping progressive forces
throughout the world in their struggle against attempts by ultrarightists to revive
fascism; they remind people that fascism and racism have been and remain the worst
enemies of peoples, enemies of peace, socialism and democracy. This is why we need
books and articles which trace the history of fascism and its social roots, par—
ticularly since numerous items are being published in a number of capitalist
countries (PRC, United States), the authors of which are essentially attempting to
whitewash and retouch the repulsive countenance of German fascism and its Fuehrer.34
Time cannot lessen the hatred of peoples toward fascism and its crimes.

One very important task is further revelation of the decisive role of the Soviet
Union in achieving victory in World War 11. It is a well-known fact that the actual
contribution by the different countries toward victory varied. Reactionary bourgeois
historians and ideologues deliberately tangle and confuse this problem, since its
correct treatment would‘hean acknowledging the decisive role of the Soviet Union.
They claim that there are no scales on which one could weigh the contribution of a
given country toward achieving victory and that there are no criteria by which that
contribution could be measured.

Soviet historians have worked out Such criteria. They are based on factors which
characterize the political essence of war, the aims of the belligerent nations, the
ideology prevailing in a country, achieved results, and particularly the political.
economic, and military damage inflicted on the adversary in the course of the war.
the magnitude and degree of contribution toward victory by individual countries,
alongside objective circumstances, were in large measure also determined by such
subjective conditions as the activeness of the masses in the war and the policy of
the governments of the anti-Uitler coalition in mobilizing manpower and reSOurces
for the struggle. Applying these criteria, one can elucidate the scope, intensity
and effectiveness of the combat operations of each country and their influence on
the course and outcome of the war as a whole. Analysis of these main criteria and
war results shows that the peoples of the Soviet Union bore on their shoulders the
brunt of the struggle against the blot of fascist states.

The decisive role of the Soviet people and their Armed Forces in the victory over
fascism is particularly clearly evident if one examines their activities from the
standpoint oi attainment of three main war aims.

The first ahn was to halt the German-fascist invaders and to block the road to
further spread of aggression. As we know, on the Soviet-German front, as a result
of stubborn combat and at the cost of heavy casualties and stress, the enemy was
halted and the aggressor's road was blocked. There is no other example in history
where a nation, finding itself in such a complex and difficult position at the out-
break of a war, achieved such a convincing victory over a powerful adversary. The
most difficult period of the war was 1941-1942, containing dramatic events involving
the retreat of our forces due to a disadvantageous strategic situation. But the
main thing was the fact that :mhesc most difficult conditions of combat, Soviet
fighting men stood up under the attacks of a most powerful adversary, blocked the
aggressor's path, thwarted his "blitzkrieg" plan and inflicted serious defeats on
the enemy at Moscow, Leningrad and Stalingrad, on the Kursk Salient and the Dnieper,

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and thus built a solid foundation for the future Great Victory. It was achieved
primarily because the Communist Party and Soviet Government rapidly and effectively
reorganized the economy and the natiOn's entire life on a war footing. Success was
achieved by the heroism, the stubborn, selfless struggle and great moral staunch-
ness of the Soviet people.

The second important task consisted in depriving the enemy of means of waging war,

that is. destroying the bulk of his manpower and military hardware. This task was

also successfully accomplished. Hitler's army lost a substantial percentage of its
cadre troops on the Soviet-German front: 10 million officers and men, 77,000 combat
aircraft, 48.000 tanks and assault guns, 167,000 artillery pieces, 2,500 warships.

cargo and troop-carrying vessels.35 This made things easier for our allies in the

other theaters, which in the final analysis hastened the end of the war and led to

the total military defeat of fascist Germany.

Finally, the Soviet Union also accomplished the third task -- rendering of direct
assistance to the peoples of the Western European countries in delivering them from
Hitlerite occupation. This required great effort. resources and sacrifices. The
genuine internationalism of the Soviet Union, internationalism in practical deeds,
was displayed here. Also important in this connection is further elaboration of
questions connected with the liberation mission of the Soviet Armed Forces and the
role of the antifascist liberation movement. These are large, fundamental questions
around which a sharp, unceasing ideological struggle continues to be waged today.

Scholarly investigators should also focus on questions pertaining to the character
and content of the resistance movement in the occupied countries and the correlation
between external and internal forces in liberating the European countries from the
fascist invaders. These are important problems. Their elucidation requires a cor~
rect methodological approach.

in analyzing the events of world War II, Soviet historians proceed from the position
that objective internal socioeconomic and political factors which caused the develop—
ment of a revolutionary situation were the principal preconditions for the
resistance movement and armed uprisingsin the countries of Central and Southeastern
Europe. The Red Army did not bring revolution'bn its bayonets," as reactionary
bourgeois historians attempt to claim. The defeat of the German-fascist armies on
the Soviet—German front and entry by the Red Army into a given country accelerated
the maturation of the preconditions for insurgency and held in check moves by
domestic reaction. Workers, peasants, and democratic strata of the intelligentsia
were the motive force of insurgencies, with the hegemony of the proletariat and
leadership role of Coumunist and worker parties. In certain instances the opposi-
tion segment of the national bourgeoisie also took part in revolutionary events, but
only as long as this was in its class interests. It naturally did not go beyond
expulsion of the foreign invaders and the endeavor to preserve its domination.

In connection with this, historians are faced with at least two tasks. First, to
elucidate more deeply and correctly the correlation between external (Soviet Armed
Forces) and internal (the Resistance Movement) forces for liberation of the European
countries from the fascist invaders. Revealing activation of the Resistance Move-
ment as a logical general democratic. patriotic movement of the broad masses and
showing its forms and the leadership role of the Communist and worker parties in

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the struggle against fascism, at the same time one shOuld examine the conditions
which ensured the successes of the Resistance Movement and antifascist uprisings
in connection with the situation on the Soviet-German front. The successes of the
Soviet Armed Forces were the decisive external factor which led to the victory of
the working people in these countries. It was precisely interaction between the
external factor and the internal forces of Resistance which accelerated processes
connected with liberation of the Western European nations from fascist occupation.
Secondly. one should correctly define the character of the uprisings and revolu-
tions which took place in the countries of Central and Southeastern Europe
during and after their liberation.

Various points of view have been expressed in the Soviet literature on this question.
According to one of these views the popular democratic revolution is a special type
of social revolution, which is neither a bourgeois-democratic nor a socialist revolu-
tion in pure form. The authors who hold these views are of the opinion that the
revolutionary process in these countries went through stages of two revolutions:
popular democratic, and socialist. Other investigators claim that the popular
democratic revolution in these countries represents one of the forms of socialist
revolution. Since the question of the character of a popular democratic revolution
is by no means a terminological question but rather a fundamental one, it shOuld be
thoroughly studied. elaborating a unified interpretation of this very important
historical-theoretical problem.

Comprehensive study of the history of wars depends on how iuiiy is provided a
comprehensive analysis of all aspects of the societal affairs of the warring classes,
nations, and coalitions. This applies first and foremost to study of the Great
Patriotic War, since it claims a special place in history. This was a contest be-
tween two systems, and its outcome determined the fate of all mankind. Therefore
elaboration of the root problems of the Great Patriotic War and their comprehensive
and thorOugh examination is an extremely important task.

Wars in defense of the socialist homeland, and particularly the Great Patriotic War
of 1941-l945 convincingly attest In the high level of Soviet art of warfare. It
won out over the art of warfare of the fascist Wehrmacht and rightfully became one
of the factors in our victory.

Considerable attention was devored to investigation of the experience in conduct of
the war and armed struggle in the 355R. But the task consists in more thorOughly
studying questions which are of particular interest to the present day, in comprehen-
sively revealing the modes and forms of military operations, which have retained
their significance up to the present day. The experience of World War ii and the
Great Patriotic War contained excellent models of strategic leadership, organization
and execution of offensive and defensive operations which were unprecedented in
world history. Such operations as the Moscow, Stalingrad. Kursk, iasi-Kishinev,
Belorussian, Vistula-Oder, Berlin and others became classic models of world art of
warfare. They were conducted over a vast area, in various conditions, ended with
outstanding results, and had far-reaching military and political consequences.

Their successful execution became possible thanks to the leadership of the Central
Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (of Bolsheviks), the State Defense
Council and Headquarters, Supreme High Command, and thanks to the vast knowledge,
talent and military expertise of the commanders and political workers. These
operations were a vivid demonstration of the advantages of SocialiSt military

23
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organization and military theory over fascist military organization and military
theory.

The task now consists in producing synthesizing studies on the history of Soviet
military strategy, strategic leadership of the war effort, studies revealing the
scope and scale of front and interfront operations, organization and conduct of
strategic defense. the strategic offensive and counteroffensive, preparations for
and execution of eucirclement operations, operations on coastal axes, in the Far
North. etc.

The experience of war constitutes a foundation for improving military theory. But
successfully utilizing the experience of the past means taking into consideration
the reasons not only for victory but for setbacks as well. The historian who
presents in his writings the experience of past battles is obligated to show not
only the high points of victories but also that which created the conditions for
achieving them. to show not only that which shines brilliantly but also that which
still stands in the shadows and awaits investigation.

Of course military history is not a collection of ready answers to questions posed
by contemporary practical military affairs. V. I. Lenin stated that theoretical
points, historical and practical experience should serve as a guide to living, in-
novative action. "To preserve a legacy." stated Lenin, "by no means signifies

being limited to that legacy."36 Applied to military affairs, this means that con-
temporary military theory and practice can be developed on the basis of the lessons
and conclusions proceeding from the experience of military history, but with absolute
ly mandatory consideration of all new things which have occurred in the area of
military organizational development, art of warfare, improvement of military hard—
ware, etc. Study of military experience is a matter not only for military his-
torians and theorists but for practical experts as well. it is the task of military
historians to synthesize the experience and to communicate it to military cadres

in such a manner as to arouse their interest, a desire solidly to assimilate this
experience and to apply it in their daily practical activities.

Of course today the Soviet Armed Forces have in large measure become different from
what they were during the Great Patriotic war. A genuine revolution in military
affairs has taken place under the influence of the rapid advance of science and
technology. Enormous successes have been achieved in army and navy weapons and
enuipment, in their organizational structure, and in theory of art of warfare. The
experience of the past war cannot serve as a ready formula, but the basic principles
of military leadership and Soviet art of warfare have retained their viability up to
the present day. Therefore we need studies which not only describe facts but -— and
this is most important -— draw substantiated conclusions and contain an analysis of
principles of action. The experience of the Great Patriotic War is indispensable

in this regard.

Popular scientific books on the Great Patriotic war are in increasing demand. His-
torical biography, for example, has always been the most popular, most easy to under-
stand form of military historical investigation. 0. A. Furmanov once presented to
the public V. i. Chapayev, legendary hero of the civil war. Too few works are ub-
lished, however, on the military leaders and heroes of the Great Patriotic war, 7
and many of those which have been published cannot be compared with Furmsnov's

21:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
excellent book as regards power of indoctrinational and emotional effect on the
reader, especially young people. One of the most important tasks of historians is

to produce popular books on the Great Patriotic War -- small in size and length but
deep in content and vivid in form.

An unrelenting. high-principled campaign against bourgeois falsifiers remains a
highly important task, which requires considerable attention. We know that an in-
creasingly more acute ideological struggle is being waged between Marxist historians
and historians of the bourgeois camp on the principal questions pertaining to the
history of World War it. Marxist historians endeavor'topresent a genuinely sci—
entific, truthful picture of the origin. course and outcome of the war. Reactionary
bourgeois historians, carrying out the social imperative. are proceeding along the
path of falsification and distortion of the events and lessons of the past war and
are attempting to present them in a false light.

Bourgeois historians and propagandists, exerting massive influence on the Western
reader, falsify the history of the war: they grossly distort its causes and politi-
cal character and make phony claims to the effect that the Soviet Union achieved
victory in the war not by virtue of the advantages of the socialist system and its
military and economic might but as a result of economic assistance by the United
States and other allies; in moving the armed struggle to foreign soil. the Soviet
Union allegedly was purSuing not liberation but expansionist aims, etc. All these
claims have nothing in common with historical truth and demand a well-reasoned and
detailed critique. The increased aggressiveness of imperialist propaganda in recent
years, including in the area of historiography of World War II. and intensification
of its anti-Soviet. anticommunist character are making it necessary to expand the
campaign against bourgeois falsifiers. There is no place for ncutralism and com-
promises in this struggle. "Needed here is a high degree of political vigilance."
stated L. [. Brezhnev, "vigorous, efficient and persuasive propaganda effort. a
prompt and expeditious rebuff to acts of hostile ideological sabotage."38

The falsifiers of the history of World War II are hard at work not only in the West
but in the East as well. Beijing propagandists recently announced a sensational
"discovery," publishing an article in the newspaper GUANGMING RIBAO an article en-
titled "On the Initial Moment of World War ll." This article contains an appeal to
revise "existing views" and "to reestablish the true countenance" of World War II,
conducting toward this end a "thorough study“ of the war from the position of the
ideas of Mao Zedong.39

This Maoist propaganda sheet argues that World War Ii began in China and that not
the Soviet-German but rather the Chinese front was the principal front in the
struggle against the aggressor, and that it was not the Soviet Union but China
which "defended world democracy and civilization" against the fascist barbarians,
fighting "on the forwardmost line on the main front“ of the antifascist struggle.

Why is Maoist propaganda now, almost fOur decades after the beginning of World
War 11. distorting the truth and presenting the history of the war in a Beijing
version? it is being done for the purpose of fabricating a lie about the special
mission of Mao and the Maoist leaders, to portray china in the role of "liberator"
of peoples, and thus to depreciate the decisive role of the USSR in achieving the
world-historic victory in World War 11.

25
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1

But the Soviet Union's great service to humanity is well known. It was also acknowl
edged in the past in China as well. And our country has never belittled the role of

praised the contribution made by China to the antifascist struggle of peoples, to
-he struggle against militarist Japan. Nevertheless the Chinese front was not the
main front, including when World war II broke out. All forces opposing fascism
joined ranks precisely around our country; and the USSR, heading the just war of
liberation against imperialist aggression. not only played a decisive role in libera-
tion of a number of European countries, but also helped the Chinese and other
peoples of Asia in their struggle against militarist Japan. To disparage the sig-
nificance of the liberation movement of the Soviet Union and its Armed Forces both
in Europe and Asia constitutes the grossest falsification, which no sober-minded

We have presented some of the_principal problems pertaining to further study and in-
vestigation of the Great Patriotic war. Evaluating the degree of completeness to
which it has been Studied and giving due credit to the work which has been ac—
complished. one should bear in mind that the history of this war still contains much

war requires further elucidation of documentary material. Archives still contain
untouched piles of documents. utilization of which will make it possible more fully
to reveal the history of the war in all its diversity. It is necessary to step up
work on establishing the documentary history of the Great Patriotic Hat and on
gathering together all those valuable items which comprise the primary source base
for investigative research. Gathering together documents, materials. combat
soldiers' letters and photographs; preserving for posterity specimens of military
equipment and weapons of that time, and displaying them in this country's museums -—
all of this is very important both for the history of the Soviet State and as a
remembrance of those who defended our homeland.

Year by year, the terrible war time is receding further into the past. Today it is
all history, which is studied only in books. But it is history which everybody
should know and remember. One of the principal tasks of Soviet historical science
is to recreate a complete picture of the unparalleled struggle of the Soviet people
and their Armed Forces against fascism, to portray in an inspired manner the

FOOTNOTES
1. V. l. Lenin, "Poln .Sobr. Soeh." [Complete Horks], Vol 37. page 122.

2. L. l. Brezhnev. "Leninskim kursom: Rechi i stat'i" [Following a Leninist Course:
Speeches and Articles], Moscow, 1976, Vol 5, page 286.

3. "Privetstviya XXV s"yezdu KPSS" [Messages of Greetings to the 25th CPSU Congress],
Moscow, 1976, page 38.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

See “Veilkaya Pohcdu sovetukogu naroda. 1941-1945: Matcrialy nauchnoy
konferentaii posvyashchennoy 30-1etiyu Pobedy aovetskogo naroda v Vclikoy
Otechestvennoy voyne" [The Great Victory of the Soviet People, 1941-1945:
Proceedings of a Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 30th Anniversary of
the Victory of the Soviet People in the Great Patriotic Var], Moscow, 1976.

"O 60-y godovshchine Velikoy Oktyabr'skoy sotsialisticheskoy revolyutsii:
postanovleniye TsK KPSS at 31 yanvarya 1977 3." [0n the 60th Anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution: CPSU Central Committee Decree of 31 January
1977], Moscow, 1977, page 6.

N. M. Zamyatin, "Srazheniye pod Stalingradom" [The Battle of Stalingrad], Mos-
cow, 1943; I. S. Isakov, "Voyenno—Morskoy Plot SSSR v Veiikoy Otechestvennoy
voyne" [The Soviet Navy in the Great Patriotic war], Moscow, Leningrad, 1944;
N. A. Taienskiy, "Three Years of the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet People
Against the German invaders," BOL'SHEVIK, No 10, 11, 1944; Ye. A. Shiiovskiy,
N. A. Talenskiy, and A. V. Vasil'yev, "Vostochno-Pruaskaya operatsiyn Krasnoy
Armii 1945 g.“ [The Red Army's East Prussian Operation of 1945], Moscow, 1946;
V. V. Voznenko and G. M. Utkin, "Osvobozhdeniye Kiyeva“ [The Liberation of
Kiev]. Moscow, 1953; Ye. A. Boltin, "Victory of the Soviet Armed Forces in the
Concluding Stage of the Great PatriOtic War." VOPROSY ISTORII, No 5, 1955:
“Vtoraya mirovaya voyna 1939-1945 gg.: Voyenno-istorichcskiy ochcrk" [Horid
war II, 1939-1945: A Military-Historical Sketch], Moscow, 1957; V. Achknaov and
B. Vayner, "Krasnoznamennyy Baltiyskiy flot v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne"
[The Red-Banner Baltic Fleet in the Great Patriotic War]. Moscow, 1957; G. A.
Deborin, "Vtoraya mirovaya voyna. Voyenno-politicheskiy ocherk" [World War ii.
A Military-Political Sketch], Moscow, 1958; B. S. Tel'pukhovskiy, "Vclikaya
Otechestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza. 1941-1945" [The Great Patriotic War
of the Soviet Union, 1941-1945], Moscow, 1959; ct a1.

"Razgron nemetskikh voysk pod Moskvoy" [Rout of the German Forces at Moscow],
Moscow, 1943, parts 1-3; "Bitva pod Stalingradon: Kratkiy ocherk" [The Battle
of Stalingrad: A Concise Sketch], Moscow, 1944; "Berlinsknya operatsiya 1945

goda" [The Berlin Operation of 1945], Moscow, 1950.

"Istoriya Veiikoy Otechestvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza, 1941-1945“ [history
of the Great Patriotic war of the Soviet Union, 1941—1945], Moscow, 1961-1965,
vols 1-6.

1. M. Mayskiy, "Voapominaniya sovetskogo poala: Voyna. 1939-1943" [Reminiscences
of a Soviet Ambassador: the War, 1939-1943], Moscow, 1965; S. S. Biryuzov,
"Surovyye gody. 1941-1945" [harsh Years, 1941-1945], Moscow, 1966; A. I.
Yeremenko, "Cody vozmezdiya. 1943-1945" [Years of Vengeance, 1943-1945], Moscow,
1969; "Sovetskaya ekonomika v period Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny 1941-1945 gg."
[The Soviet Economy in the Period of the Great Patriotic War, 1941-1945], Moscow,
1970: I. T. Peresypkin, "Svyaz' v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Communications
in the Great Patriotic War], Moscow, 1973; A. L. Getman, "Tanki idut na Berlin
(1941-1945)" [Tanks Advancing on Berlin (1941-1945)], Moscow, 1973; V. S. An-
tonov, "Put' k Berlinu" [Road to Berlin], Moscow, 1975; N. A. Antipenko, “Na
giavnom napravlenii" [On the Main Axis of Advance], third edition, Moscow, 1975;
K. S. ibskalenko, "Na Yugo-Zapadnom napravlenii: Vospominaniya konandarma" [In

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Southwestern Sector: Memoirs of an Army Commander], second edition, Moscow,
1975, books 1-2; et a1.

"0b organizatsii lnstituta voyennny istorii. Iz Postanovleniya TsK KP58 0:
27 avgusts 1966 g. KPSS o Vooruzhennykh Silakh Sovetskogo Soyuzs: Dokumenty,
1917-1968" [On Organization of the Institute of Military History. From the

27 August 1966 CPSU Central Committee Decree. The CPSU on the Armed Forces of
the Soviet Union: Documents. 1917-1968], Moscow, 1969, page All.

Ten volumes have been published: Vol 1. "Zarozhdeniye voyny. Bor'ba progressiv-
nykh sil za sokhraneniye mire" [Origin of the War. The Struggle of Progressive
Forces to Preserve Peace], Moscow, 1973; Vol 2. "Naksnune voyny" [0n the Eve

of War], Moscow. 1976; Vol 3. “Nacholo voyny. Podgotovka egressii protiv

SSSR" [Commmncement of War. Preparations for Aggression Against the USSR],
Moscow. 1974; Vol 4. "Fashiatskaya agressiya protiv SSSR. Krakh strategii
'moiniyenosnoy voyny'" [FasciSt Aggression Against the USSR. Failure of the
Strategy of "Blitzkrieg Har"], Moscow, 1975; Vol 5. "Provai agressivnykh

planov fashistkogo bloke" [Failure of the Aggressive Plans of the Fascist Bloc],
Moscow, 1975; V01 6. "Korennoy perelon v voyne" [Radical Turning Point in the
war], Moscow, 1976; Vol 7. "Zaversheniye korennogo pere1oma v voyne“ [Comple-
tion of the Radical Turning Point in the War], Moscow, 1976; Vol 8. “Krusheniyc
ohoronitel'noy strategii fashistskogo bloka" [Collapse of the Defensive Strategy
of the Foscisc Bloc], Moscow, 1977; Vol 9. "Osvobozhdeniye territorii SSSR i
yevropeyskikh stran. Voyns na Tihhom Okeane i v Azii" [Liberation of the Ter-
ritory of the USSR and the European tauntries. War in the Pacific and Asia],
Moscow, 1978; Vol 10. "Zaversheniye razgroma fashistskoy Germanii" [Completion
of the Defeat of Fascist Germany], Moscow, 1979.

See 6. A. Boguslsvskiy, "Vechnyn synam Otchizny: Pamyatniki Velikoy Otechestven-
noy voyny" [To the Eternal Sons of the Homeland: Monuments of the Great Patriotic
war], Moscow, 1975. This volume contains photographs of 536 monuments.

. See “Nateriaiy XXV s'yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1976, pp 72-73.

1. Kh. Bagrsmyan, "Tak nachinalas' voyna" [How the war Began], Moscow, 1971;

1. S. Konev. "Zapiski konanduyushchego frontom. 1963-19b4" [Notes of a Front
Connnnder, 1943-1944], Moscow, 1972; K. K. Rokossovskiy. "Soldatskiy dolg“
[Soldier's Duty], second edition, Moscow, 1972; P. I. Datov, "V pokhodakh i
boyakh" [1n Campaigns and Battles]. third edition, Moscow. 1976; A. M.
Vusilevskiy, "Dela vsey zhizni" [Lifelong Cause], second edition, Moscow, 1975;
G. K. Zhukov, "Vospominaniya i razmyshleniya" [Recollections and Reminiscences],
second edition, Moscow, 1974, vols 1-2; D. D. Lelyushenko, "Moskva-Stalingrad-
Berlin~Praga" [Moscow—Stalingrad-Berlin—Prague], third edition, Moscow, 1975;

K. S. Moskaienko, op. cit.,; A. I. Pokryshkin, "Nebo voyny" [War Sky], fifth
edition, Moscow, 1975; S. M. Shtenenko, "General'nyy shtsb v gody voyny" [The
General Staff in the War Years]. second edition. MoScow, 1974, Book 1; Moscow,
1975, Book 2; I. I. Yakuhovskiy, "Zenlya v ogne" [Earth in Flame], Moscow,

1975; A. A. Grechko, "Cody voyny. 1961-1963" [The War Years, 1961-1943], Moscow,
1976; N. G. Kuznetsov, "Kursom k pobede" [Advancing to Victory], Moscow, 1976;
M. Ye. Katukov, "Na ostriye glavnogo udara" [Spearhead of the Main Attack],
second edition, Moscow. 197t; S. I. Rudenko. "Krylya pobedy" [Wings of Victory],

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Moscow, 1976; S. A. Krasovskiy. "Zhizn' v aviatsii" [Life in the Air Force],
third edition, Minsk, 1976; et a1.

"0b ideologicheskoy rabote KPSS" [CPSU Ideological Work], Moscow, 1977, page
665.

"KPSS -- vdokhnovitel' i organizator pobedy sovetskogo naroda v Velikoy
Otechestvennoy voyne: Istoriograficheskiy ocherk" [CPSU -- Inspirational Force
Behind and Organizer of the Victory of the Soviet People in the Great Patriotic
War: Historiographic Sketch], Moscow, 1973; “Ocherki sovetskoy voyennoy
istoriografii" [Sketches of Soviet Military Historiography], Moscow, 1974; et al.

"istoriya Koumunisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuza" [History of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union], Moscow, 1970, V01 5, Book 1; Yu. V. Arutyunyan,
"Sovetskoye krest'yanstvo v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny" [The Soviet
Pessantry in the Years of the Great Patriotic Hat), second edition, Moscow,
1970; I. I. Belonosov, "Sovetskiye profsoyuzy v gody voyny" [Soviet Trade
Unions in the War Years], Moscow, 1970; A. V. MitroEanova, "Rabochiy klass SSSR
v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny" [The Worker Class in the USSR During the
Years of the Great Patriotic War], Moscow, 1971; V. s. Murmantseva. "Sovetskiye
zhenshchiny v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Soviet Women in the Great Patriotic
War], Moscow, 1974; "Voyna v tylu vraga" [War Behind Enemy Lines], Moscow, 1974,
Issue 1; "Leninskiy konsomol v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Lenin Komsomol in
the Great Patriotic war], Moscow, 1975; "Partiya vo glave narodnoy bor'by v

tyiu vraga. 1941-1945 gg." [The Party Directing the People's Struggle Sehind
Enemy Lines, 1941-1945], Moscow, 1976; N. 1. Makarov, "Nepokorennsys zenlys
Rossiyskaya" [Unvanquished Russian Land], Moscow, 1976; G. A. Kumanev. "Na
sluzhbe fronta i tyla. Zheleznodorozhnyy transport SSSR nakanune i v gody
Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny. 1938-1945" [Serving the Battle Front and Home
Front. USSR Rail Transport on the Eve of and During the Great Patriotic War,
1938-1945], Moscow, 1976.

. "Materialy XXV."," op. cit.. page 18.
Lenin, op. ci;., hui 9. page 156.

"Sovetskiy tyl v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [The Soviet Home Front in the
Great Patriotic War], Moscow, 1974, books 1-4; "SSSR v bor'be protiv
fashistskoy agressii. 1933-1945" [The USSR in the Struggle Against Fascist
Aggression, 1933-19é5], Moscow. 1976; “Sovetskiy Soyuz v gody Velikoy
Otechestvennoy voyne. 1941-1945" [The Soviet Union in the Years of the Great
Patriotic War. 1941-1945], Moscow, 1976; et al.

"Ukrainskaya SSR v Veiikoy Otechestvennoy voyne Sovetskogo Soyuza. 1941—1945 gg."
[The Ukrainian SSR in the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union, 1961-1965],
Kiev, 1975. vols 1-3; "V boyakh zs Belorussiyu" [The Battles for Belorussia],
second edition, Minsk, 1974; "Podpoi'nyye partiynyye organy Kompartii

Belorussii v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny. 1941-1944" [Underground Party
Agencies of the Belorussian Communist Party in the Years of the Great Patriotic
war, 1941-1944], Minsk, 1975; et a1.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Bor'ba Latyshskogo naroda v gody Velikoy Otecheatvennoy voyny 1941-1945"
$truggle of the Latvian People in the Years of the Great Patriotic War, 1941-
1945], Riga, 1970; "Estonskiy narod v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne Sovetskogo
Soyuza. 1941—1945" [The Estonian People in the Great Patriotic war of the
Soviet Union, 1941-]945], Tallinn, 1973, Vol 1; l. I. Kuznetsov, "Vostochnaya
Sibir' v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny. 1941-1945" [Eastern Siberia in the
Years of the Great Patriotic War, 1941-1945], Irkutsk, 1974; G. A. Madatov,
"Azerbaydzhan v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne“ [Azerbaijan in the Great
Patriotic War], Baku, 1975; Z. l. Gil'manov, "Tatarskaya ASSR v Velikoy
Otechestvennoy voyne 1941-1945 33." [The Tatar ASSR in the Great PatriOtic War,
1941-1945], Kazan', 1977; V. A. Karvyalis, "Osvobozhdeniye Litovskoy SSE at
gitlerovskoy okkupatsii (1941—1945)" [Liberation of the Lithuanian $58 from
Hitlerite Occupation (1941-1945)], Vilnius, 1975; "Vklad trudyashchikhsya
Uzbekistana v pobedu v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [The Contribution of the
Working People of Uzbekistan to Victory in the Great Patriotic Her], Tashkent,
1975; et a1.

0. Howe. "Adhes [sic] of Victory. World War II and Its Aftermath," New York,
1972, page 274.

"lstoriya Kommunisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuzn," op. cit., Vol 5, Book 1;
"Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyne. 1939-1945" [history of ﬂorid war 11. 1939-1945].
Moscow, 1974-1979, vols 1-10; "KPSS -- organizator zashchity sotsialisticheskogo
Otechestva" [The CPSU -- Organizer of Defense of the Socialist Homeland], Moscow,
1974; “V0 slave zashchity Sovetskoy Rodiny. Ocherk deyatel'nosti KPSS v gody
Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny" [Directing Defense of the Soviet Homeland. Sketch
of CPSU Activities During the Years of the Great Patriotic war], Moscow, 1975;

N. D. Kozlov and A. D. Zaytsev, "Srazhayushchayasya partiya" [Fighting Party],
Moscow, 1975; A. A. Yepishev, "Partiya -- organizator nashikh pobed” [the Party --
Organizer of Our Victories], Moscow, 1976; et a1.

"Velikayo Otechestvennaya voyna: Kratkiy nauchno-populyarnyy ocherk“ [The Great
Tairiotic War: A Concise Popular Scientific Sketch], second edition, Moscow,
1973, page 67.

“ideologicheskaya rabota KPSS na Eronte (1941-1945 33.)“ [CPSU ideological Mark
at the Front (1941-1945)], Moscow. 1960; C. D. Komkov, “Ideyno-politicheskaya
rabota KPSS v 1941-1945 33." [CPSU Ideological-Political Work in 1941-1945],
Moscow. 1965; A. A. Yepishev. "Nekotoryye voprosy ideologicheskoy raboty v
Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Silakh" [Some Problems of Ideological Mark in the Soviet
Armed Forces]. Moscow, 1975.

"Partiyno-politichcskaya rabota v Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Silakh v gody
Veiikoy Otechestvennoy voyny. 1941-1945" [Party-Political Work in the Soviet
Armed Forces During the Years of the Great Patriotic War, 1941-1945], second
edition, Moscow, 1968; "Partiyno-politicheskaya robots v Vooruzhennykh Silakh
SSSR, 1918-1973 33.: Istoricheskiy ocherk" [Party-Political Work in the USSR
Armed Forces, 1918-1973: A Historkalsketch], Moscow, 1974.

M. l. Kalinin, "0 molodezhi: Izbrannyye rechi i stat'i" [On Youth: Selected
Speeches and Articles], Moscow, 1975. page 232.

30
FOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

35.

36.

37.

Ye. M. Tyazhei'nikov, "Komsomol -- ths Party's Fighting Assistant During the
Years of the Great Patriotic Har,“ VOPROSY ISTORII KPSS, No S, 1975, page S.

"Yunost' nuzhala v boyakh: Stat'i, ocherki, dokumenty" [Youth Matured in Combat:
Articles, Essays, Documents], Moscow, 1966; "Iatoriya VLKSM. Zhivaya letopis'.
1929-1945 gg." [History of Konsonol, a Living Chronicle, 1929-1965], Moscow,
1967, Part 2, N. Mikhaylov, "Pokoy nan tol'ko snitaya: Vosponinaniya" [He Can
Only Dream of Rest: Reminiscences], second edition, Moscow, 1972; Mikhaylov,

"V te gody" [in Those Years], Moscow, 1975; "Ognennyye gody: Dok. i mater. ob
uchastii komsomola v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Flaming Years: Documents
and Materials on Komsomol Participation in the Great Patriotic Har], second
edition, Moscow, 1971; Ye. M. Tyazhel'nikov, "Lsninskiy komsomol -- boyevoy
ponoshchnik KPSS v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny" [Lenin Konsomol -- Fight-
ing Assistant of the CPSU in the Years of the Great Patriotic War], Moscow,
1973; 1. Yu. Davydov, "Yunost' ukhodit v boy" [Youth Marches Into Combat],
Moscow, 1973; "Leninskiy konsomol v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne: Sb. statey i
dokumentov" [Lenin Komsomol in the Great Patriotic Hat: Collection of Articles
and Documents], Moscow, 1975; V. Yeremin, "Boyevaya nolodost'. O geroicheskikh
delakh yunoshey i devushek sovetskogo tyla v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny"
Fighting Youth. Heroic Deeds by Boys and Girls on the Soviet Home Front During
the Years of the Great Patriotic War], Moscow, 1975; et a1.

Lenin, op. cit., Vol 32, page 77.
Ibid., page 82.

"Vsenirnaya istoriya" [world History], Moscow, 1965, Vol 10; "istoriya
diplomatii" [History of Diplomacy], second edition, Moscow, 1975, vols 3-4;
"Dokunenty vneshney politiki SSR" [Documents of USSR Foreign Policy], Moscow,
1973-1976, vols 18—20; "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny. 1939-1945" [History of
World War II, 1939-1945], Vol 1-2; et 31.

T. Dupuy, "The Military Life of Adolf Hitler, Puehrer of Germany," New York,
1969: P. Schranm, "Hitler -- the Man and Military Leaderﬂ' London, 1972; J.
Strawson, "Hitler as Military Commander," London, 1973; R. Payne, "The Life
and Death of Adolf Hitler," New York, 1973; W. Mazcr, "Adolf Hitler. Legendc,
Mythos, Nirklichkeit" [Adolf Hitler -— Legend, Myth, Reality], Munich, 1973;
J. C. Fest, "Hitler. Eiuv Biographic" (Hitler, 3 Biography], sixth edition,
Frankfurt/Main, 1974.

"Vsemirno—istoricheskaya pobeda sovetskogo naroda. 1941-1945 gg." [World-
Historic Victory of the Soviet People, 1941-1945], Moscow, 1971, page 273.

Lenin, op. cit., Vol 2. page 542.

P. G. Kuznctsov, "General Chernyakhovskiy," Moscow, 1969; S. A. Borzenko and

N. N. Donisov, "Samorodok Rossii" [Russian Genius], Moscow, 1970; M. N. Gorbunov.
"Soldat, polkovodets“ [Soldier and Military Leader], Moseow, 1973; V. I.
Kardashov, "Rokossovskiy," second edition, Moscow, 1973; B. Polevoy, "Polkovodets:
Biograficheskaya povest' o 1.8 . Koneve" [Military Leader: Biographical Narrative
About 1. S. Konev], Moscow, 1974; S. N. Golubev, "Kogds kreposti ne sdsyutsya"

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)“ Ul'l'ﬂIAL U31: ONLY

[When Fortresses W111 Not Surrender], Petrozavodsk, 1975; V. S. Akshinskiy,
"Klement Yefremovich Voroshilov: Biograficheskiy ocherk" [Klement Yefremovich
Vbroshilov: A Biographical Sketch], second edition, Moscow, 1976; A. M.
Arzumanyan, "Admiral" (l. S. Isakov), Moscow, 1976; et a1.

38. "Materialy XXV...," op. cit., page 74.

39. PRAVDA, 8 August 1978.

0. A. theshevskiy. BOURGEOIS HISTORIOCRAPHY OF THE ARMED STRUGGLE ON THE SOVIET-
GERMAN FRONT (Analysis of Contemporary Trends)

The years of the Great Patriotic War are receding ever further into the past. But
its events, results and lessons are continuing to exert enormous influence on world
sociopolitical development. "Time, separating the war years from us," stated L. I.
Brezhnev, "enables us more deeply and fully to appreciate the deathless deed of

those fighting men who accepted death in serene oflife, in the name of the freedom.

independence and honor of our beloved homeland, in the name of socialism."1

The ideologues of imperialism are undertaking enormous efforts to conceal from the
postwar generations the truth of the world-hiscoric victory of the Soviet Union in
the Great Patriotic War, and the deathless combat deed accomplished by the Soviet
people and their heroic Armed Forces, who defended the achievements of socialism
and saved the world from the threat of fascist enslavement. Bourgeois historians,
writers and journalists, carrying out the social imperative dictated by reactionary
imperialist forces, deliberately and viciously falsify the history of the Great
Patriotic War. They pursue far-reaching aims with this: to undermine the steadily
growing international prestige and authority of the USSR and the Soviet Armed Forces
and the efforts of peoples in the struggle for peace; to halt the revolutionary move—
ment, to drive a wedge between its individual detachments, and to weaken the unity
of the socialist countries and the fighting alliance of their armies; to rehabili-
tate imperialism as the main source of wars and its contemporary aggressive policy,
and ideologically to justify aggressive NATO plans directed against the Soviet

Union and the peoples of the socialist and developing countries.

A leading role in this subversive activity is played by a unique military-historical
"cartel" of major capitalist countries, the principal components of which are mili—
tary-historical services and other specially established government organizations.
The concepts elaborated by this "cartel," while containing certain differences due
to the distribution of class forces, historical and national peculiarities, and the
nature of participation in World War II by each of the countries involved in the
"cartel," are unified by a common bourgeois ideology. hostile to socialism, and the
reactionary policy of imperialism. The capitalist world's largest set of basic
works on World War 11 (more than 100 volumes) was prepared at the U.S. Army Center
of Military History, operating with the personnel and facilities of the military
historical service. The principal component part of this group of works is the
series "The United States Army in World War 11" (approximately 80 volumes). It
also includes the lS-volume "History of United States Naval Operations in World

War II," the 7-volume "The Army Air Forces in World War II," and the S-volume "His-
tory of United States Marine Corps Operations in World War II."2

12
ton omm’at use ONLY
Official ideas on the events of world War II and the Soviet-German front elaborated
by the U.S. military historical service are also contained in "Encyclopedia
Americans,"3 in "American Military History,"‘ which is intended for military
educational institutions, and a number of other publications.

In Great Britain the principal publication of this type is the 80-volume ”Official
History of the Second World War," prepared by the historical section attached to the
British cabinet.5 In the PRC the Bundesuehr military historical service is working
actively in this area. putting out a multivolume "History of world Har II."58 A 96-
volume "Official History of the Hat in Greater East Asia" 6 was published in Japan.
produced by Japan's national defense directorate, etc. These works are essentially
of a reactionary, anti—Soviet character. Their authors sidestep the question of

the guilt of imperialism in starting the war and even attempt to push off on the
USSR responsibility for it; they ascribe to the United States and Great Britain the
inappropriate role of "dominant force," thus attempting to depreciate the decisive
contribution of the USSR to defeat of the fascist-militarist bloc; they employ a

phony interpretation of the results and lessons of the war in order to revive the
myth of'Soviet military threat" in one form or another.

These themes are amended and renewed. but in the final analysis are repeated in dif-
ferent variations in the publications of the majority of "second echelon" bourgeois
historians and are aggressively utilized by bourgeois propaganda.

Propaganda agencies of the imperialist countries have undertaken many efforts to

put out literature on World War 11 and the Great Patriotic War calculated for the
mass reader. The first such item was produced in 1966-1968 in England by B. Liddell
Hart and B. Pitt. Their "Illustrated History of the Second Horld war" is a magazine—
type edition (96 magazines combined into eight volumes). Carishly made up and bear-
ing the names of well-known bourgeois scholars. they attracted the attention of a
fairly broad readership, and in subsequent years were published in French and
Spanish, and thus reached many capitalist countries. In the United States, in
response to the popularity of these volumes, Ballantine Books undertook the publica-
tion of a series of 100 inexpensive paperback books on world War II.

A characteristic feature of recent years is an increase in the number of bourgeois
publications specially dealing with the armed struggle on the Soviet-German front.
We shall list several of these. They include the three-volume “The Soviet Union at
War, 1941-1945" by A. Constantini (France) and books by C. Ryan entitled "The Last
Battle? by E. Ziemke entitled ”Stalingrad to Berlin," by H. Salisbury entitled "Nine
Hundred Days. The Siege of Leningrad,” by H. Craig entitled "Enemy at the Gate.

The Battle for Stalingrad." by H. Caidin entitled "Tigers Are Burning," by v. Kerr
entitled "The Secret of Stalingrad" (United States), by A. Seaton entitled "The
Russo-German War. 1941-1945," by J. Strauson entitled "The Battle for Berlin.” by

J. Erickson entitled "The Road to Stalingrad" (Great Britain); by E. Klink entitled
"Operation Citadel." by F. Forstmeierendtled "Odessa, 1941." by K. Reinhardt en-
titled "The Turning Point at Moscow," by H. Kerig entitled "Stalingrad," by J.
Foestcr entitled "Stalingrad, Tear in the Alliance. 1942/43" (FRG).7 Of these, only
in A. Constantini's book, and to some degree the books by K. Caidin and K. Reinhardt
is there noted an effort by the authors to engage in scholarly investigation. The
remainder of this literature, as regards its basic content, falsifies history.

FOR OFFIC’I‘RL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The writings of bourgeois historians show the following basic trends: first of all,
the significance of the armed struggle on the Soviet-German front is minimized;
second, the achievements of Soviet art of warfare are denied or distorted; third,
attempts are made to deheroize the Red Army and to cast slurs on the great combat
exploit of Soviet fighting men, who saved the world from the threat of fascist en-
slavement. Let us examine these trends in greater detail.

in order to minimize the significance of the armed struggle of the Soviet-German
front and to make it look like the decisive role in defeating the fascist-militarist
bloc was played not by the Soviet Union but by Great Britain and the United States,
bourgeois historians created the so-calied “theory of decisive battles" of World
War II. One of the authors of this theory, for example, 0.5. military historian
and political commentator n. Baldwin, is of the opinion that the outcome of ﬂorid
Har II was determined by 11 battles ("great campaigns"). He considers these to
include the Polish campaign in 1939, the Battle of Britain, the invasion of Crete,
the fall of Corregidor, the Battle of Stalingrad, the Battle of Tarawa, the in-
vasions of Sicily and Normandy, the naval battle in the Leyte Gulf, the Battle of
the Bulge, and the Battle of Okinawa.8

Most frequently bourgeois historiography includes among the decisive battles (their
number varies from one historian to the next -— ranging from S to 20) the bottles
at El Alamein, in Tunisia, in the North African Theater; the Battle of Midway and
the battles for the island of Guadalcanal in the Pacific Theater, and only one
battle on the Soviet-German front -- the Battle of Stalingrad. A number of
bourgeois authors who are adherents of this theory make no mention whatsoever of
the battles of Moscow, Kursk and others on the Soviet-German front, which deter-
mined the radical turning point in and the final outcome of World War II. In all
variations, and herein lies the heart of the theory, the absolute majority of key
battles happen to occur on fronts where combat operations were being conducted by
Anglo-American troops. Unwarranted preference is given to the Asian-Pacific and
North African theaters, while the main theater -- the European, and the Soviet-
German front in particular, is relegated to secondary importance.9

we shall note first of all the incomparability of scale and, most important, the
results and the military-political consequences of the battles between which
baurgeois historians practically place an equal sign.

At 21 Alamein the British (October-November 1942) were opposed by four German and
eight Italian divisions, totaling approximately 80,000 men. In the course of the
operation the backbone of this force succeeding in withdrawing, avoiding defeat in
detail. The German-fascist forces in the Stalingrad offensive, on the other hand,
exceeded 1 million men. Just in the period of the Soviet counteroffensive at
Stalingrad, from 19 November 1902 through 2 February 1953, 32 divisions and 3
brigades of fasciSt Germany and its allies were totally routed. In addition, 16

enemy divisions sustained a serious defeat. Total enemy casualties exceeded
800.000.

The Battle of Stalingrad marked the beginning of a radical turning point in the
course of the entire war, which was further developed and completed in subsequent
Soviet combat operations. The operation at El Alamein was net and could not be
of "turning-point" significance in this war. either by scale or results.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Anglo—American sources claim that the Allies took 250,000 Italian and German
officers and men prisoner in Tunisia (Hay l9b3). These figures were announced by
Churchill and Eisenhower soon after the fighting in North Africa ended. Some
bourgeois U.S. historians, such as R. Beitzell, claim that 275,000 men surrendered
in Tunisia. Serious doabt must be cast on these figures: they are clearly exag-
gerated and are being utilized to minimize the significance of the battle of
Stalingraland the Soviet~Cerman front as a whole. "Psychologically and militarily."
states Beitzell, "Stalingrad was a more significant victory for the Allies. Tunisia
was more productive strategically and as regards exhaustion of the resources of the
axis."10 In recent years, however, the tacit agreement by bourgeois historians
with the figures given by Churchill and Eisenhower has begun to weaken. British
bourgeois historian B. Liddell Hart reached the conclusion that in actual fact the
number of prisoners taken by the Allies was considerably smaller. In confirmation
he makes reference to information on the number of fascist troops on rations. pay
and allowances in Tunisia. According to these figures, 170-180 thousand men were
receiving rations, pay and allowances in April 1943.11 Another well-known British
historian, A. Taylor, has brOught certain clarity to this question. He writes: "The
Allies took 130,000 prisoners, but subsequently this number was puffed up to a
quarter of a million."12

The landing of a 0.8. reinforced Marine division on the island of Guadalcanal in
August 1942 is called by almost all U.S. historians the'beginning of the counter-
offensive in the Pacific." But there are insufficient grounds for such a conclu-
sion. This operation was offensive only at the tactical level, while at the
strategic level it was of defensive significance -- to prevent further increase in
the Japanese military threat to Australia.

we should separately diseuss the naval battle at Midway Island on 4-6 June 1962,

in which powerful Japanese naval forces, which were attacking the U.S. operations
base on that island, were defeated. Losing 4 carriers, 1 heavy cruiser and 322 air-
craft (the majority of Unac\aru dam wkh the carriers), the Japanese were forced to
withdraw.

AlthOugh the Battle of Midway did constitute a large-Scale ‘uccess for u.s. naval
forces and deprived militarist Japan of a large percentage of its aircraft carriers,
nevertheless it did not end Japanese naval supremacy in the Pacific and did not
exert direct influence on the general caurse of World war II.

The decisive battles. including the turnabout of events in the Pacific, began much
later. F. Roosevelt, addressing Congress on 7 January 1943 with an assessment of
the Battle of Midway and the fighting for the island of Guadalcanal. commented that
they were essentially defensive and constituted "part of the strategy of contain—
ment which characterized this phase of the war."13

Marxist military—historical science is waging a purposeful struggle against
bourgeois falsifiers, consistently and persuasively exposing their contrived
theories, including the "theory of decisive battles."

At the contemporary stage the main trend in this struggle is determined by change

in the correlation of forces in favor of Marxist military-historical science, loss
by baurgeois historiography of its former position in the capitalist world, and the
steadily evolving process of scientific discrediting of reactionary concepts of the
history of World war II. 0f considerable importance in this regard is publication

FOR omcfft USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oi the Soviet multivolume “lstorlya vtoroy mirovoy voyny. 1939-1945" [History of
World war II, 1939-1965], which has drawn the attention of historians of many
countries and various views.

The British Communist newspaper MORNING STAR, criticizing another fruitless attempt
to play down the contribution of the USSR to the defeat of the fascist-militarist
bloc, undertaken by N. Longmate in a recently published book entitled "When We Won
the War,"14 stated: "In spite of great efforts by British, British Commonwealth, and
U.S. troops on the Western Front, nobody has grounds to deny that an incomparably
more savage struggle was being waged on the Eastern Front, where the Russians had
been battling the main forces of the Wehrmacht since l941."15

Bourgeois historians, endeavoring to consolidate their position, are forced to
maneuver. They "refurbish" discredited ideas and theories, resort to great
flexibility in their argumentation, and employ objectivism as the principal means
of concealing the genuine sociopolitical essence of their writings. This can be
observed in particular in the example of evolution of the "theory of decisive
battles,“ which has undergone appreciable changes in recent years.

First of all, bourgeois historians were compelled essentially to give up their
claims that on the Soviet-German front only the Battle of Stalingrad was decisive
for the course and outcome of World War II as a whole. As a rule they now ac-
knowledge that the battles of Moscow and Kursk were also of decisive significance.
v.5. historian h. Baldwin, who formerly claimed that only the Battle of Stalingrad
was of decisive significance on the Soviet-German front, in his new book (failing
to mention his past statements) he writes that the Battle of Moscow "was without
doubt a turning point in Horld War II, to an even greater extent than Stalingrad....
The German invasion of Russia and the subsequent largest land battles in history,”
he states in summarizing 1941, "had political, psychological and military results
of global significance."16 We should note, however, that while acknowledging the
decisive significance of the battles of Moscow and Kursk, H. Baldwin, J. Erickson
and other bourgeois historians continue to falsify history and the events con—
nected with these battles.

Second, attempts are being made to "strengthen" the "theory of decisive battles"
by various means, to make up for its "losses," in order to continue utilizing it
for hegemonistic and anti-Soviet purposes.

In recent years, for example, a number of new items have been published in the Nest,
dealing with the decisive battles of World War Ii. The most substantial of these
include H. Maule'a book "The Great Battles of World War II"17 and a book entitled
"Decisive Battles of the 20th Century." N. Prankland and C. Dowling, editors.18

n. Manic lists 13 such battles (Dunkirk, the Battle of Britain, Cheren, Cyrenaica,
Moscow, Midway, Guadalcanal. El Alamein, Stalingrad, Anzio, lmphal, Normandy,

and Rangoon), while Frankiand and bowling list 16 (the Battle of the Atlantic, the
Battle of Britain, the Battle of France, Moscow, Pearl Harbor, Singapore, Midway,
El Alamein, Stalingrad, Kursk, Schweinfurt, Imphai-Kohima, Normandy, and Leyte).
Thus, alongside the truly decisive battles of the war, such as the battles of
Moscow, Stalingrad, and Kursk. they "additionally" place engagements and operations
of local significance (at ChereniJIEritrea, in Cyrenaica, Burma, etc).

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We should note that many Western historians do not subscribe to the "theory of
decisive battles." Some of them, examining events more objectively, point without
hesitation to the primary significance of the battles on the Soviet-German front
for the course and outcome of World War II. R. Michel (France) writes that Soviet
historians "correctly see in the brilliant successes of the Red Army the most
decisive victory, which signified a turning point in World War II as a whole.“19

A. Iaylgs agrees: "The main forces of the German Army were always on the Eastern
Front."

Objective appraisals, although rarely, can also be encountered in the writings of
U.S. historians. -. Norton, in one of his traditional reviews of new literature on
World War II, published in the journal AMERICAN HISTORICAL REVIEW, wrote: "The war
(in Russia) was conducted quite independently of the war in the West and was by

any criteria the largest, bloodiest and most decisive theater of World War II. In
comparison with this war, all the efforts of the Allies in the West were of dwarf
dimensions."21 Such assessments unquestionably promote the development of a more
correct view on the contribution of the Western Allies to victory over the ag-
gressors.

t**

The dominant idea in bourgeois literature examining the armed struggle on the Soviet—
German front is an idea which disparages Soviet art of warfare.

In the writings of certain bourgeois historians one encounters objective assessments
of the role of the Soviet Supreme High Command in directing the Armed Forces and

the achievements of Soviet strategy, operational art and tactics. Highly consistent
in this regard is a study written by French historian A. Constantini entitled "The
Soviet Union at War (1941-1965)." Objective appraisals of Soviet art of warfare

can also be found from time to time in the writings of other bourgeois authors.

"The offensive at Stalingrad,“ acknowledges i. Ziemke. "marked a new stage in the
conduct of operations by the Soviet Army.... The most important elements were
massive infantry actions in a narrow sector of the front for the purpose of

producing a breach. which would subsequently be utilized by large tank forces operat-
ing independently, to achieve penetration deep into the enemy's defenses.... In-
creased flexibility was observed in all phases of an operation. For example, con-
centration of troops for an offensive was conducted swiftly, calmly. unobtrusively,
without attempts to discover a weak point, and without extended artillery duels...."22

But standing in contrast to such appraisals -- which are extremely rare in the
West -- are others, which openly slander Soviet art of warfare. H. Baldwin claims
that "there was not much brilliance in the strategy of the Russians."23 That same
E. Ziemke, appraising Soviet strategy, states that it was "defensive from a
psychological standpoint (?)."Z4 A. Clark writes that planning of Soviet combat
operations "iacked imagination" and that their execution "failed to display that
art and skill which throughout the entire war characterized the British, Americans,
and particularly the Germans."25

What facts do these historians employ? They chiefly utilize the difficulties ex-
perienced by the Soviet Armed Forces in the first months of the war. The facts are

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘l-‘lf'lAI. PSI-l ONLY

against the falsifiers, howeVer. An analysis of the achievements of Soviet art of
warfare convincingly demonstrales its superiority over the art of warfare of the
fascist Wehrmacht -- the most powerful and experienced war machine of the capitalist
world at that time. The brilliant success of Soviet strategy is graphically evident
in the example of the failure of fascist Germany's plan of blitzkrieg war against
the USSR and the rout of the German-fascist troops at Moscow. "If the Soviet Union
had been unable to hold the Eastern Front." U.S. Secretary of State E. Stettinius
subsequently wrote. "the Germans would have had the possibility of capturing Great
Britain. They also cOuld have seized Africa and then could have established a

beachhegd in Latin America. President Roosevelt constantly bore this threat in
mind."-

was vividly manifested in the Battle of Stalingrad, Kurak, the Battle of the Caucasus,
in the Belorussian, Iasi-Kishinev, Vistula-Oder, Berlin and many other Soviet combat
operations. He should emphasize that the battles of Moscow and Stalingrad were won
under conditions of approximately equal relative strengths. The victories were won

thanks to well thought-out command and control of troops, as well as the skill and
heroism of Soviet fighting men.

We shOuld specifically mention, however, a quite common version put out by bourgeois
military historians. according to which the defeat of the Wehrmacht in the war
against the Soviet Union was a consequence chiefly of the fact that Germany "could
not compete with the Russians in expending human lives."27 In H. Salisbury's book
entitled "The Greatest Battles of Marshal Zhukov." which is a fabrication of the
memoirs of G. K. Zhukov. the author claims without any proof whatsoever that the Red
Army won victories purely through the copious shedding of blood. while the Soviet
command authorities, and I. V. Stalin and C. K. Zhukov personally, are accused of
"ruthless" expenditure of manpower resources. The purpose of these "accusations"

is not only to disparage Soviet art of warfare but also to conceal the scale of
atrocities perpetrated by German fascism on occupied Soviet soil.

that number which today seems advisable to a given historian. All this was incal-
culsbly more complex on the battlefield." 6. K. Zhukov decisively rejected

Salisbury's attempts to distort the historical truth. The Soviet command authori-
ties, the marshal writes. "put into battle as many troops as was necessary on the

basis of the prevailing circumstances. They did not expend more forces than were re-
quired by the conditions of a given operation."28

[he Communist Party, Soviet Government and Supreme High Command, in the most dif-
ticult conditions of a devastating war forced upon our country by Germany and by all
international imperialism, made a maximum effort to remove from the path of attack
ind to save as many civilians as possible who were threatened with fascist annihila—
.ion, while in planning military operations they were constantly concerned with con-
:erving manpower rescurcos and reducing casualties to a minimum.

2E
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We shall cite just one fact which attests to the flimsiness of the conjectures by
reactionary U.S. historians.

In January 19aa the Maritime Army was unable for an extended period of time to accom-
plish its assigned missions in the fighting for the city of Kerch'. The Suprene
High Command studied the situation in the army's zone, and on 27 January 1944
Headquarters, Supreme High Coumand issued a directive which stated: "It is evident
from the operations of the Maritime Army that the army's main efforts are now
directed toward capturing the city of Kerch' with intensive street fighting. Combat
in the city is leading to heavy casualties (my emphasis -- Auth.) and is making it
difficult to utilize the support weapons available in the army -- artillery, rocket
launcher systems, tanks, and air.... Headquarters, Supreme High Command orders:

 

l. The principal combat actions of the army's forces shall be shifted to open
gr0und.

2. Actions in the city shall be limited to operations playing a secondary
role to the actions of the army's main forces on open ground.

3. Proceeding from these instructions, forces shall be redeployed and com-
ments on the subsequent plan of action shall be submitted to the General Staff not
later than 28 January 1944.

l. Stalin, Antonov
No 220014 27 January 1944. 1720 hours"29

t 'k t

In recent years reactionary historians have stepped up their attempts to "deheroize"
the Red Army and to misrepresent the sources of the great combat exploit of the
Soviet people. accomplished for the sake of defense of the socialist homeland.

When the war was still in progress, many prominent bourgeois political and military
leaders. historians and writers noted time and again the mass heroism of Soviet
fighting men. "Only a blind man can now deny," stated the U.S. bourgeois magazine
SATURDAY EVENING POST in 1946, "that the triumph of the Red Army was the triumph of
Soviet socialism, Soviet planning, the Soviet system.“3° Today the majority of
bourgeois historians have become such "blind men." Some of them attempt to explain
the heroism of Soviet citizens as "Russian nationalism" and to ignore the fraternal
friendship of the peoples of the USSR as one of the most important factors in the
victory. nthors declare that the reasons for the unity and self-sacrifice of the
Soviet people in the struggle against the invaders lie in the "excessive acts of
brutality" by the Hitlerites. This is particularly manifested when bourgeois
authors treat the history of the partisan movement in the Great Patriotic War. Still
others, which is encountered most frequently. resort to unabashed anti-Soviet slander.

w. Craig states that discipline in the Red Army was maintained "by the method of
executing every tenth man." In the 64th Rifle Division, which was defending the
approaches to Stalingrad, "one colonel." according to Craig, proceeded as follows:
"He walked up to the large formation of assembled soldiers. With a

pistol in his hand, he turned toward the first rank and began counting loudly: 'One,

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-'I-‘ﬂ'MI. USE ONLY

two, three, four....' He put a bullet into the forehead of the tenth. While his
victim was still writhing on the ground, he again began to count: 'One, two, three....
He again shot the tenth man, and continued counting in a monotonous drone: 'One,
two...."'31 This fabricated "incident" is no accident. not a mistake, and not a
result of a pathological imagination. It is one of the typical devices employed by
reactionary bourgeois historians for purposes of anti-Soviet propaganda and to ex-
ploit the trusting gullibility of the unenlightened foreign reader.

For Mr Craig's information, the 64th Rifle Division fought bravely and courageously
on the fronts of the Great Patriotic war. in September 1941. in the most difficult
year of the war, the divis In distinguished itself in an offensive operation north—
east of Smolensk. As an element of the 16th Army, it fought stubborn engagements
and accomplished its assigned mission -- to divert to itself enemy reserves from
the Yel'nya area. The commanding general of the Western Front noted in an order

inflicted heavy tank losses on the enemy and forced him to retreat in disarray in
the vicinity of anJovshchina." 2 The 64th Rifle Division added to these fighting
traditions in the battles of Stalingrad. Kursk, and in other sectors of the front.

U.S. general Stilweil wrote in 1945: "The Americans will be expressing the feelings
of their own soldiers in paying due tribute to the Russian soldier. We ObSODAd him
in this war during a stubborn, selfless defense againsr the mighty German war
machine. during his epic resistance at Stalingrad, and in his first great victory
there, when he destroyed the German 6th Army and turned the course of the war toward
final victory. We saw him drive the German Army back and sweep the invaders from
his homeland in the largest and most stubborn offensive in military history. In

the course of three years of constant struggle we saw him hear the entire brunt of
the onslaught of the Germans, and we saw him rout them. He surpassed all the
achievements of Russian soldiers in past wars. and all soldiers of every nationality
are proud of the fact that they fought in partnership with him in this war. The
entire civilized world should particularly praise the merits of the central figure in
this struggle -- the Russian soldier."33

Today historians Such as Craig and Baldwin attempt to attribute to the Soviet Army
certain "internal weaknesses" and "antagonism§'to represent it as a caste army,
isolated from the Communist Party and from the people. Writings of this kind serve
as food for the notorious "Sovietologists" and "Kremlinologists" and are aggressive-
ly utilised in anticommunist propaganda.

Perhaps the "culmination" of adaptation of the writings of U.S. bourgeois historians
to the requirements of today's political programs of imperialism is their adventur-
istic "recommendations" of new military campaigns against the USSR, only slightly
(and not always even that) veiled by the mask of "academicism."

This trend is very clearly manifested in research studies conducted on contract with
the U.S. military. They include a book by MIT faculty member B. Whaley entitled
":odeword Barbarossa."3‘ The author analyzes the "element of strategic surprise"

in fascist Germany's attack on the USSR which, to quote the author. it "almost total-
ly achieved."35 At first glance the book appears to contain objective information.
The author does not share the view of the neofascist historiansonthe "preventive"
nature of the attack by fascist Germany on the USSR, calling it "most abSurd."36

The author states that the Soviet Government had no illusions about Germany's plans

L0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and that its aim was to keep the country out of the war until 1942. when the "Red
Army would become invincible."37 Devoting principal attention to evaluation of in—
formation on preparations by fascist Germany to attack the USSR. which in his opinion
could have been known to the Soviet Government. the author points to the extremely
contradictory nature of the information received from capitalist countries. The
wave of false information, he writes. was so great that even the government of Japan,
Germany's most powerful and dependable ally, knew virtually nothing about the
imminent German attack on the USSR, since it believed that German military prepara-
tions in the easr "were only a maneuver aimed at camouflaging preparations for an
invasion of the British isles."38 The main content of B. Uhaley's book, however.

is subordinated to the task of praising the actions of fascist Germany. The treach-
ery and cunning of the Hitlerites in their attack on the USSR which, as the author

puts it. I'the Soviet system was unable to foresee," serve him as a recommendation for
the future.

The tricks and devices of reactionary propaganda, however. cannot conceal the his-
torical fact that the German-fascist invaders were halted only on Soviet soil; the
Red Army alone was able to block the path of further spread of German-fascist ag-
gression and to make a decisive contribution to the defeat of the fascist-militarist
bloc.

The truth of history is incontrovertible. Precisely herein lies the reason for the
profound crisis of bourgeois military-historical science and the inevitable unmasking
of its falsifications. Some of them (the myth of the'breventive" attack by fascist
Germany on the USSR) have remained the exclusive domain of neofascist historians;
others (attempts to deny the decisive contribution of the USSR to the defeat of the
fascist bloc) have virtually collapsed; still others (the claim of "irreproachable"
performance by the United States and Britain of their duty as allies) are increasing-
ly revealing their flinsiness.

Comparatively recently. for example. the minutes of a meeting of the U.S.-British
Joint Staff on 20 August 1953 became known; future U.S. and British policy toward
the USSR was discussed at this meeting. They discussed the Question of whether

"the Germans w0uld not help" Anglo-U.S. troops enter German territory “in order to
push back the Russians." At a time when the Soviet Union. engaged in mortal combat
with the fascist Reich. was forging the links of victory of the anti-Hitler coali-
tion, U.S. and British military leaders were discussing a question which essentially
aimed at undermining joint efforts by the USSR, the United States and Britain in the
struggle against the fascist bloc.

it is typical that at approximately the same time a document entitled "Political
Considerations for the Contingency that Germany h'illBe lhnble to Hold out in This "at"
was recorded in Hitler's imperial chancelh-ry. The recommendations were formulated

as follows: "if Germany loses the war... it and the rest of Europe will be threatened
by total American and Russian domination.... Therefore there would be only one policy
objective in case of military defeat: the European nations should stand united under
United States protectorate." Thus the Nazi leaders were planning. when threatened

by imminent defeat. aiuﬁthm on mnenti-Soviet basis with the most reactionary U.S.
circles and preserving fascism.

hl
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These two documents, with accompanying evaluations. were first made available to
the scholarly community in the seventh volume of "History of World War Ii."39 They
point with new emphasis to the enormous -mportance and effectiveness of those con-
sistent measures which were undertaken throughout the entire war by the Soviet
Government with the aim of strengthening the anti-Hitler coalition and neutralizing
anti—Soviet trends in U.S. and British policy. This policy led to victory over the
aggressors and confirmed the possibility of cooperation between countries with dif-
fering social systems.

Publication in the USSR of the multivolume “History of World War II" was greeted by
bourgeois critics with obvious alarm. The profound scientific potential

and extensive primary-scurce foundation of this study, which includes documents from
virtually all the world's major archives, and the convincingness of the Marxist line
of reasoning. which affirms the historical truth, evoked heightened interest abroad
in each new volume as it came out.

This is why Western propaganda centers seek to weaken the impression produced by
this work of Soviet historians. The U.S. United Press agency, for example, dis-
seminated an article which expressed dissatisfaction with the study's critical
analysis of the policy of the Western powers in the prewar years. The j0urna1
AMERICAN "ISTORICAL REVIEW, in a review of the first three volumes of "history of
World War II" by one (U. Shparr), virtually repeats the fantasies of hitlerite
propaganda. attempting to hang the responsibility for beginning World War 11 on the
USSR and to whitewash the main culprit -- international imperialism."0

Unmasking falsifiers of the history of the Great Patriotic War is an important com-
ponent part of Our struggle against bourgeois ideology. Soviet historians, together
with historians from the brother socialist countries, are waging a resolute assault
on the position of reactionary historiography, which is falsifying the events of the
past war for the benefit of the aggressive intrigues of the monopolies. An ir-
reversible process of affirmation of the historical truth, the international pres-
tige and influence of Marxist-Leninist historical science is developing increasingly
more vigorously.

FOOTNOTES

1. L. l. Brezhnev. "Leninskim kursom. Rechi i stat'i" [Following a Leninist Course:
Speeches and Articles], Moscow, 1976, Vol 5. page 287.

2. "The United States Army in World War II," Government Printing Office, Washington,
1950 u— "Publications of the U.S. Army Center of Military History," Washington,
1978, pp 1-17; S. Morison. "History of United States Naval Operations in World
War it," Boston, l9b7—l962, Vols I-XV; W. Craven and J. Cate (Ed.), "The Army
Air Forces in World War 11," Chicago, 1948-1958, Vols l-VII; "History of United
States Marine Corps Operations in World War II," Washington, 1963-1968, vols i-
5. The following have been published in the Soviet Union in Russian-language
translations: F. Pog'yu. "Verkhovnoye komandovaniye" [Supreme High Command],
Moscow, 1959; S. Morison, "Bitva za Atlantiku (Sentyabr' 1939-May 1943) [Battle
of the Atlantic (September l939-May 1943)], Moscow, 1956; "Vazhneyshiye resheniya"
[Critical Decisions], Moscow, 1958. as well as certain other books of the men-
tioned official series.

h}:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.
5.

5.

5a.

9.

10.

'Encyclopedia AmericauJ'New York, 1970, vols 1-30.
M. Matloff (Ed.) "American Military History," Washington, 1973.

"Official History of the Second World War," London: HMSO, 1948. A component
part of this work —— four volumes of the series "The Grand Strategy" —- were
published in the USSR. See VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 5, 1973, page 110.

"Dan Deutsche Reich und der Zweite Weltkrieg” [The German Reich and World War II],
Stuttgart, 1979, Vol 1.

"Daitoa sense kokan sen 31," Tokyo, 1966-1976, vols 1-96.

A. Gonstnntini, "L'Union Sovietuque en guerre (1941—1945)," Paris, 1968—1969,
vols l-lII; c. Ryan. "The Last Battle," New York, 1966; E. Zienke, "Stalingrad

to Berlin: the German Defeat in the East," Office of the Chief of Military His-
tory, U.S. Army. Washington, 1968; H. Salisbury, "900 Days. Siege of Leningrad,“
New York, 1969; W. Craig, "Enemy at the Gates. Battle for Stalingrad," New York,
1973; M. Caidin, "Tigers Are Burning," New York, 1974; W. Kerr, "The Secret of
Stalingrad," Garden City, 1978: A. Seaton, "The Russo-German War. 1941-19‘5,"
London, 1971; J. Strawson, "The Battle for Berlin," London, 1974: J. Erickson,
"The Road to Stalingrad," London, 1975; E. Klink, "Das Cesetz des Nandelns. Die
Operation 'Zitadell', 1943“ [The Law of Negotiation, Operation Citadel, 19631,
Stuttgart, 1966; F. Forstmeier. "Odessa, 1941," Freiburg, 1967; K. Reinhardt,
"Die Wende von Moskau. Das Scheitern der Strategic Hitlera in Winter 1941/1942"
[The Turning Point at Moscow. The Collapse of Hitler's Strategy in the Winter of
1941-1942], Stuttgart. 1972; M. Kerig, "Stalingrad," Stuttgart. 197A; J. Foester,
"Stalingrad. Rinse in Buendnis 1962/43," Preiburg, 1975. The U.S. Army Military
Historical Service intends to publish an additional two volumes in the near
future, dealing with the armed struggle of the Soviet—German front: "Road to
ibscow: The Russian Campaign, 1961,“ and "From Moscow to Stalingrad, 1961-1942"
(Geschichte und Militaergeschichte. Wege der Forschung" [History and Military
History. Directions in Research], Frankfurt/Main, 1974, pp 130-135.

H. Baldwin. "Battles Lost and Won. Great Campaigns of World War 11," New York,

1966. See also "Decisive Battles of the 20th Century. Land-Sea-Air." edited by
N. Frankland and C. bowling, London, 1976.

Some reactionary authors unabashedly declare that their “works" pursue such aims.
U.S. historian R. Dupuy, for example, writes that he set for himself the task of
depicting the war in his book "in such a manner that the reader not only gained
a picture of its great scope but at the same tine appreciated the decisive role
of the United States in the victory of the free world over the forces of
totalitarianism" (R. Dupuy, "World War 11, A Compact History," New York, 1969,
page VII). In China Maoist historians Wang Zhende and Hen Chende, in an article
entitled "0n the Initial Moment of World War II," published in 1978. attempt to
prove that not the Soviet-German but the Chinese front was the principal front
in the struggle against the aggressors and that not the Soviet Union but China
"defended world civilization" (for more detail, see PRAVDA, 8 August 1978).

R. Beitzell, "The Uneasy Alliance: America, Britain, and Russia, 1941-1963," New
York, 1972, pp 65, 66.

h}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll.

12.

13.

16.

15.
16.
17.

18.

I9.

20.
21.
22.
23.
26.

25.

26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Liddel Cart, "Vtoraya mlrovaya voyna“ [History of the Second World War],
Moscow, 1976, page 612, translated from English.

A. Taylor, "The Second World War,” London. 1975, page 185.

"The President's War Addresses to the People and the Congress of the United
States of America,“ Washington. 1965, page 61.

N. Longmnte, "When We Won the War, the Story of Victory in Europe, 1965.“ London,
1977.

THE MORNING STAR, 9 June 1977.
H. Baldwin, "The Crucial Years,“ New York, 1976, page 320.
R. Haule, "The Great Battles of World War II,“ London, 1975.

"Decisive Battles of the 20th Century. Land-Sea-Air," edited by N. Franklnnd
and C. Dovling, London. 1976.

H. Michel, "La Seconde guerre mondiale" [World War 11]. Paris. 1968, Vol 1,
page 667.

A. Taylor. "The Second World War," London, 1975, page 188.
AMERICAN HISTORICAL REVIEW, Vol 75, No 7, 1970, page 190.
Zlemke, op. cit., pp 52-53.

Baldwin, "Battles Lost and Won...," op. cit., page 185.
Ziemke. op. cit., pp 80, 506.

A. Clark, “Barbarossa. The Russian-German Conflict, 1961-1965,"lpndon, 1965.
pp 63, 387.

E. Stettinius, "Roosevelt and the Russians," Garden City. 1968. page 7.

"The Encyclopedia Americana," New York, 1970, Vol 29. page 661.

KONMUNIST, N0 1, 1970, page 93.

VOYENNO-ISTORICHBSKIY ZﬂURNAL, No 5, 1971, pp 73-76; for detail on this subject,
see N. Shekhovtsov. "Soviet Strategic Leadership and Fabrications of Palsifiers,”

VOYENNO-ISIORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 3, 1976, pp 65-52.

Cited in L. Yeremeyev, “Glazami druzey 1 vrsgov" [Throagh the Eyes of Friends
and Enemies], Moscow, 1966, page 265.

Craig, op. cit., page 72.

"Istorlya Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza" [History of the Great
Patriotic War of the Soviet Union], Moscow, 1961. Vol 2, page 75.

MI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
33. IZVBSTIYA, 3 June 1945.

3b. 3. Hhaley, "Codeword Barbarossa." Cambridge, Haas, 1973.

35. Ibid., page 226.

36. lbid., page 225.

37. Ibid., page 226.

38. lbid., page 237.

39. "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny. 1939-1945," Moscow, 1976. Vol 7, pp 514-515.

40. THE AMERICAN HISTORICAL REVIEH, December 1976, page 1183.

CONCLUSION

The great feat accomplished by the Soviet people, who made a decisive contribution
to the defeat of the most reactionary forces of world imperialism -- German fascism
and Japanese militarism —- is inscribed forever in the history of mankind in gold
letters. The heroic accomplishments of the Soviet people in l9bl-1945 will always
serve for the working people of the entire world as a model of courage, profound
patriotism and proletarian internationaliam. a strongly attractive example in the
struggle for freedom, national independence. and social progress.

The world-historic victory over fascism exerted the most profound effect on the fate
of all cauntries and peoples and opened up extensive opportunities for development
of the world revolutionary process.

The emergence of socialism beyond the framework of a single country. the victory of
popular democratic and socialist revolutions in a number of nations in Europe and
Asia. the emergence of a world socialist system. collapse ofthecnlonial system and
gaining of national independence by the peoples of former colonies, broadening of
the sociopolitical rights of working people in capitalist cauntries, growth of the
international Communist and worker movement, and its transformation into the most
influential force of the present day -- all this would have been impossible without
the crushing defeat of Nazi Germany and militarist Japan.

The results and consequences of the Great Patriotic War are continuing to exert in-
fluence on the contemporary international situation and societal processes.

in the more than three decades which have passed since the defeat of fascism, Soviet
scholarly researchers have accomplished a great deal toward comprehensive analysis

and genuinely scientific appraisal of the most important political, economic, mili-
tary and diplomatic phenomena and events of the war years. Many valuable works have
been written, extensive and diversified documentary materials have been made available
to scholars, and important scientific-theoretical conclusions and syntheses have been
made.

1.5
FOR omcmt usr: ONLY
[ﬂu "I”! Ill l‘al “\I \

in examining the various problems of the struggle against the German-fascist in-
vaders, primary attention in Soviet hiatoriography has been focused on demonstrating
the role of the masses -- the genuine makers of history -- and the multifaceted or-
ganizing activities of the Leninist Communist Party. Recreating an objective.
historically truthful picture of the origin, course and outcome of the past war,
Soviet historians consistently rely on the military—theory legacy of V. I. Lenin and
extensively utilize his teaching on defense of the socialist homeland.

In fundamental studies published in recent years, and particularly Such major works
as the six—volume “lstoriya Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza. 1941—
1945" [History of the Great Patriotic war of the Soviet Union, 1941-1965], a concise
history of the Great Patriotic War, the first book of the fifth volume of "lstoriya
Kommunisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuza' [History of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union], the 10th volume of "lstoriya SSSR s drevneyshikh vremen do nashikh
dney" [History of the USSR From Ancient Times to the Present Day], “Sovetskiy Soyuz
v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne. 1941-1945" [The Soviet Union in the Years of
the Great Patriotic War, l941~l945] and, finally, 10 volumes of the lZ-volume
"istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny. l939-l9h5" [History of Horld War II. l939-1945|,the
authors profOundly reveal the prehistory of the war and the titanic efforts of the
Communist Party and Soviet Government in conditions of unleashed fascist aggression
to mobilize all the nation's rescurces to defeat the enemy.

Many studies dealing with this period contain a detailed analysis of the armed
struggle on the battle fronts and the most important military operations of the Soviet
Armed Forces and combat actions of partisan and underground groups.

' Much has also been accomplished by Soviet historians in analyzing the state and
development of the Soviet home front. Considerable attention has been devoted to
problems of party supervision and direction of reorganization of the economy of the
USSR onto a war footing and establishment in this country of a smoothly running war
economy, which ensured the economic victory of the Soviet Union over the fascist bloc.

At the same time, as is shown in the nuterials in this volume, many topics connected
with the events of the Great Patriotic Har have not yet been adequately treated.

The present state of historiography and investigation of primary sources makes it
possible to proceed with producing major synthesizing studies on all important prob-
lems of history of the past war. The resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress direct
social scientists toward preparing solid studies which would he the result of

further broadening and deepening of study and investigation of the laws, patterns
and nechanisms of societal development. scientific synthesis of the world-historic
experience of the CPSU, and other cardinal problems. Publication of "Malaya Zemiya,"
written by CPSU Central Committee General Secretary L. I. Brezhnev, chairman of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, constituted an important event in contemporary
Soviet sociopolitical affairs. it revealed the principles of leadership and direc-
tion by the Communist Party during the period of the battle against fascism, the
nature and sources of the heroism of Soviet citizens, modes and methods of party-
politieal work at the front. The book is not only of great political and scientific-
historical but also of indoctrinational significance, since it vividly reflects the
moral and ideological foundations of the new men. "Turning to the history of the
Great Patriotic var," emphasized L. i. Brezhnev, "will teach the younger generation
of Soviet citizens to be worthy of their fathers. to stride persistently along the
road of building communism. which our people defended at a truly incalculable cost."1

)6
FOR OFFICIAL use 0le
Essential conditions for successful accomplishment of the important tasks assigned
by the party to historians is their close bond with the life and affairs of all

Soviet society. creation of a productive and innovative atmosphere on every scien-
tific work force, high-principledness and party-mindedness, and a consistent cam-

paign for excellent quality in every publication and for increasing the effective-
ness of scholarly research.

FOOTNOTE

1. KOMMUNIST. No 7, 1977. page 83.

APPENDIX: Topics Recommended by the All-Union Scientific Conference "Historiography
of the Great Patriotic Har" for Scholarly Research

I. On the Problem "The CPSU -- Inspirational Force Behind and Organizer of the
Victory of the Soviet People in the Great Patriotic War"

1. Communist Party ideological work in the period of the Great Patriotic War.

2. Communist Party activities to strengthen the friendship and international unity

of the peoples of the USSR in the years of the Great Patriotic War.

Party guidance and direction of government and public organizations in 1941-1945.

The party's role in securing the decisive victories of the Soviet Armed Forces.

. The Communist Party -- organizer and leader oi the popular struggle behind enemy

lines.

The party underground in the years of the Great Patriotic War.

The Communist Party -- organizer and director of the war economy of the USSR.

The leadership role of the Communist Party in relocating the productive re-

sources of the USSR in 1941-1942.

9. Communist Party activities pertaining to directing Soviet industry in the years
of the Great Patriotic War.

10. Party economic-management policy in the village during the war.

ii. CPSU activities in the area of ensuring uninterrupted functioning of transporta-
tion in 1941-1955.

l2. The Communist Party -- organizer of rebuilding the economy and culture in those
areas of the USSR liberated from fascist occupation.

13. The CPSU -- directing socialiSt competition of workers on the Soviet home front.

14. Soviet culture -- powerful party weapon in the struggle against fascism.

15. CPSU foreign policy activity in 1941-1945.

16. Party organizational development in the years of the Great Patriotic War.

17. CPSU historiography in the period of the Great Patriotic war.

U't‘w

ONO
oo-

11. On the Problem "Armed Struggle of the Soviet People Against the German-Fascist
invaders During the Years of the Great Patriotic War"

1. The decisive role of the Soviet Armed Forces in the victory over fascism in
World War II.

2. Development of Soviet military strategy, operational art and tactics in the years
of the Great Patriotic War.

3. Organization of strategic direction of the Soviet Armed Forces in the war years.

b?
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

III.

1.

13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

Hill OFFIf'lAI. UNI-I ONI \‘

Activities of Headquarters, Supreme High Command and the General Staff of the
USSR People's Commissariat of Defense in the years of the Great Patriotic Har.
Soviet border guards in the Great Patriotic War.

The Battle of Smolensk.

Radical turning point on the Soviet-German front.

The Belorussian Operation.

The East Prussian Operation.

Liberation of the Left—Bank Ukraine and the Donbass by the Soviet Armed Forces.
The liberation of Poland in the years of the Great Patriotic War.

The liberation of Czechoslovakia in 1945.

. The liberation of Hungary in 1955.

The liberation of Austria in 1945.

The struggle of Soviet partisans and members of the underground in the years of
the Great Patriotic War.

The struggle of the Soviet people against the German-fascist invaders on tear
porarily occupied Soviet territory.

Liberation mission of the Soviet Armed Forces in the years of World Bar 11.
Critique of bourgeois falsification of history of the Great Patriotic Har.
Soviet citizens in the antifascist Resistance Movement during the years of the
Great Patriotic War.

Historiography of the armed struggle of the Soviet people againsc the German-
fascist invaders in 1941-1945.

On the Problem "The Soviet Home Front in the Great Patriotic war"

Party and government direction of the USSR economy in the years of the Great
Patriotic Har.

Activities of the State Defense Committee and other emergency bodies in 1941-
1965 in the area of directing the Soviet war economy.

The USSR Council of People's Commissars in the years of the Great Patriotic War.
Reorganization of the USSR economy onto a war footing and transformation of the
Soviet nation into a unified military camp.

The Soviet home front in the year of the radical turning point in the Great
Patriotic war.

The Soviet home front in the concluding period of the Great Patriotic War (1944-
1945). .

The alliance of the worker class and kolkhoz peasantry during the war years.
Strengthening of the friendship and international unity of workers on the home
front in 1941-1945.

Relocating the productive resources of the USSR in 1941-1942.

Construction in the USSR during the years of the Great Patriotic war.

. Rebuilding the economy and culture of the liberated areas in the years of the

Great Patriotic War.

. Rebuilding Soviet cities which had suffered from German-fascist occupation.

The eastern regions of the USSR -- powerful arsenal for the war front.
Activities of local soviets on the home front.

Activities of Soviet trade unions on the home front.

National-governmental organizational development in the USSR in wartime condi-
tions (1941-1965).

Mobilization of the country's labor resources in 1941-1945.

Financing the USSR economy and sociocultural measures in the years of the Great
Patriotic Har.

uS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

35.
36.
37.
38.
COPY

3024
C80:

USSR trade in 1941-1945.

Hark of health care agencies on the Soviet home front.

Labor exploit of Soviet women in the Great Patriotic War.

Labor exploit of youth in the Great Patriotic War.

Socialist competition in 1961-1955.

USSR industry in the years of the Great Patriotic var.

USSR transportation in the war years (l9b1-l945).

Horor and air transport in the Great Patriotic Har.

USSR agriculture in 1941-1955.

Exploit of communications workers on the home front.

Soviet culture in the Great Patriotic War.

Activities of cultural-educational establishments on the home front.

USSR science and technology in 19h1-1945.

Activities of scientific and technical societies in conditions of wartime.

The home guard in the Great Patriotic War.

Daily life of the workers on the Soviet home front in conditions of wartime
(1961-1945).

Universal military training of the civilian population (Vsevobuch) in the period
of the Great Patriotic Her.

Activities of Osoaviakhim and the Union of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
in 19kl-l945.

Activities of antifascist cmmmittees of Soviet women, Soviet youth. Soviet sci-
entists, and the All-Slavic Committee in the years of the Great Patriotic war.
Historiography of the Soviet home front in the period of the Great Patriotic Har.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Nauka”. 1980

1801/071

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERCEPTIONS, VIEWS, COMMENTS

BOOK DESCRIBES MILITARY PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION SCIENCE

Moscow OSNOVY VOYBNNOY PSIKHOLOCII I PEDAGOGIKI in Russian 1981 (signed to press
10 Mar 81) pp 362-367, 3-6

[Table of contents, Annotation and Introduction of book edited by Doctor of
Pedagogic Sciences Prof Maj Gen A. V. Barebanshchikov and Doctor of Psychological
Sciences Prof Col N. F. Fedenko]
[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: OSNOVY VOYENNOY PSIKHOLOCII I PBDAGOGIKI (Fundamentals of Military

Psychology and Education Science)

Publisher: Voyenizdat

Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1981
Signed to Press Date: 10 March 1981
Number of Copies Published: 130,000
Number of Pages: 366
Table of Contents Page
Introduction ............................................................. 3

Part 1. Fundamentals of Military Psychology

Section I. General Problems of Military Psychology

Chapter 1. Subject, Methods and Tasks of Military Psychology ............ 7
1. The Subject of Military Psychology .................... ...... ... 7

2. Methods of Psychology and Their Practical Utilization in Training
and Indoctrinating Military Personnel ........................... 11
3. Military Psychology as a Science ........................ ........ 15
A. The Significance and Tasks of Military Psychology ..... ......... 16

Chapter 2. Methodﬂogical, Military-Theoretical and‘Natursl-Scientific Fun-
damentals of Soviet Military Psychology ............ ...... .... 19

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l. Methodological Foundations of Military Psychology .............
2. Military-Theoretical Feundations of Soviet Military Psychology
3. Natural-Scientific Foundations of Military Psychology .........

Section II. Mental Processes in Conditions of Military Activities
Chapter 3. Sensation, Perception and Attention of the Serviceman ......

1. Specific Features of the Process of Sensation in Military Activities
2. Consideration of the Specific Features of the Process of Perception
in Combat Training of Military Personnel ............. ...... ...

3. Types and Properties of Attention .............................

Chapter A. Memory, Conceptions, Imagination. Their Development in Military

Personnel ..................................................

1. Memory .............................. ..... .....................

2. Conceptions ....... .......... ..................................
3. Imagination ..... ...................... ..... ...................

Chapter 5. Thought Process and Speech in Military Activities ..........

1. Characteristics of the Thought Process .... .......... ..........
2. Fundamental Operations, Forms, Methods and Types of Thinking ..
3. Development of Thought Process in Military Personnel ..........
4. Speech Process in Military Activities .................. ...... .

Chapter 6. Emotions and Feelings of the Serviceman ....................

1. General Description of Emotions and Feelings ..................
2. Emotions and Feelings of Serviceman in Combat .................
3. Forming Higher Feelings in Soviet Servicemen ..................

Chapter 7. Volition. Development of Volitional Qualities in Military Per-

sonnel ............................... ..... .................

1. General Description of Vclition ............ ..... ..............
2. Volitional Qualities of a Serviceman ............. ...... .......
3. Psychological Analysis of a Volitional Action of a Serviceman

4. Ways to Develop Volition in Servicemen ........................

Section III. The Individual and the Military Collective
Chapter 8. The Problem of Personality in Psychology ...................

1. General Description of Personality ............................

2. Role of the Environment in Fowi‘eg the Personality.. ....... ....
3. Personality and Activity ...... ...............................
4. Activity and Individual Awareness ............... ...... ........

Chapter 9. Directional Thrust and Motives for activity of Soviet Servicemen

51
son OFFICIAL use ONLY

19
22
25

33
33

39
45

69

49
52
SS

60

60
64
68
70

76

76
80
84

87

87
90
91
93

96

96
98
100
104

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. General Description of Individual Motivation ............ ..... ..
2. Military Personnel Motives of Behavior .... ....... ..............

Chapter 10. Temperament and Character. Development of Character ........

1. Temperament ...... ...... ................................. ..... ..
2. Character and Hays of Developing It in Military Personnel ......

Chapter 11. Abilities and Their Development in the Process of Training and
Indoctrination of Servicemen ................................

1. Essence of Abilities . ..... ............. ...... ..................
2. Evaluation and Utilization of the Abilities of Military Personnel
3. Development of the Abilities of Servicemen .....................

Chapter 12. The Military Collective ........ ........ .....................

l. Psychological Description of the Military Collective ...........
2. Mutual Relations in the Military Collective ....................
3. Guiding the Subunit Collective ..... ................. ...........

Section IV. Psychology of Military Activity
Chapter 13. Psychological Analysis of Military Activity .................
1. General Description of Activity ................... ..... ........
2. Content and Structure of Military Activity .....................
3. Specific Features of Combat Activity ...........................
4. Specific Features of Combat Training Activity ........... .......
Chapter 14. Psychological Foundation of Forming Combat Skill ............

1. Knowledge -- Foundation of Activity ............................
2. From Knowledge to Skills and Abilities .........................

3. Goal of Training ......... ...... ................................
A. Process of Forming Skills and Abilities ..... ...................
Chapter 15. Psychological Training of Soviet Serviceman ......... ..... ...

1. Increased Significance of Psychological Training in Present-Day

Conditions .............. ....... .............. ...... ............
2. Essence and Tasks of Psychological Training ....................
3. Ways and Means of Psychological Training .......................

Part 11. Fundamentals of Military Education Science

Section I. General Problems of Military Education Science

Chapter 16. Military Pedagogy as a Science ........................ ......
l. The Subject of Military Education Science ....... ...............
52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Relationship Between Military Education Science and Other Sciences
Methodological Foundations of Soviet Military Education Science
Tasks of Soviet Military Education Science ......................
Investigational Methods of Soviet Military Education Science ....

Chapter 17. The Soviet Officer —- Teacher and Indoctrinator of His Subor-

1.
2.
3.

Section II.

dinates ......................................................

Content of the Military-Pedagogic Activities of the Officer .....
Essence of the Officer's Pedagogic Skills .......................
Forming and Improving an Officer's Pedagogic Skill ..............

Chapter 18. Essence of the Training Process ..............................

1.

2.
3.
4.

General Description of the Process of Training Servicemen .......
Content of Training Servicemen ......... ............. . ...........
Guiding the Cognitive Activity of Trainees ......................
Indoctrination, Development and Psychological Preparation of

Servicemen in the Process of Training ...........................

Chapter 19. Principles of Training .......................................

1. System of Principles ............................................
2. Communist Party-Mindedness and Scientific Character in Training
3. Teach Troops What Is Needed in War ..... ......... ...... ..........
4. Conscientiousness and Activeness by Trainees - Guarantee of Suc-
cess in Training Troops .........................................
5. Graphic Clarity in Training .....................................
6. Systematicness, Sequence, and Comprehensiveness in Training .....
7. Training at a High Level of Difficulties . ...... .................
8. Pirmness of Knowledge. Skills and Abilities .....................
9. Collectivism and the Individual Approach in Training . ...........
Chapter 20. Training Methods .. ........ ...................................
1. Concept of Training Methods ..... ....... . ........ . ..............
2. Oral Presentation of Training Material ..........................
3. Discussion of Training Materials ................................
4. Demonstration ...................................................
5. Exercise and Practice ...........................................
6. Practical Work ..................................................
7. Independent Study ...............................................
8. Programed Learning Methods ............ .... ............. . ...... .

‘Chapter 21. Testing and Evaluating Knowledge, Skills and Abilities .......

1.
2.
3.

Function of Testing and Evaluation ..............................
Purpose and Nature of Tests ............. ......... . ...... ........
Methods of Testing Preparedness of Military Personnel ...........

5 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Theory of Training Soviet Servicemen (Military Didactics)

194
196
198
200

204

204
207
213

219

219
224
228

233
238

238
239
241

243
246
249
251
253
254

256

256
257
260
263
266
268
270
272

275
275

276
278
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Evaluating Knowledge, Skills and Abilities ...................... 280

Chapter 22. Organizational Forms of Training ............................. 283
1. Description of Principal Forms of Training ...................... 283
2. Structure of Training Classes and Exercises . ....... .. ....... .... 287

3. Procedure of Preparation for Drills, Exercises. and Weapon Firing
Activities .......... ............................................ 289

Section III. Pedagogic Principles of the Process of Indoctrination of Servicemen

Chapter 23. Essence of the Indoctrination Process ........................ 292
1. Structure and Logical Sequence of the Indoctrination Process .... 292
2. Guiding the Indoctrination Process .............................. 296

Chapter 24. Tasks and Contents of Communist Indoctrination of Soviet Ser-

vicemen ......... ............................................. 300

l. Ideological-Political Indoctrination ............. ........ ....... 300

2. Military Indoctrination ...... ................................... 303

3. Moral Indoctrination ............................................ 304

4. Legal Indoctrination ....................................... ..... 305

5. Aesthetic Indoctrination ........................................ 307

6. 'Physical Training .. ......... . ...... ...... ............ ........... 308
Chapter 25. Principles of Indoctrination ................................. 312
1. Idea of the Principles of Indoctrination .................. ...... 312

2. Communist Purposefulness and Party-Mindedness ................... 313
3. Relationship Between Indoctrination and Realities of Life, the
Practical Business of Building Communism, and the Demands of Con-

bat Activities ........... .......... .... ..... .................... 315
4. Indoctrination in the Process of Military Activities ............ 317
5. Indoctrination in and Through the Collective ...... .............. 318
6. Individual and Differentiated Approach to Servicemen ............ 320
7. Combining Demandingness on Trainees With Respect for Their Per-

sonal Dignity and Concern for Them . ........... ... ............... 322

8. Reliance on the Positive in the Individual and the Collective ... 324
9. Unity, Coordination and Succession of Indoctrinational Influences 325

Chapter 26. Methods of Indoctrination .................................... 328
1. Concept of Methods of Indoctrination ............................ 328
2. Method of Persuasion -- Principal Method of Indoctrination of
Soviet Servicemen . .................... ......................... 329
3. The Example as a Method of Indoctrinating Servicemen ............ 332
4. Method of Practice and Exercise ................................. 335
5. Competition as a Method of Indoctrination ....................... 337
6. Method of Encouragement and Reward .............................. 340

. 3’4
FOR om AL USE ONLY
7. Criticism and Self-Criticism as a Method of Indoctrination ...... 362
8. Method of Coercion in Indoctrinating Servicemen ................. 3‘“

Chapter 27. Guide to Self-Indoctrination of Enlisted Personnel and Non-

commissioned Officers ........................................ 349
1. Essence of Self-Indoctrination of Soviet Servicemen ............. 349
2. Means of Guiding the Self-Indoctrination of Enlisted Personnel
and Noncommissioned Officers .................................... 353
Conclusion ... ....... ............................... ........ . ........... .. 358

Brief Description:

This textbook presents the main points of Soviet military psychology and education
science in conformity with the curriculum at higher command and engineering schools.
Advice and recommendations on teaching and training enlisted personnel and non-
commissioned officers are presented on the basis of practical experience in combat
and political training of Soviet Armed Forces personnel. This textbook is in-
tended for personnel enrolled at higher command and engineering schools. It can be
recommended to officers of military units and naval ships, as well as to persons
enrolled at party schools.

INTRODUCTION

The Soviet Armed Forces are called upon reliably to defend the socialist homeland

and to maintain a continuous state of combat readiness guaranteeing an immediate
rebuff to any aggressor.

An important feature of the contemporary development of the USSR Armed Forces is a
continuous improvement in their technical equipment. V. I. Lenin considered this
to be one of the main indicators of the defense capability of the state. "The very
finest army and persons most dedicated to the cause of the revolution," he stated,
"will be immediately annihilated by the enemy if they are inadequately armed,

provisioned, and trained."1 The Communist Party of the Soviet Union rigorously
follows these Lenin precepts.

Attaching great importance to technical equipment of the USSR Armed Forces. the CPSU
at the same time has always believed and continues to believe that weapons can be

a powerful means of national defense only if army and navy personnel are deeply
aware of their great responsibility to the homeland and possess a consummate mastery
of their weapons. "A solir fusion of a high degree of technical equipment, military
expertise and indomitable wrale -- this is the fighting potential of the Soviet
Armed Forces,"2 stressed L. I. Brezhnev in the CPSU Central Committee Accountability
Report to the 26th CPSU Congress. For this reasonthepmrty devotes unrelenting at-
tention to training and indoctrination of Soviet military personnel and increasing
the combat readiness of the USSR Armed Forces.

Demands on the content, quality and effectiveness of work in the area of Communist
indoctrination of Soviet servicemen have increased in present-day conditions. CPSU

55
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decisions have stressed time and again that the heart of ideological and political
indoctrination work has been and remains formation in Soviet citizens of a sci-
entific philosophical outlook, total dedication to the cause of the party and Com-
munist ideals, a love of the socialist homeland, and proletarian internationalism.
Also of great importance in indoctrination of personnel is development of a
vigorous political attitude, total dedication to the military duty, a high degree of
discipline, political vigilance, hatred toward imperialism, readiness and willing-
ness to come to the defense of the homeland at all times.

In order to accomplish these important tasks of Communist indoctrination of Soviet
citizens, army and navy personnel, the CPSU Central Committee considers it essential
continuously to raise the scientific level of ideological and political indoctrina-
tion work, further to strengthen its bond with practical realities, and to develop
the aggressive character of the indoctrination process.

Officer cadres play the principal role in development of the Soviet servicemen and
in ensuring the continuous combat readiness of the USSR Armed Forces. Officer

cadres train and indoctrinate army and navy personnel and direct the daily activi-
ties of their subordinates.

Troop training and indoctrination are organized and conducted on a scientific basis.
V. I. Lenin emphasized that a modern army cannot be built without science.3 These
words ring particularly true today. "Soviet military science," notes USSR Minister
of Defense Mar St D. P. Ustinov, member of the CPSU Central Committee Politburo,
"reliably serves, as it always has, the cause of practical accomplishment of the
tasks facing the Armed Forces."4

Military psychology and military education science play an important role in train-
ing and indoctrination of personnel.

Military psychology studies the laws and patterns of development and manifestation
of the psychological features of the individual serviceman and military collectives
in conditions of peacetime and wartime. Military education science investigates
the essence, content, laws and patterns of training and indoctrination of ser-
vicemen and military collectives. It substantiates the principles, forms, methods
and means of training and indoctrination of servicemen and military collectives.
working in close coordination, military psychology and military education science
elaborate the conditions and ways of effectively influencing the consciousness and
behavior of military personnel for the purpose of forming excellent moral-political
and fighting qualities in these personnel.

Military psychology and education science incorporate advances made in many sci-
ences dealing with man, the collective, their labor and combat activities.

Military psychology and pedagogy as sciences are closely linked with the theory and
practice of party-political work. At the same time party-political work in the mili-
tary produces fine, positive results if it is performed taking into account the

laws and patterns revealed by military psychology and education science. Army Gen

A. A. Yepishev, chief of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy,
notes that “successes in combat, moral-political and psychological training of
personnel are due to a significant degree to the fact that their activities are

56
ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
grounded on scientific theory and practice of party-political work and take into ac-

count the points and conclusions of Soviet military psychology and education
science."5

Profound mastery of military psychology and education science is a serious matter.

In order successfully to train and indoctrinate his subordinates, it is not enough
for an officer to possess a certain sum total of knowledge which he acquires at mili-
tary educational institutions and in independent study of the literature. As is in-
dicated by practical experience, he must develop in himself a psychological-
pedagogic mode of thinking -- the ability to think in terms of psychology and educa-
tion science in accomplishing training and indoctrination tasks and in daily supervi-

sion of his men, just as he thinks, for example, in the terms and concepts of tac-
tics in solving tactical problems.

This textbook will assist future officers in this. It contains a systematized
presentation of military psychology and military education science in conformity
with the curriCulum forrugher military schools and reveals the fundamental
psychological-pedagogic laws and patterns forming the foundation of Successful
service and combat activity of military personnel, the essence, forms and methods of
training, indictrination and moral-psychological preparation of personnel, cohesion

of military collectives, strengthening of discipline and combat readiness of units
and subunits.

Knowledge of military psychology and education science is transformed into firm
concepts and ideas, into a psychological-pedagogic mode of thinking only when the
student systematically assimilatesthe curricular material and thoroughly understands
theoretical content and practical significance. This is promoted by the student
thoroughly thinking through each and every lecture, independent study of the recom-

mended literature, as well as regular, well-prepared presentations at seminar
classes.

The habit of reading on a regular basis newly-appearing works on military psychology
and education science, active participation in a military psychology and education
science study group, and systematic reading of war memoir literature, which con-
tainsznwealth of experience in training. indoctrination and guidance of the ac—
tivities of personnel during the years of the Great Patriotic War -- all this helps
gain a better understanding of the service performance, combat activities and daily
life of personnel, as well as training and indoctrination tasks assigned to Soviet
Army and Navy officers, and helps understand the essence of a psychological-
pedagogic approach to accomplishing them. Very helpful in mastering military
psychology and education science is viewing and discussion, from the standpoint of

psychological-pedagogic science, of training and feature films dealing with the
life and activities of Soviet servicemen.

A decisive role in mastering curricular material on military psychology and educa-
tion science is played by practical application of knowledge obtained on these sub-

jects and work with personnel during a tour of duty in line units, in daily train-
ing and service activities.

Vigorous and systematic independent work by cadets and young officers in order to
master military psychology and education science will produce the desired results --

57
ron omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military-psychological and pedagogic knowledge V111 be be transformed into their
personal views, into a system of psychological-pedagogic thinking. And this is the
foundation of effective, genuinely innovative work in the area of training and in-
doctrinating subordinates and guiding their activities.

FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin. "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete WorksL Vol 35, page 408.

2. L. I. Brezhnev, "Otchetnyy doklad Isentral'nogo Kamiteta KPSS XXVI s"yezdu
Kounnuiisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuza i ocherednyye zadachi partii v
oblasti vnutrenney i vneshney politiki" [Accountability Report of the CPSU Cen-
tral Conudttee to the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

and Current Party Tasks in the Area of Domestic and Foreign Policy], Moscow,
1981, page 89.

3. See Lenin, op. cit., Vol b0, page 183.

4. D. F. Ustin0v, "Izbrannyye rechi i stat'i" [Selected Speeches and Articles],
Moscow, 1979, page 321.

5. A. A. Yepishev, "Ideologicheskaya rabota v Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Silakh"
[Ideological Work in the Soviet Armed Forces], Moscow, 1979, page 139.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

3024
C50: 1801/095 END

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY