FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10164
4 December 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 751

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information.primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts.. Materials from'foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOI»0511C1AI.USE‘0NLY

JPRS L/la
4 Decembe:

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

P000 NO. 751

CONTENTS
CHAD
Briefs
Libyan Help in Army Training
Possible Foreign Aid Resumption
EDP Cotton Finanring
CONGO

Major Trends of 1982-1986 Development Plan Noted
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS, 2 Oct 81)...............

Briefs
IDA River Transport Credit
csc's Restoration of Discipline
Students Returning to School

GAMBIA

Establishment of Agricultural Developnent Bank Reported
(HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS, 16 Oct Bl).............

IVORY COAST

French Expatriates: Their Importance, Cost Analyzed
(JEUNE APRIQUEI 7 Oct 81)ooaoooooeeaoooooooooooouoeaoaaoooeoeo

Valuable but Expensive, by Jean-Claude Hazera
Opinions of Ivorian Cadre

MADAGASCAR

Mitterrand, Ratsiraka Inaugurate New Relationship
(Simon Halley; APRIOUE-ASIE, 12 Oct 81).......................

Austrian Loans To Fund Distillery for Alcohol Fuel Pron Sugar
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS, 25 Sep 81)..............

-a- [III-NBsA-lzo

F0! 0FFK3AI.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

New Fertilizer Plants To Satisfy Domestic Needs
(HANGERS TROPICAUX ET MEDITBREANBENS, 16 Oct 81)..............

Briefs
Soya Enterprise

MAURITIUS

Closer Business Cooperation with Reunion Discussed
(Dorothee Durban: APRIOOE-ASIB, 12 Oct 81)....................

NIGER

Briefs

831 Power Plant Loan
Educational Statistics
EDP Road Financing

SEREGAL

Briefs
SAED's Rice. Tomato Production

TANZANIA

Briefs

New Internal Trade Regulations
EDP Water Supply Grant

ZAMBIA
Briefs

Increase of Criminal Activity
Automobile Plant Closure

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL.USEl)NLY

LIBYAN HELP IN ARMY TRAINING-—Quoting an informed source in Yaounde, the AP? recently
announced that Libya had agreed to help train and finance Chad's Integrated National
Army (ANI) under an agreement reached with the authorities of Ndjsmena on 17 August
this year in Tripoli. According to the terms of this agreement, Libya is reported
to have made a cmmnitment to help train 2,000 men a year over a 5-year period (a to-
tal of 10,000 men). Tripoli will also help set up the "governing bodies" of the In~

troops are stationed in the towns of Abeche, Biltine, Guereda, lriba and in neighbor-
ing garrisons. that area of the national territory is now under the "almost exclusive
and military control of the Libyan Army. Some 10,000 Libyan troops with an "impres-
sive" array of equipment are reported to be established there on a permanent basis.
Finally. it is thought in Yaounde that the fighting, which has taken place in recent
weeks between Chadian and Libyan troops on the one hand and Hissein Habre's Northern
Armed Forces on the other, has now stopped. However, the Ndjamena authorities are
said to have decided to send "substantial" Chadian reinforcements, mostly troops, to
that region because they expect further clashes. [Text[ [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX

ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1874 16 Oct 81 p 2635] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et
Cie Paris 1981] 8796

POSSIBLE FOREIGN AID RESUHPTION--It is reported that several financial backers who
are likely to resume sending aid to Chad are planning to hold a meeting in Paris at
the end of October or beginning of November. In addition to France with its bilater-
al aid, these backers are the BBC, the UNDP [UN Development Program], the ADB [Afri-
can Development Bank) and the world Bank. One of the main items in their agenda is
said to be the reconstruction of Ndjamena. [Text] [Paris NARCHES TROPICADX ET MEDI-

TERRANEENS in French No 1874,16 Oct 81 p 2635} [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris
1981] 8796

EDP COTTON FINANCING-~A grant of 9.6 million ECUs [European currency unit] from the
European Development Fund [EDP] is going to a program to support Chad's cotton farm-

ing production. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 187$
16 Oct 81 p 2635] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981) 8796

C50: 4719/44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COIGO

MAJOR TRENDS (1" 1982-1986 DEVELOPMENT PLAN sores
Paris ”0128 TIDPICAUX ET MEDITERMNEENS in French No 1873, 2 Oct 81 p 2510

[Text] The authorities of the People's Ramblic of the Congo are preparing the 5-year
development plan for the 1982-1986 period. That plan and a new Investment Code are
scheduled to be adopted at the end of the year by the National Assembly.

At this stage, only the major trends of the plan have been decided. These trends are
based on the main objective of the recovery and redevelopment of the national territory,

particularly in the following sectors: transportation, telecamunications and infor-
mation, energy infrastructure and commerce.

Regarding transportatim, priority must be given to all domestic transportation links
to facilitate the development of trade inside the regions and between the regions
with a view to expanding the domestic market.

Steps in the sphere of telecoumunications and information will be directed to improve
the postal service and to have a telephme, radio and television network covering the
entire national territory by 1980 [sic] for a rapid circulation of information which
will make it possible to implement programs of popularization in the fields of agri-
culture, health education and culture.

The energy infrastructure must be calpleted to bring electricity into all the district
capitals of all the regions to pranote local predictive activities and to improve the
quality of life of the rural POPulation.

Since the main wheels of the econauy are at present under the control of foreign
capita1--a situation where the shortcomings of the Congolese econauy are ccmpounded by
inflationary pressure and excessive concentration of unproductive cosmercial acti-

vities--one of the objectives of the 1982-1986 plan is to go ahead with the Cmgoli-
ration of commerce.

To nationalize the key sectors, it is necessary for the already created state enter-
prises to become adequately structured, which is not the case right now. This is why
the program adopted at the end of "arch 1981 deals with the following points:

--Development of 14 state enterprises presenting relatively sound conditions of organi-

zation, management, finances and environment and which offer possibilities of
expansion.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«Straightening out 36 state enterprises which are facing problems of organization,
management and environment.

--Reassessing the situation of 14 state enterprises which are facing prdalems in the

sphere of markets and technology to bring them to redirect their activities or even to
eliminate them.

Before drawing up a new commerce code and to revise oouercial regulations and practices,
control over businessmen will be reinforced by means of more specific and consistent
regulations and with more significant means, all of this to achieve the Congolization

of cornerce since one of the priorities of the 1982-1986 plan is to place couuerce
into national hands.

For that purpose, the following guidelines have been agreed upon:
--Eventua1 natimalization of key sectors. particularly in the big import branch.

--The awarding of state markets to enterprises of the national private sector and the
awarding of processing activities to these same enterprises.

The awarding of business monopolies in sane sectors yet to be determined to enter-
prises of the national private sector.

"More strict conditions under which foreigners are allowed to engage in commercial
activities with the requirement that they deposit a bond which will be paid into a
Comerce Guarantee Fund, to which non-national merchants are already contributing.

In April 1981, the African Development Bank (BAD) gave a line of credit of 1 billion
CPA francs to the National Development Bank of the Congo (BNDC) to encourage the
creation of small and medium-size industrial enterprises and cottage industry enter-
prises to process local products. Total investment per unit must quaint to between
40 and 150 million CPA francs with an initial investment of at least 20 percent of
the total investment. The projects must be suinitted for appraisal by the minister
of plan. The BAD's contribution reinforces the means of action available to public
authorities to reorganize local enterprises encouraging them to bring an added value
to the products.

However, the Congolese authorities have reaffirmed their wish to cooperate with the
foreign private sector in the sphere of comeroe.

One of the measures adopted prior to preparing the 1982-1986 plan was to grant a
credit of 300 million CPA francs to the pre-cooperative grcups operating in the spheres
of agricultural and livestock production and rural cottage industry.

The'outlined 1982-1986 plan gives top priority to oil as a source of incense. Oil
will provide 70 percent of the 1981 budget receipts and in 1980 it accounted for more
then 90 percent of the Congolese exports. Oil production is constantly increasing:
2.3 million tons in 1979 and 3 million tests in 1980. Production for 1981 is expected
to amount to 4 million tons, rising to 5 million tons in 1982 and to 6 million tons
in 1983. These expected increases presuppose the exploitation of new deposits.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But oil production is in danger of slowing down after 1983 and the Cargolese authorities
are already making plans for the post-petrol period by having new thoughts about the
problems of more traditional resources, particularly tinber. During the 1980-1990
decade it is essential to boost the exploitation md industrialization of the north

of the Congo taking advantage of a current shortage of the main tree species which

can only be found in sufficient quantities in the Congo and in Central Africa.

Efforts must be urgently made to improve the channels to get the productim out of
the area.

The purpose is to make timber again as important as it should be for the national
economy and to ensure the after-petrol period. To achieve this objective, the timber
industry must be reorganized and there must be large investsents in basic infra-
structures and to help the operators. In this respect. it seems that the monqaoly
of the Congolese Tinber Office (0cm in the field of export is an obstacle to the
development of production.

Difficult financial arbitraticns will have to be made between now and the end of 1981
and the 5-year development plan for the 1982-1986 period will assume its final shape,
be calculated and published before the end of December 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

8796
C50: 4719/143

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FORTOFFNJAI.USB(MVLY

CONGO

BRIEFS

IDA RIVER TRANSPORT CREDIT--The International Development Association (IDA), an affil-
iate of the Rorld Bank. recently extended to the Congo a $17-million credit (14.6
millions worth of special drawing rights) to help finance a $28-nillion project for
the improvement of the country's river transport facilities, mainly to help develop
its timber industry in the north of the country. These river facilities also serve
the south of Cameroon and the Central African Republic. Transport equipment sched-
uled to be supplied include 16 barges, 2 push tugs and 1 tugboat. Data processing
equipment and consultant services will be supplied to the Trans-Congolese Communica-
tions Agency which operates a fleet of freighters and passenger boats over a distance
of 1.120 kilometers on the navigable sections of the Congo and Oubangui rivers.

[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1874.16 Oct 81 p 2637]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

CSC'S RESTORATION 0F DISCIPLINE--The Confederal Executive Commission of the Congolese
Trade Union Confederation (CSC) has decided to restore "authority and discipline"

at all levels. In a communique published in Brazzaville, on 8 October, the CSC
states that it has pointed out the need to revive sanctions in accordance with the
existing regulations, the need to reintroduce a close relationship between wages and
"actually performed and well performed" work, to strictly observe working schedules
and to organize the channels through which the directives issued by the political
leadership are circulated. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANEENS in
French No 1874.16 Oct 81 p 2637] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Noreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

STUDENTS RETURNING TO SCHOOL--The 1981-1982 school year has started throughout the
Congo. A message from the Congolese minister of national education, Antoine Ndings
Oba. states that almost half of the Congolese population has attended school and
that for the current year the number of schoolchildren and students is expected to
be 580,000. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1876116
Oct 81 p 2637] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

C30: 6719/166

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GAMBIA

ESTABLISHMENT (F AGRICULTURAL DBVBIDPMENT BANK memo
Paris MAKZHES TROPICAUX ET HDITERRAMBDS in Freud; NO 1875116 Oct 81 p 2623

[Text] The Gambian Parliament held a special session last 24 and 25 September. It
adopted, among others, a law concerning the establishuent of the Agricultural Develop-
ment Bank.

It appears fran the reports made an that occasion that the Gambian Goverment attaches
great importance to agricultural development and to food production in particular.

The year, 1980-1981 saw the planting of 21,000 hectares of rice, making possible the
production of 21,000 tons of paddy, which are in additiaa to the 12,000 tons of ir-
rigated rice for the sane period.

With regard to peanuts, because of unfavorable climatic cmditions, a drop was noted

in production, which may have been the lowest in 30 years: 05,000 tats only were
harvested. Cotton production for the year 1980-1981 registered at 608 kilograms per
hectare over 1,000 hectares. The goverment intenk to cmtinue expanding and imroving
production.

Cattle marketing is estimated at sane 2.3 million dalasis, of which 1.5 million are
fran export. Nigeria has signed an import agreenent with Gambia for a 5-year period,
during which 5,000 head of cattle will be exported to Nigeria.

As for fishing, the developnent project for the fishing industry is under way, with
European Fund financing. Japan has just granted a subsidy for the acquisition of a
deep-freezing industry, snall boats, outboard motors and accessories, as part of the
effort made in this sector.

The new bank is thus coming at an opportune time. With a capital of 3 sillion dalasis,
it will operate in Banjul as well as in the provinces. It will be involved in the agri-
cultural, fishing and cattle marketing fields.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

9434
CSO: 4719/131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

FRENCH EXPATRIATBS: THEIR IMPORTANCE. COST ANALYZED
Valuable but Expensive
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1083. 7 Oct 81 pp 36-38
[Article by Jean-Claude Hazera: "Can We Get Along Hithout the 'Toubabs'?"]

[Text] Hhat have the French contributed to Ivory Coast? Usual answer: "It works!”
The contrast with Angola or Mozambique of today. for example, shows that the

former colonizers do an effective job of assuring the continuity of a whole series
of systems: public services. administration. trade. banks. etc. Add to this the
economic liberalism displayed by the government and this government's stability

and you have the explanation why foreign capital is more ready to invest in Ivory
Coast than elsewhere.

It can also be said that the former colonizing country developed cadre. though
this point merits critical evaluation. One Frenchman said to us: "I wonder
whether. by exercising the leadership too long. we are not preventing the Ivorian
cadre from making the mistakes which provide the experience."

But if their presence has contributed to creating the conditions for a strong
economic growth. the French have not been the primary factor. no more than they
are responsible for the current economic slow-down. President Houphouet-Boigny's
main economic principle. which makes his country fundamentally different. is the
maintenance and development of agriculture. He addresses his speeches primarily
to the peasants.

Ivory Coast's growth is primarily in the agricultural sector. which contributes the
bulk of exports. The French still play an important role in this sector: economic
advisers to establish the stabilization fund and scientific experts in the agricul-
tural research institutes. The impact of this research can be very great. But it
is not Frenchmen who manage the plantations. except in very special cases (lumber.
rubber...). The sweating farmers in Ivory Coast are in reality other foreigners.
Voltans or Halians. supervised by Ivorian planters.

Resentment

In the administration certain Frenchmen are. although discreetly. more than advisers.
Several are directors of ministries or departments. However. the Ivory Coast has
never objected to people from other African states serving as ministers. Anyway. it
is Houphouet-Boigny who runs the country.

7
INJIIOFF1CIAL.USE1ONIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To answer the question: "Do the French run the Ivory Coast?". one must concen-
trate on the relations between the president and the former colonizer. Under de
Caulle these relations reflected great mutual esteem; under Giscard lack of under-
standing led to resentment. Under Hitterrand. relations seem again to be favored
by the personal friendship between the two headc of state. If Ivory Coast wise to
depend on such a high proportion of workers imported from France? To find out. we
need to study how much of the wealth goes to the French. Their status is not
exactly that of an African worker in France living in a maid's room or a home.
when one sees the villas of Cocody. the cars. the servant boys, the chauffeurs,
one cannot help wondering--whatever one thinks about the legitimacy of this way

of life--how much of a burden it is on the country's economy. At any rate. some
Frenchmen say very clearly: "Otherwise we would not come."

A curious thing: the Ivorian authorities do not seem very interested in this
overall economic evaluation. The Central Bank reportedly did an estimate of out-
going funds attributable to the French. leading to the conclusion that their
presence is expensive; but not all regard the analysis as convincing. In 1975.
the expatriates. representing 5 percent of the work forces received 40 percent of
gross industrial salary. while the Ivorians representing #7 percent. had to settle
for 37 percent and the non-lvorians. the other #7 percent. for 23 percent. This
illustrates the following statement from the draft plan for 1976-1980: "One of
the major handicaps in industrialization is indeed the extra cost to factories
through using expatriate staff." Moreover. managers readily admit it. It is one
of the causes of the high price of Ivorian’products.

Without claiming to calculate to the nearest penny the portion of the national
wealth received by the French. it is nevertheless possible to give a rough estimate:
at minimum one-tenth. with 20.000 workers receiving an average monthly income of
708.000 Fr CFA (Fr fr 14.160). perquisites included (houses. etc.) Twelve months
would amount to 10 percent of a GNP of about 1.7 billion Fr CFA. not counting the
profits from invested French capital.

"Ivorization"

One can conclude that such a drain is not serious insofar as the wealthy stimulate
trade. be they French or Ivorian. Moreover. the income of the Ivorian upper middle
class is no lower than that of the French. It would nevertheless be interesting to
know the cost in foreign exchange. That is. to know how much of their salary they
send to France and how much they spend in Ivory Coast to pay for imported products
(cars. household furnishing. wine, cheese. etc.)] The range of French products
offered by a supermarket in downtown Abidjan inevitably makes one wonder: how
much of the precious foreign exchange earned by the sale of coffee and cocoa leaves
again in this way? Lacking an analysis. we can only recall that the chronic prob-
lem of Ivorian foreign trade remained a regular deficit in the balance of payments
despite a positive balance of trade. Nevertheless. it should be noted that the
trade surplus is not due to France. with which the imbalance has always been to
the detriment of Ivory Coast. A deficit of 33.3 billion Fr CFA in 1977; and more
than 85 billion in 1980.

Could Ivorians do without the French then? Could "ivorization" be speeded up?
There are a multitude of arrangements. regulations. and proposals. How are they

FOI.OF11C1AI.US£(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

applied? From absolute zero in 1960, the Ivorian share of industrial capital
reached 105 percent in 1980. In principle. no foreigner can work without a work
contract in proper form and without the approval of the Ivory Coast Labor Office
(mm). In practice. there is no control or enforcement to ensure that these
provisions are taken seriously.

Unemp loyment

Although the major corporations prudently adhere to these regulations. most of the
artisans and other small entrepreneurs who came to seek their fortune during the
coffee boon paid little attention to them. Reportedly, Bretaon was even seen to
disembark with his huge tractor-trailer intending to go to work imediately with-
out asking anyone. though the transport sector is in theory closed to foreigners.
lie was apparently granted an exception.

Only the "ivorization plans" for the more important enterprises seem worthwhile.
The formula is flexible: the Ministry of Labor simply requests the enterprise

to itself plan the "ivorization" of a position and checks again on the effective
date. The proportion of European expatriates in industry is thus declining slowly
(today it must be about to percent). The pressure would not become stronger with-
out a political decision at the highest level. And we are not yet at that point.

However. recently a new element has been adding some inediacy to the problem.

it seems that for the first time some Ivorian cadre are unemployed. They have
even formed an association. The reasons for this unusual phenomenon are easy to
grasp. The economic stagnation is reducing hiring. Some Frenchmen have left the
country because of cutbacks in personnel or redirection of activities to other
countries: Cameroon. Gabon. Nigeria. This is true particularly in public works.
A number of "small whites" who had been attracted by the housing boom (masons,
carpenters. plumbers. etc.) have left. Others have got into difficulties and
found themselves in prison for minor swindles. At the same time. an increasing
number of Ivorians are leaving the university, diploma in hand. Also. the dis-
solution in June 1980, because of inefficiency. of 29 out of the 36 existing
national corporations has put many Ivorian cadre out on the sidewalk. especially
since these corporations often had swollen management staffs.

Both the employers. particularly the French directors of enterprises. and the
authorities take a similar attitude to this whiff of unemployment. No one seems
to dramatize or be afraid of a growth in the phenomenon. No one seems to think
that the reaction. as concerns the French. would go beyond a mild xenophobia. The
Lebanese risk greater problems. it is sometimes thought. The development of a
degree of insecurity. blamed on the Voltans or Halians. also directs attention to
other foreigners.

Frust rat ions

However. neither side seems to want to allow the cadre unemployment problem to
deteriorate. In a politically very stable country like Ivory Coast. where there
is no voice of an organized political opposition. the students are no doubt the
primary source of potential trouble. Thus it is unthinkable to allow the develop-
ment among them of too many specific frustrations. which would be all the more

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

violent because the young graduates feel obligated to fulfill all the hopes that
their families have placed in them.

In an effort to reduce this unemployment. the labor minister met with industrial
leaders at the end of Harch 1981 to present the problem and ask them to try to
hire the 600 cadre then unemployed. However. both sides pointed out that the
majority among them had training which was saleable with difficulty in the Ivorian
labor market: there were. for example. many degrees in literature and modern
languages. Yet "ivorization" of teaching in these subjects has virtually been
discontinued. It is in mathematics and sciences that personnel are lacking and it
is these subjects that the majority (76 percent) of French instructors are teach-
ing. Among the unemployed are also some holders of degrees in. frankly. "exotic"
disciplines, for example criminology. One official said: "If only we could have
made him a police comissioner!"

Inef f iciency

The industrialists concluded that in the final analysis only 150 among them would
be suitable for specific jobs in trade and industry. and depending on an inventory.
at that. It was necessary to exclude those “graduates" with false diplomas (a
comon traffic which Ivory Coast authorities are trying to eliminate). and those
who have declared themselves unemployed because they want to change jobs. while
already employed.

How is the situation likely to develop in the longer term? It is hard to believe
that Ivory Coast will soon suffer from an excess of graduates. as has been the
case for several years in wealthy countries. UNESCO's latest statistics annual
reports that in 1977 there were still only 133 students per 100,000 Ivory Coast
inhabitants. compared to 282 in Gabon. 366 in Morocco. 368 in Algeria. 1054 in
Tunisia. and 1.368 in Egypt. But the education must also respond to the needs.
and the jobs offered must be acceptable to the young graduates.

One can point to at least two problems in this regard. First. Ivoriane seem to be
little attracted to teaching. particularly scientific subjects. although it is a
field in which there are Frenchmen to replace. Secondly, the generation which is
coming of age to seek employment will be less favored than its predecessors by

the shortage of cadre. Gone is the time when one could be a director general or
ambassador at 30. An official close to the president told us: "Our ambassadors
are 1.0. We are not going to retire them in order to appoint young people."

And in the private sector? Are the French really ready to yield their positions?
For a clearer view. we asked French managers and staff what they thought of their
Ivorian colleagues. The first conclusion: they all agree in saying that the
French are expensive and must be replaced as far as possible with Ivorians. Second
conclusion: they have reservations. implicit or explicit. about the efficiency of
Ivorian cadre: production has dropped in a certain factory where an Ivorian fore-
man has replaced an expatriate; in the banking sector--the sector most affected by
"ivorization"--it has been necessary to readmit a large proportion of expatriates;
in another company a young Ivorian engineer has rapidly alienated all the personnel
of the factory...By digging a little. one learns that the reservations of the French
are quite precise and easy to describe.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
First criticism, which echoes a warning often found in the speeches of Felix
Houphouet-Boigny: the reactions of the employee. Some new cadre have the impres-
sion that once they have their diplola in hand everything is done. They have only
to enjoy their sinecure.

Fear

Second criticism. which seems fundamental: difficulty of supervision. According
to the French. the Ivorian cadre reportedly are always afraid that the subordinate
may be a brother. cousin. or friend of someone powerful who could harm them and
their family. We can thus better understand what is often the role of the French
cadre: a buffer between Ivorians. Several Frenchmen have told us. in effect:
they know I am neutral. that I act in relation to the interests of my management
or my enterprise. and that I have no ulterior motive, ethnic or political.

However. young Ivorian cadre do seem to handle better the problem of supervision
if they have been trained in the Ivory Coast. rather than spending several years
in France. Re have been told that there is nothing worse than the work relations

of a young cadre assuming responsibility after having been completely cut off from
Ivorian society.

A final criticism-~perhaps the most serious consequence of a presence as large and
prolonged as the French--the Ivorian cadre are expensive. "They want to be paid
like the expatriates they are replacing and even to benefit from all that the
French have in addition to their salary: expatriation bonuses. housing. travel

to France. car..." The new employees. particularly. are considered expensive.
"They want immediately the lifestyle that their family expects of a cadre," the
French explain.

In an economy which has great difficulty in being competitive in other than agri-
cultural products, such a high requirement by the cadre is a serious handicap.
Generally. it is to be feared that in the end the most negative effect of the
French presence may be to leave in the spirit of the Ivorian elite an excessive
tendency to imitate everything French. It is quite understandable that Ivorians
of means find sir-conditioners very attractive. It is not only whites who feel
the heat. But the day when Ivorian cadre will consider. like their French
colleagues. that there is no happiness on earth without a camembert or a good bot-
tle of Bordeaux. there will be little left of the exchange earnings from coffee
and cocoa.

COPYRIGUT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981 "
Opinions of Ivorian Cadre

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1083. 7 Oct 81 p 37

[Text] With some 3,900 technical advisers (precise figure 3.976 in 1980. or one-
third of all French advisers throughout the world). Ivory Coast is the "largest
consumer" of French technicians in Africa. Far behind it come Senegal (1.300) then
Cameroon. Gabon and Madagascar with 700 each. Among the technical advisers sta-
tioned in Ivory Coast. teachers are in large majority (80 percent), and technical
training specialists predominate.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what do Ivorian cadre think about this? A poll by Marco-er-Gallup International

for JEUNE APRIQUE ECONOMIE. published in the first issue (October) of that monthly
reveals that Ivorians believe the (strong) presence of "cooperants" to be still
necessary in the technical and scientific field: 55 percent of those polled (of

a sample of 112 cadre in Abidjan and Bouake) gave this opinion. But the technical
field goes far beyond teaching: it includes the entire scientific and technologi-
cal sector. That is. in addition to teachers, the foreign operational technicians--
both researchers and engineers in industry or the latest technology-are still
"wanted" in Ivory Coast.

0n the other hand. the presence of "cooperants" is henceforth regarded as "undesir-
able" in the administration: 32 percent of Ivorian cadre favor their departure,
and only 10 percent want then to remain. This attitude shows at least a serene
frame of mind toward the shortages of Ivory Coast: foreign technicians are still
wanted. but henceforth Ivorians can administer themselves.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9920
C50: 4719/125

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

HITTERRAND,RAISIRAKA INAUGURAIE NEW RELAIIONSHIP
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 250, 12 Oct 81 pp 13-16
[Article by Simon Halley: "Ratsiraka in Paris: “hat Really Happened"]

[Text] It was a Didier Ratsiraka with face beaming and eyes shining with that
hope. that optimism in the future of his country that never leaves him who said
"su revoir" to President Francois Hitterrand on 30 September at the conclusion of
their official talks at the Elysee. Hhat passed between the two heads of state
during their long conversation? Did they succeed in establishing what they both
desired. a dialogue of a permanent nature. friendly, frank. sincere and productive,
in full awareness that the whole relationship between France and the African
states on the Indian Ocean depends on such a dialogue. particularly in view of
Madagascar's strategic position in the area?

Before receiving President Ratairaka, Francois Hitterrand had studied the Malagasy
file at length. He had already met his guest. who had visited him during one of
his recent trips to Paris (in the Giscard era).

The Scattered Islands

He was aware of his guest's considerable public prestige among the nonaligned
countries, especially the progressive and revolutionary regimes of Africa. the
Arab world. Asia and Latin America. since he had taken care to question and listen
to all those who knew him well in order to gain a clear impression of the man. his
deeper motivations. and the problems which preoccupy the political. economic, and
social scene of the island. FrancoisMitterrandwas fully up to date on the
numerous attempts at destabilization. sabotage. and plots concocted by various
power groups. including elements of the French Rightwing in collusion with Malagasy
reactionary political elements. In President Hiterrand's view, the campaign
orchestrated by part of the French press against the Malagasy regime was both
remotely controlled by a strong anti-Malagasy lobby rooted in Reunion and in some
sectors of French management and inspired, if not financed. by all who felt that
the Ratsiraka regime threatened their neocolonial interests. In summary. if the
objective of the several press articles--in which distortion of facts competed
with calumny. and which were published on the same day as the Hitterrand-Ratsiraka
meeting--was to harm French-Malagasy relations, then one can affirm without fear

of contradiction that the purpose was not achieved. Quite the contrary. This
mini-campaign amused the two heads of state. who know the source and the originators.

13

F‘“!(NWHCJAI.USE13NLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In fact, it had an opposite effect to that desired: "If the Right was trying to
torpedo our meeting, this means that we are on the right road...," they said. The
discussions indeed began with favorable prospects. One of President Mitterrand's
close advisers confided to us: "It was almost as if a kind of osmosis occurred
the moment the two leaders shook hands."

Three main problems confronted the two presidents. who at the outset by mutual
agreement had decided to turn a page in the relations which had prevailed between
Madagascar and France since Didier Ratsiraka's assumption of power in 1975: "Rela-
tions constantly clouded by misjudged intentions. unfounded accusations. and

unjustified criticisms directed by some rightwing and extreme rightwing French
elements against the government of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar, committed

to its socialist course."

It was a question, first of all, within the framework of the well-elaborated geo-
political vision of both parties, to agree on an overall strategy for the medium
and long term. ﬂow. for example could the policy of socialist France fit into

the context of the rivalries and covetousness of which the Indian Ocean is today
both the stake and the target? In Didier Ratsiraka's view, no one can remain
equivocal on this issue. Madagascar can be regarded as one of the countries most
faithful to nonalignment. both in the area and the African continent as a whole.
Not only has it never agreed to grant bases to any foreign power, and refused to
allow naval ships of the superpowers to dock in its ports. but it persists in
stressing forcefully that its priority program--to transform the Indian Ocean into
a "zone of peace.“ demilitarized. denuclearized--is a full expression of its
inflexible will to preserve, develop. and strengthen the independence and
sovereignty of its own country as well as contributing to that of the other coastal
states. Has it not resumed its pilgrim task to convince these states of the neces-
sity of an international conference to ensure Indian Ocean security? Has not this
will impelled it to raise, once again. the issue of the scattered islands (Europa.
Bassa dc India, Juan de Nova, Glorieuses and Tromelin), which are still under French
jurisdiction despite the numerous UN and OAU resolutions calling for their return
to Madagascar, of which they are an integral part?

Said Ratsiraka: "Since we are still poor, what do we have but our dignity and our
sovereignty to protect and defend?" Impressed by these views expressed by his
guest with such conviction, Francois Mitterrand did not hesitate. answering in
effect: "The return of these islands to Madagascar is part of the program of the
Socialist Party and government. All our commitments will be honored... We are ready
to promptly open negotiations on this subject..."

"Ail-Around" Cooperation

The issue of French-Malagasy cooperation, which had already been discussed at length
by President Ratsiraka. Minister of External Relations Claude Cheysson. and the
minister delegate for cooperation and development. Jean-Pierre Cot. did not present
any insurmountable obstacle. Given Francois Mitterrand's conviction that for
socialist France cooperation must benefit both partners. that it is not a matter

of viewing cooperation as "aid" or a "gift" but something that inevitably involves

a return. the French Government plans to develop by all possible means its policy

of cooperation with Madagascar to help it overcome its economic and financial
problems. The goal is to end the pressures and blackmail by some international

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

bodies which view "cooperation" only in terms of profitability for the indus-
trialized. developed powers. For example. if Madagascar experiences this year an
unexpected fall in coffee prices* which warms the hearts of international
speculators--, how could France's cooperation policy inaugurated by Jean-Pierre
Cot contribute to easing the effects? Mere also. an agreement in principle was
soon reached by the two heads of state: Paris and Antananarivo will begin
negotiations as soon as possible to reach a new "all-around" cooperation agreement
which would revise radically all the agreements signed with the Giscard government.

One significant and revealing aspect of the atmosphere at the 30 September meeting:
At no time did President Mitterrand try to raise the issue of Madagascar's alleged
dependence on one or another camp. he said: "whatever your difficulties. I know
that you have succeeded in keeping your country as far as possible from the
rivalries which continue to surface in this vital area of the world..."

And Libya?

There was. finally. the key problem of the political situation on the African
continent. of which the Malagasy president gave an overall review. Not wishing

to serve as the apologist for this or that country. or this or that political
regime, he was concerned that the president not be misled by anyone regarding his
own analysis of the events affecting the continent. And. even if Libya remains a
"cause for concern" to Paris. Ratsiraka affirmed his belief--shared. basically. by
President Mitterrand himself. as he clearly indicated in his Riyadh press confer-
ence--that the disinformation campaign directed at Madagascar also affects other
countries, some of which have been trying to distort the policy or exaggerate the
alleged aims or ambitions. Having previously talked at length to President
Qadhdhafi, Ratsiraka said he was convinced that the Libyan leader is willing to
withdraw his troops from Chadian territory whenever President Goukouni, recognized
by the CAD as sole interim president of Chad. requests their withdrawal. Also. did
not the victory of the French Left on 10 May, hailed by Qadhdhafi. give Francois
Mitterrand the opportunity to try to establish a direct dialogue with Tripoli?

And might not President Ratsiraka be the intermediary for this? Since he is
respected by both sides, the Elysee is seriously studying the role he might play
in this respect. The Elysee is aware that he is perhaps the only one among the
progressive African leaders who could assume this important responsibility.

But that is not all. A multitude of other regional and international problems
were reviewed and sometimes debated with the passionate conviction of "men of the
Left" by Miterrand and Ratsiraka, who plan other meetings. The Malagasy head of
state has issued an official invitation to his counterpart to visit Madagascar.
Confidences were exchanged. and secret decisions made. Not all have been made
known. At any rate. we can say that for the Malagasy people there will be new and
pleasant surprises.

*
The price per pound of coffee, which rose to $1.15 in 1980, has today fallen to
about 65 cents.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9920

C50: 0719/120
lS

FOIIOFFHJAL.USE(MMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

AUSTRIAN LOANS T0 FUND DISTILLERY FOR ALCOHOL FUEL FROM SUGAR
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1872. 25 Sep 81 p 2457

[Text] At the beginning of September an agreement was signed in Antananarivo
between officials of SlRAMA (Malagasy National Sugar Corporation) and a delegation
of the Austrian corporation VEH (Vereinigte Bdelstahlwerke AG) on expansion of
SIRAMA operations to production of alcohol fuel.

The agreement concerns specifically a project for a distillery at Ambilobe. The
Ambilobe sugarmill. which has a production capacity of 60,000 tons of sugar per
year, exported thus far about 24.000 tons in the form of molasses at rather vari-
able prices. SIRAMA decided to profit from the by-product. and the yeast unit has
been using 2,000 tons of molasses per year. The remaining 22.000 tons will in
future be processed by a distillery to produce alcohol fuel. The planned capacity
is 600 hectoliters of alcohol at 100 degrees per day. producing 150 days a year.
that is, an annual production of 90.000 hectoliters. The quantity of molasses now
available will permit production of about 70,000 hectoliters per year. An expan-
sion of the sugarmill's production capacity (already planned) will make it possible
to reach 90,000 hectoliters. The distillery can also operate more than the men-
tioned 150 days by treating other agricultural products. manioc for example.

The investment necessary to establish the distillery is estimated at 2.2 billion
Malagasy francs, of which 1.7 billion in equipment will be covered by a commercial
contract between SIRAMA and V3“. and the remaining 500 million will be civil engi-
neering work by SIRAMA. The financing of the equipment is provided by the agreement
signed at the beginning of September for two Austrian loans: 600 million Malagasy
francs repayable in 25 years, with deferral of 13 years, at 2 percent, and 1.1 mil-
lion repayable in 11 years, with deferral of 38 years, at 6.5 percent. These low
interest rates and long repayment periods were obtained thanks to the assistance of
the Austrian Government. The project will go into operation at the end of 1983.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1981.

9920
C30: 4719/120

16

FOR‘OFFHJAL.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

NEW FERI'ILIZBR MARYS TO SAT!“ DWIC NEEDS
Paris NAMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITBWEDS in French NO 1875.16 Oct 81 p 2643

[Text] Malagasy agriculture lacks fertilizer. This is pointed out by a study pub-
lished by the daily MADAGASCAR-”TIN, which states that the forecasts for fertilizer
use in the 1901-1982 agricultural campaign are acne 10,000 tons, whereas 70,000 tons
would have to be used in order to make it possible to produce the 200,000 additional
tons of white rice which the country is obliged to import.

If the peasants are prepared to use fertilizer, it would be preferable. the newspaper
writes, to import 70,000 tons of fertilizer, rather than 200,000 tons of rice. But
the problem is not so simple. The fertilizers used at present are often provided in
the form of gifts and then delivered to the peasants at reasonable prices, which are
nonetheless high for them, all the more since the habit of using fertilizers has not
yet become normal practice. It is only since 1963 that mineral fertilizers have
begun to be used in the traditimal peasant environment, with the operation “rice pro-
duction." Subsequently, a rather marked increase was experienced, and in 1971-1972,
fertilizer use in Madagascar reached 10,000 tons of NPK (that is, 1.7 kilograns per
inhabitant as against an average of 100 kilograms in Europe. or 5 kilograms per
hectare as against a world average of 41.4 kilograms). Consumption then diminished,
to pick up again since 1976: from 5.000 tons in 1980, it is expected to go to 10,000
tons in 1981-1982.

Thus, a national plan for fertilizer productim was set in operatim, involving in the
first stage, two plants: chemical fertilizers at Toamasina and organitrbiological
fertilizers at Amboasary.

Construction of the Ze-Ren fertilizer plant at Toamasina is making good progress, and
on 22 September. 80 percent of the civil engineering work was finished, and 7S per-
cent of the plant equipment installed. Let us recall that the ammonia unit is being
provided by Austria. the urea unit by Canada, and the rest of the equipment by‘the
Federal Republic of Germany, among others. The plant is being built by the American
group N-Ren International. Ltd., associated with the Malagasy State (75 percent for
the latter). The first stone of the Toamasina plant was laid at the end of December
1978. with investments of scme 4 billion Malagasy francs, the Ze-mn plant in Toamasina
(which is also called Pamokarana Zezika Toamasina in Madagascar) will have a pro-
duction capacity of 90,000 tens of urea per year. It will use, in particular,
petroleum products (naphtha and fuel oil) provided by Solima.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The other fertilizer plant, that of Zezika Malagasy (Zena), is on the way to canpletion
at Anboasary. Like Ze—Mn, it will begin production at the beginning of next year.
Constructed with Franco-Malagasy financing (the Central Treasury in particular) of
sane 2 billion Malagasy francs by the Engineering and Management Works Company (STBG.

a French company) . the plant will process local raw materials based on sisal, algae
and dolomite wastes; it will be able to deliver sale 22,000 tars of organic-biological
fertilizers per year with one 8-hour shift per day and double that with two shifts.

Let us add that Madagascar is also considering using, later on, phosphates from the
small islands off Haintirano, based at sea bird wastes. or Ianufacturing fertilizer
fran cattle bones, which are abundant but which would be difficult to collect.
COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9434
CSO: 4719/131

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

SOYA ENTERPRISE-—Soya is soon to be grown on an industrial scale in Antananarivo
faritany with the establishment of the Hamiaoa socialist enterprise for soya
development in Hoyen—Ouest. Betafo region. Begun last year in Amparihy-Penomanana
Eokontany. Mandoto firaisampokontany, the soya-growing experiments have been com-
pleted and expansion work will begin this year. Hamisoa will not limit itself to
soya culture. but also grow other crops such as maize and maniac which are neces-
sary to animal diet. This year, 1,070 hectares of says are to be developed. though
Betafo fivondronana by itself is not interested in such a large operation. Indeed,
in the next few years Hamiaoa will also work in the fivondronana of Tsiroanamandidy
and Soavinandirana. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HZDITERRANEENS in French
No 1872. 25 Sep 81 p 2457] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9920

CSO: 4719/120

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITIUS

CLOSER BUSINESS COOPERATION WITH REUNION DISCUSS-

Paris AFRIOUB-ASIE in French No 250, 12 Oct 81 pp XX-XXII

[Article by special correspondent Dorothee Durban: 'Uncertain Economic
Future Seen:/

[Text] The general development of the situation in the Indian
Ocean points to the need for rapprochement among the islands.

but there are numerous inhibiting factors. both political and

economic.

In April 1981 meetings were held in Mauritius of professionals from Mauritius and
Reunion. The meetings were organized by the chambers of commerce and industry and
the principal management groups of the two islands. Also present were the French
embassy commercial attache. the representative of the European communities' delega-
tion to Mauritius, as well as government representatives only from Mauritius.
Attending were 35 prominent persons from socio—economic sectors in Reunion.
received by a larger number of Hauritians.

The last meeting of this kind was held in 1969. just after Mauritian independence.
This "establishment of contact." this "exploration," as Charles Isautier. president
of the Reunion chamber of commerce and industry. put it. was intended to benefit
the sister islands. a cooperation long sought by all the island's political organi-
zations and recently encouraged by Claude Cheysson during his tour of the area,
while still commissioner for development of the EEC. It was also with his encourage-
ment that the meeting. for which the initiative came from the economic representa-
tives of the two islands, took shape. During his latest trip in the Indian Ocean
area. Claude Cheysson said: "Don't turn your back on the region! Unite against
those who come to invade your fishing zones! Organize, economically and
politically, to manage and control these zones! Develop your scientific, technical
and political relations! History has woven ties between you, and you form a com-
pact geographic and strategic area. Europe is ready to help you! It has consider-
able means which can be made available to you..."

There has been trade between the islands for a long time. though without it reaching
a level of importance. since it is only 3 percent of Reunien's trade balance, and
Mauritius is only the 16th trading partner.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

End Mutual Ignorance

In 1979 Reunion imported from Mauritius 6,800 tons of merchandise worth 17.864 bil-
lion francs and exported to it 1.521 tons worth 6.3b9 billion. The bulk of the
imbalance is due to import of clothing. fertilizer. and paper.

The organizers of the meetings had set as goals: to exchange ideas. identify areas
in which cooperation could be started or developed between Mauritian and Reunion
professionals. study measures to be taken to promote this cooperation. and. finally.
to make concrete proposals for action. On conclusion of the discussions. both
sides felt that the result had been positive. though they did not foresee immediate
results. The final communique said that despite the indisputable historical and
cultural ties the similarity of the economies. both basically sugar. considerably
reduced the possibilities for cooperation and trade. The communique added that the
very strongly marked vertical relations--with France for Reunion. and Great Britain
for Mauritius--and mutual ignorance regarding the capabilities and needs of each
island constituted a significant hindrance to possibilities for cooperation between
the two small island entities. although their future can only be seen as one of
cooperation.

The participants were also prudent in their conclusions and suggestions worked out

in the four committees: tourist cooperation. inter-island communications. supply

of services and investment. In each committee there was emphasis on the need to

get to know the neighbor better. to put an end to "mutual ignorance of the particular
capabilities and needs of each island."

In regard to tourism. it is certainly Reunion which stood to gain from the sugges-
tions made. since it has only one-sixth the number of visitors to Mauritius. A
matter of prices and attractions. The committee proposed that they launch promotion
of a joint package offer for the two destinations. while adjusting prices. that is.
to break the Air France monopoly.

The committee on inter-island communications called for a unified tariff system for
port services. coordination of airline schedules. and improvement of telephone
services.

The committee on exchanges concerning supply of services envisaged formation of a
joint economic data bank and increased education exchanges: retraining sessions.
lectures. joint education activities. etc.

But it was in the last committee on investments that the most important decisions
for the future and for cooperation between the two islands were made. This commit-
tee was also the best attended and obviously the subject of more interest. Hhat
goals did this committee formulate? That Reunion entrepreneurs gain maximum bene-
fit from the opportunities offered them to Join in the Mauritian free zone. That
labor-intensive production be carried out in Mauritius. where conditions are
clearly advantageous--a way of saying that they are more exploited-compared to
Reunion. Finally. that industries be created. "on the basis of mixed financial
participation." or be developed to supply the market of each island. After reading
these resolution. one can foresee what will happen. Reunion capital. but par-
ticularly French capital via Reunion, will go to invest in the Mauritius free zone.

21

FOR OFTWCIAL USEZCNNLY
FOR 0FF1C1AL USIICMNLY

assured of finding inexpensive labor. and lower operating and service costs. More-
over. Mauritius offers a deep-water port with 400 meters of piers. which Reunion
will not be able to offer until 1986. and an international airport linked by direct
flight to all major world centers (London. Sydney. Johannesburg. Paris. Rome.
Frankfurt. Bombay. and Taiwan).

if this turns out to be the logical outcome of the proposals made during the meet-
ings. and there is very reason to think it will. then the Reunion people will once
again be both purchasers and consumers. when it is the production capacities of the
island which must be developed to ease the unemployment. This reasoning can even
apply to those areas where cooperation appears eminently profitable for the two
sides: computer science. for example. Sharing of tasks could follow exactly the
preference stated by the chairman of the Mauritian chamber of commerce and industry:
"Reunion. which is impressive for its fine infrastructure. modern equipment, and
quality of human resources. could contribute its advanced technology. while
Mauritius would provide its industrial experience and its abundant. intelligent

and significantly cheaper labor." In this field. Mauritius is still in its
infancy. with only one-quarter the computer inventory of Reunion. But what does
the committee propose? Aid and training of Mauritian computer experts. but
especially establishment of companies for common services in the Mauritian free
zone. Again. the immediate interest of the Reunion capitalists gets precedence.

What will result from the Suggestions put forward at this meeting? The secretary
general of the chamber of employers said on his return to Reunion: "The most
interesting results can be expected at the level of export of services. in train-
ing. studies. computers. telecommunications and meteorology. He must be very
modest. and not spend time wondering how we can sell. to countries with limited
purchasing power. things we are not even yet producing."

Beyond this initial conclusion. delegation members expressed the hope that similar
talks can be opened between the Seychelles and Madagascar. in order to genuinely
launch the process of creating an Indian Ocean "Common Market." But there are
many problems. There are certainly problems of a political nature. since the idea
of cooperation with the leaders of the Seychelles or Madagascar has thus far not
aroused any enthusiasm on the part of the Mauritian or Reunion authorities. But
the general evolution of the situation in the Indian Ocean argues in favor of such
rapprochements. and it is known that Reunion economic circles and a significant
element of the local bourgeoisie are ready for them.

Heavy Guardianship

Another important problem is France's tutelage over its Indian Ocean department;
thus far a totally static guardianship in respect to relations with Mauritius.
Charles Isautier. chairman of the Reunion Chamber of Commerce and Industry. says
frankly: France's assistance is in this area more of a handicap than anything
else. like. paradoxically--and the contradiction is interesting--. the maze of
economic and financial regulations which constitute Reunion's status as a French
department. However. the problems are little different for Mauritius. which still
depends on its former powerful guardian.

22

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(JNLY
and finance three projects for Rodrigues: set up a property register. construct
fishemen's housing, and improve health services. The other projects involve
diversification of agriculture and food production generally. In the latter field.
the Mauritian efforts have been very significant. The govern-eat has decided to

These efforts pill be accompanied by a series of other neaaures: increase in energy
production by sugarmills. enabling a saving of 95,000 tons of petroleum per year;
production of ethanol from molasses to be used for fuel. of which the initial tests

by 30 percent, thus creating more jobs; establishment of a zone for export of

services: "offshore banking." a bureau of consultants to create jobs in the
tertiary sector.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

.9920
C80: 6719/12!

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

first unit (also a lé-megawatt unit) recently went into operation, will burn local
coal thus cutting back on the use of imported oil and offering a greater guarantee

to the supply of electrical power for the uranium industry and the local population.
The loan was granted to the Anon—Maren Coal Company of Niger (SONICHAR) for a period
of 16 years and at an interest rate of 8 percent, taking into account the interest
discount on the resources of the European Development Fund. SONICHAR is a stock
company created in 1977 in which the Nigerian State hold 66 percent of the stock in
partnership with the Islamic Development Bank and the companies operating the uranium
mines. The total estimated cost of the second unit is 25 million CPA francs and this
unit is expected to start operating during 1982. The project will be carried out
with technical assistance provided by the French Electric Power Company (EDP). The
African Development Bank. the Central fund for Economic Development, the Abu Dhabi
Fund and the Government of Nigeria will help finance this expansion project. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1874, 16 Oct 81 p 2626]
[COPYRIGlsz Rene Moreux et Cic Paris 1981] 8796

EDUCATIONAL STATISTICS--In Niger, where 90 percent of the adult population is illiter-
ate, 260.000 children are attending primary school and 33,000 secondary school as the
new school year has started, according to figures issued by the Ministry of National
Education. The school attendance rate in Niger is about 20 percent and the figures

ers are Nigerian nationals. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX BT HBDITBRRANEENS in
French No 18710.16 Oct 81 p 2626] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

CSO: 4719/1414
24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!:0FFNJAL.USE(NVLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

SAED‘S RICE, TOMATO PRODUCTION--Serigne Lamine Diop, Senegal‘s minister of rural de-
velopment, who visited the peanut growing region in September, traveled to the Pleuve
region at the beginning of October and visited, in particular, the irrigated areas

of the SAED (Company for the Development and Exploitation of the Delta). This visit
coincides with a change in the status of the SAED which is no longer a public concern
but a national company. Explaining the reasons for the change, the minister of rural
development said that, in the future, the president-director general will have elbow
room to manage his company. It will be easier to finance agricultural programs be-
cause they will no longer be subjected to a priori control. The government, which
has just signed a planning contract with the company, has promised to provide it

with sufficient funds. The company, for its part, has con-utted itself to produce
50,000 tons of rice in 3 years‘ time. This represents the amount of rice consumed in
the country in 2 months. Three years from now, the tomato production is expected to
be 60,000 tons, which represents the country‘s overall consumption. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1874 16 Oct 81] [COPYRIGHTz Rene

Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

cso: 4719/1“

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TANZANIA

BRIEFS

NEH INTERNAL TRADE REGULATIONSnTanzanian Minister of Comerce Ali Hohuno announced
in Masasi, on 9 October. that as of this coning November the Regional Trading Compan-
ies (RTC) of Tanzania must order their goods directly from Tanzanian industrialists
by a system of credit. The RTCs, located in areas far fro. industrial centers,

must pay for their orders through the National Bank of Commerce (NBC) 1.5 days after
delivery. For the regions where the industries are located, payment will be made

15 days after delivery. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French
No 1871., 16 Oct 81 p 2641] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

EDP WATER SUPPLY GRANT-«The European Development Fund [EDP] will provide a grant of
5 million ECU: [European currency unit] for the water supply of Ntwara, a coastal
town in southern Tanzania. [Text] [Paris HARGES TROPICAIIX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in
French No 1871., 16 Oct 81 p 2641] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

C80: 4719/1106

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

BRIEFS

INCREASE OF CRIMINAL ACTIVITY-The increase of crimes recently reported in Zambia has
made the Lusaka authorities react. Thus, the secretary of state for defense and se-
curity, Zulu, has asked the police to increase their patrols on the borders. In addi-
tion to this step, the inspector general of the Zambian Police, Fabiano Chela, told
the press on 2 October, in Lusaka, that some "influential people" and Zambian "lead-
ers" were using "various methods" to encourage crime, including bribery of police
officials. Referring to these "leaders", he said: "Not only they do not cooperate
in the fight against crime, but they also actually engage in activities which demor-
alize those who are actively fighting crime." As part of the fight against crime,
particularly in the Copperbelt region, it has been decided that from now on bars will
close at 1800 hours in Ndola. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in
French No 1876,16 Oct 81 p 2641] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

AUTOMOBILE PLANT CLOSURE--A spokesman for the Zambian state holding company INDBSCO
(Industrial Development Corporation) announced in Lusaka, on 1 October, that the

half-pay while waiting for spare parts to be imported. The original plan was to
have some work done in the plant while it was closed to diversify its production.
That plan was abandoned for lack of foreign exchange. INDBSCO has also announced that

plantation. Construction work was scheduled to start in 1982. Under a contract
worth 12 million kwachas signed with Austria last May, that country was supposed to
build the plant. But when the Zambian side failed to fulfill its commitments, Aus-
tria was forced to denounce the contract. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDI-
TERRANEENS in French No 1874.16 Oct 81 p 2642] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris
1981] 8796

C50: 4719/146 END

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY