FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10138
24 November 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 750

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1013
24 November

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

12000 No. 750

CONTENTS

ANGOLA

South African Strategy, Aims Analyzed
(Achille Lone; AFRIQUB-ASIE, 12 Oct 81)

War in Angola Seen Directly Pitting Vest Against Camunism
(Roger Holeindre; PARIS HATCH, 16 Oct 81) ..................

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Paper Describes Reasons French Aid Essential in Maintaining
Stability
(Jacques Latremoliere; MARCHRS TROPICAUX ET HBDITEBRANRENS,

9 mt 81)e...eaeeeeoeeoeoeeleeeeeloooneeeeeoloeee00001000..

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

President Discusses Progress Made by His Regime
(Nguema Hbasogo Interview; JEURE APRIQUE, 111 Oct 81) .......

GUINEA
Briefs

Cash Restraint Advocated
Dispute With ﬁance

MADAGASCAR

Briefs
Economic Plight

MOZAMBIQUE

Regulations on Cashew Marketing for 1981-1982 Detailed
(MARCHE TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAWS, 9 Oct 81) ...........

Briefs
Maputo Milk Consumption
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEAL

END Leader Discusses Party ' 3 Objectives, Ideolo
(Gillette cot; Amalia-A313, 12-25 00*. 81 0 so I a a o 0 o o o o o o o I o a

SEYCHELLES

Rene Wants Stronger Ties With ﬁance
(Albert Rene Interview; Ma’s-ASIA, 12-25 0131’. 81) 000.00..

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL IS}: ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

ANGOLA

SOUTH AFRICAN STRATEGY, AIMS ANALYZBD
Paris APRIQUE-ASIB in French No 250, 12 Oct 81 p 24

[Article by Achille Lollo: "Pretoria's New Plans"]

[Text] In its official statements, the government in Pretoria insists it has made
a so-called total withdrawal of its troops from southern Angola. And yet, on
18 September, Gen Charles Lloyd, commander in chief of the forces stationed in

Namibia, had to send emergency reinforcements to South African troops attacked by
the Angolan Army ~- particularly units of the "Namibian territorial forces,"

trained according to the pattern of the Rhodesian Selous Scouts - in order to
enable the armored battalion accompanying the 1st Motorized Infantry Column and

the Buffalo 32 mercenary battalion to return to safer areas close to the Namibian
border. Since the launching of the Angolan counteroffeasive, the latter had in
fact been in difficulty and risked remaining in the Xangongo region, where they

were surprised by the attack of the PAPLA [People's Armed Porces for the Liberation
of Angola] and cut off from their rear guard.

As we had announced, the Angolan Army had, by using guerrilla techniques, succeeded

in escaping from air reconnaissance and in going around the advance posts of the
South African Army, who had prepared to defend the occupied territory by concen-

trating around six centers, transformed into strongholds.

According to General Celdenhuys, strategist of the war, the South African troops
were capable of halting the offensive which the FAPLA would more than likely have
launched following the criteria of traditional warfare, with the aid of the Cuban
Army.

Actually, following a distribution of the tasks of defending southern Angola, the
Cubans were in charge of holding a support line immediately south of the capital of
Huila Vrnvince, and only the PAPLA undertook this bold counteroffensive in Xangongo,
Hongua and 0ndjiva. Small but multiple columns of the Angolan Army were penetrating

the regions occupied by Pretoria between 18 and 22 September, forcing the invaders
to engage in close battle and making the intervention of the South African artillery

and Air Force impossible. From 20 to 22 September, with the arrival of contingents
sent to the aid of units almost completely encircled by the FAPLA, these forces of

occupation, exhausted, began their retreat to the south. They were then going to
have a general withdrawal and concentrate in the regions of Cusmato, ‘0 kilometers
from the border, Calueque and Namacunde, closer to the border.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These positions, which the South African Army will not give up for a long time,
still enable it to keep the city of Ondjiva, as well as the entire province of which
this city is the capital, his state of total insecurity, while preparing for a
second counteroffensive from a favorable position. That is what the Angolan min-

ister of defense, who has just publicly denounced the military plan that the
South Africans will follow, foresees.

This time, Pretoria's army allegedly intends to clear the way as far as Cuvelai,
200 kilometers from the border, still preceded by intense bombing, then go west as
far as Tchibembe, already used as a target by the planes during the first offensive,

and east, as far as Nehone. Thus, a front line at the 16th parallel, which marks
the boundaries between Cunene and Huila provinces, would be established.

It is therefore a question of creating a buffer zone in southern Angola, totally
surrounding Cunene. In that province, despite the tactical victory of the Angolan
Army, which has considerably reduced the so-called "vital space" which General
Geldenhuys intended to keep, the situation has not changed a great deal, with the
obvious exception of the aid that may finally be taken to the martyrised people.
The same threats weigh on the entire region. But without a doubt, the South Afri-
can plan of strategy has been substantially upset. Pretoria, whose intentions of
"internationalizing" the conflict in order to make it move toward a "confrontation
between blocs" are now obvious, hoped that at least, if there were an Angolan
counteroffensive involving combat, the Cubans would participate in it, which would
have permitted Brand Fourie, South African deputy minister of foreign affairs, who
on 20 September met with the American Chester Cracker in Zurich, to talk of the
fighting between Pretoria's army and the Cubans. This would have facilitated the
demand, previous to any negotiations on Namibia, for the withdrawal of the Cubans

from Angola. Pretoria would then give free rein to its expansionist and destabil-
ization plans for Angola.

Under the Hing of the Pentagon

At the same time, other moves in the same direction were to see the light: The
engagement of the armies of the reactionary regimes of Central Africa alongside
the South African forces would be the last "find" employed by Washington, in
other words, the "Africanization" of the destabilization of the progressive regimes
in southern Africa. This information, made public by a Portuguese weekly, gave
rise to the denial of one of the countries involved: Zaire. But the memory of
the latter's aggression against Angola, carrying out a plan already conceived in
Hashington and executed jointly with South Africa, is still too recent to allow
the denials to bury this new affair so soon, especially since we know that many
Zairian generals have not digested the defeat that their troops suffered in 1975-
1976 or the disappearance of their protege, the PNLA, from the political scene.

It would therefore not be surprising that South Africa would once more try to
emerge from its isolation by appealing to certain African countries.

Pretoria also has another trump card for trying to internationalize this conflict:
its insertion into the Southern Atlantic Alliance (SATO) which, bringing Chile,
Argentina and Uruguay (Brazil has increasingly kept its distance recently) together
into the same "anticcxmnuniat" front, is making great progress under the protective
wing of the Pentagon.

2
FOR OFFICJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Angolan leaders are very aware of all that is at stake. The organizational
secretary of the “FLA-Labor Party, Lucio Lara. emphasized at a leeting in Benguela

that "it is the Angolans who repulsed the South African aggression. Through South
Africa, it is imperialism that is threatening Angola directly."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrlque-Asle.

11.1.61.
CSO: 6719/126

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

UAR IN ANGOLA SEEN DIRECTLY PI'ITING REST AGAINST WIS“
Paris PARIS HATCH in French No 1689, 16 Oct 81 p 65
[Article by Roger Holeindre]

[Excerpts] The Angola-Namibia war can no longer be considered as an inter—African
conflict; it is instead a direct confrontation between the West and cosmlunism.

The South African soldiers have found irrefutable proof of the strong Soviet and
East German iwlsntation while neticulously searching the terrain they have occupied
in Angola in the course of operation "Proteus." A total of 5,000 tons of Soviet
material has been seized or destroyed and SAM 7, SAN 3 and SAN 6 have been discov-
ered.

T-JIo tanks and more than 200 new vehicles have been brought back to Namibia. as well
as an impressive quantity of heavy equipnent, ranging from amphibious tanks to
Stalin organs launching 122-1- rockets. Classic artillery and anti-aircraft artil—
lery are sinilar to those used by the POLISARIO units against Morocco. Nunerous
Soviet and Best Gernan Spouses accompany their instructor or adviser husbands.
which tends to prove that theirs will be protracted stays.

A vast radar system was deployed along the border with South Africa, but it seen
--and there is proof of that--that only the material serviced by Europeans ensured
a continuous vatch.... ‘

0n the other hand, the lsunchingpads of ground-to-air lissiles serviced solely by
the cousunists from "brotherly countries" created problems for the attacking air
force.

The South African and Namibian soldiers found buried defense lines, whose conception
and execution leave the impression that Asiatics have served as instructors--perhsps
even North Vietnamese. the only serious users of the french officer's manual, chap-
ter "field fortifications." It is indeed in this Isnual that Giap's nen had found
all the necessary information for the trench and underground var around Dian Bien
Phu.

According to the South Africans. there is the threat of a large-scale var exploding
soon in the southern part of the continent. Gen Charles Lloyd, co-ander of the
South African and Namibian forces on the Angolan border, has just declared: "He are

necessarily preparing ourselves. Iilitsrily and logistically, for a classic war
on the Angolan frontier. . . ."

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whatever the logical and humanitarian reasons for the condenation of apartheid

by the mjority of the world's governments, one mat nevertheless admit that South
Africa will fight for what it considers its right to live.

Today, the Namibian problem is closely connected in the undergromd war opposing
South Africa to the Soviet Union by way of Angola.

The Soviets. the socialist bloc powers and Ctba help the SHAPO, based in Mgole

and fighting against South Africa, which supports not only the legal Namibian Govern-
ment it partly controls, but also, within Angola itself , Jonas Savidyi's UNITA, with
the latter giving a great deal of trouble to the troops of the Mmtnnnt
established with the help of the Soviets and Cubans. In 1981, the Marxist Angolan
Government is controlling less than 2 million people out of the 6 million inhabi-
rants. Its army. the FAPLA, is on the alert everywhere and many of the garrisons
are only re-supplied by Soviet aircraft. Jonas Ssvimbi is accusing the Luanda govern
ment of having engaged in the war against South Africa and Namibia solely to make
people forget about its colossal internal problems. The potentially rich drained
country cannot even feed its own population, while under the Portuguese it ex-
ported cereals, meat, coffee and fish in large quantities. The armed opposition
imrutes the responsibility for this state of affairs to the "disastrous economic
policy based on the Soviet model." The South African army, by far the best-trained
and equipped in Africa thanks to its specialists who know how to take the utsost
advantage of the available sophisticated materiel—which is certainly not the case
in other African armies-has no intention of displaying moderation. Moreover, its
leaders, applying Israeli tactics, are very explicit on the subject: "He shall
strike all the way into Ethiopia if necessary! He are already feeding one-third

of Africa; what sore do they want of us? We are white Africans. Is it a crime if
we want to stay, defend our country and not disappear?... Hherever the white minor-
ity dealt without genuine guarantees and without preserving the authority over mili-
tary resources, it has been swept away. We are not fighting against our blacks
within the country. we are fighting against enemies without, those who, abetted,

armed and paid by the Soviets, threaten our freedom and our very existence as a
nation."

with the departure of the whites from Zimbabwe-at the rate of nearly 10,000 a
month-~the country will be faced in a couple of years with the same fate as the
countries forming the "front line" against South Africa. These countries, formerly
prosperous, with excellent soil, sun and water, are today suffering from famine.

On I. percent of the tillsble land in Africa, the South Africans grow more than a
third of the continent's harvest.... )ioreover, the black population, every time

it finds credible leaders, rises up and fights against regimes imosed by the "fair-
minded" thinkers of Europe and the United States. If Saviﬂai is fighting—and fight-
ing well--in Angola. in Mozambique the National Resistance Hovement already has

4 to 5.000 anti-Marxist fighters in the bush and is giving a lot of trouble to local
authorities and to the KGB men: it seem that, despite the deployment of men and
materiel, relations between the Soviet. East Germans, Cubans and the civilian

population are not always idyllic.... 0n the whole, the Soviets are hated by the
Africans, whom they call "black asses.”

5
FOR OFFICIAL vs: ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviets' "fraternal" help is very, very expensive.... The USSR has been suc-
cessful in obtaining all the fishing rights in Mozambican and Angolan waters. As
in all the African countries it "protects," and where it has also gotten hold of

the same maritime rights, its fishing fleets depredate marine resources, with less

than 60 percent of the results of this anti-ecological aassacre finally reaching
the tables of the socialist countries.

It is interesting to know that these somewhat special "fishing fleets" steam around

as veritable little squadrons directly connected to Admiral Gorshkov's navy general
staff.

As for the Cubans, whom the East Germans characterize as "poor soldiers" and "clowns,"
they are accused by the population of having totally sacked the country. This as-
sertion seems to be borne out by impartial observers. All of the movable goods left
behind by the departing Portuguese. as well as civilian vehicles. have most left

for Cuba....

The most astonishing revelations uncovered by operation "Proteus" in Angola are those
related to intelligence. Mountains of documents prove that African Marxist move-
ments have found support in unexpected quarters: they are financed by the Ecumeni-
cal Council of Churches with headquarters in Geneva.

In recent years, the main beneficiaries of this incredible largesse are the SHAPO
and the black South African terrorist groups. These organizations also receive
funds indirectly from the UN, the UNESCO and other so-called "charitable" movements
that solicit funds in large European cities to aid the "hungry people of the Third
World"!

Such funds reach in the millions of dollars. Let us add, in conclusion, that from
the documents seized. it appears that Guadeloupe. Martinique, Reunion and New Cale-
donia are still considered as countries struggling against French colonialisn, and
needing support in shaking off this terrible yoke....

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

CSO: 4719/172

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOItOFFKJAl.l£ﬂE(NNLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

PAPER DESCRIBES REASONS FRENCH AID ESSENTIAL IN MAINTAINING STABILITY

Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1873, 9 Oct 31 p 2503-2546
[Article by Jacques Latremoliere]

[Excerpts] David Dacko't statements after his ouster by Gen Andre Kolingba have
intrigued French readers and television viewers somewhat. Smiling and tongue in
cheek, the former president of the Central African Republic was obviously trying
to make people understand that the coup d'etst that had overthrown him actually
steamed, even if it had taken place in keeping with the rules governing the genre,
from a semi-official arrangement. Consequently, the natural question was precisely
who had thought up the scenario and against what.

Dacko scarcely refutes the accusation that he was not only the co-author, but also
the true beneficiary, from his standpoint at least. Suffering from asthma and cir-
culatory problems, he certainly aspires to rest and freedom from ends of months made
painful by the suicidal demands of civil servants and the delays of financial backers.
His unselfishness -- he was known to make up the sums out of his own pocket - means
that he will hardly miss the precarious charms of power. Finally, he can only take
pleasure in the excellent trick played on his adversaries. from Patasse to Goumba,
placing bayonets between their ambitions and the levers of government.

Nor is it impossible that Dacko may have taken a certain satisfaction, tinged with

bitterness, it is true, in showing France - one of whose governments had brought him
out of exile fairly willingly -- what the consequences would be of the inadequate and
irregular financial "followup" given to the change in regime it had decided upon and

carried out after so much hesitation. This relative satisfaction is joined with
that of thwarting the tendencies that were manifested within the French left in favor

of the :an who. out of all the Central African politicians, nevertheless seems to be
least suited to take over after him: Abel Goumba.

In other words. no strictly political factor - much less a French domestic politi-
cal factor -- influenced the support given at the outset by France to David Dacko.

In fact, this teacher of the classics -- the spiritual heir of Barthelemy Boganda,
who had made him minister of interior in the last government formed before his

death -- is and remains a leftist democrat. One may dispute the timeliness of the
multiparty system. quite unusual in Africa, that he sponsored in 1980, but not the

fact that it was the expression of a sincere conviction. as witnessed by the impar-
tiality of the 1981 presidential elections, in which he won but 51 percent of the

votes. The preferential popularity which Goumbs seems to enjoy in certain quarters

7
FOIIOFFIJAI.USE¢3NLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

probably stems from inadequate information, but also from a Hanichean algebra ac-
cording to which the friends of our enemies are our enemies as well, and their
enemies our friends. Enthroned by Giscard d'Estaing, Dacko remained suspect.

If we bring this out, it is not in order to question Goumba's qualities. Did past
squabbles with Dacko, his imprisonment and a 17-year stay in Europe, first of all,
to complete his medical studies, and then in Africa as regional head of the World
Health Organization, influence an itinerary that took him more to Marxist countries,
such as Benin or the Congo, than to others? Judging by his vocabulary and friend-
ships, one imagines that he would be rather disposed to appealing to the East, which
did not endear him to Giscard d'Estaing, but which should not make him much more
sympathetic to Hitterrand or most of our African allies. The truth is that, aside
from all political considerations, Abel Goumba cannot reasonably hope, without out-
side help. to govern the Central African Republic for the simple reason that over

50 percent of the country's population was born after his departure, he did not re-
turn before 1981, comes from a minority ethnic group in the Grimari region in the
eastern region of the country, and the ignorance concerning his name is not made up
for by any tribal influence. The score of 1 percent that he won in the presidential
elections is on an exact par with his credit.

Dacko's smile before the French television cameras is not therefore without justi-
fication. General Kolingba's coup d'etat not only permit: him to solve his health
problems, but also to cut off any suggestions of a "national union” government, re-
introducing Goumba on the political scene and gently beginning a change in his favor.
Dacko has repeatedly maintained that if it were a civilian who succeeded him at head
of state, he would almost infallibly be led to seek support in the communist world.
This would very likely have been true of Goumba, but even moreso of Patasse, whom
neither his services under Bokassa -- to whom he owes his career and for whom he

was minister of agriculture, prime minister and minister of the coronation - nor
his Libyan commitments not the dubious origin of his funds have prevented him from
winning 38 percent of the votes in the April elections. It would not be any more
desirable to see the other candidates surge forward since all of them were, to some
extent, the sides and accomplices of the former emperor. The most capable among
them. Maidou, was one of the few to be involved in the process of ousting Bokassa,
but he has not succeeded in getting rid of the "Mr Denial" label pinned on him for

a long time to come by Bangui lycee students (Haidou, then prime minister, offi-

cially denied the massacre of young people that was the basis of Bokasss's depar-
turc).

Aware of the exceptional decisions required by the economic and financial situation,
but with little taste or inclination for the style of government they demand, Dacko
remains faithful to himself, yielding to others of whom such a style is normally ex-
pected. Jean-Pierre Cot recently told the diplomatic press associations and the

Eurafrican press "that a military government was always an admission of failure."
This is in fact often true. However, it is admirable that a chief of state would re

recognize such a failure and his inability to remedy it. It would appear that this
moderate homage was Dacko's due.
Civil Service. Budget Deficit and Debt

The restoration of normal road and river traffic, a solution to the fuel supply prob-
lem -- now the task of Central African Total Management (TOCAGES), a joint venture

8
FOI‘OFFKJALIEEJONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in which Total Afrique holds 69 percent and the Central African Republic 51 percent,
in place of the American Transworld Oil Company, which had obtained the concession
from Bokassa - the withdrawal of one-fifth of the army cadres, and finally, the
financial rehabilitation of national companies constituting one of the old regile's
open wounds, are all operations to put on the positive side of the ledger of the
retiring president. Unfortunately, when a country is in the state of decomposition
which is that of the Central African Republic. its successes barely emerge, here
and there, from a morass of deficits and bankruptcies,vhme overlapping is such that
seen from one angle, any truly positive action might have aggravating effects from
another. This is the case of the rehabilitation of national companies, obtained
with the cooperation of our technical assistants and the support of the French
Treasury but which, resultingin several thousand layoffs, makes the job situation
even more critical during a period of disinterest in farm work and the increasing
urban concentration linked to it.

The expansion of the Central African civil service obviously constitutes one of the
current anomalies. Put at some 7,000 governsent employees and officials in 1960,
11,650 in 1966 (655 technical assistants, including 558 French, 5,227 Central Afri-
can employees, 805 contractors and 6,953 decisimnairss [translation unknown], with
pay then representing 53 percent of the operating budget), and 14,000 in 1973, the
number is now about 25,000, of which 23,000 are actually paid. Nothing in the ha-
tional production or revenue justifies such an increase. Since 1977, that income
has been declining 5 percent annually. The figure is expected to reach 6 percent
in 1981 and 7 to 8 percent in 1982. Since Dacko came to power in 1979, an addi-
tional 1,000 officials have been recruited (it was actually a aatter of eliminating
the excessive firings decreed by the preceding regime). The average level of
salaries has risen 20 percent. Whether fair or not, these measures have naturally
aggravated a situation characterized by an annual cost of 21 billion CPA for govern-
ment employees, when the amount of budget receipts (allocated receipts excluded) is

only 17 billion!

Dacko's government has been criticized for not striking when the iron was hot,
imediately after his return, following an operation identical to the one used to
repair the injustices of the previous administration in order to clean out the
elements of the civil service that had been introduced according to the whim of

the former emperor and in much larger proportions. By encouraging part of these
elements to go back home, the operation would have relieved the constant pressure
exercised on the government by Bangui goverment employees and would have been
beneficial politically. Unfortunately, it is not certain that the national employ-
ment situation would have been improved or that the "detribalited" persons would
have been put back to work.. A closer examination reveals, in fact, that from 1977
to 1980, the overall number of wage earners in the public and private sectors
remained stable, with the increase in the number of public employees mainly stealing
from those cast out of the private sector. Since January 1981, civil service hiring
has been frozen, but the overall number of wage earners has dropped 20 percent.

It should be noted in passing that cutbacks on European personnel by enterprises
have not been made up for by any hiring of Central African personnel.

As catastrophic as the situation of the civil service might appear as a symptom of
poor economic health, it has only an indirect effect on government finances. The
"ends of month" that caused Dacko to lose so much sleep were and are still almost
entirely covered by the French Treasury. In 1980, the budget deficit amounted to

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8 billion CPA francs, a figure to be compared with the 7-billion-CFA franc subsidy
paid by France during the same fiscal year. In 1981, the initial deficit was

7 billion also. It will in fact reach 11 billion by the end of the year, a pheno-
menon due to the uncontrolled spending and the 5 billion francs in arrears from
1980, while the 25-percent increase in receipts that might be expected from infla-
tion and increased fiscal pressure finally comes down to 10 percent. Actually,

tax proceeds drop as taxes increase, even though applied to such reliable resources
as hydrocarbons, industrial and commercial profits and wages.

Consequently, in 1981, the 4 billion CPA francs from the International Monetary Fund
and the 3 billion from France only cover the budget deficit announced and not the
real deficit. The difference: 6 billion, must be found from a levy of 500 million
out of the credits allocated by the FAG [Aid and Cooperation FUnd], 500 million

as an extra payment from the special drawing rights (3.9 billion CFA francs instead
of 2.6 billion), 400 million from the modification in the Central African Republic's
ceiling with the Bank of Central African States (BEAC), an additional subsidy of

1.2 billion recently requested from the French Government, and finally, by a one-
month delay in paying government employees, which will have to be made up in one way
or another. In addition to the government's distress resulting from the hole to be
filled are those -- stemming from the insufficiency of Treasury funds -- resulting
from the delays with which certain payments have been made and of which Paris is

not always aware. For example, the agreement on the last two payments of the French
subsidy, planned before the departure of President Giscard d'Estaing, was not signed
until 10 July and the funds were not made available to Dacko until 17 July, only 3

3 days before the Le Club Cinema attack.

In 1982, lacking a new IMF program and a balancing subsidy from France, the Central
African Government should, in the worst instance, have to face. A joint mission
from the two organizations will take up the problem in October in Bangui. But it
is clear that at an average budget level of 28 billion CFA francs, the term "re-

balancing" appears to be only a euphemism.

The service on the debt largely maintains the budget deficit. The conventional
public debt is 55 billion (without considering the opening of a 7-billion CPA franc
credit for Bokassa by South Africa, for construction of the Inter Continental Hotel;
some 3 billion were actually invested, without any positive result, it would appear).
it is less the level of the figure, considering that of export receipts (1 30 bil-
lion), that makes itsseriousness than the 18 billion in arrears whose weight it
bears. The consolidation granted in June by the Club de Paris attenuates the burden
by setting the percentage of arrears to be paid in 1981 at 3, 4 percent for each of
the following three years and the rest in 6 years. In addition, there is the inter-
est on overdue payments which only certain creditors have given up: This was the
case of Yugoslavia but not Switzerland. The 1982 payments are heavy, as the result
of poorly studied short- and medium-term loans. The receipts of the Autonomous
Amortization Fund. which manages the public debt, are also down (the tax on beer
consumed, which is one of its resources, has had its proceeds drop 15 percent in

one year). Actually, only the cancellations of debts by France and the Federal
Republic of Germany seem likely to provide some relief, sufficiently soon if they
want to prevent the worst, to the jamming of government departments and the entire
economy .

10
IN)! OFFICIAI.lHﬂE(M§LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moreover, in order to draw an accurate picture of the financial situation of the
Central African Republic, one should take into account, not only the unfortunately
unrecoverable sums squandered by Bokassa, but also his misappropriation of public
funds put into Swiss accounts, enabling the Prince Regent and his family to lead

a high life in Geneva or Paris. Their amount is estimated at 50 billion CPA francs,
not including the crown, sceptre and solid gold necklace for the coronation which
have mysteriously disappeared. The sale of a few chateau: purchased in France by
the former emperor will perhaps make it possible - although this is not certain -
to recover a small part of the sum. The rest would be enough to pay off most of
the public debt. Although there is little talk of this and while it is unknown
whether this situation gave rise to the international measures it would justify,
financially speaking, this is the most overwhelming evidence of the "Bokassa
scandals."

To the amounts devoted by France to the restoration of public services, one must
add a S-billion CPA franc subsidy in addition to the budget, including 1 billion
to compensate merchants who were the victims of the Bangui lootings in 1979, 1.6
billion to pay the debts of the joint ventures, 1.3 billion for those of the
national firms and the rest to pay Central African counterpart funds not put into
international projects or to set up a national fund to replace the Development
Bank which disappeared in the turmoil. Furthermore, the PAC allocations continue
to be paid on the approximate annual basis of 80 million French francs, including
60 million for technical assistance, 6 million for scientific research, 8 million
for training and cooperation, 2 million for military equipment and some 10.7 mil- -
lion for aid to strictly economic investments.

It must be observed that these means taken as a whole did not check the constant
drop in agricultural, mining and industrial production. The benefits that can be
expected from the construction of infrastructures will come in the long run, but
the malady undermining the Central African economy seems to justify vigorous,’
rapid remedies. The dismantling of the old private sector and its replacement

by an inoperative national or mixed economy sector did not lead to the economic
takeoff on which people had counted, once the administrative machine was somewhat
back on its feet. Urban concentration is growing worse. (One wage earner supports
an average of ten persons in Bangui.) Paradoxically enough, at the same time, the
bush is returning to a subsistence economy, which is improperly understood in the
affirmation that "Central Africans no longer want to work." They are actually
working in a different world and the slow impregnation of the domestic economy by
the market economy, which constitutes the essential economic element of the colon-
ial achievement, has slowed down or disappeared. In areas where cotton is grown,
it was the area of the cottonfield which, the second year, determined that of
sesame, peanuts and finally, that of manioc.

It is now necessary to recommence an evolution that tooks decades of efforts and

one notes with concern that it is not enough to set up a scales near the cotton-
field or to present encouragement to peasants -— in the form of imported products --
to develop their activity. The Central African Republic's cotton harvest totaled
50,000 tons in the best years. It is now only 18,000 tons, representing 25 percent
of all exports still. SOCADA [expansion unknown], set up by the new government with
the aid of the PAC, long-term loans from the Central Fund for Economic Cooperation
and technical assistance from the French Company for the Development of Textile
Fibers, in order to face the deficiencies of the UCCA (Central African Cotton

11
FINICHHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Union), seems to have overestimated the possibilities of relaunching cotton, inas-
much as the program it set up would only be profitable over 40,000 tons. Seasonal
loans applied for were twice as high as real needs. Either the programs should be
reduced or they should be continued with losses for a few years in the four prefec-
tures of Ouham-Pende, Ouham, "economic" Gribingui and Ouaka. The STABEX [Export
Stabilization Fund] payments should facilitate the effort, on the condition,
naturally, that they go into the equalization funds and are not simply budgeted, as
has been the practice in recent years.

The boost given to coffee production by the 1974 boom has had a somewhat prolonged
effect, despite Bokassa's confiscation of the profits of the Support Fund. Since

that time, the old age and poor maintenance of coffee plantations, thefts from
the tree affecting nearly 40 percent of the crop and finally, the drop in prices

dealt a severe blow. This year, the tonnage exported should not exceed 7,500,
compared with 14,000 in 1978-1979.

For its first phase. the establishment of an oil palm plantation at Bassongo
received a loan from the African Development Bank. Poor operating conditions
affected a profitability visible only over 4,000 hectares. Nevertheless, resump-
tion of the affair is being studied with the support of the Agricultural Bank and
the contribution of Belgian capital.

The Central African Republic owes its trade balance surplus to diamonds. Bokassa's
expulsion of European enterprises reduced production by half (400,000 carats in
1974; 250,000 in 1980), a drop which was not remedied by the drop in prices in
April 1981. This is official production, it is true, and does not take into account
the smuggling organized to the East by Muslim merchants who have largely monopolized
the local market, imposing their prices on producers, while is Bangui itself, a
purchasing office and the gem cutting shops are controlled by Israeli Americans.

Acrually, the cottage industry, now the only form of mining, is very inefficient

and covers only already known deposits, meaning the halt of all prospecting. The
action of COGEHA [General Nuclear Materials Company], subsidiary of the French

Atomic Energy Commission, remains linked to the granting of permits in Hambere and
Sangha. Despite criticisms of principle of which it is the target and which politics
has deliberately sharpened, it would appear to be the only organization able to

get production back on its feet, given the current state of affairs.

Oil prospecting is at a minimum. Conoco is operating in the Chadian border region,
closely following progress in research in neighboring countries. As for the
Bakouma uranium, its extraction does not appear to be justified by current process-

ing techniques. It is postponed until better times.

From this gloomy picture, one must absolutely not infer that the limited but real
resources of the Central African Republic are inadequate to ensure the support and
development of the population. Sixteen years of looting and incompetent management
have led to contradictory reactions of "lumpen proletarization" and domestic parsl-
ysis that cannot be dissipated by the mere rehabilitation of public services, even
of development organizations or communications networks. It is in the field of
human activity and customs that action must be taken, which could be very slow and
certainly costly if one wishesto speed up the necessary rate of treatment. Under-
standing this, Dacko preferred to resign, hoping that his departure would bring his

12
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR 0F31C1AL.USE(MVLY

successor the international understanding so often refused to him and, at the same
time, freedom from the burden of his own mistakes.

General Kolingba may provide the favorable conditions the'country needs during its
recovery. One of his first actions will be to have the Council of Ministers pass
a bill drafted several months ago and prescribing the retirement of all civil ser-
vants with 27 years of service and encouraging withdrawal from the civil service
through the institution of the special leave. Likewise, he may help to change the
defensive attitude of the commercial and industrial sectors, an attitude they have

been prompted to take in the past and which partial indennifications have not helped
dissipate.

The fact remains that the change itself cannot be brought about without outside
financial help. For having openly intervened in Central African politics in 1979,
France, a contrario. admitted its responsibility for the process of deterioration
that has affected the country since 1966. It must now assume it without quibbling,
the enemy of effectiveness. The financial effort needed for a rehabilitation, not
only of the administration, but of the economy as well, is an estimated 15 billion
CPA francs a year, renewed for 5 years, not including the PAC allocations which have
other objectives. It is up to the French Government to decide whether stability

in this region of Africa is worth that price.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
C50: “719/133

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUA‘NRIAL GUINEA

PRESIDENT DISCUSSES PROGRESS MADE BY Ills REGIME
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE in French No 1086, 1!. Oct 81 supplement pp 102, 103

[Interview with 001 Nguena Ibseogo, president of material Guinea, by Noel
Ngouo Ngabissio, on 22 Sep 81, place not given]

[Text] Those who net Teodoro Obiang Ngueaa Pbasogo the day
after the coup of 3 August 1979 will remember a young officer,
age 36, shy and ill at ease at the interest be evoked in a
pack of international journalists who were curious to lest
"the man who felled Tiger Macias." Today, the president of
the Suprelne Military Comil has gained in assurance and

can put on a convincing perforssnce. Disdainful as always of
the constraints of protocol, he gave us a very infernal inter-

view, without requiring that the questions be submitted to his
beforehand.-

[Question] No years ago, Equatorial Guinea got rid of the Macias dictatorship.

Today, people are surprised that demcratic institutions have still not been put
in place...

[Answer] One of the biggest probleaa our continent has is excessive haste. People
want to go entirely too fast, even with respect to denocratization. The ar-y of
Equatorial Guinea liberated the country fron an unprecedented dictatorship. Our
nunber one concern, mind you, is for a rapid return to denatratic life, with
guaranteed freedona. But some prerequisites are essential, without which the word
democracy would have no meaning. I know that aoae leaders put up an institutional
facade to give themselves legitincy and strengthen their hold on power. You see

what happened in Central Africa. I as not interested in lake-believe. I want to
start at the beginning, from the base.

Village councils, the result of conpletely free elections, are presently being set
up, and they in turn will elect regional councils. He will do the sane thing in
the amicipalities. Soon afterward, a constitutional co-isaion will be naned to
draw up a draft constitution to be submitted to the people of Equatorial Guinea in
a referendum, before 3 August 1982. Then, free elections will be held.

[Question] “111 the constitution recognize the principle of nultiple parties?

11;

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The constitutional commission will draw up the document. I have not told
them what to write. The people of Equatorial Guinea will have the final decision.

[Question] How would you describe your own record in your 2 years as'the head
of state?

[Answer] These last 2 years would have not been satisfactory, or even very sub-
stantial. one must recognize this. There have been deficiencies. due to a criti-
cal shortage of nanpower, particularly in the agricultural sector, and due to the
fact that worthwhile ties of cooperation have not been forged with the outside
world. Prices have shot up; inflation rose to intolerable levels, while we were
forced to keep wages down. The cadres responsible for financial matters and plan-
ning were not up to their task. These facts are deplorable, because Equatorial
Guinea has resources that should enable it to move rapidly toward satisfactory
development.

[Question] You have not gotten as such foreign aid as you expected?

[Answer] I am not saying that. We are appreciative of the organizations and coun-
tries that have supported us. The I“? provided us $23 million; unfortunately, this
was at the cost of the devaluation of our currency, and inflation was the result.
We are on the right road with the EEC. Spain has provided us with 10 billion
pesetas in emergency assistance.

Today our cooperation with that country should start covering the whole range of

our relations, it should become more progressive and better planned. You have

seen that Spanish missions are in our country right now; others are getting ready

to cone, to review the various aspects of our cooperative relations with the authori-
ties of Equatorial Guinea.

[Question] Some political trials have recently been held. Equatorial Guinean
dissidents exiled in Spain have spoken of machinations. Hhat is that all about?

[Answer] The trial of which you speak was a public one and the international press
was invited. You did not come. For us. it was a simple matter. A citizen of
Equatorial Guinea who was living in exile asked to return. Not only were the doors
opened wide for him, but once he was here he treacherously took advantage of the
loan facilities open to all those who return to invest: 200 million bikueles
(around Pr CPA 200 aillion). The bulk of that sun was used to corrupt some
soldiers and work toward the destabilization of the regime. He very clearly re-
ceived his just deserts.

[Question] You criticize the international press for not having attended the
trial. But your government has aonetimes confiscated newspapers. especially
Spanish ones!

[Answer] We have never confiscated your weekly, JEUNE APRIQUE, despite articles
which were, let us say....sometines very harsh with the regime in Equatorial Guinea.
If the minister of the interior, as his right, banned three Spanish papers
(INTERVIU, DIARIO l6 and GAMBIO 16) it was because they persisted in telling lies

about our country. Everyone knows that they are in league with Guinean dissidents
in Spain. Journalists may be free to consent, but their facts must be correct!

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] What do you want not for your country today?

[Ausver] Your question is a very inportant one. “hat I want has three aspects:
real democracy, respect for human rights, prosperity, and finally self-
sufficiency. We want more than anything else to establish a real democracy where
the big decisions are made by the people in a totally free form. and where husan
rights are guaranteed. We also want to see a rapid rehabilitation of the infra-
structure needed to provide citizens of Equatorial Guinea with what they need in
terms of health, education, food. Finally, we want our country to be able to
develop using its own resources, especially agricultural resources. But we hm
that all that remains only a pious hope if the people of Equatorial Guinea, both
the cadres and the laborers, fail to keep in mind the fact that above all they must
be self-reliant.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9516
C80: 4719/129

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'0F1NC1AI.USEGDNLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

CASH RESTRAINT ADVOCATED--In a speech broadcast by Guinean radio, President Ahmed
Sekou rouru recommended a reduction in the number of bills in circulation. The
Guinean chief of state asked for greater restraint in the use of the monequaking
machine because, he explained. the mass of bills now in circulation is "clearly
higher" than the total amount of currency issued in 1972 (when the syli was created)
and April 1981 (after the change in monetary symbols). This inflation in the mass
of bills also results from the introduction of fake sily notes issued by counter-
feitcrs and has the effect of depreciating Guinean money and of contributing to
inflation in the country. Sekou Toure also asked private merchants to set up re-
gional unions in order to combine their means and solve problems linked to their
profession. Finally, he asked for the systematic closing of "bars and cheap res-
tauranta,“ which in his opinion are "places for the depravation of the morale" of
young Guineans. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICADX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS in French

No 1874, 9 Oct 81 p 2564] [COPYnIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

DISPUTE HITH FRANCE-~Approved by the French Cabinet in July, a bill concerning
application of the French-Guinean agreement of 26 January 1977 relative to settle-
ment of the financial dispute between the two countries is to be submitted to
Parliament during the fall session. The bill, which would considerably simplify
the task of the indemnification commission, should make it possible to complete

the distribution of the compensation. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITER-

RANEENS in French No 1874, 9 Oct 81 p 2566] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris
1981] 11,464

CSO: 4719/126

1?
FOR 0F11C1A1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

ECONOMIC PLIGHT--Didier Retsirekn is urgently seeking 1 billion dollare to deflect
the consequences of the economic crisis before the 1982 elections. Shortages heve
increased over the past year to the point where. in the cities, there are no longer
lengthy lines in front of the stores since there is not anything to purchase. [Text]

[Paris JEUNB AFRIQUB in French No 1086, 28 Oct 81 p 103] (COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique
GRUPJIA 1981]

C80: 6719/2110

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

MMIQUB

REGULATIONS 0“ CASH!" MARKETING FOR 1981-1982 DETAILED
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITEWS in French No 1872, 9 Oct 81 p 2587

[Excerpts] A ruling from the Office of Secretary of State for the Cashew Crop
establishes regulations applicable to marketing in Hoaanbique for the 1981-1982
season. The purchase of cashews can be made by private concerns, govern-ant fir-s,
cooperatives and other structures that light be interested in the future (plant
representatives, for example). All must be registered with the provincial delega-
tions of the Ministry of Domestic Comerce so as to be able to obtain bank credits.

The minimum price to be paid to the planter-collector is S neticais per kilogram.
whatever the purchase place. The purchase price to be paid by industry, at the

entry-to-the-plant stage or by plant representatives at the entry-to-storage stage
is set at 7,500 neticais per ton for Type 1 and 7,200 neticais for Type 2, not

including bags. Middleman prices to be paid by retailers and warehouaenen will be
set by an agre-ent between then. Price schedules have been set up to take trans-

port costs into account.

In order to receive reimbursement for the transport cost, aerchants must present
to the plant or plant representative their registration card from the provincial
directorate of dolestic comerce. For their part, plants lust keep a record of
merchants.

Marketing of cashews from provinces in northern Save will be planned by the Rational
Cashew Enterprise-Hozubique Cashew. No nerchandise bought by the plants can be
sold or surrendered by the. without previous authorization fron the conpany, after
notification of the provincial govern-eats.

In order that cashews night bedelivered to the plants, the latter must take the

necessary measures by setting up receiving stations working 26 hours around the
clock. Plants must provide the necessary personnel to rapidly unload trucks in

the order of their arrival. New or used bags furnished by niddlenen will be given
back to then or paid for at the new price minus 25 percent.

Seven ports are considered as shipping ports for this season: Hoci-boa da Praia,
Pemba, Quelimane, Pebane, Nacala, Angoche and Beira.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,466
cs0: 4719/126
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1Wf1AL.USE|DNLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

HAPUTO MILK CONSUMPTION-ln order to meet the needs of the population, Maputo
should have 45,000 liters of silk a day, but the local dairy does not have the
capacity tn meet such needs. It puts out only 30,000 liters a day. Further-ore,
as a result of the lack of packing materials. the plant can furnish only 20,000
liters of stabilized milk that can be kept for long periods of tune (in packages)

and 2,000 liters of pasturized silk (in bottles),or half of the daily needs.
Mozambique hopes to be able to make up its shortage by means of the delivery in
October of 230 tons of milk from the UN world Food Program, after receiving 500 tons
from Sweden in August. [Text] [Paris NARCBES TROPICADX ET MEDITERRANEZNS in French
No 1874, 9 Oct 81 p 2587] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,465

CSO: A7l9/126

20
FOR 0F1WC1AI.USEGDNLY
FOR(HHHCJAL.USB(NULY

SENEGAL

RND LEADER DISCUSSES PARTY'S OBJECTIVES, IDEOLOGY
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 250, 12-25 Oct 81 pp 25-27
[Article by Ginette Cot: "0n the Side of the Opposition"]

[Text] Trying to grasp the personality of each of the opposition political parties
that have just achieved legal status in Dakar is certainly not an easy task, espe-
cially since, if one wants to outline a presentation, one can only, for the time
being, go by speeches, programs and declarations of intentions, awaiting a confron-
tation with the true circumstances in order to be able to judge the real practice,
the importance and impact of each of the basic components of the new political
scene. Furthermore. at first sight, the objectives and fundamental analyses seem
to support one another. Consequently, the concern of those who ask "Hhat good are
so many parties?" is not totally without legitimacy.

The six organizations that have just been allowed to come out into the daylight are
not completely -- far from it. especially in the case of their leaders - unknowns
in Dakar political circles. And yet, their semi-legal status did not permit them
to reveal the extent of their real dimensions. It is obvious that their entry on
the official scene has considerably modified the political structure previously

in place and it is bound to have an effect on all participants in the process.

Furthermore, while it may well be a source of confusion, this broad range of par-
ties (alongside the Socialist Party in power, there now exist nine opposition par-
ties) nevertheless bears witness to a rich political tradition that has remained
vital despite past vicissitudes.

The rivalry that this diversity implies and the confrontation of ideas, proposals
and practices it presumes should lead to an overall, detailed, far-reaching and
concrete search for suitable ways and means of bringing the country out of the pro-
found crisis in which it has been plunged in the 20 years after nominal indepen-

dence.

One can retort that this is not completely new. Host leftist organizations not re-
cognized at that time - with the exception of the RND [Democratic National Rally] --
had since 1978 been in a context of flexible concertation, called the Coordination
of the United Senegalese Opposition (c060) and built around a common program whose
strategic task was to work for the victory of the democratic national people's
revolution, a program that has inspired the proposals of certain new parties.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Bilateral concertations also took place between different organizations, when

there was not joint work behind a precise task, as was the case between the old
PAl-Senegal [African Independence Party] and the self-management socialists

united behind Hamadou Dis, which since 1978 have published a sophisticated political
monthly, AND: SOPI.

And yet, as we know, the ostracism of the old government concerning the underground
leftist organizations erected a kind of wall between the latter and the legal
opposition parties. The new situation created by the establishment of the multi-

party system can only lead, by lifting the obstacles, to an expansion of debate and
concertation, its first visible consequence. At the sane time, in the emulation
necessarily created by the new dynamic, one can sooner or later expect a clarifica-
tion. It is in fact in the confrontation with circumstances, the daily, overall

struggles, that the real concerns, the sincerity and effectiveness of each, will
appear.

Uncertainties and Instability

In this sense, it can be said that the hour of truth has come, not only for re-
cently recognized parties, but for all the elements of the new political scene a.
well, elements that are.now facing greater responsibilities. At the same time,

one can also expect that sooner or later, perhaps more constructive and more repre-
sentative reclassifications may come about. This hypothesis is all the more plau-
sible because with the exception, naturally, of the Senegalese Republican Movement
(MRS, conservative) set up by Boubacar Gueye and which appears to be a kind of
accident of history, if not an ironic challenge put before the old system of imposed
currents of thought, everyone in the opposition is on the left, a left that can be
defined as ranging from the moderate left to the extreme left. Furthermore, while
the controversy often remains lively between the different organizations in this
sector and while the political debate is marked by a certain parochialism, the unity

of the patriotic forces constitutes a concern that is unanimously shared or at
least proclaimed by everyone.

However, it will still be necessary to define the lines of demarcation, the bases

of a possible alliance, and to know the ' 1n for such a union front. As one could
see in the months preceding Senghor's depc :re, during which the unity of patriotic
forces appeared to be an urgent task but \ren talks in that direction dragged on

and on, unless there are stimulating events, it will not be an easy task.

The uncertainties and instability of the situation add to the complexity of things.
Naturally, the change in persons at the head of state did not mean a radical change
in regimes, for from it. Nevertheless, many things have begun to be altered and
the innovations in style, action and government projects cannot fail to force the
opposition to an approach and an adaptation consistent with them.

Now then, despite the ever greater difficulties in daily life confronting the
majority of the population, difficulties that point to the possibility of an explo-
sion of anger from the people, nothing indicates that the "state of grace" which
the new government has heretofore enjoyed will disappear. Consequently, it is not
surprising that perplexities are emerging and that speculation is rampant.

22
FOR 0$TWCIAI.USIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Is the RND going to break up? Is the PDS slowing down? Is Hamadou Dia's Peo-
ple's Democratic Movement, only recently formed, going. to disappear? Has what
former President Senghor called the 'crypto-personal opposition,’ referring to
Cheikh Anta Diop and Hamadou Dia, moved over to make room for an Abdoulaye Hade-
Abdou Diouf duel? Hill the 0050 collapse and ANDE-SOPI disappear? Hill some be
tempted by a dangerous surge forward and others by capitulation?" All of these
rumors, which were circulating in Dakar in August, cannot simply be explained by
the well-known fondness of the Senegalese for political games, any more than by
deceptive measures, each aimed -- a phenomenon universally observed at all times
and in all places -- at "pulling the covers over to one's side." But they defin-
itely expose a certain malaise, if not a climate of confusion and abarrassed
expectation in which everything seems possible.

Finally, as one may have felt at the time of the Gambian affair - and of the sus-
picions and verbal attacks aimed at the opponents of military intervention in Ban-
jul -- the democratic achievement made official in April, one which constitutes
the first experiment of its type attempted on the continent, still appears to be
very fragile. The annoying and troublesome adventure that has just happened in
the PDS, several of whose members and leaders have been apprehended, an affair

whose outcome must be known before the exact significance can be weighed, shows
that anything can still happen.

On this shifting terrain, one can therefore try only to get a fix on a specific
moment of the Dakar political situation. how do the recently recognized parties
view the new situation? How are they original? What are their differences and
objectivos? How do they stand on the problem of unity? These are the questions
that we shall try to answer.

Serene Style of RND

Formed in February 1976, the Democratic National Rally (3ND), which was the object,
during its fight for official recognition, of all kinds of trials and harassment,
is without a doubt one of the movements that enjoy the broadest potential audience,
not only because of the political honesty of its leaders, its worthy conduct, its-
serene style totally lacking in braggadocio and demagogy, but also because of the
realistic intelligence of its program, which is rooted in the socioeconomic reality
of a country in which religious feelings play' a predominant role and the phase of
liberation and the rise of the nation is far from being over, a country which aims,
relying on the organized and politicized population's own strength, at the estab-
lishment of "an independent, sovereign, democratic and popular state."

We also know that it was essentially in order to bar the way to the RND which. as
its name suggests, intended to be the rallier of the country's patriotic forces,

that the controlled multiparty system was imposed 5 years ago, which contributed
more than a little to its prestige.

Following official recognition, the END, through its secretary general, Prof Cheikh
Anta Diop, defined the objectives of the policy he intended to follow during this
phase in this way: "Consolidating the democratic opening so that it will become
a continuing search; forging national unity above and beyond the divergenoies of

23
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ethnic groups, religious denominations and specific brotherhoods; creating the
right political conditions that will enable the entire Senegalese nation to face
the humiliating challenge of neocolonialism; and showing by deeds that the RED is
connerned only with the task of building the nation."

It was undoubtedly these concerns, along with his acute awareness of the country's
grave economic and social situation, that caused Prof Cheikh Anta Diop, at a press

conference held by the RND in Dakar on 10 August ~- the first public manifestation
of the movement since its legalization -- to take up subjects rarely touched upon

dency on other countries; and finally, the promotion of national languages as an

indispensable factor for a true democracy and the blossoming of the country's human
potential.

"We could have held this conference in an abstract language," the secretary general
of the RND explained. "He could have traced the history of our movement and re-

called the fight it has waged. But everyone knows that. The important thing, in
our opinion, was to propose concrete alternatives. He intend to emerge from the
field of the traditional abstractions."

And yet, from there to thinking that the RND intended to duck the current questions
was but a step that some took. However, the surprise does not stop there. Exposing
the key to his approach, meaning that any opportunism, any complacency aimed at
gaining facile popularity is obviously absent, the secretary general of the RND re-
sponded to a question and, at the same time he made the responsibility for the cur-
rent crisis relative, he made a particularly calm evaluation of the action taken

by the new Senegalese president: "I believe," he said,-"that we must have the
courage to say everything positive in the action of this government. It is repug-
nant to us to give the impression that we engage in opposition for opposition's
sake. Parties can form openly, exit visas have been done away with, and I cannot
say that everything is negative; that would not be reasonable. Furthermore, we
must also consider the deep difficulties that are nearly out of the control of our
small cauntries. The government compass is beginning to tremble precisely because
of this impossible situation in which we find ourselves and also because of the
political options chosen long ago. He will never be able to emerge from this
situation until we agree to certain profound reforms. In the last eight months,
things have happened that are apparently negative, but we must not forget that the

fate reserved for all our isolated nations is chronic indebtedness, dependency on
foreign financial backers."

Construcrive Opposition?

[s it then a question, as some would think, of a blank check given to the new govern-
ment? The rest of the speech belies such an interpretation: "If we do not change
economic credos, Cheikh Anta Diop continued, "we shall get further and further off
course. The IMF is often within our walls and assigns very astringent solutions

to us that bother us. When the Senegalese Government is humiliated, I am also
humiliated. I suffer morally, personally, from the humiliationa we endure. Under
such conditions, it is quite obvious that we shall find a solution only by changing

211
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structures. What the government should perhaps have done was to draw up a balance
sheet of our liabilities, say: 'Look at the abyss. That is our financial and eco-
nomic situation. It is catastrophic and it demands a national effort. Re are
going to examine under what conditions the nation will agree to these efforts.‘

But if we try to steer the ship of state as well as we can while not breathing a
word about all of this, that is when we shall engender difficulties like those we
now face. Having said that much, there are things undeniably positive in the
government's action and the opposition is the first to admit it, so that it will

be clear that we are not practicing a policy of 'Get out of there so I can get in.’
It is repugnant to us to be in the race for power for power's sake. The RND has
already said it: It is interested only in the task of building the nation and will
prove it by deeds. What concerns us, at a time when the countries on the continent
are being destabilized, is to strengthen national cohesion. As for the government's
action, we judge it with a freedom that proves that if tomorrow, the government

acts in a harmful way, we shall say so. However, we must admit that the political
future is necessarily uncertain, under the conditions in which we work, if they do
not agree to the reforms that we recommend."

It is understandable that such lucid language, breaking with the style of the tradi-
tional pamphlets of any opposition party in general, may have irritated or intrigued
some persons and that, once cut apart and with its nuances removed, it could give
rise to interpretations and speculations that are hasty, to say the least. For
example, the government press and the Socialist Party took advantage of the oppor-
tunity to hail in the RND, which not long ago was the object of violent attacks,

the coming of an exemplary constructive opposition. Some commentators went even
further, suggesting the possibility of the establishment of a government of na-
tional union between the PS and the RND. however, for the time being, nothing
supports such a hypothesis. Moreover, as if a test question were being put to

him: Has the RRD willing to participate in the reforestation campaign decided upon
by the government? Cheikh Anta Diop responded in the negative: "If there were any
peril, we could rise up together. Today, on the spur of the moment, they cannot

ask us to go plant trees. He must create the conditions that will enable the Sene-
galese nation to rise up as a single man.“

The fact that this approach may have given rise to debate and questions within the
RND itself is not surprising. The Democratic National Rally, as its secretary
general recalls, is not in fact a monolithic party, but "a rallying of men and
women from all political backgrounds who have come together to do what is essential,
that is, bring about beneficial changes in the direction of the interests of the
majority. It is at one and the same time our strength and our weakness."

Other specific traits of the Democratic National Rally deserve to be pointed out.
The RND is not concerned with creating ties with other countries. "All the pro—
gressive parties in the world could, a priori, be our allies," Cheikh Anta Diop
says, “but we believe that an extroverted attitude is not a good political educa-
tion. We want to be free at all times. He shall concentrate on our country's
conditions and we intend to derive all our strength from the Senegalese masses."

As for knowing what ideology the END claims as its own, the secretary general
states: "we apply the mass political line defined at our congresses. For six
year, although they tried to impose one on us. we refused to stick a label on

25
son omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

our foreheads, out of dignity and in order to set an example, because it was not
in keeping with the idea we had of political freedom, of the freedom of man and

the deeper meaning of political action. Why should we now agree to accept a
label?"

For Cheikh Anta Diop, in fact, given the current situation of the African countries,
"the class struggle constitutes a phrase more than a real condition. That may be
an aspiration," he believes. "but no political party can truly try to conduct its
action based on the interests of a single class."

lts vocation as a rallier of patriotic forces, which the RND chose as soon as it
was formed, and its rejection of any hasty action that might be short—lived undoub-
tedly explains its attitude to the problems of unity with other opposition forces,
which criticize it for sometimes tending to "go its own way."

At the time of its founding. the 3ND proposed to other leftist groups - all of
which were then illegal -- to form the Democratic National Rally, while at the
same time continuing to develop their own organizations with complete autonomy.
"we imagined that solution because we knew that the political struggle waged to-
gether is sincere only if all are committed to the same extent,“ Cheikh Anta Diop
says. "They replied with a refusal, but the RED is completely at ease in speaking
of its relations with the other opposition groups. We remain constantly available
to respond to any appeal, when it is a question of concerted action. Unity in
order to promote greater political, economic and cultural independence will come
about. All that we can get together, we shall. But unity will come about through
vigorous action and not around a bargaining table. Nor does anything say that
there can be no mergers. By dint of rubbing elbows. understanding one another and
explaining our positions to one another. we shall perhaps finally pose the question
of what does, in the finally analysis, really separate us. The thick wall of pre-
judice could then begin to erode away until it finally collapses.”

For the time being, and while awaiting a greater clarification of the situation,
the END goes about extending its base, which remains very uneven depending on the
region, for different reasons, the least of which is not material difficulties.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

11,464
cs0: 4719/124

26
MI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEYCHELLES

RENE “ANTS STRONGER TIES um! FRANCE
PHO91031 Paris AFRIQUE-ASIA in French 12-25 Oct 81 pp 9-12

[Part I of interview with Seychelles' President Albert Rene by Sonon Halley:
"Seychelles Has Not Ceased to be Target of Inperislist Destsbilisstion Attenpts"--
date and place not given]

[Excerpts] When we turned to the subject of Franco-Seychelles relations [Albert
Rene's] reaction was clear and categorical. how could this statesman, who was
particularly close to the leftwing labor leaders in Britain when he was a young
lawyer in London, fail to be happy to see "conrsdes in am” in the Elysee,
Hatignon. the Quai d'Orsay and the National Assenbly? He has my personal friends
within the French left and makes no secret of his hope to meet with the:- soon:

"As soon as the results of the second round of the Hay French presidential election
were announced I sent a congratulatory message to President Hitterrand fras Tripoli,
where I was asking an official visit, and I infomed hill of the importance we
attach to the development and intensification of fruitful cooperation between our
two countries based on nutual respect.

"We always followed his stances on international policy isms closely when he
was PS first secretary, especially those on cooperation between the industrialized
and developing countries and toward those struggling for their independence, and
his concern for peace and greater justice in the world.

"We were particularly [loved by the content. of his opening speech at the Paris
conference on the least developed countries in which he hoped, like us, that in
North-South relations 'the spirit of shared responsibility night replace distrust
and indifference,’ and that global negotiations night he started. 'llelping the
Third World is helping yourself overcome the erisis'; President Hitterrand's apt
expression strikes me as very true and is an excellent expression of that necessary
shared responsibility."

But what hopes does the Seychelles have of the new cooperation and development

policy announced by the Hauroy goverment and which Jean-Pierre Cot intends to
implement?

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"He hope it will strengthen and consolidate the cooperative relations between our
two countries. based on mutual respect and reciprocal interest," President Albert
Rene replied. "As far as principles are concerned, the approach taken by a new
French cooperation policy, more especially in Africa, coincides with ours and

opens up the prospect of a vast potential to be exploited. The initial contacts

at ministerial level and especially the recent meeting between our foreign minister
and [French External Relations Minister] Claude Cheysson open up prospects in which
we place great hope for the mutual benefit of our two countries and our two peoples."

What about the Seychelles' security? The Seychelles regime, which is one of the
favorite targets of American imperialism, which wants to make Diego Garcia a

powerful base for aggression, is also facing all kinds of attempts at destabiliza-
tion, sabotage, plots, mercenaries....

The Seychelles head of state has no illusions about the abandonment of these
machinations against his regime owing to the very fact that it is progressive,
anti-imperialist and that it defends socialist options: "The destabilization
attempts," he stressed. "are not over. They are the sign that the revolutionary
process is continuing in the Seychelles and that it is upsetting some people.

The forms may change, become less brutal and more insidious, but the objective is
the same: to stop the process of building a new society in the Seychelles or to
divert it from its path. Moreover this impression as to the forms these attempts
are taking must be altered in view of the apartheid regime's new direct inter-

vention in the internal affairs of the countries in the region. The examples are
increasingly numerous.

"In the division of roles among the imperialist powers it certainly seems that our
region is being placed in its [the apartheid regime's] hands more than in the past
in order to relieve the other powers. That is a real danger which we must watch
carefully.

"But in face of the threats hanging over our country. its security depends primarily
on its defense forces, which are, at the same time, working for its development.

In addition to these forces there is the people's mobilization, especially through
the people's militia. We are also developing cooperation with the progressive
countries in the region and, on the military plane. our forces have, on several
occasions, carried out joint maneuvers with the Tanzanian and Madagascan forces

to test the level of coordination and their operational capability."

[Rene continues] "With regard to security in the Indian Ocean region, our position
has always been clear. It must be ensured by the countries in the region. which
do not threaten anybody's interests, or marine navigation or the oil supply routes.
The real threat, on the other hand. hangs over our countries, our development
efforts, and our peoples through this foreign military presence.

"Thus. in this specific sphere, the logic of our argument leads us to demand the
withdrawal of all foreign military forces in the region, the dismantling of the
military bases and an end to the facilities granted to them. Our demand applies
to all foreign forces, irrespective of who they are and without any exception."

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And what does President Albert Rene think of the plan for a conference on the
demilitarization of the Indian Ocean? what progress has it made? How does he
view the development of relations between the Seychelles, Madagascar, Mauritius,
reunion and the Comoro Islands?

The Seychelles head of state thinks that preparations for the Sri Lanka conference
on the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, scheduled for the end of the year or, at
latest, early 1982 and which is to be held under UN auspices, are asking no progress
and that the blame for this rests with some great powers for whom peace and

peoples' peace of mind are not subjects for discussion.

"We are continuing," he said, "our efforts and consultations to ensure that this
desired peace is established and that the specter of intervention against the
peoples is removed by demilitarization and the dismantling of the foreign bases

in the region. As far as our region is concerned, we strongly advocate close
regional cooperation among the Indian Ocean countries despite the different social
and political systems which characterize their respective situations. That is our
viewpoint on interstate relations, and we do not believe in interference in other
states' internal affairs. Of course. in view of our progressive options, our
interparty relations give priority to relations with the parties in the region
which are struggling for progress, national and social emancipatlon, and the right
of the peoples to self-determination--which. in our view, goes hand in hand with
the as yet uncompleted decolonisation procer."

The more aggressive policy pursued by Hashington since the Reagan administration
took office is still one of President Albert Rene's main sources of concern.

The adventurism. the race for the most destructive weapons and the cold war which
the United States has launched herald a situation which is particularly explosive
since the progressive Third world countries are one of the most immediate objec-
tives of its aggressive policy, especially following its decision to train, arm
and finance the Angolan, Mozambique. Khmer and Afghan counterrevolutionaries,
among others, to increase its support for Sauth Africa, tn try to overthrow
al-Qadhdhafi's regime by force and to regari all liberatiun movement fighters as
"terrorists." Can President Albert Rene think of or suggest anything to counter
this American offensive?

"We think," he replied without hesitation, "that we must present a united front
through more regular consultations and discussions among progressive countries at

a time when some administrations are basing their international relations policy

on increasing aggressiveness. Any leaning toward national liberation, any struggle
for justice and equality strikes them as su:pect and to be condemned and prompts
them to resort to provocation and direct intervention. In face of these dangers

we must adopt a better coordinated strategy of struggle ard show effective and
constant solidarity among the advocates of progress and peace, the better to with-
stand this new offensive."

Our interview was not over. Other questions came to mind- Polisario, Namibia.
South Africa, Israel and its aggressive policy against the Palestinians, Lebanese
and Iraqis, the invasion cf Angola, the futire of southern Africa and also the
evolution in the Seychelles' internal situation since the revolution of 5 June
1977....

CDPYRIGBT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

CSO: 6719/201 END
29
FOR OFFICIAL.USEIDNLY