FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10148
1 December 1981

Korean Affairs Report

(FOUO 5/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the

last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
KOREAN AFFAIRS REPORT

(P000 5/81)

Coursms

scum RNA

POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

New Political Pipeline Hith Japan Banned
(”maﬁa “Ob“O; mmsm, 6 mt 81) OOOOOIOOOOOOCOOIOOCC...

BCONQH

Technological Assistance for P'ohang Steel Mill Refused
(“mm mm W, 13 mt 81) I...OOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOI...

-a- [III-ASIA-lOSI

FOB mﬂll. “CI? ‘1va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. KOREA/POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

NEH POLITICAL PIPELINE HIT“ JAPANEXAHINKD
Tokyo ECONOHISTO in Japanese 6 Oct 81 pp 38-42

[Article by commentator Nakagawa Nobuo: "A New Japanese-Korean Pipeline in the
Making")

[Text] Tilting to "Economic Cooperation for Security"

"Korea is hopeful regarding the outcome of the general meeting of the Japan-Korea
Parliamentarians Association to be held on the 16th. It wants to appeal to the
understanding of the Diet members in the Japan-Korea Parliamentarians Association.
and hopes that the association will make the most of its influence on public
opinion in Japan" (correspondent Pujitaka in Seoul. ASAHI SHIHBUN. 13 September
1981).

"President Ken Yasui (Japan-Korea Parliamentarians Association) and other members.
a total of about 60. will depart for Seoul as scheduled on the 15th to attend the
general meeting of the Japan-Korea. Korea-Japan Parliamentarians Associations.
There is a move toward 'extending a helping hand of aid to Korea since the issue
of economic aid to China found a political solution' which relieves the concern
that the government might be dragged by the Diet members diplomacy" (HAINICHI
SHIMBUN. 12 September).

This news was reported immediately after the closing of the llth Japan-Korea Regular
Ministerial Conference (10-11 September. Seoul) which failed even to issue a joint
statement because of the differences: Korea requested economic cooperation valued

at $6 billion with implications for security. while Japan refused to yield to "eco-
nomic cooperation for security."

Although the negotiations between the governments failed to achieve a successful

result. these reports candidly indicate the attitude of the Chun Doo Ewan adminis-
tration in placing its hope on the work of Diet members friendly to Korea concen-
trated in the Japan-Korea Parliamentarians Association. and the movement of those

related to the Japan—Korea Parliamentarians Association in trying to give a posi-
tive response to that.

At the ninth general meeting of the Japan-Korea. Korea-Japan Parliamentarians
Associations held 16-17 September. the Japanese side refrained from mentioning
directly ”economic cooperation for security". However. the joint statement. which

was issued after the opinions of both sides were successfully ironed out. contained
some big problematic points.

1
FOI.0F11(1A1.USE(MVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEZONLN

The first point is the description: "We recognise that dangers due to the extra-
ordinary buildup of military power and ceaseless provocations by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) are permanently present and bitter ten-
sions continue to exist in the Korean Peninsula. In particular. we jointly
acknowledge that it [economic cooperation for security] is extremely important for
peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula."

A Japanese government-level announcement also mentions that peace and stability

on the Korean Peninsula. where tensions exist. are essential to peace and stability
in Japan (a joint newspaper announcement of the llth ministerial conference).
However, the recognition that such tensions are exclusively attributable to "the
extraordinary buildup of military power and ceaseless provocations by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea" was announced for the first time in the joint statement
on this general meeting of the parliamentarians associations. It is very obvious
that this statement symbolized nothing but total agreement with the Korean side,
which blames the "threat from the north" as the source of the tense situation on
the Korean Peninsula.

The second problem is the point: "In acknowledgement of this. the Japanese side
evaluates highly the Korean defense efforts. expresses profound understanding of
the difficult economic situation in Korea which must bear burdensome national
defense expenses, and confirms our sincere efforts for economic cooperation with
Korea."

In this statement. the resolution to act for the economic cooperation with Korea
with "our sincere efforts" is directly connected to the high evaluation of the
Korean defense efforts and to the profound understanding of the hardship of the
Korean economy due to the burdensome national defense expenses. With this point
is viewed in connection with the first point. which recognized the "threat froa
the north" as the scurce of tensions, the content of the joint statement seems to
be in agreement with the theory of "economic cooperation for security" proposed by
the Chon Tu-hwan administration.

Thus, we can see that the Diet members friendly to Korea, in expressing their posi-
tion. grossly stepped out of the formal posture of the Japanese Government through
the latest general meeting of the Japan-Korea and Korea-Japan Parliamentarians
Associations in regard to the issue of the loan in yen worth $6 billion with an
implication of security.

The wheels turned as the Chon Tu-hwan administration had hoped. This indicates
that the efforts of the Chon Tu-hwan administration aimed at the creation of a
new political pipeline between Japan and Korea through the parliamentarians
association bore the desired fruit.

1
The structure of the parliamentarians association, which serves as a parliamentary

exchange machine-political pipeline. was formally founded on 10 July 1975. The
parent body of this organization was the Japan-Korea Parliamentary Social Reunion
established in 1972.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFNKJAI.USEZONLN

New Stage of Parliamentarians Association

Through the two organizations. Yi Pyong-hui. known as the "minister in charge of
Japanese affairs." was the man who functioned as a service window for the Korean
side. and Kim Chong—p'il functioned behind the scenes. The objective of Ti Pyong-
hui and his camp was the building of a new pipeline primarily between members of
the Kim Chong-p'il faction and the mainstay of the Liberal Democratic Diet members.
in place of the old pipeline between Ti Bu-rsk and other factions against Kim
Chang-p'il and the Japanese old line such as the Japan-Korea Cooperation Committee.

In summation. from the viewpoint of the political pipeline. the Japan-Korea relation
shifted from the first stage to the second stage with the evolution from the Japan-
Korea Parliamentary School Reunion to the parliamentarians association.

The second stage was the period when Korea overwhelmingly approached Japan because
of an increase in capital and capital goods dependence on Japan associated with the
cooling of Korea-0.8. relations during both the Nixon and the Carter administra-
tions. which formulated a policy to pull Out 0.8. Armed Forces resident in Korea,
and it was also associated economically with the beginning of heavy chemical indus-
trialization. '

However, the situation made a complete turnabout in the wake of the assassination

of Pak. post-assassination unrest and the emergence of the Chon Tu-hwan structure.
Under the discipline and whirlwind restoration of the political, economic social

and cultural worlds enforced by the Chen Tu-hwan structure. almost all Korean
politicians linked to the old Japan-Korea pipeline disappeared from the frontline.
Hith this as a fact. an effort to rebuild a pipeline to Japan was begun. brandishing
the pretext: "breaking froe past sticky relations." The third stage of Japan-Korea
relations has started. The centerpiece of the new stage is the restablishment of
the parliamentarians association through remodeling.

The parliamentarians association is comprised of two organisations. the Japan-
Kores Parliamentarians Association and the Korea-Japan Parliamentarians Associa-
tion. The Korean side has proceeded with the remodeling of the Korea-Japan Parlia-
mentarians Association with the progress of the Chon Tu-hwan structure consolidation
process, and it asked the Japan-Korea Parliamentarians Association to take corres-
ponding actions. striving for the reopening of the activities by the parliamen-
tarians association. At the table of the Takes Pukuda and Chen Tu-hwsn meeting

held on 15 September 1980, agreement was reached regarding the reopening of activi-
ties by the parliamentarians association. but it took until June 1981 for the
agreement to be implemented.

Factors such as the restless Korean situation during the l and 1/2 years since the
assassination of Pak. and particularly the hesitation of the Japanese side in
getting accustomed to the change inflicted by the deportation of the Korean part-
ners, had considerable influence on bringing a necessary functional halt to the
association's activities during that period.

In June 1981. the parliamentarians association was finally reestablished as an

organization. after various events and manifestations--the announcement of an
American policy to support the Chon Tu-hwan administration wholeheartedly at the

FOR 0F1ﬂ€lAl.USEIDNlN
FNJR4OFFICJAI.lﬂHE(NNLY

Reagan-Chan Tu-hwan meeting (February 1981). a commutation of the death sentence
to life imprisonment for Kim Tee-Chung just before the meeting. and with that as
a momentum. the starting of a movement by the Japanese Government toward all-out
rapprochement with Korea.

0n 3 June. the Japan-Korea Parliamentarians Association held a general meeting.
and new officers. beginning with President Yasui. were installed. Subsequently.
on the 10th of the same month. the Korea-Japan Parliamentarians Association held
an executive meeting and installed President Yi Chae-hyong. Secretary General

Kim Yun-hwan and other new officers. 0n the 22d of the same month. the joint
executive meeting of the Japan-Korea and Korea-Japan Parliamentarians Associations
' was held in Tokyo, which marked the relaunching of the parliamentarians associa-
tions.

What is notable about the parliamentarians associations that were finally reestab-
lished is the contrast in the fact that the Korean officers were almost completely
replaced whereas the Japanese officers were practically all old hands. except for
the position of the president. which was filled by Yasui. a new face who was the
former chairman of the house of Councilors (see table below).

Consequently. the limit of the association is predictable from its origin. since
the Japanese side officers are occupied by "those who served then" (TOA NIPPO.

9 June 1981). while the Korean side is stressing "breaking from past sticky
relations” and "modernisation of diplomatic style toward Japan."

Return to Bilateral Diplomacy

Prom 26 May to a June. Secretary General Kim Yun-hwan (then unofficially in office)
visited Japan on the pretext of introducing himself as the new secretary-general-
designate. and talked with political leaders such as former Prime Minister Fukuda;
Chairman shintaro Abe of the Policy Affairs Research Council. Liberal Democratic
Party; Chairman Yoshikatsu Takeiri of the Clean Government Party; and Secretary
General Toshio Yamaguchi of the New Liberal Club. As if taking this opportunity.
a political level Japan-Korea pipeline began to operate.

As mentioned before. new officers of the Japan-Korea Parliamentarians Association
were installed on 3 June while Kim Yun-hwan was in Japan. On 8-11 June. a party
of Liberal Democratic representatives. hideyuki Aizawa. Kiyoshi H ri and Bideo
Hatanabe. visited Korea. Afterward. Japanese politicians visited Korea one after
another. creating a traffic rush.

Among those visitors. the most notable ones were: a party led by Chairman Abe of
the Liberal Democratic Party's Policy affairs Research Council (15-19 June). a
party led by President Yasui of the Japanelorea Parliamentarians Association
(14-16 July). a party led by Chairman Canri Yamashita of the Standing Committee
for House Management (21-26 July). a party led by Liberal Democratic Representa-
tive Noboru Takeshita (23-28 August) and a party led by Chairman Takeiri of the
Clean Government Party (25-29 August).

h
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NWLY
Aoo>auauaomouao¢ no «use: we nonin-
.>uuom ouuouuoaua aauoaaav «not oozaouaz

Ano>uuauuooounoa mo 0.50: no non-09 .xuucm
unqucuoom ouuaquIonv unaioxuz aqua:
AaHOuuuocsoo «o

v qua-«sou: ougau
ahead: oau<
cannon-u chasm
«30:03 osauna
suqaounu nugw

: nuanuoxda :uonoz
: v quasouau» «uoaqvum
v «Auscusxqm canon»
Ano>wuuusoaouaou uo canon no nonioa
.xuuom ouuauooaon Handguav on: oxsoom

canon mo hogan! .
a. V
.9 V
L V
v
v

AAAAAAA

Auouu>va

nauauou .muuom uoaaoauom oauouoOIonv
awn-ax ass" ucovuuoum husaon

Aauunm ouunquSon

unhapwa no uoaq>va can .auoauuousoo
mo «use: on» no cuauuaso nuaMOuv
«so.» can

Aaupaunu< deceauoz no non-ca
.auuum oouuoan ouu-uoOﬂunv cuanucbu lax

“sauna ungﬂqaoom

caucuooaoa mo vaosv cannuaono on
Anouucopnoo >uu¢~lnu<

Hucouuuz no :ulu«¢30v 00A ucoanncoau a»
Aucovuooua

oou> .huudm unudluoow uuuau06ﬂoav
also 5»

Raga-uau< ”anodes: no

non-a: .auuam oouuusn ouuauooﬂaav
u:a.aoIH :«no

noouuwaloo

o>uuaooun nauucoo uo calhwnzu

oow> .huuam oouuaan ouuanoolonu
asunsu a»

Aauuoaou

nouuouav .>uuam ouuuosn uuunuooaonv
oculwcogu coax

Acouuwlaoo o>uusuoxu Huuuaoo no
cnlhw-zu .AUuum oouuoan ouuoHUOIoav

meoasuoasu a»
ustice Patty.

Justice Party.
ly)

)

)

)

area Party.
13!)

)

I. member

Hutsuki Kata (
member of Bonn
ﬂironi Nakanur
Noboru Minoan
Kabun Huto
Koaaku Had: (D
number of Bone
Tatsuo Yanazak
Party. nelber
Shinya Totsuka
Hichiyuki Isur
Hichikazu Kara
Socialist Parq
Councillors)
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They all met with President Chon Tu-hwan and talked about substantive matters.

For example. the request for a government loan of $6 billion with the implication

of security was informally conveyed through the talks with Chairman Abe of the
Policy Affairs Research Council. President Yasui of the Japan-Korea Parliamentarians
Association and Chairman Yamashita of the Standing Committee for House Management.
preceding conveyance of the communication by a formal route. (TDA NIPPO.

11 August) In the case of Abe. he met with Prime Minister Suzuki after his return
and deftly requested the improvement of relationship with Korea, with which Prime
Minister Suzuki reportedly agreed (IDA NIPPO. 13 July).

This vividly characterizes the creation of the new Japanese political pipeline by
the Chon Tu-hwan administration.

The first characteristic is that the parliamentarians association. furnished with
new faces, is used as the centerpiece of the structure.

Second. in parallel with the approach to the Liberal Democratic Party's Pukuda
faction as a human reservoir. as seen in the invitations to visit Korea extended
to former Prime Minister Pikuda (September 1980) and subsequently to Abe and Yasui.
the Chun administration is intensifying its effort to approach the Tanaka faction
by inviting Yamashita and Takeshita to Korea. Furthermore. as seen in the invita-
tion to Takeire. it intends to expand the pipeline even to the Clean Government
Party.

This is noteworthy as a new movement to broaden the available human reservoir to
include other influential factions in the Liberal Democratic Party and parties
other than the Democratic Socialist Party. while the previous conventional pipeline
was partial to some factions of the Liberal Democratic Party and the Democratic
Socialist Party.

However, the technique used to achieve the objective was none other than an old
familiar tactic which aims at encouraging government-to-government formal route
negotiations in front by exerting pressure through political maneuvering from the
back. This is. therefore, the third characteristic. He cannot help but say that
the Korean approach is far from new and refreshing when it seeks to broaden the
pipeline to Japan yet expects most from chairman Abe of the Policy Affairs Research
Council, who is considered to be the next leader of the Pukuda faction.

The newspaper KYUNG HYANG (dated 16 June). known as siding with the government in
Korea. described Abe as "the Diet member who was elected eight times and who is
known as the 'crown prince' of the Fukuda faction because of his career experiences
in serving as minister of agriculture and forestry in the Niki cabinet and as chief
cabinet secretary in the Fukuda cabinet"; and in a comment--to give an example of
the Korean partisanship for Abe-~said: "Chairman (Policy Affairs Research Council)
Abe. who advocates a clean government and a young government and it is hoped will
be the next candidate for prime minister. is expected to work as a (Japanese)
service window to Korea in the future and is recognized as a powerful figure in

the Japanese political arena."

Thus we got into a mess and were pointedly criticized for "creating noises that
bypass the diplomatic route. and projecting an impression of bilateral diplomacy
once again" (YOHIURI SHIHBUN editorial dated 12 August).

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unilateral Economic Service window to Japan

In parallel with the building of a political pipeline. efforts are also made to
rebuild a pipeline connecting Japan and Korea economically.

"hat the Chen Tu-hwan administration did first for that purpose was to make a uni-
lateral service window for economic cooperation with Japan.

The broadest pipeline connecting Japan and Korea economically is the Japan-Korea
Joint Economic Committee of the Private Sector. This coemdttee was created in
February 1967 as a permanent organization which stemmed from the Japan-Korea Joint
Economic Social ﬂeeting of the Private Sector held in February 1966. 1 year after
the conclusion of the Japan-Korea Treaty.

In Japan. the Japan-Korea Economic Committee was established by the Keidanren, the
Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Japan Foreign Trade Council. and
from the beginning it assumed an attitude of unilaterally taking charge of the
service window to Korea. including the founding of the Joint Economic Committee.

In contrast, in Korea. actual contacts with Japan were predominantly handled
individually by each economic group and each corporation regardless of the existing
service window of which the Korea-Japan Economic Committee was in charge.

Incidentally. while the Japan-Korea Economic Committee had a substantive standing
executive office, namely. the Japan-Korea Economic Association. the Korea-Japan
Economic Committee did not have a similar office. Korean management was quite
different in that the work of an executive office was entrusted by turns to the
Federation of Korean Industrialists (Zenkeiren). the Korean National Committee of
the International Chamber of Commerce and the Korean Traders' Association.

The Chon Tu-hwan administration launched a policy to correct these situations and
to make a unilateral service window to Japan. which resulted in the new establish-
ment of the Korea-Japan Economic Association (12 February 1981). A total of 10
influential economic leaders were selected. including Pak Tae-chun. president of
the Po Hang Iron Works. who was appointed chairman; and Kim U-chung leader of the
Daewoo group. who was appointed vice chairman.

Chairman Pak Tae—chun was at one time. as an army officer. an instructor to Presi-
dent Chon Tu-hwan. and he has also been a key figure for heavy chemical industriali-
sation as president of the Po Hang Iron Works since 1968. which makes him the

number one industrialist in the spotlight under the Chen Tu-hwan structure. The

P0 Hang Iron Works is closely connected both financially and technologically to
Japanese iron and steel capital such as the Nippon Steel Corporation. and Pak

would be a suitable man to build human relations with Japan's present financial
world. where financiers from the iron and steel industry play leading roles.

At the same time. this creation of a unilateral economic service window to Japan
has been wheeled out. from one point of view. with the hidden design of placing
the economic cooperation with Japan under the powerful management and control of
the Chan Tu-hwan structure by reforming the conventional practice whereby each
financial group and corporation individually established economic relations with
Japan in the period of President Pak.

8
FOR¢0FFKJA1.USIZONLY
F‘HICHWWCJAL.USEZCNHLY

Large-scale heavy chemical industry reorganization and the corporate integration
and deintegration policy pursued by Chon Tu-hwan entail the intention to nurture
business groups suitable for the new system by shaving the power of the hyundai
group and the Daewoo group, which grew to be the largest and second largest busi-
ness groups in Korea during the Pak administration. A typical example of the new
groups is the Sunkyung group. which acquired the right of management of the Korean
Oil Public Corporation after its denationalization to a private operation.

In any case. the real power acquired by the Hyun Dee and Daewoo groups through
their hitherto rapid growth became too strong for the Chon Tu-hwan structure to
manipulate at will.

Therefore. the reorganization of the economic world under the Chon Tu-hwan struc-
ture is still in an unpredictable state. unlike the political field. Chairman
Chong Chu-Yoang of Zenkeiren (a financial group equivalent to Japan's Keidanren).
who is also the leader of the Ryan Dae group was recently harshly critical of the
government, in apparent defiance of the new policy: "Incentive to create profits
will not be furnished no matter what competent human resources. rich capital and
excellent technologies are mobilized as long as government control over business
and interference and restrictions over the economic functions are deep-rooted"
(TOA NIPPO. 8 August).

In a nutshell. it is clear that the crack between the government and the economic
world is enlarging behind the Korean effort to create a unilateral economic window
to Japan.

In contrast. the Japanese economic world has amplified the movement to repair
economic relations with Korea. which started to cool off in 1979, by means of mass
attendance of influential members at the ceremony for the completion of the fourth
equipment expansion work held in February at the Po Bang Iron Works and at the 13th
meeting of the Japan-Korea Joint Economic Committee of the Private Sector held in
June.

Of course. these movements are associated with the captivating glemor of the large
business talks relating to the new 5-year project work in Korea. However. the
making of corporate-level intimate pipelines, in current conditions. allows us to
grasp a more accurate picture of the complicated Korean reality.

Rapprochement Lacking in Popular Support

These phenomena disclose the fact that the Japan-Korea rapprochement is being put
forward according to a pattern whereby political and financial pipeline rebuilding
precedes and exerts pressure on negotiations through the formal route. That has
nothing to do with rebuilding Japan-Korea relations on a broad national basis.

Referring to a slightly outdated account. SANKEI SHIHBUN once asked a question in
a survey of opinion in January 1977: "What kind of danger should we expect in
Japan if the 0.3. Armed Forces resident in Korea are withdrawn?” Of those
answering this question. 58.5 percent said: "There is absolutely no danger of
Japan ever being invaded no matter what happens to Korea."

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Also, according to a poll made public on 20 September of this year by the prime
minister's office, "feel friendly" toward Korea dropped to 35 percent from the
farmer (1980) 1.3 percent, whereas "do not feel friendly" increased to 53 percent
from 47 percent. It is obvious that the critical sentiment toward the trial of
Kim Tae-chung and discord with the Chon Tu-hwan administration affected the poll.

Views expressed at the general meeting of the parliamentarians association by the
Diet members friendly to Korea, who took a large step toward the Chen Tu-hwan
adninistration. which brandishes "the threat from the north". contends that "Korean
defense efforts protect Japan" and requests a gigantic sum for a "defense loan."
are definitely alienated to a great extent from this trend of public opinion.

Furthermore. it must be pointed out that the security theory advocated by Chen
Tu-hwan indeed encounters divergent views within Korea.

Young Nam University in Dae Koo city is known to be one of the prominent private
universities in Korea. There is a "research report" which is assumed to have

been prepared and presented by the Unification Issue Research Institute at Young
Nan University to the authorities of the Pak administration in December 1971. Top
Secret is stamped on the cover page. Incidentally. the director of the research
institute at that time was Sin To-song who later held the post of director of the
National Unification Board.

The report pointed out that "the first line of the security of our nation" lies
"within our territory much more than the ceasefire line or any other border
lines," and that "the enemy that we must defend against is not a large unit of
regular armed forces attacking us with tanks and heavy guns. but the factor of
instability within our own system." Furthermore. it described the following as
specific problems.

"The current power structure of our nation has become very rigid and grossly
alienated from the aajority of the people. The ruling force has become closed to
the public and cannot properly apprehend the trend of public opinion and the
actual living status of the people at all times. The political leadership has
lost moral persuasive power and shows a tendency toward increased dependence on
violence as a means of rule. Thus. the unsatisfied demands of the majority of
the populace centering around the intellectuals. youth and students are daily
intensified and entail the danger of growing beyond simple sentiment against the
government to the denial of the system."

The actual threat to the security of Korea. the report concludes. is none other
than the increasing discontent of the people with the inadequate power makeup and
domination.

The fact that in Korea the struggle for democracy, which represented the discontent
of the populace, continuously marched on without bending to suppression in the
seventies, bears witness to the accuracy of this conclusion.

The security theory being insisted upon by Chon Tu-hwan is only a succession to
the already denounced theory which existed at the time of the Pak administration.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This further shows the vulnerability of the foundation of the Japan-Korea rapproche-
ment presently being pursued.

If Japan-Korea rapprochement. alienated from the broad popular basis. is allowed to
act as it pleases. a refumigation (furthermore. amplified) of the black mists that
cling to the sticky relations will be unavoidable. In addition, the Korean economy
will continue to suffer from increasing difficulty. as seen by its foreign debt
remainder. which will double to $6.1 billion by the end of 1986 from $30.5 billion
at the end of 1981. even if Japan vere to prop it up completely.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shimbunaha 1981

89100
CSO: 6105/7

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. KOREA/BOOM!!!

TECHNOLOGICAL ASSISTANCE FOR P'OKANG STEEL HILL REFUSED
Tokyo "1110“ KEIZAI SHDIBUN in Japanese 13 Oct 81 p 1

[Text] Japan and West Refuse to Cooperate with Korea in Its Sea-less Steel Pipe
Plant Construction, Fearing "Boomerang"-Bffect

The P'ohsng Steel Hill of Korea, which has taken the export offensive against Japan
and in the Southeast Asian market, is now aiming at moving into high-grade steel.
seamless steel pipe production. It has approached the Nippon Steel Corporation,
Nippon Kokan Kabushiki Kaisha, and Sunitoao Hotel Industries Ltd for technical
assistance, but the request was refused by all three fires. it was learned on the
12th. According to insiders in steel business circles, European manufacturers
such as Hannesnan of West Germany appear to have refused also. The main reason
cited was: "Japanese as well as 0.8. manufacturers of seamless steel pipe are
stepping up their production and adding new facilities today, so there is a danger
of oversupply worldwide after 1984." There is no precedence for Japan's steel
industries refusing a request for technical assistance. This event shows the
nervousness of the industry about the boomerang effect. whose inpact has begun to
be felt in earnest. He might say that steel technology cooperation has also
entered "an age of selectivity."

The F'ohang Steel Mill is a new advanced steel plant built with the overall tech-
nical assistance of Japanese Ianufacturers. It has grown into a system which by
February this year was producing 8.5 million tons of raw steel a year. and its
second hot-roll plant will be in full operation this summer. Its main product-
hot coils-—is comparable in quality with the Japanese product but cheaper by $20
per ton or so. The impact of P'ohang products will be felt by Japan in the form of
a reduction in the export of hot coils to Southeast Asia during the October to
December period to 250,000 tons, which is less than half that during_the sane
period of the previous year. In addition, exports to Japan are also increasing
slowly but steadily, and Japan's business circles are receiving a heavy blow;

The request for technical assistance in the construction of e see-less steel pipe
plant as well as instruction in operational skills after the plant is built was
made by the technical personnel in charge of the P'ohang Steel Mill in person. It
is the desire of Koreans to progress froa production of low- to mediun-grsde steel
centered around hot-rolled thin plate and thick plate to the production of high-
grade steel. The Koreans believe that, with the Japanese manufacturers' assistance.
construction of a seamless steel pipe plant can be undertaken immediately within
the existing steel mill.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, seamless steel pipe is in short supply worldwide as a result of the oil
developnent boom. However, as a result of facilities being added in Japan alone,
the supply capacity after 1985 will increase 60 percent, from the present 3.9
million tons a year to 6.2 million tone a year [figures as published]. if the in-
crease in supply capacity of the 0.8. nanufacturera is added to this, the balance
between supply and demand is bound to collapse. To build a new seamless steel

pipe plant, at least 100 billion you of capital will be required, and there is a
strang indication that a request for a financial assistance will follow. Therefore,
the Japanese are said to have declined the request on the ground that "they do not
have technical personnel to spare."

However, the true reason for refusing the Korean request by Japan as well as the
West is the fear that it might upset the narket situation. like the low cost
offensive of hot coils that is taking place today, because more than half of the
seamless steel pipe that could be produced by P‘ohang would have to be exported.
The Korean Government recently postponed the construction of its second national
steel plant (the second P'ohang project) from 1982 to 1985. It is inevitable that
high-grade steel will have to be dealt with in the second P'ohang project. The
steel industries of Japan. which have truly begun to suffer from the boomerang
phenomenon, are forced to cope with this very difficult situation created by the
request for economic cooperation made by the Japanese and Korean Governments.

Boomerang effect: As a result of capital or technical assistance offered over-
seas, the enterprises which received assistance become so powerful that their
merchandise begins to flow back into the country which exported the capital and
technology in the first place. or begins to compete for narkets in third countries.
A boomerang is an instrument used by natives of Australia to hunt small prey such
as a bird. The word is used metaphorically to describe its conic: back at you.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keirai Shiﬂunsha 1981

9113
(:80: ‘5105/12 END

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY