FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

JPRS L/10063
22 October 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 49/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRues
(P000 49/81)

CONTENTS

ASIA

HNG [LNG

Heroin 3m Pomd Hidden in Hallowed-Out Fruit
(80m GINA mmmc Pwr, 9’ 10 “p 81)....00000000000.0.0.0...

Seized at Airport
111.1 Actress merged

mai Syndicate Sent Drugs to Hong Kong by Parcel Post
(80“ mm mmmc Par. 2’. sep 81)..0.0.0.0...OOCOOOOOOOOOOOO

HALAYS IA

Officials Anticipate Flood of Southeast Asian Heroin
(“m stAY nus. ”A“: 81).0......000......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Drug Arrests, Seizures for August 1981 Reported
(NW smns TIES. 12 sep 81)..0.0...OOOOIOOOOOOOOCOOOOO0......

largest Seizure of Heroin in Perak Smte ‘lhis Year
(“w smlm nm, 8 sep 81)....0..0.000.000.0000DOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Drug Couriers Switching Over to Senai Airport
(“w STRAITS um. 11 sep 81)....‘0...00.000.00.00...0.0.0.0...

Kelmtan Police Increase Antidrug Activities
(“a sms TIES, 15 “p 81)..00.....0....OOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOQOOO

PAKISTAN

Custom ACQUh‘esPast Bosts and Helicopter
(m. 29 sep 81)....00..CO..0...00.000.000.00...OOOCOOOOOCCOOOO

- e - [III - WW - 138 3000]

POI? nmﬂ ‘ ' US“ ON! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drug Enforcement Agencies 1b (ht Detective Dogs
(W, 30 *P 81)....000I.0...0.0.00.0...OOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Bashieh Factory Uncovered
(M, 4 mt 81).0.000'.O...OOIOOOOOICOOOOO0.00000000000000IOOO

Briefs
Drug Sales in Punjab
S6 Kiloe of Opium Seized
Drug Trafficker Peleaed
Heroin Seized
Islamabad llashish Seizure
Peshawar Hashish Seizure

Gadap llashish Seizure
VIB‘DIAM

Hanoi Outer-s Hikes Arrests for Opiu- Trafficking
(“n01 mﬁstic semce. 2 0°: 81)...0..IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

EAST EUROPE
CZEOiOS IDVAKIA

Briefs
Narcotics Theft

LATIN “ERICA

BERMUDA

Minister Calls Drug Treatment Program Failure
(”in km“ “um, 17 SOP 81)....000000000000.000000000000000

GUYANA

Briefs
Mti-arihuana Drive

EHO)

PGR 'Pilot Plan' for Drug Destruction lhder Hay
(EL “NANA, 3’ 9 sep 81)....0.0......0...0...................~

Fifth Phase Annomced
Success Reported

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Atmrney General Pilot Plan Operations Described
(BL MARIO m Pmnw new, 13 sep anOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO

Trafficking on mnercial Flights lhder Investigation
(BL BRAVO. ‘ sep 81)....005000.0.IOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Until-nuns, Pill Trafficksrs Given Jail Sentences
(BL DImO m vao mm. 5. 12 sep 81)....00000000000000O...

7-Year Ter- Ordered
Harihusna Growers Sentenced

Dangerous ‘l‘rafficker Trmsferrsd to Tijuana
(u vol m u Fun”. 22 m 81)....0...‘OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Fehabilitation of Former Drug Producers Meribed
(u vozm “Mn“, 27“ 81)....0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOO

Briefs
Any Antidrug Activity
Rosales Trafficking Out
Cocaine Trafficker Caught
Possible lblease for Insates
Report on Pilot Plan
Cmton Officials Acwsed

ST. LUCIA

Editorial Assesses Efforts To Ourtsil Use of Harihusns
(wmrul; m3 ml“, 29 Jul 81)....0...OOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOIO

NEAR EAST AND NORM AFRICA

AFGlANIS‘l'AN

IRAN

Soviet Soldiers hportedly asserting to lisshish
(Kmm mmmAnM' 27 8.9 81)....0.000QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Opium Haul

Briefs
Reappointmnt of Narcotics Official
Heroin Seized in Khorasan

Heroin Seized in Ahvs:
(bins Confiscated in mm:
Opiu- Discovered in Shirvsn

-c-

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
1(qu

Social Pmblene lhderlying Drug Use Brought Out
(Hutlaq Sa'd Swailan; Alr‘l'ALI'All, 2 Sep 81)

ooooeooeoenoooeoooo

sun-3mm AFRICA

HAL!
Anti-Drug Oomission bets, Proposes New Dhasures
(L'ESSOR' 22-23 M8 81).0.0...000.00....OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOO.
“traffickers Arrested; Sterner Pmitive ﬁssures Urged
(came “183:1..ESOR. 15 sep 81)....00000000000000000.00....
WEST EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Health Minister on Drug Proble-
(DIE Pmsn, 28 sep 81)...0.00...OIO..00....OOOIOOOCOCOOOOOOOC
DENMARK
Police Narcotics Section Grief hports on Drug Situation
(Sign Alenius; HUWUIBIAIBBIMBT, 210 Aug 81).................
FRANCE
Briefs
Record Hashish Haul
ICELAND

Social Horters Worried Over Drug Trends
("ms Pm" lawn. *p 81)...IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOOOOI.0000...

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HEROIN BASE FOUND RIDDEN IN HOMO-OUT FRUIT

$31sz at Airport

Thai Accra: Chum

long Kong SOUTH CHINA manna: POST in English 9 Sop 81 p 1

5320/9093

0
o

650
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060040-7

THAI SYNDICATE SENT DRUGS TO 3086 KONG BY PARCEL POST

Bong Kong scum CHINA momma was: in angush 26 Sep 81 p 1

mmmm... unuumm» ”mad“ “mm:

“Mmm: $mm m.~mL

mtwm .mmmuh

Wamwm at“;
mg" «”5” .mm.&. 2‘.wuhm

‘.~-m xﬂw
m... “my FEW”: Mm

[Text]

WM

mummw
mmmmwm m

m.»~ ..

"mm mm

y“.

mm: m

m
L“.

m3

2 m“ m: a

I
wa

mama

5320/9093

CSO :

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080040-7

Kuala Lnnpur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 12 Sep 81 p 7

DRUG ARRESTS, SEIZURES FOR AUGUST 1981 REPORTED

In of «up

an onion
mud.

«ml-am

In July

[Text]

Inna tout
mam
"my
my»:
W830
smut
national»
1 00m-
«and
W.
d
.3

at hotel

"I oplo :
.13:

M

m

I“

luv

I!“
as:

m» grun-
nd 3
a.
“I:

u

In

W
and

n at

m
a.
u

not:

gnu
M
new

Mn 0
at
A
ca:
.
I‘d.

ﬂ;

Police mad 8.!”

mum-:11)“

gm gamma
«mam am m «mm m
“mm ”ﬁt WWW

5300/8304

CSO:
m.liee.— Peiice
eeieed eheet 6.35 idl-

(ii the) ei
herein whee they
etepped e oer in
“it “°‘ M
u Ill item here
recently.

"the eeieere ie the
hi eet heel ei here-
in e Pereix ee ier
this yeer." Chiei Pe-
iice 0iiicer Deteh
Mier Mehened
Jeeier hie liter Sell
eeid tedey.

he etee in their
the were deteined.

I) e t u h M I e r
hlehe‘ped Jeeier
eeid t heediee el
hereie were ieeed te-
eide e ee the
reer eeet the cer.

lie eeid Derek pee
lice received e ti ii
eheut e dries -
"chi?! ey‘enicet‘:
“I I! l’
1.32 er dbtrihetieo
within the Stete ee e

eiereceeter
te Kedeh.
r
eeti‘etiee.
theeeereed
meet
eere.
Oee ei the eee~
pected cere wee
eighted heedie
eeeth ee Gert. t.
teem ei pe iee oi.
iieere treat the cm
Nereetice Breech
etepped the cer
eheet twee: et Mt
tileetetre temper.
reed.

he- cer wee
eeerehed eed the it
heediee ei herein.
were ieeed ieeide e
m'fhe driver wee

ie ieiiew

‘ “P 09°
eretiee e iew heere
ieier.peiieedeteieed
eeether rte. The
heret- wee heiieved
ie bee heee eeteg-

gied ie ire. the
eerth. ,

5%:
ﬁx; .
CSO 1

5300/ 830“
KELANTAN POLICE INCREASE ANTIDRUG ACTIVITIES

Kuala Lumput NEW STRAITS TIMES in English 15 Sep 81 p 8

[Text]

CSO :

KOTA BARU. Mon. -
Itelantan police are step-
ping up the war against da-
dah and various security
and anti-smuggling units
have been ordered to be on
the lookout lor dadah
smugglers.

The Chlel Police Oliicer.
Senior Assistant Como
mlssioner Haji Ibrahim
Yeop. issuing the order said
it was in anticipation oi
more smuggling attempts
in the comln months.

ila I lb In said checks
on t e busy Malaysian-
‘l‘hai border on the west
coast had been made more
stringent.

He directed the area se-
curity units (Uitlt) to step

5300/8304

up antlodadah activities.
Patrols ol the antlosmug-
gllng unit (UP?) have also
been directed to concen-
trate on dadah emu glers.
lteia members In rder
areas have been told to be
more alert and report any
suspicious character.

Flying squad

The CPO said the anti~
dadah unit 01 thc State CID
would be moved irom its
base here to Bantu Pan.
Jan; — the main entry and
exit point on the Keiantan-
Thai border.

The oﬂicers oi the Ulﬂt
and 0?? have been brieled
and many have undergone
special courses on dadah.

Ilaji Ibrahim said mem~
bers oi the police in-
telligence would he sta-
tioned at selected points
along the daemile border.

At the same time the
anti-dadah unit has set up a
tlyla squad to attend to

uhi ti through the hot
ine -- 792 — round the
clock.

Since the unit was set up.
zso addicts have been re is-
tered and this has enab ed
the police to watch their
movements. Bail Ibrahim
added.
CUSTOMS ACQUIRESFAST BOATS AND HELICOPTER

Karachi DAWN in English 29 Sep 81 p h

.wwmmmm m :m

mmmmmmmm mammxmmmaxmﬁag
ggmmmmgmgmmmmgmmmmmmm
mmmamamWmMmmmagwggmm
mmgmmagmamm :wga mmammagmmgm
m mumawwmm m mmmm WWNMWmm...m gm mmemmmmm mam” mw
.. mm o . mm
«mawmmmmmga MW “3 m WWW“... WWW iﬁm
1. mm m m «a m m . mm“ a»
“mm m a a: “a a m- mm
m
a magmaa a a mag magma

mammm wmmmmm mmmwm mummmmm ”mammmmma mmmmmmww mm

mm. m Wm “WM“ mmmmmm wmmm mmmMmemmm
mm
mm“

m a: amamw mmmamWW
muammmm “mam Wmmwmw awwmmmm mmmmmmmm

[Text]

$300/A519

CSO:
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060040-7

DRUG ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES TO GET DETECTIVE 0068

Karachi DAWN in English 30 509 81 9 lo

[Text]

CSO:

mmwm
«ah! ha! turn] «'1.
hmnununcaannslkucllﬂn»
Inntamndu h an awn";
“madman”.
Jduudn Hanna CIR(Chnann
Ithu‘ hh duurnunlo khlnmol

i

5300/6520

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060040-7
HASHISH FACTORY UNCOVBRED
GF061412 Karachi DAHN in English 4 Oct 81 p 8

[Text] Interpol and acne other international drug enforceaent agencies have been
sent a "SOS" following the discovery of the activities of a well-knit, drug

snugglers' gang along with the arrest of two "couriers" by the provincial excise
hounds.

The Karachi excise police also unearthed a "hash packing factory" set up in a
house at Kausar Niazi colony in north Nazi-shad along with 2,660 kilos of refined
exportable hashish, 20 kilos of hash oil and 2 kilos of precious heroin worth
over Rs 300 million.

Announcing the details of this international drug racket, Syed Hohibullah Shah,
director general of Excise and Taxation. Sind, told a press conference that he
expected aore arrests in a couple of days including those of underworld bosses
who are on the run.

he told reporters that the seizure was an off-shoot of heroin extracting factory
case last week as a result of intensive questioning of the accused. '

The accused had set up their "factory" for packing hashish for export to European
countries and the United States in s snall house having a coapresaor, weighing
machine and other paraphernalia.

He said the aodus operandi adopted in this case was unique. The contraband was
concealed in aarble, onyx, electronics (in enpty cassettes) and hosiery goods.

To hoodwink drug enforcement agencies they packed these articles after conceal-
nent of narcotics in polythene packing with silver foil and thin-natal containers
which were fully air-tight and finally wrapped again in polythene deposited in
wooden crates ﬂaking difficult its detection even by x-ray nachines, he said.

Mr Hohibullah Shah said that the whole operation was still under thorough investi-
gation and further details were expected.

In charge of the drug enforcement cell of custona, Mr Shuja Shah and superintendent

Hubeen Khan have also been associated with the inquiry because of some interna-
tional aspects. in the field of drug enforcenent, Hr Shah said.

10
In fact, Karachi use being used as a "transit" station by the drug snugglers and
in order to hoodwink the enforcement agencies they avoided the name of "source
country." Viz, Pakistan, through dubious scene. he added.

Later. director excise Anwsr Shaikh and the seizing officer Niaz Baloch and
inspector Ghulan ﬂusain took the press-en to the site and explained the working

of the "drug packing factory" and seized contraband narcotics. Sensational
disclosures are expected.

CSO: 5300/6518

11
BRIEFS

DRUG SALES IN PUNJAB--Lahore. 20 July. There has been a frightening increase in the
sale of narcotics in thecapital and other major cities of Punjab. Now these drugs
are openly on sale in the drug stores. Among these are liegethetanide. Dextro-
nethorphan and Mendrex tablets. These drugs are legally sold only with a doctor's
prescription. Along the intoxicating drugs. Megathetsnide is being imported in a
quantity far in excess of legal demand and its tablets. which are usually 25 Paisas
apiece. are being sold for a rupee and a half to 2 rupees apiece. It is being
imported from abroad through the dry port. Addicted youth purchase these medicines
without any prescription. Off iciala have permitted a pharneceuticel cospany to
manufacture codeine cough syrup while mixing codeine in drugs is banned in Pakistan.
In addition to bohari Bazar Harket of Lahore. there are big illegal drug centers in
Faisal Abad. Multan. and Sialkot. In view of the frightening increase in the ille-
gal drug sales. the Quality Control Department of Islanabad sent a menorandue to
the Health Departeent of Punjab requesting it to provide the records of the nann-
facturing, stock and the sales of intoxicating drugs within 15 days. The tine linit
expired and the records were never provided. nor were any measures taken to stop
their illegal sale. [Text] [Lahore WA-I-HAQI in Urdu 21 Jul 81 p 6] 9859

56 Knos 0F onus SBIZEDnThe attenpt to snuggle opium from Northwest Frontier
Province to Baluchistan has failed. The truck. No. T.R.P. 723. driven by Asad Khan
Ninzi, when it arrived at Tanai in Southern Haziristan en route from Peshawar to
Baluchistan. was stopped by a political clerk. Mir Shah. Hr Shah becane suspicious
as the driver engaged in evasive tactics when asked to subject his truck to inspec-
tion. he immediately informed higher political officials of the situation. 0n
conducting a search, 106 kilos of opium powder were uncovered hidden under the
clothes and packed in one-kilo bags. The truck driver. Aaad Khan and his assistant
Anwar Khan were inediately taken into custody. The political officials praised
Amir Shah for his good work and hoped that he will continue keeping an eye on public
enemies and snugglers. [Text] [Peshawar HASHRIQ in Urdu 2!. Jul 81 p 5] 9859

DRUG TRAFFIGGR RELEASED—CIA [Criminal Investigation Agency] agents arrested Aziz,
alias Bhaiya, a oonpanion of Abdul Latif Singapori. In addition to pornographic and
Indian films, opiun um fomd in his possession. Abdul Min Singapori was released
upon the completion of his arrest process. Previously, foreign cloth, narcotics, liquor
and lb VCR were confiscated at Dent Design Centre on Yakub Khan road and Abdul Latif
Singapori, Abdul Rahim Singspori and Suleinan were arrested. An investigation was in-
stituted. Late at night another companion of the accmed. Asia, alias Bhaiya, was also
taken in custody while Abdul Rabin Singapori wm released even before his booking process

12
was completed. The accused have been active in smuggling for a long tine. It has
been learned that a member of the Karachi Council is taking a keen interest in the
release of the accused. He has been seen contacting influential people in this
connection. It needs to be pointed out that the office of the councilor used to

be where the contraband was confiscated and the councilor had previously been seen
in the company of the accused. [Text] [Karachi JASARAT in Urdu 25 Jul 81 p 2] 9859

HEROIN SEIZ!l-Pursuing the 'leads' provided by the accused in the heroin-
extraction plant last week, the Excise hounds laid hands on two more drug
peddlers with five kilos of heroin worth Rs 5 million in the international mar-
ket yesterday. A spokesman of the Excise Police said that more arrests are

' likely to be made and more drugs are to be recovered on the pointation of the
accused persons. It may be recalled that the Excise Police had last nabbed two
persons and discovered an illicit heroin-extracting plant in a People's Colony
apartment in North Nazimabad. along with the seizure of 13 kilograms of heroin
worth Rs 200 million. [Text] [Karachi DAMN in English 2 Oct 81 p 18]

ISLAMABAD HASHISH SEIZURE--Customs officials at Islamabad airport seized 55 kg of
hashish from Mrs Pazana Jagirdar on 6 October. The market value of the London-
bound hashish is estimated at 500,000 rupees. [GP162037 Karachi JANG in Urdu

5 Oct 81 p l]

PESHAHAR HASHISE SEIZURE--Pifty maunds of charaa were seized from a Punjab-bound
truck near Peshawar this morning. It was the biggest haul of the year. The truck
was impounded by the customs collector and its driver and an occupant were taken
into custody. The charas is worth crores of rupees in the world market, though
locally it cost only Rs 10 lakhs. After giving up traveling by the main road
(Grand Turnk Road), smugglers have been transporting contraband goods through

Charsndda-Peshawar Road for the past several months. [GPlOlZl7 Karachi DAMN
in English 3 Oct 81 p 12]

GADAP HASHISH SEIZURB--Contraband hashish weighing over 1800 kg. worth about
Rs 15 million in international market was seized by the Gadsp police from an
underground tank in a house at Daraana channa off Halir Csntoment yesterday.
Two persons. Saeed of Chitra] and Ghanam Gul of Peshawar. were arrested from
the house. [GFllll37 Karachi Dawn in English 8 Oct 81 p 10]

C50: 5300/4518

13
HANOI CUSTOMS MAKES ARRESTS FOR OPIUM TRAFFICKING
BK020656 Hanoi Domestic Service in Vietnamese 0400 GMT 2 Oct 81

[Report on drug trafficking in Hanoi]

[Text] Over the past 9 months. 20 customs stations of the Hanoi customs office
have. in coordination with the trade and public security sectors and with the local
administration, detected and made arrests in 360 profiteering and smuggling cases
involving the illegal trafficking of 3.1 million dong worth of 36 kinds of state-
controlled goods.

In the third quarter alone, various customs stations and mobile customs units and
teams, assisted by the people, joined with the market management and public security
sectors, city ward people's committees and so forth in making arrests in 2,688
cases involving illegal dealing in contraband goods.

Various customs stations, especially those posted at airports and the harbor, have
coordinated with the public security sector in intensifying their investigative
activities and have detected many tricks used by dishonest merchants to deceive or
bribe responsible officials. On 12 September 1981 the (Hoi Ban) airport customs and
public security stations caught in the act (Nguyen Van Hhi) who, residing at 81 Nghia
Dung city block in Hanoi, hid 15 taels of gold in a radio receiver which he was
taking to Ho Chi Hinh City. These stations also confiscated 37,000 dong from

(Nguyen Van Hhi), including 20,000 dong which he used to bribe the officials on

duty.

Over the past 9 months. the (N01 Ban) and Sin Lam airport customs stations alone made
arrests in 10 cases involving the illegal carrying of large sums of money.

During June and August, the Kim Lien, Hoan Kiem and Doug Da customs stations inves-
tigated and made arrests in three cases involving the trafficking of 11 kilos of
opium. Specifically, brother and sister officials at these stations have detected
many tricks used by smugglers to hide their goods, and to offer bribes to officials
in exchange for covering up their crimes.

CSO: 5300/6717

14
BRIEFS
NARCOTICS THEFT--Police in Prague b is investigating a burglary at the pharmacy of

the Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine. The thief got away with 860
anpulea containing opiates, worth Kca 10.000. [Prague PRACB in Czech 5 Oct 81 p 3]

C80: 5300
A staff mm thread dot.» ataﬂ Mugcd to be "MOM Bryanthicharth. Who mot.
’ . . .8 . recon ' g pravoncion

Only tutu addicta. tmted bootinic'um mine and tutu.“ ‘ .“t t
u maintenance clients now mint: seatintu. the mm”: mm‘:
attend thoclinic—whi'a tho Funhar problem aroaa notiﬁed within . mu.
police nnre-ttica squad eau‘. thmuahagthanannfdoctou W.”

mm :1» number a! Main m mummy the We H. said mm tho tn-
usets in Ramada at “but! and a doctamn was Ethan tended to ma . can
3”. about R M? Um “I m It fmmmmm‘lL" ”I.”
f‘ThO proxramma “.3 “0"“ NW “MW '0" containing rehabilitation
faded mm the last year. ' “ﬁnned My tn July centm.
Minister. Dr. tha Hon. Clar- hoe-nae there In no N- ' '
once James said. "It has mutant (at Dr. PJ. Jau-
railed due to the stafﬁng “who unthew .
problems we have had met Dr. .lamatt was In t in-
the pound. But I cannot say formed thmugh tho
that the clinic hu ham a Bond an the Miauu of
mmplete failute. We atill Drum which it dined n-
have the clianu and the gptmt'hlatnhim. Ha nit.
method at treatment has not ted that the Board has been
been the prohlam. ithhaa min. for m tima fora
been the administration. ' new "habiﬂuu'on mm.
Minister‘s commanu tt mu almw that
came «mly a wk after he an altmtiva sit. ahanld ha
had defended that r0- chmen fur tho mum! N
mmmemtho basin 0 addicts.
tmtmcnt until an ideal can m, Jam.- said «an m
is found. . _ nmv being taken :0 na- "1!?

The clinic hit dilﬂcumea pmblcms at St. Brandana

in [979 when about 30 14- while ha wan alao neon-

dicts were atmdtnx- Soﬂlt mendtmr extra half foe Mt.
BRIEFS

ANTIHARIHUANA DRIVE---:1ore than 3.000 fully grown mrijuans trees were uprooted
and destroyed when a combined party of Rio Clara and hyaro policenn swooped
down in the Guayaguayars forest yesterday. The police party began their exercise

early yesterday morning when they led a pack of tracker dogs about a mile inside
the forest. According to reports, lore than an acre of the “weed" was discovered.

It was immediately uprooted and burnt on the site. police said. The exercise was
the latest in an anti-marijuana drive which was launched by Eastern Division

Police recently. Last week, police destroyed $.5 nillion worth of narijuene
froe the Rio Claro forest and at the sane tine disconnected and seized six trap

guns. [Excerpt] [Port-of-Spain EXPRESS in English 21 Aug 81 p 10]

cso: 5300/7505

17
PGR 'PILOT PLAN' FOR DRUG DESTRUCTION URDER HAY

Fifth Phase Announced

Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 3 Sep 81 Sec B pp 1, 7

[Text] Yesterday. in Monterrey. the deputy attorney general of the republic HER], Samuel
Alba Leyva, initiated the fifth phase of the Pilot Plan for the definitive eradica-
tion of drug plantations, with the participation of a special reinforcement team

which took off in eight helicopters and two airplanes, its nission being to "clean

up" the traces of drugs remaining in the states of Hichoacan, Coahuila, Nuevo Leon
and Tamaulipas.

Accompanied by Carlos Aguilar Garza, coordinator of the Federal Public Ministry
agencies in the northeastern part of the republic, and the five federal prosecutors
from Monterrey. the deputy attorney general gave the symbolic "flagging” that marked
the takeoff of the aircraft, on the special platform at the international airport
in the Nuevo Laredo capital.

Alba Leyva, general coordinator of the caspaign against drug trafficking, had
previously told EL HARANA that "it is the unswerving intention of the government
of the republic to 'clear' the entire national territory of drug plantations;
and we are engaged in this task on a 26-hour basis, every day of the year."

Carlos Aguilar Garza. for his part. explained that this "pilot plan" is being
enacted in areas wherein there had previously been a systematic attack on the
planting and harvesting of drugs; so that the "mop up" by this special brigade is
merely to corroborate the fact that there are no traces of the crops, and to
exterminate then in the event that they should still be surviving.

The special brigade consists of six, four-seat 206 helicopters, two of the 2-12
type with a larger capacity and two airplanes, all with their respective crews
especially trained in the search, spotting and extermination of drug plantations.

The War Is without Quarter

Alba Leyva announced that the results of the four previous phases of this "pilot
plan" proved to be the ones desired by the attorney general of the republic, Oscar
Flores Sanchez; because a large percentage of the planting, harvesting and market-
ing of drugs was elininated.

18
However, he explained, this has been no easy task, because the drug traffickers have
put up fierce resistance and are attempting by all means to counter the action of
the law, even assaulting the very lives of the federal agents detailed to pursue
then.

He added that drug trafficking is a business involving many nillions of pesos, which
the criainals refuse to give up, despite their realization of the serious harm that
they are causing thOusands of persons who are addicts; and for this reason they
resort to weapons to defend the empire that they have succeeded in building.

He announced that some of the helicopters taking part in this "pilot plan" are
equipped with "pliers" especially fitted into the front section, which break the
cables which the drug traffickers the-selves install in the ravines and other steep

mountain areas, and with which they have succeeded in bringing down some of these
aircraft, with a loss of lives.

After the planes took off, bound for the aforementioned areas, the deputy attorney
general and Aguilar Garza made an inspection tour of the offices of the five Federal
Public Ministry agencies operating in Monterrey.

Success Reported

Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 9 Sep 81 Sec 3 p 6

[Text] A six-seat Cessna plane from the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic assigned for air patrol to the coordinator of the Federal Public Ministry
agencies in the northeastern part of the country had engine trouble and was forced
to make an emergency landing on a section of highway known as La Cons, between San
Fernando and Ciudad Victoria, with the sisfortune of striking a curb and ease
warning signs which caused it to overturn, with its wheels standing upward.

Fortunately, the only two crew members. Capt Manuel Anuzurrutia Silva and technician
Alejandro Sandoval. received only minor injuries, while the aircraft sustained
considerable damage.

The foregoing report was provided by Carlos Aguilar Garza, coordinator of the Federal
Public Ministry agencies, who ordered the damaged airplane to be kept under guard

on the site of the accident itself, so that the experts who are to cone from the
Federal District may examine it and determine the causes of the engine failure.

The Cessna plane was on a police backup patrol when the trouble occurred with the
engine, which ceased operating while in flight.

The plane's captain began "gliding", taking advantage of the air currents, with
great skill on his part. because he managed to bring it down on the highway, but
the ditch and the warning signs caused the landing to fail.

Successful Campaign

Aguilar Garza, noreover, announced that the "pilot plan" for definitive extermination
of drug plantations, which the deputy attorney general of the republic put into

19
effect in Monterrey, has brought good results inasluch as, by yesterday,there was
corroboration of the successful campaign which the Federal Judicial Police have
launched on a permanent basis against drug traffickers; because in the area of the
Conchos River alone, in the nunicipality of Linares. Nuevo Leon, two plantations
have been detected.

The eight helicopters and two airplanes participating in this "pilot plan” have
"conbed" 71,831 square kilometers in 200 hours of flight, covering four states,
where it has been ascertained that the planting of drugs has been almost entirely

eliminated .

2909
C80: 5330/47

20
AT‘IORNEY GENERAL PILOT PLAN OPERATIONS [ESCRIBED
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDMS NEGRAS in Spanish 13 Sep 81 Sec 3 p 1

[Text] An intense battle against the drug traffic and the growing of narihuana is
under way throughout all of Coahuila, Nuevo Leon and Tauaulipas, with sudden "raids"
made by forces from the brigade sent directly from the Office of the Attorney General
of the Republic, under the leadership of Oscar Flores Sanchez.

Yesterday. here in Piedras Negras. the so-called "Pilot Plan" involving heavily armed
men with special training and orders to operate directly arrived at the local airport
in a helicopter.

The group, commanded by Mr Benito Estrada, told EL DIARIO that the work is done in
an unannounced manner, and that there has been success in destroying plantations in
Tanaulipas and Nuevo Leon. in the southern area, and in arresting sale individuals
who have been innediately turned over to the Office of the. Attorney General of the
Republic.

The work itself involves establishing unannounced checkpoints on the highways. as

well as investigation. through the questioning of those engaged in growing poppies
and other drug-producing plants.

The group has also been working with the individual in charge of services against
drug trafficking here on this border. Hr Mario Eapinosa. who serves as chief of the
district.

The day before yesterday. the group of men, disguised. were detailed for a short
period of time to the vicinity of kiloseter 22, where they made a careful search
of every vehicle heading toward this border.

Nothing could be said about the action to be taken, inasmuch as these operations are
sudden and unannounced, so as to attain the goal that has been set: namely, to

catch the public poisoners by surprise and put them where they belong, in prison,
thereby putting a final end to that activity of unlawful mssuent of weath at the
cost of the health of those who becoae addicted to these products that are doing
irreversible damage to the society.

2909
C80: 5330/ 69

21
TRAFFICKING 0" COMMERCIAL FLIGHTS UNDER INVESTIGATION
H. Mata-oros EL BRAVO in Spanish 4 Sep 81 See A p 10

[Text] The Federal Judicial Police are continuing the investigation of the drug
trafficking that is taking place on Aeromexico's commercial flights. Several
individuals are being traced, including some women; although at this point they
are considered difficult to apprehend because they are already aware that they
have been discovered.

Meanwhile, the agent of the investigating public ministry has concluded the preli-
minary investigation of the 11 kilograms of marihuana found in a suitcase being
carried from Mexico City by the young girl Lourdes Morales Luna, 14 years of age.

The aforementioned drug-trafficking minor will appear today in the'fourth district
court, to which she has been remanded.

The girl has made a full confession of her crime, and has given a large nunber of
names of individuals implicated in this illegal activity.

As for the investigation being pursued by the Federal Judicial Police, it concerns
the whereabouts of those residing in this area who are participating in the ring
for which young Lourdes Morales was working.

It has been learned from the investigation that the aforementioned girl arrived with
her marihuana shipments at a residence located at 12th Street and Espana, near the
corner. Sometimes she arrived with as many as two suitcases and, according to her
own confession, she had made about 12 trips.

The young girl's accomplices number no fewer than three women, and the girl under
arrest used the name and even the identification card of one of them, both to
purchase the airline ticket and to label her baggage.

There are several male accolplices, on whom extensive information exists. There
is also information available on their contacts in the United States. which the
Mexican authorities have given to the antidrug department of the neighboring
country, so that action may be taken against than.

2909
C80: 5330/47

22
HARIHUANA, PILL TRAPPICKBRS GIVEN JAIL SENTENCBS
7-Year Terms Ordered
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB NUEVO LARBDO in Spanish 5 Sep 81 Sec C p 3

[Text] After a year and 6 months spent completing the penal investigation of four
individuals who proved to be guilty of crimes against health, the third district
judge, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal, handed down a sentence of 7 years in prison and
a fine of 10,000 pesos for each of them.

Roberto Alvarado Camacho, Antonio Soto Ramirez, Jeronimo lands Leija and Luis Javier
Rodriguez are the four subjects found guilty of crimes against health, for which
each one of them will serve a 7-year term.

According to record 88/980 related to the probe of the aforementioned persons,
Roberto Alvarado Camacho was charged with a crime against health in the degrees of
marihuana possession and trafficking: Antonio Soto Ramirez. in the degrees of
possession. trafficking and sale of psychotropic substances; and Jeronimo Bands,
in the degrees of marihuana possession, transportation and trafficking; and,

finally, Luis Javier, in the degrees of possession and trafficking of psychotropic
substances.

These subjects were captured by Federal Judicial Police agents in March of last
year. The first to be apprehended was Roberto Alvarado, during a surveillance
tour of the Victoria housing development. When searched by the federal police, he
was found to have two joints of marihuana, which he was selling to addicts for the
sum of 100 pesos.

Upon being questioned, this individual told the federal police that Antonio Soto
Ramirez, residing at 5720 Tamaulipas, was the one who was supplying the drugs at
the rate of 65 persos per "joint."

The judicial police agents, upon continuing the investigation, succeeded in arrest-
ing Soto Ramirez who, when questioned, said that he was purchasing the marihuana

in Hatehuala, San Luis Potosi, from an individual called "Lencho" Sanchez; whereas
he was buying the psychotropic pills with Jeronimo lands Leija, and reselling then
to various addicts in the town.

The long tentacles of this ring of drug traffickers were completely dismembered
when the last of the suppliers, Luis Javier Rodriguez Rodriguez, who at the time

23
was thcproprietor of the Fleming Pharmacy, located in block #2 of Peru Street, was
captured.

This individual had been selling pharmaceuticals which required a doctor's prescrip-

tion on those premises, at twice their price, and his leading purchaser was Jeronimo
Bands Leija.

when the entire ring was captured, they were found to have over a ton of "grass"
in their possession, as well as countless toxic pills with which they had been
poisoning the youth of both border ports.

This attests to the fact that the perpetrator of crime will always be punished in
an exemplary manner. as in this instance wherein each one of the drug traffickers
received a well-deserved sentence, as cited above, consisting of 7 years' imprison-
ment and a fine of 10,000 pesos.

Marihuana Growers Sentenced
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 12 Sep 81 Sec C p 3

[Text] A prison sentence of 3 years and 2 months and a fine of 3,000 pesos was the
sentence handed down yesterday morning by Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal. the third
district judge, against two individuals found guilty-of crimes against health.

Pedro Mendoza Alvarado, aged 42, a resident of the La Palma communal farm in the
municipality of Camargo, Tamaulipas, and Sergio Salinas Gonzalez, aged 20, a resident
of Comales, Tamaulipas. are the two subjects found guilty of crimes against health,
as usual, the growing, harvesting, transporting and trafficking of marihuana. for
which they were given a sentence of 3 years and 2 months in prison.

Record 253-980 notes that both subjects were captured by Federal Judicial Police
forces on 26 July of last year, when the former of the two was engaged in planting
marihuana on a plot on the La Palma communal farm in the municipality of Camargo,
Tamaulipas.

"hen the federal police pursued the investigation to find the marihuana trafficking
ring involved in the case, they succeeded in arresting Sergio Salinas Gonzalez,
who was responsible for supplying the seed of the injurious grass to Pedro Mendoza.

During the questioning, as well as in the preliminary statements of the aforemen-
tioned individuals. they told the authorities that, after harvesting the harmful

drug, they were selling it to several persons at the rate of 750 pesos per kilo-

gram. They took charge of shipping it to Reynosa, Tamaulipas, where it was taken
illegally into the United States to supply the black market in that country.

2909
C30: 4330/67

2‘
DANGEROUS TRAFFICKﬁR TRANSFERRED TO TIJUANA
Mexicali LA V02 DE LA PRONTERA in Spanish 22 Aug 81 Sec 3 p 12

[Text] Tijuana-The Federal Judicial Police, in compliance with a warrant for

arrest issued by the second district judge, Carlos Trujillo Altasirsno, arrested
Merced Monge Cisneros. aged 35, so that he would respond to trial No 329-79,
being held against him for a crime against health.

This drug trafficker, a native of San Luis, Rio Colorado, Sonora, was captured in
Mexico City and brought to this town last Tuesday under strict guard, because last
year, when police forces from the neighboring country attempted to capture hia,

he engaged in a gun battle with then and succeeded in escaping.

As soon as the airplane arrived and the subject in custody left the plane, he was
received by the Federal Public Ministry agent Torres Espinoza, and Coadr Manuel
Mendoza and several members of this force, who immediately went to the state peni-

tentiary to incarcerate Monge Cisneros, and the latter was placed at the disposal
of the second district judge there.

Monge Cisneros, who was the owner of a large sarihuans plantation that was discovered
near San Felipe, Baja California. could not be captured on the occasion when his
accomplices were arrested and his plantation destroyed, because he was not there

at the time. For this reason, the warrant for his arrest was issued in 1979, and
has now been inpleaented since he was located by the Federal Judicial Police.

Yesterday, he was ordered to be brought to the second district judge to make his
preliminary statement. In this case, he is being accused as one presumed guilty
of a crime against health; and, therefore, until the constitutional period for
issuing the order for official imprisonment, release or release on bail expires, he
will be confined in the La Mesa prison.

This drug trafficker, who has been described by the Federal Judicial Police chiefs
themselves as the "fat fish" in this business, was set last Tuesday at the airport
by the connander of that force himself, Manuel Mendoza, and Miguel Espinoza Martinez,
serving astheregional coordinator of the per-snent caapaign against drug traffick-
ing, as a replacement for Alfredo Aaron Juarez Jisanez, who is on a 2-week vacation.

2909
C80: 5330/66

25
REHABILITATION 0P FORMER DRUG PRODUCERS DESCRIBED
Mexicali LA V02 DE LA FRONTERA in Spanish 27 Aug 81 pp 2, 10

[Text] Culiacan, Sinaloa. 26 Aug --Poverty, promiscuity and illiteracy, but mainly
a strong desire for a "real economic advancement"havecaused hundreds of farmers in
the state to become victims of drug traffickers. Over 1,000 hectares planted with

marihuana and poppies have been reintegrated for food production by the judicial
and state authorities.

The farmer Gustavo Zepeda Navarrete, one of those arrested thus far this year for
engaging in the illegal activity. remarked: "The hunger and poverty in which I was
living caused me to fall into the clutches of the drug traffickers and to take care
of their marihuana plantations. There are 14 of us in the family, and I could
hardly feed them with an average of 50 pesos per day."

The tiller of the soil continued: "At a time of desperation. I decided to plant
marihusna and poppies, but it was all due to ny precarious situation; because the
drug traffickers almost tripled my wages which I had earned when I was working
honestly on my small plot of land."

Zepeda Navarrete, who has 10 children, claimed: "I am well aware that drugs are bad,
but because of my lack of education I did not know the extent to which they could
damage health. I am repentant, and I hope to work honestly from ndw on."

In this connection, the coordinator of the canpaign against drug trafficking in

Zone 06, which includes the states of Durango, Chihuahua, Sinaloa and part of Nayarit,
Hector Aviles Castillo, commented that, by means of an extensive study and research,
there has been success in rehabilitating the farmers who were victims of the public
poisoners, and in providing the former with the means necessary for becoming rein-
corporated into the state's productive activity.

He disclosed that, during recent months, there has been a successful recovery of
over 1,000 hectares. which are again being used for food production.

He remarked: "Host of the farmers who were arrested for engaging in the injurious
activity have been released, when it was proven that they were the victi.1s of their
own ignorance and of the lack of scruples of native and foreign drug traffickers."

Aviles Castillo aslo announced that, this morning, eight marihuana and poppy planta-
tions located in the southern part of the state were funigated and destroyed.

2909

050: 5330/46

26
BRIEFS

ARMY ANTIDRUG ACTIVITY-Nogales, Sonora, 8 September-The conmander of the local
military garrison, Gen Heriberto Bell Fernandez, announced that the Mexican Army
would continue its campaign against drug trafficking in the area under its juris-
diction on a permanent basis, and that it has sufficient capacity to intervene
directly if it should become necessary. He said that, at the instruction of the
Secretariat of National Defense, the "Condor" campaign is being conducted throughout
the country, so that the menbers of our armed institution may maintain a general
alert against these illegal activities constantly. In this effort, he noted, the
Army is acting in coordination with the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic, through the Federal Judicial Police, detecting in a timely manner those
who are trafficking in all kinds of drugs, and proceeding in accordance with the
law. when asked about the current status of the border with regard to drug traffick-
ing, Bello Fernandez said that, to date, a relative calm has been noted in this
respect, owing to the intensive surveillance carried out by the federal authorities,
and that a significant resurgence of that activity is not anticipated. However,

he repeated that both the Army and the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic
are maintaining stringent control of the area, to prevent any possible outbreak of
large-scale drug trafficking which, if it should occur, would be detected and

curbed immediately. With regard to the activity of the Federal Judicial Police to
eradicate this type of crime in the border area, the garrison commander said that

it was highly satisfactory, and that they would continue to work in a coordinated
fashion, adopting along the way any measures that become necessary, depending on
the way in which the circumstances appear. [Text] [hernosillo BL IMPARCIAL in
Spanish 9 Sep 81 Sec D p 3] 2909

NOGALES TRAPPICKING CUT-~Nogales, 28 August-A reduction of approximately 50 percent
has been observed during recent months in the trafficking of drugs sent from the
southern part of the republic, owing to the action of the Federal Judicial Police
"mobile units" on the international highway. The conmsnder of that force, Francisco
Alejandro Hernandez. announced that the vigilance along the highway has brought
magnificent results in the interception of shipments of various types of drugs,
especially marihuana, which are carried to this border in order to take them to the
American drug narket. The surveillance was carried out on the Nogales-Benjamin Hill
section of the international highway, stopping and carefully searching vehicles
whose drivers had suspicious behavior, or those whowere already on record or'wsre
known in the illegal traffic by the Federal Judicial Police, according to Connmnder
Hernandez. He added that, at the instruction of the attorney general of the repub-
lic, Oscar Flores Sanchez, both the "mobile units" on the highway and the vigilance

27
to reduce to a maximum this illegal business which has taken so many human lives
in recent years. When asked about charges made by individuals who consider them-

the pertinent complaint, with the assurance that the proper investigation will be

made and those responsible will be punished. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in
Spanish 29 Aug 81 Sec A p 12] 2909

especially after the trafficker showed aggressiveness toward those who requested a
routine search of her in the inspection line. She had the drugs attached to her
body. and was supposed to turn them over, in the ladies' room, to her contact,
Alicia Bueno Cruz, of Ecuadorean nationality. [Text] [Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA
in Spanish 3 Sep 81 p 4] 2909

POSSIBLE RELEASE FOR INHATES--Through an agreement on the part of the state governor.
Harcial Flores Reyes, deputy director of the Coordinated Crime Prevention and Rehabi-
litation Services of the Secretariat of Government in Hexico City, arrived in this
town yesterday in order to study the possibility of allowing over 200 prisoners who
are incarcerated for federal crimes to secure their release as soon as possible.

The foregoing announcement was made by Agustin Jaime Lopes, director of government

of Sinaloa. who said that, during his stay, Flores Reyes would take charge of
reviewing each of the records and the conduct of the individuals confined in the ‘.

jails, so as to enable them to become reincorporated into society. He noted that,
based upon the service policy available to the official of the Secretariat of
Government, he will analyze an average of 100 cases, chiefly of those imprisoned
for crimes against health. as well as 50 for the town of Los Hochis and a similar
number for this town, in accordance with the law on minimal standards. Agustin
Jaime remarked that, apart from the fact that the government, through this type
of action, is seeking to rehabilitate those who have co-itted a crime and who
must pay society for it, it is of interest that, based on the policy of Governor
Toledo Corro. the alliance for justice that will make it possible to aid and
relieve the Sinaloa prison population is to be applied. It was reported that
Flores Reyes himself recently released over 100 inmates who were in the Social
Rehabilitation Institute in Sinaloa for the same reasons. [Text] [Culiacan EL
SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 27 Aug 81 pp 1, 2] 2909

REPORT ON PILOT PLAN--This week, the "pilot plan" of the Office of the Attorney
General of Justice, which will greatly reinforce the permanent campaign against
the drug traffic, is to be carried out in the northern region, which includes the
jurisdiction of the Federal Judicial Police group under orders from Commander

28
Mario Espinoza. In making the foregoing announcement. Comdr Mario Espinoza said
that sufficient equipment will have to be received to fly over the entire area,

with helicopters and small planes. to detect clandestine airstrips,pachs and routes
used by smugglers and drug traffickers to carry out their illegal activities both
free within the country to the border and vice versa. He said that Zone 2 will

have to implement the pilot plan according to instructions and as it is being
carried out on the national level. He also announced that there would be close
surveillance in educational centers, from the secondary to other levels. as well

as in certain work areas, to prevent the distribution of marihuana and other drugs
and psychotropic substances. he noted that a work plan has been organised, which
will be executed nost forcefully, just now at the beginning of the return to school
of all the students in secondary and preparatory courses, and those pursuing different
university studies. There have been reports of something of this nature taking
place in certain educational institutions. and all possible means will have to be
used to put an end to the trafficking, distribution and use of drugs in such insti—
tutions. [Text] [Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DB PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 8 Sep 81 Sec
B p l] 2909

CUSTOHS OFFICIALS A£CUSED¢~Hexico City. 27 August (INPORHEX)--"The war of vested
interests and the proliferation of 'guarurismo' have brought about genuine chaos
among the personnel of the customs service at this city's international airport."
This announcement was made today by a high-ranking official who stressed that. to
date, 70 tons of banned goods have been inspected, including television sets.
stereos, radios. tape recorders, lux ry items and even oil paintings; but he explain-
ed that this action was taken by the General Customs Department and not the police.
who refuse to lose their "privileges." He said that while large amounts of contra-
band are arriving in the Federal District from the border in trailer trucks and

by rail, the customs agents are concerned with searching even the pockets of children
from which their toys are often taken. The result of the foregoing is disorder in
the inspection rooms, and it has caused a period of terror among both native and
foreign tourists arriving in our city. He noted that travelers coming from Central
and South America are really "held up" in an arbitrary manner by the narcotics

police inspectors, who have no respect for age, sex or human condition, "because

they see all of them as drug traffickers.” He reported that the government revenue
collected for the payment of import duties on the various items amounts to 50
million pesos every 2h hours. [Text] [Mexicali LA V02 DE LA FRONTIRA in Spanish

28 Aug 81 Sec A p ll] 2909

cso: 5330/46

29
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060040-7

EDITORIAL ASSESSES EFFORTS TO CL'R‘I‘AIL USE OF HARIHUANA
Cascries THE VOICE in English 29 Jul 81 p 2

[Editorial: “Join Fight Against Marijuana"]

 

[Text]
WITHIN the recent weeks. the police Cm man
have embarked on a series of raids amid men who bea
clear indications that the marijuana busi- Earlier
ness has expanded to unprecedented "a by a,
proportions. gindpals re
it is now evident that there are marijuana wa
large ”estates" of marijuana growing the island's sc
in this country as the deﬂers of the Dan- Out”’of
gerous Drugs Act continue to indulge in the drug ha:
illegal practices that constitute a serious mom. 11“
Na] "12-. . - _._____——... .. . -.- —— a men‘
According to the Police. 33 million. to be found 3.
worth of the drug was up-rooted in the whom. w. m
Millet area two weeks ago. This was _fumqgjthisr
followed by another raid which netted w. can
close to $20 million more of the drug. dons to thrive
in the most recent incident last handful of 9‘
Sunday. the Police say they were am- foriheirownt:
hushed in the Fond St. Jacques area and _ By the
shot at by a band of six youths. in the' Md" polict
shootoout which ensued. _one youth was W W pla
killed and another wounded. _ _ _ _- assistance of
itisnowclearthatthemoveby quired. The
the Government some three or so years will never be
ago to upgrade the antidrug Act to pro- the Police.
vide stiffer penalties for offenders has We a]
done nothing to checit this crime.“ Police in “a.“
Persons arrested and brought by "9011100 t
before the Courts "get away" with a ﬁne dons where“
«imprisonment term. or both. In most, exist
cases. fines ' are promptly paid. pre- In ,0 ¢
sumably with funds derived from traf- In comha
ﬂaking in the drug. _ And while the to m
young St. Lu
cso: 5300/7505 closely linked

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060040-7
SOVIET SOLDIERS REPORTEDLY RESORTING T0 HASHISH

4m mmmeux mumwﬂ mmm .amwmm Mmmm
«.mmWWu mm m... .WWWWWW mmmm AWMM :Wmm
WWW. Mmmmm a mmmumnm .1 ma wm.mm mmﬁam WWW
WWWWWW...“ WWW. WWW. WWWW :LWWWWW WW
. WWWWWW WWWWWWW. a... WWWWWWWWW. WWW
m»..WM.W..wm.wm a. .m
3% W mummy... “WWW, mm. W .m WWW.
3W .. .m .m W. .MMMW JWWMWWMM. 7% WWW
W. W... WWW. WW .WWWWW WM .3... WWW WWW...
ﬂWhWWMMMmQMMuma mmmummwm mmu WWmmmm Mmcmmmm Mm
WWW

m w 8.8m ”Mn-“mm. MW “Wt. wmmmﬁ no“
WWWWMWWWW- WWWMWWWWL mm ..M MWWWW
MMMMm mmmwmw . wmm mmwmm: fa “um
WWW...“ WWWMMW Em... W." gnaw...

Tehran KAYHAN INTERNATIONAL in English 27 Sep 81 p

[Text]

31
m E; mmmw

mm “mm Wm
a. WWW.”
BRIEFS

OPIUM HAUL--The staff of the Department for the Prevention of Narcotics toggling
seized 160 bags of opium with a total weight of 1,300 kg while being transported

by a [word indistinct] from Kabul to Dandabar. The captured opiu was officially
submitted to a Kabul customs house and the issue is under investigation. According
to another report the sane department confiscated 16 bags of opium, with a total

weight of more than 100 kg, which was being transported by a bus from Kabul 'to
Kandahar. The opium and the driver of the bus were turned over to the Kabul

customs house and the issue is being investigated. [Text] [1.0140747 Kabul Radio
in English to Europe 1900 GMT 13 Sep 81]

080: 5300/5307

33
BRIEFS

REAPPOINTMENT 0P NARCOTICS OFFICIAL-~According to a report by the central news
unit. the anti-narcotics Islamic Revolution public-prosecutor's office has
announced: By decree of Mr Musavi-Tabrizi. the revolution prosecutor general of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr Ahmad Zargar has been reappointed the supervisor
of the anti-narcotics public-prosecutor's office and has started his activities
in connection with eradicating narcotics. The anti-narcotics Islamic Revolution
public-prosecutor's office has also asked the 36-million strong intelligence
organization to report narcotics peddlers to security centers. {Textl [L0280616
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 0730 GMT 27 Sep 81]

HEROIN SEIZED IN KHORASAN--Members of Torbat Neydariyeh gendarmerie narcotics
department discovered £80 grams of heroin on 'Ali Moshtaqan this morning and
arrested him. IGP051616 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 5 Oct 81]

NEROIN SEIZED IN AHVAZ—-Members of Ahvaz Central Islamic Revolution Committee
arrested an individual on 30 September for possessing 90 grams of heroin. He
was delivered to the Ahvaz Islamic Revolution prosecutor's office. [GP061830
Ahvaz Domestic Service in Persian 1330 GMT 6 Oct 81]

OPIUM CONFISCATED IN TORBAT--Torbat Meydariyeh revolution guards arrested Nasrollah
Kordinezhad yesterday for possessing 15.8 kg of opium. IGP061830 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1630 GMT 6 Oct 81]

OPIUM DISCOVERED IN SHIRVAN--Shirvan revolution guards have arrested a man on
Sabzevar Road who had 15 kg of opium in his possession. [GP061830 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1630 GMT 6 Oct 81]

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--The activities of Bushehr's narcotics control head-
quarters have been reported for the past week. During the past week 32 persons
illegally attempting to cross the border as well as 3 agents for such actions

were arrested in Bushehr (2Province). Two others were arrested for transporting
illegal passengers to southern Persian Gulf countries. In the same period the
headquarters confiscated 1 kg of opium as well as a quantity of heroin and foreign
alcoholic beverages. They also discovered a place for producing alcoholic
beverages and arrested four in this connection. A gambling den was also discovered.
leading to the arrest of six professional gamblers. Twenty—two supporters of

the hypocrite minigroup were also arrested by narcotics agents.and delivered to
Bushehr's Islamic Revolution prosecutor's office. [Text] [CF061630 Shiraz
Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 6 Oct 81]

36
HASHHAD OPIUH HAUL--The Mashhad drug squad discovered 1.9 kg of opium while
searching a house belonging to J'afar Karmizadeh and Hohuuad Javad Homayezi.
They also found 50 gram of heroin in the house of an Afghan citizen named

Mohammad Aiyub. All guilty parties have been turned over to judicial authorities.
[GF072053 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 7 Oct 81]

DRUG SHUGGLING SENTENCES--The central news unit reports that the prosecutor's
office dealing with drug smuggling cases has announced that the first and second
branches of the Islamic Revolution Courts dealing with drug smuggling cases have
investigated the charges brought against 665 persons by the prosecutor's office
during the past 3 weeks, passing the following sentences on the accused: eight
persons were sentenced to death; 8 to life imprisonment; 3 to 20 years in jail;
7 to 15 years in jail: 3 to 12 years in jail; and 119 to prison sentences varying
from 1 to 10 years. A number were sentenced to prison terms of less than 1 year
and the rest were freed on bail after signing an undertaking [presumably not to
repeat the offence]. The files of those sentenced to death were sent to the
Supreme Judicial Council to be reviewed. [Text] [LDO81212 Tehran Domestic
Service in Persian 1030 GMT 8 Oct 81]

OPIUH SEIZED IN RASHT--Officia1s of the drug squad seized 150 rolls of opium worth
2 million rials from two people in Rasht and arrested them. In Torbat Jam and
Sarakhs drug squad agents arrested two individuals for possession of 7.05 kg of
opium. [CFlZlJOO Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1030 GMT 12 Oct 81]

MASHHAD HEEOIN SEIZURE--The Mashhad ant idrug squad has seized 2.5 kg of heroin and

11 kg of opium from six persons during the past few days. [Cl-‘162036 Mashhad
Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 11': Oct 81]

BARDESKAN OPIUH JUICE--The Bardeskan Islamic Revolution Guard Corps has seized

375 grams of opium juice from one person. He has been handed over to the Bardeskan

Islamic revolution court. [6F142036 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT
1!. Oct 81

C80: 5300/5308

35
SOCIAL PRGLEHS UNDERLYING DRUG USE smear our
Kuwait AL-TALI'AH in Arabic No 708 2 Sep 81 p 52
[ﬁrticle by Mutlaq Sa'd Suwailan: "Save cm Young Peqﬂe frm Ruin?

[Texg A frightening spread of hallucinogens and drugs of all types has been observed
recently among Kuwaiti youth circles. This gives rise to the following questions as
an attempt to find appropriate and speedy solutions to this grave manifestation. The
first question is: What are the causes and motivations lying behind the interest of
the young in this sort of drug addiction? The second is: Where can they obtain drugs?
I will try to set forth sane points briefly to respond to each questlm, starting with
a response to the first one.

A. With regard to the causes and motivations.

1. There are the complex social problems which face young people in Kuwait. including
family circumstances that go along with the ignorance of the parents cm how to bring
up and guide their children and the neglected role of the school in understanding the
student's social problems and in guiding his properly. The student thereby lives in
a social limbo from which he tries to escape by taking drugs. Moreover there is the
decline in living conditions of sane families that forces some young people to leave
school early and to try to find a job to support the faaily; however, the student then
bumps into bitter reality which is reflected in his persmal behavior when he tries to
get even with this society that is treating hill in such a way and he ventures on
taking drugs to forget his painful reality.

2. The lack of supervision. We all know that the student can spend half his day in
school; however, he is at a loss where to spend the other half. There are no places
available for the young people to spend their free tine other than sitting in the streets
or driving around in their cars fraa one area to another. This is during the school
year. After it is over, the unhappy situation is even worse as there is no school
taking up half the time so the whole day is free time and there is no place where the
young people can develop their ability and talents and overccme the long period of free
time. At this point sure people might go so far as to say that there are smuer clubs
and athletic clubs where the student can spend his free time. To respond to this, with
regard to the former, we all know the quality of the programs presented at the sumer
clubs and the bad treatment a young person gets at a sumer club, something which makes
him avoid going to it. with regard to the latter, the athletic clubs have been
infected by the illnesses of tribalism, factimalism and cliquishness and if you
aren't from the tribe. faction or clique of the club's board of directors, you don't
have a chance of participating in any sport.

36
3. Neglect of the role of the information media in publicizing the harm and dangers
of drugs and also the falling short by the Ministry of Health and other official
quarters in searching for proper treatuent for the addict by which he would be subject
to psychological and physical examinatims.

These are sane of the causes which are conducive to the increase and intensity of the
problem. As for how to obtain hallucinogens and drugs, there are many ways, including:

1. The prevalence of the drug trade, particularly by sane foreign workers such as
Koreans and Thais and some illegal aliens in the country who consider drugs a pro-
fitable business. The best example of that is found on the pages of the daily news-

papers.

2. Sone addicts obtain drugs frost the hospital of psychological Iedicine and sell
then to their associates outside the hospital at unbelievable prices.

3. There is the act of getting high by sniffing glue which is done by those who do
not have the wherewithal to buy I'the good stuff“ because of its high cost. Glue
sniffing can at times be seen in public in broad dsYlight near sue cooperative societies.

4. Some young people studying abroad bring in drugs which they call “the good stuff"
from the United States, England and some Buropean countries and try to awaken an interest
in young people here so that "they would be educated“ like the American and Burcpean
young people, as it was put by one of the pushers. Worse yet is the fact that these
Americanized young people who push drugs try to awaken a desire or even urge the young
people here, based on their 'agricultural theory,‘ to accept the idea that drugs,
particularly the best grades of marijuana, are suitable for cultivation in the soil

of Kuwait, as if the Kuwaiti soil were unsuitable for any type of agriculture other

than growing drugs, according to the theory of our Aaericanised associate.

Finally, after having faniliarized ourselves with the causes and with how to obtain
drugs, it is incumbent upon official circles to get involved to find proper. speedy
solutions to prevent this social illness that has begun to gain ground among youth
circles, threatening over the long tern to destroy these vital young people.

8389
C50: 5300/‘758

37
AﬁTI-DﬁUU ”NSSION MEETS, PROPOSES NW MEASURE
Bamako L'BSSOR in French 22-23 Aug 81 p S
[Unettri‘outed article: “The National Anti-Drug mission at work'_7

[Text] The anti-drug comission net on Seturdw 15 August under the chair-
manship of Yacouba Sell to review the tasks already accaplished by each of
the sub-couissions in the month end a half that has passed since the first
meeting.

The technical sub-emission is divided into two sub-groups, A and B,

Sun-group A, chaired by Professor Souleynene Sengare oi‘ Point-6,1s responsible
for identimng and detailing the extent of the phenomenon, determining the
number of persons effected, defining the socio-professional categories involved
end indicating likely future abuser types, for distributing medications. reg-
ulation end consumption of drugs, the ABC tables, and medical prescriptions.

2rofcssor Sengare presented the draft of a questionnaire to be distributed
to the entire medical profession throughout the territory to eveluate,where-
ever a medical facility exists in Mali, the profesionel level of those in
in charge of supplies of medications as well as the quantities of the latter
with a view to possible limitation of then.

The chairman of sub-group A also dwelt upon the preparation and application
in Hall of a health code and a code of professional practices.

Before concluding, meessor Souleylene Sangere pointed out that there was
some overlapping between the work of his sub-group and that of sub-group
B chaired by Professor Koumere. He therefore requested some Joint meetings
with sub-group a, which is responsible for destruction of fields used to

grow toxic substances, for making a register of drugs with the causes that
induce individuals to become addicted, supply sources and delivery lines, the

laboratory for control of nercotics and other drugs, end for specific identio
fication end-classification of drugs.

with respect to the first point, “location and destruction of fields used for

38
growing Ienhe [huhishjﬂ s letter will he sent to the minister of the
interior entrusting this test to the rsgtonel governors.

‘fhe second sub-emission is cheired by Professor Henedou Isnins freore, end
is responsible for the epprehension, detection, end trestnent of sddicts.

In his speech, the representetise of the cheinsn of this submission
proposed e certein nusher of concrete neesms, including elertisg the
public through press end rsdio, informing physiciens of the existence in

Heli of specielists in drug sddiction trestaent], becense it is usuelly
generel prectitioners who see sick c .

The lest two sub-emissions, the one on educetion end infomtion, end
the one on control, responsible for writing lews epprops-iste to nstionel
circuestences end the extent of the problem. and: it else: that they can

only operste on the heels of the findings of the first two sub-omissions.

Here end now, the sub-comission on educetion end intonation, chsired by
Professor ilou Beh of [the n‘inistry of] sduoetion, which is responsible
for incressing swereness,by ell eveilehle nsens,of the herefulness of drugs,
end for dissenineting infornstion on the nessurss being teken, hes oupleted
s lerge took of docuentetion end hes proposed s certein umber of notions:

integretion of the stw of the ill effects of drugs into educetion, field
studies, orgenisstion of specielists' seniners, etceurs.

The next nesting of the conission is plenned for ‘ruesdey, 15 Septenber.

121w
cso: BOO/1:965

39
mmcms mm; 5mm mnrm mes umxn
Bamako L'ESSORinPrench ISSep81 p6
[Article by Ousme Helga: mm m; Traffickera in WI. let' _7

/-‘l‘ext 7 Eight persons, including a young scan of 19, an old nan of 61, and
5 disaBled persons, 226 Innenoctal tablets, 2h amphetamine tablets: this is
the balance-sheet from the raid organised last week by nmaroz. in Baaaxo
underworld circles. The results are certainly not very dazzling, but the
fact remains that they are thought-provoking, Just the suns. Drug traffic
and consuption are assuming alarming proportions.

The attitude of the delinquents, nearly all repeaters, gives the impression
that these social outcasts think they are fully within their rights. Indeed,
devoid of any feeling of shame, renorse, or fear, they seen not to know that
theirs is one of the most heinous of crimes, and they think that like any
other lucrative activity, this traffic is quite legal. It uould seen that
these people are Just pans in a well-organiud network that has so far

had at its disposal an unbrsachable cover.

Thus when questioned about the source of the products, the criminals give
only vague answers, which hardly gives the police the clues needed to trace
blCK to the top and consider breaking up the network in the near future.

"How, indeed, can one fight this scourge when sasstines 3 days after turning
in the criminals, we encounter the sane tacos back in circulation, and they
seem not to have sdaitted their crime at all,‘I points out Inspector Diarra.

Severe penalties and heavy fines are the appropriate solutions in the authori-
ties' war on these criminals. Thus, with the nonies collected as tines,
re-education centers could be built for the wretches, Inspector Diarra stated

finally.

Let us hope that there will be a response to this appeal, and that these
measures, once taken, will contribute to clear the public of thoughtless
people and protect the naive ones.
NB: For tnoee rho any be interested, here are none none. used by drug
deoloro in referring to their veree:

I-enoctel is elao known a "plant: [Heed];I "tuna," 'benogo,“ or '0t.’
Alpnetoninex "revolution,“ 'dihn," "periniﬂnﬂl

1211.19
080: 5300/1065

lo].
iIBAL'l‘H MINISTER GI DRUG mam
Vienna DIE PRESSE in German 20 Sep 81 p 10
[Krticlez 'Steyrer: 'Neu Starter Drug Valiun'--Drug Abuse Begins in the Chance-:7

[Pexg Feldkirchu‘rhe drug problem cannot be solved by using force and drastic
punishment. This was the main conclusion of a conference attended, along others, by
Health Minister Kurt Steyrer. Steyrer indicated his satisfactim over the fact that
the drug inquiry had been depoliticized. He was of the opinion that, apart fran
alcohol, such tranquilizers as Valium, liberally prescribed for school children,
must be considered as starter drugs leading to addictim.

Innsbruck's criminal court judge Christian Bertel voiced doubt about the usefulness

of jail sentences for addicts and also discussed the caitroversial Methadone treatment.
Methadone as a heroin substitute, he said, should be used only or a strictly con-
trolled basis and in conjunction with many adjunct procedures.

Health ninister Steyrer esphasized that the drug problem is deeply rooted in the
ethical and social dcnain and that neither the medical nor the legal profession could
deal with it alone. “After all, there are legal narcotics,‘ he said, referring to the
200,000 alcoholic and the 600,000 near-alcoholic Austrians, as well as to the annual
death toll of 300 intoxicated drivers. According to Steyrer, the main task is not
the physical, but rather the social breaking of the habit, brought about by longtern
therapy. he indicated his strong oppositiai to legalizing marijuana as a supposedly
harmless drug. Steyrer stated that 'despite Salcher's red pencil,‘ the 24 million
schillings budgeted for fighting drug abuse would not be wt. Vorarlberg, the only
Austrian province which so far has its own drug program, will shortly start construction
of a 10 million schilling drug center.

In closing. the health minister announced the forthooning pronulgationof laws for

regulating medications and pharmacists. These two legal measures should, nong
other things, serve to cmtrol drug abuse.

9273
C50: 5300/2014

42
pouca mooncs src'non cum serous on oeuc summon
Helsinki numosrmssmrr in swam. 21. Aug 31 p 7
[Article by Sigyn Alenius]

[Text] Danish police hoped that drug abuse would end with the youth rebellion.
But that didn't happen. The leaders of the youth rebellion are now respectable
and prosperous fathers and mothers with community service jobs, responsibilities
and neatly-combed hair. But drug abuse remains a problem. "He make enormous
hauls all the time,” says the head of the police narcotics section, Paul Gauguin.
But the miserable situation simply continues to exist.

Today Denmark has 10,000 drug addicts dependent on hard drugs. It takes 600
Finnish marks a day for each one to buy drugs. Host of the money comes from rob-
beries and prostitution. Overdoses have taken the lives of 165 people this year.
No one can say how many have died as a result of illnesses stemming from lack of
hygiene while shooting up or how many have committed suicide.

Enormous Problem

Drugs continue to be an enormous problem. Those affected are typically young
people between the ages of 17 and 23. As a rule they start out by ”just trying it
once" and hashish is what they try. But they quickly go over to dangerous hard
drugs, cocaine and heroin being the most commonly available in Denmark today.

Social workers and doctors once considered decriminalislng hashish to provide
drug addicts with an opportunity to use something that is related to the narcotics
sector but is not dangerous. But no one believes in that course today. All ex.
perience shows that hashish is a beginning. Almost 100 percent of those handled
at the many treatment centers say they started out with hashish.

The police have 65 men in the narcotics division. They work around the clock in
an effort to catch dealers. They make raids in parts of the city where drugs are
a big problem, in bars where drugs are sold and in Christiania.

Four Boats

Denmark also has a national anti-narcotics society. Members are young people
with experience in the drug environment, some of them former addicts. Parents of

63
addicts can also join along with idealists who hope to be able to make a contri-
bution. Just now the society has acquired enough money to buy four old boats
where 30 young people live. The boats are anchored in the harbor areas. The
crews put on plays and talk with other young people.

The money to equip the four boats came from voluntary donations, from funds and

a very small part came from public authorities. The goal is to travel around the
country each summer. In winter the activities will consist of outreach work in
big cities and offering courses. a kind of folk high school dealing with drug
problems. Applications for funds have been made to the Ministry of Social Affairs
and the Ministry of Education. Both ministers have made positive statements but
have not yet made a final decision. Much of the money comes from the efforts of

society members themselves. For example the members repair and paint the boats
voluntarily and without being paid.

Cultivation in Denmark

"we are also fighting the cultivation of hashish in Denmark. Recently Danish
hashish has turned out to contain as many dangerous substances as the imported
variety. In England sentences of up to 15 months have been handed down for the
importation of Danish-grown products,” said a member of the national society.

Danish Justice Minister Ole Espersen has ordered a study to find out if hash crops
are really being raised commercially in Denmark. If so the practice will be pro-

hibited, the minister said. No steps could really be taken against cultivation
for personal use, he added.

Generally speaking the principle is the same as the one used in police hauls--
those caught with narcotics for their own use are usually let off with a warning.
But if drugs are found in amounts clearly intended for resale they go to court.

The law provides for 10 years in jail for large dealers but in practice sentences
in Denmark tend to be for no more than 6 years.

Entry Port to Nordic Region

Incidentally this has been criticized by all the other Nordic lands. Copenhagen
is the entrance to the rest of the Nordic market-~what the Danish authorities do

is thus of great importance to the entire Nordic region. But 6 years is regarded
as a very stiff sentence in Denmark.

Host of the goods come from Turkey and Thailand and are smuggled further by land--
in cars--or by plane. Amsterdam and Copenhagen are the big European distribution
centers with Copenhagen serving the Nordic region while Amsterdam takes care of
central Europe and England.

"The narcotics market is terribly tempting," says Police Inspector Gauguin. "The
money is earned so easily."

46
Easy Money

He mentioned a typical case: five nice boys and girls from Copenhagen and a
couple of other big cities. They talked over the best way of quickly getting the
money to buy cars and motorcycles they wanted. None had ever been in trouble
with the police--and none had ever had anything to do with narcotics. But some-
one had said that was a good way to earn money fast.

This turned out to be quite correct. They invested a total of 12,000 marks. a
quarter of it going to tickets to Bangkok, the rest for buying the goods. A month
later it was all sold and the five were 300,000 marks richer. A return of 2000
percent in just 30 days! That was too tempting to stop, as they had originally
planned to do after the first trip. But the second trip brought them into the
hands of the police.

Police Powerless

"We are powerless," says Gauguin. "Many young people start while they are still
in school. Hashish 'just for the fun of it.’ This keeps them up late--that is
the effect hashish has--so they are sleepy the next day.. Take more to wake up--
and become even sleepler the day after. Now they have entered the vicious circle.
It doesn't take long before they try stronger things--and then as a rule it is

too late to back out."
"That is our message," says 26-year-old Kjeld Pries, spokesman for the national
society and a member of the crew of one of the sailing warning centers. "Say no
the first time--it's easy then. It gets harder for each time one tries it. Drugs
are hell," says Pries. "If only people understood that."

6578
C80: 5300/2056

45
BRIEFS

RECORD HASHISR HAUL-Jon hundred kg of haehiah. a record hau1,. have been inter-
cepted off Porquerollea 1n Var department. The drugs were drifting in an inflat-
able dinghy.. They were recovered by the crew of the aircraft carrier Foch which
was cruising in the area. [Text] [1.0100602 Paria Don'eatic Service-in French
1200 GMT 8 Oct 81] -

C80: 5300/2022
M
.” 8mm In
mm; 41mm}: Mob-ﬁrm]
b. human-om. Iwho» Marin":
_ M... r." '0»; :1: Plan
uku- n. M. Mini «r to u
m relatively 1,, "magnum“ ‘5‘: mmmmmnidrh
cheap tuna-bu 30% ~ "0.1.4 am (”:0un Home. w... "norm a la
"'4 °’ ”9"“ “a". "M (Rouble ‘Uonomly My "eh.“
than by Pinon! m their early cannabis u“ "no.“ ”0010 3.
"OM _ , their only “an. “out: to
£2; .: mi; 2:232.- "wwwwww-w-
l e . . . t
at June. A: “than dem- “331.3% “$5.32,:
men! sum: waeinn Pat-con ~2in M
(old a city new an Matty. "I
have been

: ( mm!)
"a. "ink!” of 1% ~
aroma; 16a 7%: hint M
ho» had. 'Moulnd 'A certain numb» In “at
Myounznaopl bacon» cuﬂ- 9mm...mx.
:so: 5300/2020
8ND

47