FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10040
8 October 1981

Japan Report

[FOUO 58/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sourccs
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Ito/10040
8 October 1981

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 58/81)

Coursurs

SCIENCE AND TECHNOImY

Pressures for Defense Buildup Increases
(THE JAPAN EGONMC Jm’j, 880p 81) OIDODOOOOIOOOOOOIOOOUDOO 1

Among Business Leaders, by Naoaki Okabe
Defense Agency Budget Increase, by Ichiyo Hino
Business Wants Priorities -

Gakuji Moriya Interview;

Observation Analysis Center To Be Established for Resources
Satellite Use
(”3 JAPAN mmc JmAL, 8&p 81) OIOOOOOIOOOIOOICOCIOOQQ. 6

Plant Builders Ask Iraq for War Damages of Ibo-SO Billion
(m JAPAN Mme I’m“, 8&p 81) CI...................... 7

Mitsubishi, Westinghouse To Collaborate in High Technologies
(THE JAPAN Bcwmlc JwRNAL, 839p 81) OIODOOOOODOIOIQVOOIOOOOO 8

Tripartite Future Computers Project with U.S.-Europe
(THE JAPAN Ecoﬁmc JOIIRNAL, 8 sep 81) .OOOOQOOOOICOOIO'OOUOOOO 9

Domestic Computer Makers Unable To Return Subsidies
(TE JAPAN mmc JwRNAII’ 8&p 81) OCOQOIOOOOtOOOCCOIOOCOOO 10

Future of Trade Relationship Between Japan, USS! Overviewed
(Masahiro Arakawa Interview; “II-ION KEIZAI SHDEBUN, 31 Aug-81).. 11

Electromagnetic Propulsion Methods Described
(Katsuo Nishiyama; DENSHI GIJUTSU SOGO KENKYUSHO 1H0, No 6,

1977) coca...acoaocooooaacoast...-cosoocoooooocoaoooeoo0.000... 15

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 P0001

MD MP." "QI‘ "HIV
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRESSURES FOR DEFENSE WILDUP INCREASES

Anions Business Leaders

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONG‘IIC JOURNAL in English No 971, 8 Sep 81 pp 1, 15

[Article by Naoaki. Oltebc. correspondent, NIKON KBIZAI SHIHBUN]

[Text]

Debates among top btsinas
leaders on the deiense issue are
becoming more heated lately.
The Japan Federation oi Eco-
nomic Organisations (Keidan-
ren) ptanstodiscuss the matter
at its top policy research com-
mittee. while the defense
production committee at the

out details about proposed ex-
change of deienso technology
with the United States and
btnmeesmeo's requuts with
regard to the nation's median-
term deiense buiidtp program
(See ieattne stories on Page
ii.)

Business lenders showed
strong interest in the deicise
issue at the iorum orgaldzed by
Kendanren in Karta'zawa last
month. Masamichi lnoki.
(Erector oi Research institute
for Peace and Security,
stressed the need to strengthen
Japan's deiense capabilities
and reorganize the deiense set-
up to meet a possible emer-
gency. Most oi the par-
ticipating businessmen made a
posntive response to lnohi's
remarks.

Bunichiro Tanahe. chairman
oi Mitsubishi Corporation. said.
"it is ahots time the Govern-
ment lined the ban on export oi
annstoioreigh comtriee."

Hirotichi Yoshiyama. chair-
man of Hitachi. Ltd.. stressed
the need to improve research-
developmeot systems. such as
tor precise guided munition
(POM).

ainpei Omoto. an advisor to
Mitsui Mining t Smelting
Co.. Ltd. said. "We nit-t at-
tech great importance to the
haclmp system. such as re-
serves oi vital metals to he
medior arms wothIction."

Keidutrat hopes to taloa up
these subjects and iurther as.
cuss them at the policy its
mission meetim. traded by
Yodtihiro tnayama. chairman
oi Keidamn. and participated
by top hotness leaders. in-
cluding liaruo Sustti. chair-
man oi‘Showa Denito KJt..
Ryoichi Kawal. president oi
Kornateu mi. and Takasle'
lshihara. resident oi Nissan
Motor Co.. Ltd.

It is believed that the deienu
production committee. which

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thepolicy discussioon

Keidanren and its
production committee
by Gakuii Mariya.
chairmen oi Mitsuhis
industries. Ltd. he
wins the Defuse At
other mnisations c

pared with 25.1 per
fiscal net. The capil
ing is to he used ior
oi military eq
research and dev
and maintenance oi tt
facilities

They also insist th
search and developt
shoud ecootmt for at
cent oi the total di
pendittree. compare:
per cent oi the fiscal :

The «tense produ
mittee will also disc
issues oi the deiens
at newly-establiel
committees with main focus on
Japan-us. technology ex—
change in the military held.
and matte recommeothtions to
theGoverm-nent.

With regard to the military
technology excltange between

Japan and the U.S.. the ﬁnan-
Cial entries are ready to con-
sader it actively as is shown in
the remark made by Morlya:
"it is very natural for Japan
and the US. to cooperate with
each other as allied cotmtrles
ior development oi tech-
1101081"

Some people also pointed out
that it ts important to improve
military technology indirectly
through a joint development
eiiortnotmlyinthel‘leidoi
purely military technolo‘y III
also in the iield oi high tech
nology. such .as very large-
scale integrated circuit and
next-generation oommters

Another issue to he dsctssod
at the deienae production corn-
mittee is the 1%! traermediate
estimate tor the ﬁscal IBIS-m7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deieose plan. “it committee
will emphasize increasing
defense spaidio; to improve

the qtnlityoi deienae eiiortsas I

to equimeu and roe-ch
development while twin to in-
crease the qtnntity oi deicose
expenditures itaeli. -
Some oi the liberal but»
cratic Party Dietl'nen m
that the outline for the Menu
plan. Which is the basis tor the
inset-mediate deiense estimate.
be reviewed so that the detain
budget will he increued to

‘l‘hce is a videapeadvlew
amorutheiloaocialcirclesthat
even it the defuse
resents 2 per cent oi the
mtlon‘s GNP. it isstill very low
byinternatlonalcompar‘non

mammqnuu-
'ytoooovert'peroentoiGNP
when the outline tor

thine
planisreallud.Aisithaﬁoan-
cialcltcleaanllhelytoatapup

theirvolcethatthedettnei

'oothe

Defense Agency Budge: Increase

erstakearsihercw view
“wind-up on the
deienae issue Shoiiro Kikuchi.
chairman oi Nippon Ytsen
eism about the recent anti-
Soviet hardline policy oi the
US. adniniatration oi Presi-
deuRonaldReagan.

Many oi them tear that
mounutu deiettee expenditures
may lead to a militarydepen—
dent economy despite the [act
that Japan's economic growth
was acideved the to a relative
ly small thistse btrden in the
M.

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English No 971, 8 Sep 81 p 10

[Article by Ichiyo lune]

[Text]

TheDaienseAgencylaatweaksuhtnlttad
to the Iiinistry oi Flo-tea a recast ior
vmunmummettorthcamaz-a

Mireupccentwtromthecwmtiiacal

yaar'sactualbuaat.
Whammtheman'mun ed
exceptionallytoddeuebuaetvhenothc

achieving its me ddei-e outline by ﬁscal
m.
thematnote'orthypointlnitsrmla
thatthauencytriedthaiamoattomeettls.
danaocb tor "to: demos etiorts. eit-
ueaaad repeatedly inthe U.S.Jap-i malt

cam .

Speciﬁcallyp “Amandalleduéoru
mm “W00 W9
alrdeiutaaandantieuhmartnawariare; 2)
Witspraparednasatoranemer-

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a
not placed much emphasis on “panning
combat capability in its modernization pro-
yam and could hardly oope even with
the "small-acale and limited invasions" they
thetmelvee imagine. “II. unless some
thincisdoneaboutconeotiutlnrreaent
situation. it is awarent that two pillars of
Japaneae defense -theSDl-'andtheseetr-
ity treaty — will ooilapae in use of emer-
gency. In this some. the Agency' a budget re-
qneetsaimld beevalmtedhighly lromthe
standpointthatlttstrylngtoaehievethe
targets at the 1m detenseoutline.

Buttbeproblemisaau'alncatnedby
meetilu the US. demand to: Japan's "faster
and target” deleme but Especially since
the Agency asked for e ~than-adteduled
budget"; ol Fla. P30. ammunition: and
oomtmctions oi mutant. the ﬁnancial
birden to be shoddered in late: years ha
totaled a massive new billion which can~
not be lowed From a ions-tam stand
point. it is unavoidable that Japan has to
take a yeater defense buden in an attempt
to placate U.S. criticisms for Japan's "ll'ee-
ride" and maintaln the stable bilateral tela-
tions. butitisneceeearytoptaptioﬂtieson
beaded items. thereby imptovlng the de-
fense capability more efﬁciently than before.
thst oi the present Suzuki
cabinet. Many pollea believed
that extra emphasis should be
placed on quality as well ason
quality oi deiense eqta’pment
in the Mile bialdup program.

Giairman Yoehio Yagi oi
91in Meiwa Indistry stated
that the Governmett should
speed up the completion date oi
the Principles oi the Defense
Buildup Progam [tom the
presently-speed iiscal m1.
While Presidatt lasso Kine
shita oi Hitachi Shipbuilding in
Engineering stated that Japan
should build up its deienss
capability step by step. and not
overnight. no one accepted the
idea that the deiense program
might be delayed became oi
considerations ior restoration
oi Government finances and
welfare musures. This shows
that. while Japanese deiense
industry leaders are not
exactly speed on revamping
the Principles of the Deiaise
Buildup Program as demanded
by the Amcicans. they share a
consensin that deiense buildup
measures should continue to
enjoy top priority among
various Govemmaitmeastres.

A majority also agreed that
deiense-reiated expenses intuit
very well exceed one per cent
oi GNP in the course oi the
buildup program. “GNP itseli
is variable." President Rye
ichi Kawai oi Kornatsu Ltd.
stated. "We should not take
GNP as something absolute. it
shoud be considered only as
one oi the yardstick in lorv
mutating necessary deiense
policies." All the pollees main
tained that we shouM not be
concerned about holding down
defense-misled expenses to one
per cent oi GNP.

“ﬁle most important thing is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what we should do some otl’
deiense." Gian-man Sadaltani
Shindo oi mistaiishi Iectric
Corp. stated “no pollen oi
apnoea comes only alter we
have made a decision on this
allimportant problems." .
ugh some. like Prol-
dent mm Nishimura oi
Sumltomo Heavy industries.
stated that some ceiling was
necessary ior deiqise upsid-
tures ii the oneper-ceucoi-
GNP irameworh was removed.
most. like Chairman Yagi oi
Siln Meiwa Industry. were oi
the heiiei that there was no
possibility oi deiuiae outlays
expending uncontrollahly even
in the absence oi pre-ec limita-
tions.

Technology eseisaage

As to tedinological assist:
ance sought by the Americans.
many deitlnae indiuu-y leaders
declared themselves in iavor
complyiu withtheremieets.

"As long as a pest mahrlty
oi our military tecimolol!
originally came irorn the
United States." annoimced
Gian-man my Unieda oi
Kawasaki ileevy inatsh'ies.
"we should comply with the
Americans' retpests." Many
are more of ice the same
opinion as Umeda; they are lot
repayingtheiavora accorded.

Qiairman Taiyu Koheyashi
oi Puﬁtsu. on the other hand.
maintained thd. ii Japan
remained only at the receiving
end oi technological eschew”
with the Americans. it would
sooner or later be cisoii h'orn
theexchange list.

President Tskashi Ishihara
oi Nissan Motor thouht that
Japan should go along with the
Americam’ requests in the
beliei that it w- to the mutual
goodcithetwonationstostep

1;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

up teclaioloo'cal exchanges in
communications equipment
and electrode machinery. he
theyoiamilitarynatureormt.
"Join research and develop-
ment will be highly eﬂectivei"
canon-red PresLdent Kano
Maeda oi Mitsui twinning is
Shlphttildiru. "(or the advance
meat oi Japan's own tech-
mlogicalstandards."

Expert controls

As to the esistir; three
negative principles on arms
exporta.PresltbtﬁShotchlSaba
oi “lbslaha Corp. stated that
rules we too exacting a they
cover such nondirect
“weapon" as radar.

"ii export controls are
slachened vis-a-vis iree world
coilitries."PresidentKinoshita
oi Hitachi Shipbuilding &

stated. "we would
be able to malte a considerable
contribution to the overall
strengthening of the iree
world's aimse. Exports also

will help reduce ion
costs and improve tech.
nological standards

Doiense industry leaders'

attitude toward exports has
apparently become more posi-
tive notv that at the begirating
oi the ml. year when ex.
ports oi gun barrels to the
Reptblic oi Korea by a special
steel manilacturer touched oil
a great controversy. At that
time. deiense industry lenders
maintained a very low proﬁle.

Some. like Evident hteno
oi Japan See! Wort. however.
was very caution aboia aging
the Comment to change the
existing three principles at the
present time. meintairlng that
eeports oi arms are only oi
secondary importance in the
nation's deiense industry
policy.
Tokyo TEE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gaituji. Horiya Interview

[Interview with Gakuji horiya,

chairmen of Keidanren '

niecee, date and place not given)

{79“} Talk: about Japan'a really cogent or not. or
defense capability have whether Japan can or
been going on heatedy ever cannot tollov Washington'a
since Washington called on dent-ids it it really vanta
‘l'oityoto adeita detenae to.
power. a many peopiebe- Sotne tall: about limiting
lieve that the Japanae «(unrelated expenaee to
deieme indutry is m in certalnperceniaceloi GNP.
an excellent position to lake Is their theory really right?
iuil advantage oi the Duel the theory hold to in
nation's increasing aware- the lace oi the our! reality
neasotthe deienee . in the United aatee. the
At this importam picture Soviﬂ Urdu! an! BC?

the Nihon Keiaai stimuli
had on opportunity to tall:
with saint“ Moriya. their-
man A Keidairen'a
Winn Committee and
concurrently adviaor to
"Matti iieavy indu-
trieo. on a variety oi deienae
mattera. Saleem oi the
interview lotion.

o: What are your
opinions oi the Nnericana'
call for .Japan to holater its
defense capabilityandoithe
Japaneae Government'a
reapouae to Wastington?

Mariya: You have to
matte a clear dotlnction he-
the Governmait‘a
deienae policy and detenae
production itseli in talking
about any deteme problems.
What Japan Mid do am
its deiense is. in the ﬁnal
analysis. II) to the Govern
ment Every JW. hov-

evenhaaariﬂlttoaactu‘

the problem and mate III
contribution to the Govern
ment'a linai deciaim. You
ahead idly diactlaa whether
the Americans' detnnnda on
Jepan'a detcnae power are

What is the reellty in
the very

eonaiderate
means? It the ratios oi
detain-related eapemea in
ouch nations are tar higher
than thoae of Japan aulnat
GNP. aotnettdns must he
wont with Japan'a policy.
a: me United Satea is

not seeking Japan'a_

military teetuoiosy in ouch
fields I «humiliation!
and electronics and la
hoping 'ior joint teaearch
and development- 00 ya:
think that Japan should
comply With Vlaahington'a
wishea?
Mariya:
Suzuki eotfnnied when he
met with Preaident Reagan
that relations between
Myo and WW eon-
atitute a (til-W alliance.
it is only natural tor alileo to
with each other
for promotion oi aeieneeand
technology. Mtlmghthellne
between military technolo-

COPYRTCHT: 1981 The “than Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

C50:

b120/1

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

n English lio 971. 8 Sep 81 p 11

8 Defense Production Con-

gies and

non - mili-

tary tech-

nologiea

has never

been quite

clear.

he i ie v a

that tech-

nology ex-

chlmo between private
corporation on both aides ot
the Paeitic should mote be
activated.

a: The problem to the
Government‘s three haaic
principle on arnia exports.
ian'tii?

mntriﬂ engaged in inter-
national diaputea. The
trouble. however. is that it ia
not always dear what eon-

_atitutea military eqtlptnent
.w have

Mariya: For cut-rem tie

cal year. we viii ptaee
extra emphaaia on our
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OBSERVATION ANALYSIS CENTER TO BE ESTABLISHED FOR RESOURCES SATELLITE USE

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 971. 8 Sept 81 p 13

[Text]

About Jo‘leading indtntrial
corporations and banks are
scheduied to set up a joint
research loundation in Tokyo
by the end oi this month to
analyze all sorts oi inlorination
concerning earth resumes to
be obtained lrom the remote

American Landat
series oi satellite and Japan's
first equivalent to be orbited by
m1 or in

The proposed Resources
Observation Analysis Center
will be lotmded shortly alter
the September is meeting oi

then sponsou- fiveoilex-
ploration-development and 0
metal mining-smelting com-
panies. So far. 27 companies
have expressed intention to join
the project toset up and operate
thecenteronasemi-permanent
basis.

The live oil exploration-de
veiopment companies are
Japan Petroleum hpioration
Co.. Telltoku Oil Co.. Idemitsu
Kosan Oo.. indooesia Pm
leum Ltd. and Arabian Oil Co.

The six metal miningamelt-
ing companies are Nippon Min-
ing Co.. Mitsui Mining &
Smelting 00.. Mitsubishi Metal
Corp. Sumitomo Metal Mining
00., Nittetsu Mining 00.. and
Dowa Mining Co.

The in others are Mitaui itin-
iig Co. (coal mining). Tahlba
Corp.. Mitsubishi Electric
Corp. Nippon Electric Co.
Hitachi. Ltd. Misti Ltd. and
NAC Inc. all electricelectronic
manufacturers. and nine big
city-based major commercial

banks.

pendent on three US. Landsat
satellites orbited since m: (or
whatever information it events
on hidden underground and
tndersea natural resources in
and around its territory as well
as geological conditions and
changes detectable only
through remote sensing from
space.

All such information come
from the satellites in photo-
graphic images digitized into
numerical values requiring
computerized analysis and
synthesis.

Though having a few
specialized computer systans
to do such iobs. including that
of Japan Petroleum Explora-
tion Co.. Japan is still way be-
hind America in such analyzing
tecleiology.

The ll sponsoring compania
at the end olJuly thus decided

to create such an industrial

Japan has been entirely de-

COPYRIGHT:

CSO: Ii120/1

1981 The Nihon Keizai Shinbun. Inc.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

center oi Japan's own a's‘quicii-
lyaspossible.

‘l'he propmed center is to
start its raearch activities
lint by mdertakirg a job at
developing Japan's on via-
sateilite remote resources
sensing technology [root the
Ministryollmernational Trade
in industry under a In billion
national buttetary appropria-
tion the latter is seeking for
fiscal 1902.

Beam gathering all avail~

able techmcal knowledge con-
cerning analyzing ol the Land-
sat-provided intormation. the
center will also develop a new
analytical method to match
the information to be sent down
lrom Japan's own resource
satellite being planned by MIT!
together with the National
Space Develounent Agency
with a ayiuhetic openmotsh
type oi radar to obtain images
oi earth resource through
radar beams and their reﬂec-
tions.
Such a radar probing system
is said to provide much clearer.
better images that the Land-
sat's special cameras.

The joint research lotuidation
is expected topave the way let
Japan's establishment oi its
own remote sewing technology.
SCIENCE AND TECIINOIDGY

Iraq Wat and gum-n; tuspn' (M ‘mi N .mw)
m 0‘ (gimme!!! in.“ Mil '(M'mn
The ﬁve are n- _ .

ca! mm. «W 3:32“ mem;

(10.. Kama» vy m _ .

W- Wu Mirth” Hag 9.21"“ 313': 3mm

Industries. u ..

have npphed war clauses
or/md lone-manta
in conlnus In their
mm (or canpamw.
lncludingthose tot many low
apected m arise until plums

are completed

m cues involved are nine
commas concluded lrom Feb
ugh December. me

«(can

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

F WOO-50 BILLIOR

lip-nest Hum-h! phat when
«um tot Iraq to pay var damages

PM tutu-on
Our-o» ““00” 1M
mum IWiI
(M I I II (mm)

mm cum“! tun-mun
In" an» an

I.. I". .5 DIN-l| -

um .15 bill-m all

an 0’ Mum our

100' .9 null-I Mum.“
soil. 0. W (M

w. in 9mm Im

on. on plum 'Itovr n ma

«5 umo m

I) ad to who m Imu-

. raps:
lid mum HI. ¥7b¥lo

.bulioo i_n dams all"! its

:1 Oil Co. (INOC).

Itwillbenotuutilnlew
months hence that (unwed
com “on am will be
held Also. It seems am it wil
ulna I lone time were III a
the diwulu are «and.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECﬂNOLOGY

MITSUBISHI, WESTINGHOUSE T0 COLLABORATB IN RICH TECHNOLOGIES

Tokyo JAPAN ccouomc JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 971, 8 Sep 81 p 1

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

C50:

Mitsubishi Electric Corp and
Mitsubishi Ileavy Industries.
us. will lightai their press“
toelutical connotation relation
with Westinghouse Electric
Corp. ol the 0.5. and jointly
engage in development oi high
technologies with it. They
recently came to ayeement on
such an arrangement.

Industrial robots. eerni«
conductors and new energy
sources will he the major
themes ol the joint march
and development project be-
tween Mitsubishi Electric and
Westinghouse. Mitsubishi
Electric. which alreetly ha
been marketing weldim robots.
will tackle development 0'

4120/1

intelligatt robota bintly with
the American partner. '

1he two time also will
promote joint Mes on very
largeecale integrated circtﬂts
IVLSI). They aheady have
lnougta‘ated a project team tor
lat-idling a joint VLSl mane
todtving ventur.

in the lleld 0! new energy
sou-ca. Mitsubishi Electric
and w will shortly
start a joint study on ellective
mil lion oi solar energies a
wet I on new type atomic
power reactors. They also ere
expected to elicit-ice technical
inlormation on unclear lusion

‘lheae joint MD projects will
malte Mitottiahi Electric an

1981 The Nihon Keizat Shmbun. Inc.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ml partnu oi Valium:
in the true sense oi the word.
tlmghitsolar hastenttedto
tpentl on the American lirm‘s
alvaocedteclmiquea.

Mimi Heavy intlustries
and Venomous: have agreed
hintly to «level» an advanced
pressurised water reactor
(APWR) having a power otlput
capacity of arm-id 1.3 million
kilowatts. a little larger than
the conventional PWR.

Westinghouse also has
agreed to help Mlll develop a
last breeder reactor (FDR) by
altering mgineerintt data. in
the lttttro. the two firms will
jointly develop commercial-
scale Hilts.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

TRIPARTITB FUTURE CWUTBPS PROJECT WITH U.S.-EUWPE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 971, 8 Sep 81 p 9

[Text]

A Japan-U.S.-Eunope tri-
partite project to jointly
develop the ao-called ”ﬁlth
generation computers“ will he
inaugurated next year an to
leading American and Euro
pean companies already have
notified their intention to
participate in the Japaneae
Gommt-propoaed meeting
oi computer experts in Tokyo
scheduled lor lateOctoher.

The experts‘ meeting is

expected to lay the ground [or
the planned lo-year inter-
national project. starting next
April.
A filth-generation compiler.
an advanced version o! the
present (moth-generation one.
is a high-performance unit
capable of "learning," "irtler-
ence" and other inaction: that
conventional computer: cannot
do.

Among the 15 participants
are international Buinma
Machines Corp. Sperry-Uni-
vac. Honeywell. NCR. Texu
Instruments and Siemens.

COPYRIGHT :

cso: 4120/1

v

IBM's participation will ave
stylificance to the gunned
project an the world‘s target
computer builder already has
made several hrealttltomha in
tectaiiquee to protaice next-
generation compilers. _

The Japanese Government
has called for international
cooperation to develop such
high-perlormance cinnputers
as well as cooperation among
the government. lndtntry and
actiotars. Major ream that
has led the Japanese Govern-

menttopropoaethetripartite

puncture:

— t cont: will he-
cometoohugeloraoinglecom-
party or a single cotaitry to
meet.

-A joint tripartite protect
will prevent possible frictions
over high tedinologlee lrom
develop"; among them.

—Baaic atudiea on compo
nenta tor the filth-generation
computers have progreaaed to
a considerable extent at
governmental institutions in
industrialized nations. and joint

1981 The Nihon Keizai Shim‘oun, Inc.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

utlizatlon of each studies
accelerate development
neangeoeration compact:
Other major overseas
ticipanta in the em
meeting are Hopewell-C
France. NW at West
many. Dearborn Canada .
puter of Canada and 0m
Maintenance“ India.
noun to “pole no

and tediniciana oi Japan
us. Britain. France and

Ministry of tote-national 1
& Industry M rated I
participation in the meetl
it an tar has been devel
teclnlquee on its own.
Optimism ia moat-rt
however. There are 1
problems to clear before
generation computere
wacticalized. such an po
dopin- over patem
know-how on the luau I
joint developmnt croied.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DOMESTIC CWU’IER MAKERS UNABLE TO RETURN SUBSIDIBS

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19. No 971, 8 Sep 81 p 9

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

1:120/1

Proﬁtshiiity oi Japan-e
computer makers is so low that
they now ﬁnd it difficult to re-
pay before the Msrch at. Its:
deadline the suhsidie they
received iron the Government
in the early mm.

hiiitsu Limited. Hitsehl.
Lul. Nippon Electric Co. To
shiha Corp. Mitmhishi Electric
Corp. and Oki Electric indistry
Co. have received a total oi
“7.470 million worth 11 sub
sidies {or five years since fiscal
1972 tor development at super
high-performance computers.

Since around if". they have
developed such meﬁum- and
large-size general-purpose
computers as the M Series (the
hilltsu-Hltacld group). the
ACOS Series (NBC-What
and the MELCOM/COSMO
Series (Mitsubishi). Oki with-
drew from the senenl-pwpose
computer held.

it was learned recently that
none oi the six Japanese com-
puter milder: hss paid back
the sthsidies. They are re-

10

Jepanlitdhsalestoheeane

maker.
melowproﬂtaﬂlltyotupa-

nose computer makers ls
ascribed to_ their excessive

pies-cuttingmsrketin‘eom-

industry becomes reliable. I
Ml'i'l «new said

1981 The N1hon Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FUTURE OF TRADE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JAPAN, USSR OVERVIENBD

Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SBIHBUN in Japanese 31 Aug 81 p 3

[Interview with Hasahiro Arakawa, Former Chief, USSR Office, Mituabiahi Corp-
oration

[Text] Starting with negotiations on equipment for the 13 billion dollar
Yamburg natural gas project, trade relations between Japan, Hestern Europe
and the United States and the USSR have reached a turning point. The 0.5.
has urged Japan and Hestern Europe to restrain East-Heat trade relations
within the limits of the Heat's security. I asked Hasahiro Arakawa. former
chief, USSR Office, Mitsubishi Corporation (presently with the machinery de-
partment, Mitsubishi Corporation) what will happen with Japan-Soviet trade

relations. (The reporter is Hideo Tamura, economics department, Tokyo nain
office).

Course of Bast-West Trade Relations

[Question] The Reagan administration is trying to regulate East-west trade
relations from the standpoint of security. isn't it?

Logic of Strength in the Background

[Answer] Certainly the Reagan administration is assuming a strong posture, but
I think that is a strong principle but we should not necessarily be pessimistic
about the actual flow of the economy. The former Carter administration sought
to clamp down on exports to the Soviets on the grounds of human rights, but
with the Reagan administration's methods, it is easier for the USSR to re-
spond to negotiations. The USSR has traditionally believed that might makes
right and if their opponent shows strength. the USSR will understand and ask
for negotiations. The logic of strength is even behind the removal of the

0.3. embargo on grain exports. It is a mistake to be under the simplistic
impression that both heads and tails are the same thing.

If :he USSR is prepared to make some kind of concessions, the U.S. will also
compromise. A good example of that is the authorization for the Caterpillar
Company to export to the USSR pipe laying equipment for the Yamburg natural
333 project. So long as the U.S. makes a principle of tying trade with the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviets to security, it will strongly oppose haying Heat Germany and others
depend on the USSR for 15—30 percent of their natural gas supplies. However,
the U.S. has approved the pipe laying equipment under the pretext that it is
unrelated to Yamburg. No one can guarantee that the pipe laying equipment
which can be freely moved will not be used at Yamhurg.

Muestion] Can the Western allied nations avoid the unbending principle of
the U.S.?

[Answer] The U.S. is requesting West Germany's reconsideration of the intro-
duction of natural gas from Yanburg into West Germany. using substitute energy
‘ supplies as the condition. but West Germany is holding firm. Ruhr Gas, the
gas company, counterargues that even if the USSR applies the political pres—
sure of completely cutting off natural gas supplies, the national interest
will not be harmed. It has considered countermeasures with such means as
changing raw materials or using on-hand supplies as that even in an emergency
situation there will be no problem for large consumers.

West Germany even depends on Libya for 6 percent of its total energy. It is
argued which is more dangerous, Libya or the USSR. and as long as the U.S.
does not propose a better alternative, I do not think West Germany will give
up the introduction of gas from the USSR. Because the Yamburg project is such

a large scale project, the plan is apt to be delayed; negotiations will move
ahead in installments.

[Question] The U.S. is pressing Japan and Western Europe to tighten controls
on exports of high level technology. What about that effect?

Hestern Unity Impossible on "Technology"

[Answer] In the case of my company and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.,

as a result of economic sanctions against the USSR following its invasion of
Afghanistan we could not export second recovery equipment for oil fields to
the USSR and so-France finally did. Since the basic technology was intro-
duced from the U.S., we cannot export without authorization from the U.S.
government. The U.S. holds much of the high technology. and the U.S. where
those with the technology move freely has historically been compised of people
of European descent. and so there are limits to how much the outflow of tech-
nology to Europe can be held in check. However. U.S. technology will not be
introduced into Japan unless we make the customary contract for technology

introduction. On that point, France has been successful. Western unity is
impossible, isn't it?

It has recently become difficult to export items that until now had been ap-
proved for export to the USSR even though they were on the COCOM embargo list.
Three-dimensional machine tools are an example. We are having a difficult
time changing our methods and the like in order to get approval.

[Question] Isn't the Soviet government quite dissatisfied with Japan's trade
policies towards the USSR?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Having been asked many times last year to meet with Soviet officials
of the Ministry of Foreign Trade. I went to Moscow. At that time, one of the
directors aaid: "we used to think Japan was the Soviet Union‘s number one
partner, but haven't you been outstripped by west Germany. France and England?"
I explained to him that Japan‘s exports to the U.S. account for more than
one-fourth of all exports, and the Soviet director sailed when I presented

him with a U.S. publication's special edition on trade friction with Japan.

The foundation of USSR trade policies is driving hard bargains to purchase
products from the Heat cheaply. To do this. it is necessary to set Japan.
the East. against Western Europe. Even in the Yamburg talks, the Soviet
Union brought Japan a deal of 3 billion dollars, but with the exception of
Daikei Kokan Company. most of the other materails can be sufficiently sup-
lied by Europe. Clearly there are items which would not have to be purchased
from Japan. Likewise, with Yamburg as the bait, its aim is to get financing
from the Export-Import Bank of Japan. I understand that the amount of orders

Japanese enterprises can receive in the Yamburg negotiations is 1.4-1.5 billion
dollars.

[Question] Talks on plants other than Yamburg have made themselves scarce.
haven't they?

[Answer] That't right. This is not because the political situation or the
economic sanctions against the USSR are obstacles; the major reason is that
the building of the Soviet economy has arrived at a turning point. Until
now it has purchased steel. fertilizer and chemical plants. The Soviets

have done their best. but there are plants here and there which are still

not in operation. A film plant which Mitsubishi contracted for in cooperation
with Konishiroku Photo Industry Co., Ltd. has remained unopened for more than
a year. In order to imporve the operating efficiency of these plants. the
USSR put major emphasis on providing completely such basics as transportation
and parts supplies. Therefore, talks with the USSR on plants have all grown
smaller. Only energy related plants are the exception; the USSR has to
export energy resources in order to gain foreign currency. when inflation

is taken into consideration in Japan's exports to the USSR, they remain al-
most at the same level as last year.

[Question] It is said that one of the USSR's economic weaknesses is its
foreign currency situation.

Grain Shortage Cannot Be Solved

[Answer] The Soviet Union's trade revenues with OECD countries were in the
bisck by 800 million dollars. Conversely, the USSR's trade with the West
was constantly in the red. The cost of grain imports due to large amounts of
comparatively expensive Argentine wheat because of the 0.3. grain embargo an
a bad harvest is supposed to be an additional 2-3 billion dollars, but I
haven't heard that they have launched into selling their reserves because of
it. A maior reason is that foreign currency income has increased with the
Steuo :ise in energy prices. Rather, isn't the shortage of funds in the

13 -
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country the question confronting them? Even though the 0588's financial crisis

is not as great as Japan‘s. budgetary deficits are conspicuous with the delay
in plant operations.

Soviet agriculture is limited to agriculture in the north and dry Central Asia.
A good or bad harvest clearly depends on the amount of rainfall. No matter
how much they try. the grain shortage will not be solved. The pattern of ex-
porting energv resources and purchasing grain and industrial products from

the West will still continue. There are reasons for pointing out that if'

the 0.8. places a total embargo on ultra-modern energy technology. the USSR
will be immediately driven into a corner and would plan to advance into the

Middle East; and even the Reagan administration cannot completely stop exports
of oil exploration technology to the Soviet Union.

Comment

Since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979. Japan's exports
to the USSR have levelled off. With the economic sanctions against the USSR
since January 1980, plant exports have been curbed, and last fall electromag-
netic steel sheet plants and the like were snatched away by France. Japan
which started late in the Yamburg talks is playing second fiddle to Europe.

Naturally, dissatisfaction is expressed in industrial circles. However, Mr.
Arakawa who was in the forefront of Soviet business until this past August

is quite unperturbed. He thinks that the"Reagan administration's strong
posture toward the USSR aims at gaining concessions politically" and he sees
the possibility of a thaw in U.S.-Soviet trade relations. He says that the
progress of talks between the Japanese government and the USSR "should not

be hurried and will be meaningless unless there is a clear purpose." The

experience of a businessman seems to be extremely different than that of
government officials.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

9400
C80: 6105/239

1h
roe 01371an use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

_ELECTROHAGNETIC PROPULSION METHODS DESCRIBED
Tokyo DENSRI GIJUTSU SOGO KBNKYUSHO 1H0 in Japanese Vol 41 No 6, 1977 pp 67-76

[Article by Katsuo Nishiyama, Hasaoli Kimura, Energy Dept., Energy Conversion
Research Room; and Takuma Homma Energy Dept., Energy Conversion Research Room,
Chief, Ph.D. in Engineering. Article received 21 April 1977]

[Text] 1. Preface

As the development of ocean progresses, it is believed that the use of marine
vehicles operating at great depths would be inevitable. If so, the application
of conventional propulsion method to such vessels would create several problems
including the maintenance of airtightness in the transmission section, cavita-
tion created around the propellers, noise from power transmission devices and
propellers, the decline in the propulsion efficiency, etc. For this reason,
since around 1960, when [the study of] electromagnetic hydromechanics was [just]
beginning to emerge, there began a research in the electromagnetic propulsion
method which, based on the observation that seawater conducts electricity, would
create propulsion by adding electromagnetic forces to the water. The major fea-
ture of this method was the elimination of solid movable parts unavoidable in
the propeller method; its advantages include the ability to maintain [better]
airtight conditions, easier handling, and low noise level. The electromagnetic
propulsion methods proposed to date can be classified by categories of working
fluids as shown in Table 1. Based on this table, we shall discuss the princi-
ples involved in each method and the performance of each as a source of propul-
sion, in particular, the method using the liquid metals.

2. Seawater Method
2.1 Induction-type Propulsion

In 1962, Phillips of the United States proposed an induction-type electro-
magnetic jet propulsion method shown in Yigures l and 2, and published a de-
tailed analysis of its characteristics.‘ Figure 1 shows how symmetrically
moving magnetic field is created along the external walls of a vessel; seawater
IR jetted out by the reciprocal action of induction current created by the mov-
ing annetic field and the field itself. Figure 2 shows how seawater can be
jetted out through the ducts by creating concentric cylindrical shells outside

15
roe omcut use ONLY
Table 1. Classification of Electromagnetic Propulsion Methods

 

Channel method
_ Working fluid and yes or no
working fluid thrust method of experiment

         
    
     
    
 

Induction method Internal, no

External, no

 

Electric conduc- Internal, yes
tion method External, no

 

Liquid metal Induction method Internal, no
Electric conduc- Internal, yes
tion method

 

Solid-liquid Magnetic suction Internal, no
2-phnee flow method
FORIOFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

  
  

  

ounLMﬂmuxhuunuu._

   
       
    

(a) - "menstrual-Inf",
.nnmd§%é%%%ﬂﬂlﬁlw- '“
(b)

Figure 1. Distribution of Lines of Figure 2. Structure of Induction-
Hagnetic Forces of the Induction-type type Blectronagnetic Jet Propulsion
External Magnetic Field Electromagnetic System and Flux Distribution. There
Jet Propulsion Systen Proposed by is a 2/5 cycle phase difference
Phillips between (a) and (b)
(Source: Bibliography 1) (Source: Bibliography 1)

the vessel, and by forming magne-ic circuits using coils on both the body of
the vessel and the external shells so as to provide for a concentration of
magnetic flux. Concerning these methods, Phillips has concluded that the
maximum value of efficiency is 8 to 10 percent.

2.2 Electrical Conduction-type Propulsion

In 1963. Dorazhannounced a pump jet method using superconducting magnets as
shown in Figure 3.3 Figure 6 shows the relationship between speed and effi-
ciency of a vessel with a displacement of 2,000 t, channel length of 15.2hn,
channel area of 6.98n2, ratio of channel area to seawater input area (diffu-
sion ratio) 1.02, and ratio of [wave area?] to seawater output area (jet
ratio) 1.69. Also, Way proposed a structure which enlarges the range of elec-
tromagnetic action as shown in Figure S."'6 The sides of a vessel are wired
with superconductors through which currents of opposite direction flow alter-
nately and electrodes are attached to the outside of wiring. Those with two
electrodes are called two poles, those with four electrodes, four poles. The
two-pole type is more efficient. but in order to minimize the effect of magne-
tic field inside the vessel, more than six poles is ideal. The distribution of
the lines of electric forces and lines of magnetic forces for t two-pole type

17
FOR!0F11C1AL,USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. General Diagram of MED Pump Jet (Source:

Key :

(1) Pulp jet channel (7)
(2) Electrode (8)
(3) Magnetic shelter (9)
((0) Magnetic field (10)
(5) C011 (11)

(6) Internal Dewar

 

Bibliography 3)

External Dewar

Surrounding pressure-300°K
Magnetic pressure-b'x
Vacuun

Conditions for assuming the
supportive structure

-...___-___.—‘———

4m.
".89!"
0 I) . \

113M

(Ghana: um

Figure a. Relationship Between Ship Spe
Density as Parameter (Source:

Key:

(1) Electric efficiency (5)

(2) Comprehensive efficiency

(3) Channel length

(6) Channel area

18

ad and Efficiency Based on Flux
Bibliography 3)

Diffusion ratio

(6) Jet ratio
(7) Efficiency
(8) Speed of sub-urine (knots)

(percent)

ﬁOR 0i1ﬂ€1Al.lﬂﬂE(HWLY
Figure 5. Electric Conducting External Magnetic Field-type Six Poles of
(K-3) of Electromagnetic Jet Propulsion System for a Large
Submarine Tanker Proposed by Way (Source: Bibliography 6)

 

Figure 6. Distribution of Lines of Magnetic and Electric Forces in the Case
of Two Poles (Source: Bibliography 5) .

Key:
(1) Lines of electric force (A) Excitation coil
(2) Lines of magnetic force (5) Ship hull

(3) Electromagnetic surface

are shown in Figure 6. Table 2 shows the results of calculation on the propul-
sion characteristics of a submarine tanker with a displacement of 2,500 tons,
total length of 151.2(m), body radius of 8.66(m), total submerged area of
6.860(m2), drag coefficient of 0.03156, and length of electrode, 75.6(m).

when various problems concerning superconducting magnets (e.g., cable support
method, compact pole low temperature systen, etc) are solved from these re-
sults, we can expect the realization of an electromagnetic jet prOpulsion vessel.
In 1966, in order to confirm the propulsion principle shown in Figure 5, Way

and others built and tested an experimental electromagnetic propulsion ship of
the size shown in Figure 7. As a result, it was reported that the ship traveled
at a speed of about 25 (cm/sec) when the exciting current was at 160 (Amp) and
the current between electrodes at 116 (Amp). Furthermore. Kinura and others
built their own experimental four-pole type with an external magnetic field

and a two—pole type with an internal channel; they are studying the propulsion

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCIAL USEZCNVLY

Table 2. Propulsion Choractcrlsticu of a 25.000 Ton Tanker

. ._ ._._.___- . _-..

 

Speed u (m/s) 5 10 15

 

Thrust F x 10--3 (N) 13.10 520.1 1,172
Effective output PT (kw) 650 5,201 17,600

Number of poles b 6 6 6 6 6
Electric efficiency ne 0.928 0.920 0.868 0.852 0.813 0.793
Input Pg (kw) 700 707 5,990 6,110 21,650 22,200
Voltage between electrodes(V) 163 105 305 227 690 366

Electrode current 21 (A) 2,665 2,266 9,810 8,975 22,100 20,220

 

Note: Bcr - 7.6H'b/m2 for 6 poles

Ber _ THb/nz for 6 poles (Source: Bibliography 6)

 

Figure 7. A Model for a 2-Pole Electromagnetic Submarine Designed by Hay

Key: (1) Rater surface

performances efficiency using strong magnetic fields, Hinahawe end

Hiyake built and tested a pump jet propulsion ship equipped with amechanism
to cool saddle-shaped copper coils to liquid nitrogen temperatures.a

Table 3 compares the results of experiments between Hinakawa's model and
others.

3. Liquid Metal System

From above it is apparent that the use of superconducting magnet is indispens-
able in order to realize the method which uses seawater. In such a case, how-
ever, the [propulsion] system must be of large scale, which is inappropriate
for smaller submarine research vessels with displacements of less than 10 tons.
For this reason, a conceivable alternative would be to use a medium with higher
electric conductivity, such as liquid metals, as a working fluid to replace
seawater; this will reduce the size of the propulsion nechsnisn.

20
POR¢MHWCJAI.USE|DNLY
FOItOFFICtAL USEZCMNLY

Table 3. Comparisons of Characteristics of Electromagnetic Propulsion Systems

_____—__—_—___———————————-—-———-

1967 1970 1971
University Kobe University
of Blectrotechnical of Mercantile
Item California Laboratory Marine
Method External mag- Internal magnetic Low temperature
netic type type internal magne-
tic type
Total length of ship 3.0m 1.2bm 1.10m
Diameter of ship 0.65(2b)m 0.62/0.22(-d)m 0.38/0.ll(-d)m
Number of coils 602 300 1,000
Voltage 30V (-ZVe) (05V 48V
Exciting current 160A 67A 29A
Pole current 120A 172A 110A
Speed 0.27m/sec 0.08m/sec 0.05m/sec
Underwater Tank Underwater
Magnetic field 0.015wb/m2 0.012wb/m2 mum/.2
Efficiency 1 x 10-“ 4.7 x 10-5 1.6 x 10-5

_____________________———_———

3.1. Induction-type Propulsion Vessel

Neuringer and his group have proposed a cylindrical compressor shown in

Figure 8 and have been conducting theoretical studies of its electromagnetic
action. To explain the functional principle [of this compressor]. we refer to
Figure 9. As the Figure shows, when N-S magnet moves in the direction of 2 at
a speed U, current (density) Jo - - oUBr runs through the coil placed in the
magnetic field. In this case, however, the magnetic field, in relation to the
axial, has only the axial directional component 32 and radius directional com-
ponent Br. At this point, the electromagnetic force arising in the coil can
be expressed from F - 3x3 to F - aUBrzz - aUBrBzr per unit volume. In other
words, we see that the coil always receives a positive force in the direction
of the axial, but a force which varies depending on the code of the magnetic
field in the direction of the radius. Now, if the coil is replaced by the
conductive fluid (working fluid) as shown in Figure 8, the force produced
with!n the working fluid will transform the surface of the melbrane, since the
fluid is enclosed in the diaMrugm1ddch is composed of flexible membrane.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8. General Diagram of a Cylindrical Induction Compressor
(Source: Bibliography 9)

Key:
(1) C011 (3) Transport fluid
(2) Flexible disphrsgs (6) Conducting fluid

 

Figure 9. General Diagram of Electroengnetic Induction Produced Within a
Statimary Circular Coil by Magnetic Field of Synetrical Axis
of Activated n-s Magnet (Source: Bibliography 9)

Key:
(1) Coil
(2) Lines of magnetic force

If. at this point. the magnetic field is a moving nagnetic field as shown in
Figure 10, the transforuation of the flexible nembrene will take the form of
a progressing sine curve and the fluid between r; and r2 will be pushed toward
the direction of 2 by the action of the nabrsne. As a result, a continuous
pumping will take place. If we let the diaphragm in Figure 8 to be a cylinder
with an outer diaeeter of 2 to and an inner diameter of 2 r1 and then seek the
electromagnetic force F: per unit volume produced within the working fluid,
the force, in the case of Rt} >> 1, based on the following essmptions.--

1) the average speed of the working fluid in the direction of z is zero (0-0).
2) the transp; rt fluid is nonmagnetic and of low conductivity. and

3) the pressure incline produced within the transport fluid is equal to the
electromagnetic force (F2) calculated when the diaphragm is at its position of
equalibrium (r-r1)---it will be expressed as below:

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 10. Distribution of Moving Magnetic Field Within a Cylindrical Induc—
tion Compressor

-. - .. _ .-._—_.—_.——

I _ :
\ ‘_£!)}G|(RII K‘)
c '0

,.~/9K;ED:{(;

(r-r.)6.(R.. Kh)-'
'm. k. exp{-KII zucuguﬁnL

R.‘

E [II-20¢; a 0‘]. 4 l}. +;'+'2-E‘R;'-:")‘.

 

Here, K represents the number of moving waves with K - u/U (w: angular frequency);
NI, ampere turns per unit length; to, outer radius of the compressor; h, thick—
ness of the tube section containing the working fluid, with h I r0- r1; Rm,
magnetic Reynolds number, with Rn - uoow/KZ; no, permeability of free space;

0, conductivity of working fluid. From the P, equation, we see that electro-
magnetic force is proportionate to G}: therefore, at km and Rh, where 6; reaches
the maximum value, F2 becomes the greatest. When we seek Rm and Kh, Rm - 6.120
and Rh - 0.309; thus, Glmax - 0.0553. Pigure 11 shows the relationship between
6, and km, with Kh as the parameter. Based on these results, Neuringer and
others have been studying the performance of this compressor as a marine pro-
pulsion equipment. According to their results, when the ratio of the length to
the diameter of the ship is 10:1, when the drag coefficiency based on submerged
area is 0.003, when the length of the compressor is 1/2 the total ship length,
and when the thickness of the tube section of the working fluid and that of the
tube section of the fluid which is being transported are equal, ships with total
length of 11h.6m and 5.33- would have s 90 percent jet coefficiency (2/1 + (ullu);
u‘, speed of jetted fluid; u, speed of ship) and travel at 30 knots under the
following conditions. Figure 12 shows the relationship between the speed of the
ship (u) and speed of the moving wave (U), with depth (d) from the sea surface

to the ship as a parameter. however, this is based on the calculation that the
critical tolerance ressure level of the cavitation at the entrance of the com-
pressor is 0 (kg/cm ). From this figure, we see that when a ship is traveling

at a speed of 30 knots at the depth of 305m, the speed at which magnetic field
can travel without producing cavitation must be below 80m/sec. Figure 13 shows
the relationship between the magnetic Reynolds number (km) and the moving wave
frequency (r0) needed to obtain a minimum of magnetic field. Under the condition
found in the figure, it can be seen that re is below 100 Hz and that it is in
inverse proportion to the dimensions of the ship. Also, the relationship between

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  

 

”I... l,.,.. “I
0.1 10 I0 I!» I033 103:»

R-

Figure 11. Relationship Between Dilensionleaa Axie Directional Force and
Magnetic Reynolds Nunber (Source: Bibliography 10)

Key: (1) Envelope

ss_

umnmaonawme.
A
o

8

       

0 20 4O 60 60 3

u (Solemn/socigz)
50' too 150 230

00:00“)

Figure 12. Relationship Between Ship'a Speed and the Speed of Moving Magnetic
Field mm the Depth of the Sea Below the Ship ea Para-etc:

(Source: Bibliography 10)

Key:
(1) U (Speed of moving magnetic field, nine)
(2) u (Speed of ship, III/sec)

2h
roe omcm. use ONLY
' FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

 

Figure 13. Relationship Between Magnetic Reynolds Number Satisfying the Condi-
tions which Minimize the Magnetic Field and Frequency of Moving
Magnetic Field, Based on the Total Length and Depth of Sea Below
the Ship as Parameters (Source: Bibliography 10)

Key:
(1) v0 (Frequency of moving magnetic field C/sec)
(2) Total length of ship

. .'.’7.()

'00:)

(2...! x; ~1-u‘ .

 

Figure la. Relationship of Magnetic Reynolds and Minimum Magnetic Field When
the Ship Is Traveling on Surface (Source: Bibliography 10)

Key:

(1) 3min (minimum magnetic field. gauss)

Rm and minimum magnetic flux Jensityi 3,1“, is as shown in Figure 14; when

Rm - 4.120, Bm9 must be 0.146 ("b/m ). It is conjectured that 3min should be
about 0.1 (“b/m ) throughout a considerably wide range of km. The relationship
between Rm and electric conductivity of the working fluid is as shown in Figure 15.
He can see that by using lithium for smaller ships with total length of 5.33 (m),
Rm will approach 5.120. Figure 16 shows the relationship between electrical
coefficiegcz (ne) and dimensionless value r; r is expressed as r - kh (2+2

(m2 + 1) 1 ; when Rm - «.120, kh - 0.309, then r - 1. From above, it is

assumed that a ship with a total length of 5.33:, magnetic flux density of
approximately 0.1wb/m2, moving wave frequency of 503:, and lithium as working

25
son OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A
p—a
V
tI/m)

  

uné

'5 no"
I '1 n tuna?”-

Figure 15. Relationship Between Conductivity of Working Fluid and Magnetic
Reynolds Number, Which Satisfies the Conditions Hinimizing the
Magnetic Field, With the Total Length of the Ship as Parameter
(Source: Bibliography 10)

Key:
(1) (Conductivity of working fluid 0/1!) (3) Bismuth

(2) Lithium (lo) Total length of ship

 

Figure 16. Relationship Between Electricial Efficiency and Dimensionless y
(Source: Bibliography 10)

Key: (1) Electrical efficiency ne

fluid, will have a 33 percent efficiency and travel at 30 knots. Iliwever. since
the nelting point of lithium is 179'c, there are problems with respect to energy
sources for liquifying lithium and nembrane materials. For this reason, mercury
may be substituted; but. although the problems of energy source and membrane nay
be solved, this will reduce the electrical conductivity by 10-fold and thrust
will drop by 2.6 times and the speed will fall below 30 knots. Therefore. in
order to use mercury as a working fluid and maintain the speed of 30 knots. we
must increase the frequency by 10 tines or nagnetic flux density by 1.6 times.
Moreover, the calculation in the above study is done on the supposition that the
entire peristaltic notion energy of the menbrane is converted to the notion energy
of the fluid being transported. Therefore. let us briefly examine the character-
istics of the peristaltic pump. Shapiro and others have been conducting a study

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of peristaltic pump with long wavelength at low Reynolds numbers.12 According
to their study, the relationship between pressure and flux based on the assumed
two-dimensional plane model and the pump efficiency (3) are as follows:

(l-¢')
U 0. - 0.
"9'52 )éééﬁr. "3%!

Here, Ap, represents pressure per unit wavelength; 8 - Q/bc; 6, average flux
per cycle: C. speed of peristaltic motion; b, amplitude; a, the position of
membrane from the central axis when b - 0; l, wavelength. u, coefficient of
viscosity: 0 - b/a. In addition, in the case of axial symmetry model, the re-
lationship between pressure and flux as well as pump efficiency are as follows:

exam—(em:
' “Lim— 9/92)

but,

4464'
“WWW—W.
'[4+4(l-¢-)*+10¢'+1¢'+.gw]

eusgego' 9_ D____
. "h,“ :a'C(2é-5"-¢’)

 

Figure 17 shows the relationship between dimensionless flux and pump efficiency.
From the figure we can assume that, despite the relatively narrow range, effi-
ciency can be raised considerably by expanding the amplitude. Shapiro and others
have compared the results of their analysis with Latham's experimental results.
Figure 18 is a simple diagram of Latham's experimental apparatus. The test tube
is of 1.3 (mm) thick transparent vinyl chloride; at an average position, it is
in the shape of a rectangle, 63.5 x 7.6 (mm). The fundamental wave multiplied
by integers, approaching the sine curve. is produced by adjusting 32 pairs of
fingers attached to the rotary ring. Figure 19 shows the test results in the
case of 6-fold high waves at 6 - 1/3: the vertical axis shows the measured pres-
sure value (0px), made dimensionless by the pressure added at the tine of zero
flux. From this figure, we observe that when the Reynolds numbers are within
the range of R < 0.2, theoretical and experimental results agree well; however,

27
FINICNNHCJAI.1EHE(NVLY
Key:
(1) Efficiency (3) Cylinder model
(2) Two-dilensionsl plane model '

 

Figure 18. General Disgrel of Testing Device
(s) plane; (b) details of cross section A-A
(Source: Bibliography 12)

Key: (5) Rotsry ring

(1) Tank (6) 32 pairs of fingers
(2) Control vslve (7) Vinyl tube

(3) Fluxneter (8) Finger

(4) Flexible band (9) Teflon slider
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 19. Comparison Between Theoretical and Experimental Values
(Source: Bibliography 12)

Key: (1) Theoretical

within the range of R > 0.2, the two do not agree and the performance of the
pump declines. Also. when R - 38. we asst-e that the performance of the pup
will decline radically due to effects of inertia. Before Neuringer's induc-
tion-type electromagnetic compressor can be used as a propulsion mechanism,

it is necessary to study the above-mentioned characteristics of the peristaltic
motion pump and the problems attached to the working fluid.

3. 2 Conduction-type Propulsion

Home and Nishiyama have proposed a method using the action of working fluid
within the U-shape tube and the resonance phenomenon of impressa" electromag-
netic force as illustrated in Figure 20.13 This is an electric conduction system
which requires magnets and electrodes. and its pump principle is same as that of
dual alternating pump. Namely, as the figure shows, the electromagnetic force
flows clockwise and, when the liquid column moves in the same direction by the
same force. the pressure at valves 3 and 4 increases. allowing one directional
valve lo to open and seawater to flow out in the direction shown in the figure.
Also, the pressures at valves 1 and 2 will decrease. allowing valve 1 to open
and seawater to flow in. When the liquid column fully rises along one of the
two sides of the U-shape tube and current from the battery is reversed by a nc-ac
inverter, the reverse action will take place; i.e.. the seawater will flow in
and out through the valves 2 and 3, and continuous pumping action can take
place. The action equation of the working fluid in this method is expressed as
follows:
2
mjt—;+2 pgsx+uf - P-T

29
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 20. General Diagraa of Electric Conducting Propulsion System Using the
Action of the Fluid Coluln Within the U-shape Tube and the Resonance
Phenolenon of Electromagnetic Force (Source: Bibliography 13)

Key: (5) Seawater

(1) Valve 1 (6) Valve 6

(2) Valve 2 (7) Valve 3

(3) Magnet (8) Battery

(4) Mercury . (9) DC-Ac inverter

In the above equation, the first member of the left side of the equation repre-
sents inertia; the second, restoring force; the third. loss in flow. The first

menber of the right side represents input aagnetic force; the second, thrust
force. In order to examine the qualitative characteristics of thrust force of

this method. let us suppose that pf _ c %E* T _ K gﬁ’ P _ 0(3-3 %%)BV. B _ 30

sin wt. But 8 will stand for electric field; B, magnetic flux density;
8, tube cross section area; V, values of iapreased electronagnetic force;

0, conductivity; pg, specific gravity. Based on the above supposition, our
attempt to solve the action equation and find the output ratio (r) against

maximum output and its efficiency (n) would be as follows:

C

1+...
5 ell‘V
. _....,.--,}___c__.
r ('“)(‘*7uvv*wv).

t-l/(l a CIEXI +k'an'lr'+€/ol"") .

and k/oBZV where efficiency becones laxinum would be

.. _C"_C'— ._ I
"'m ‘_\/'.w=v(“_71gw)

30
FIMI(Mﬂﬂ(]AI.lEﬂ§(ﬂWlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. the ratio of maxim-I output—- <Pout> men-each at c to the naximm
output at c - 0. or <Pout> Bag. will be (1 + c/anzv)-1; <Pout> us: will move to

rho point where 032V - l+clol V. Vigurn 21 shows efficiency rate and the rela-
tionship between output and load. using the coefficiency of loss in flow as the
parameter. The following is assumed from the diagram: a) Efficiency and output
decrease gradually after passing their respective maximum points; b) the point
of maximum efficiency is on the side of low load rather than on the maximum out-
put point, but with the increase in the loss of flow, both points approach one
another; c) the maxim output point exists where the load is greater than the
electromagnetic force created by reverse electric force: d) the loss in flow
greatly decreases efficiency and output. Figure 22 shows the experimental re-
sults of a simple electromagnetic pup system. (The length of electrodes is
longer than that of magnetic poles, and no consideration is given to decrease
the loss in flow.) From the figure, we see that the efficiency reaches its
maxim when output is relatively small and that it decreases with the increase
in output. Also, it is acknowledged that the point of maxim- efficiency moves
toward the direction of larger outputs as the speed of the alternating action
of the mercury column increases. From the above qualitative analysis and ex-
periment. further studies must be made of l) quantitative indication method for
each member of the action equation of the liquid column and 2) the most appro-
priate shape for the cross section of the driving portion based on the results
of the quantitative analysis. When this is done we believe it is possible to
build a propulsion .mechanism with 10 percent efficiency based on this method.

f7

 

o 05 1 ‘5 2—7? s

Figure 21. Relationships Between Efficiency Output and Load With Plow Loss as
Parameter

Key: (1) Curve

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 2‘11)!th
, W () --.5(""m:)
-' '.\\H67K°WWI
Hiaﬁ-Wm)
MINE/m)

(2)

8' 890003712)

   
   
    
 

Figure 22. Relationship Between Efficiency and Output. Uith the Speed of
Colman of Mercury as Parameter (Source: Bibliography 13)

Key: (1) Speed of column of mercury (2) (Gauss)

 
  

{IE (5)

[Egg] "mm
’.‘ 5 ’5

Figure 23. General Diagram of Rater Jet Hethod Using Magnetic Sucking Force
(Source: Bibliography lb)

Key:
(1) Hater current (6) Magnet
(2) Entrance diffuser (5) Discharge nozzle

(3) Particle injection opening

lo. Solid-liquid Two-phase Plow Method

McGowan and others have proposed a hydro-emetic waterjet. seen in Figure 23,
based on the principle that when micron sire iron particles. nixed into the
seawater within the channel of a propulsion nechanism. are accelerated free
the nagnetic field, the seawater receives force due to viscous action.”

In the f igure, the seawater flows in fron section 0-0 and slurry-state solid
particles are injected at section 2-2; the water is then acted upon by the
nagnetic field in the channel between sections 3-3 and 6-5 and jetted out

from section 6-6. The iron particles nova in the direction of the channel

walls under the influence of magnetic field induced radius directional force
within the solenoidal nagnet; they are then recovered by a novable belt-like
mechanism at section c-c. HcGowan and others have calculated the propulsion

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics of this system, based on the values indicated in Table A and
on the following suppositions: l) The speed distribution of the fluid at the
entrance of the flow is parabolic; 2) particles are evenly injected at the in-
jection section; and 3) the total loss of weterhsad from section c-c to sec-
tion 6-6 can be ignored. Figure 2b shows the relationship between thrust
force and particle density based on particle diameter and magnetic flux den-
sity as parameters. From the figure we see that the thrust increases as the
diameter of a particle and flux density increase. Also. Figure 25 indicates
the relationship between thrust per sass flux of the particle and the speed of
the seawater at the entrance with flux density as parameter; it is acknowledged
that when the speed at the entrance exceeds 100 (cmlsec), the thrust will de-
crease radically. The relationship between thrust per unit weight of the pro-
pulsion mechanism and concentration of the particles is as shown in Figure 26:
it is obvious that only low thrust is obtained for the weights. For this rea-
son, it is assumed that this method has application only within the range of
control propulsion devices for major propulsion systems.

Table 4. Values Used in Calculating Propulsion Performances

Fluid's inflow speed on the center line. Uin (cm/sec) 10-5000
Radius of coil, rs (cm) 1

Length of coil (en) 10
Distance between magnetic surface and section 3-3 10
Maximum magnetic flux density, Bmax (kilo gauss) 50-500
Diameter of particle, dp (u) 1-30
Particle density at entrance (number of particle/cma) ,lat10”- l x 10s

1"

       

0.022 —
- mo“ uzd‘ mo' ma’(3)

”mam-3mm” (1.)

Figure 2A. Relationship of Propulsion System's Thrust Against Particle Density

and Particle Diameter (Source: Bibliography 14)
Key:
(1) Thrust (kg) (3) Kilo genes
(2) Micron (b) Particle density (number of particle]:
33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0;}. (an/sec)

Figure 25. Relationship of Thrust Per Particle Mass and Flu: Against Magnetic
Flux Density and Fluid Entrance Speed (Source: Bibliography 16)

Key:
(1) Thrust/particle uses and flux (l/hour) (3) Kilogauss
(2) Number of particle/cl3

9

(1)

'f‘

e
8

Jun/um

 

Figure 26. Relationship of Thrust Per Height of Propulsion Systen Against -
Magnetic Flux Density and Particle Density (Source: Bibliography 16)

Key:
(1) Thrust/weight of propulsion systela (3) Hicron
(2) Kilogsuss (6) Particle density (umber of

particle/«3)

5. Conclusion

He have studied the various electromagnetic propulsion Iethods uhic have advan-
tages under suhnerged conditions (especially. in extremely deep waters) over
conventional propeller Iethode; ve have categorized each system by working
fluids. studied the principles involved. propulsion perforaances, and some
probleastic areas. As a result, it became clear that the lethod using sea-
water has lover propulsion efficiency due to poor conductivity of seawater,

and that higher efficiency lust await the develop-cut of superconducting Iagnets.
Thereupon. a method using liquid metals as a small-scale propulsion lechanisu

3h
roe omau. use ONLY
FOR40FFN3AL.USE(NHLY

which uses a low magnetic field of several thousand genes was conceived. As a
result of our study of the propulsion performances, we can be hopeful that,
with further improvements, a propulsion system with efficiency for greater
than 10 percent can be realized. In addition, we have discovered that the
solid-liquid two-phase flow system that mixes iron particles with seawater

can be used only for something like the control propulsion device for major
propulsion systems because its thrust per propulsion weight, even if iron par-
ticles can be recovered efficiently, is small. Prom above, we believe that

in order to develop a small propulsion system which is desirable for marine
exploration, we must thoroughly examine the liquid metal method and accurately
grasp the problems which hinder its actualization.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Phillips, 0.M.: "The Prospects for Magnetohydrodynamic Ship Propulsion,"
J. Ship 325., 5-1. (1962-3). 9. 63

2. Friauf, M. 3.: "Electromagnetic Ship Propulsion," A.S.N.E.J., (1961-2),
p 139

3. Doragh, L.R.A.: "Magnetohydrodynamic Ship Propulsion Using Superconduct-
ing Magnets," Soc of Naval Arch. and Marine Engrs., Annual Meeting, New
York, (1963-11). p. 370

a. Way, 8.: "Propulsion of Submarines by Lorentz Forces in the Surrounding
Sea," A.S.M. E. Paper 66-HA/ENER-7, (1966-11)

5. Ray, S. and Devlin, C.: "Prospects for the Electromagnetic Submarine,”
AIAA Paper 76-432, (1967)

6. Way, 8.: "Electromagnetic Propulsion for Cargo Submarines," J. Bydronautics,
2-10 (1968-10). p. 1:9

7. Kimurs, Momma: "A Model of an Electromagnetic Jet Propulsion Vessel,"
preparatory manuscript for the National Conference of Electrical Society,
[121-831 (1970-3). p. 1098

8. Minakswa and three others: “Basic Research on Extremely Low Temperature
Electromagnetic Propulsion," Kobe University of Merchantile Marine Bulletin,

Second Classification No 20, (1973-1), p. 253

9. Neuringer. J. L.. and three others: "Theoretical Investigation of a Peri-
staitic Magneto-Fluid Dynamic Induction Compressor-I" J. Ship Res., 8-6
(1965-3). P. 56

10. Neuringer, J. L., and three others: "Theoretical Investigation ofa Peri-
stcltic Magneto-Fluid Dynamic Induction Compressor-II," J. Ship Res., 9-1

(1965-6). p. 56

35
ron omcm use ONLY
11.

12.

13.

14.

9711
C80:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Resler, 3.1.. Jr..: 'Magnetohydrodynnic Propulsion for Sen Vehicles,"
Seventh Synposiun, Naval Hydrodynnics. Uncanventionel Propulsion, Rona,

Italy. (1968-8), p. 1437

Shapiro, A. IL, and two others: "Peristsltic Puping Hith Long Have-
lengths at Low Reynolds Number," J. Fluid Hech., 37-4 (1969), p. 799

Home. Nishiym: "Electromagnetic Propulsion (using liquid netsl)."
preparatory manuscript for the National Conference of Machinery Society,
110710-15, (1971-10). P 231

McGowan, J .G. and Hurthy. S.N.B.: "A Feasibility Study of s Hydronegnetic
"sterjet Propulsion System," J. Hydromtics, 5-1 (1971-1). p. 31

8329/1627 El!)

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY