FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10425

1 April 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(FOUO 3/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in bracaets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in :he first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itens are as
given by source.

'lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the [1.5. Govermnent.

COPYRIQT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICT- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIIE REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(rouo 3/82)

CONTENTS

BIA

PEOPLES' REPUBLIC 01’ MA.

PRC Seeks Aid in Selling Enriched Uranium

(mm 83mm. 27 Feb 82) OIOOOOIOIICOOOOIOID;OIOOO0.000C l
EASTWOPE
CZECHOSIDVAKIA
Production Technique for Breeder Reactor Fuel muente Described
(Hem Lendepersw, et 9.1.; JADRRIA man. no n, 1981) ... 3
WEST EUROPE
ITALY
Cecreo Plant Reatarted After Shutdown
(ATmEmmn’ 15 Dec 81) COOOI00......IOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOO 19
Gem-so Pouer Pleat Starts Operetion
(Am B INDUSTMA, 15 J“ 82) eeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeee 21
Puslie Region Approves Two Possible Sites for Pover Plant
(AmMOEIIDlmIA’ 15 Doc 81) .00.0.0.0..DOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIOOO 23
RIM Steam Generator Prototype
(Amamn’ 15 J“ 82) O.9OI.IOIIOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOIOOO 25
- a - [III - WW - 141. P000]

l-‘OROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PBOPLES' mastic 0? CHINA

PRC SEEKS AID Ill 8mm mm (1mm

0H281155 Tokyo rumour semen: in Japanese 27 Feb 82 Morning Edition p 1

[Text] China. a nuclear power. seeks to export enriched uran'ius. heevy water and other
nuclear-related naterial and has sought the help of Hambeni Corporation. Hitsui and
Coapany. and several other sajor Japanese trading iirns in selling the- to third countries.
it was disclosed on 26 February. According to the trading cnpanies. the request was node
recently by the Metals and Minerals lnport end Export Corporation of China. which handles
aineral resources. to their branch offices in China.

So far the trading conpanies have reacted passively to the request. saying: "we are
afraid that these nuclear-related netarials nay be used to cake nuclear baits." In any
case. this nave by China. a country troubled by a shortage of foreign exchange. is likely
to create a big international stir because it can be taken as an action aised at joining
the ranks of nuclear uterine-exporting nations by capitalizing on its free position

as a aomesber of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (m).

According to najor trading conpany sources. Chine said in its request: "Since we have
alnoat conpleted our atoeic boeb production plans. we are requesting your help in selling
heoVy water and enriched uraniu thatwewill produce in the future to those comtri. that
have atoeic energy powerplanta.“ Chins sounded out Japanese trading fins handling
sultinational transactions on the export of the saterials to user countries other than
Japan because Japan already has contracts with the United States and other supplier
countries for the supply of low enriched uraniu for its nuclear powerplants sufficient
to neet denand until 2003 and also because Japan has no power reactors of the Canadian-
developed Candu type which use heavy water. |

It is believed that the Japanese trading coepaniea received the request because they play
an isportant role in GliM'l trade and have past records of trilsteral trade. or of
handling trade transactions between two foreign countries without involving Japan.

At one tine in the past. a certain najor trading coepany was an»; headway in its nego-
tiations for the export of heavy water to India and Pakistan. which have Candu-type
reactors. but it had to give up its plan of concluding the contracts when it net with
intervention from the United States. which is keeping an eye on nuclear proliferation.
Because of this. trading firms have so for shown no owe to proceed with negotiations.

An official of a sajor company obviously expressed caution when he said: "It is possible
that a deal nay result in promoting nuclear proliferation and in trading coepanies
risking being denounced an merchants of death." However. he also showed eagerness to
positively strike a deal. saying: "If it can be guaranteed that the enriched uranium

In question is used for peaceful purposes. I would say it is all right to approve the
deal as resources trade."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

According to an official atomic energy souzce. China has no arctic-power generating
facilities. but it has conducted atomic bod, explosion tests an acre than 100 occasions
to date and reportedly has large-scale uraniua enrichent facilities and plutoniu pro-
duction equipment for aaking atonic boobs in the Xinj iang Uygur Autonouous Region. It
appears that high enriched uranium is being produced there and that a large quantity of
heavy water is being used for asking plutonir- of high purity.

 

China appears to seek foreign exchange earnings by effectively utilizing these facilities
and equip-ant to nuke enriched uranium and heavy water for export. new that it has completed
its etonic bomb production plan for the tine being. One of the safer countries in the
world blessed with natural uraniu. thoriiaa and other nuclear fuel resources. China also
appears to be eager to seize the east of its doaestic resources.

iiowever. since the products in question are node in the process of asking atomic baits.
countria importing then can. with comparative ease. produce atomic bats should they
choose to develop nuclear arns. nigh enriched uranium in particular is a dangerous aaterial
because under certain conditions it can be easily turned into atuic bombs merely by
attaching- a triggering device.

For this reason. international trade involving these products is subject to strict checks

by the International Atosic Energy Agency (IAEA) . The Japanese group represented by Hitsui
and the Power Reactor and nuclear Fuel Development Corporation imported 2 tons of heavy
water fro. China in Noveder 1980 for use as noderator [gensohuzail in the autoaatic transfer
reactor "i’ugen." but only after having convinced the IAEA of the peaceful nature of the
purpose.

Al- inportant point about China's latest "export strategy." however. is the: it is not
necessarily for peaceful purposes. as one can see free its previous attempt to export

heavy water to such countries as India and Pakistan. which both had a strong desire :o sake
atoalc boabs. Aaong the nations possessing nuclear arms. China is unique in that it has
not ratified the "PT and is not a member of the IAEA. ‘i'tose nations which are formally
unable to obtain cooperation in their nuclear arns building efforts. eit'ner fro. the United
States or f roa any European country bound by the m. will be greatly interested in the
Chinese love.

COPYRIGHT: Mainlchi Shimbunaha 1982

cso: 5100/2123

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PRODUCTION TECHNIQUE FOR BREEDER REACTOR FUEL ELEMENTS DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA ENERGIB in Czech No ll,'l981 pp 388-395

[Article in Czech by Hanna Landspersky and Milan Tympl, Institute of Nuclear
Research, Rex, and Vaclav Pinkas, Institute of Nuclear Fuels, Prague: "A
Laboratory Line for Preparation of Coarse-Fraction Sintered 002 Spherules by
the Sol-Gel Method, and Preparation of Fuel Elements by Vibratory Compaction"]

[Text] Between 1970 and 1979, Czechoslovakia developed

and tested on a laboratory scale a technology for the pro-
duction of oxide fuel by the sol-gel method. As part of
this research a semicontinuous laboratory line for the
so-called "coarse fraction," with spheruls sizes from 0.7

to 1.0 mm, was built, and efforts were made to develop and
test a technology for producing the so-called "fine frac-
tion," whose preparation involves a number of difficulties
resulting from specifications regarding its properties. In
conjunction with development of the sol-gel nethod for oxide
fuel production, Czechoslovakia has also built an experimen-
tal facility for the preparation of fuel elements by vibra-
tory compaction of sol-gel materials using the "sphere pack"
process. In the process of research, the preparation of
shortened model fuel elements with core lengths of 100 and
600 mm and densities about 80 percent of the theoretical
maximum was tested.

1. Introduction

Almost since the very beginning of the development of nuclear power, pellets of
sintered uranium oxide have been used as the starting fuel material in designing
fuel elements for both thermal and breeder reactors. Inthe course of time,
experience with pellet production has been acquired and pelletizing process
technology has been well mastered.

However, at the beginning of the 1960's, more detailed investigation of the be-
havior of fuel material for breeder reactors indicated that the characteristics
of the fuel cycle in such reactors does not allow straightforward application to
them of the experience acquired with the first generation of reactors. In most
breeder reactors, plutonium is the plarned fissile material; because of its cost,
it becomes necessary to increase burnup and assure the fastest possible recycling

F!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂl!(ﬂ§l¥
ltllCﬂﬂﬂC]Al.lEﬂi(ﬂ§LY

of the fuel. These requirements lead to a number of major complications which
were not considered critical in the fuel cycle of thermal reactors.

The high cost of plutonium, safety concerns in working with it, and the radio-
active character of the material is to be recycled, requiring that the process
be remote-controlled with maximum possible automation, have led to the develop-
ment of new approaches to fuel preparation. including the so-called "sphere
pack" process, which involves preparation of spherical fuel material by the
sol-gel method and its vibrationcompaction.

The need for a lower density in the fuel for breeder reactors (80-85 percent
of the theoretical maximum), the successful mastery of sphere preparation by
the sol-gel method. the simplicity of the process. allowing remote control, and
economic considerations. all contribute to the great promise of this process.

In recent years, the method of preparing dispersed fuels called the "sol-gel"
method has been developed abroad; the method successfully solves certain prob-
lems stemming from the nature of the breeder reactor fuel cycle. This hydro-
metallurgical process is relatively simple and is amenable to remote control.
The fuel is formed into microspherules of the oxide, carbide or carbonitride

of fissionable or fertile materials, which are loaded into the fuel-element
jackets and vibration-compacted to the required density. This process elimi-
nates some of the mechanical complexity of the equipment, material consumption
is the same as or less than that in classical pelletizing methods, dust produc-
tion is decreased, and the filling of the jackets involves no risk of damaging
their inner walls. Published results of radiation experiments conducted abroad
have indicated that vibration-compacted fuel elements are suitable for use in
reactor cores.

2. Preparation of Fuel Materials by the Sol-Gel Method

A variant of the sol-gel method called the "interior gelatinization method" has
been developed in Czechoslovakia. During 1970-1978 the basic research was
conducted and the problems of the chemistry of gelatinisation, leaching of the
gels. their conversion to xerogels and their heat processing into the final
product, sintered uranium oxide, were solved [1-9]. The findings have made it
possible to design and build a laboratory line which produces one 0.5-1 kg lot
of the "coarse fraction" per shift.

The wet part of the procedure for producing uranium oxide spherules by interior
gelatinization uses the principles of colloid chemistry [1,2]. Under certain
circumstances, the colloidal solution is converted to a gel, i.e.. a solid,
elastic material with the characteristics of the solid .tate. The gel has the
same volume and shape as the colloidal solution which preceded it.

In the first stage of the process. a solution of uranyl nitrate is produced,
after which urea and urotropin [hexamethylenetetramine] are added to it. This
mixture is temperature-unstable: at low temperatures it remains liquid for a
long time. but when heated to 7o-9o°c it rapidly solidifies into a gel. If the
gelatinization reaction takes place in a drop, the gel forms a solid sphere,
from which impurities (residual urea, urotropin, ammonium nitrate and the like)

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
must be removed before further treatment. As a result, the particles are first
rinsed to remove any adhering residue of the oil used as a dispersing medium,
then leached in dilute ammonia water. This produces spherules consisting pri-
marily of ammonium polyuranate. The rinsed spherulss are then dried, calcined
and finally sintered at a high temperature in a hydrogen or argon-hydrogen
atmosphere to produce the final product: dense, solid spherules of uranium
oxide of precisely spherical shape.

3. Preparation of Fuel Elements by Vibration Compaction

One promising method of preparing fuel elements for breeder reactors, called the
"sphere pack" method, is a process involving low-energy vibration compaction of
the material prepared by the sol-gel method [10-12]. The principle of this
method is that by suitable choice of the particle size of the material to be
compacted with reference to the diameter of the jackets and the vibration fre-
quency and vibration process conditions, the ultimate density of the finished
column of material can be controlled very precisely.

The choice of particle size and number of fractions is based on theoretical con-
ceptions of optimal compaction conditions, according to which the size of the
particles is controlled, compacting a certain number of size fractions of mater-
ial to obtain the desired density.

Compaction can be classified in terms of the number of fractions, as described
below.

a. Single Component

According to Ayer [13], the compaction effectiveness P is a function of the
ratio D/Dl, where D is the inner diameter of the jacket and D1 is the diameter

of the spherical particles. The effective compaction volume P1 is the part

of the total volume of the element which is filled by the compacted material,

in the present case, coarse-fraction spheres of diameter DI. Figure 1 shows

the packing effectiveness for spheres of diameter D; as a function of the

ratio D/Dl. It is clear from the figure that when D/Dl 2 10 the curve becomes
approximately linear, and its limiting value of 0.635 indicates that the maxi-
mum attainable density with spheres of one size is 63.5 percent of the theoret-
ical maximum. This limiting density of a vibration-compacted column is of course
insufficient for nuclear fuel, and accordingly two or more fractions of different
sites must be used.

b. Two-Component

Various graphic and mathematical models have been proposed and developed for
multicomponent compaction and for the relationship between D, ])1and 02, where
D; is the diameter of the spheres of the finer fraction. Following references
10 and 11, the limiting value for a two-component system is calcuated as 0.865,
i.e., the maximum achievable density of a column of spheres of two sizes is

86.5 percent of the theoretical density. This value is satisfactory for breeder
reactor fuel. Figure 2 shows one of the graphs published by Ayer [13] for

5
anICMHHCIAI.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE1DNLY

3". -- -_ ._.__.._..

"""y['.'.7'~‘
$

.00....h.‘ I” w.
.-n/p,

 

Figure 1. Relationship of P1 (percent Figure 2. Relationship of P1 (percent-

of theoretical maximum) to ratio D/Dl age of theoretical maximum) to DID]

for single-component compaction with ratio DID; constant (according to
reference 13)

two-component packing. from which it is possible to rend off sufficiently de-
tailed relationships between the diameters D. D] and 03.

6. A Laboratory Line for Preparing the Coarse Fraction

In accordance with the requirements of vibrathxxcompacting, trial preparation
of the coarse fraction of compact uranium oxide spheres aimed at a diameter of
approximately 0.8 mm. The principles of the preparation. drying and heat treat-
ment of the gel materials have been described in a number of earlier publica-
tions [1-9]; here we are concerned with our experience in the construction of

a line capable of producing 0.5-1 kg of sintered uraniua oxide per shift.

Figure 3 is a diagram of a line for production of the coarse fraction, consist-
ing of the following components: solution preparation, dispersion of drops,
gelatinization, tempering of the gel, rinsing away of the gelatinizing medium,
leaching, drying, calcination and sintering.

Figure 3. Design of line for preparation of coarse fraction

Key:

1. Gelstinization column 9. Tempering column

2. Gelatinizing solution tank 10. Baskets for rinsing and leaching
3. Dispersing head gel particles

6. Overflow 11. Rinsing unit

5. Constant-temperature vessel. pump 12. Washer

6. Hydrolift 13. Distillation apparatus

7. Sphere separator 16. Calcination furnace

8. Constant-temperature vessel, pump 15. Sintering furnace
6 16. Container for aintered 002 apherulea

FIIICHNHC1A1.UEI:(M‘LY
4.1 Preparation of Solution, Dispersion and Gelatinization

The gelatiniration solution is prepared by dissolving weighed quantities or
uranyl nitrate and urea in demineralized water in a stirred reaction vessel

to produce a 2!! concentration of uranium in the final solution and a 2:1 molar
ratio of urea to uranium. After conplete solution, filtration and cooling to
a temperature of lO'C (e.g. in s bath of ethyl alcoholand dry ice), a weighed
quantity of solid urotropin is added bit by bit so that the local t-perature
nowhere rises above 10'C while it is being dissolved by stirring. The solution
of uranyl nitrate and urea is prepared in advance in large quantities and
stored, while the gelatinization solution with dissolved urotropin is prepared

in the quantity required for one batch; the ultimate molar ratio of urotropin
to uranium is 1:5.

The quantity of gelatinizstion solution required for one batch is introduced
all at one tine into the cooled gelatinirstion solution tank, located above the
dispersing head of the gelatinization and tempering colums. This arrangement
can be seen from Figure 3, while the dimensions of the equipment, largely con-
structed from comercially available glass parts from the Kevalier concern en-
terprise in Sazava nad Sazavou, are shown in Figure 6. The individual compo-
nents can be purchased directly according to the data given in the catalog.

The dispersing head, a diagran of which isshown in Figure 5, consists of a
cooled solution tank and a cooled tube with a stopcock, at the opening of which
is a set of drop-producing jets nounted in a rubber holder which is attached
to the opening. The temperature of the coolant is naintained at 'S' in a
constant-temperature vessel. The drip jets are stainless steel tubes, whose
inner diameters, along with the density and viscosity of the solution, the
height of the solvent column and the surface tension on the surface of the
spheres determines the drop size. The approximate relationship between drop
size and the inner diameter of the drop jets in our system is given in Table 1.

Table 1. Inner Diatneter of Jets Used To Prepare Coarse-Fraction Particles

Jet diameter, mm Diameter of sintered spherules, II
0.21. 0.7
0.52 0.87
0.79 1.0

The drop jets are inserted into the head of the gelatinizing column above the
level of the gelatinizing nedium. The gelatinising medium, in the present case
a. silicone oil, passes from a constant-temperature vessel through cock 5 (Figure
lo) and flows both into the gelatinicing column itself , where the gelatinirstion
occurs, and into branch 10, through which the gel spheres exit. As a result of
the surface tension between the two liquid phases, the individual drops of
gelatiniring solution become spherical in shape and are gelatinized by rapid
heating to 89‘c in the column. The time required for gelatinization is about
20 seconds. Hydrolift 8 carries the spheres my to device 16 which separates
them fron the liquid. The separator [14], which is diagrammed in Figure 6, con-
sists of a funnel across which are stretched steel wires which trap the spheres

MOMMUSEONLY
F0!!DFFHJA1.USE(NVLY

 

Figure 5. Gelatinizing and Tampering Columns

1. Cross, Js [nominal inside diameter] 15.
80

2. Tube, J: 80, length 1,500 mm 16.

3. Reducer, Ja 80/50

a. T piece, J31 50, J32 25, length 17.

300 mm 18.
5. Stopcock, Je 25 19.
6. Reducer, Ja 50/25 20.
7. U tube, 33 25/15 21.
8. T piece, Ja 15, length 100 mm 22.
9. Laboratory stopcock, inner diamter 23.
3 mm 24.
10. Tube, Ja 15, length 800 mm
11. Curved tubing, Ja 10 25.
12. Elbov, Js 80 26.
13. Reducer, 80/25 27.
14. Modified filter with reducer, Je
80/25 a.
b.

Key:

 

Intake and return tubea for oil,
Je 25

Particle separator of telpering
column

I piece, J: 50, length 300 mm
Tube, Ja 50, length 500 mm

T piece, Ja 50, length 300 mm
Reducer. Je 50/25

Reducer, Je 25/15

U tube. Js 15

T piece, J: 15, length 100 mm
Laboratory stopcock, inner diameter
3 mm

Tube, Je 15, length 800 mm

Bent tube, Js 10

Reducer. Je 50/25

Constant temperature vessel
Conpreseed air

Note: Total height of gelatinization

column 2,570 mm (without drip
equipment, about 500 mm high);
total height of tempering column
1,550 mm.

Figure 5. Disperaing head

a. Coolant outlet
b. Coolant inlet
c. Diapereing jets

FOIlOFIﬂC1A1.lIﬂE(HVLY
I

Figure 6. Drop separator

and allow the liquid to flow through and return to the constant-temperature
vessel. The spheres roll by their own weight along the inclined, stretched
wires, and fall into the tempering column. This colunn works by the same
principle as the gelatinizing column, but the temperature is 35'C and its
purpose is uniform, slow cooling of the spheres to a temperature lower than
that of the gelatinizing column so that the gel will mature into solid spheres.
This homogenization of the gel into solid spheres is the essential condition
for their further successful processing. If the spheres are not made intern-
ally homogeneous, the; powder during further processing, particularly during
drying and calcination, spoiling the entire batch. It is not necessary, of
course, that the tempering column be filled with the same medium as the gela-
tinization column. After separation of the phases in a second continuous
separator, the spheres fall into a basket in which further processing takes
place.

4.2 Rinsing and Leaching of the Gel
The gel material from the separator is accumulated in baskets (Figure 7).

These baskets have walls made of sheet stainless steel with openings measuring
0.1 mm and are filled to a specified height. After filling, the basket is sub-
merged in a tank containing carbon tetrachloride or some other medium, which
rinses away silicone oil adhering to the surfaces of the spherules. After all
of the gelatinizing solution is converted to gel, silicone oil is completely

*Note: Cocks 9 and 24 feed air into the hydrolift; the air bubbles make possi-
ble transport of the spheres at high gelatinization column outputs. The silicon
oil is fed to the gelatinization and tempering columns by a gear pump in the
temperature-controlled vessel, and the flow rate can be regulated. The silicone
oil Lukooil H100 is used as the gelatiniring medium.

9
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USB!DNLY
FINICNW"C1AI.Loe‘ONLN

removed from the spheres by successive
immersion of the basket into three con-
tainers of carbon tetrachloride.

Studies of the kinetics of the rinsing
process indicated that the minimum
amount of time required for satisfac-
tory rinsing at room temperature is

15 minutes. At a temperature of about
40°C, the rinsing time can be decreased
to about 5 minutes without any evident
changes in the mechanical properties
of the gel [3]. After draining and
drying for about 15 minutes the bas-
kets and their contents are placed in
the leaching solution.

Following gelatinisation, the gel con-

taina all the components which were

present in the liquid phase. All of

the unreacted substances, such as ex-

cess urotropin and urea, and all pro-

ducts of the reaction, primarily

ammnnium nitrate, must be removed from

the gel before it is further processed ’
into a xerogel. These products are
eliminated by leaching the batch in Figure 7. Basket for rinsing and
2.5 percent ammonia solution in a leaching of gel
leaching unit. Key: stainless steel mesh

    

sit/r0

   

nersz.

For the laboratory line we modified a commercially available agitator-type
washing machine with a screw agitator by installing a holder for the baskets
in the upper part. After all of the baskets holding the spheres from one
batch of gelatinization solution were placed in the machine, it was filled
with ammonia solution and a timer was used to turn the agitator on briefly
at preselected, pretested intervals. The time required for adequate leach-
ing of the gel was determined as a function of the intensity of agitation,
the solution temperature, and the quantities of gel and leaching solution.
In general the time required at room temperature was less than an hour.

After leaching, the baskets were allowed to drain, then each was emptied into
a feed container from which the gel was introduced into the dryer.

4.3 Calcination and Drying

Great attention was devoted tothe drying process as one of the most sensitive
operations in the processing of the gel. The initial drying method, at a
temperature of 220’C [6,5] in a controlled atmosphere of the decomposition
products of the material, was abandoned because of the time required. He
selectrd a basic drying method using the principle of azeotropic distillation

10
IM)I1OFII(1AI.I£§EZCMULY
of water with chlorinated hydrocarbons [5-7]. The first apparatus for drying
the gel particles by azeotropic distillation consisted of a heating vessel.

a reverse-flow cooler and a separator unit to separate the organic and water
phases. This design was not satisfactory. Some of the product was contami-
nated by drops of water which dropped from the coolest locations into the
heating vessel. It proved impossible to eliminate this problem by installing
baffles, and accordingly a column with a perforated bottom was installed in the
apparatus. The vapors of the organic liquid penetrated the layer of spheres,
where they partially condensed. In some locations a continuous layer of con-
densate was formed, at the top of which the water phase separated out; however.
this produced peptization of the particles. Use of a column with an overflow
plate proved to oe the best method.

This device, whose function has been described in detail in earlier publications
[6,7}, also uses the principle of azeotropic distillation. but introduction of
the overflow plateassures homogeneous drying conditions for the entire batch of
particles. In addition, it also allows control of the speed of the process. A
diagram of the device is given in Figure 8 (according to reference 6). The
operating principle is as follows. The gel particles are poured from the tank
into column 1, where they are trapped by perforated plate 4. Vapor from the

Key:
1. Column with overflow plate
2. Perforated bottom

3. Overflow
4. Mesh

5. Cone velve
6. Head

7. Particle exit from column
8. Vapor generator
9. Vapor mixture outlet
10. Condenser
11. Phase separator
12. Hater phase outlet
13. Pressure-equalizer
16. U-overflow
15. Container for gel particles
16. Cone valve
17. Transport of gel particles to column
18. Transport of gel particles to container
19. Exhaust
. 20. Temperature sensor
21. Removal of dried particles
22. Separator

 

Figure 8. Schematic of equipment for drying by aaeotropic distillation in
column with overflow plate as described in reference 6

vapor generator 8 accumulates above the plate, where it condenses. The column
fills with liquid as far as the opening of the overflow plate, over which the
liquid flows back to the vapor generator. The spheres are dried on the plate

11
FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY

by azeotropic distillation until outlet tube 9 reaches the constant temperature
of the azeotropic mixture of steam and the vapor of the organic phase. The
vapors are condensed in condenser 10, and the water and organic phases are
separated in separator 11. The water phase is removed from the apparatus,
while the organic phase is returned to the vapor generator. Initially, carbon
tetrachloride was used as the organic phase, but it was later replaced by
perchloroethylene because of the latter's higher boiling point, producing more
rapid drying.

The distilling column was 160 mm in diameter, and 5 liters of perchloroethylene
was used to dry about 1 kg of gel; drying required 60 minutes. After drying the
material was collect‘d in a holder, from which the xerogel was loaded into stain-
less steel boats and placed in the calcining apparatus.

The calcining has two main functions: it allows the grain size of the final
material to be regulated and assures uniformity and homogeneity throughout the
batch, as well as eliminating most of the volatiles, which must be removed
from the material before treatment in the sintering furnace. These highly
corrosive decomposition products would destroy the inner walls of the furnace
and the heating elements, as well as the sintering boats.

The calcining unit is a pass-through furnace made of stainless steel tubing

70 mm in diameter, with a resistance-heated heating zone (zone of maximum
temperature) about 60 cm long. The furnace has chambers at each end to assure
uniform heating and cooling of the entire batch and permitting removal of gase-
ous decomposition products from the furnace and their condensation outside.
The calcination was carried out at 550°C [8, 15] in a current of air flowing
in the opposite direction from the boats. The boats consisted of cylinders
cut in half longitudinally with perforated bottoms to allow easier entrance

of gas and rapid removal of the decomposition products from the material.

The layer of charge was 2-3 cm thick and the material was held in the maximum-
temperature zone for 2 hours. The boats were transported mechanically, and
after removal from the furnace and complete cooling the material was stored

in polyethylene containers for sintering.

5.4 Sintering Process and Properties of the Final Product

The sintering was performed in batches, using molybdenum boats measuring 7x3x3
cm in a high-temperature Heraeus tubular furnace, where the heating element was
the molybdenum tube itself. The process consisted of two parts: reduction of
the calcinate to uranium oxide, and sintering proper. The sintering conditions
had to be adjusted so thattheheating would first produce complete reduction
of the entire volume of the charge, after which sintering would proceed. The
sintering conditions were as follows: heating by 500 deg/hr to a maximum
temperature of 1,450-1,sso°c, maintenance of this temperature for 2 hours,

and cooling at a rate of 500 deg/hr. the entire reduction and sintering pro-
cess was carried out in hydrogen. If a better furnace design, assuring com-
plete, rapid removal of the reaction products and steam from the charge were
used, a mixture of hydrogen and argon or hydrogen and nitrogen could be safely
used. The sintered material was collected in a polyethylene container. The
product of this process was sintered spherulea of uranium oxide with a density
96-99 percent of the theoretical value, with sizes ranging from 0.7 to 1.0 mm

12
INNICIWHC1A1.USEGNVLY
depending on the size of the jets in the dispersing head, with a maximum deris-
tion of :5 percent from the average size, and with an average conpression strength
only slightly dependent on the sphere size. equal to 220130 N/sphere for spheres
about C.8 mm in diameter. The composition was 002.010-2.o16. with less than

100 ppm of carbon, with the grains uniformly distributed through the entire
sphere: their size depended on the calcination and sintering temperature and
was equal to about 20 microns for a calcination temperature of 550° and a
sintering temperature and was equal to about 20 microns for a calcination
temperature of 550° and a sintering temperature of 1.500°C, and they had a
characteristic residual intergranclar porosity and a pore size cf 1 micron.
Residual chlorine was below the detection threshold of 10 micron [as published].

5. Preparation of the Fine Fraction

Preparation of the fine fraction proved considerably more difficult than ini-
tially expected [16, 3]. Although the starting solutions were essentially the
same as for the coarse fraction, dispersion was an important stage of prepara-
tion whose achievement was a demanding undertaking.

The preparation of dimensionally homogeneous, relatively concentrated dispersions
with gel particle sizes about 150-250 microns required the use of a special
dispersing unit. Designing a high-quality dispersing device which meets the
required tolerances was not a simple task, and the manufacture of certain parts,
particularly the jets, was difficult. Since at the same time that the gels
were being prepared and processed it was also necessary to develop a vibration
apparatus for the final compacting of the elements, it was decided to prepare
small quantities of fine-fraction sintered spherules for this purpose by a pro-
visional method. In this case, the fine fraction was produced by stirring in

a simple device, a reactor with a heated surface, in which an emulsion of gels-
tinizing solution in a suitable organic medium had first been prepared. This
emulsion was then converted to a gel by heating to 80-90‘C, after which a poly-
dispersed mixture was obtained by a method similar to that described above,

and the required size fraction was prepared from it by sieving. This entire
procedure has been described in detail in earlier publications [16,17] and will
not be discussed further here. After finalization of a design for the line of
production of the fine fraction with a narrow sire interval (maximum deviation
:20 percent of average size), the results will be published in the same form

as has been done for the coarse fraction.

6. A Line for the Preparation of Fuel Elements by Vibration Compaction

In the experiments, we used a coarse fraction D1 with an average size of
0.8020.040 mm and a fine fraction D; with a size of 0.060:0.012 mm. The re-
search work was intended to determine the optimal conditions for compacting a
column of material 400 mm long and 5.6 an in diameter. The line consists of
the following assemblies: an electrodynamic vibration apparatusfor compacting
the column of spherules. an SHZlZ measuring unit to mointor the compaction
conditions, units for assembling the elements, including filling them with
helium (at a pressure of about 0.2 HPa) and sealing them, and units for testing
tightness and density distribution along the elements.

13
IIIICRHHC1A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.1 Vibration and Infiltration Equipment

For the experiment we used an SVUSS [State Research Institute for Machinery
Construction] vibration device whose design and production are described in
detail in reference 18. This device consists of an electrodynamic vibrator.
to whose workingplatfonmis attached a fuel element jacket, a power supply and
an SHZlZ monitoring unit. The main specifications of the unit are: maximum
amplitude of sinusoidal force 2,000 N, frequency range 500-5,000 Hz, maximum
available acceleration 1.000 m/secz. maximum load on table 5 kg. To limit
noise and to control dust from the uranium-containing material, the entire
electrodynamic vibrator is located in a sound-deadening, dust-tight box.
Figure 9 shows an overall view of the device. In tests of two-component com-
pactics, initially the particles of the 0‘ and 02 fractions tended to separate,
which had a negative effect on the final homogeneity of the column of fuel
material and thus on the final density and density distribution. This problen
was solved by adding an infiltration device [19, 20], which involved introduc-
ing a bed of D} particles with a filling tube before infiltration of the fine-
fraction spheres. The end of the filling tube, which was to be inserted into
the fuel element jacket, was perforated with holes smaller than the dimension
of the 0, fraction spheres. A diagram of the infiltration device is given in
Figure 10, and a photograph in Figure 11.

 

Figure 9. SVUSS Vibration device (reference 18)

The infiltration unit is attached to the vibration equipment by a base plate.
After the 0‘ fraction is loaded into the jackets and compacted. the resulting
bed is held in place by the filling tube, which is inserted as far as the top
of the compacted column of coarse—fraction particles. The calculated quantity
of fine—fraction particles is introduced into the jacket through the filling
tube. after which the vibration causes it to pass into the spaces between the
compressed coarse—fraction spheres. In addition the infiltration devices
makes it possible to read out the height of the compressed column to within

$9.5 m.

FOR1OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.2 Assembly of Fuel Elements and Density Tests

The procedure described was used in a series of experiments which allowed us

to check the apparatus and determine the basic compaction parameters. The ul-
tinate density proved to be affected by a series of parameters such as the rate
at which the fractions were introduced, the infiltration time, the vibration
frequency and the acceleration. Under the conditions described above, a vibra-
tion frequency of 80 sec"1 and an acceleration of 7S m/sec2 proved to be the
most suitable.

- Using the experimental results which we had obtained, we
. prepared model fuel elements with compacted columns 100 and
‘ 600 In high. A cross-sectional diagram of a compacted
' element is shown in Figure 12.

 

Figure 12. Diagram of model fuel element

Key: 1. Lower cap
2. Colman of compressed particles
3. Jacket

4. Retaining tablet

5. Spring

6. Upper cap

7. Sealing plate

l?

_._.

The elements were assembled as follows: the lower cap was welded onto the
jacket and the weld tested for tightness. After the compaction and testing,
the column was secured in place by a short pellet of uraniun oxide. the spring
was inserted. the upper cap was welded on and the element was evacuated and
filled with inert gas (helium). The filling opening was covered with the top
piece of the cap, which was welded on. The tightness of the element was tested
using an Ultratest B helium detector.

The density and density distribution along the element were tested with a densi-
meter [19,21]. Figure 13 shows the density measurements made on a fuel column
with this device. The graph shows a good density distribution curve, with a
slight drop in density at the top of the cmscted colmn. This phenomenon is
typical of vibration-compacted elenents and has been described in the literature.
The density of the elements prepared by the method described was generally

over 80 percent of the theoretical maximum, and thus was in the lower part of
the range of densities required for breeder reactors. Preparation of a higher-
quality fine fraction will make it possible to further increase this density to
a satisfactory degree.

, ..,__..,
f; .3. .'__. .;:_':_‘J
,. .

em

—h(lum!

-II'I. '1'

Figure 13. Density distribution along AGO-m compacted column

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7. Conclusions

In summary, we may state that Czechoslovakia has mastered the laboratory prepara-
tion of coarse-fraction spherical material by the sol-gel method and has con-
structed an experimental facility and designed and tested nonstandard apparatus
for preparing fuel elements by vibration compaction. The vibration compaction
technique and test methods have been successfully mastered and have been tested
by the preparation of model fuel elements. A fine fraction of mediocre quality
was used to test the preparation of the fuel elements because the preparation
method described is still in the laboratory development stage. Nonetheless,
the densities for two-component compaction exceeded 80 percent of the theoreti-
cal maximum and accordingly were already in the lower part of‘the density range
required for breeder reactors. The techniques described yielded sufficient
information and data for industrial application.

In addition to the results described in this article, it should be noted that
the sol-gel method has also been applied to a number of nonnuclear materials and
that positive compaction results were achieved. Application of vibration compac-
tion to dusty materials has produced an experimental base for the more extensive
use of this technique in nonnuclear sectors.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Urbanek, V., and Baran, V. JADERNA ENERGIE, Vol 21, No 2, 1975, p 51.

2. Urbanek, V., and Dolezal, J. UJV [Institute of Nuclear Research] Report
No 6793-H, Rez, 1978.

3. Berta, 0., Bensdik, A. et a1. UJV Report No ASlb-A, H, Res, 1978.
4. Lsndspersky, H. JADERNA ENERGIB, Vol 21, No l, 1975, p 11.

5. "Materialy jaderne techniki [Nuclear Materials)" Collected Articles from
the 1976 Hornicka Pribram Symposium on Science and Technology, Pribam, 1976.

6. Benadik, A. UJV Report No 4792-", A, Res, 1978.

7. Benadik, A., and Skvor, F. "Suseni a susarny zrnitych materialu [Drying of
Granular Materials and Drying EquipmentJ," Collected Articles, Dun Tech-
nicky, CVTS [Czech Advanced Technical School], Parduhice, 1978.

8. Jakesova, L., and Padevet, A. UJV Report 3824-H, Rez, 1978.

9. Group of articles in POKROKY PRASKOVB HETALURGIB, VUHP Sumberk, Nos 1-2,
1977.

10. Pitt, R.s. Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., No 7, 1969, p 9.

ll. Herbst, R. IAEA Panel, Vienna, 1968.

1?
itﬂltﬂﬂﬂCIAl.USE(ﬂULY
FIHRQJFFICIAI.lEﬂE(MNLY

12. Hana, C. C. Report ORNL 3861, 1965.
13. Ayer, 1.3. "Proc. of Gattlinburg Conf., Tenn., May 4-7, 1970.

14. Baran. V., and SEPS, A. Inventor's certificate No 181 960, 7 November
1977.

15. Urbanek, V.. and Dolezal, J. UJV Report No bSl3-M, Res, 1978.
16. Landsperaky. u. UJV Report 493b-H, Rec, 1978.
17. Landaperaky, H. et a1. UJV Report, N Rex. 1980.

18. Pinkas, V.. and Pluhar, 0. UJP [Institute of Nuclear Fuels] Report No 386,
Zoraalav. 1975.

19. Pinkas. v. UJP Report No 1.76, Zbraslav, 1978.

20. Pinkas, V. et al. Inventor's certificate No 191 382.
21. Pinkas, V. et a1. Patent application PV 1552-80.
COPYRIGHT: SNTL n.p., 1981

8480
CSO: 5100/3009

18
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
CAORSO PLANT “STARTED AFTER SHUTDOHN
Rome Am B INDUSTRIA in Italian 15 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] At noon on 16 December the Caorso nuclear power plant entered the starting
up and power build-up phases after another shutdown lasting several days due to
the need to repair a circulation pun) for the prinary circuit. By the evening of
Monday 14 December it was producing ”0 MN and was on the way to full power output.
Its nanagers are confident: Engineer Guido Horante, director of the plant. said:
"I'm optimistic; the blockage (of the pulp) does not jeopardize the plan; there
shouldn't be any delay in achieving full power output."

Operating at full power. the Caorso plant produces about 20 nillion kwh per day.
putting more than 5 billion kwh into the network per year; this corresponds to an
input worth about 300 billion lire for ﬁnal [National Electric Power Agency]. Sub-
tracting 50 billion for nuclear fuel and another 50 billion for nintensnce. personnel
and depreciation. Enel will receive a net profit of 200 billion lire per year. The
plant cost 450 billion. so it will pay for itself in a little over 2 years.

Engineer Giovanni Naschi, central director of safety and health protection for can
[National Nuclear Energy Comission]. cemented on the Caorso situation and made
some remarks about safety regulations in an interview with ENERGIA. the bulletin

of the ADN agency, on 3 Decenber.

The interviewer asked Engineer Naschi why it took 6 years for the power plant to
begin operating. His answer: "I think this is the price our country has to pay
for its relative experience in the nuclear field.

Also. there are some gaps in Italian legislation about nuclear plants and their
safety. especially regarding the procedures to be followed in bringing a plant into
operation. After the approximately 10 months of so-called "cold trials" there is
a period of testing with the fuel called "hot trials" or ”nuclear trials," whose
main purpose is to enable the technicians to check the operation of the power plant
under various conditions.

Once these two test cycles are over, the plant has to be shut down to enable the
relevant coniasion--in our case that of CHEN—to asks a final judgement of the
operation of the plant. In other countries, on the other hand. as has been the

case for several years in the United States. for exawle, the opinion of the con-ais-
eion is formed during the second trial period. that of nuclear trials. since the
commission grants the plant a temporary license which more or less covers the period
of "hot trials."

19
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

In this way as soon as the nuclear trial period is over, if everything is going
well the operating license can be granted immediately and the plant can cone on

line and produce electricity very soon. This is practically inposaible in Italy
with the present procedure.

The delay with Caorso enabled the CHEN commission to analyze and study all the pro-
blems which surfaced during the intermittent operation of the plant.

The Csorso plant has finally becom operational now that the emission has given

a favorable judgement and the Ministry of Industry has aimed the operating license.
but only until Septenber-October of next year, i.e.. until the end of the hot trial
period and mtil the next batch of fuel cones, at about that time.

If our country were to adopt a system like the one used in the United States. it
would be possible to have the end of the hot trial period coincide with the coal-is-

sion's judgement, so the plant would not have to shut down after these trials with
fuel to have the situation assessed."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 by Edizioni Atono e Industria

9855
C80: 5100/2088

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
can 5 8282.3 1.5 55 ca.
2.3 .6 5.558.. .2. .3382.
.3352: .3238 5 0.8365 3.
3.. 0.3 t... 88.3.. .3393:
3.2. at .2. o. .895 a :5:
o: 3:: 9.3: 833. :6 8.
8:... .82.. 3% ..

5 33.2.3. 8 3°29 ma...»
=33... ego—z. 2:83 86
5: «.08 2:8: :3 8: 23.
to 83323 23:92! :80 v.
=2. 1.... .93 3 c. .333... .8
2:8: 3« 5..- a; .a 33.
2.5.. 8 =6 :8 .= a... 2.8 o.
no.3." 3232 38 2:6: .33
as :0 rs; .2383 33:33.
953 .2. 90 .3. 38 2:8:
in”. .gvaoazoaa .838. .2
3 a.

thin}
iombo spoke of the prospects of
solving also in Italy the problem
of spent fuel reprocessing. now
experimented in our country on the
pilot plant scale. By 1905. he an
nounced. a start will be made on
the industrial plant by AGIP Nu-
ciaara. Prof. Colombo also recaiied
the necessity that the Parliamentl
should approve rapidly. as the con-
ditioning iact. CNEN's restructuring
law. alresd passed in the Senate
and now Ing examined at the
Industry Committee of the Cham-
ber oi Deputies.

In his turn the President of anal

Carbellini recalled the Importance.
for the purposes of supplies oi
electric power. oi the application
of the muItLhour rates to

try. which has already yielded its
lirst results. melting a contribu.
tion oi tooo MWe oi capacity: a
real and proper aghost power ate.

tfon -.

Finally Minister Maroon gave
journalists a series of news Items
on the Ceoreo power station which

we summarize here.

On the completion oi the techni-
cal tests. the nuclear poor station
at Caorso began Its activity of
real and proper operation. intro-
ducing energy into the national

rid.
9 Coorso. with a capeclty oi 040
Mw. produces at full power an
average of 21 million kWh a day:
even tailing into account some In-
terruptions or some momenta of
operation at reduced capacity, the
power station will be able to
ply about 520 million kWh a mont .
that Is. no less than 5.050 million

kWh a year.

COPYRIGIT :

C80: 5100/2121

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_____—_._——
tit! omcm. OOMMUNIOIIE'

The Caorso Power Station has
become operational end introdu-
see into the grid 040 MWe equal
to 5 billion kWh a year.

the Ceorso power station cost
450 billion Iire in all.

In a year's activity it will pro-
duce. as has been said. 5 bil-
lion kWh. equal to a revenue
for Enel of about 300 billion
lire. Ii 50 billion are deducted
for atomic iuei. and so billion
for maintenance. personnel and
amortization. Enel will have a
not annual Income of 200 billion
ire.

That means that in just over
2 years the power station ls
paid tor.

Caorso produces from is to
20 million kWh a day of electri-
city. equal to saving 1 billion It-
re a day of fuel oil. which leads
to a reduction of 303 billion ilre
a year in the oil bill. Had Italy
constructed 5 other power sta-
tions oi this type. tarlife could
have coat aw. iess.

———————

_____————-—

To produce the same quantit
oi power having recourse to oi.
it would be necessary to burn
4.000 t. of iuel a day. "0.0m t.
a month. 1.300000 t. a year. equal.
to give an idee. to the load oi
13 super tankers of 100.000 t. each.
In practice. it would be necessary
to have more than one tanker oi
100.000 t. arrive every month. spen
ding about 800 billion lire every
year.

1982 by Edizioni. Atom e Industria

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This saving Is obtained without
payi a price In terms of risk.
the so station has at. its di-
sposal. in fact. the most sophisti-
cated and advanced seiety measu
res l lnabla today. the power
station been built to emerge
unharmed.oratleastnottore-
present a danger tor the surroun-
dlnga' from any type of ioreseeable
accident or calamity.

Nevertheless. out of a further
at: e. the operation licence is-
au by the Ministry oi industry
was limited to the first phase of
operation. which will be comple-
ted with the fIrst recharge of nu-
clear fuel. The final licence for a
long period will be subordinated to
a new series oi very severe tests.

The risks of possible blackouts
should be considered greatly redu-
ced it not completely overcome
with the start-u of Caorso.

Having passe the third week of
December which usually constitu-
tes the peak point of energy de-
mand in the country. with the con
tribution of Csorso italy should have
a sufficient margin to avoid the
drawbacks of lea: winter.

‘ihere would be even greater
certainty if. alongside Caorso. the
thermoelectric station at Porto Tol-
Ie. already completed. could baco-
me operative. it Is able to pro-
vide a capacity of 1.200 Mw.

Enel is examining the requests
put iorward by local bodies. Issue
of bulldl licences to lay the oil
pipeline t t supplies the power
station and authorizations tor the
mooring of lighters. are subordlne
te to their acceptance. in the
meentime It has been established
that work will In on the lirsl
part of the pipe lne from Porto
Tolle to Aslnara.
PUGLIA REGION APPROVES m POSSIBLE SITES FOR POWER PLANT
Rome ATOHO E INDUSTRIA in Italian 15 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Puglis is the first region which. pursuant to law 393 of 1975. has indicated
the two sites where one of the nuclear power plants provided for by the National
Energy Plan might be built.

They are on the Ionian coast near Avetrana (east of Taranto. on the boundary of the
province of Lecce) and on the Adriatic coast north of Brindiei. near Carovigno. The
decision was made. according to a comique from the Puglis region. by the regional
Giunts and took into account studies made by CHEN and by the for-er chairman of the
engineering department of the University of Bari. Professor Vincenro Cotecchia, the
suggestions of the Regional Energy Plan. and the final act of the joint comittee
region-Bnel-CNEN. The Giants also considered it necessary to come to an agreement
with the commmities concerned (Handuria. Avetrans. Porto Cesareo and Carovigno)
before taking a final decision. as provided for by law 393.

San Benedetto Po. Viadana. and Bozzolo-in the province of Hantova--are the three
sites where it would be possible to build nuclear power plants in Lombardy; these
will probably be the places suggested by the region to the government by 4 February
1982. the end of the 60 day period set by CIPE [International Omittee for Economic
Planning]. That period started on 4 December when the measure was approved by PEN.
This has been announced by Guido Sasso. regional assessor of energy. and Luciano
Forcellini. president of the standing emission for energy problems and the protec-
tion of the environment. According to these indications. before the end of January
the Regional Council will have to give the government a series of detailed ensure.
This will be a first concrete step toward the construction of a nuclear power plant,
but it is not a final step. as the two representatives of the region explained. Por
now Enel must collect technical data about the areas concerned to provide a basis
for a judgement about the qualifications of the sites.

The assessor and the president of the commission will arrange a series of meetings
with the inhabitants of the three areas concerned in order to explain the protection
of the environment and other things involved in the construction of a nuclear power
plant.

Finally. for Piemonte. the Honorable Giorgio La Halfa. minister of the budget. who
has been asked by the president of the Comcil to find a solution—together with
the region-~to the serious economic problems besetting Piemonte. has appealed

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF 1C1“. USE ONLY

explicitly to Pienontese political groups "To halve the tine-table for the construc-
tion of a nuclear power plant. while keeping the schedule for appropriate safety
studies unchanged. "

The sites on the Po are at Trino Vercelleee and Pilippona.

WPYRIGHT: 1981 by 361210111 Atono e Industria

9855
cso: 5100/2088

21:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On the design of mm (Nuclee
re Italiana Fleettori Avanzatil. the
Steam Generation Division of An-
oeldo has conatncted. crowning
fifteen year; of research and e»
perimentetion carried out by MIRA
.end CNEN. a prototype ol eteam
.generetor for last eodiurn-heatod
'reactore.

The prototype, which he: a ce-
;pecity of so MW. hee undergone
:operetion teate in France. at the
podium component teet Station at
nLoe Renardierea of Electricite do
NFrence (EDF). The poet-operational
examinatione oi the plant, which
was completely dismantled to am-
Hi)! It in eve particular. end the
eucceee of t e toeta heve quell-
iied itaiian mdoetry ior operations
of thia type. putting It in the amell
number of inductriai countriee oe-
pable oi designing and conatruo-
ting steam generatore for feet eo-
dlurnheated reectore.

Although it it not e epeciiiceily
nuclear component. the ateam ge-
neretor representa. aa la ironwn.

one oi the'inoet dolloete rte of
a last reactor with liwi metal.

owing to Ito function of producing
man at a high eaure end tern.
pemtue to to the turbines
oi the atetion receiving. in
form o heet. energy from the li-
quid eodlum coming from the reao
tor.

Thus the pient Ie cubiact to very
great etreeeea. having to operate
et high tempereture with two
llulda. water end eodium. which
moat be mubeoiutely nuts:

The rat 0 a power
tiono “melon dlrectiy conditio-
ned by the correct atlon oi
the eteem orator. e nce an eo-
cident to generetor. while it
doee not also probleme of aalety.
can ceuee long ehutdowne oi the
whole plant. that maioee mow
the iicetion of non-conventional
”demogiee. the conformity of the
deeign to the etricteet regulatione
in ioroe today. the we of hi hly
eeleoted materieie and the .3»
tion of eophiattoeted control rech-

nlquee.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 by Edition Atom e Inducttie
C80: 5100/2121 m
25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY