FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10501

7 May 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No.77?

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

FOUO NO. 772

CONTENTS

ANGOLA

Lisbon Seen Maintaining Good Relations in Southern Africa
(NARCHBS TROPICAUX ET NEDITERRANEENS, 19 Mar 82) ......

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Briefs
Priority to Rural Development
Public Sector hkrk Hours
CHAD

Briefs
French Civil Aid

CONGO
Briefs
French BRGM Resumes Operations
French Aid to CF00

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Briefs
Spanish Relations

GABON

BDG Notes Nation's Economic Prospects
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS, 26 Feb 82) ......

Briefs
1981 Petroleum, Uranium Production

'03- [III-NE&A-li

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GHANA

Briefs
Baulings Security Problems

GUINEA

French Economic, Financial Relations Apparently Improving
(MARCHE TROPICAUX ET IEDITEERANEENS, 12 Her 82) ........

Briefs
Iron Ore Deposits

IVORY COAST

University Students Press for More Freedom
(Siradiou Diallo; JBUNE AFRIQUE, 2h Feb 82) .............

MOZAMBIQUE

Briefs
Grain Requirements‘
Whter Project Loan

NIGER

Briefs
President Visits Diffs Department

EDF Rice Firming Grant

SEHEOAHBIA

Briefs
Expansion of SAR Installations

Cotton Production

IMF Standby Agreement
Tunisian Cooperation

itﬂt(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂﬁlY
LISBON SEEN MAINTAINING GOOD RELATIONS IN SOUTHERN AFRICA
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1897, 19 Mar 82 p 809

[Text] Portugal intends to strengthen its relations with Angola. That is
what can be implied from a recent 3-day visit to Luanda during the second week
of March by the Portuguese minister of foreign affairs, Andre Goncalves
Pereira. This visit is the first by a Portuguese foreign minister since
Angola's independence in 1975.

Goncalves Pereira was coming from Brazil and during a press conference in Sao
Paulo, on 10 March, he announced that his visit to Luanda wOuld be followed by
one from the Portuguese minister for finance and planning and later, probably
in May, by a visit from President Antonio Ramalho Banes of the Republic of
Portugal heading an important delegation of businessmen.

During his stay, the Portuguese minister-who was met on arrival by his
Angolan counterpart, Paulo Jorge—was received by the president of the Repub-
lic of Angola, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, and had talks with the minister for
planning and foreign trade, Lopo do Nascimento, and with the minister of fi-
nance, Ismael Martins. .

From a political viewpoint, this trip is an opportunity to recall Portugal's
special position in relation to Southern Africa. It is a fact that Lisbon had
"good if not close" relations with both Angola and South Africa where a situ-
ation of conflict exists, with countries of the Contact Group on Namibia and
with African countries known as "frontline countries."

Although Portugal condemns apartheid, it feels grateful towards Pretoria be-
cause South Africa opened its doors to many Portuguese exiles after Angola and
Mozambique became independent in 1975 (the Portuguese community in South
Africa numbers ar0und 600,000 people).

While not taking part in the process of Namibia's independence, Portugal
wishes for the negotiations in progress to rapidly succeed and endorses UN
Resolution 435 calling for a ceasefire and for elections conducted under in-
Lcrnational supervision.

In the econonic sphere, Portugal is Angola's major supplier fron the Rest,
closely followed by France, then by Brazil. Between 8,000 and 10,000

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Portuguese are officially registered in Angola and most of them are working
as overseas volunteers or on contract but the total number of Portuguese na-
tionals in the country is estimated to be at least double that figure.

Independent Angola, observers point out, suffered a great loss with the de-
parture of some 30,000 Portuguese cadres most of whom could not be replaced.
Also, and according to Luanda, friction often arises as a result of the ac-
tivities of the "retornados" [returnees] (the Portuguese equivalent of the
"pieds noirs" [Algerian-born Frenchmenl) and of the support given by some
Portuguese circles to opponents of the HPLA, Angola's ruling party.

(he of the bilateral issues discussed in Luanda was the question of coupon-
sation for the confiscated assets of former Portuguese settlers. ‘Ihc Angolan
authorities have always maintained that compensation for those who left at a

moment's notice was out of the question. This is a typical problem in de-
colonization.

In addition to their cooperation in the linguistic and cultural sphere, the
two countries cooperate in lost of the sectors where Portuguese nationals are
employed, specially in the energy sector where the usin project involves the
building of the second stage of the Cambambe Dam, 200 kms southeast of Luanda.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
C80: 4719/7510

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

PRIORITY T0 RURAL DEVELOPHENT--The annual conference on rural development,
which was held in Bangui from 15 February to 20 Ftbruary, was opened by the
Central African minister of agriculture and animal husbandry, Lt Col Alphonse
Gombadi, who declared that the Central African Republic's economic potential
could allow it to produce trade and budget surpluses 'by giving priority to
rural development." The minister stated that it will be a matter of "promot-
ing all subsistence and market garden crops in order to better insure food
self-sufficiency, the key to the economic recovery strategy." In tne cash
crops area, Central African authorities are proposing in the short and medium
term to increase the volume of export products while maintaining supply of
raw materials to local industries. Coffee production should be getting up

to 20,000 tons very fast. In order to facilitate farming work a special
emphasis will be put on the means making it possible to modernize agri-
culture in the years to come. In particular the improvement of agricultural
techniques and the expansion of tilling using draft animals ought to make

it possible to attain these objectives. Thanks to a policy of decentraliz-
ing the agriCulturel training agencies efforts will also be undertaken with

a view to bringing the farmer closer to rural development institutions in
order to have broad participation of country dwellers in the decisions which
concern them. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French

No 1894, 26 Feb 82 p 625] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.]
9631

PUBLIC SECTOR WORK HOURS--Puhlic Sector: Unbroken Workday: On 26 February
President Kolingba signed an order instituting an "unbroken workday" for the
public and parastatal enterprise sectors in the Central African Republic.

The new work hours, which come into effect starting 1 March, are being
established as follows: Monday to Friday from 0630 to 1330, and Saturday from
0700 to 1200. In addition, a presidential decree sets the opening hours for
cafes and dance halls. This new regulation is meant to restrict as much as
possible the presence of civil servants in bars during work hours. [Text]

[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 688]
[COPYRIGﬂTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

CSO: 4719/698

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

FRENCH CIVIL AID--In a response to a written question published in the 22
February Official Jouranl, Jean-Pierre Cot, French minister delegate for
cooperation and development. stated that French civil aid to Chad "to date“
amounted to Fr 59.4 million. The minister said that this aid will be
"maintained and expanded in 1982 in accordance with requests of the Chadian
Government." The minister went on to say that special French aid to Chad
involved mostly the capital of Chad where "action on the part of the French
Ministry of Cooperation and Development has made it possible to reestablish
the conditions necessary for a retu:n to normal activity" (restoration of
water, electricity and telephone; fitting out ferries making it possible to
cross the river; setting up emergency health aid). In addition, the French
Government has kept up "aid in areas not much affected by the war, mainly
in the south. where our overseas volunteers have continued their activity
and where our consular presence, in Houndou. has been maintained without a
bzeak." The extent of the damage caused by the civil war is too great to be
dealt with by "France's means alone." He mentioned that last November on the
request of the Transitional National Union Government (GUNT) of Chad the
French Government organized an international conference in which the major
sources of foreign aid, multilateral and bilateral, participated. [Text]
[Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 6881
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

C50: 4719/698

h
Ft"!()FF1C]Al.lJSEI(NNLY
BRIEFS

FRENCH BRGH RESUHES OPERATIONS-—The "newsletter" of France's BRGH (Bureau of
Geological and Mining Exploration) recently reported that the BRGu's drawing
up a mineral survey in the People's Republic of the Congo on behalf of the
Congolese Ministry of Mines and Energy (on the basis of French financing)
marked the resumption of the Bach's activity in that country. The afore-
mentioned undertaking consists of first collecting all the information gathered
owing to studies and work carried out on Congolese territory by analyzing
geological and mining documentation. Hissions in the field will then make it
possible to verify the collected data. to make a synthesis of all of it, and
to delimit the areas most likely to have mineral ores present. Thus, the
mineral survey makes it possible to answer the first question any mining
exploration contractor (government authorities or private companies) asks
himself: where is one to prospect for needed ore or ores with the best
probability of success? And, in a defined region what mineral resources does
one have the best chance of discovering and where are they located? Thus,
the mineral survey contributes in a critical way to working out prospecting
plans. In addition, the BRGH is making an initial reconnaissance into the
Niari for sites for extraction of raw materials for a cement factory project.
After that samplings will have to be carried out on the most promising sites
in order to get to know the potential of available raw materials for meeting
the needs of the future cement factory. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANBEﬂS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 690] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et
Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

FRENCH AID To CPCO-—0n 19 February in Brazzaville France and Congo signed a
bilateral agreement in the amount of 400 million CPA francs (8 million French
francs) relating to the 7th segment of the Congo-Ocean Railroad (CFCO) track
relaying project. France's Aid and Cooperation Fund (TAC) has already made

6 grants totalling a billion CFA francs (80 million French francs) which fall
under the heading of its participation in that project. [Text] [Paris
HARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1894, 26 Feb 82] [COPYRIGHTz
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

C50: b719/699

5
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
BRIEFS

SPANISH RELATIONS—-According to the Madrid daily EL PAIS, assets deposited by
the Equatorial Guinean Central Bank in Spain were frozen on 12 February by a
legal decision in reference to a Spanish company's suit. The newspaper said
that the measure affects the accounts which the Equatorial Guinean Central
Bank has at the Bank of Spain and the Banco Exterior. This whole business

is occurring at a time when relations between Madrid and Malabo are going
through a particularly delicate phase. According to AIP, the Malabo au-
thorities are in actual fact accusing the former colonial power of icposing
a "veritable economic diktat" on Malabo again. According to a Spanish source
in Malabo cited by AGENA [expansion unknown], the relations between the two
countries have never been so strained during the time since Col Teodoro
Obiang Nguema came to power on 3 August 1979. The economic recovery plan
presented by Madrid last November has been "frozen" by the Equatorial Guinean
Supreme Military Council (Government). The latter opposes in particular the
naming of high-level Spanish civil servants to the Ministries of Finance and
Budget who would have "decisionmaking power" in the country's economic manage-
ment. The presence of these high-level civil servants is the "condition" re-
quired by Spain for continuing irs financial aid to its former colony. There
are indications from Western sources in Malabo that Spain's aid has added up
to $25 million in less than 3 years. To justify such a reeuirement Spain
stresses that since the fall of the dictator Macias Mguema "few things have
really changed" to straighten out the country's economy. In addition, Spanish
authorities complain about the Equatorial Guinean administration's "incompe-
tence." In order to boost its economy and face up to the consequences of its
disagreements with Spain, Equatorial Guinea intends to "give greater impor-
tance to" its relations with other states. Thus, France has financed
"limited operations" (in particular the redevelopment of the port of Malabo)
the cost of which reached Fr 18 million in 1981. [Text] [Paris MARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1894, 26 Ebb 82 p 625] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

C50: 6719/699

6
FOIIOFF1C1A1.USE‘0NLN
nnc NOTES NATION'S ECONOMIC PROSPECTS

Paris MARCHBS ranPIcaux ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1896, 26 Feb 82 pp
626, 627

[Text] In recent correspondence Jean-Felix Mamalepot, direcror general of the

Gabon Development Bank (806) gave us his opinion regarding economic prospects
in Gabon at the start of 1982.

he noted that in spite of the country's remarkable financial recovery, re-
sumption of economic activity at the end of 1981 "was starting up only very
hesitantly since business activity was not yet really making itself felt.
Since the state has remained to this day the largest if not the sole initiator
of large development projects in all sectors and cautiousness will henceforth
be its golden rule, it no longer intends to initiate projects in great haste
but is giving increasing care to their selection, to their study, to their
valuation, and to the determination of their real economic imact before
starting them up. Since the “Building and Public Works" sector was the cause
of the overheating of the years 1975-77, we no longer intend to favor it ex-
cessively but will attempt to emphasize profitable projects, particularly in
agriculture and agribusiness, with a view to gradually preparing for the
"post-oil" period. At least we are very much aware of this even though
spectacular results on this score are not just around the corner. Neverthe-
less, we are putting a great deal of hope in operations such as: ACROGABON
[Company for Agriculture and Livestock-raising Development in Gabon], in which
the Gabon Development Bank is involved to the tune of more than 4 billion CPA
francs out of an initial investment segment of 12 billion (6,000 hectares of
palm trees to be planted); HEVECAB: [Gabon Rubber Company] planting rubber
trees in the hitzic region, the financing arrangement not completely settled
even though most of the lenders have made their interest in the project clear;
and SIAEB [Boumango Agriculture and Livestock-raising Industrial Company],
production of livestock fodder and chickens for eating in Boumango in the

Franceville region: the Gabon Development Bank's involvement in that is 500
million CPA francs.

Furthermore, the 1982 budget which the parliament has just voted amounts to
453.5 billion CPA francs and balances out in receipts and expenditures. That
budget devotes more than 12 billion CPA francs to agriculture.

7
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHUAL (I'M-L ONLY

Unfortunately a decline in most of our export products must be noted. The
decline in our oil reserves is continuing because of the deposits being de-
pleted. Thus, the first 8 months of 1981 showed a decline of 17 percent com-
pared with the same period in 1980. Crude oil production in volume terms was
6,036,167 tons for the first 8 months of 1980 and 4,969,763 tons for the first
8 months of 1981.

The fall in manganese production is the consequence of the recession and low
figures for iron and steelmaking in the industrial countries which are con-
sumers for that ore. The manganese mining results show a fall of 40.3 per-
cent. Production was 1,108,207 tons at the end of September 1981 compared to
1,705,036 tons at the end of September 1980.

On the other hand, uranium metal production was increasing slightly, by 4.4
percent, as of the end of August 1981. Exports increased by the end of that
same period by 7.4 percent compared to the same period in 1980.

It must be noted that COHUF [Franceville Uranium Mining Cempany) anticipates
stopping operations of its uranium processing plant for two months at the be-
ginning of 1982 in order to replace and renovate some of its equipment. The
company wanted to establish an available stock of 270 tons of metal at the
end of 1981.

Nhile coffee and cocoa production still show disappointing results, sugarb
cane production is encouraging. Refined sugar production went from 6,865
tons in 1978 to 9,009 tons in 1979 and 13,034 tons in 1980. Since local
consumption is around 7,500 tons, the rest, which is 5,500 tons since

SOSUHO [Haut-Ogooue Sugar Company) has decided to maintain its production at
13,000 tons in 1981, will be exported.

Timber output, particularly okoume, continues to decline. The cumulative re-

sults by the end of August 1981 were 624,000 cubic meters as against 740,000
Cubic meters the previous year.

Getting back to the monetary and financial area, Gabon's financial situation
has continuously and unceasingly grown stronger after having reached an
equilibrium following drastic recovery measures put in place by the govern-
ment.

Gabon's foreign Currency situation (foreign exchange reserves) has progressed
recently as follows: (figures in millions of CPA francs) -12,461 in August
1979; -789 in August 1980; +37,345 in April 1981; +48,459 in June 1981;
+Sl,316 in August 1981.

Gabon's net external assets managed by the Central Bank have advanced as fol-
lows: (figures in millions of CFA francs) 8,457 in August 1979; 18,360 in
August 1980; 53,787 in April 1981; 70,161 in June 1981; 80,040 in August 1981.

After that analysis Hr Mamalepot concluded: "Thus, after the financis1 shock
of 1977 Gabon is certainly still rebandaging its wounds, wounds which are
healing up, and it has not reached cruising speed, but it is coming out of

8
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
"that historical stage of its economy tested and glorious. mile Gabon has
made mistakes or blunders in the past, it is, nevertheless, to its credit
that it has recognized them in time and imposed a brutal and strict dis-
cipline on itself and turned this difficult corner in a relatively short

period of time. That is what explains its present cautiousness and the slow
and measured resumption of business activity.

"In circumstances such as these the Gabon Development Bank’s activity natur-
ally finds itself slowed down. Though fiscal 1980 for the bank could be con-
sidered exceptional, with more than Pr 9 billion of credits granted owing

to sizable and targeted assistance set up for AGROGABON, a noteworthy drop

in the level of grants in 1981 mat be expected.

"Since the Gabon Development Bank's activity is mainly oriented toward fi-
nancing big investments in the medium and long-term (which distinguishes it
from standard commercial banks), and paperwork relating to investments of
that kind was not initiated by developers, amounts of assistance comparable
to those of 1980 were not run up in 1981."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.

9631
CSO: 4719/699

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H”! UM‘ICIAI. l-br. ONLY

BRIEFS

1981 PETROLEUM, URANIUM PRODUCTION~Extractive Operations: Estimate of 1981
Results: According to unofficial sources, Gabon's oil production only reached
7 million tons in 1981 compared to 8.5 million in 1980. Manganese production
was said to be on the order of 1.5 million tone as against 2 million in 1980.
Uranium production was said to be remaining steady at about 1,000 tons of
uranium metal. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDI‘I‘ERRANEENS in French
No 1895. 5 Her 82 p 689] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

cso: 4719/698

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RAHLINGS SECURITY PROBLEMS--Captain Rawlings is facing an increasingly serious
economic situation while rumors of a plot continue to circulate in Accra. the
AF? notes. According to the news agency, the president of the Provisional
National Defense Cauncil has actually been the target of several assassination
attempts with the latest said to have taken place on 5 March, on the eve of
celebrations marking the 25th anniversary of the cauntry's independence. It
is said that the officers who organized the operation-they were reported to
be eight—-have already been executed. The news agency also mentions that
Captain Rawlings only goes arOund in a combat car and under heavy escort even
inside his own base camp, the Burma Camp. His feeling of being in a vulner-
able position could also explain why he has delayed adopting the promised
meaSures of economic recovery. On 13 March, speaking about the coup d'etat
of 31 December and about Libya's aid to his country, Captain Rawlings said
that the military took over not because they were avid for power but because
they could not watch inpassively the collapse of the country. The head of
state did not conceal from his compatriots the fact that ”difficult times"
were in store for them but he assured then that the "days of slavery and ex-
ploitation were over forever." The head of state also said that Libyan aid
to his country was limited to supplies of petrol and food for the army and
did not include any arms delivery. Captain Rawlings also denied that Libya
had sent troops and equipment to organize the coup. He also denied any kind
of Soviet pmetrstion in Ghana pointing out that the Soviet Red Cross had
only sent to the country 8 tons of drugs. [Excerpts] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1897, 19 Mar 82 p 7941 [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 8796

C80: 4719/754

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

FRENCH ECONOMIC, FINANCIAL RELATIONS APPARENTLY IMPROVING
Paris HARCHES TBOPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82 p 734

[Text] After a 20-year chill punctuated by unsuccessful attempts at rapproche-
ment, there is now reason to hope relations between France and Guinea may

take a more favorable turn in the context of renewed cooperation. Guinea

has already benefited from French loans in both the public and private sector
in the years since 1976, when diplomatic relations between the two countries
were restored.

Guinea is not yet benefiting from the PAC (Aid and Cooperation Fund), but the
CCCE (Central Fund for Economic Cooperation) has gotten involved through long-
term loans to help finance various Guinean development projects: enhancing
hydro-electric energy production capacity, railroad modernization, restora-
tion and expansion of the telecommunications network, mining investments.
Other new financing accords will help Guinea increase its hard currency earn-
ings: mines, industrial fishing, agriculture, etc....

In addition, COFACE [French Insurance Company for Foreign Trade] has guarante-
ed a number of private sector loans in all sectors of the Guinean economy:
agriculture, energy, transport, telecommunications, energy, mines, tourist
infrastructure, provision of consumer and equipment goods, etc....

In 1977 it signed an agreement with the BFCE (French Foreign Commerce Bank)
enabling it to make purchases on credit. Up to now French banks have not

had a great deal of direct involvement, outside the export financing opera-
tions and transactions guaranteed by COFACE. Nevertheless, Guinea has obtain-
ed lines of credit from the BFCE and the BUB (European Union Bank) for the
refinancing of installment payments on various contracts, and, more recently,
from the French Commercial Bank, the "Credit Lyonnals" and the "Societe
Generale." In addition, a number of transactions relative to short-term
operations are being handled through the intermediation of the BIAO [Inter-
national Bank for "est Africa].

Guinea has had serious problems meeting its debt repayment and commitments

on loans made with French banks through private-sector credit guaranteed

by COFACE. So an agreement with that institution was signed in December 1980
providing a debt moratorium and rescheduling.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Industrial Presence

French industry has found many fields of activity in Guinea: study and renova-
tion of the Conakry-Kankan railroad, highway projects and building construc-
tion, modernization of the telecommunications network (telephone exchanges,
provision and laying of cables, a Telspace ground station, water supply and
village hydraulic engineering, rehabiliation of the turbines at the Grandes
Chutes dam, electrification in Conakry and urban centers in the interior,
renovation of the fruit juice production facility in the agro-industrial
sector, construction of the clinker-crushing unit, renovation of the struc-
ture and equipment of state-owned enterprises: the Sanoya textile complex,
the Kankan brickworks, tobacco and matches, tire recapping, paint, furniture.
etc....

Since 1960 the Pechiney-Ugine-Kuhlmann firm has been operating an internation—
al consortium, Frialco, which mines the Pris bauxite deposit and produces
alumina on the spot. The Guinean Government owns a 59 percent interest in

the mining company: the other 51 percent is divided between Pechiney (18.25
percent) and Noranda (19.25 percent), British Aluminum (5.5 percent), Alusiusse
(5.5 percent) and MG" (2.5 percent). During recent years Fria's alumina
production has steadily increased: 500,000 tons in 1975, then 653,100 tons

in 1979 and 708,000 tons in 1980. Production in 1981 has been estimated

at around 700,000 tons.

The Guinean Government hold a 51 percent interest and is the majority partner
inthe Guinea Bauxite Company (CBC), which was created in 1971 to exploit

the Boke-Sangaredi deposit. The American company Alcoa runs actual operations,
and Pechiney-Ugine-Kuhlmann is in partnership (5.1 percent) with American,
Canadian, German and Italian firms, Bauxite production has grown from 3.8
million tons in 1975 to 8.3 million tons in 1979 and 9.3 million tons in

1980.

The Guinean Government is an equal partner with several foreign associates in
MIFERCUI [Iron Mining Company of Guinea], which was created to exploit the
iron ore deposit at Mount Nimba. The 50 percent interest held by foreign
partners is shared between Liberia, Nigeria, Algeria, Libya and--though
state-owned enterprises--Romsnia, Yugoslavia and Spain. Private sector
interests (totaling 9.81 percent) include the French steel company Solmer-
Usinor (3.37 percent), 0.8. Steel and a Japanese company.

COGEMA [Nuclear Material General Company], an offshoot of the Atomic Energy
Commission, carried out a uranium prospecting operation covering all of
northern Guinea in 1980-1981. Another COGEHA affiliate, HINERSA, became
invoIvcd from 1979-1981 in the Guinea Diamond Company, whose prospecting
operations should continue.

No French companies are involved in oil exploration at present; the American
company Union Texas, however, has subcontracted offshore seismic studies
to the General Geophysical Company.

BRGM [Bureau of Geological and Mining Exploration] is involved in a program
to locate and improve waterholes.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A semi-public works company. the National Construction Company of Guinea
(SONATRA-Guinea) has been established with a capital of $8 million: French
partners hold a total of 37 percent (Entreprise Jean Lefebvre, Grands Travaux
de Marseille and Entreprise Colas); a German company has a 12 percent inter-
est, and the Guinean Government is the majority shareholder with 51 percent.
In 1980 another semi-public company was established in partnership with a
French company, the Guinea Construction Company (SOGUICO).

Trade Relations and Cooperation
Franco-Guinea commerical relations are an asset to France's overall trade
balance. Both French sales and purchases grew (by 24.2 and 36 percent,

respectively) during the first 9 months of 1981.

Franco-Guinean trade is shown in the following table, in millions of French
francs:

 

1979 1980 1980 1981
9 mos. 9 mos.

French imports 220.4 182.8 127.5 173.5
.French exports 412.5 412.8 288.4 358.1

Bauxite and alumina figure prominently in imports: Fr 198 million in 1979,
159.5 million in 1980. and 165.3 million for the first 9 months of 1981.
French purchases of bananas from Guinea--very significant in the past--have
fallen to an insignificant level: Fr 1 million in the first 9 months of
1981; some coffee was also purchased (Pr 4.3 million).

French sales are primarily in the area of food products (flour, dairy products,
sugar, canned goods and beverages), equipment goods (engineering and electri-
cal equipment, vehicles, railway equipment) and consumer goods (fertilizers,
chemical products, tires, tools and machinery, cardboard, etc....)

Franco-Guinean cooperation in the field of culture, while it was never broken
off, remains at anodest level. The French academic team in Conakry, respon-
sible to the French Embassy, carries out French programs; the technical schools
of the semi-public companies Friguia and Guinea Bauxite Company are specialized
in bauxite extraction and processing. Several French development experts have
been seconded to Guinean institutions, and some [French] professors are going
to give courses at the University of Conakry each year or head seminars while
on short-term missions. From 20 to 25 Guinean students on scholarships
provided by the French Government travel to France each year for training or
refresher courses.

With regard to technical cooperation, ORSTOH [Overseas Scientific and Techni-
cal Research Office] and the French research institutes have no involvement

in Guinea apart from projects financed and coordinated by international bodies.
Scientific and technical cooperation is crysta1lizing around a small number

of operations: hydrogeological studies by the BRGM, the training of skilled
workers in the fields of automative mechanics and agricultural machinery by

11;
IKNI(MWNCJA1.USE(MNBV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Renault's engineering subsidiary, cartographic surveys and preparation of
the master plan for Conakry by the National Georgraphic Institute and, finally,

the attendance in December 1981 of Guinean represenatives to the Hedico-
Pharmaceutical Heek sponsored by the Ministry of Health, the National Phar-
maceutical Industry Association and some ten private laboratories.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
C80: 4719/992

15
ron omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

IRON ORB DEPOSITS--Nimba Mountains: Plan for Cooperation With the BBC: On

26 February in Brussels the Guinean minister of mines, Ismael Tours, declared
that Guinea has proposed to the European Economic Community that the latter
participate in the Nimba-SinandOu iron ore deposit mining project near Guinea's
Liberian border. Hr Teure stated that the second portion of the Nimba
Mountains deposit mining project is slated to make it possible to bring high—
grade iron ore production from 15 to 20 million tons. The Nimba deposit is

an extension of Liberia's deposit which is in the process of being exhausted.
According to the experts, the Nimba project is meant to make it possible to

use installations already existing in Liberia. especially the railway necessary
for transporting the Guinean ore to the coast. The project's total cost is
$990 million. Ismael Toure's stay in Brussels was from 23 February to 2 March.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES ET HEDITERRANBENS in French no 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 681]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

cso: 4719/ 698

16
FOR‘OFFICIAI.USEGDNLY
UNIVERSITY STUDENTS mass FOR MORE FREEDOM
Paris mm: AFRIQUE in French 2/. Feb 82 pp 18-19

[Article b special correspondent Siradiou Diallo: "Discontent at the Uni-
versity" f

A Text _/ Since the morning of 11 February the University of Abidjan looks like
an entrenched camp whose occupants are all in hiding. Among the deserted build-
ings. overshadowed by the tall fronds of tropical trees. members of republican
security companies wander about in battle dress. helmeted. and with hefty
black truncheons hanging on their bolts. All the higher education establish-
ments and university residence halls in the Ivorian capital offer the same
spectacle of desolation. The olive drab figures have taken the place of stu-
dents everywhere. The forner are preparing to camp on the preaises for a
long time. the latter. after packing their bags. went off with books and note-
books under their arms. The university bus drivers play checkers or take long
naps in the shade of their caremlly aligned vehicles in the huge parking lot
opposite the campus.

On 10 February, after a four-hour debate. the political bureau of the PDCI
(Democratic Party of the Ivory Coast) announced the closing of the university
and the higher education establishments in Abidjan until further notice. the
evacuation of all the university villages and residences in the capital. and
suspension of higher education scholarhips. The political bureau's communique
also declared the strike called by SYNARES (African Union for Research and
Higher Education) illegal. and announced that the syndicate is no longer re-
cognized either by the party or the government. This amounts to saying that
between the 15,000 students of the University of Ab.‘ djan and the authorities.
there is a trial of strength. How did it come to this?

it all began on 5 February. 'That day. the national daily newspaper FRATERNITE-
HATIN ran an article entitled "Leaks and Cheating on Ruminations. a Plague
Gnawing at the University," in which are given in detail all the techniques
used by students for cheating during examinations. The author of the article.
ladji Sidibe. had merely written down the confidences of students about prac-
tices that are not. incidentally. special to the University of Abidjan. but
are commonly encountered elsewhere, and conspicuously in France. Feeling

1
FOR OFl-TCIZL USE ONLY
that their honor was under attack. the Ivorian students decided to respond.
After a stormy session on the campus, some 200 of them marched on FRATERNITE-
MATIN. To have a discussion. they said. with the author of the offending
article. Fearing that the discussion would degenerate into a fist-fight. the
authorities ordered the demonstration dispersed with clubs. Two days later.
a television broadcast that was to have been presented by a student was sup-
pressed. And on 8 February. a lecture that was to be given by a professor
of the faculty of letters was prohibited in its turn. Deciding that that was
going too far. the students made up their minds to resort to strong measures.

Muscular commandos burst into the classrooms. forcing students and teachers

to disperse. A dean of the faculty was roundly roughed up. and the rector of
the university himself, surprised in his office, subjected to annoyance. Hin-
dows were splintered. Faced with the hourly mounting tension. the authorities
reacted ruthlessly. After surrounding the the campus, the CRS [_hepublican
Security Companies_7 arrested hundreds of students and took them to the
Adkouedo army camp. on the Bingerville road, in order, said an officer."to
reeducate them for as long as it takes.“ In pamphlets calling for general
mobilization, the students announced an indefinite strike. SYNARES assisted
them by deciding to adopt the same stance. Hhat do the Ivorian officials feel
about it? "After all that has been done for these students." they say, I'why
this ingratitude?"

And they go on to list in detail all the advantages they have been given and
the things that have been done for their tenefit: scholarships of 42.00 CPA
francs (840 French francs) a month, while the SMIC L interoccupational mini-
mum growth wage) is 35.000 CPA francs a month. 18 comfortable university resi-
dences spread all over Abidjan and the suburbs, student rooms at 3.000 CFA
francs a month, restaurant vouchers at 75 CFA francs and free bus transporta-
tion. "What can they be complaining about," say the country's leaders, “un-
less it is that the head of state spoils them too much?" The students are
denying these advantages. but are denouncing certain flaws. A glance over
their pamphlets is enough to show that. Out of their nine demands. not a
single one is of a material order. Their demands range from the right to
information to freedom of expression. and include respect for the immunity of
the university campus and suppression of extremist and dishonest selection
"intended to turn them into out-of-work intellectuals.“ They are also calling
for the dissolution of the MEECI (Movement of Students and Pupils of the

Ivory Coast. s government~sponsored organization). and the publication by
FRATERNITE-HATIN of a formal denial of what they call their so-called cheat~
ing on examinations. In point of fact. the student unrest in Abidjan is only
one of the problems the country is experiencing after the accelerated develop-
ment it has undergone during the last 20 years.. The student demands reflect
the needs and aspirations of a social class that having acquired a standard
of living unknown elsewhere in Africa, would now like to have the same thing
in intellectual terms. Likctheastute politician that he is. President
ﬁouphouet-Boigny started to meet these needs. As proof: the organized, chan-
neled democratization within the single party at the end of 1980, at the'
legislative elections. FRATERNITE-MATIN and the media as a whole. including
television. regularly reflect it. Not a week,not to claim a day. goes by

that the opportunity is not given to an academic. a cadre. a student. or a
union member, to criticize some political leader or other for his management

18
INDR OFTNCIALIISE(NNLY
or his conduct. A traveler retuming to Abidjan after six lonths' absence
cannot help being surprised by the heat of the debate now going on in the coun-

try.

A veritable cultural revolution. desired. organized, and controlled by the
head of state hisself is being witnessed. And it is precisely the control and
theimpedinents that the intellectuals and the students are eager to see gone.
But President Houphouet-Boiyzy. on his side. intends to act with caution, in
stages. and providing safety rails. Will he succeed in calming people down
and implementing his deaocracy little by little? That is the basic issue.

The very future of the regime is at stake. Especially in these heated tines.
with offices. factories. and plantations massing with persistent rumors about
the succession.

COPYRIGHT: Joune Afrique GRU‘PJIA 1982

12149
080: 1.71 9/667

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

GRAIN REQUIRHENTs—Hozambique requires food supplies amunting to close to
180,000 tons of grain following a drought which has affected large areas of
the country. On 8 March, Minister of Home Trade Aranda da Silva called a
meeting of representatives of the diplomatic corps and humanitarian interna-
tional agencies to inform then about the general situation created by a
particularly severe drought in the coastal regions of Cabo Delgado, Nonpula
and Inhambane. The minister made it clear that aid to the stricken popula-
tion will be required for the entire year of 1982 and until the next harvest
is gathered in June-July 1983. He added that the international cor-unity will
also have to' provide assistance in the form of shipments of grain and of al-
most 18,000 tons of dry beans. The total number of people affected by the
drought is estimated to be around 1.8 million. [Text] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAIJX ET HIITERRANBENS in French No 1897, 19 liar 82 p 809] [COPYRIGHTz
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 8796

HATER PROJECT LOAN-41m African Development Bank has just granted a loan to
Mozambique for the equivalent of 3,772,000,000 CPA francs to finance part of
the Pequenos Limbombos Dan project. The project is intended to ensure a ra-
tional utilization of the meager water resources of the Umbeluzi River and
pursues the double purpose of meeting the future increasing need of water
supply for household and industrial consumption in the town of Maputo, and
of irrigating close to 15,000 hectares of land to boost the citrus crop and
several other food crops. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS
in French No 1897, 19 Mar 82 p 809] [COPYRIGHn Rene Moreux et Cie Paris
1982.] 8796

C80: 4 719/754

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PRESIDENT v1511's mm murmur-~01: 26 February President Kountche got back
to Niamey at the end of a 6-day visit in Diffa Department near the Chadian
border. He was accompanied by several members of the Nigerien Government and

livestock (cattle, goats, sheep and camels) harbored by the persistence of the
drought. He also inspected the public welfare infrastructure set up during the
lasr few years: community clinics and maternity hospitals, educational
escablishments, roads, electrical power supply, fuel depots, wells and bore-
holes. President Kountche visited the military posts tasked with protecting
nomad shepherds against the forays of looters coming from Chad. In meeting
with the chiefs of the Taubou, Arab, Tuareg and Peul tribes as well as with
the Beri-Beri peoples who are in the majority in Diffs Department, the chief
of state asked them to "strengthen national unity" and to "participate in

the maintenance of security" at the side of the armed forces and the police.
In all the administrative subdivisions, moreover, he supervised the establish-
ment of stockpiles of grain (millet. sorghum, wheat) and fodder for livestock
which will enable the population groups and the livestock to get thrOugh

this department. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French
No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 684] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

080: 4719/699

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAHBIA

BRIEFS

EXPANSION 0F SAR INSTALLATIONS-~Petroleum Products: Expansion Program of SAR
[African Refining Company] Installations: Senegal's African Refining Company
has started carrying out its expansion program by equipping itself with a
lAOO—meter underwater pipe for discharging crude oil from oil tankers The
pipe will be able to discharge 80,000 cubic-meter tankers and will yield
savings of 1 billion CFA francs per year. SAR's objective is to bring its
refining capacity from 900,000 to 1,200,000 tons. [Text] [Paris HARCBES
TROPICADX ET HEDITEﬂkANEENS in French 80 1895. 5 Mar 82 p 679] [CDPYRIGHTz
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

COTTON PRODUCTION-Cotton production forecasts were met this year with an
estimated harvest of 33,000 tons of seed catton. Of particular note is that
yields reached a record level (1.2 tons/hectare), the highest recorded since
the crop was introduced into Senegal in 1961. Thus. the objective of 1.1
tons/hectare in 1984 was exceeded, which objective was set by the contract
schedule with the government binding on SODEFITEX (Textile Fibers Development
Company). Similar production performances were achieved by SODEFITEX with
respect to rice and corn. [Text] [Paris HARCBES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS
in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 679] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Moreux et Cie Paris
1982.] 9631

IMF STANDBY AGREEMENT-—The IMF gives its support to the economic Stabilization
Program: On 24 February the International Monetary Fund (THE) announced the
conclusion of a standby agreement (or confirmation agreement) with Gambia
authorizing that country to buy the equivalent of 16.9 million SDR (Special
Drawing Rights) during the next 12 months to support the economic and financial
program of the Gambian Government. It was pointed out that Gambia's IMF

quota is 13.5 million SDR and its financial obligations with respect to the
Fund currently amount to the equivalent of 14.9 million SDR. The government
program to which the recent agreement contributes the lHP's support aims to
stabilize the country's economic and financial situation during the upcoming 12
months. It provides for a redirection of investment toward productive
-sectors, agriculture in particular. At the same time strict measures will

be put into force in price, currency and tax matters in order to curb demand
for imported goods, to limit the balance of payments deficit to an acceptable
level, and to reduce foreign payments arrears. [Text] [Paris MARCHES

TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 680] [COPYRIGHT:

Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

22
IWJR OFT1C]A1.USE¢3NLY
TUNISIA}! COOPERATIONu-It was learned in Dakar at the close of the third session
of the joint Senegalese-Tunisian cooperation couiasion on 16 February that
the Tunisian prime minister, Mohamed Mzali, will be making an official visit
to Senegal at the beginning of April. The session was presided over by the
foreign affairs ministers of the two countries, Hessrs Niaaae (Senegal) and
Beji Caid es-Sebsi (Tunisia). The areas of industry and agriculture as well
as fishing, tourism and transportation occupy an important place in bilateral
relations. In the industry area, Senegalese and Tunisians will be meeting in
March to work jointly in a cooperation program. In air transportation the
national company Tunis Air will inaugurate its first flight to Dakar on

31 March only a few days before Tunisian Prime Minister Mohamed Mazali's
visit. The establishment of direct dial telephone connections between Dakar
and Tunis is also anticipated. The two cauntries reaffirmed their desire to
expand and strengthen their cooperation in all fields. That is why the joint
emission has been raised in status to a high-level joint commission which
will hold its first meeting next year in Tunnis. [Text] [Paris MATCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1894, 26 Feb 82 p 616] [COPYRlcﬂTz
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9631

C50: “19/699 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY