FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10123
18 November 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 60/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
encIOsed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR1)FF“JAL.USEIDNLY

JPRS L/lOl
18 Novembe:

NEST EUROPE REPORT
(9000 60/81)

CONTENTS

ECONOMIC
FRANCE

Ways To and Inflation, Increase Production Reviewed
(Raymnd Bourgine’ VALZURS mm, 5 Oct 81)eeeeeeeeeeoeee

POLITICAL
SPAIN

Recent Terrorist Reprieve, New Violence Analyzed
(CAHBIO, 5' 12 OCt 81)eeeeDoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Recent Reprieve, by Ander Landaburu
New Violence

Sertorius Discusses Internal Issues of PCB
(Nicolas Sartorius Interview: CAHBIO. 28 Sep 81).............

UCD Can No Longer neon-e Support of Business Sector
(CAMBIO, 19 Oct 81)0.00.0.0...to...OIneon-Ooooooooooloeeeeeee

GENERAL .

FRANCE

Crews of First Franco-Soviet Flight To Be Trained Before and of 1981
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET COSMOS, 12 Sep 81).................
FOR oman. USE ONLY

ECONCMIC Pm

WAYS TO END INPUTION. INCREASE PRODUCTION REVIEWED
Paris VALBURS AC‘rUELLBS in French 5 Oct 81 pp 27-29
[Article by Raymndpourgine]

[Text] For employment, against inflation, through solidarity! This, in a few
words, sums up the intent of the 1982 budget submitted by Mr Fabius. What are its
chances of success? Under what conditions? Isportant though the budget certainly
is. it is but part of an entirety which is economic policy as a whole.

let us begin by identifying the dimension of the problem of unemployment. First
of all, it demands the creation, each year. of 250,000 new jobs (750.000 youths
are reaching employment age as 500.000 older employees retire). In addition to
this, the existing number of unemployed (1.000.000) must be reduced. will this be'
possible? It is at all events necessary.

In the United States. between 1975 and 1981. 12 million jobs were created, which
is an average of 2 sillion jobs a year and the figure actually reached last year.

Considering the ratio between the two populations, which is 4 to 1, this would
mean the creation in France of 500,000 jobs.

let us not hear made to this counent the silly response, I'But France is not the
United States: France. for example. does not have the energy resources!" Neither
are we Japan. which has no raw materials in its own soil and very little tillable
land. No! Economics is not a purely quantitative science. Its determinative
factor is the human being, whore intelligence and will are variables.

On a requirement of 300,000-500,000 jobs annually, the effect of the state budget
is negligible: For 1981 and 1982. the socialists themselves have not dared to
project more than 65,000 a year. Thus. the solution depends essentially upon the
industrial and connercial sector. Now, what are the requisites for the creation
of jobs in private enterprise?

Their nature is twofold: Psychological and practical. Confidence must be reunited
with means, factors which react upon each other.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Let us state the key term: There must be profits. Without the prospect of profits
there is no confidence; without profits there are no means.

Mr Laurent Fabius writes: ”The recovery of productive investment depends upon the
strengthening of the prospects for demand. Currently, it is moderate, inasmuch as
the profit margin of business enterprises...is very much below its 1980 level.'

Hr Fabius expects the self-financing of business to improve substantially more
rapidly.

In plain words, this means that the Socialist government is counting on the re-
covery of profit margins. (he of the basic assumptions of the 1982 budget is
that, volumewise, the investments of the productive branches, other than the GBN's
[Large National Enterprises] will increase by 2.9 percent, even though in 1981
they decreased by 4.9 percent.

Actually, this recovery is necessary. It is an essential condition for a 3.3-per-
cent volume increase in GDP [Gross Domestic Product], without which the budgetary
deficit will greatly exceed the projected me of Pr 95.4 billion. The battle for
employment and against inflation will then be lost.

How then can the confidence and the means of the business ccmunity be reactiva-
ted?

This question ran like a leitmctif through the president of the Republic's press
conference:

--"0ur industry must be reactivated (...). A major effort was launched at the

the start of Mr Pompidou's presidency, an effort that subsequently slaved and
disintegrated (...). Our domestic market must be recaptured. I repeat that, I em-
phasi'ze it! It shall be a basic objective of my policy throughout my seven-year
term. '

True: True! But Mr Francois Mitterrand and his ministers must face the fact
realistically that in this respect they are laboring under a handicap.

What is a businessman? He is the central figure of a capitalist economy--the one
who takes the initiative in organizing people and capital around an idea to form
an enterprise the ultimate master of which is the customer. Now, what has been
the central theme of the socialist doctrine? The "break with capitalism!" And
this is still the intent of most of the new deputies, according to their own
statements.

Therein lies a gap. Actions will be necessary to bridge it.

The proposed actions, as they are perceived by the businessmen, do not reassure
them: nationalizations, their indemnizations, the wealth tax, "emergency” but
regularly renewed supplementary allowances, etc.

In concrete terms, the businessmen know they are entirely exposed to international

competition: They must export to percent of our industrial and agricultural
production, while 32 percent of the industrial products being sold on our domestic

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

market are of foreign origin. They have heard the prime minister, and then the
president of the Republic, deplore the loss of S to 6 percent of the dmestic
market during the last 5 years--a loss with which they are thoroughly familiar.
since it is they who have suffered it. It accounts for a loss of 300,000 jobs out
of the approximately 6 million jobs in industry (construction industry excluded).
But they also know it is not their fault.

Industrial policy is inseparable from monetary policy.

Why havenrnaymond Barre and Mr Jacques Delors, one after the other, professed the
fetishism of the strong--the artificially strong--franc?

Neither of them has been at the head of an enterprise whose competitors belong to
a country with a lower inflation rate. Since 1978, French costs and prices have
increased by 20 percent more than have those of the no. No amount of genius can
surmount such a handicap. To save one's business. the only solution is to suspend
one's own production and offer one's production network to his oolpetitor as a
channel for the marketing of the competitor's products.

There is undoubtedly also the fact that both Mr Barre and Mr Delors are' dedicated
Europeans: The EMS [European Monetary System] holds forth the hope of a future
common European currency. But a single_currency requires a single inflation rate.

The businessmen have heard Mr Hitterrand talk to them of their I'just interest,"
which in truth is indistinguishable from the interest of the enterprise and its
jobs. They have heard him say that the currency is the "reflection” of the
economy. Which means there is just one way of 'defending the franc,“ which is:
Recognize the lessons of the past, align the currency exchange rate on a parity
basis with its purchasing power; then, on this new basis, never again suffer an
inflation rate higher than that of our neighbors.

Meanwhile, our monetary unrealism is inflicting upon our businessmen two sources
of losses: A franc-mark exchange rate that is 20 percent too high for them. and
interest rates which, at 18-23 percent levels, are unbearable.

Take the draft budget: It contains, for 1982, a subsidy of Fr 1 billion for
Renault that did not exist last year. It is a reflection of the general situa-
tion.

In his submittal of the 1982 budget, Mr Laurent Pabius evokes the cause-and-effect
relationship between monetary parities and commercial competitiveness. no points
out that the drop in European currencies with respect to the dollar and the yen
will favor “profits in parts of the aac's marketing zone.” That is entirely true.
Unfortunately. within the EMS, we the French are being penalized by our inflation
rate.

This monetary parities problem is the major problem in the canpetitiveness of our
enterprises.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should have been resolved on 22 May. Recovery is delayed with the passing of
each month.

On the wealth tax, it was Mr Mitterrand himself who reacted personally. As con-
ceived by the experts. it was a machine designed to crush growth (see VALEURS
ACTUELLES No 2338, 21 Sep: "A Question of Confidence in Mr Hauroy'). Mr Jacques
Attali, special adviser to the president, stated to MAlIN MAGAZINE:

--"ue were abOut to commit an error. Public debate helped us avoid it.‘

Briefly, owners of enterprises whose personal capital increases by more than 1.5
percent annually and is invested will be exempt from the tax on this portion of
their wealth. It is a success for realism.

As regards nationalizations, Hr Francois Mitterrand explained during his confer-
ence that their intent was to stave off 'internationalizations.‘ For most
businessmen, this poses the question: Yesterday, we were prevented from allowing
ourselves to be taken over by the multinationals; tomorrow, are we not going to
be taken over by the nationalised groups?

This is a rule of the game that has yet to be laid down, in the form of a genuine
antitrust legislation that includes the state as well.

Compensations? They must be fair, not only to the shareholders but also because
world confidence will be measurable by this yardstick.

The sum being mentioned is between Br 30 and 40 billion. Mr Rocard, minister

of the plan, has stated to the American magazine FORTUNE that the nationaliza-
tions will increase the public sector's share in the French productive economy

from 12 to 18 percent. A simple rule-of-three calculation brings out the absurdity
of estimating a value of Fr 30 billion from this 6 percent: This would mean that
the entire French industrial and banking apparatus is now not worth more than

Fr 500 billion. This is untenable.

Besides, the foreign shareholders. the Arabs in particular, are a safeguard of
sorts for the French: For these could not be hurt without provoking damaging
reactions.

Let not the Ministry's 'financiers' raise their arms heavenwards, appealing for
public funds! Let them simply look at one item of the 1982 budget: "Contributions
to National Enterprises.‘l which totals Fr 43 billion annually. The SNCF [French
National Railroads] alone will receive over Fr 24 billion. consisting of Fr 14
billion of balancing subsidy and Fr 10 billion to cover its retirement pensions.

If the Nationalized Companies Shareholders Indennization Fund were to be granted
some Fr 8 billion annually, indexed, to cover the servicing of indemnizations over
a periodofls years, the sum would represent 1 percent of the general budget. It
would represent a slight increase of 3 percent in Title Iv, which brings together
under one heading the entirety of economic and social interventions, an entirety

INDR 0F1WCJAL USEICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the government feels no constraints in increasing by 39 percent from one
year to the next. instead of totaling Pr 262 billion for 1982. Title IV would
go to Fr 300 billion!

This increase is small, even with respect to the expected deficit, which, inclu-
sive of this increase will go from Fr 95 to Fr 103 billion.

The restoration of confidence would be a real bargain at the price.

We will get back to the calculation of indemnizations. But at this point we wish
to call the government's attention to two facts:

1. The net assets of the nationalized coupanies whose subsidiaries have undertaken
intensive self-financing programs mst be taken at their consolidated value.
Otherwise, the more they have invested--that is, the more they have created or
protected jobs--the more they will be penalized.

2. The present value of these assets will have to be calculated on the basis of
the monetary erosion that has taken place. The state should not profit from its
failing: Inflation.

The 1982 budget is first of all an intended Keynesian-based recovery through
consumption. It is replete with generosity: For families, whose allowances are to
be increased by 50 percent in 1 year; for the elderly, for whom the minimum bene-
fit will go from Fr 1,400 per month to Fr 2,000 per month. It is full of “finish-
ing touches" through economic interventions.

Mr Laurent Pabius makes a point of the fact that public aid to industry is to
total Pr 34.4 billion, representing an increase of over 52.4 percent.

He himself must admit that this sum is minimal for an industry whose annual turn-
over exoeeds Pr 1,500 billion. However, one is justified in questioning the very
principle of such aid. A sound enterprise is financed by its customers. Subsidies
distort the marketplace and enslave.

The only way for the state to truly aid industry is to provide a sound monetary
base, efficient public services and a cometitive fiscal policy.

Mr Mitterrand has ordered a review of the "detrimental'I capital gains tax and a
revision of the business tax, which penalizes production in France. That is all
positive.

Mr Pabius has annOunced the tightening of the fight against tax fraud. Most
businessmen will applaud this, since tax fraud distorts canpetition to their
disadvantage and contributes to increasing their tax burden.

Everything centers on one figure: will there or will there not be the 3.3 percent

increase in volume of the GDP on which the balancing of the budget submitted is
based?

FOR OFFICLKL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If not, tax losses and larger benefits payouts, particularly unemployment, will
upset the terms of the budget.

What this budget needs in order to avoid drowning in inflation is a sound recovery
of production, hence of investments.

The documented figures Mr Pabius has attached to his draft budget show clearly
the evolution of our finances in space and tine.

In 1973, the public and social levy on the GDP in France was 35.7 percent, hence
lower than the PRG's. which was 36.3 percent. In 1979, they were 41.7 percent in
France and 37.3 percent in the PRC. A differential of 4 points!

During the same period, the figures in Japan went from 22.5 percent to 24.8 per-
cent, and in the United States from 30.3 percent to 31.4 percent.

In 1980 and 1981, we French reached 42.5 percent for each of the 2 years. and for
1982 the official allocation is to be 43.3 percent. During the electoral can-
paign. Mr Francois Mitterrand had indicated his intention to bring this figure
down below 42 percent again. But how?

Everyone who has had the experience of putting an enterprise in good operating
order again knows that there is only one way to do this: By increasing its reve-
nues. The balancing of an econany must be dynamic.

It should be noted that the 4-percent differential between the French and German
levies represents, for a GDP of Pr 3,600 billion projected for 1982. some Fr 1“
billion. If we were being managed in the German manner, this would be the sur-
plus available to our productive economy. This should suffice to explain the
significance of the difference between the inflation rates of the two countries,
inflation being nothing other than a hidden tax that automatically adjusts demand
(by depriving it of its buying power) to supply.

There is just one way to combat it effectively: By increasing the latter. This
is what is called the theory of "supply-side" economics, of recovery through
production. It is the opposite of recovery through consumption ('demand-side'
economics) advocated by Lord Keynes.

The irony of the Pabius budget is that it cannot be made good except through the
anticipated increase in the GDP. which he hopes will reach 3.3 percent, by way of
the supply side, hence by way of profits, assuming they can be made, which will
depend upon monetary policy, and assuming they are reinvested, which will depend
upon confidence.

When it is stated that the entitlements levies on the GDP will not total more
than 43.3 percent, this is based on two basic assumtions:

1. That the GDP will definitely increase by 3.3 percent. If it does not, it will
not total Pr 3,600 billion.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. That the financing of the deficit is not an entitlement levy on the GDP. The
fact is that borrowings by the state are definitely a levy on the financial
markets to the detriment of productive investments. And that inflation is defin-
itely a hidden tax.

The 43.3 percent for 1982 has been calculated by the minister of finance based on
levying Pr 1.570 billion of entitlement payouts against Pr 3,627 billion of GDP.

But in case of failure, the GDP would rise by less than 3.3 percent and would not
exceed Pr 3.520 billion. To the total payouts would have to be added the servi-

cing of the deficit, which would then be greater than the planned Pr 95 billion.

The levy would then rise to 50 percent. 0:: economy would be a spin.

The bankruptcy of the businessmen would result in loss of salaried jobs. What

would happen in a situation involving 2 and 1/2 million to 3 million unemployed,
consisting for the most part this tine of young workers?

The communist party awaits only this moment; it would have its revolution.

What are the forces that could bring about this failure and. in that context,
how?

There is absolute solidarity along the passengers of the ship 'Prance.‘ But
errors of calculation are from all angles a possibility, especially when the
“experts“ are bound by a fetishist sentimentality.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs Actuelles'

9399
C30: 3100/36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

RECENT TERRORIST REPRIEVE, NEH VIOLENCE ANALYZBD
Recent Reprieve

Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 5 Oct 81 pp 26-32

[Article by Ander landaburu: "The loo-Day Truce")

[Text] Although the terrorist organization. ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty
Group], is not giving an official explanation of its partial summer truce, it
seems that there are many reasons why the ETA leaders were obliged to call a spec-
tacular halt to their activist actions during the past 3 months.

It was enough time for Buskadi [Easque Countr 7 to recover, in whatever way necessary
and devoid of the usual tension, most of its ost gaiety and tranquillity while,

at the sane time, observe how the nassive return of tourists was invading its
beaches. This ETA interval is now considered a positive development, although it
does not preclude the fear throughout the entire Basque Country of a possible new
terrorist offensive; in view of this possibility, the authorities and security
forces have recently taken precautionary measures, particularly in Spain's capital,
upon receiving information from the French authorities indicating that the commando
unit, Madrid, had crossed over the border. A maximum alert operation in one of the
downtown streets of Madrid resulted in the arrest of Juan Antonio Hsdariaga, member
of an ETA information commando unit operating in that city.

The Causes

Both the Basque authorities, those of Madrid, and political sources consulted by
this publication agree that there are various causes of this partial lull, among
which the following should be stressed: a loss of substantial support by an Abert-
zal [patriotic] sector of the population, a weakening of BTA's infrastructure due
to police operations in the spring, the new French posture regarding refugees
coming to the other side of the Pyrenees, a deep-rooted internal squabble in which
the "milis" [militants] are presently engaged in forcing this "technical truce,"
the attitude of the "polimilis" [polymilitants] in abandoning the armed conflict,
the replanning of ETA's activist strategy for more selective goals and coupe and,
finally, ongoing speculative negotiations with authorities on either the state or
Basque level.

All these causes do not make it possible to forget the cold hard facts of the figures
involved. In fact. from information released by the Ministry of Interior less than

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. lESI-l ONLY

a month ago, it was learned that in the first 6 months of 1981 there were 30 deaths
from terrorist activities compared with 57 for the same period of 1980. Hith re-
gard to division of responsibility by terrorist groups, according to the report,
the ETA—military comitted more assassinations between January and June 1980 than
in the same period of 1981. A total of 21o persons died from assaults by the "cilia"
this year coapared with 44 last year.

However, this violence has decreased considerably since July. For example, the

last assault against individuals carried out in the Basque country occurred on

25 July. On that day, Felix Galindez Llano, apartment salesman, was murdered by

the ETA in the Alava locality of Amurrio. After a peaceful August during which the
Basque Country experienced the most tranquil sun for many years, with gay and
jubilant celebrations, the ETA organization again attacked in the middle of September.
On 12 Septaaber, the explosion of two booby traps placed near the substation of
Iberduero in Usurbil (Guipvscoa) seriously wounded two rural polic-en. But,
practically speaking, it can be said that the ETA had almost 100 days of truce in

its schedule of assassinations.

Among these macabre statistics of ETA violence, it shOuld also be pointed out that
the date of the BTA'a latest murder of a mmaber of state security was 10 July. This
assault was committed near Bilbao, in Basauri, against a retired rural policeman
named Joaquin Porjon.

Resignedly accustomed to living in successive waves of violence, the Basques have
recently recovered a measure of tranquillity which, to be sure, was disturbed only
by numerous attacks against the installations of Iberduero up and down the country
but without the frightening string of deaths of last year.

This change in social atmosphere, noted particularly in Busbdi this smer, and
the people's desire to have a peaceful life have resulted in a general rejection

of ETA's tenets. Continuous attempts at street demonstrations, promoted by groups
affiliated with the ETA, have met with an increasingly weaker echo. 0f the 3,000
or 10,000 persons who managed to daonstrate a few years ago, even including last
year, in favor of stands taken by the ETA or its principles, now only a few hundred,
in most instances, manage to regroup, except, at times, on the matter of the nuclear
power plant of Lannie.

What Has Happened in the Past 3 Months?

"Whereas street demonstrations are continuing, we shall not side with those who,
with their cries, are justifying the BTA's actions more than they are supporting
the prisoners," cemented a well-known restorar, a militant of the PNV [Basque
Nationalist Party], from the old section of San Sebastian.

In the opinion of Valentin Solagaistua, statutory deputy and former director of
the Herri Batasuna coalition, the ETA should revise its posture in view of the pre-
sent situation: "Demonstrations are achieving very weak results, even in the case
of the prisoners or in that of Lemonia. The people are tired of so much squabb-
ling, and those who support the ETA should realize that they have isolated tha-
selves from most of their fellow countrymen. For example, it is counterproductive
to hold demonstrations such as that on regatta day in San Sebastian. People go to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the boat races and do not want to be disturbed. The use of a celebration to com-
plain, justified or not, is now counterproductive." And that was the attitude of
the people who attended the inauguration of the International Movie Festival of

Donosti when they openly reproved the attempt made by certain groups of demonstra-

tors to boycott the affair by insulting and throwing eggs at the city's mayor, J.
M. Alkain.

This lack of support for the harsher expressions of the political struggle is also
due to the rational attitude of the Basque people who want to return to a normal
situation, according to a cement made by Guipuzcoa Civilian Governor Pedro de
Aristegui: "The splendid amt we had this year," the governor added, "has con-
firmed the people's deep desire for pace. we now hear the expression, '1 want
peace,' and since, in the past few weeks, peace has become almost a habit, it will
be difficult to break that habit again, unless there is a general upheaval among
the people."

Although with another shade of meaning, this behavior by the people has also rubbed
off on old ETA militants or on that former prisoner who said: "Previously, in the
Franco era, people fought to the death, took risks, hid militants and the like.
Nowadays, the motivation for possible assistance does not appear so clearcut for
many people. Acts such as the death of Engineer Ryan and similar events, in addi-
tion to being unanimously denounced, have made many people change their attitude,
people who turned their back (on the ETA adherents) and no longer want to take
risks as in the past."

These days, dmnocratic principles, the possibility of conducting the political
struggle through established institutions and, especially, the violent methods of

the ETA and its allies have turned most of the people away from those "old patriots."
In the general opinion, blackmail, assault and fear are not the means for struggle

in a democracy, no matter how incipient and fragile it may be.

The Prisoners

On 25 August, at the penitentiary of El Puerto de Santamaria, Cadiz, about 100
ETA-military prisoners had begun a hunger strike of indefinite duration. However,
even the announcement of this strike did not help Berri Batasuna [Popular Unity] and
his allies to stir up the people on behalf of the prisoners while, on the other
hand, a greater number of people were induced to take part in the demonstrations
against the bemoniz power plant, as ossurred this week in Bilbao.

From what CAMBIO 16 was able to learn from a reliable Basque source, the ETA-
military prisoners reproached and criticized the party's directorate harshly.
Generally speaking, upon being transferred to the south, the prisoners encountered
only indifference and, while they are in prison, there are others in France living
in a certain amount of comfort and with fairly favorable economic means. The pri-
soners also emphasize the special and more favorable treatment which, according

to th-, the imprisoned manbers of the ETA-pm [polymilitary] are enjoying as a re-
ward for their organization's having abandoned the armed conflict. There are even
rumors of early and staggered pardons or gratuitous measures for the polymilitants.

Relations between the "milis" prisoners and part of the ETA directorate, both in
France and our country, have stepped up and "poisoned" the internal crisis even

10
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more. It is certain that these difficult relations have also been an important
factor in the recent truce by the ETA-military.

With the central administration's promise of improved conditions and a general
transfer of the prisoners to the prisons of Reclares de la Oca (Alava) and Soﬁa—-
presently being renodeled--before the end of the year, the prisoners on a hunger
strike since August changed their attitude and gave up the strike last week without

To the loss of popular support, strongly resented in the past few months, we must
add new police action which, with- increasing effectiveness, has very seriously
dananged the organization’s information infrastructure and resulted in the arrest
of certain important operative commdos. For example, with the recent removal
from circulation of comando Donibane, who was active only since February, it was
possible to avoid attacks against two police vehicles, an attack against a Civil
Guard barracks and the bombing of various Iberduero facilities. Among the im-
portant material seized were 65 kg of gum-w taken during last year's robbery at the
powder warehouse of Soto de la Marina, in Santander. ‘rhese police operations, like
those reported in Navarre and Alava last spring against the ETA apparatus, have
also seriously weakened the adherents of that organization. In this regard and
according to police sources. in a document found in an apartmmt in Zaraus from
which Miguel Antonio Goikoetxea Elorriaga, "Txapela," managed to escape after an
exchange of gunfire in which young inspector Maria Jose Sanchez died under strange
circumstances not revealed by the authorities, ‘l‘xapela complained about a lack of
popular and logistic support as well as an inadequate information structure at his
disposal.

At present, Miguel Antonio Goikoetxea, or mapela, is one of the men most wanted
by the police, who believe he is forming a cmando unit in Madrid.

In this connection, some political observers of the basque Country are venturing
the theory that the organization, appreciably "affected" by increasingly effective
police act ion, has centered its activist framework around the fight against Lemoniz,
having to abandon other objectives. Numerous assaults against Iberduero's elec-
trical system confirm that this was BTA's primary objective during the armor and
that, through the strategy of a “tectmical truce" and a period of replanning masked
by an internal crisis or resulting from a lack of operative capacity, it directed
its coups against the company which is building the Lemoniz plant.

Despite the relative success achieved by the security forces against B'IA resistance,
the authorities are being cautious. In a recent trip to Euskadi, Interior Minister
Juan Jose Roson, referring to ETA's pause in its activity, retained certain mis-
givings in stating the following: "Despite BTA‘s truce in recent months, we cannot
speak of victory. I believe we have made substantial progress, but we cannot pre-
clude the possibility of new terrorist activity, for a number of comandos are
capable of putting that activity into practice, and I think we shall see such acti-
vity in the not too distant future."

In its eagerness and desire to get close to the people, the National Police organi-
zation recently launched a campaign in Buskadi. As an illustration of the people's
change of attitude toward the ETA, there were two events which, although isolated

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in principle, could, in its symbolism, signify a new phase in the Basque Country.
In fact, for the first time and in keeping with this campaign, members of the
National Police were applauded in towns like Renteria or Bilbao which, up to now,
were in a state of conflict. If we add to this a speedup in the establishment of
independent police foreseen for the spring, we have reason to believe that ETA
members will have an increasingly difficult time.

However, Minister Roson's fears were justified: a few days later, in view of a
possible resumption of terrorist acts and, in particular, the discovery of two
commands units in Madrid, the state security leaders took serious measures to

keep an eye on the Spanish capital as well as on Euskadi where highway control was
resumed.

A severe attack against military leaders or officials of the security forces
caused the government to increase these special measures. In turn, as part of the
plan for controlling and combating the ETA, 80 inspectors-wfficers of the Central
Information Brigade, subordinate to the EDA (Unified Antiterrorist Command) were
urgently sent to the Basque Country that same week.

French Change

0n the other side of the border life goes on peacefully and, due to good weather,
the sums: season extended until the end of September. Commotion in the downtom
streets of Bayona or San Juan de Luz continues at all hours of the day. However,
in traditional and historic meeting places, refugees are not seen as in past years.
According to sources close to those refugees, exiles do not appear so easily as
"Hinge" or "Etnabe-Enea." They have pushed security regulations to the limit and
most of the: go from their jobs—those who have jobs—to their homes or leave their
homes only for organization engagements.

Not only has the fear of possible attacks from the extreme right resulted in an
increase in precautionary measures but also the French authorities are now exer-
cising more direct control of ETA refugees.

The leadership of the Basque organization, in turn, is greatly concerned about the
new relations which recently evolved between France and Spain. These relations
were made concrete on the technical level through the recent visit to Paris of
Francisco Laina, director general of security, who was accompanied by Gen Aramburu
Topete, Fernandez Dopico and Manuel Ballesteros.

These initial control measures were confirmed within a few days in the French Basque
country where the French administration required the Basques to pass through the
border control to validate their papers just like the Arabs, Iranians, South Ameri-
cans or Vietnamese. From now on there will be strict control, and the only ones

who can manage to escape that control will be those who decide to live in France
illegally, or in Spain, so long as they are not arrested by the police. This
"passage through a small opening" has caused the present French authorities to
revamp their entire file of exiles and, in the inediate future, they will be
carrying out their police activities with more zeal and efficiency.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To Guadeloupe

CAHBIO 16 received verification from official French sources of this new attitude
by Prance which, until now. and especially with Giscard, wanted to see Spain con-
tinue the way the writer, Prosper Merimee, envisioned it. Thus, after the visit
to Madrid of French Interior Minister Gaston Deferre, who made a commitment to both
the government and the first opposition party, the P803 [Spanish Socialist Workers
Party], an official spokesman and director of that ministry summoned a few re-
presentative refugees of the ETA-military to advise them of the firm decision of
his government to prevent any terrorist activity in or from its territory.

According to the same sources, the French warning was expressed in that interview

in the following terms: "We are doing you a favor regularizing your situation while
we are negotiating with Spain. This regularization must be the same as the accorded
to the refugees of other countries. But now that has ended. Cease all [terrorist]
activity. In principle, we are not in favor of sxtraditions; but if even one engages
in such activity we shall send all of you to the Isle of Yeu, if not to Guadeloupe."

In this change of French attitude an aspect should also be pointed out which has
perhaps gone unnoticed in the neighboring country at the public level but which can
illustrate the new thinking of President Mitterrand's regime. Urged for reasons of
domestic policy not to create a "dangerous atmosphere," a well-known Paris weekly
refused last week to publish a lengthy report with ETA photos of an exclusive inter-
view with two leaders of that organization, alleging that "space should not be
given to those people." According to the French journalist, in that interview BTA
likewise gave no clarification concerning its respite, and the only reference to
the subject was the remark: "Action is prepared in 3 hours or in 6 months." In
the opinion of another Gallic colleague, an expert in this area and the editor of

a major Paris daily, "the ETA youth have become the spokesmen of a new fascism
mixed with postures of Torquemada."

Strange Document

For most of the professionals in the news media, contact with the "milis" continues
to be almost impossible. Nevertheless, mention can be made o:.one meeting in which,
repeating their refusal to make statements, they agreed to give the reporter a

copy of their latest text or communique, without adding a word.

In their latest public memorandum, entitled "Communique to the Basque People," the
ETA leaders, as if to show that the truce did not exist and that this impression
was due to "tendentious and manipulative connivings," call attention to their last
two assaults. However, what for the first time in months is astonishing in this
type of writing is its moderate tone and terminiology. For example, after denounc-
ing the situation of the prisoners and repression of mobilizations in favor of
amnesty and against Lemoniz, they speak of "the laws which are acting contrary to
the aspirations of democracy and self-government by the Basque people and other
nationalities of the state," which could represent an implied recognition of the
Constitution. Terms such as "absence of progressive and liberal will“ or "dialogue
and peaceful" in referring to the authorities clash with their usual aggressive
revolutionary jargon. In turn, there are also no references to Buskadi's indepen—
dence or to the continuance of armed conflict with the publicizing of planned action
or possible "reprisals."

13

FOR Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The communique, considered by some experts as surprising and conciliating and by
others as a symptom of the internal evolution or "crisis" within the apparatus
between the "hardliners" and the "negotiators," ends up calling a meeting for 27
October, coinciding with the anniversary of the execution of Txiki and Otaegui

and three other anti-Franco militants, without calling it "combat day," as customary,
but, rather, "reaffirmation day" for the sector of the people which supports them.

From all of the above, it is clear that at present the ETA—military is going through
a process of intense reflection, also influenced by the fact that the "poli-milis"
have abandoned the struggle. In this regard, Mario Onaindia, secretary general of
the BIA [Basque Revolutionary Party] recently made the statement: "The 6 months

of truce have been more positive than 10 years of killing. I trust that the truce
will be definite."

Making Up for Lost Time?

An extended truce could favor that indirect dialogue, previously mentioned, between
the two sides, according to the opinion of many PNV nationalists.

For now the truce is continuing, and, either because the ETA has concentrated on
its struggle against Lemoniz or on spectacular selective action against top mili-
tary or political coonmmds despite the people's reaction or police action, the most
widespread opinion in the political circles we consulted is that the ETA has begun
to make up for lost time and is about to put an end to the broad summer truce.
Although it is in weakened position, the ETA will not give up weapons, unless its
crisis is more serious than it appears and its internal squabble leads to an atti-
tude similar to that of the "poli-nilis." Buskadi, which has partially recovered
its tranquillity and peace for the moment, is tensely waiting.

The same applies to Spain's capital where the authorities have set operation "Scor-
pion 1" in motion and provided strong security measures around the military centers
and active military chain of command.

New Violence
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 12 Oct 81 p 45

[Text] With the bombing of the Spanish fleet's destroyer, “Marques de la Ensenada,"
the Basque terrorist organization, ETA-military, gave its first notice last week

of what will be its future objective: the armed forces, government and even the
crown.

This is the conclusion reached by the top officials of the Forces of Public Order
after discovering that several meetings had been held by the terrorist organization's
staff in the south of France during the first part of September and intercepting

some of the organization's internal communications.

According to sources close to the directorate of state security, the ETA decided in
these meetings to break the cease-fire it had maintained during the past 3 months

and come up with a new terrorist strategy to be followed by all armed commandos in
the future.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n the opinion of the Spanish police, the new strategy is centered along three
basic lines: a return to "selective attacks," such as that launched in 1973 against
Adm Luis Carrero Blanca; continuous harassment of the army, government and even

the king; and amplification of the "armed conflict" in places located outside the
borders of the Basque Country, preferably with the use of explosives to facilitate
the commandos' escape.

According to this new strategy, the terrorist organization has decided to base its
activities on "illegal commandos," made up of the organization's most seasoned men,
most of whom have received military training in socialist countries and have es-
tablished their official residence in the departments of France's Atlantic Pyrenees.

The presence of "commando Madrid" in Spain's capital and the attempt made on 2
October by ETA-military against the navy destroyer, "Harques de'la Ensenada," in
Santander Province, give reason to believe that the state security officials are
correct in their theories.

The destroyer, "Marques de la Ensenada," a vessel 119 meters long, with 3,370 tons
displacement, six 38-mm guns and eight torpedo-launching tubes, was struck at 0500
hours on 2 October by a powerful explosive charge which left it with a 3qmeter
diameter hole and could have caused the Spanish Navy to have its most serious ca-
tastrophe since the civil war: when attacked. the vessel was carrying 318 sailors,
600 tons of fuel and more than 2,000 rounds of ammunition.

According to initial investigations made by navy authorities, the explosion was
made by means of a magnetic mine attached to the vessel's hull and not at the dock
as first thought. 1

Therefore, the state security officials immediately thought in terms of a terrorist
attack. So that there would be no doubt, the ETA-military made it a point to claim
responsibility a few hours later in communiques sent to various Basque newspapers.

The choice of the time to explode the bomb--short1y after the changing of the watch--
and the location of the mine--as far away as possible from the crew's cabins-~gave
the navy officials reason to think that the Basque terrorist organization had the
ship's layout in its possession and this, in turn, makes it obvious that ETA

members spent their military service on the Marques de la Ensenada or a similar

unit.

Some of these terrorists might even have taken part in this action which, according
to police information, was carried out by two terrorist commandos probably led by
ETA member, Isidro Maria Garalde Bedialauneta, alias "Hamarru."

Hamarru, 1.65 meters tall and 30 years old, is the ETA-military terrorist organiza-
tion's top man in the field of explosives and was the one who bombed a convoy made
up of 120 rural policemen, for which the Basque terrorist organization claimed
responsibility on 7 July, 1980 in Ingrono Province.

Together with Mamarru, six other dangerous Basque terrorists are being sought these
days in Madrid in a full-scale police operation known as "Scorpion 1," 1 month
after their presence was discovered in the Spanish capital.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Two of these terrorists, Jose Maria Izaguirre Gogorza and Jose Maria Bererciatua
Echsrri, are the top leaders of ETA-military's Madrid commando unit and, accord-
ing to the police. it is probable that other dangerous activists have been added
to their group, such as Miquel Antonio Goicoechea Blorriaga, alias ”hapela";
Miguel Angel Apalategui, "Apala"; Juan Otegui Blicegui, "Trato"; and Angel Maria
de Lete Echaniz, "Patas," with the aim of pulling off some heavy terrorist act in
Spain's capital.

these suppositions by the state security officials, who are offering 5 million
pesetas for information leading to the capture of the commando. Madri ," gained
strength on 25 September with the capture in Madrid of Jose Antonio Madariaga
Erezuma, head of ETA-military's information network in the central area.

At the apartment which Madariaga Erezuma occupied at 57 Madera Street, the police
found 30 sheets containing the BTA‘s plans to assassinate six aruy generals and a
map of Madrid with red circles indicating the residences of the officers and the
routes they took every day to go to work.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Informacion y Revistas. S.A.

8569
080: 3110/26

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

SARTORIUS DISCUSSBS INTERNAL ISSUES OF PCB
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Sep 81 pp 35, 37

[Interview with Nicolas Sartorius. assistant secretary of the PCB (Spanish Communist
Party) by correspondent Jose Manuel Arija: "Czar Nicolad'; date and place not given.]

[Text :Uanted: A person of average age. acceptable to both young and old militants;
with a reputation as a Burocommunist, but not anti-Soviet; with broad experience
among the working base. and at the same time accepted by the intellectuals; having
no problems with the communist parties of the nationalities, but loyal to Santiago
Carrillo; someone who would give the leadership a dynamic image without rejecting
the past .

If this advertisement that Santiago Carrillo had in mind in selecting his right

hand man had been put into a computer, the result would have been the same. The
circuits and information in the computer would in the end have come up with the

same name which the secretary general of the PCB chose for his crown prince: Nicolas
Sartorius.

There was no one else among the leaders of the Communist Party who could fulfill
those contradictory requirements; and so this is what happened. He was taken away
from his responsibilities in the CC.00. [Workers' Committees] far enough in advance,
and was given the seat of Marcelino Camacho in the Congress of Deputies. so that

he could warm up and get to know th political class. At the same time. in his capa-
city as representative of the PCB leadership, he travelled to regional congresses
and abroad so that his name. with long surnames from the ancient nobility, and his
face, with his glasses like an English intellectual's and his red hair. could become
known. The final phase, some days ago. was to formally elect his first general
assistant secretary of the PCB.

Nicolas Sartorius Alvarez de las Asturias y Bohorquez. married and with two children,
42 years old. a lawyer and journalist. began his political career in 1959. First

he was in the now extinct FLP [People's Liberation Front] and later in the Communist
Party. Secrecy, prison. and false names and passports accompanied his progress
through these two organizations and throughout the whole Franco era. Now he is

the heir of Santiago Carrillo.

[Nicolas Sartorius speaks] The matter of the assistant secretariats has been planned
with two assistant secretaries just so as to avoid the appearance of having a "suc-
cessor" or crown prince. as the newspapers call it. It is approached from the opera-
tive point of view. In a modern party it is difficult for one person alone to coordi-
nate the top political leadership.

17
Previous experience points out the advisability of having a secretary-general. who
must look after everything from parliamentary questions to the movements of the
masses. make use of two persons to help him in the work of coordinating large areas.
It is a functional arrangement. and also a guarantee of continuity.

CAHBIO 16: "hat does your position as assistant secretary involve?

“5.: Substituting for the secretary-general when he is absent; guaranteeing reli-
able information for the central committee; presiding over a committee on workers'
problems. Not union-related ones, but all those questions which can affect them;
and it will be made up of union. party and technical leaders. My work will also
involve keeping track of other movements of the masses. youth. women. etc. Then.
I will follow and look after the economic commission of the Central Committee. and
later. other leadership tasks which require coordination. Jaime Ballesteros. on
his part. will be in charge of everything having to do with organization.

C16: That is. there will be a "troika" which will share all the political decisions
of the PCB?

N.S.: I don't think it will be exactly that way. What there will be is a collective
decision of the secretariat. because these duties are not over and above the func-
tions of the members of the secretariat. There is no "troika." because I will coor-
dinate what others will do. To put it simply. the functions of the general secretar-
iat will now have two supports in making decisions. so that what one person did
previously. now three will do.

c16: Are you going to give up your responsibilities in the Workers Coumuttees?

N.S.: 0n the 16th of this month. in the plenum of the Executive Committee on the
CC.00.. I resigned my post on the Executive board and on the Federal Committee.
Not because of political incompatibility. which does not exist. but rather because
of physical and functional incompatibility. I do not believethat it is good for

eitherside for an assistant secretary of the party to be on a union's governing
body.

016: Will one of your new missions be to smooth out some of the tensions with the
"renovators"?

N.S.: I think the matter is obvious. The Tenth Congress is over; and a party should
debate and contend about what is needed until the congress takes place. Then. what
is approved there should be carried out whether or not they agree with it. I will
always be in favorof smoothing over rough places. but that does not mean making
political concessions or harming the group as a whole. A member does not leave

his party because the idea of whether there should or should not be internal fac-
tions has not won out in a congress. It has not happened in the P808 [Spanish
Socialist Party] and the DOD [Democratic Center Union], and even less in the PCB.
Today things inside th PCB are substantially better than before the Tenth Congress.

C16: What can be done to overcome the decline in understanding with the SPUC [Uni-
fied Socialist Party of Catalonia]?

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N.S.: The PSUC's problems are basically those of the Catalan comunists, and it
is up to them to overcome them. There is no dispute. they only have to finish the
process which they are carrying out. to make it clear to Catalan society and to
everyone what the line has been, and the identification of the PSUC with Burocom-

nunism. Let there not be the slightest doubt that the PSUC is in every way a Euro-
communist party.

C16: How do you interpret the present tension with the Basque communists?

N.S.: We think the idea of seeking convergence, and later unification of the Basque
Communist Party and the BIA [Basque Revolutionary Party] is a positive step. and

we support it, because it would strengthen the workers' movement. Now. the process
of real convergence is one thing--where the bases participate and come up with a
clarification of ideological principles. of programs and positions on such questions
as the unions and parliament. which would seem very good to us--and a superficial
process is another thing, whereluatall these matters are touched on because of haste;
to the point where it becomes something imaginary. and ends in nothing, even raising
the fear of self-liquidation. '

016: Would you now be prepared to accept the dissolution of the Basque Communist
Party?

N.S.: Certainly not. Either it is done in a serious way. calmly and tranquilly,
discussing everything in depth and leaving matters clear. or with rapid self-liqui-
dation by the Basque communists, breaking links with the PCB, etc. Because what
they are doing is not serious, when it is a question of two parties with different
traditions, and even with different social bases.

616: Do you believe that an integrated strategy between the PCB and the P803 would
be possible?

8.8.: I don't think so because the socialists would not want it. although it would
be a good thing. False illusions cannot be created when there are unquestionable
differences which show that we are two distinct parties; that we share and uphold
different concepts.

C16: Wouldn't there also be a generational factor which spearstes you, with the
PSOE younger and more renovated. and the PCB in which the old guard dominates?

N.S.: No. that does not affect the political positions. Furthermore, from the
point of view of ideological and political renewal. the PCB has undergone the
strongest process of renewal in the country. The Spanish right resembles more and
more the one of the past. and the P802 now resewles the one before the war more
than the PCB today resembles the party then. We have made an important break with
the past. There are much fewer pro-Soviets in the PCB than there are socialdemo-
crats in the P505. If what we communists have to overcome is the concept of dogma,
Stalinisn. etc., the PC! has made much greater advances than the P303 in the social
democratic concept.

€16: Couldn't it be that the P503 had less to overcome and jettison in adapting
to today's reality than did Stalinist communism, where change was a matter of sur-
vival?

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N.S.: If Stalinism did enter a crisis. as did the concept ofa narrow party. isn't
classic social democracy also completely bankrupt? Because in Europe social demo-u-
cracy is not able to overcome the crisis. or to present alternatives to the situation.
All renewal involves keeping up to date. and we have made great efforts. under very
difficult conditions, in clandestinity. andwe have admitted our errors of dogmatism
and of sectarianism. with extensive self-criticism. It would not be fair to say

that the leadership of the PCB put off the renewal because they were along in years.
or because of their past. The elderly leadership of the PCB has earned its place
inhlstory precisely because under conditions of Franco repression--in 1968. and

even before with the national reconciliation. the agreement on liberty and all those
political events-~they overcame sectarian Stalinist positions. and put themselves

in opposition to the Soviet Union. That is extraordinarily significant.

616: Are there no pro-Soviets or sectarians in the PCB leadership?

N.S.: There is no pro-Sovietism at all in the leadership of the PCB. I do not

say that there is none in other circles of the party. or that a lingering sentimental
feeling does not exist toward the USSR; it evidently does. A distinction must be
made between political pro-Sovietism. which says and does what the Soviet Union

may say. and those people who feel smathetic toward the Soviet Union because

of what is has meant historically. I include myself among the latter. My syupathy
made by humanity. and because of their struggle against Fascism and Hitler. The
errors came later. Stalinism and all those things which are unsound and can be criti-
cized.

(:16: From the outside you give the impression that Eurocommnism is in a state
of stagnation. Do you believe that it can evolve?

N.S.: Eurocoununism has been banalized. has been presented as the fad of a particu-
lar given moment. But Eurocomunism is a strategy which not only includes the com-
munist parties. but the socialist ones as well. It is a concept of progress toward
a different society. which is only possible through programs which are differnt

from the traditional ones. which are based on an increasingly greater convergence

of comunists and socialists. who are capable of gathering about them a social and
political alternative. who consider that the turn toward socialism in Europe is

now not national. but European.

Eurocoumunism is based on the negation of bloc politics; and thus when the cold war
and the blocs gain strength. Eurocouaunism is in difficulty. But events are proving
that it is a just theory. because it means peace as opposed to war. and because it

is set in a historical framework which originates with the Greeks. and thinks of
Europe as an independent concept. That is the historical perspective: An involve-
ment of all the left with a European autonomy.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 INFORHACION Y RBVISTAS. S.A.

8131
C80: 3110/20

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

UCD CAN NO LONGER ASSUME SUPPORT OF BUSINESS SECTOR
Madrid CAHBTO 16 in Spanish 19 Oct 81 pp 60-62

[Texc] The organization which is spending the most millions in going into the
next elections for the Galician parliament is not a political party but the Con-
federation of Businessmen of Galicia, an affiliate of the big Spanish manufactur-
ers' association, the C505. The campaign has an initial budget of 110 million
pesetas (300 millions more than the 0CD [Democratic Center Union!) and is aimed
at fighting abstention, first of all. and to disclose the viewpoints of business
and industry to the electorate.

There are no elections going on in Hadrid but the business and industry community
in Madrid is already laying the foundations for what may come. £81", a member of
the CEOE, has just approved a series of action lines indicating that the manu-
facturers must present the political reality of electoral options to the voters.
And there is a very specific objective behind this: "The voters must be really
familiarized with the philosophy of the various parties and, if they choose a
Marxist alternative, they must know all of the political consequences deriving from
their vote," they explained. To make sure that their option is perfectly clear,
they say further: "The Madrid businessmen are determined. with the force of our
reasons, to support the liberal-conservative options which spell out free enter—
prise and private initiative."

The watchword has also reached Asturias. "The businessman is not a militant poli-
tician but must take sides when it comes to political decisions," said Arturo
Corte ﬂier. president of the Asturias Hanufscturers' Federation. a member of the
CEOE.

Businessmen are plunging into active palitics with determination. Their top leader
took the first step; he is Carlos Ferrer and he did that when he was reelected
early in September as president of the C303. "We businessmen have a responsibility
which we cannot shirk. we have something to say and we have solutions to contri-
bute. Politics is something that is too important to leave only in the hands of
professional politicians or bureaucrats."

The strongman of the CEO! have always been close to the corridors of power and to
the political and economic decisions. But during these past 4 years there were
two main concerns which took up their time and their efforts, above and beyond

direct politics.

21
FOR 0F11CJAI.IHNB(R€LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the one hand, they wanted to put together a powerful manufacturers' associa-
tion, structured and coordinated after 60 years of vertical control. Perrer
traveled from province to province and, with a small initial team, he put together
a provincial and territorial setup which is quite strong.

He managed to appear as the top leader who would rally all of the Spanish business-
men, above all through the integration of the CEPYHB (the association of small and
medium business operators) in April 1980. He has already created a homogeneous
"manufacturers' government," where he has become the unchallenged leader who alone
decided to run for reelection although it was necessary to amend the charter for
that purpose.

0n the other hand, the C205 top leader has already become specifically "the chief
of personnel of Spanish businessmen.” After 40 years of labor union asphyxiation,
the first few years of democracy were full of labor conflicts and clashes. The
men who built the CEOE were the men who drafted the first rules of the game, both
written and unwritten, concerning the negotiation of agreements, the handling of
strikes, relations with labor unions and contacts with the administration. Just
a years later labor relations had ceased to be "dramatic"; the CEOB has signed
two key agreements with the DOT [General Union of Workers], the AN! (National Ac-
cord on Employment) has been worked out, and businessmen have a much clearer view
of the labor policy to be implemented.

Consequently, the manufacturers' association is in place and no longer needs to
devote as much time to "first—line" tasks. Carlos Ferrer, like the top leaders

of the C303, rejects the road of coming to power in government. But they do want
to influence the government within the parties and within society. "Our promise
of action during the first 3 years," said Perrer in his address, "will be directed
at promoting, supporting, and collaborating with those political and social or-
ganizations which, in their specific programs and actions, advocate free enter-
prise within a political and social system of peaceful coexistence that will guar-
antee freedom for each and every one of us and that will protect the individual's
efforts and the fruits of those efforts, as well as the values of our humanist,
Christian, and Western culture and civilization.

This certainly is a program declaration, not in abstract terms, but to be defended
day after day and above all before the next election. "The CEOE [Spanish Con-
federation of Businessmen's Organizations] will participate more in the next elec-
tions," the leaders of the big employers' organization agree in asserting. They
are guided by the example of France where the socialists have come to power and
where the cold wind of nationalization is blowing.

This strong desire to "orient" the voting is the moving force behind the campaign
of the Galician businessmen's association prior to the elections on 20 October.
But there is already a past experience where the businessmen's association inter-
vened directly in an election: This is the case of National Labor Development,

a member of the C508, which openly attacked the left-wing parties during the elec-
tions to the Catalan parliament. lts president and the man behind that attitude
-going even further to the right of Jordi Pujol-was Alfredo Holinas who is now

"moving up" to the position of CEO! vice president.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Another significant promotion involves Jose Antonio Segurado to the position of
vice president; he is a man who has distinguished himself through his direct at-
tacks (he is called the "hawk" of the CEOE)-rather undiplomatic attacks by the
way--against the politicians. the government, and primarily its social-democratic
wing. As president of the Madrid Employers' Association, he is the father of the
latest CHIN policy statements. "Businessmen must divest themselves of this kind

of virginity in dealing with politics. This does not mean that they must get into
politics directly but they must actively defend the interests in which we believe,"
said Segurado.

Direct intervention by businessmen in politics however is not ruled out. "Business-
men, as a group, have the obligation to defend the interests of the business com-
munity against the political establishment. It seems entirely legitimate to me

that the 6305 should conduct a campaign in connection with the elections. Busi-
nessmen, persons who are going to defend the interests and ideas of the business
community, are showing up on the election slates," commented Javier Gonzalez
Estefani, vice president of CEOE and president of CEPYHE, to CAHBIOlG.

While some business leaders are thinking of joining right-wing parties in order
better to defend their interests, the 0203 prefers to exert pressure from the out-
side upon the party in power so that it will not deviate from the defense of its
interests and will follow up on the vote which the businessmen cast at the time.
The first call to attention was given by Carlos Ferrer during the speech he deli-
vered after his reelection: "The current situation of the ruling party and its
future are a matter of concern. If its leaders and the undoubted responsibility

of the prime minister do not manage to overcome the illogical concept of the

center as a mixture of diverse and sometimes opposing ideologies, then we can anti-
cipate an inevitable election defeat right around the corner."

in two places in his speech, Ferrer presented two quotations from Oscar Alzaga, a
Christian Democrat and leader of the moderate platform of the UCD. And he openly
criticized the political record of Suarez and the social-democratic wing.

There was only one alert called. The first skirmish of the CBOE with the adminis-
tration came one month later when the administration presented its budget for 1982.
One day, Ferrer decided unilaterally to resign from the follow up commission for
the ANE as a way of exerting pressure against the administration and public opinion
over some budgets which should not he approved. Initially, the "excuse" for his
resignation was that an item of 800 millions was included for the labor unions at
the expense of the union's assets; that looks like a secret pact, behind the as-
sociation's back, with some obviously responsible individuals, such as the social
democrats of the UCD headed by Garcia Diet, minister of economy and commerce.

Although the ANB is too imporant to Spain's social, economic, and political sta-
bility to allow the employers' association the luxury of ruining it--"we want the
ANE to be successful," Ferrer said-~the CEOB has already launched its first poli-
tical battle by taking this step, according to the majority of observers. This is
true even though the employers' association does not come up with that interpreta-
tion.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem facing the employers‘ association-we political matter—is that the
party it voted for and the party that theoretically should have defended its posi-
tions is adopting an economic policy which the employers do not like. And this is
what they have begun to denounce in connection with the budget which in turn is a
consequence of the administration's economic policy.

"This is not a problem, in my opinion, that is connected with the fact that econ-
omic policy is made by the social dalocrats and that this supposedly is the reason
why we do not like it. For me, Garcia Diez is pursuing a policy of a liberal style.
This is a problem of another kind. This is a situation where they are governing

as a response to multiple pressures which in the end boil down to waste. These are
internal pressures springing from the fact that the DC!) is a conglomerate of fam-
ilies without a uniform ideology. There are also external pressures since they

are governing with an eye to the PSOE [Spanish Socialist Horkers Party]," Gonzalez
Estefani consented to CAHBIO 16.

Coherence with their program when the time to govern comes—that might be the sum-
mary of what the businessmen ask. "Here the administration has the majority in
parliament and is not pushing its projects; instead it is promoting ambiguous pro-
posals which are the result of pacts and understandings. Like Hitterrand in France,
it is stepping up public spending. This cannot go on."

"The UCD, as it is today, is going to find it difficult to respond to the problems
that worry the businessmen," Javier Gonzalez Batefani, CBOE vice president, told
CAMBIO 16. This is the feeling one can detect in almost all employer circles. They
like the idea of the "big right" but they are worried about the opposing and in-
flexible posture of Prime Minister Calvo Sotelo whom all businessmen and employer
association leaders, interviewed by this magazine, believe today to be "untouchable."

If the 06!) does not do the job, such as it is now, and if Calvo Sotelo does not

bring it under control. it will be necessary to start attacking Calvo Sotelo him-
self. But businessmen have no replacement. This is why perhaps the only possible
way out for the next several months will be to remind the prime minister that they
have the power of money while the extreme right wing of the DOD grows stronger.

Perhaps, if the risk of a possible socialist victory increases. it will be easier
to come to an agrement. Anything--so long as the story of France is not repeated

in Spain.“

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

5058
C80: 3110/ 30

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CREWS OF FIRST FRANCO-SOVIET FLIGHT To 38 TRAINBD BEFORE END OF 1981
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 12 Sep 81 pp “-45
[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The Franco-Soviet crews for the flight of the first French spacenan
scheduled for 1982 aboard the new Soviet orbital station Salyut 7 will be named
before the end of this year. The curs [National Center for Space Studies] made
this announcement on 4 September, the eve of the return to the City of the Stars:
near Moscow (USSR), of the two French spacenen, who will now begin the practical
phase of the space training program they began 10 months ago.

Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loop Chretien were on their way back after having spent
their sum: vacation in France and ads some training flights aboard Mirage 3's
and Mirage Fl's at the Bretigny CB'V [In-Flight Testing Center] and at the Air
Force's Orange base to which they were attached. Actually, the French spacemen
are compelled to cone to France to fly in order to maintain their pilot rating,
as, contrary to what had been planned, Soviet officials have not peraitted then to
fly aboard Mig 21's as all the Soviet cosmonauts do regularly while in training:
and as the cosmonauts of the Intercosmos program do.

The French spacemen did not even attend a spaceship launching at Baikanour, al-
though it had been planned that they would for the departure of the Soviet-
Roruanian crew. However,in principle, they are to attend the next Soviet launching,
which should be that of the principal crew of the new Salyut 7 station, which, it
has been announced, will be put into orbit about the beginning of 1982 (see AIR 3?
COSMOS, No 870).

The first flight involving a French spacenan is still scheduled to take place
during the second quarter of 1982, tentatively about Hay-June, for a period of

1 week aboard this new Salyut 7 station, designed as the successor to the present
Salyut 6 station, which has been in orbit 4 years and which it is not intended to
use again.

A Three-Man Crew

On Wednesday 9 September, the cues decided who, between Jean-Loup Chretien and
Patrick Baudry, will be the astronaut of the regular crew (designated as the first

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run U. I‘dklﬂu V05 VIQLI

choice to make the flight) and the astronaut of the reserve crew that replaces the
regular crew in case that becomes necessary but that unfortunately will remain on
the ground if all goes well! (See box on facing pagel.

Soviet officials will designate later, around October-November, their cosmonauts
for the regular crew and the reserve crew, who will from then on train together
with the French astronauts to prepare this flight.

Bach crew will consist of three men, since the Franco-Soviet flight will be aboard
the new three-place Soyuz T space capsule, which will then replace the Soyuz of the
1970's to take men into space. The last flight of the Soyuz series was in princi-
ple made with Soyuz 40 in May.

The new Soyuz T spaceship resembles the old Soyuz externally but is in fact very
different from the standpoint of its equipment (on-board computer, unified pro-
pulsion system, etc). It has already served successfully on four flights--three
of which were piloted--toward Salyut 6 last year. The French spacemen will train
a10ng with their Soviet colleagues in the piloting of the new spaceship on the
Soyuz T simulator in City of the Stars. Tentatively planned are 30 training
sessiOns of 4 hours each in the Soyuz T simulator for training in normal flight
procedures and 15 sessions of 4 hours each to become familiar with emergency pro-
cedures (in case of flight accidents). The spacemen will also undergo tests in
centrifuge and training in survival techniques for use in extreme cold land condi—
tions and in the Black Sea. in preparation for their return to earth.

The Franco-Soviet crews will also train. in the mock-up of the Salyut station at
City of the Stars, on the carrying out of the French and Soviet scientific and
technical experiments they will have to effect during the flight aboard Salyut 7.

Ten French Experiments

There has been no change in the French experiments. although their weight has
been continually reduced since the start of the program: From 600 kg initially to
350 kg at present. Part of the scientific and technical apparatus will be loaded
directly on to the station prior to its launching; the rest of it will be ferried
up to the station by a cargo spaceship, Progress, that will be launched before the
Franco-Soviet crew. The testing and calibration of the station's equipment is
currently in progress at the cues Toulouse Space Center, and the flight equipment
is scheduled for delivery before the end of this year. The training models are
already_installed at the City of the Stars /Yuri Gagarin Star City Militaxy a1;
Academyl. -

The 10 French experiments will include:

Three medical experiments in sensory and cardiovascular physiology:
T-‘Posture' for the study of the fundamental mechanisms involved in equilibrium
in a weightless environment. and in adaptation to flights of long duration. More

particularly, it will enable the study of postural changes in response to visual
stimulation by the projection of motional scenes inside a special hood:

26

FOR OFFKJMJ.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

[80*]

 

Assignment of functions to Prench Spacesen
for Franco-Soviet Manned Plight

During the first quarter of 1982, a French spaceman will participate in a scienti-
fic mission aboard a Soviet space station as an experimental engineer.

Two candidates were selected on ll June 1980 for this manned flight: Mr Patrick
Baudry and M: Jean-Loup Chretien (who have already been introduced to ourreaders).
Since September 1980. they have been undergoing training at the Yuri Gagarine
Center near Moscow. The CUBS has just assigned the function of regular on-board
spaceman-engineer No l to Jean-Loup Chretien and that of regular on-board space-
man-engineer No 2 to Patrick Baudry.

Two Franco-Soviet crews will be designated. whose preparation for the flight and
for the carrying out of the experiments must be absolutely identical. so that the
crew designated as the No 2 crew will at all times be able to carry out the
mission should it become necessary for it to do so.

Weremindour readers thatthis firstsanned spaceflightinvolving French participa-
tion will include experiments in the fields of medicine, manufacture of materials,
and astronomy, designed by research teams at Grenoble. Marseille, Paris, Toulouse,
Tours and verrieres-le-Buisson.

The manned flight program is part of the cooperation between the CNBS and the
Intercosnos Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The operations manager for
the French part of this program is the Toulouse Space Center.

 

27
FOR!0FFHJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFTHC1A1.USE(MNLY

--'DS 1“ for the measurement. by means of supersonic velocimetry, of the velocity
of circulation of the blood in the carotid, to determine the rate of irrigation of
the brain in weightless conditions, a determinative factor in the ability of
humans to function in space.:

--'DS 2" for the observation in real time, by supersonic echograPhY. the image of
the heart of the cosmonauts, particularly at the instant of redistribution of the
blood volume.

Two space biology experiments:

--"Biobloc S" for the study of the biological effects of the low-energy component
of cosmic radiation on the development of biological specimens (tobacco seed,
shrimp eggs and DNA molecules) in space;

--"Cytos 2' for the study of the action of antibiotics on different germs of the
intestinal microflora in weightlessness.

Two experiments in space metallurgy in microgravity using the new Magma tempera-
ture-gradient furnace:

--'ELMA 2" will deal simultaneously with the production of an immiscible aluminum-
indium composition and with the measurement of coefficients of interdiffusion of
the liquid phase of an alloying in the course of fusion.

These experiments will be preceded by the precise calibration of furnace tempera-
tures, the testing of the data recording system, and the measurement of residual
accelerations (parasites) inside the station, particularly during activity of the
crew.

Three experiments in astronomy and aeronomy, using a highly sensitive but low-
angular-resolution telescope to photograph certain astronomic phenomena (zodiacal
light, antisolar gleam, accumulation, if any, of dust at terrestrial-lunar

Lagrangian points), and atmospheric phenomena (aurorae boreales, ionospheric
emissions, nocturnal glares, etc). These three experiments are:

-"Piramig“ for the observation of the earth's atmosphere in the near infrared:
--"PCN' for the photographing of the nocturnal sky;

--"Sirene' for the observation of the galaxy.

The aeronomy experiments will be conducted during the Franco-Soviet flight,
whereas the astronomy one will be carried out later since it requires opening of
the forward chamber of the station.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1981

9399
C80: 8119/0211 Eu?

FOR 0FT1C1AI.USE4)NLN