I50“ OFFICIAL NSF. "NIX

JPRS L/10251

13 January 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

'lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF nus PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/ 10

13 Januar

JAPAN REPORT
(POUO 2/82)

CONTENTS

MILITARY

[DP Link With Military Buildup Policy Reviewed
(Hideo Ohtake; ASAHI JANARU, 6, 13, 20 Nov 81)..............

RONOM IC

Mitsubishi Broadens Scope of Deals with China
(JAPAN RONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81).........................

MITI Called on To Consolidate View on Materials Sector
(Haruo Suzuki Interview: JAPAN scommc JOURNAL. 123 Dec 81).

Honda. Yugoslav Pi rm To Construct Engine-Making Plant
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL. 15 Dec 81) .........................

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

Technical Cooperation Among Japan, 0.8.. Europe
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81).........................

Companies Pin Hopes on New Products, Technology
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81).........................

JIRA Asked To Participate in USSR Robot Show _
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81).........................

Nuclear Powerplant Construction Revives
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81).........................

Two Underwater Steel-Cutting Technologies
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81).........................

Japan Still Imports More Technology Than It Exports
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec 81). ..................... ...

- a - [:11 - ASIA - 111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Small Metal Particles Used for Production of Carbon Fiber
(JAPAN RONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Dec a1).....................

Briefs
Australian Uranium Enrichment
Automated Car Painting
Machine Tool Orders Down
Semi-Finished IC Chip Exports
Carbon Fiber Plant

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (‘I-‘FK'MI. llSl-Z ONLY

MILITARY

LDP LINK H111! MILITARY BUILDUI POLICY REVIMD

Tokyo ASAHI JANARU in Japanese 6, 13, 20 Nov 81

[Articles by Hideo Ohtake: "From Detente to Military Buildup"]
[6 Nov 81 pp 30-310]

[Text] [No 14] Fukuda Government and Military Expansion Plan

The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) suffered a disastrous defeat in the 5 December
1976 general elections, about a month after the "General Principles of the Defense
Plan" were decided. Prime Minister Niki took the responsibility and resigned, and
was replaced by Takeo Fukuda as prime minister. Many members of the Fukuda faction
were critical of the decision on the "General Principles," as was the Seirankai
(Blue Storm Society), which had provided active support to the establishment of the
Fukuda government. Also, the new cabinet was less than enthusiastic in faithfully
upholding the "General Principles" and the policy of "keeping under 1 percent of the
GNP," because it was not directly responsible for the decision on the "General Prin-
ciples." It is therefore not surprising that the disengagement from the Hiki-Sakata
line of dentente began with the change of government.

However, the Fukuda cabinet did not rush precipitately toward military expansion and
militarization soon after acquiring political power. The reason was that there were
several constraints which prevented a sudden change in policy.

First. the LDP defeat which resulted in Miki's resignation (and the subsequent in-
auguration of the Fukuda cabinet) brought a balance of power between conservatives
and reformists in the Lower and Upper Houses. The LDP barely maintained a majority
with the late addition of unaffiliated winners. and the party candidate for prime
ndnister was appointed by a bare majority of one vote. As a result, the Fukuda cabi-
net had to be extremely careful not to irritate the opposition parties by disengaging
itself from detente, and it also could not neglect its guard against moves by the
Niki faction. which sought to merge forces with the opposition. This was probably
why Mihara, a veteran of Diet policy affairs, was selected as director of the

Defense Agency.

Second, the Japanese economy faced a grave crisis in 1977 and 1978. The policy of
restraining overall demand to stabilize "runaway connodity prices" following the
first oil shock had resulted in the beginning of a serious recession. Moreover,

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. (35F. ()N|.\

conditions had failed to improve despite the government's switch to business stimu-
lating measures beginning in 1975, and mass bankruptcies and an employment crisis
loomed. The new prime minister, who had prided himself on being "Fukuda, the
economic expert," personally sought to improve conditions and was completely bound
up with economic problems in the early stage of his administration. Also, on the
international front, demands made on Japan regarding such economic policies as the
"three engine theory“ took center stage and, together with the detente diplomacy of
the early Carter period, resulted in the defense problem being placed on the back
burner. Consequently, there was no room or necessity for the prime minister and his
aides to take strong leadership on the defense question.

Thirdly, the signing of the Japan-China peace andfriendsthpact was the prime

foreign policy project at the time, with Chief Cabinet Secretary Sonoda (foreign
minister since late 1977) taking the initiative. Sonoda was trying hard to avoid the
inference that Japan-Guina relations would signify an encirclement of the Soviet Union,
and he was therefore impelled to adopt a cautious stance to avoid irritating the
Soviet Union with a buildup of defense power. Additionally, Sonoda who wielded real
power with the Pukuda cabinet adopted a dovish posture on foreign policy and defense
problems in general. As a result, his presence could be seen as having played a cer—
tain restraining role on militarization. Especially since 1978, Sounds was considered
to have a braking influence on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which was run by anti-
Soviet hardliners of the Shinsaku Hogen school.

Fourth, Sonoda had advocated "a test as a peace-loving nation" in the face of foreign
criticism of Japanese militarism in the early 1970's, and apparently needed some time
to convert to an "inherent" hawkish stance, even with the nudging of hawkish elements
in his faction. For example, when Sonoda visited the ASEAN countries in August 1977,
he announced the Manila Delcaration (Fukuda Doctrine) based on the following:

"Looking back on history, economic powers have always been military powers at the same
time. However, our nation upholds the unprecedented ideal in world history of trusting
in the justice and faith of the peoples of the world and of striving to maintain their
security and existence with the decision not to take the path of a military power.
1his is our challenge to a test unprecedented in history. I believe that this option
by Japan will contribute to the fundamental benefit of not only the entire Asian
region. but also to that of the entire world." This statement represents Pukuda'a

pet theory, and it was not at all surprising to find it inserted in the communique.
However, as we will explain later, when one considers that by that this time the
Soviet threat was already beginning to be pointed out inside the Foreign Ministry and
the Defense Agency, the fact that the communique was issued has a significance which
cannot be overlooked.

With this as a background, Fukuda continued the basic Miki-Sakata line for some time.
This posture is best revealed in the Pukuda cabinet's position vis-a-vis the question
of v.5. troop withdrawal from South Korea. Prime Minister Pukuda's aides reportedly
submitted a written opinion to the prime minister as follo : "If Japan talks too
much about the withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Korea, the United States might
urge Japan to adopt 'an equal share of defnese costs' and to 'increase aid to South
Korea.’ To avoid this, we would advise prudence in making statements on the subject."
Fukuda apparently took the advice and refrained from presenting any strong request

to the United States concerning U.S. troop withdrawal. Assuming that Fukuda had

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0M)

already entertained strong doubts about any Soviet military buildup, he was not pre—
pared to assume any additional burden in defense spending. Nor was he prepared to
arouse popular domestic opinion for the strengthening of defense power to offset the
withdrawal of U.S. forces.

It is readily understandable from these circumstances that there were serious con-
straints which prevented Pukuda from taking the initiative in a turnabout from de-
tente. In fact, it was the Defense Agency-especially the uniformed officials-dwho
led the criticism against detente during this period. Their activity gradually but
surely gained results throughout 1977.

1 Percent of GNP Ceiling ls Initial Target

On 14 January 1977, an unofficial announcement was made regarding the Finance Min-
istry's budget draft, which was delayed by the general elections. In the FY-77
budget, the defense budget was increased by 11.8 percent compared to the previous
year, while its ratio of the GNP declined from 0.9 percent the previous year to
0.88 percent. Also, the general account spending declined from 6.2 percent to 5.9
pnrccnt, dropping under 6 percent for the first time since the war. The Defense
Agency's Internal Bureau expressed satisfaction with the fact that the ratio of
personnel costs had dropped while the ratio of guns and equipment had increased,
but the uniformed group was reported to be strongly dissatisfied. The reason was
that the next generation main fighter planes (PX) wanted by the Air Defense Force
Staff Office, the anti-air missile-carrying escort vessels and next generation anti-
submarine scout planes sought by the Maritime Defense Force Staff Office, and the
arms and equipment requested by the Ground Defense Force [GSDF] were curtailed for
the most part.

GSDF Chief of Staff Kurisu, who spoke in behalf of the dissidents at a press confer-
ence, criticized the Internal Bureau and the Finance Ministry, saying: "This means
the Accounting Bureau has taken over civilian control." Such a statement was unusual.
With this criticism of the first budget since the decision on the "General Principles"
as a beginning, the uniformed group of officers and the Defense Agency's Internal
Bureau which was incited by the officers gradually brought their criticism of the
"General Principles" into the open.

1ho criticism was first directed against the cabinet decision on the ceiling of

l percent or the GNP. 0a 1b April. Director Hihara commented on the defense budget
at an Upper House budget committee meeting as follows: "The approximately 1 percent
ratio of the GNP is not a fixed ratio. Depending on the turn of events, we sometimes
have to raise it to the 1 percent level." He thus expressed the opinion that it
sometimes exceeds 1 percent. Mihara subsequently repeated his contention that "there
is no need to fix defense spending to the ceiling of 1 percent of the CHI." As back-
ground for this, at the time the mid-term and long-term defense budget for the post-
fuurth buildup plan was being drafted by the Defense Agency, and it was predicted
that if the Fx and the PXL were to be imported during FY-78, the two major projects
would incur tremendous costs, making it difficult several years later to keep defense
spending under 1 percent of the GNP.

The uninformed group of officials reportedly submitted a demand to the Internal
Bureau to increase the ceiling to approximately 1.2 percent. Also, former Defense

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Planning Agency Director Kuranari stated at the National Defense Council's Diet
members discussion meeting in July: "In order to respond to foreign criticism of a
free ride, we should not worry about sticking to 1 percent." They thus provided
lateral support to the Defense Agency's position.

The aforementioned debate on the 1 percent ceiling was an important event because.
several months after the Miki Cabinet's decision, the government itself advocated an
amendment to the direction of the "General Principles." However, whether out of fear
of a reaction from the opposition or due to the view that the 1 percent ceiling would
not be exceeded despite the importation of the FX and the PXL, the debate itself came
to an abrupt ending with an "orbital correction" by Director Hihara at the October
Diet session, when he stated: “The 1 percent ceiling will be maintained for the

next decade."

The second was the surfacing of American demands concerning Japan's share of joint
defense.

shelve their previous demand for "abolition of the Joint security pact." The Demo-
cratic Socialist Party (95?), which succeeded in increasing its seats in the election
with this as a background, again requested the establishment of a joint security com-
mittee in the Diet--a long held goal. Seeing the Komeito Party and the New Liberal
Club both in agreement with the request, the newly appointed Defense Director Hihara
is said to have "worked hard" to gain support for the formation of the committee.
There was also said to be a 'special order" by Prime Minister Fukuda. At this

on the other hand, in the July 1977 Lower House elections, the JSP practically
avoided the questions of joint security and national defense, further deepening the
impression of an epochal change. The opposition parties, presented with a chance

to form a government becuase of the conservative-reformist balance of power, "turned
to pragmatism," like a similar situation in Europe, which requires no explanation.
It is very interesting to note the paradox from these examples that as the LDP loses
power its views are increasingly adopted by the opposition.

“.3. Pressure: strengthen Defense Agency's Position

Second, during this period American demands for a greater defense buildup by Japan
and a larger share in maintenance costs for U.S. forces in Japan were presented in

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL l-‘SE ONLY

concrete terms. Needless to say, the U.S. pressures resulted in strengthening the
position of the Defense Agency. We will take up the issue of sharing costs for the
use of bases by U.S. forces in our next installment and would like to review here
the v.5. demands for the buildup of the Self Defense Force, as well as Japan's re-
sponse to it.

Already late in the Ford administration, expectations toward Japan had increased,
especially in the improvement of its antisubmarine capability. However, due to
cutbacks and delays in the fourth buildup plan, the U.S. side reportedly became
"strongly dissatisfied with the cutbacks in naval vessels, the absence of a decision
on the next generation antisubmarine scout plan and the delay in the modernization
of the antisubmarine detector." As a result, a Pentagon report issued in January
1976 included the statement: "The improvement of Japan's antisubmarine capability
in the Western Pacific is to Japan's benefit." Even after the Carter administration
came into being, the views of the Pentagon and the 0.8. forces remained unchanged.
Soon after his appointment, Secretary of Defense Brown visited Japan in July of the
same year and presented five demands for Japan-11.8. defense cooperation. They in-
eluded an increased share by Japan in costs for U.S. forces stationed in Japan, and
improved antisubmarine and anti-air capability by Japan.

In response to these demands. Prime Minister Fukuda stated in his meeting with Presi—
dent Cartur in March 1977: "As Pacific nations, both Japan and the United States full
recognize the importance of the Pacific region. As a link in worldwide cooperation,
the two nations will continue their contribution to the security and welfare of the
Pacific region." In addition, the phrase, "the maintenance of an enduring peace in
the Pacific area," was inserted in the joint communique. This was interpreted as a
public connutment to the importation of the PXL to cope with the Soviet Navy, es-
pecially its submarines.

These demands on Japan provided powerful support to the call by the Defense Agency
for a military buildup, especially for the early import of the PXL and the PX. At
the time, the import of the two types of aircraft was under final review as the
showpieces of the post-fourth buildup plan, and the Defense Agency had its back
against the wall because of the negative stance of the Finance Ministry and resis-
tance by the opposition.

Regarding the FX, just before the Niki cabinet resigned, the decision was made to
designate the F—15 Eagle manufactured by the McDonnell Douglas Company, and the
Defense Agency—-especially the Air Self Defense Force-~strongly requested its
importation in FY-77. However, the Fukuda cabinet, which barely came into being

by a single vote margin, hesitated to launch a major project which would irritate the
opposition. Consequently, it was decided at the National Defense Council meeting hel
in late 1976 that "the related government agencies would conduct a review with the
aim of beginning deployment in FY-78," thus delaying the decision to import. Mean—
while, due to its connection to the Lockheed corruption scandal, the PXL became the
object of suspicion. It was questioned in the Diet and the decision on a plane se-
loctioo was delayed considerably.

However, the U.S. demand for Japan's defense buildup was instrumental in the rapid
surfacing of the two major projects starting in the spring of 1977, and in August
Director Mihara unofficially decided on the Lockheed P-3C Orion as the PXL plane.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He decided to request a rough estimate budget for it and the F-15 in FY-78. Up to
that time. the Defense Agency and SD? officials had been disputing which of the two--
the FX or the PXL--should be given first priority, but with Director Mihara's decision
the agency took the bold step of requesting both types simultaneously. Regarding

the P-BC decision, Director Mihara reportedly had already received instructions from
Prime Minister Fukuda and was working actively to gain concurrence from the opposition
parties. Apparently, behind this decision was the expectation that although the
Lockheed affair had not been settled, the P-3C designation would be approved in the
Diet. During the 8 months from late 1977, when postponement of the decision to import
the F-15 became inevitable. until the decision in August that year, the Fukuda cabinet
had acquired adequate confidence in Diet measures concerning the defense issue.

On the basis of the director's policy decision, the Defense Agency requested 29 F—15
planes in the rough estimate budget for FY-78, with the goal of importing 123 planes

under an 11-year plan. It also requested 10 P-3C's for 7Y-78, with the intention to
import 45 planes under a lO~year plan.

Naturally. the Finance Ministry opposed such an enormous outlay. Therefore, during
negotiations the Defense Agency presented a compromise proposal to import 100 FBIS's
under a 10-year plan and the original number of P-3C's under an 11-year plan, but it
was made clear that it would not compromise a step further.

Import of New Aircraft Intended To Reduce Trade Surplus

Kanemarc, who succeeded Mihara as Defense Agency director, also made efforts to per-
suade Prime Minister Fukuda and the Finance Ministry, and succeeded in.obtaining a
formal decision in the National Defense Council in late December on the import of both
types of aircraft. In this case, the Defense AgencyYs ”final draft proposal" on the
total number of planes was accepted intact. Also, the decision on the quota of 23
F-lS's and 8 P-JC's for FY-78 was close to the agency's request. However, regarding
the subsequent pace of procurement, no decision was reached on a definite period for
the plan, but a review was to be conducted each fiscal year.

As we have seen regarding the import of the two types of aircraft, both the U.S. de-
mand and the opinion of the Defense Agency. which used it as a lever, were directly
reflected in policy measures. In other words, compared to the period ending in 1976
(or further compared to the period of financial reconstruction after 1978), salient
points concerning the policy measures were the lack of influence from criticism by
the oppositior and lack of restraints by the Finance Ministry.

One reason was possibly the financial conditions at the time. As was stated before,
the decision on the adoption of the two types of aircraft was made during the drafting
stage of the FY-78 budget. This budget was drafted as the so-called "15-month budget,"
which was linked to the second supplemental budget for PY—77, and it constituted

the "peak in business stimulating measures" in the 1970's. The deficit financing
based on a massive issue of national bonds was targeted to the 7-percent economic
growth rate demanded by the Hestern nations, and was decided with "extraordinary
determination."

Judging from such a background, the decision to reject the argument to import fully
completed aircraft and instead to approve a partial knockdown licensed production was
probably based on consideration for the aforementioned business recovery measures.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIJ

However, unlike public service projects, defense spending tends to center on fixed
expenditures and the two projects were both long-range plans spanning more than 10
years. Moreover, the procurement amount in FY-78 was small, with the balance shifted
to national bond debt issues. It is absolutely impossible to believe that the Finance
Ministry, which sought a business recovery through short-term measures followed by
financial reconstruction in the next fiscal year to reduce national bonds, had agreed
to the rhetoric on business recovery through such arms production. The reason is that
at the time, the Finance Ministry had even been against tax reduction as a business
recovery measure because of its fixed nature. Therefore, the lack of resistance on
the part of the ministry must be interpreted as due to a reason other than a business
recovery measure.

It is probably reasonable to believe that the import of the 5:15 and the P-3C was en-
trusted to the "political judgment" of Prime Minister Fukuda and other cabinet-level
leaders, and that it was an issue which was difficult for the Finance Ministry to argue
against. And according to the newspapers, consideration for relations with the United
States was the focal point in the series of meetings by the National Defense Council.
The argument was especially strong for the import of the two types of aircraft in
order to correct the trade imbalance with the United States--i.e., the "reduction

of trade surplus." One newspaper reported: “At the National Defense Council, Prime
Minister Fukuda and others engaged from beginning to end in debating whether or not
the import of the new aircraft would serve to 'reduce surplus'." In other words,

this issue was debated primarily as an economic issue.

Even when referring to the defense issue, the ".3. request concerning "Japan's defense
effort" was merely pointed out, and the adjustment of relations withthe United States
took center stage. In other words, the need to import the P-15 and the P-3C to
strengthen the Self Defense Force so that it could cope with the growing Soviet threat
was never mentioned. The newspaper media may have been manipulated, but judging from
the speech and actions of the Fukuda administration leaders at the time and later
events, the aforementioned reporting could be said to quite accurately reflect the
debate in the National Defense Council. If this judgment is not wrong, as far as the
top level of the government at this stage is concerned, it could be concluded that

the argument of a Soviet threat was not dominant.

Uniformed Group Begins To Express Bold Opinions

However, among the officials in charge of defense, awareness of the international
situation and opinions on defense strategy had already undergone a drastic change.
“:19 was clearly seen in the FY-77 version of the "Defense white Paper" reported

at the cabinet meeting in late July. It is in sharp contrast to the "white paper"

of the Sakata era in the previous fiscal year, which begins with an explanation of
detente conditions and contains a chapter on "The People and the Self Defense Force,"
describing disaster relief activities and cooperation with the people's life, and
Consciously creating a soft mood. The FY-77 "white paper" begins with an analysis

of military conditions centering on the Soviet military buildup and devotes many pages
to the selection process of the FX and the PXL. The drafters of the Defense Agency's
"white paper“ reportedly complained that, owing to requests by the foreign minister
and aides of the prime minister who were concerned about relations with the Soviet
Union, "we could not state a tenth of what we wanted to say." Nonetheless, it is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

abundantly clear that the keynote of the “white paper" swerved from the SDP's position
in the detente era in the direction of an appeal to cope with the "severe international
conditions." Seeing the U.S. Defense Department's change to military expansion. and
encouraged by changes in the Diet and public opinion. the Defense Agency is seen as
beginning to boldly advance its opinions, especially those of the uniformed group.

In this connnection, the reader's attention is called to three "events" which occurred
in October. First, Ground SD? Chief of Staff Kurisu, who was unofficially designated
chairman of the Joint Staff Council. stated: "I would like hereafter to brief the
prime minister periodically regarding the military situation." He also stated:

sanctioned by the emperor" and submitted a request to the ehiei cabinet secretary.
Although the request itself did not materialize. it was significant as the first
positive statement by a uniformed official regarding the recognition of the Self
Defense Force.

Second, the fact that the prime minister publicly announced in the Diet the start
within the Defense Agency of "research on a legal system to cope with an emergency
situation." 1hird. the fact that the Defense Agency explained in the Diet its policy
not to rennvo the mid—air refueling and bombing systems from the P-15.

The latter two problems developed into major political issues in 1978. In any case,
in the fall of 1977, the Defense Agency disengaged itself from the previous defense
posture and began a frontal challenge concerning the defense debate. How the Fukuda
cabinet, which had supported it behind the scenes, would interpret this initiative
by the Defense Agency from the standpoint of the government clearly became the most
important issue in 1978.

[13 Nov 81 pp 35-39]
[Text] [No 15] Tune of Defense Debate Changes

The year 1978, which was actually the second year of the Fukuda government, was
replete with 'ﬂefense statements" from the outset.

First, Chairman Kurisu of the Joint Staff Council severely criticized the "strictly
defense" military policy of the government in the 4 January issue of the aeronautics
magazine WING. He stated: "There.is a theory which differentiates between aggressive
armament and defensive armament, but the distinction is difficult." He concluded:
"Military history shows that in any war, attack is the only way to victory. With only
defensive means, we would be unable to effectively cope with aggressive acts by

forces outside our sphere of action. Any weapon which does not exert psychological
restraint on an adversary, so that they cannot predict when a blow will be struck
against their base and center of operations, must be construed to be lacking in
deterrent effect against the adversary's plan of attack."

Heanwhile, on 8 January, Director kanemsru, who addressed the let Airborne Brigade

of the Ground SDP, stated: "Our nation will not invade. nor will it be invaded. The
SDF is a purely defensive military force. Nonetheless, although some people say the
SDF must not pose a threat to other countries, what is defense without posing a threat
to an enemy? A purely defensive SDF must not pose a threat of invasion or attack to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR ()l-‘FK'IAI. [NI-f ONLY

foreign countries, but it is necessary to pose a threat in the sense that we will
not allow them to think they can invade us, and to let them know that invading Japan
will prove to be costly."

Although there is a latent and important. contrast (for example, concerning the eval-
uation of the term "purely defensive") in the statements of the two men which later
resulted in Kurisu's resignation, they were of pivotal significance in the defense
debate in that both publicly used the terms 'deterrent" and "threat,” which had been
taboo until then.

Furthermore, in the sense of a continuation of the two statements. Prise Minister
Fukuds referred to the "defense issue" in his policy speech on 21 January, as follows:
"The defense of a nation must be considered to be the base of the nation's existence
and the foremost duty to be performed by the government. ‘lhe government intends to
secure smooth and effective implementation of the Japan-v.8. joint security pact and
to devote its efforts toward the buildup of necessary defense strength. However, the
basis for defense is the people's will to defend their country. It is the national
consensus. It is indeed a happy thought that, in recent years, the people's under
standing and concern regarding the defense issue has been mounting, and it is our
earnest expectation to have the defense issue discussed constructively and widely,

in all quarters, as an issue before the entire nation."

This speech uses far lore abstract terms than the previous statements by the two
leaders, and it is seen as carefully avoiding any irritation to the opposition.
However, it is the first postwar policy speech dealing directly with the defense issue,
and in that sense it may be considered as an extremely noteworthy one. As for its
content, the prime minister himself reportedly inserted such terms as "defense issue,"
"economic recovery" and "promotion of social development" in the drafting stage, and
gave instructions for the terms to be treated as "the three pillars."

As a backdrop for this, Prime Minister Pukuda was strongly impressed by the fact that,
at the "public debate on the people's awareness" jointly sponsored by the Kansai
Kelzai Doyukai (Kansai Comittee for Economic Development) and the Osaka Liaison
Council for Private Labor Unions late the previous year, not only management but

also Chairman Takabatake of the Matsushitn Electrical Industrial workers Union
"advocated a defense buildup and the revision of Article 9 of the constitution."

1he prime minister was also said to be encouraged that Chairman Takeiiri of the
Komelto Party advocated the constitutionality of the Self Defense Force at the party's
general convention on 11 January, albeit as a personal opinion. In any case, the
speech represented the Fukuda cabinet's posture of aggressively grappling with the
defense issue in view of the change in the opposition's attitude.

0n the other hand, the opposition, which received the challenge to debate, was not
prepared to react aggressively, and it was forced to adopt a passive stance. Regarding
Prime Minister Fukuda's policy speech, there was reportedly "not much reaction" in

the Diet, nor did the opposition come forth with much substantial criticism against

the Kauemaru statement. Kanemaru himself said: "It seems that many opposition
members have understood my convictions, and during the past year there has not been

a :zingle case of trouble during my speeches in the Diet."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lluwcvur, regarding the Kurisu statement, Masashi Ishibashi and his colleagues of the
Japan Socialist Party came up with severe criticism and demanded his resignation on
the Diet floor. Kanemaru accepted this criticism and was obliged to explain:
"Director Kurisu's argument lacked adequate explanation, and he has been cautioned
regarding his speech and actions." But the matter was not pursued any further. 'ihe
fact that the opposition let the matter crop at this point, while publicly criticizing
pure defense which is the major premise of Japan's strategy, could be interpreted as
prime evidence of the lackadaisical nature of the opposition's criticism.

Pivotal Adoption of the F-15

In February, the problem held over from the previous year of whether to remove the
F—lS's bombing and refueling systems flared up anew, and at this point the "ceiling
on the defense strength" became the focus of debate in the Diet. Here, also, the
administration countered the interpellations by the opposition and challenged the
taboos on defense.

The origin of this problem goes back to November 1972 during the Tanaka administration.
At the time, the government stated the following regarding the opposition's questioning
of the adoption of the F-lo Phantom fighter: "In order to abstain from posing a threat
to foreign countries, we will not attach the boating system." Again in April of the
following year, Prime Minister Tanaka stressed the three general principles: "He will
not refuel in mid-air. we will not maintain refueling planes and we will not conduct
training in refueling." However, in adopting the 17-15, efforts were apparently

being consolidated within the Air SDF to change this policy. In late October 1977,
Defense Bureau Chief Ito stated in the Diet the policy not to remove the bombsight

and mid-air refueling systems from the F-15.

'lhe JSP innediately criticized and questioned this, whereupon Ito replied: 'Tirst,
the F-lo's bombing capability was high at the time, but the F-lS's primary capability
is effective today when low altitude, high-speed infiltration is possible, and it is
better to obtain the cooperation of the U.S. forces in making mid-air refueling
possible.“ However, he added that this policy "is the wish of the Defense Agency
secretariat, and not a government decision." Also, Prime Minister Pukuda held his
opinion in abeyance, saying: "It is not a decision of the National Defense Council
nor of the government." At this stdge in the fall of 1977, he apparently decided to
let the Defense Agency take the initiative and to observe the opposition's moves.

In late January the next year, the JSP again took up the issue in the Diet and
questioned the government. 'lhat is, Diet member Tetsu Neda asked if the F-lS's
bombing and refueling systems didn't exceed the limits of defense by posing a threat
to other countries. Chief Mada of the cabinet's Bureau of Legislation replied:
"Stated succinctly, the question is whether the other side would feel a threat."
"Depending on the progress of science and technology at that point in time, there
should be allowance for a change in the limits of self-defense permitted by the
constitution." This argument gave legitimacy to the position of the Defense Agency.
However, he repeated the statement that "in the absence of professional military ex-
pertise, one could not say whether a threat is posed or not" by the P-15, whereupon
the JSP demanded that the Defense Agency submit a document stating whether the 17-15
and the P-3C constituted fighting power.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘l-‘K'Ml. USE ONLY

No weeks later, the Defense Agency documented its view that "the F-15 and the P—Jc
do not constitute the 'fighting power' banned by the constitution," and submitted it
to the Diet. In it the Defense Agency stated: "With regard to the concrete limits
to defense power permitted under constitutional control, it cannot be denied that it
has a relative aspect which is changeable according to international conditions and
the levels of military technology and other conditions at the particular time."

It thus contended that the import of the F-15 and the P-SC was decided "on the basis
of consideration for changes in the level of military technology."

This document continues to represent the Defense Agency's viewpoint, but it was
submitted with the approval of the Bureau of Legislation and Prime Minister Fukuda.
It is in reality a government opinion. It is the first government document to state:
"The limit to defense power is relative," with the implication of broadly removing
the restraint on SDF arms hitherto imposed by the administration out of concern re-
garding the opposition. With the concrete issue of the adoption of the F-15 as a

pivot, the Fukuda cabinet discarded past government views and, in one stroke, changed
the defense policy.

The JSP strongly protested that "such a view would mean tne recognition of all weapons,
including nuclear arm, for the reason that they are relative." On the following day,
the JSP issued a party statement severely censoring the government, saying: Ihe
Fukuda cabinet is promoting a drastic buildup of arms and a resurgence of militarism."
It also pointed out: "Since his inauguration, Prime Minister Fukuda has openly re-
sorted to reactionary and nationalistic moves, such as designating the "Kimi ga yo"
as the national anthem, legalizing the era names of emperors, putting national anni-
versary activities under government sponsorship and planning the amendment of the
criminal code to worsen it. me JSP, which had hitherto stressed antirecession
measures, addeu "antimilitarism" as an important issue to i s struggle in the Diet.

It thus made public its determination to activate a nationwide mass movement.

Taboo Against Nuclear Weapons Challenged

Meanwhile, the government offensive in the Diet continued to upstage the interpella-
tions by the opposition. At the Lower House budget committee session on 18 February,
Defense Bureau Chief Ito replied to an interpellation by a JCP Diet member: "Pros
the standpoint of the constitution, we may possess defensive strategic weapons. He
may possess short-range cruise missiles without warheads." Subsequently, on 9 March,
the government formally submitted a documentd, unified opinion and stated its
position: "Although we will uphold the three non-nuclear principles as a policy, we
do not believe that all nuclear weapons are banned by the constitution. " The
opposition could not fully counter this, and as a result, the taboo against nuclear
weapons was quickly annulled.

However, a noteworthy point in the abovementioned defense debate was that the aim

of the legal argument from the government side, steaming from the P-15 issue, was
strictly to challenge the taboo against defense, and was not intended to expand
armament beyond the import of the F-15 and the P-3c. Moreover, even supposing that
the l-‘ukuda cabinet, which was facing a financial crunch, did have such an intent, it
was totally unfeasible from a financial standpoint. Director Kanemaru formally denied
the idea of a defense strength requirement, saying: "The maintenance of 2,000

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft by the USSR in the Far East does not mean we need 1,000 planes." He also
said: "I believe the present approximately 400 planes is adequate for Japan." It
is clear frnm this that he intended to limit defense strength from the standpoint
of volume. In that sense, the JSP's criticism that "the Pukuda cabinet conducted a
deliberate campaign for defense buildup” cannot escape being accused of overstating

the government's intent. (A later chapter will deal with the interpretation of this
"intent".)

However, it is also a fact that, at the time, foreign criticism of a “free ride" and
demands for a military buildup and expansion of arms production were increasing because
of a business recession. For example, at the Kansai financial seminar which opened

in early February, Hosai Biuga stated in his keynote address: "We must not rest
lethargically on the Japan-v.5. joint security pact, but must frontally review our
defense direction." This was reportedly followed by a succession of statements on
defense, which were clearly caused by a concern with "defense complications" (criticism
of a "free ride") with the United States. Also, between late February and early March,
President Nagano of the Japan Chamber of Commerce stated: "The government is over-
restraining itself concerning arms export." He was speaking in behalf of the ship-
building industry, especially the small and medium shipyards, which were suffering

from the business recession. Meanwhile, the aircraft manufacturing and shipbuilding
workers unions began in 1975 to petition the government to start "domestic production"
of weapons.

The problem was whether such "pressures" would serve to further Japan's military
expansion, regardless of the intent of the Pukuda cabinet. However, during this
period, the fukuda cabinet's economic measures were producing sound results vis-a-vis
the recession and the trade surplus. The business stimulating measures through the
15-month budget showed results during the last half of FY-78, achieving a real
growth rate of 7 percent in domestic demand, a change to a deficit in the current
foreign account balance, and an overall 5.7 percent growth rate. As a result, not
only did the expectations for arms production due to the recession suddenly die down,
but fears of anti-Japanese pressures also temporarily subsided. The solution to the
economic crisis became an extremely important factor in restraining any runaway
"militarization" policy by the Pukuda cabinet.

Moreover, "financial reconstruction" was the urgent purpose of a massive issuance of
national bonds carried out as a business stimulant measure, restraining the expansion
of defense spending from a financial standpoint. Therefore, as we will explain later,
the Finance Punistry would prove to be the major stumbling block to "militarization."
This condition continues today, as is common knowledge.

0n the other hand, as is clear from all this, the opposition, which shared a braking
role with the Finance Punistry, could not prevent the Fukuda cabinet's "militari-
zation." Several factors have been pointed out. First, all of the opposition par-
ties considered countermeasures for the deepening recession to be their major policy
task. They questioned the govenrment on the defense issue and avoided delaying
economic policy measures. It is said especially that "the SOHYO (General Council of
Trade Unions), which focused its struggles on recession and empolyment countermeasures
based on concern for private enterprise workers unions, had an impact on the activi-
ties of the JSP."

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 'FFFK'IM. USE ONLY

Second, the response of the "mass movement" was much slower, and this affected the
response by the opposition. For example, Director Ueda of the JSP Education and
Propaganda Bureau did some self-reflecting and noted: "Re are not fulfilling our
mission if we cannot even quickly unite to protest against the U.S.-South Korea joint
maneuvers." And Director Tatebayashi of the People's Movement Bureau also reportedly
said regarding the port reentry of the Midway: 'Vb regret that there were practically
no cells within the party for a mass movement." Observing these conditions, Chairman
Asukata realized the need for a policy change and said: "Times have changed so much

that the mere slogan, 'Young people, do not take up arms,‘ has no appeal for the
younger generation."

Third, the opposition parties hestitated to confront the government because, if they
made defense an issue, it would cause splits within the respective parties. For ex-
ample, within the JSP, the pro-China element was put in a delicate situation because
China approved the Japan-v.5. joint security pact and the Self Defense Force. In the
case of the Komeito Party, the LDP's appraisal of Komeito Chairman Takeiiri's state-
ment in January caused complex repercussions within his party on the joint security
pact and the SDF because there was no party consensus. A similar problem existed
within the Democratic Socialist Party. Among the unions affiliated withthe DOHEI
(Japan Confederation of Labor), there were some unions, such as the shipbuilding and
aircraft manufacturing unions, which advocated the "domestic production of arms."
However, not a law among the DOME! and DSP menbers were concerned about the govern-
ment's "militarization."

Fourth, regarding the defense issue,theconsensus among the opposition was fading more
quickly than withinthe respective parties, and it was difficult in view of the in-
creasing multiparty trend within the oppositioa to effectively question the govern-
ment. Consequently, despite the conservative-reformist balance of power, the LDP

was able to take a much stronger initiative concerning defense policy than during the
Sato and Tanaka governments when it enjoyed an absolute majority. This was in sharp
contrast to the introduction of tax cuts, where the opposition's influence in budget
formulation had been drastically strengthened.

Fifth, probably the most 1. ..tant reason was that the opposition, unable to raise
an effective argument against the LDP's contention, failed to make a strong appeal
to the nation. We will discuss the causes in more detail.

Military Power On Par With Advanced Western Nations Is Goal

Until that time, the opposition always interpreted the LDP’s defense theory as "a
return to prewar days" and criticized it as indicating a rightist, fascist and
militarist trend. However, at the time, the LDP and the Defense Agency were extremely
careful not to commit any expressions which could be interpreted as a turn to the
right or militaristic. As a backdrop to this is the fact that with the end of the
1960's as a dividing point, the LDP Diet members in charge of defense affairs passed
from the tradition of former military officers to the postwar generation. As we have
already stated in our discussions about Nakasone as director of the Defense Agency

in this series, the LDP's defense argument in the 1970's had been "modernized" to the
point where it appealed to the intermediate age level of people who had their own
homes to protect.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SI'I ONLY

In this sense, the Nukasone concept and the Sahara concept are on the same track.

50 was Director Knncmaru at the time. From 1977 to 1978, Diet members in charge of
defense like Hinoru Genda, who could not disociate themselves from their ties to
former militarist ideology, could not play a key role in the party's defense policy,
and it was no simple coincidence that two "doves" like Shin Kanemsru and Hichita
Sakata led the defense debate during the Pukuda era, from their respective positions
as Defense Agency director and chairman of the party's Security Investigation Committee.
Kanemaru's defense theory will be reviewed in detail later, but it was undoubtedly
based on the denial of Japan's transformation to a military power and supportive of
the strengthening of the Japan-v.5. security pact. If Kanemaru looked like a ”hawk,”
it was as in Hakasone's case merely a frank explanation of his position. There was
nothing in his rhetoric which smacked of any rightist trend or advocacy of military
power.

in a word, it would not be an over statement to say the defense debate of the Fukuda
cabinet at the time sought to establish armament equal to that of advanced Western
nations, and to build a relationship of military cooperation with the United States
on a par with NATO. Unless the Western nations are viewed as fascist and militarist,
it would not be proper a label the defense policy of the Pukuda cabinet as rightist
or militarist.

Of course, it is fully possible for Japan to be criticized for not actively contri-
buting to world peace through disarmament. Probably the most severe criticism of
postwar Japan's defense policy is directed toward its total lack of effort toward
world peace. while criticism is directed toward its subservience to "global mili-
tarization," it is different from the JSP's censure of "a return to postwar days"
and 'h road to fascism." Seen from global military "commonsense," there was nothing
to be criticized in the Japanese Government's policy at the time...especially in
Director Kanemaru's concept of "deterrence through threat.“

For example, regarding the F-lS's boutsight and refueling systems, the JSP criticized
the "threat to foreign countries." However, China had already approved of Japan's
military buildup. and the ASEAN nations and South Korea, while not completely without
concern about Japan's militarization, did not feel threatened by its current degree
of armament. They even indicated that they welcomed the strengthening of Japan—v.8.
armament in the face of advances by the Soviet Union. 0n the other hand, it was
unseemly for the USSR, which possessed enormous military power, to contend that it
was threatened by a post-fourth defense buildup by Japan. The threat to foreign
countries thus ended in a mere "abstract theory." As a result, the JSP's criticism
remained a "procedural" debate which was at variance with its past testimony. It was
therefore not surprising for the government to devote itself to a "legal debate,"
which stressed the consistency of its replies to Diet interpellations, rather than

to discuss the necessity of national defense.

Furthermore, if the recognition of the Swaere to be a premise, it would be nonsense
to remove the bombsight and refueling systems from the F-lS's, which were purchased
at high prices. If the criticism by the JSP, which did not recognize the SDP, were
to be accepted and the systems removed, it would indicate an irresponsible lack of
vision and an unprincipled reaction to the trend of the times. Such opportunism

would pose greater danger if public opinion were to turn to the right, and it would
be difficult to expect strong civilian control over the 80? from such a government.

In that sense,,the position taken by the Pukuda government must be deemed to be much
more logical than the Tanaka government.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rightwing Policies Promoted Outside of Defense Realm

It was Director Kanemaru who had most strongly advocated such a position within the
government. In retrospect, he wrote as follows: 'WMat can you do with government
officials who talk about consisLency in Diet debates and yet do not make sense when
talking about the bonbsight and refueling systems for the F-15? Therefore I told the
Agency officials: 'If the boubsight and refueling systems are removed from the
fighter plane, what will you have left? The purchase of expensive late-model jets
with the people's dear taxes and the training of pilots at high cost surely were not
for the purpose of enabling them to enjoy supersonic flight in singleseat passenger
planes. Actually, the government was wrong to remove the bombsight from the Phantom
jet. It was also wrong to remove the in-flight refueling system. The problem is con-
trol over politics, and the SD? absolutely cannot be permitted to act without restraint
like the old Imperial Army. Tell them that I, as the director of the Defense Agency,
and the prime minister will be responsible.’ Those were mystrongwords to the
officials.”

"My strong persuasionalsotothe cabinet'sBureauofLeg1slac10n resu1ted 1n,nureau
Chief Hada's talk in the Diet advocating 'a change in defense power proportionate to
the progress of technology.'"

The JSP, with its policy of attacking the LDP's previous contradictory rhetoric, born
out of concern for opposition views and public opinion, proved to be no match for the
abovementioned logical argument of the government and LDP. The JSP therefore
resorted to the criticism that, since the history of democracy in Japan was short

and civilian control was yet to be established, despite the LDP'a announced intent

of a 'hedium—level military state," and despite its ostensible statements, the LDP's
real intent was to conceal its aim to turn to the right and build a militarily
powerful state. In other words, the JSP argued that Japan was a peculiar nation
which, once freed from its restraints as a peaceful nation, could not remain at the
same level of armament as advanced Hestern nations.

From the standpoint of the framework of this series, the JSP's argument was that
Japan's "militarization" was inevitably linked to "a turn to the right" and
'bureaucratization" which would rapidly turn "militaristic.” The central theme of
this series is actually to review the validity of the JSP's contentions.

As for the "real intent" of the LDP. despite the pains the Pukuda administration took
to avoid any linkage to prewar aspects in its defense policy, it actually promoted
"rightist" trends in other areas pertaining to the national flag, the legalizing of
the era names of emperors and worship at the Yasukuni Shrine. Later, we want to re-
view in detail the influence of the LDP rﬂ¥:twing and the prime minister's own
philosophy concerning this problem, center g on the legalization of era names.

0n the other hand, concerning the potential "objective conditions“ for Japan's de-
velopment as a military power, we could point out the expectations and pressures by
the munitions industry and labor unions for defense production, as well as "un-
restrained behavior" by the uniformed officials. As we have already explained con-
cerning the munitions industry, this danger had declined, at least temporarily, in
the last half of 1978 because of a change to favorable economic conditions. However,

15

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with respect to unrestrained behavior by uniformed officers, Kurisu's frequent
statements provided the opposition with excellent fodder for criticism. Kurisu's
statement in July 1978 on emergency legislation was a prime case. In our next

installment, we would like to review the contentions of Kurisu and the SD? from
this angle.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbunsha 1981

S884
CSO: 4105/23

[20 Nov 81 pp 29-33]

[Text] [No 16] Chairman Kurisu of the Joint Staff Council suddenly resigned fol-
lowing the ordinary Diet session in 1978, which had been characterized by a contin-
uing defense debate. In this article, 1 would like to examine the meaning of the
Kurisu resignation.

Kurisu, at a regular press conference on 19 July 1978, stated: "Because of many
flaws in the present Self Defense Force Act, it is possible that the Self Defense
Forces would take supra-legal action in an emergency." In reaction to that state-
ment, Defense Agency Director General Kanemaru recommended Kurisu's retirement to the
prime minister on the 2lst, obtained his approval and directed Deputy Director Haruyama
to persuade Kurisu to submit his resignation and to persuade and obtain the approval
of the Internal Bureaus and that of various chiefs of staff. Kurisu submitted a
letter of resignation on the 26th. Kanemaru accepted it and released him officially
as chairman of the Joint Staff Council. Kanemaru made the following statement about
the "release" at a press conference. "The statement about such things as "supra-
legal action", whether true or not, caused the misundersatnding that it is possible
for the Self Defense Forces to act without regard for the law. This is not an
appropriate statement for the chairman of the Joint Staff Council. The past state-
ments of Mr Kurisu have been attacked in the Diet and, due to a number of consider—
ations, I have decided to accept his resignation." This is the history of the
"release."

However, this "supra-legal action statement" was reaffirmed in a SBUKAN POST inter-
view and his aim seems to have been to point out the legal problems involved in
emergency action by the Self Defense Forces and declare the need to revise the laws.
Therefore, this statement implied criticism of the Defense Agency director generalfs
office, which has responsibility for preparation of laws. The Defense Agency director
general’s office had appeared to side with the military in promoting defense in the
defense debate, but in this context we can see why it switched to criticizing Kurisu
on this issue.

ﬂoweVer, il we carefully examine the development of the defense debate under the
Fukuda government, we see that a conflict between the military and the Defense Agency,
or rather, a challenge of the civilian officials by the military, occurred from time
to time. Clearly the Kurisu statement was not just a spontaneous occurrence.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘FK’MI. “SI-I UNI.‘

For example, Kurisu appeared on Nippon Television and stated that "the Soviet Army
is conducting large-scale exercises on Etorofu“ and this statement was criticized in
the Diet. In response to this, the director general's office in the Defense Agency
criticized Kurisu for making a careless statement. The premise of this criticism
was that the announcement of such news was exclusively the job of the director
general's office. The only reason that the Defense Agency officials took such a
strong stand against Kurisu was that they felt a challenge to their authority.

with respect to this problem, Keiichi Ito, director of the Defense Bureau, stated:
"Because there is civilian control, we cannot have even the chairman of the Joint
Staff speaking as he pleases. We understand the desire of the military to report on
the movements of the Soviet military to the people and increase their awareness of
the need for defense. However, if they go outside the channels of civilian control,
it could lead to a repeat of the mistakes committed by the old military." Kurisu
responded to this by saying: "The chairmanship is the highest military position,
equal to a vice minister. He will accept civilian control in the form of directions
from the director general but not from a vice minister. Information about the
exercises had been reported to the director general. I made the decision to announce
it." Kurisu's rebuttal was based on his professional pride, holding that the military
has superior specialized knowledge in judging the military situation.

lhis series of "Kurisu statements" was somewhat related to the individual personality
of Kurisu, but they should be seen as the result of more structural factors. In other
words, increased awareness of the "Self Defense Forces" and the growth of an active
defense debate provided an opportunity for restoring the authority of the military,
and this resulted in a challenge to the civilian control of the Defense Agency. In
this sense, the challenge to the Defense Agency was the natural result of the more
active defense concerns which emanated from the Fukuda cabinet. And the ultimate
result was Kurisu's "supra-legal acticn statement."

From another angle, Director General Kanemsru felt that the "supra-legal action
statement" might destroy his careful efforts at building an agreement with the
opposition parties. There was already the state of affairs described in the state-
mcnt in WING by Kanemaru at the time Kurisu criticized the "strictly defense" policy.
"In order to protect the interest in defense that was finally emerging among the
people, I took a strict approach and gave a stern warning to Chairman Kurisu."

Specifically as a response to the gains of the Socialist Party, he had publicly
proposed: "if such a thing (infringement of civilian control) occurs again, I will
Lake stern action." An "opposition party friend" told him over and over: "Because
you are a close friend, Hr Kanemaru, he will probably be persuaded this time. But
the problem should not be treated lightly. That statement has deep roots. He want
you to put a stop to the outbursts of the military. Let me tell you:- You're on
probation, you're on probation."

Because of the accumulation of statements and the inflammatory wording of the "supra-
legal action statement," Kanemaru decided that he "could not get through the next
Diet session," and he immediately decided to release Kurisu. It is reasonable to
assume that Kanemaru's decision was made mainly as a strategy aimed at the opposition
parties.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.Y
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY

It is not surprising that the hawks within the LDP criticized this concession to

the opposition. At the LDP general meeting following the decision on release, the
Upper House LDP hawks defended Kurisu. For example, Kazuro Tamaoki, representing

the Upper House Executive Committee, requested "reconsideration of the release."

He gave the following reasons: "The chairman only said what was natural as a pro-
fessional. It is not the fault of the military that there is no policy for action
before an emergency. It is because we and the government are negligent." Expressing
concern over the situation, he also said: "If we do something like this, the Self
Defense Force members on the frontlines will lose the will to fight."

Kurisu Statement Expresses Feeling of the Self Defense Forces

Kanemaru made a speech before the Defense Production Committee of the Keidanren in
which he explained his decision: "I believe civilian control means that we cannot
go back to a prewar Japan." "I felt that if I did nothing about the recent Kurisu
statement, there was a danger of something happening just like the Marco Polo bridge
incident." By switching the point of the argument from a political consideration of
"the possibility of misleading public opinion" to the basic principle of civilian
control, the director general fully supported the Defense Agency's position in the
conflict with the military. This is because he made an issue of the fact that Kurisu
had made a statement to the outside rather than of the content of the statement.
Also, by bringing up prewar experience, he indirectly criticized Kurisu as having
the same ideas as the old military.

It is not surprising that Kurisu thought this criticism was inappropriate. That is
because, regardless of how the statement was made, the supra-legal action statement
demanded legal preparation. However, if the situation is examined in a wider con-
text, it is undeniable that the Kurisu statement of the 19th was a demand for restor-
ation of the authority of the military and a part of the challenge to "Japanese-style”
civilian control. Kanemaru did not argue this point systematically, but at least he
seemed to sense it with his politician's intuition. Here, I would like to analyze

and examine Kurisu's declaration systematically from this point of view.

In brief, Kurisu's statement directly expressed the perspective of military leaders
with the responsibility for directing troops on the frontlines. It directly reflected
the interest of the Self Defense Forces as an organization. His statement aroused
public criticism because of its directness. But it was not just a careless remark.
That is why it was dismissed as a problem of a particular personality. His assertion
was the assertion of the Self Defense Forces as a body. Therefore, the conflict be-
tween the director general of the Defense Agency and the chairman of the Joint Staff
Council. which emerged in the form of Kurisu's dismissal, must be seen primarily as

a result of a structural conflict between the military and civilian authorities.

Let us look at the situation from the military's point of view in detail.

The following episode shows a connection between a conversation between Kurisu and
Self Defense Force pilots about the MiG-25 incident and the supra-legal action state-
ment. Kurisu asked: "what would you do if during emergency deployment you approached
a Soviet aircraft and it began firing?" The pilot replied: "He are not allowed to
fire any bullets." when questioned further, the pilots gave the following answers.
"He are resigned to our fate. If we are not allowed to shoot bullets, we must ram
the Soviet plane." "Japan does not allow the action I would try to take. I would

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SI-I "NIX

end up doing something that the country would punish me for. Even if I thought I was
doing what was correct, I would become a criminal, so it is like having someone
holding on to your hair from behind."

Following this, Kurisu wrote the following: "There is also great anadety on the part
of the officer and controller directing emergency deployment of aircraft. Even when
danger approaches, the officer cannot order his pilots to fire on the enemy. Even

if the officer gives such an order, it cannot be considered legitimate. The law says
that the pilot must not follow it. Therefore, he will say, "Do what is necessary."
This means: "You know what to do." he pilots are prepared to attack. ‘Ihis is a
case of nonverbal commmication."

It is easy to imagine how the top military leader, the chairman of the Joint Staff
Council, must feel about this situation. he judgaent that a Soviet attack on Japan
could not occur cannot be the standard for the Self Defense Forces, which must take
action in an emergency. From the point of view of Self Defense Force members, the
Self Defense Forces are constantly in a battle situation because of Soviet encroach-
ment on Japanese airspace. They are placed in a life or death situation. Therefore,
the military began to make the criticism that, in spite of this situation, the
Defense Agency neglected legal protection of Self Defense Force members because of
concern for public opinion and the opposition parties.

'lhe director general and other officials of the Defense Agency recognized the legiti-
macy of Kurisu's criticism and did not attack it within the agency, but they made his
actions into a scandal outside. In response to this, Kurisu explained the problem

as follows. "Throughout the history of the Self Defense Forces, the military contin-
ually made demands internally and the Defense Agency cut them off. It continually
ignored the heartfelt desires of the troops on the frontlines. his is a problem with
a long history." He explained that he was forced to make his criticism public because
it had no effect internally.

Demanding 3 Position for the Military Above the Civilian Officials

Kurisu's criticism of the civilian officials did not end with the legal flaws men-
tioned above. Rather, it is fair to say that Kurisu was extremely dissatisfied with
the Defense Agency with respect to general formulation and execution of defense policy.
His major grievance was that the military was not even given an opportunity to voice
its criticism. For example, he criticized the situation analysis of the "Defense
White Paper" as follows.

“The greatest prerequisite for formulation of defense policy is an analysis of the
military and political conditions of the opposing military force. Therefore, the Self
Defense Forces are continually engaged in the collection and analysis of data. My
job as chairman of the Joint Staff Council was to look over the information collected
and. even if it was insufficient, to make situational judgments. Ordinarily, that
was my most important job. However, nowhere was this analysis of information by the
Self Defense Forces incorporated into the 'Defense Hhite Paper.’ It was not even
comunicated to the political leadership.... If the military says, "Ihat is in-
correct,‘ the Defense Agency protests vehemently, saying, 'Are you going against
government policy?’

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"It is the same thing as saying that once the overall defense plan is made we should
not complain about anything. The 'beense Hhite Paper" was written according to this
kind of thinking, so if we say that something in it is problematic, they respond by
saying, 'Arc you going to oppose cabinet policy?‘ 'lherefore, no one inside the Self
Defense Forces is in a position to say anything about the 'Defense White Paper'."

'ihis criticism pertains to the fact that the military was not given the authority
it should normally be provided in consideration of its duties. In other words, it
is asserting a demand for "reasonable" influence inside the government. Let us
quote from Kurisu's statement again.

"Under the Self Defense Forces Act, nothing pertaining to information is included

in the duties of the bureau directors or secretaries in the Defense Agency. In con-
trast to this, collection and investigation of information concerning defense is
listed among the duties of the Joint Staff Council.... In spite of this, military
situation judgments are reported to the director general of the Defense Agency by
departments and bureaus within the agency. Hhem I was chief of the Administrative
Bureau of the Joint Staff Council, I discovered that the bureaus of the Defense
Agency made military situation reports.... When I became chairman, I told the chiefs
of staff that this custom existed. It was most extreme at the time of the installa-
tion of a new director general of the Defense Agency. I said I was going to protest,
but the chiefs of staff said it would create obstacles in future work if such a thing
were done right after the director general took office and suggested that I not say
anything for the time being. So I did not interfere at that time. They went ahead
and made the military situation report without my attendance or anything."

It was for exactly the same reason that Kurisu declared that he wanted to make a
military situation report to the prime minister as soon as he was installed as chair-
man of the Joint Staff Council.

As indicated here, the demands for authority by the military usually emerged in the
form of power struggles between the military and the Defense Agency. In this con-
flict, Kurisu defined military authority as "military command" rather than the
"military administration" of the Defense Agency's authority. He attempted to justify
this as professionalism.

"I actually said in meetings that 'there is a clear area of military comand.‘ But
the bureau directors said: 'Not at present. The military administration covers
everything.‘ Hhen I asked, 'Hhat happens when actually conducting operations with
troops?', they said, 'Conducting operations costs money, so that is related to the
budget. Also. equipping the troops comes under the province of the military admin-
istration.’ They went that far. It is a ridiculous argument to say that even

strategy comes under military administration."

"After I was in office, I continued to maintain that there is such a thing as military
professionalism. We, as the military, should have pride and maintain it. Also,
we should get the civilian officials to recognize this."

In this fashion, Kurisu demanded that the military, which is subordinate to the
Defense Agency at present, be put on an equal level. In his ideal of civilian control,

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"the Diet which is elected by the people and the prime minister chosen by the Diet
should exercise civilian control. Therefore, even though they wear civilian clothes,
there should be no bureaucrats included in the concept of civilian control. The basic
principle of the Self Defense Forces Act allows for a two-part organization made up

of the Defense Agency and the military to advise the director general of the Defense
Agency. One thing I worked for while I was in office was to break up the present
system in which the Defense Agency has a superior position and return to the basic
principles of the Self Defense Forces Act."

however, there is more contained in Kurisu's demand than just equality with the Defense
Agency. He demanded that politicians "set the large policies and framework. All
action within those limits should be entrusted with and left to the officers at each
level of command." He justified this by saying: "Areas of professional competence
should be left to professionals." First, we should note that this became a demand
that the military should be in a superior position to the Defense Agency because the
civilians lack specialized knowledge. In reality, his specific proposal for revising
the system aimed at an almost total dismantling of the Defense Agency bureaucracy.

He proposed that control by the Defense Agency should be limited to control in budget
areas only. Second, the concept of professional autonomy in military areas leads to
an argument for the exclusion of all control, not just that of the Defense Agency.
Kurisu brought up the American failure in Vietnam and took a position opposing inter-
ference in strategy by top leadership such as the president of a country. However,
in the present situation of Japan, it is reasonable to suppose that the purpose of
his series of statements was mainly to revise the system of civilian control in which
the Defense Agency is in total control and which is "quite excessive" from the view-
point of "international commonsense", and make it "similar to Europe and the United
States."

Distrust of Military Deep-Rooted in Conservative Mainstream

This "Japanese-style" civilian control is an organized form of the strong distrust

of the military based on experiences before and during the war. The idea of civilian
control was originally based on a distrust of military professionals. Because of the
Japanese experience of militarism, there is a strong distrust of the military even
among the political and economic elite. And that has placed the military in a sub—
ordinate position in the system.

Although defense capability has grown in terms of the budget since the time of
Shigeru Yoshidu, the distrust of the military felt by Yoshida took hold in the de-
fense ideology of the conservative mainstream. It came down to the Pukuda government
with hardly any change. In this respect, one could say that the military was not
"recognized" even by the LDP.

Furthermore, Kanemaru announced this mainstream conservative thinking on every
occasion after he became director general of the Defense Agency. For example, a
book he wrote contains this passage: "I was born in 1914, so I saw the escalation
of military activities from the 15 Hay incident to the 26 February incident and the
tragedy of Japan's defeat in World War II, the Pacific war, with my own eyes. I was
conscripted into the army as a private. I experienced treatment many times based on
the idea that military men were superior and 'others are not true Japanese.‘ In
that situation, I seriously wondered, as a young man, "With things like this, what

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-“1:“. USE ONLY

will become of the future of Japan?" There was no freedom. Speech was controlled.
Because of one red piece of paper, it was necessary to select the path of death.

'18 this the way a country should be?‘ This anguish penetrated to the marrow of my
bones. This feeling did not change at all when I became director general of the
Defense Agency." He repeatedly made such pronouncements. "We must not go back

to a prewar Japan. This is the first step in thinking about national defense."

"The director general of the Defense Agency is the guardian of the ironclad principle

U"

that 'The civilian government takes precedence over the military .

with respect to the issue of civilian control, Kanemaru steadfastly maintained the
position, based on similar experiences, of former Director General Sakata who was
responsible for determining the "defense guidelines." He supported complete control
of the military by the Defense Agency. We cannot appreciate the "understanding" of
Kanemaru's defense policies shown by the opposition parties without this background.
Therefore. Kurisu's series of statements were a hindrance to the "trust" between

the director general and the opposition parties. The quick response by Kanemaru to
the supra-legal action statement demonstrated Kanemaru's strong convictions.

From these circumstances, we can see that Kurisu's criticism of the Defense Agency
actually implied a challenge to the defense ideology of the conservative mainstream.
However, at the time, Fukuda, who was able to control the rightwing of the party,
was in power, and he gave total support to Kanemaru. Therefore, this challenge did
not create a rift in the party. If an incident like this had occurred while the
Niki government was in power, circumstances might have been different.

In any case, the first challenge by the military was avoided through Kanemaru's de-
cision for "release". However, this certainly did not mean that the problem was
solved. This is because Kanemaru's policy of breaking down the taboo on defense
itself made it difficult to prevent statements by the military. The Kurisu statement
was induced by this policy of the Fukuda cabinet.

Furthermore, if the defense question is treated as a technical problem of national
defense rather than as a problem of constitutional principles, the voice of military
officials, as professional experts, will inevitably become stronger. In fact, the
Democratic Socialist Party conducted talks with the chiefs of staff of the Air,

Ground, and Maritime Self Defense‘Forces in August 1978, and there have been stronger
demands that the opinion of the military be heard by the Special Committee for Security
Affairs in the Diet.

Military Challenge Not Ended with 'Release'

Also, it is difficult to give convincing reasons why the military professionals
should not report to the prime minister on the military situation as demanded by
Kurisu. It is not logical to recognize the Self Defense Forces but not give them the
right to speak. To borrow Kane-aru's own phrase: "It does not make sense to use

the people's tax money for military situation analysis and then not use it in govern-
ment policy. Presumably, we are not having it done for the amusement of the in-
dividuals involved." If we are aiming at becoming a medium-size military power
similar to the countries of Western Europe, it is difficult to reject Kurisu's claim
that "at least, we should allow the military to have as much political influence

as in the countries of Western Europe."

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This became very evident in the work on strategic plans and emergency laws carried
out by Kanemaru. The strategic plan and emergency laws are related to the area of
"military comand" for actually moving troops. In an emergency, or in preparing for
a hypothetical emergency, the influence of the military leaders as military profes-

sionals inevitably becomes stronger. The following statement by Kurisu accurately
reflects his awareness of this fact:

"In an emergency, it will be necessary to create a consolidated force, if only from
military necessity. And again. the Defense Agency resists this. If a consolidated
force is to be created, the joint chiefs will have to have authority over all oper-
ations. The Defense Agency does not like that." "In an emergency, or in other words,
in time of war, civilian control will be entirely in the hands of the prime minister
as supreme commander and, within the limits of the directions he receives, the
director general of the Defense Agency. The bureaucrats of the Defense Agency should
no longer be a problem." In short, strategic planning and work on an emergency law
uystem provided a golden opportunity for rapidly raising the position of the military
in relation to the Defense Agency bureaus. This meant that as long as the Fukuda
government continued that policy, the challenge to Japanese-style civilian control
could not be ended just by Kurisu's dismissal.

pressure from the military being applied through the 0.8. Government as an intermed-
iary. Also, the spread of a concept of the Soviet threat brought about an increase
in the number of military supporters in the LDP.

about a reexamination of the previous system of civilian control and the need for a
new concept. However, this awareness was almost nonexistent in the government and

the LDP. Director General Ksnemaru, in particular, labelled the statements of the
military as being "the same as before the war" and only tried to stop them from making
such statements. There was no attempt to build agreement or establish a concept of
the role that should be taken by the military, as military specialists, in determining
defense policy. Ironically, he took exactly the same line of argument as the opposi-
tion parties which do not recognize the Self Defense Forces. This policy has the den-
ger ur only adding to the doubts of the military and leading in the direction of
allowing (‘nlllplctely unrestricted influence to the military.

Thus, the problv‘m of civilian control was left unsolved by Director General Kanemaru.
Because of this, the criticism of the Defense Agency by the chiefs of staff of the
Air, Ground, and Maritime Self Defense Forces continued after Kurisu's dismissal.
"Kanemaru proclaimed everywhere that ’the emergency law system will stand on its own'
and there was no end to the 'disturbance' until there was a change in personnel."
Just bcl‘urr Kunenm-u resigned as director general, a section manager in a
Defense Agency bureau had the following comment. "Kanemaru did many things such as
producing the guidelines for Japan-v.8. defense strategy. However, in the end, the
director general said: 'I do not understand the Self Defense Forces any more.‘

Why is this?"

'I'ne greatest reason, in my opinion, is that Kanemaru did not directly accept Kuriau's
proposal for reexamination of civilian control.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbunshu 1981

9651
(:50: 4105/24 23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MITSUBISHI BROADENS SCOPE OF DEALS WITH CHINA

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19. No 985. 15 Dec 81 p lo

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

C50:

Mitsubishi Corp. has
strengthened cooperative
ties with so—called “friendly
trading homes" excltaively
ensued in trade with China.

it recently reached agree-
ment with 15 such trading
homes under which it will
guarantee supply of corn-
modities contracted for ex-
port to China which these
friendly firms canmt pro
cureontheir own.

Sinoaapanae trade has
slowed down recently due to
Chin's economic adjust-
ment program. Mitsubisla'
helices that it will be able
to take part in more detailed
uni-actions by ioinir; with
the friendly firms and tla's
will serve mutually to es-
pend trade this.

Mossalti Enomoto. manag-
ing director of Mitsubishi.
and the heads of the business
divmons of the company met
recently with the president!
of the is friendly firms which
in the past creased in trans-
actions with Mitsubishi and
reached an agreement on
entering into cooperative
ties

Under the agreement. the
friendly firms will actively
secure orders from China
even for commodities wia'ch
they so tar lnve not han-
dled Mitsubishi. on its part.
will supply commoditia for
export to Clans when nece-
sary and cooperate in trans-
actions.

As a malt of Olina's eeo
nornlc adjustments. large
scale deals. such as thee
for plant exports. arenot be-
incomludodwndtradehas
tapered off. Since China also
is taking a policy of regional
decentralisation oi power,
the time has passed when
hustnea could he oonthcted
simply by soils to Mine

The friendly firms enjoy
mobility. Many d them
live clients in China's re-
gional areas. One of their
weak points. however. is
that their business‘ is
specialized. which limits
their u'atlactions.

0n the one hand. Mit-
subishi and other primal
trading houses have finally

embarked on expanding
their branches in regional

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

6120/94

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

areas of China. Even then
they are not able totalte up
detailed transactions as in
the case of the friendly
firms. 'lhe general trading
lanes. however. live the
ability to cope with inquiries
for all sorts of modiﬁes.
inchiding "Mali-zit be
tween third cou

Mitsubishi thus decided to
cooperate with the friendly
ﬁrms to sipplernent each
other's weaknesses and
m fordrfeoelpt of orders in
a more ective as
m as to ewe-

Larpe-scale traraactial
with China have disap
peared. it thtl can be said
that the era of competition

. between the seneni trading

homes and friendly firms
hasarrlved. withtheformer
tendim to acroach on the
riuitsofthelatter.

The recalt stop taken by
Mitsubishi is aimed at stem-
rniru the decline in trade
with China by smthenine
its cooperative tie with the
friendlyfirms.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

MITI CALLED ON TO CONSOLIDATE VIEW 0N MATERIALS SECTOR
Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 985, 15 Dec 81 p 16

[Interview with Home Suzuki. chairman of Shows Denko K.K., by Seiji Okade,
industrial news editor of THE NIHON KEIZA SHDtBUN; date and place not: speci-

fied]

[Text] Huruo Suzuki. chairman of Showa Denho K.K., wants the
Government to frame a clear policy regarding petrochemical
and other so~called "materials industries" l which produce
such basic materials as nonlerrous metals and steel). tits urge
for a clear policy followed submission of an interim report by
tho Industrial Structure Council's chemical industry oom-
mitten. lot! by another prominent eeonomtet. Hiromi Arisawa.
tn the Minister of international Trade I industry. (See 181

December 8 issue.)
The report advised Ml‘l‘i to draft a raw materials policy.

including imports of naphtha. in light of the worldwide trend
to make petrochemicals from natural gas (ethane). The
pressurr of imports was forecast to keep Japan's ethylene
production at the present level alabout 4.5 million tons in mo.

Suzuki's views on the industry's problems were obtained
In' Serii Ohmic. an industrial news editor a] The Nihon Kelsol

Shimhmt

NKS: Japan will be unable points. In other wads. it is Butl think that urn mayi

to compete with the us. and hard topnctioetmeloeatook its hotness in two dmetator
Canada. Which utilise inexpen- imports). Willem should The nutthb twin I
sive natural gas as raw mate- lmutipﬂewhyitbdﬂiashlo imwhu in tofu! d inva
rial. The Japanese industry in [1.de the MM irn- ment all anploymmt It:
aisle that i' be allowed to freely pom l “I! um to outlaw “111'! M ottlcieis 8W ct:
mil-m im-qu-nsiw- naphtha. It: ambian- stand. solid-to m 0"!!!” Ill
the interim report shows NI“: MIT! people held hot one now tilt the (Zed:
understanding of the problem debates before the advices mmtnﬂmmm
but fails to come up with spec- were submitted. But the M

iﬁc measures. is the industry
frustrated?

Seulti: The recommends-
tion shows that the 18C mem-
bers know the direction to
wiich we should had for. But
ithnsnotsuiduwordebwtlm-
mediati- implementation The
report is vagte when it com.
to the core. the most importsnt

Agency of Ndurot Interest 0
Energy, which counts the
”mount out-rum won ”I0
arguments over the Basic in-
dustries Bureau. “tear that the
petrochemical industry in-
ments about loch oftheir petiti-
cai inﬂuence.

Snail: I amt 1m
any specific division at um.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NKS: Not much can be e
pected o] the Government 1
raw materials problem. So.
seems that the industry itsa
should try to improve its pr:
liability and revise the produ
tion bose suitable to sit
growth of demand in thelutur
Thu requires improvemem
the industry's behavior. such
COPYRIGHT :

C80:

l0120/94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

osercompetition.
Quasi: ‘No or three lead»
ones
ruponsibie for
all the producers‘ proﬁtability.
Our (Shove Denlto's) tie-up
with Mitsui Petrochemiul in
metrics in medium- and low-
pnssure polyethylene is such
anesample.

Nils; Will excessive capac-
ity become a major problem?

Shir-hi: It is imputani to
matte production lscilitles
nuseular. it is desirable to
abandon as much inefficient
and otuolete capacity as pani-
hie so that the weratins rates
at InilIl'ﬂl. efficient plants can
be moat-ti. The industry must
hurry to moderate its capao
ity. l painluily ieel tint we will
go nowhere it we maintain the
status M but we are not mix-
in; thorough ellorts.

Niel: Overcompetition. in
some people 's View. stems
from too many a company in
the some area. The interim re-
port said that "mergers are
desirable” and advocated
“consolidation that will lorm
leading companies. "

sushi: Merci-s are lrn-
possible even it compania so
under‘ There will he no rnnior
mergers in the next two or
three years. i believe tint tie
ups in production and sales will
he as eilective or nearly eilec-
live as met-yrs. We shutld
pursue tie-we with mderstsnd-
in¢ iron the Fair Trade Corn-
rnlssim ﬂaws will he dice-
tive in recovering profitability.

NI“: Formation of com-
pany groups and consolidation
will require discussion by com-

1981, The Nlhon Keizai. Shinbun, Inc.

26

ponies. Won't the discussion be
regarded as a problem in light
althe Anti-Monopoly act?

Sat-Iii: The present
petrochemical industry situa-
tion is analogous to a sick pen
sat who dos not have to he
instilalised but has to go to a
hospital once or twice a week.
Healthy persons may he ex-
posed to tree competition. But
the industry's slams satisfies
one per cert. oi the condition
for cartel lormstion it de
serve s near«carteL Given
slow growth. um and m
should not he antagonistic out
lorm a commas about what
prescription is necessary. That
will be a plus tor the whole
economy. too

NKS: Do you mean a
mechanism with which
iheraphy can be practiced
openly departing from the pat-
tern 0] MIN providing its ad-
mlnlstrotiw suldanceand FTC
trying to amend it?

Sunni: i mean ttat when
poor men are taltiru together.
a policemen does not need to
siophytand interiors).

hills: Can the petrochemi-
cal industry survive problems
in Japan?

Suzuki: Pesslmlsnt pre-
vails. but I third: it can sur-
vive. You canmt be sure tilt
the raw material cost [ape with
the US. and Cam“ will re
main in the inure. too Even ll
imports grow toaocoum torn-
:0 per cent oi the demand in
Japan. you should be aware
mﬁmmgm hereare lairly

dunesticprodueu-s
canes satisfy thesevenedemand
from users about predict quali-
ti. anal deliveries. Oct dit-
lereness alone will not vipeout
Japanse were horn on
dons-tic marten. Esausive

iaarsarenotitltliied.

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

FOR OFFICIAL liSIi ONLY

HONDA, YUGOSLAV FIRM TO CONSTRUCT ENGINE-MAKING PLANT

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 985, 15 Dec 81 p 7

[Text]

COPYR IGH’l‘:

CSO:

(0120/91.

1981,

Honda Motor Co. will start
producing general-purpose
engines in Yugoslavia at the
end at next year on a joint
veraure basis.

The Tokyo-based cornpny
recently obtained iinal go
ahead oi the Federal Govem
ment at Yugoslavia to operate
:1 joint vonturc enterprise. Min
Standard Tvor'ra'ca Motora
Osijelt. with on indigenous
agricultural machinery maker.
Metalsita lrmstrije Standard
Osiieit.

The Yugoslav tirrn so far has
been assembling Honda
cultivator: and pump at an
annual rate oi 10.000 units.

The joint engine-making
company will be capitalized at
so million (or appm H.300
million). of which Honda will
put up about to per cent (or
some V200 million) in the form
ot providing its manulacturing
know-how.

The new company will
construct a factory in Osiiel.

The Hilton Kelzni. Shinbun. Inc.

27

the Republic «1 Croatia. where
it will turn out Hands engines.
6-150. 6-300 and GM. at an
auroral rate of 20.000 units in
the first year and 30.000 in the
toliowiru ruyears.

Boob Motta‘ will IW the
Osiiek plant with lratnes.
transmission and other mata-
parta ot em. The ratio d
local contents to total parts
mpplies will he raised to 70 to
00 per cent when the Joint wen
tnre operations no on stream.

Yugoslavia will tints have an
Iraesrated cultivator producing
setup in its country.

Meamhiie. Honda Iota h-
in mind a similar plan to
wovide its teclnologlcal know-
how to Cltlna in launciana a
Joint motorcycle-making ven
ture sortiettme in the near
future.

The enginemakin; venture in
Yugoslavia will prove an
impo rtanttesttorits plonto

provide skills and m
motorcycles in China.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLNY

TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG JAPAN. U.S., EUROPE

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 98S, 15 Dec 81 pp 1.3

I‘l‘cxt]

In the midst ol ongoing trade
trictiona. Japan. the United
States and Watern Europe
have been steppilu up tech-
nical exchange: in computer.
semiconductor. robotandother
high-technology ﬁelds recently.

()baervers note in particular
that Japan is taking the irdtia-
live in mat trilateral ea-
charces which have taken the
form of technological co
operation. joint venture. origi-
nal equipment manufacturer
(08m contracts and other:
This indicts. they say. “at
despite continuing central}
tion. a new era of trilateral
technological cooperation with
Japan as a pillar is emerging

In heavy machinery and
hcavy electrical machinery
ﬁelds where Japan med to
import technology. there have
been a number ot Japan
initiated projects with the us
and West Europe recemly.
Kawasaki .l'leavy lndustrieg
Ltd. has initiated iotntdevelop
ment of a large coal-burnt"!
boiler with Deutache Babcccl
a Wilcox AG ot West Germany.
Mitsul Engineerirg ti Ship
buildiig Co. has cooperated
with Biphaae Energy Syrians
ot the US. in commercializing
two-phase flow turbine ap-
p;;:nblc to geothermal and low-
tcmperature powergeneration

The typical technoloﬂcal
exchange can be lotmd in the

field ot turbochargers - newly-
developed equipment in-
dispensable to improve com-
bustion efficiency at engines for
energy-swim in the future.
Mitsubishi Heavy lnrhiatriea.
Ltd. the early starter in the
field. ottered technological aa-
sistauce to General Electric
Company ol Britain receialy.
and at around the some time.
Mitsui Engineering at Shipbuild-
ing introduced technology
trorn MAN-saw Diesel (3th
ol West Germany. . And
lshikamjima-itarima Heavy
industries Co. has. in coopera-
tion with Brown Bovert Co. (1
Switzerland. managed to com-
{mirth-tile uirbocnaruers.
.Thae endanger luve been
more evident in Japan‘s
leading fields ot eletronier and
electromechanica. Fujitsu Ltd.
witch already has business tie
ups with Siemens A6 of Went
Germany and Amhhl Corp of
the u.s.. ins recently con
cluded a contract to offer tech
nology for large-scale oom-
puters and semicormctota to
find lofzritaii'i And N l

e mp Telephone ic
Corp. has also concluded a
eras-licerairg contract on
patented technology of coin-
piters and electronic telephone
exchange ayatetna with later-
natiomi Business Maciiner
Corp. ot the US.

Furthermore. Yokogatva

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electric Wortts. Ltd. has sil
an OEM contract to pro
parts at ultrasound diagn
equipment to General Ele
Co ot‘ the us. Similar
tracts have been signer
TEAC Corp to offer video
playera to ThomsonCSl
France and by Minolta Co:

Co to otter plain paper co|

, lolBM dtheUS.

President Nihachiro t
yama ot Mitsubishi Ele
Corp. commented. "I
the impression that we
entered the era of equal

house Electric Corp of the
to cooperate in semicond
and inch-trial robot iieida
even prodiction technolog
quality control skills.
More and more Anne
and European firms are vi
to Introduce Japan“: a:
Motion and applied
nology. Symbolic of the
moves in the field of large
integrated circuits when
makers like Texas l
mu. lnc.. Motorola. In
lnlel Corp. have plats
pond its Japanese siibaidi
Tuhio Kodaka. preside

Tokyo Electron Ltd. whicl
to import and sell aemicr
tit production equipment
the 05.. but in toda
creasingly handling Jar
prothtcts. said. “Dolnedtlt
iOI'YR ICIIT:

:80:

LN. UVCI. I'm IMI LII d I!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

no lower buy our products
unless they are made in
Japan.“

Although the 0.8. and West
Europe increasingly praise
Japanese production and ap
plied technology. a great many
Japanese managers believe
Japan is still interior to the
West in basic technology. For
example. Tokyo Electric Power
Co. a user of boiling water-
type nuclear reactors. has
started studying a plan to in
iroducc pressurized water-type
reactors in an attempt to
diversify reactors. but Japa-
nese makers like Tmliiba
Corp. Hitachi. Ltd. and htji
Electric Co were forced to dis
patch their engineers to Kraft-
werit Union A6 of West Gen
many to be briefed on pres-
surized water- type rem-tors.

0' W”. MM

U . “uglier-mi at a n-M VIII
9001 Between Mahala-la Elect!

RM" Iasen 6“" d W“! GM

U marrow-um

n we» oueml oi nec- arm-m

I l Jenn! anew-m- oi l

(Mduun
damandrm

waevno com
is locum-at to and

"C'ﬂ’ﬂ'mm I."

never Ll. ol lie-Ion. Ila-ulnar” nae-ma man

MINI-es (o . Kenna.» ”N

M huts-sn- ”My Indian-n Lid nu. oveiecll

I l Jim! development at Jana-r
.i-u um Ono-q New: Mn:
Ul- "any "tall-H. I w- "0‘
All! mam Ame-Putin a-u u"
l l Jon! mum-um! ol soot

\ rue-t mat-on eml
v Imﬂlﬂ. Km
.5" mauve-n. I.”
mate's f VXI mm 0)
mow-a boilers between

:mm- um" invite-n are Deena-e Incest Ii
W-IIOI AI. 0' W". WM
1 1 (main net-m Minu- (WM ‘ M-

” Information "chance 0"

la]. 20/ 914

29

D

D - (“Wanner-loos

SUDOD

OED 3

1981, The Nlhon Keizai Shimbun,

Thus. it is an urgent matter
for Japan to overcome such
"cotnparalive inferiority" and
to tlnt end. induction of west-
ern technoltgy will continue in
the years to come. It is true
that technology exchange must
be based on swapping superior
technology. but the important
thing is understood to be to
see to it technology offer-
on contributes to industrial
promotion of the other side.
Noboru \‘oahii. senior adviser
at Sony Corp. who participated
in the recent conference of the
Japan-Britain Electronics
Council. said. "We lave been
successful in offeriic lech-
noloxy of home appliances to
West Europe. but we must
thinit of technical transfer.
which will take root in the
West."

— Establishment or a low venture to We "man-
ia." roam.“- mtpmi new Managua.
Groom: (unmade-Sum In: an the Crimea
Gav-rum

L-uII-ne I mlrol rotor and wink-butt
Week-no led-loner In N-tuh- to “metal
Emil-c Co or he 0.:

l «mine or Min-uni canon mwaeM-no technique
"‘qu Ilium Mann-at to lay o vac ol the
u .

Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR (li‘l-‘IK‘IAI. USE ONLY

COMPANIES PIN HOPES 0N NEH PRODUCTS, TECHNOLOGY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOHIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 985, 15 Dec 81, p 6

[Text ]

COPYRIGNT :

Development oi new products
and technologies is the lore
mast aim oi leading cornpanies
in considering what they shwld
do about their future mange
mm.

This was disclosed recently
in the yearly survey on man
agerial aims carried out by the
Japan Mamgement Associa
tion in October. it directed its
checkup at sou companies listed
on stock exchanges.

Responses obtained irom m
at them showed thatnperoent
thouﬂit that development oi
new protaicts-tecimoloo'es was
the moat important. Tits was
as in the case oi last year's
survey.

'l‘hc answer indiated tint
enterprises operating in an era
«I stable growth were most
concerned about developing
new prodocwtechnologies so
that they would not be left
behind in the current tide oi
trcmilogicai innovations.

Ntntt mist impta‘tant goal
was "t-k-vating market share"

such rwlus reaching 37 per

(280: (0120/91.

cant. Thirty-live per cent cited
raising the productivity of their
directly concerned iieid oi
work.

The association also querried
the companies on their main
operations. using the product
portlolio management (PPM)
method to ascertain their pre~
sent-future possibilities.

As to this. as per cent said
thev were a "problem child"
business tin a growing industry
but with a small share! and 11
per cent said they were a

“beaten dog business“ tin a
low mwth indultry with a
little share). in other worth.
onethird oitheresptmdentsielt
that the direction at their
lasinua in the iuture was in
need oi a review.

This revealed that these
iirms felt the urgency oi
developlrg new products and
techniques for replacing their
main lamina was.

(mueodierhandmnlytslier
cent oi the cornpanls
were tound to be systematically

1981. the Nihon Keizal. Shinbun, Inc.

30

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

grappling with the prob
elevating oiiioe prorated!
Mich itlerest lately ha
vowing.

The association abo
into such aspects as pen
education. productiot
search-development
marketing.

This bored that as t
smut-education. the pt
oi devising measure
“vitalizing your: and :
age engoyees“ ind ri
the top el; twothirds
it“? .. Mei:

H!“-
dimlnished: 6 per cent
comparies had started
group activities. out
quality cmtrol (QC) cin
themarlteting area.

Note: PPM is a man
meat- to gauge produt
position by taking int
sideration the smalln
lameness oi the marite
of a product and the sn
orlargenessoiltsgrowt
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JIRA ASKED TO PARTICIPATE IN USSR ROBOT

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL In English

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

(ISO:

Ill 20/94

The Soviet Government.
scheduled to open an inter-
nauoml industrial robot
exhibition in benino'ad tor a
“May showing begiming
October In. next year. has
called on the Japan Indus-
trial Robot Association to
join it

.ltRA members. num-
bering 36. appear willir‘ to
take part in the proposed
sham as they expect it will
lead to cultivating fresh
demand for their promcts.

In writing Japanae robot
makers in hemngrad. the
Kremlin ins presented a list
at specific items they want
the Japanese to display.
They include manual man'-
pulators. computer-aided
designing systems. ﬂexible
manufacturing systems.
related parts and com-
ponents. jig machines. and
almost alllunds ot Industrial
rnhnut

31

FOR OFFICIAL

5110“

Vol 19, No 985, 15 Dec 81 p 8

l The aemi-gowrunemai
Japan Exterml Trade 0r-
ganiaation will act as a
channel tor Japanese robot
makers to priicipte in the
Soviet extibition.

The Soviet Union. noting
that Japan possess: 7o per
mt oi the world's total
robots. originally envisioned
holding an exhibition oi
solely Japanbuilt robots in
Moscow. The Kremlin. how-
ever. has given it up in favor
at an international show in
Leningrad.

Aside from such a show.
the Soviet Union has been
approaching Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries. Ltd. to tie
up on robot-mdting skills.
So tar. only Kawasaki
Heavy lndusu'ies. Ltd has
sold a number at robots to a
Soviet auto plant with
others making several con
tracts for exporting a (eu-
products in small lots.

1981, The Nikon Keizat Sliimbun, Inc.

USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NUCLEAR PWERPLANT CONSTRUCTION REVIVES

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 985. 15 Dec 81 p 5

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

080:

(ii 20/910

Nuclear power plant con-
struction. stalled so tar lies
year. is moving ahead again.

Chum Electric Power Co. is
scheduled to start bulldog its
third atomic energy plant with
a generating capacity oi t.t
million kilowatts at Hnmaoka
in March. tau. Japan Atomic
Power Co. plans to start a
similarly large (Lid million
kilowatts) at human once it
solves the woblerns with a
radioactive waste leakage into
seawaters.

The involved a
smaller plant at ‘l‘aurup. The
Government‘s Electric Power
Source Coordination Council is
likely to approve conatniction
plans totaling in generating
capacity more than 4 million
kilowatts. including a project oi
Tohoku Electric Power Co. la
a usmokibwau plant at
Mall.

The nuclear projects were
stalled alter the accident at the
Three Mile island station in the
us. in March. um. Projects
were revived in mint. 'seo.
when the Ministry oi inter-
national Trade In industry
allowed two utilities — Tokyo
and Kansai Electric Power
Comparies — to comlnict two
ouch reactors at Pukushirna
rind Takahama. Then. the
utilities here were hit by the
Nruga loaltage problems.
which MIT! discovered in April
this yer.

The utility industry feared
that the problems would earn
nuclear projects to he delayed

one or two years. But the latest
HIT! action for Chubu Electric
Power indicated that the
Government and utilitiea
suttered only about six months
oi delays.

Japan Atomic Power waa
originally schetltled to start
mtructlon of its lara plant
(Purina-2) in Jute. But the
leakage earned lll‘l'l to retrain
irorn leeuiu its coutuction
approval in light oi the
‘i‘suruga-l problem. The
smaller reactor will remain
auspendeduntilDeeember l7by
theministry‘s order.

Meantime. Hokuritu Electric
Power Co. is tryim to bliell'int
its nuclear project. including a
mono-kilowatt plant at Noto
Peranaula. This protect. how-
ever. is unlikely to progrus
last com to cool: the EP-
SCC‘s approval in (local tau
ilolnrtku. Kaneal and Ciaibu
are consider“. a Joint ratclear
poject tor a large no million
kilowatt) nuclear complex also
on the peninsula. But iiokuriku
has not submitted ita joint plan
to local pverraneds because

of the ailects the‘l‘sumu prob
lunhaa.

Elsewhere. the projects are
going on relatively smoothly
Utilitiea plan to propoesix
projects in the Mlﬂsponsored
public hearlrgs and EPSCC
meetings in the rest or (local
net. The largeat plane the
two Lib million kilowat nts
considered by Kyushu Electric
Power Co.

1981. The Hilton Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80 l l'INCl". AND TECHNOLOGY

TWO UNDERWATER STEEL-CUTTING TECHNOLOGIES

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 985, 15 Dec 81 p 17

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

C50:

4120/96

The world's first two are
electric discharge methods for
cutting underwater tor the
salt-st disposal oi radioactive
steel structures. developed by
[mt February by a Japanese
governmental laboratory. have
become applicable to modern

commercial nuclear station
pressure vessels. it was
mentlylcarned.

According to the Government
lndustrial Research Institute.
Shikoku. Takamatsu ol the
Ministry of International Trade
ti lndustry‘s Agency of Intim-
trial Science and Technology.
one at its two method at cut-
ting stainless-clad steel struc-
tures Into smaller pieces has
been developed to a higher
capacity of severing up to 300-
millimeter'thick steel plates or
bars. The capacity thus has
been doubled compared with
the original one announced last
February.

The two methods. respec»
tivcly tor cutting stainlus steel
and stainless-covered steel.
feature an underwater arc type
0‘ electric discharge like
welding. tor etiiciently
severing stainless steel and in
the «use at stainless-clad steel.
the combined application d
tint electric arc discharge
won-sis lor cutting through
star-tics: steel and a as torch
tor scveruat steel under the

33

stainless coverim. The gas
torch process had already been
developed in America for corn-
mercial application Japan's
own methods feature
minimised underwater genera-
tion of redioactive gas.

As the institute explained. the
gas torch it has used for the
steel part of the stainleascover-
ed steel structures 0! the N-plant
pressure vessels has reached
the new my: capacity through
such improvements as: t)
Enlargement ot the torch dia-
meter from 20 to so milli-
meters; 2) Bxpamlon ot the
oaygen blow mmth diameter
from between 1.9 and 2.3 ton
and 3.: millimeters. 3) Use at
the conventional propane (as
mixed with a so per cent
methylacetylene gas as the
main ﬂame; and 4) Switching
ot a " ed water cur-v
tain" applied to both the arc
discharge cutting and the us
torch cuttim to an “air pres
sure curtain" in the case of the
gas torch to eliminate water
seepage.

But the whole severance
equipment did not have tobeas
enlarged as anticipated. The
new capacity is more than
emugh tor cuttiru oil the
ousting commercial N-plant

vessel steel at :50
millimeters in thickness.

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shillibun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JAPAN STILL IMPORTS MORE TECHNOLOGY THAN IT EXPORTS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 985, 15 Dec 81 p 17

[Text]

COPY RIGHT :

CSO:

4120/94

Japan‘s annual balance of
technology imports and
exports alill registers a big
excise oi imports despite
the recent sharp growth in
Japan‘s teetaiology exports.

The Science and Tech-
nology Agency revealed
recently that technology
imports in fiscal I“) ended
last March. in terms oi
royalty and other compen-
sation payments on a dollar
base. totaled 81.639 million.
11.2 per cent up [com the
weccding liscal year,

Technology exports airing
liscul I980 totaled $378
million. 10.5 per cent up.
Both annual increases in
«heated a contimed brialt
interchange of technologis.

Apart trnm the compensa-
tion payment value which
include umtmucd annual
payments lrom the past.
2.llz new technology im-
porting contracts were con
cluded during the year. an
increase of as (or L: per
ecnlloverlheyear belore.

By category. machine
technologies comprised the
lamest number at the fiscal
lam import «attracts. Elec-
lric-elct‘ll'onic. chemical.
and metallurgical lechnolo
aim lnllnwed in that order.

The predominance of
machine and electric-elec-
tronic technologiea' clearly
reﬂected Japan's recently-
mounting imports oi Amer-
ican and West European
technologies concerning the
development ol new types oi
nuclear electric power
plants. large thermal-steam
electric power plant boilers.
other heavydity machin-
ery. and computer-related
equipment.

Computer-related tech
nologies numbered m eon-
tractsmpﬂor t5.9 per cent
from the preceding year.
with the US. accounting tor
about hali‘. and France,
West Germany. and Britain
coming thereafter in that
order.

Technology exports' rate
In technology imports. in
value percentage terms. had
been steadily rising with
slight breaks [rem ”A per
cent in fiscal me to 22.7 in
ﬁscal um; :21 in [local
1m; 17.! in fiscal 1919; and
25.3 in fiscal 1800. Small
aliphaelts are comidered
due to teclnieal payment
timing arrangements. and
the Agency believed.
Japerfs exporta are
basically on an uptrend.

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SHALL METAL PARTICLES USED FOR PRODUCTION OF CARBON FIBER

Tokyo JAPAN ECONWIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 985, 15 Dec 81. p 17

[Text]

An innovational method to applicableiorm.hesait1
produce carbon ﬁber with use
of minute metal particles has
been developed by Proi. Tauneo

Koyama. Assistant Proiesaor held early December.

Morinobu Endo and their team
ut the Shinshu Urlversity Err

gineering Faculty.

It ieatures low cost and high

cﬂiciency.

According to Endo. employ~
mcnt oi extremely line metal
particles is without pecedent
anywhere and has drawn many
joint study proposals irom

abroad. such as from the hydrqenintothel‘m'nace.

National Aeronautics and
Space Aanlnistration. Mas-
sachusetts Institute oi Tech-
nolocy. 80‘ 0th" American cotton candy. with each bar tip

and French research institu- centeringonametalparticle

lions.

Carbon ﬁber. (or its out-

nm. the research team has standing heat and strain resist-

chusen Shows Denlto K.K.. a

leading Japanese chemical widelyapplied to aerospace en-
makcr. as its joint research ginoeritg.

partner inr rcimemcnt oi the

method into a commercially two varieties — a very expen

(.‘ill'YR lCii'i':

(ISO: lil2ii/94

I981, The Nilton Kcizal. Shimbun, Inc.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The team Introduced the
methodatan eighthconwaoi
the Carbon Society oi Japan

Endo called the new method
"Gas Plane Growth Carbon
Fiber" redaction process. it
consists in sprinkling very fine
particles oi some metal
tbelievedtobeironionametal
board inside an electric inr-
nace. heated-up to woo degrees
C. ora higher. and “ten. Nwiic
a mixed (as oi benzene and

These simple operations
quidtly result in the formation
oi bars oi carbon iiber like

once. recently has come to be

Soiar.therehadbeenonly

site lists-grade type oi a PAN
tpolyacrylonitrile) aroup and a
cheap and low-undo type of a

; pitch mp.

'l‘henew innovational method
promise production oi a better
kind oi carbon fiber tho both
oi the conventional products in
tensile strength Besides. its
utilization oi benzene and
simplicity oi working meat
the possibility oi a much lower
production cost in mass

production.
Denko's Vice

Pruitbnt Tailiro 03a saw
many possibilities o! applica-
tion oi the carbon fiber
proﬁteedbythenewmelhodto
electronic and metalluraeat
areas. emitting its bid: heat
conductivity.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

AUSTRALIAN URANIUM ENRICHMENT--Both the Government and nuclear industry in Japan
have decided to try to join an international uranium enrichment project planned
by Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia. Top executives of UECA visited Japan
to consult with officials at the Ministry of International Trade 6 Industry,
electric utilities and other nuclear companies. The visitors were told that
Japan deems it necessary to further strengthen the nuclear relations between the
two countries for Japan's long—term interest in securing uranium. Besides,
Japanese participation seemed to promise a large volume exports of centrifuge
machines that are required to build an enrichment plant. UECA plans to start
enrichment in Australia with funding and technical cooperation from, among others.
the U.S. and France. Japan is being urged to join because of the Group's evalua-
tion of high-level technical expertise in Japan. Specifically, UECA plans to
complete a plant with annual capacity of 1,000 tons by the end of the 19803.

The eventual capacity is envisaged to total 3,000-5,000 tons a year. To realize
the project, Australia is scheduled to select partners to handle the technical
requirement by March, 1982. The UBGA project has attracted attention of nuclear
leaders in Japan, the U.S. and Europe because it represents the first case of
major multinational cooperation in the nuclear field. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN
ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 98S, 15 Dec 81 p 5] [COPYRIGHT: 1981.
The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, lnc.]

AUTOMATED CAR PAINTINc--Toyo Kogyo Co. will be the first of major Japanese auto-
makers to fully automate car body painting. The Mazda car maker said its Hofu,
Yamaguchi Prefecture plant. now under construction and due to start up next fall,

will have fully unmanned body painting lines. Toyo plans to use 200 industrial
robots at its factories in Japan. Of that, 140 robots will be installed at the
new Hofu factory. Painting robots will account for 22. The company will buy the
22 from Tokico, Ltd.. a painting robot maker, early next year and complete trial
lines of painting robots in June. After repeating test runs, the company hopes
to entirely automate painting lines at Hofu next autumn. The Hofu factory,

when completed next fall, will have a monthly 20,000 cars producing capacity.

The 140 robots at Hofu will supplant 1,800 workers, half the number now employed
at existing factories of the same capacity. Toyo intends to apply the full auto-
nation system to the painting lines at all of its factories if the attempt at
Hofu proves a success. Leading automakers in Japan as well as abroad, already
having installed welding robots, new are going up one step further—-robotization
of the painting process. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19,
No 985. 15 Dec 81 p 7] (COPYRIGHT: 1981, The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.]

36

FOR‘OFFICJAI.IISIZ(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MACHINE TOOL ORDERS WN--The Japan Machine Tool Builders' Association said that
orders received by its 68 member companies in October totaled $50,215 million,
down 9.7 percent from a month earlier and down 3.7 percent from the same 1980
month. ‘l'ools equipped with numerical control devices accounted for Y25,696 mil-
lion 15.0 percent from September and down 1.2 percent from the year-earlier
level. Order hacklogs at the end of October stood at 1017,5110 million, up 1.6
port‘cnt from a month earlier and up 3.1 percent from a year earlier. January—
October orders aggregated $517,825 million, up 1.5 percent from the comparable
1980 period. NC machine tools aecOunted for $272,018 million, up 7.5 percent.
A JMTBA spokesman said that orders in all of 1981 will go almost crabuise from
a year earlier at some $620,000 million if the situation remains as it now is.
[Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 985, 15 Dec 81]

(COPYRIGHT: 1981, The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.]

SEMI—FINISHED IC CHIP EXPORTS-—Japan's exports of semi—finished integrated cir-
cuit chips have been surging recently, apparently mirroring establishment of more
assembly plants in the 0.5. and Europe. According to the Electronic Industries
Association of Japan, their exports in the first nine months of this year totaled
¥27,795 million, up 23.4 percent from the year-before level. This sharply con-

trasts with poor exports of encased le (finished products). Their exports
he same period. Export of IC chips are expected to

lectric Co. and Hitachi, Ltd. begin

(RAM) chips at their plants in the

assembly of 64-kilobit random access memory
15 Dec 81]

11.5. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 985,
lCOPYRlCll‘l‘: 1981, The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.]

CARBON FIBER Pl.AN‘l‘——Carbon fiber projects have been drafted by Mitsubishi Chemi—
cal Industries, Ltd. MCI plans to start its production by completing a large
plant with annual capacity of 1,000 tons by sometime in 1984. In the unique
Mitsubishi process, coaltar-—a byproduct of coke-«will be utilized as a raw ma—
terial. Compared to polyacrylonitrile carbon fibers (as produced by Toray Indus-
tries Inc.), the MCI know—how is claimed to promise cutting production steps,
thus contributing to lower production costs. The plan reflects the company's
intention to make best use of byproducts from its coke operation. Earlier, MCI
deveIOpt-«l the so—-called needle coke which. can be used as a raw material of elec-
trodes in e] ectrlc furnaces. The developer started joint studies with users to
dew-lop applications of the coke shaped like a needle. The carbon fiber plant
will be located at either Kuroaakl in north Kyushu or Sakaide on Shikoku island.
Meanwhile, Torny, the largest producer in the world, and Hitsui Coke Co. agreed
to build a pilot plant for carbon fiber production from solvent refined coal at
Omuta, also Kyushu. by mid-I983. Their joint venture, C.M.T. Development Co.,
In capitalized at ¥200 million. The two first: intend to make the coal—derived
grades for use in automobiles. 'l'oray's PAN fibers are mainly consumed for manu—
Ineturc of aircraft components. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English

an W, No 985, 15 Dec 81 p 16] ICOPYRIGKI: 1981, The Nihon Kelzai Shimbun, Inc.]

(:50: 1.120/94 mo

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY