FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10327
16 February 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transiitcrated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/]

16 Pebrt

NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 9/82)

Cou'reu'rs

ECONOHIC

P’RANCE

Textiles, Naval Shipyards. Steelworks Reorganize To Face Crisis
(Richard de Vendeuil; VALBURS ACTUELLES. various dates) .

Textile Sector Lagging

Modernisation of Metallurgical Sector,
Shipyards Linked

POLITICAL

SPAIN

Arzallus: PNV Hay Support Calvo Sotelo, ETA Isolated
(Ander Landaburu; CAMBIO 16, 6 Jan 82) ..................

22's Onaindia To Push for Unity of Basque Leftists
(CAMnIo 16, 11 Jan 82) ..................................

MILITARY

FRANCE

New Training Planes Described as More Economical, Efficient
(AIR ET cosmos. 12 Dec 81) ..............................

Mirage F.13. Squadron 3/5
Hicrojet 200 To Fly in June

-a- [III-WE-IS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

TEXTILES. NAVAL SHIPYARDS. STBBLHORKS REDRGANIZE TO FACE CRISIS
Textile Sector Lagging

Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 6-10 Jan 82 pp b6-48

[Article by Richard de Vendeuil: "Slowdown in Textiles"]

[Excerpts] It is better to sign nothing rather than endorse a bad agreement. From

the Textile Industry Owners Union to the CFDT [French Democratic Confederation of Labor]-
ﬂcuitex. the negotiation of the third multifiber agreement (AH?) has created a har-
monious whole. To the point that the prime minister has said:

"He will no longer allow countries claiming to the 'developing nations' to disturb
our markets."

The textile owners who 2 weeks earlier had demonstrated in the streets under the slogan
"don't give up. Hauroy. stand firm." said they were reassured. Now they are concerned.

The fact is that the task of renewing the multifiher agreement which was entrusted

to the Brussels Commission differs substantially from the position asserted by France.
That position was designed to reduce the penetration of imported textile items (accounting
for 50 percent of the French market and 44 percent of that of Europe). and thereby.
secondarily, to safeguard industrial activity.

"Any 1 percent increase in imports leads to the elimination of 1.000 jobs in France."
Hr Pierre Dreyfus said in pleading his case in Brussels.

Despite the support of his British. Italian or Greek colleagues who favor a firm attitude
toward the four musketeers of Southeast Asia (Hong Kong. South Korea. Taiwan and Macao).
the French Ministry of Industry did not carry the day on 23 December in Brussels:

The European liberals--the Germans. Danes and Dutch--continue to support a more open
strategy (see box on p 48).

will the decision adopted cancel out the textile strategy pursued by Mr Dreyfus?

"In any case. it received a warmer welcome than that of his predecessor." Hr Pierre
Rodes. general manager of Gaston Jaunet. has commented.

Some 35.000 jobs lost this year. 880 court settlements in 1980. foreign trade showing
a deficit of 3 billion. domestic production which has dropped 20 percent in 3 years--
the symptons of the ailment are obvious. To prevent it from spreading to the 550,000
jobs in the textile-clothing chain. Hr Andre Giraud is encouraging investment and

Mr Dreyfus is betting on a reduction in the social burden on enterprises.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This alleviation of wage costs (up to 12 points for the employers' quota). a kingpin

in the plan. puts French enterprises back in the game. The percentage of social charges
they bear in comparison to total wages (41 percent in France. as compared to 20 percent
in the United States and 18 percent in the FRG) seriously limits their ability to
compete. The effort agreed upon (1 quota point represents 300 million francs) means

an improvcuent of 3 or 4 percent in production costs.

"It is a matter of gaining a respite. the better to reorganize." hr Dreyfus has said.
Meaning to organize as our neighbors have. The Germans and the Italians. like ourselves.
have experienced a textile crisis. Between 1970 and 1978. while their ranks were
declining by 32 and 14 percent respectively (22 percent in France). they developed

an active defense strategy.

The German scenario called for disengagement in the clothing sector (subcontracted
abroad). stability in fiber processing and development in machine textiles.

Thanks to untiring effort and the statute allowing 500.000 "homeworkers." as well
as a judicious investment policy. the Italians. still participating all along the
chain. are in a stronger position in weaving and knitwear.

France failed to follow. It was not until 1978 that investments came to 5 percent

of the turnover figure in the sector. The result was a production chain in which
industrial concentration lags behind that elsewhere. and in which even the most dynamic
enterprises produce series which are too short to make coat prices competitive. where
a German produces 5 million items. his French counterpart produces only one-tenth

that many.

"If no corrective step is taken today. we will lose 90.000 jobs by 1986." the clothing
enterprise owners say.

The minister of industry. a businessman. is aware of this. His plan refers to "main-
taining employment at as high a level as possible." It also includes a whole series
of improvements in the chain:

Establishment of a promotion center to concentrate the facilities existing on the
various ownership levels and to strengthen the cooperation between manufacturers and
distributors;

Establishment of a fashion school to stimulate the creative spirit; and

Development of innovation and technology. automation of clothing manufacture and textile
machinery.

Taken together. these are measures already urged by the Textile Industries Union.

and they would cost the state some 600 million francs in investment aid. The existing
procedures (participation alone. industrial policy credit. development contracts)

have been extended to the small and medium-size business sector.

"Your move!" Hr Dreyfus is telling the industrialists.
Many of them did not wait for the last of these suggested measures before taking action.

In many cases. the government plan does no more than endorse and systematize steps
already undertaken by a certain number of enterprises.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First of all. in distribution. With 76.000 points of sale (60 percent of them with
a turnover total of less than a million francs). our distribution system is plethoric
in its diversity and anarchic in its price and market policy.

If prices (public) reach a substantially higher level in France than abroad. it is
more because of distribution costs than cost prices at the factory gate. according
to a recent report by the Economic and Social Council.

To undo the tangle. some garment makers favor major distribution outlets. while others
are testing their own retailers. Mr Paul Salmon. president of Catimi (children's
sportswear). believes that the formula is simple.

"Study methods for optimizing sales and marketing in the form of a franchise or partner-
ship agreement with the middlemen."

A similar review has been undertaken with regard to the methods of developing textile
produccs. with consumer panels presenting designers with a list of requirements. proto-
types being drafted and final selection made before collections are presented.

From the programmed designing of patterns to the cutting of pieces by laser scissors.
automation is gaining ground in the clothing industry. One example: in Douai. in

the north. the Scalabre-Belleteste group has just received a bid from Anvar to install
robots to produce its jackets. with a 30 percent saving in time as compared to the
traditional procedure.

But much remains to be done before this sector can regain the "cruising speed consistent
with the tines." as Mr christian Pierret. a deputy from Vosges. hopes it can do.

Modernization of Metallurgical Sector. shipyards Linked
Paris VALBURS ACTUELLZS in French 11-17 Jan 82 pp 43-45
[Article by Guillaume dc Truchis: "Reequipping the shipyards"]

[Text] Hatters are still in the talking stage. but if the government does in fact

come to the aid of the naval shipyards. three birds will have been killed with one
stone: completion of the modernization of the metallurgical sector and the simultaneous
rebuilding of the Schneider group and the naval construction industry.

For the idea came from Schneider. In this sprawling and disunited group. the departure
of Baron Empain. who was replaced by Paribas (now nationalized) as main stockholder.
and the assumption of a management post by Mr Didier Pineau-Valencienne were to speed
up a number of "boundary adjustments." it was in fact a question of remedying. as

well as could be managed. the fate of a number of deficit activities of the rue d'Anjou
group. Among these were two heavy burdens--the metallurgical sector and the shipyards.

in 1977 the Normandie Metallurgical Company (SHN) (Empain-Schneider branch. with 41
percent) and the France—Dunkirk shipyards. with 80 percent control. were merged to

form the Normandie Metallurgical Company-Naval Division (SHN-DN). This merger was
something of a surprise: These two businesses did not supplement each other at all

and they had nothing in common outside their main stockholder. But one sector. metal-
lurgy. was losing money. while the other. shipbuilding. was still profitable. And it
was indeed hoped that the latter would help rcfloat the former. which was in even
greater need of assistance when the Normandie Metallurgical Company found itself excluded
in November of 1978 from the aid program which the state limited to the Usinor and

Sacilor companies exclusively.
3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK Urfiulru. Ubl'; UNL!

The situation has now become untenable for ship construction. In 3 years. this sector
has advanced nearly 1.4 billion francs to the metallurgical sector. Its results last
year. which unfortunately have not been published separately since the merger. were
burdened by the allocations of 191 million for work in progress and 70 million francs
for adjustments to methane tankers already delivered. For the first time. this sector
was unable to offset the losses of the steelworks.

Following the negotiations pursued for 3 months by the Schneider group and the public
authorities. the fate of the metallurgical sector was one of the first points settled:
it will be left in the hands of the USlNOR and SACILOR.

The fate of the shipyards thus remained to be determined.

Here Mr Louis Le Pensec. minister of maritime affairs. intervened unmediately to explain
that because of trade union vulnerability. there could be no question of reorganization
in the sense given the term to date. The word itself causes fear. for it is synonymous
with the shutdown of shipyards and thus dismissals.

There have been no shipyard shutdowns since 1971. The last was that in Bordeaux,
belonging to France-Gironde. the very firm which was to become France-Dunkirk.

Negotiations on shipyard mergers have on the other hand had their ups and downs. being
shelved for years on end in the offices of successive ministers. The most recent

of any size was the merger in 1954 of the Penhoet Shipyards and the Shipyards of the
Loire. to form the Atlantic Shipyards. At the time. there were already no more than
12 naval shipyards in France. the same number as prior to 1914. Today there are six.
Pour are large: Atlantic Shipyards. Mediterranean Industrial and Naval Construction
(CNIM). La Ciotat and France-Dunkirk. and two are Small--Le Havre-La Pallice and
Dubigeon—Normandy.

There was talk first of negotiations between La Ciotat and Atlantic. and then about
negotiations between the so-called "Atlantic" shipyards on the one hand and the "Hedi-
terrancan" shipyards on the other. A little more than 2 years ago. the idea of a
merger of France-Dunkirk and Atlantic within a company of which the state would be

the majority stockholder was also discussed. After the fact. the concept seemed like
a trial balloon to see what "the others" would say.

The solution urged by the public authorities today is similar to that which was suggested
in 1978 and was called. curiously. the "eastern grouping" as opposed to the "western
grouping." It calls for a merger of the France-Dunkirk. La Ciotat and Chin (La Seyne)
shipyards. All three. similar in size. would constitute a complex of nearly 12.000
persons (4.640 for the CNIH. 3.700 for La Ciotat and 3.600 for France-Dunkirk) and

would have a turnover figure (variant including work in progress) of about 3 billion
francs.

No final scheme has yet been adopted. in one possible solution. each of the three
independent companies would become a portfolio company. controlling a percentage of

the stock (to be determined) in an industrial company called the Naval shipyards of
France (the former name of the Dunkirk Shipyard). which would operate the three existing
shipyards (see our table of organization). The name of the man who would head the

new complex. Mr Dellois. of Schneider, has even been suggested.

Although not unanimously agreed. the trade unions have nonetheless given evidence
of indisputable good will. This solution has won the support of the leaders of the
Schneider group. Mr Gerard Chauchat. currently president and general manager of

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SMN-DN. readily recalls that he had proposed such a plan during the commissioning

of a methane tanker at Dunkirk. in October 1973. in the midst of the Yom Kippur war.
lts promoters believe it would make it possible to obtain synergetic effects in the
realm of prospecting (thanks to a more powerful and more structured marketing service).
production (better use of installations as a function of the variety of orders) and
research, while at the same time reducing the devastating competition which leads to
the acceptance of orders at a loss.

The difficulty which could be claimed in the past of managing shipyards so far apart

one from the other would no longer apply in the era of computers. One might mention

by way of example the collaboration between the shipyards in Kockum and those in Lisbon.
or between the shipyards in Nagasaki and those in Tokyo.

At the Atlantic Shipyards. by far the leader in France. relief prevails: they will
be excluded from the confusion. At the most there is talk of a possible "bridge“
between the shipyard in Saint-Nazaire and the Dubigeon establishment in Nantes. This
suggestion is vague enough to allow any interpretation.

In 1976. the Atlantic Shipyards merged with Alsthom. and this operation was roundly
compared with the merger of France-Dunkirk and the SHN. In this instance also. there
was one company in difficulty (the shipyards) and another on the path of recovery
(Alsthom). There was above all a supplementary aspect to the work of the two groups.
long accustomed to working together.

At the Atlantic Shipyards, which is only one of the eight divisions of group now.

Mr Regard congratulates himself again each day on his collaboration with Aisthon.

The market prospecting of the shipyards advanced the world reputation of Alsthom.

and it was thanks to the support of this quite diversified group that the shipyards
can permit themselves the luxury. if one might put it that way. of taking orders at

a loss. This is the kind of situation which has long been the strength of the Japanese
shipyards.

There is a ready inclination to compare the new group planned. which would be pre—
dominantly private. with Alsthom-Atlantic. which as a branch of the nationalized C08

is a state group. In brief. those in charge at Alathom-Atlantic will certainly see

a change in the structure of their board of directors. but there is no reason. a priori.
to foresee a change in the management team.

On the other hand. the three merged shipyards will very certainly benefit from rather
more generous government aid than in the past. All in all. in a sector which depends
on state aid to this point. the discussion remains academic.

One thing is certain: the French shipyards (despite diversification long since under-
taken by Atlantic and encouraged by the public authorities) are operating at 60 percent
of their capacity. They are not alone in their difficulties: as of last 30 September.
the portfolio of orders from the OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment] countries had shrunk 2.5 percent. Japan. which alone has 57 percent 0! these
orders. has experienced the most serious decline (6 percent). To the point that it

is the first to complain about the Korean shipyards. operating at a deficit and receiving
heavier subsidies than the others.

The Atlantic Shipyards order book is full until 1984. Put in another way. if no further
orders are received. the sheet iron shop. the first involved in the building of a
vessel. will have nothing to do in the second quarter of 1983. And reCuvery. regularly
predicted. is not expected before 1985.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the naval shipyards as elsewhere. reorganization cannot alter the situation.

It is not by adding to the losses of shipyards that prices can be brought down the
30 percent which separates them from the Japanese. Even if there were to remain only
one shipyard, it would still have to be able to secure orders.

In Sweden and in Great Britain, the nationalized shipyards are well aware of this.
They have not been spared by the crisis.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Valeurs Actuelles"

5157
080: 3100/255

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

ARZALLUS: PNV MAY SUPPORI CALVO SOTELO. ETA ISOLATED
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish b Jan 82 pp 30-31

[Article by Ander Landaburu: "ETA on the Ropes"]

[Textl As if to spoil the yearend celebrations for many Basques, the ETA [Basque
Fatherland and Liberty Group] terrorist organization gave signs of life with an
early, macabre Magi gift. A few days ago, dozens of individuals were frightened
again upon receiving the threat of the so-called "revolutionary tax" through the
traditional message.

Describing the ETA coercion as a "tax for the destruction of Buskadi." the PNV's
[Basque Nationalist Party] Biscay assembly assumed a clearcut position against the
ETA members, and as on previous occasions asked its members not to pay even a single
five pesetas.

Last Sunday. Xabier Arzallus. president of the Basque Nationalist Party, who was

far more harsh and direct. launched an attack against the perpetrators of the

tragic blackmail in the locality of Ordicia. Without mincing any words. so that he
would not be called ambiguous again, the PNV's supreme leader said: "It is impossible
to strive for amnesty when thousands of families are afraid to go out on the street
in the belief that they are under the sight of a pistol. because they are unwilling
to pay the revolutionary tax. I tell that mob that 1f the people were with them
they would have no reason to coerce. nor to demand a tax under threat of death."

Hours later, less agitated and more concerned over the aspects of the Organic Law
for Harmonization of the Autonomous Process (LOAPA), and the coup plot, the PNV
president received CAMBIO 16 in his office on Gran Via in Bilbao.

CAMBIO 16: At a recent luncheon in Madrid with the foreign press correspondents.
you remarked that the coup movement in the Army is not the fundamental one.

Xabier Arzallus: it is fundamental in that they have the weapons, but what I meant
was that there is much talk here almost exclusively about the Army. whereas in
reality there are coup backers among many groups. and on many levels of interest.
To talk only about the Army or a sector of that Army is over-simplification. The
military would not set forth with a coup if there were no one pushing them; that
is the key issue in how the Army is being incited by other groups.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C 16: Then is there a civilian coup plot?

X.A.: Of course, obviously. It is very clear to me that there is very little
investigation here, very little follow-up, or very little known in this regard.
at least on a general level, concerning all those coup-related interests and
sectors that exist, and the matter is concentrated too much on the Army.

C 16: With respect to the controversial issue of the LOAPA and the autonomous pacts
between UCD [Democratic Center Union] and PSOE [Spanish Socialist Workers Party].
do you believe that a solution can be found with the Nationalists? Under what
conditions would PNV make a pact, and with whom?

X.A.: We are still sincerely willing to hold dialog. However, I more than suspect
that in the autonomous pacts (as well as in the matter of LOAPA, for we already
know what that consists of). in those bilateral agreements there are secret pacts.
We learned some things as a result of a "blunder", for example when Txiki Benegas
mentioned the topic of the quota in the magazine ESCORIAL. It may not take 2
months before that secret pact becomes known publicly. The purpose of that secret
agreement would be to reform the Electoral Law; and that change in the electoral
system would mean reducing the potential of the regional and nationalist parties
in favor of the so-called state ones. However, the political pacts are closely
related to the goals being pursued by each political party of group. In that
regard, it is clear that our preeminent goal is the issue of autonomy, the estab-
lishment of the statute and its intensification; and for us the main purpose of
negotiating a pact would be that.

C 16: If President Calvo Sotelo needs the PNV's votes for his parliamentary majority,
would you agree to back the president, and under what conditions would you do so?

X.A.: There is a possibility of that parliamentary backing, but the price wOuld
obviously be an understanding on the basic statutory issues which have been raised
for some time, such as those concerning the LOAPA, the issue of the bases for the
Local Regime, that of the officials, and the definitive formation of the quota in
the agreements. These would be the issues to be brought up, and if we are given
satisfaction, we would support Calvo Sotelo in Parliament. To put it briefly, the
PNV's backing for Calvo Sotelo necessarily entails a change in the LOAPA and a
government program that will satisfy us.

C 16: And in theeventof a PSOE victory in the next elections, would the agreement
be reached more readily?

X.A.: The fact is that we have not had any great success in our pacts with the P808
to date.

C 16: The ETA's action has declined spectacularly, as has the violence in the
Basque Country as a whole. what does this fact represent?

X. A. For the present. it represents a relief. a great relief; although, on the
other hand, it has also caused a certain amount of disillusionment, from the _,
standpoint that there was so much talk about terrorism, a|.d then it turns out that
when we had months without any major terrorist activity was when there was the most
talk about a coup. So one wonders about the reason for the situation. But it is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a relief. and although they are still blowing up Iberduero turrets. at least they
are not killing. which is after all the most tragic and saddest thing that could
happen.

C 16: what is going on in ETA?

X.A.: Well. we don't know for sure. It has given the impression that there is
strong internal tension. that there are many matters being discussed or reviewed,
and probably a serious confrontation of some kind. In my view, that is the
greatest reason for this standstill. But, on the other hand. there has also been
an obvious decline in popular support, as well as the police action which has
meant hard blows to the organization. However. let us not deceive ourselves, ETA
will always be able to engage in certain action, even though it may not have the
backing that it did before. Carrying out a spectacular action, something very
serious, is not so difficult either if one acts with the surprise factor. using a
certain system. even without major infrastructure. France's position has also
had an influence. The issue of the extraditions is still hovering. and it could
also be a major factor in this present standstill in ETA activities.

with regard to them. our position is still the same; and I stated it clearly on
Sunday in Ordicia. If they are trying to scare our people with coercion, we too
shall manage to instill fear in them. The increasing isolation of ETA is obvious.
and abysmally greater than previously.

And its isolation will be total when the Statute on Autonomy is fulfilled. and
the work of the autonomous police comes under the command of the Basque Government.

C 16: Recently, there has been a debate on the topic of the Lemoniz nuclear power-
plant in the Basque Parliament. Do you think that this nuclear powerplant is
ncessary for Euskadi?

X.A.: We have approved the matter of Lemoniz with some logical conditions. What we
note is a need, which we observe. We want to gage the risk and the extent to which
the need compensates for the risk, which we do not consider excessive by any means.
It is a risk which is more theoretical than real, if there are aCtually guarantees
for the control of that powerplant. l. of course, am absolutely convinced that,

if there were an extensive.and properly conducted debate, with opportunities for
everyone to speak. which reached everywhere, then afterwards a referendum would be
won calmly in favor of Lemoniz, as has occurred in my own party.

Moreover, the argument has declined, and I sincerely believe that Lemoniz is
necessary for Huskadi. The fact is thateverything has been mixed here: there has
been opposition to Lemoniz, opposition to Parliament. opposition to NATO. opposi—
tion to everything. Certain political groups have made a mllitancy out of "no"

and topics which could have been subjected r: a special discussion have also fallen
under the weight of the "no". Those who were sincerely opposed to the powerplant
have lost moral strength as a result of these negative positions at the outset.
those dynamics of rejecting everything.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Information y Revistas, S.A.

2909
C50: 3110/71

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ' SPAIN

EE'S ONAINDIA T0 PUSH FOR UNITY OF BASQUE LEFTISTS
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 11 Jan 82 pp 29-31
[Article by A.L.: "Merger for a Basque Force"!

[Text] Crafty, with a good-natured manner at his 33 years of age, Mario Onaindia,
the one formerly condemned to death in the famous Burgos Trial of 1970, is about
to become the great leader of the new Basque left which is becoming established
amazingly and at a rapid pace.

Respected in Madrid, appreciated and even feared by his political foes in Buskadi.
Onaindia is currently considered the leading architect of that ambitious plan.

Some time ago he rejected all the violent options, and now, harshly criticizing

the two branches of ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group], the present secretary
general of 81A [Basque Revolutionary Party], a most staunch defender of the Statute
of Autonomy and of the democratic process, states in a categorical but dispassionate
manner that he is more concerned over the political analysis than with winning or
losing votes.

He is not the traditional party secretary general, he refuses the election-oriented
dynamics of publicity and over—simplification, "which have done so much to disillu-
sion people." He wants to create a party in which the membership is not boring,

not "stupid."

In his small Vitoria apartment, surrounded both by books on Marxism and politics

and many volumes of literature and poetry in Basque and Spanish, Mario, facing the
classic Groucho Marx poster, "appearing out of nowhere," is working hard on the
preparation of the reports that must be submitted at the forthcoming congress in

March.

In fact, after long, difficult months of negotiation, within a couple of months,
Euskadi will officially observe the rise of a new Euskadiko Ezkerra [Basque Left]
party (Left for Socialism), resulting from the convergence between the Basque
Communist Party and EIA and some independents from the former ESBI [Basque Socialist
Coordinating Force], a party which at the moment has aroused great expectations,
interest and even uneasiness, both among the traditional nationalist right and

among the "statist" left.

During this agitated year of 1981, two extremely important events involving Buskadi
have occurred: the truce of the Polimilis [ETA military faction] and the process

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of convergence for the creation of a new Basque left. In the documents or reports
being prepared for the congress. Mario stresses that there is an unquestionable
defense of the country's democratic process; a position consistent with the
Euskadiko Ezkerra policy since 15 June: "One of the reasons that we defend the
Statute of Autonomy is precisely to achieve the democratization of the state

apparatus. 1 think that these docuaents are along the line of what we have always
upheld.

And, as if to prove it, he recalls the many fine “no" proposals or the appeals of
unconstitutionality in the defense of the text compared with excerpts of it which
his party submitted in both the Madrid Parliament and that of Vitoria; or how they
were alone on 27 February in the streets of Bilbao after the demonstration to
defend that process following the attempted coup of 23 February.

As for the creation of that new party. the idea arose after a long period of
reflection during which both Onaindla and his collaborators, and later the Lerchundi
sector of the PC [Colmnunist Party], realized that there was a serious problem which
had to be solved; that. since the transition, the balance has been quite negative
for that left which, nevertheless. had borne all the burden of the anti-Franco
struggle, and which now has a right wing government in Madrid and Vitoria; that,

in Euskadi. a right wing party had reappeared with an enormous entrenchment among
the people; and that the latter were protecting the interests of the state right
wing on key issues.

The Convergence

At the same time. in their analysis, the "convergers" admitted that the left in
the autonomous comunity was divided into four irreducible parties, opposing the
right from different vantage points, and with very few points of agreement. Mario
cements today: "At that time, this situation had to be surmounted, a left had to
be created in Euskadi which would propose the elimination of the old division
between nationalists and non-nationalists; in other words, a left which would serve
all the workers of the Basque Country combined. Although all of us claimed that,
except perhaps for PSOE, recently. no one would face the problem completely. And
so long as we did not seek unity with other parties from different areas, we would
actually continue to do what we were condemning in theory. Then we realized that
the only solution to this problem would be based on convergence.”

'l'hat convergence among parties with a "clearCut". "key" entrenchment in the
Abertzale [Patriotic] area. and others in the non-nationalist area, for the purpose
of forming a new party, was created at first with the majority sector of PC, the
Len-hundi sector. spokesman for the renewal movement. According to its promoters,
this new party must have a real souls] entrenchment in those two areas of Basque
society in order to be able to claim that the gap between nationalism and non-
natlonalism has been bridged.

According to the fonner secretary general of ETA. a party that has recently been
dissolved, this convergence is also a result of the autonomous process itself. and

the parties which have backed it: "In the accomplishment of the process. for us
(and we have stressed this). is was not merely a matter of obtaining authority fro":

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Madrid, nor of bringing our area closer to the administered ones, nor merely from

the standpoint of a liberation process; rather, it was to have the authority to

carry out the democratization of the state apparatuses, and this was indispensable

for making it possible for a process of establishing a single nationality to occur

in Euskadi. in the strong sense of the term; in other words, the creation of a

single autonomous community or people. In a country that was lacking in vitality,
distorted and disjointed (with 50 percent abstention and parties exclusively in

the state area), the autonomous process would uniteit; and that is what has happened."

Continuing this analysis. the EB leaders express agreement on the fact that, within
the left. many excluding proposals of the nationalist parties have been cut down.
and the traditional left has also, for example, been forced to consider the follow-
ing problem: How is it possible to carry out a type of political leadership in a
country which is more democratic than the party itself? (as in the case of the PC).

In this connection, it should be noted that the Basque Parliament now has more
powers in many areas than the Socialist Party of Euskadi-PSOE has.

This represents a contradiction for the two converging parties, and the process
cannot remain there. There is still a considerable abstention, there is the P508.

a camp which they wish to reach, as well as the world of Herri Batasuna [Popular
Unity].

Mario Onaindia seems confident that this is only the first step. "I think that the
beginning is usually always the most difficult, and that after this there will be
other processes which will not be exclusively those of absorbing other forces or
the electorate. but rather that we shall make demands on the left, if we want the
workers to "make any mark' in this country, for convergence processes that are
seriously proposed."

Fear of Utopia?

However, not all the left in the Basque Country views this convergence process with
optimism. "It is nothing but a mere communist utopian scheme," claim Txiki Benegas'
socialists with contempt but with fear: while the minority sector of the Stalinist
Ramon Ormazabal blames Lerchundi for breaking that unity (?) of the left by

giving in to Euskadiko Ezkerra.

PNV. for its part, somewhat concerned, predicts the failure of the plan as a result
of the danger of radicalization of the members of the new party which, according

to the PNV leaders. will preclude a genuine process to agglutinate the left in

the Basque Country.

Mario repudiates these charges, although he admits that, in its beginnings, BE
started with more radical principles thanthosetaf HB, and that, at the time of its
creation, ElA "intended to devour the world;" but that afterwards, a real change
took place, when it demonstrated its desire to participate directly in political
activity. in the decision-making institutions or locations. During 1975—76, the
radicalization in Euskadi was enormous. and it was in that context that EIA was
created.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mario declares: "Later, after 15 June, we defended the democratic process. This
defense of the democratic process has prompted us to keep our feet more on the
ground, and to attempt to engage in politics, not just with the Abertzale left
or the most radical sectors, but for all the workers in Euskadi combined."

Actually, the evolution of EIA has been a very remarkable event since its creation.
For example, it is the only party emerging from the anti-Franco era to be able to
compete with the traditional parties. According to Onaindia, that real evolution
“from textbook Harxian—Leninism to a position of its own" has features similar to
those of the Italian PC during the 1920's or 1930's. or those of other socialist
or communist parties in post-war Europe.

According to the former BIA secretary general, most of the militants in that future
party would now be in the CERES ]Center for Socialist Studies. Research and Educa-
tion] of the French PS, or in the PC. in the case of Italy. "Nevertheless, we are
attempting to escape that separation between communism and socialism. It is a
separation that does not make much sense. Today, especially in Europe. there is
an evolution based on what was then termed the two and a half International."

No to Eurocommunism

In his historicalanalysis, Onaindia notes that there is on the part of the PC's
Eurocommunism an acceptance of a democracy of an instrumental type, which does not
have repercussions on the party, but rather on the strategy that is pursued for
socialism (inspired by Gramsci). There has also been a similar evolution in certain
socialist parties. "For example, at present the French Socialist Party is not the
old SFIO [French Section of the Horkers International], and somn interesting new
concepts, such as that of CERES. are occurring in a socialist party. Therefore,

we in Euskadi have the good fortune of being able to create a party with those
ideas; in other words, we can form a party with less dead weight."

Despite its process of convergence with the Euskadi PC, which could take away its
image as a result of the harsh criticism from certain Abertzale sectors, Onaindia
rejects and discards the Eurocommunist formula for the Basque country: "We could
not be such. not even if we wanted to." According to Mario, Eurocommunism. as an
attempt to gear the PC's or the European communist movement to the new situation
created by the economic development of the World War II post-war period. may have
certain similarities to what they want, such as in the democratic strategy for
socialism; despite the fact that they are not features discovered nor invented by
the PC's, but rather date back far earlier. to the Second International, before
the break. "It is ridiculous to propose a war of labels."

Moreover. the provisional leadership of the recently established future party

intends to invite to its first congress representatives of the French and Greek
Socialist Parties, the ltalian PC and the British Labour Party. with which relations

are maintained more on the intellectual level than with the parties themselves,
officially.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Unskilled Left

Mario Onaindia thinks: "The left, both in Euskadi and the rest of the State, lacks
the experience which the European left has from 60 years of the post-war period.
He here emerged from Prancoism. but not during the era of the Marshall Plan, rather,

at the height of a crisis in the model of development. That enormous gap which the
left has must be filled."

As for the relations with the rest of the left in the State, the leaders of the new
party want an opportunity to improve them. However, day by day the agreements are
not extensive enough to propose any "hypothetical" federations of parties or merely
institutionalized relations as yet. Mario claims: "We would like to have them.

but if that cooperation does not exist it is due far more to a lack of willingness
on their part than on ours. Furthermore, both the PCB and P803 maintain political
parties here which prevent their seeking a broader spectrum of allies than the
party itself. In the P805. it could be far more serious from an historical stand-
point. And, with a View toward a possible victory in the 1983 elections, this
would be a very great mistake."

The prolonged truce of the Polimilis has unquestionably benefited the rapprochement
among some of the leftist political forces in the Basque Country. Concretely, in
this instance, it has hastened the process of convergence between Euakadiko Ezkerra
and the Basque Communist Party. Therefore, according to Onaindia, this truce has
represented the second most important event of last year.

According to the leader of Euskadiko Ezkerra,the standstill of the action by ETA
P-M [Political and Military] has entailed a change in the Basque society, and in

a way has carried along the other branch of ETA. the "Mills". "The violence has
been reduced, and they have fallen back. The infernal dynamics has been broken.
This has been extremely positive, and on the subject of ETA I think that we must
be very consistent; because the solution to the violence entails an intensification
of the democratic process and the Statute of Autonomy.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Information y Revistas, S.A.

2909
C50: 3110/71

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

NEH TRAINING PLANES DESCRIBED AS MORE ECONOMICAL, EFFICIENT

Mirage F.1B, Squadron 3/5

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 12 Dec 81 pp 27-30

ﬁrticle by J. 6:7

[Eext7 "Air Force policy in the matter of combat aircraft," General Capillon
[Commander of Air Defensg/ told us in his introductory remarks. "is to have.
for each type of aircraft, a two-seater training version, the final goal be-
ing to have available as soon as possible the greatest possible number of
operational combat pilots. What is an operational combat pilot zﬁﬁg7? It
is a pilot who responds to an alert. that is. who is capable of taking off
on very short notice on an interception mission, accomplishing it success—
fully, and bringing his aircraft back to base in weather conditions in which
the maximum ceiling may be as low as 200 ft (60 m) and horizontal visibility
may be but 1 km."

"In view of that." the general continued, "the advantage of a two-seater
Mirage F.1 trainer appears evident, for it permits training. both basic and
advanced, to proceed under the four following conditions (as contrasted to
a training mode using two single-seater aircraft): faster, and consequently
at less cost; better; and in complete safety:

"Faster and cheaper: the one is the consequence of the other. With two air-
craft, basic training required 16 months and ZHO flying hours; advent of the
two-seater has permitted reduction of those times to 12 months and 130 hours.
The gain is evident;

"Better: all pilots in transitional training prefer to have onboard their
own aircraft an instructor who guides them by having before and around him
the same environment as their own. For the pilot in training, an instructor
onboard means someone who sees the same things he does, at the same instant.

"That is true for initial training, and true also for operational training.
Better than with a team-mate in another aircraft, the pilot in training re-
alizes the limitations of his aircraft in combat maneuvers;

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"In safety: that is evident. Onboard, everything happens as if the pilot
in the forward seat were at the controls of a single-senor. Except that

from the rear seat someone can, at the last second, correct an error which
could have been fatal."

With the F.1B the Air Force is striving not only to insure the turnout of
young pilots destined to fly the F.1C, but also, with concurrent use of si-
mulators, to provide their operational training. Concern to insure that
operationa. training was strongly apparent to us during our visit to the
Orange base, comanded by Col Pierre Richalet, which is the home station of
the 5th Fighter Wing, commanded by Lt Col Michel Gachelin, whose Squadron
3/5, the Comtat Venaissin squadron, commanded by Maj Yannick Chardin, is the
unit equipped with the Air Force's F.1 two-seaters.

Squadron 3/5, we recall, was created on 1 January 1953, disbanded on 30
October 195?, and reactivated on 1 April 1981. The traditional ceremony
marking the assumption of squadron command, presided by Air Force Chief of
Staff Gen Guy Fleury, took place on 3 July 1981 (see AIR ET CCBHCS no 868).

The decision to reactivate the squadron followed that taken by the govern-
ment in 1976 to order 20 two-seater versions of the Mirage F31. Squadron
3/5 will receive 15 of them, the others being intended for the CEV [fest
E‘light Cente£7 and GED! Eenter for Military Aviation Experiment_s7, or to
make up for attrition. When it has taken delivery of the last of these 15
F.1B's, the Squadron will number 19 pilots, including one operations chief;
the full complement will be 1l+o.

The squadron now has five aircraft and nine instructor pilots, of whom eight
are former F.1 pilots and the ~int‘n is an instructor who trained students of
the Fighter School at 'Z'Ours on Alpha Jets. These instructors were retrained
by eight flights on F.1B's at the CEAM in Mont-de-Marean.

We note that the major peacetime mission of Squadron 3/5 is "instruction and
monitoring of hirege F.1 pilots. Its principal wartime mission is intercep-
tion at all times, since all operational equipment and arnnment installed
in the F.1C (except for two internal cannon, which can be replaced by an ex-
ternal pod mounting) are found also in the F.1B.

Externally, the two versions are similar: the forward extremity of the F.1B
fuselage is longer by 30 cm; the forward position in the two-Beater, occu-
pied by the student pilot, is identical to that of the single-seater. In
the rear position, the piloting, navigational, and interception controls are
the same; in addition, a few safety devices are available to the monitor—
instructor for control of the engine, airbrakes, landing brakes, and pres-
surization system particularly.

All Mirage F.1Bs leave the factory equipped with the IV M version of the
Thomson CSF Cyrano radar.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Hirage F.1B cannot be refueled in flight. But a few of them in Squadron
3/5 will be equipped with removable but non—retractable coupling arms, iden-
tical to those mounted on the single-seater versions, to train F.1 pilots,
in dry contact exercises, to place the arm in the cone of the fueling air-

craft.

Another difference between the F.1B and F.1c concerns the ejeetable seats.
Both are Martin Bakers, but those of the two-seater (MkF—1GH) permit 0~0
ejections, while those of the single-seater (RMk) permit only 0:90 ejections.

The operational F.135 of Squadron 3/5 have the following capabilities:
Familiarization missions for training in piloting of the aircraft;

Missions for advanced training in operation of the complete Mirage F.1C wea-
pons system (firing, combat, in—flight reloading);

Retraining missions for qualified operational pilots;
Operational combat missions.

Squadron 3/5 provides Mir 7e F.1 training for very young pilots who arrive
in Orange at the end of their stage with the 8th Fighter Hing based at Car
zaux, whose Hystere IVs, until now used for firing training of fighter pi-
lots leaving Tours, are being gradually replaced by Alpha Jets. These

young pilots, who have about 300 hours' flying time on arrival in Orange,
receive an initial training which now extends to eight or ten flights. They
then rejoin their assigned squadron, where they remain for approximately 6
months, during which they fly some 100 hours. They then return to Orange,
where they receive their real training as operational combat pilots ready

to respond to alerts. That essential complementarv training "to learn com-
bat“ is and will remain the constant and ever growing concern of the Squad-
ron 3/5 instructors. t includes, of course, a good portion of thoretical
instruction on the ground, supplemented by hours on the simulator. That
device proves at this juncture to be the indispensable complement of the
aircraft. Not everything can be learned from it, but for reasons of econo-
my the pilot in training should not wait upon the aircraft to teach him
what he could have learned on the simulator, one of whose essential functions
is to adapt the student's behavior to the actual handling of the aircraft.

This complementary training also includes, and in fact emphasizes, in—flight
traininr, of which 40 to 50 hours are now scheduled. Major themes stressed
on these flights are air safety, weapons management, and combat. here again,
all the advantages of the two-seater can be appreciated. Onboard, the pilot
in training learns the systematic character of everything relating to pro-
cedures and terminology of air safety or air police missions; he learns all
he must ask of ground control in the course of an interception; and he learns
to carry mat combat maneuvers while following appropriate paths. This ini-
tiation to combat, not only with aircraft of the same type, but also with
different types, goes hand in hand with cenduct of interceptions involving
flights at very low altitudes above the sea.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Definite instructions from the Air Defense Command foresee the regular pres-
ence of one or two F.1Bs and a number of monitors with each squadron carry-
ing out an air-to-air firing exercise at Solenzara.

By 30 November 1981, the Air Force's squadron of two-seater F.1s had just
completed 500 hours’ flying time. It had conducted 23 day flying qualifi-
cations (for both very young pilots and qualified pilots who had not flown

the F.1), and 25 night flying qualifications, as well as 1k refresher flights.
It had to its credit three completed operational retraining cycles, and two
more were in progress.

The wing and squadron commanders, while not discounting the magnitude of the
task remaining, do not hide their satisfaction with the way the F.1B is in-
tegrating itself into the fleet of Air Force combat aircraft.

That satisfaction was shared by Lt Col Jean-Pierre Leclercq, chief of tech-
nical services for the 5th Fighter wing, even though the need to insure main-
tenance of the F.1s, which are not all equipped to the same standards, poses
evident problems with regard to spare parts and establishment of a mainte-
nance program.

The evolution of Mirage F.1 maintenance is marked by transition from mainte-
nance of the classic type, called programmed maintenance (periodic inspec-
tions every year or every 300 hours, with major inspections at 8, 16, and
ak-year intervals) to a method called progressive maintenance, which has
proven itself for civil aircraft, and which consists of carrying out succes-
sive operations on a rather shortened cycle.

From delivery to units until its sixth year of operation, servicing and main-
tenance of the airframe (lubrication and periodic inspections or special fa-
tigue inspections) are done within units, by wings or GERMAS ngecialized
Air Materiel Service and Maintenance Group? units, as the case may be.. From
the sixth year, major inspections will be made every h years, or every 1200
hours, in air industrial shops, a progressive servicing inspection also being
made, in the interval, every 1200 hours.

This increase in cycles, together with a reduction in the number of opera-
tions performed at inspection times, naturally leads to greater aircraft
availability. Studies in progress are aimed at lengthening equipment life.

Modification work on the first F.1Cs, which was performed by the AIA [Kir-
craft Industries Associatioﬁ? facilities at Clermont-Ferrand on aircraft of
the 12th Wing, concerned essentially a renovation of the navigational and
weapons systems, which appreciably enhances Mirage P.1 performance, notably
in the interception function, by improving radar pickup quality, and makes
it possible to take the best advantage of the qualities of the Super 530
medium range air to air missile.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is no maintenance difference between the F.1B and 1".‘IC other than that
concerning the ejectable seats: periodic inspection every 6 months for the

single-seater, and every 2 years (until nos scheduled every 12 months) for
the two-seater.

Engine maintenance has also evolved toward lengthening of intervals, which
are now 300 hours for hot parts and #00 for cold, having been initially set
at 75 hours.

For servicing and maintenance of Super 530 missiles, the Orange base will by

the end of 1982 have a mintenance bench for second echelon servicing opera-
tions.

Eight years after its entry into service with the Air Force, the Mirage F.1,
in its interception and training versions, is having a very fine career.

Microjet 200 to Fly in June

Paris AIR ET C(an in French 12 Dec 81 pp 16-17

[A-rticle by J. M_.7

[fexg Flight tests of the small two-seater twin-jet Microjet 200 trainer
developed by the Hicroturbo firm around its TRS-18 turbojet are in progress
at Toulouse-Colomiers. The plane now has about 200 hours of flying time.
Tests will henceforth be made by Claude Lelaie, former chief of the aircraft
section at the Test Flight Center, who has recently joined the ﬂicrojet 200
team gathered by Hicrojet around Jacques Grangette, who can thus devote him-
self more fully to the tasks awaiting him: launching of the prototype series
and marketing of the Hicrojet 2008, in which interest is shown by various
countries of Africa, South America, the Middle East. Far East, and even Eur-
Ope-

‘1'e;:::: 01‘ the Microjet 200 prototype have indeed made it possible to Lake a
long stride toward definition of the production model, to be designated Mi-
crojet 2008. The Hicrojet 200, we recall. was shown in flight at the last
air show at Le Ruurget. Industrialists or military staffs of many countries
immediately showed a lively interest in this "hyper-economical" aircraft:
the first because Microjet offers partial or total licensing for building of
the airframe or engine, a manufacturing arrangement which wOuld in certain
cases permit the inception of an aeronautical industry where none has exis-
ted; and the second because the Toulouse-built twin jet offers possibilities
heretofore unknown for training at very low cost. The reduced dimensions of
the plane, the adoption or simple systems, the elimination of other than in-
dispensable equipment, the presence of a unique set o:‘ instruments simul-
taneously accessible to both pilots, the very low fuel consumption of the
twin engines, and the easy and infrequent maintenance-all these factors
contrihute to a surprisingly modest operating cost. Both as a school trai-
ner for basic training of pilots between initial selection and advanced

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

training, and as a means of maintaining the skills of pilots already trained
on combat aircraft, the Microjet 200 thus appears to be a product with a fu-
ture, for it is both effective and economical.

Interested countries have, of course, put forward certain requirements, and
all the more so since the aircraft's design lends itself to complementary
uses such as liaison, photographic observation, and various missions possi-
bly requiring additional payload. Mcreover, the twin jet design is justi-
fied for certain missions only if the thrust-weight ratio for a single en-
gine is sufficient always to assure safe single engine operation. Finally,
certain countries might be led to set particular requirements owing to high
prevailing temperatures there.

Consequently, the Hicrojet 200 is now powered by two TRS-18-1 engines whose
unit thrust at takeoff has been raised from 115 to 130 kg. Better still,
thanks to the electronic control with which this turbojet is equipped, it
has been possible to install a system which in the event of failure at take-
off by one engine, or even in the event of a 10 percent variation in engine
thrusts, automatically provides emergency power to raise thrust to 145 kg--
while keeping within the same weight limits: 650 kg with no load, 995 kg at
category A takeoff, or 1,150 kg at category U. But at Microturbo they are
already thinking of a TRS-18 "X" capable of delivering a takeoff thrust of
160 kg, or 180 kg in emergency conditions, which would permit performance
levels far in excess of present ones.

Meanwhile, Hircoturbo has found an effective partner in Marmande Aerznautics,
whose president H Creuzet, has taken a lively interest in the new aircraft.
Contracts have consequently been signed by the two companies which provide
that Marmande Aeronautics will coordinate manufacture,.which is to be done
in part at Marmande and in part by subcontractors whose activities are to be
coordinated by Narmande Aeronautics. Now underway, or on the point of being
launched, are the following stages:

Building of an airframe for static tests, which will go to the CEAT ZEenter
for Aerodynamic and Thermal Studie§73

Building of three pro-production aircraft;

Necessary tooling-up, which in practical terms means 70 to 80 percent of
production tooling. -

The firms concerned are resolved to move fast. Everything is being done so
that the first pro-production Microjet 2008 can be presented at the next
Farnborough show. For that to be done, it must fly by June 1982, which is
the target date. This Microjet 2003, we note in passing, will be rather
different structurally from the present Microjet 200, even though its gen-
eral design remains the same.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aircraft's performance characteristics are shown by the two aphs for
range and flight envelope. Service ceiling is 30,000 ft; VNE ever Exceed
Speeg7 is 300 kts; and endurance can reach 2 hours, for a cruising range of
1,000 km (with two 300-1 tanks). Maximum load factors are +7 and -3 "g"

(+ 4/- 1.8 "g" at full capacity. and the aircraft has already demonstrated
flying qualities which make its piloting comparable to that of a combat air-
craft. The flight controls, moreover, reproduce to the utmost the sensations
of a pilot in an aircraft with servocontrols, and'the number of "g's" sus-
tained in turning permit great realism in combat maneuvers.

Photos and diagram: on following page;

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

The ﬂicroje: 2C0 has uniergone few modifications: to be. :oted.
however, is the addi:ion o: vc. tex generators on the tai -unit
to 1m; mo 8 longi: udina; staczlity at low speeds. r-ight per-
:ormance ra.:ge has teen explore: :o 250 kts and 22,000 ft

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-lxee-vzew plan or :he Hisrojeta 303 (pm -;rcduct:cnv version). Geometry has
. ied (particularly :he canopy), out 3: ructere ‘3 different:
wood is inandoued: :he fuselage will have a fetallic structure, Jhile air gs
nd tail «nit will be of composite zazeri : (fioe erglass ard epox;= resin.
Hizrojet EGGS no. 2 will 51" 103;: November 1982, and no. 3--possibly modi-

 

--ea:;:" in 19850
22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘ "I II. :- \mw M

0n on M '

'- |v~o| Olin“. IIANCWSSMII . mm mm
um - MAX m“

I

Manna: out.

on ww-uu. my "ﬂ,

 

COPYRIGHT: A 8 C 1980

6145
050: 3100/237