FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10571
7 June 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 36/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newapapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained. ,

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by was. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was smrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F IRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(POUO 36/82)

CONTENTS

WIS!

FRANCE

Diplomatic Ties, Interrelations, New Policies Examined
(Gerard de Villiers; PARIS HATCH, 16 Apr 82) ...........

FDIC Leader on Violence, Repression, Rationale
(Jean-Francois Luciani Interview; PARIS HATCH, 9 Apr 82)

Possible Foreign Intelligence Service Tie in Businentov

Case
(Elisabeth Schemla; LB NWVBI. OBSERVA‘I‘EUB, 9-16 Apr 82).

POLITICAL

AUSTRIA

Kreisky on Foreign Policy, Relations nth Italy
(Bruno Kreisky Interview; LA STAHPA, 19 Kay 82) .......

FRANCE

Change to Proportional Representation Seen as Han-ful
(Jacques Julliard; LE Hm OBSERVATEUR, 9-16 Apr 82)..

miles on Election Results, P3P Plans, moral Race
(Kathleen Evin; LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR, 9-16 Apr 82). ...

-a- [III-KB-IS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM MQ

mmmm ms, IITBRRBLATIOIS, m mucus sums]:
Paris mus mm in French 16 Apr 82 pp h8-51,-12
[Article by Gerard de Villiers: "The Terrorist Plan for 1982”]

[Text] The antiterrorist experts no longer have any doubt.
France is threatened in the next few weeks by a wave of
attacks which will be both specific and ”random." War. has
been declared; a stealthy and underground war, with
unpredictable hut planned attacks.

The five killed at the Capitole were certainly not victims of tragic fate but
of a premeditated act, planned to cause the maximum number of casualties, and
carried out by one or more perfectly trained experts. Excluding the Me
Copernic attack, this was only the second instance in Rance of an attack aimed
at killing, without any specific religious target. The first was the grenade
attack on the Saint-Germain Drugstore. The technical investigation has nade

it possible to trace this hack to Carlos, the fanous Illitch hires-

There followed the unsuccessful attempt on the Paris Exchange, which could have
killed scores of people. It was attributed to Direct Action.

And now, the (hpitole. .
Who is responsible?

Naturally, it is too early to be able to answer this question. He mat he sat-
isfied with what we already know. The explosive used was reportedly penthrite,
of Czech origin, used by Arabic and Armenian terrorists.

There 1.- the disturbing coincidence that this murderous attack was the sequel
to a chain of events which leads directly to the infmous Garlos. On

16 February, the police arrested two terrorists who were about to place a hub
outside the Paris City hall. Specifically, a bomb caspased basically of

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

penthrite. One of the two was Bruno Breguet, a Swiss activist who had already
been sentenced in Israel for a bomb attack. His companion, Magdalena Kopp, is
the mistress of a friend of Carlos.

Ten days later, the minister of interior, Gaston Defferre, received an ulti-
matum from Carlos, authenticated by his fingerprints. The French Government
must either release the two terrorists within a month, or be prepared for a
series of bloody attacks.

This ultimatul, which became known through a leak, expired on 27 )hrch. On
29 March, at 201:0 hours, a bomb contained in a black Samsonite suitcase
exploded in the luggage rack of a compartment of car 18 of the Capitole.

Then? These are the only facts we know. They are enough to cause great con-
cern to the experts in antiterrorist operations. For example, suppose we
accept the most plausible hypothesis, that the originators were Carlos and his
men. Who is Carlos?

A Venezuelan from a good family, brought up with Marxism, and sent to Moscow
and recruited by the KGB, which introduced him to the Arab terrorist movement.
Carlos has never operated on his own account. At one time, he was connected
to the Algerian services. He was "handled" by m Secretary General Yayaoui.
However, this did not last, and at one point the Algerians even wanted to kill
Carlos. The latter then moved into the Libyan orbit. This was the ‘time of the
OPEC incident in Vienna. According to certain indiscretely revealed informa-
tion, Carlos was "handled" in Libya by Ahmed Shahati, chief of operations for
(Amktab Tasfir Athsoui) [sic], the brain in charge of organizing Libyan terror-
ist activities.

Then Carlos disappeared. It is known that he lived in Tripoli, Libya, at the
Palm Beach Hotel, but he was no longer involved in "outside" operations,
limiting himself to instructing. At one time, it was even said that he was
dead, but that was a false mor.

Carlos went back into operation. The proof of this is last month's ultimatum

The real problem is to find out on whose behalf. The Libyan!!! The
Palestinians of the ReJection Front! Or the French terrorist groups? It has
been knom since 1979 that the Libyans clandestinely support the Movements for
Independence of Reunion and New Caledonia. A nmber of Basques and Corsicans
haVe taken sabotage training in Libya, including forging of letters, booby-
trapped packages, psychological exploitation of attacks, etc. Beginning in
1980, the bomb and automatic weapon attacks against the Directorate of Terri-
torial Surveillance (IBT) and the ainistry of cooperation left the same signa-
ture "Direct Action." Since then, the IBT and the Foreign Intelligence and

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Counterintelligence Service (80803) have obtained proof that the Libyan ser-
vices have been in close contact with "Direct Action." It was these services,
among others, which provided the latter with the leaflets containing the
charge: "Prom Gefsa to NdJamena, from Djibouti to Bangui, it is the French
army which keeps order to protect neocolonialist trade."

The serious aspect todqr is that the Capitole attack represents a complete
change in the strategy of the terrorists operating in France.

Until now, there had indeed been nunerous incidents, particularly in Paris, but
those actions, though carried out on French territory, had only been aimed at
foreigners.

This restraint had been due to the secret agreement reached by the French
Government with Yasir 'Arefet in 1975. An Elysee representative had met with
the Palestinian leader in Beirut and they had reached an agreement. The French
would close their eyes to the travel of Palestinians through France and would
not prevent establisIment of support networks. In return, the Palestinians
would refrain from any action against bench interests. The agreement was
scrupulously observed. Proof of this was the arrest and rapid release by the
French authorities of Abu Daud, the organizer of the Munich massacre.

The negative consequence of this agreement was the transformation of our
country into a kind of rear base for terrorists of all kinds, who—still with-

out attacking hench interests—began to settle their personal accounts in our
capital.

Today, the Capitole bomb incident may mean that the Palestinians and Libyans
regard this agreement as broken, and therefore believe they are in their right
to target French interests.

Indeed, with the change of administration in France, a new factor did enter the
picture with respect to the French intelligence services. lhtil my 1981, the
SDECE and the [ST had maintained excellent relations with their Arabic counter-
parts: Iraqi, Moroccan, Tunisian, Saudi, and Jordanian. This was the result
of a policy decision at the highest level to favor the Arab camp at the expense
of Israel, even though many members of the former French majority had many
friends in Israel. However, some time ago the situation changed. The Arab
countries, hardening their intransigence against Israel, did not really accept
Francois Mitterrand's visit to Israel, the first visit by a French president

to that country. Nor did ﬁance's position on reconstruction of the Iraqi
"Osiris" reactor fully satisfy the Iraqis.

On the other hand, some members of the "Israeli lobby" within Francois
Mitterrand's entourage showed their preference clunsily. This development
embarrassed the bench intelligence services.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the 811263, which had been put in charge of external security, the new
director, Pierre hrion, went to a great deal of effort to maintain the exist-
ing ties with his Arab counterparts. lie was helped in this by his excellent
personal relations with many of the Arab "espionage establishment" and by his
tireless activity: visits to the Arab countries, meetings, and contacts at all
levels.

In spite of this ant-like industriousness, it seems that sue intonation net-
works, normally useful for preventing assassination plots, were not as active
as they should have been. The Arabs were refusing to talk. Also, there is a
difference between knowing and preventing. For several weeks ihe D68!
[YGeneral Directorate of External Security] had been sending notes to the
Elysee warning of the danger of attacks. It could do no more. Of course, it
would be an exaggeration to sqr that there is a direct causal relation between
the change in policy and the Capitole attack.

However, we must not forget that terrorist attacks are never the product of
chance and always have a specific purpose.

Over a number of years we had maintained a precarious equilibrium with the
most radical Arab militant movements. That equilibrium has been upset. This
fact, combined with the lax approach to terrorism which has prevailed in France
for a long time, has created a potentially explosive situation which could
produce other attacks which are theoretically "random" but in fact carefully
conducted with a specific obJective.

According to some intelligence experts, this objective might be to politically
"break" the PM by blaming it for bloody and unpopular attacks.

Already, in December, an attack almost took the life of Yasir 'Arafat. Two of
his bodyguards were killed. Toward the end of the year, there was a rumor in
Beirut that the Syrians wanted to get rid of him, that he was assuing too much
political and military importance.

‘On the other hand, Pierre Varion's services are now convinced that it was
really Carlos behind the Capitole attack. The IBT does not exclude the possi-
bility that he was in France.

In this case, as I said, the only question is: For whom is Carlos working?
In whose interest would it be to sabotage the PLO?

The Rejection boat? The Libyans? The Syrians?

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with the PLO destabilized, there would be a danger of the whole Middle East "
catching fire. Further, who but the Soviet mien, of which Syria is a main
"client,” is interested in maintaining tension in this part of the world?

The 5 dead and 27 wounded in the Capitole incident were perhaps the victims of
an inter-Arab quarrel. If this is so, others will follow.

Before the war, no Frenchman wanted to die for Danzig. low, some are risking
death for the PLO, without anyone asking for their opinion.

What methods do the terrorists use, and what answers can we find? Jacob
Barsinantov, who was assassinated on Saturday by a terrorist who was certainly
in the pay of the Palestinians, was killed in the same manner as the previous
victims. In cold blood, in the presence of his wife and son, by five bullets
from a 7.65, two of which were fatal. The killer: a woman, alone.

The murderer will never be found. Just as the killer of the American diplomat
in the heart of Paris twwand-a-half months ago has not been found.

Lt Col Charles Ray did not know that he was going to die when he left his
residence on Monday, 18 January. It was 9 ea. and, as every morning, Charles
my was going to his Job as assistant military attache at the 0.5. hbassy.
Elnile-Augier Boulevard, in the 16th District, was quiet; the diplomat's car
was parked in front of no 210. Before he had time to get in, a dark-skinned
man, with long hair, of oriental type, approached him and fired a shot point
blank into the nape of his neck. He then left on foot and disappeared after
carrying out a decision prepared thousands of kilometers from Paris.

This is what is called in special services Jargon an "action homo” [personal
hit], that is, the final "solution" to an opponent whom you have not been able
to neutralize any other way.

In the past 5 years there have been a series of "personal hits" against

foreign diplomats in Paris: May 1976: assassination of the Bolivian ambassador;
June 1976: assassination of the Chilean ambassador; November 1916: attempted
assassination of the social counsellor of the Iranian embassy; December 1979:
assassination of the tourism counsellor of the Turkish embassy; September 1980:
serious wounding of the press attache of the Turkish embassy; July 1980: kill-
ing of Syrian po1iticsl remgee Salah al-Bitar at his own home; March 1981:
assassination of two Turkish diplomats; and, finally, in November 1981:
attempted assassination of Christian Chapman, the number-two man at the
American Embassy in Paris.

None of the perpetrators have been arrested, and one might be tempted to ask:
What have the police been doing? That would be unfair, because, short of
some unexpected deve10pnent.. they are powerless. In a "personal hit ," every-
thing has been anticipated.

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first place, there has been no previous contact between the victim and

the attacker. The latter is brought to the attack location by accomplices,
who retrieve him afterward and put him on the first plane. Often he does not

even speak the language of the country.

Ior does the weapon, even if it is recovered (which is rarely the case) provide
any lead. It is usually sent in a diplomatic pouch by a roundabout route.
Western intelligence services have long had proof that the embassies of Libya,
Southern Yemen, Syria, and Iraq are veritable arsenals of weapons for supply
to terrorists. For "personal hits," the latter favor 7.65 Berettas because
they are very short, can be easily concealed, and are relatively quiet. Since
the murders are comitted at very close range, a large caliber is not useful.

Hhen the weapon is not sent by diplomatic pouch, it is bought on site from gun
dealers through the support network.

It is also impossible to find out the identity of the killer. The majority
come from the Middle East and return there. In Beirut, fake passports are
virtually sold 5: tobacco shops. The intelligence services know, for example,
that there is a clandestine printshop in Beirut which prepares Cypriot,
Maltese, Kenyan, and huritanian passports by the dozen. One of these was
used by the Copernic killer.

This is in addition to the blank Cypriot passports stolen regularly in
Nicosia; to the complimentary, often diplomatic, passports issued to
Palestinians by the Yemenis, Libyans, and Syrians; and the fact that a Bath
Party law in Iraq authorises any Arab to claim Iraqi nationality using any name
he wishes.

However, all these murders have one element in common: what I will call the
"Lebanese aura." The killers depart from Beirut even if their orders come from
elsewhere, and their actions are claimed by lore or less phantom organizations
operating out of Lebanon. The murder of Lieutenant Colonel Bay was claimed

on the same day by the "Lebanese Revolutionary Groups," a totally unknown
organization.

It appears that this murder was in reality the final episode in a struggle
which had been going on for several months between the Libyan services and the
CIA. According to reliable sources, Colonel Qadhdhafi was hit during a shoot-
ing attack in Tripoli in December. Re disappeared for a week, and when he
reappeared on television his left arm was visibly imbilized. The attack was
reportedly carried out by Lebanese Shiites who had been "used." Qadhdhafi
wasted no time in answering, the experts say. One fact is not generally
recognized: Qadhdhafi is very well informed about his herican adversaries.
His two advisers on terrorism are not Soviet or East German, but American: Two
former CIA agents, Edwin Wilson and Frank Terpil, who naturally are hunted by

6 _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the Americans. It was they who organized the abduction of General Dozier in
Italy, "subcontracting" with the Red Brigade, who are very closely linked with
Libya; and the murder of Lieutenant Colonel Ray by a killer recruited in
Beirut.

Always Beirut, the Copernic killer came from Beirut and returned there. The
killers of the Armenian ASALA are based in Beirut. The Palestinian extremist
factions like Abou lidal, members of the BeJection Front, even though ”spon-
sored" by the wrians or the Libyans, are also based in Beirut. It provides
better concealment. For a long time Beirut has not belonged to amne, least
of all the Lebanese.

In Beirut, awone can be recruited to do awthing. Some of the armed factions
which proliferate there need money and advertise themselves as assassins for
pay. For example, it is now almost certain that French Ambassador Delamare
was assassinated by order of the Syrian services who could not stomach his
involvement in efforts to reconcile the Lebanese. However, the Syrians, who
are not stupid, hired the services of a "Shiite" death commando. nevertheless,
it all eventually became known in Beirut.

However, the primary factor which makes Beirut the breeding place of terrorism
is that it is the largest weapons supeimarket in the world. Your hotel porter
will offer you a Kalashnikov for $20, and grenades are used for paperweights.
It is the only place in the world where a normal family will bw a combat
weapon with a telescopic sight.

In this powderkeg there is a teeming multitude of little organisations who will
change their title on request, who help each other, fight each other, infiltrate
each other, use each other, and all get their supplies from the same sources.

First, there are all the small Palestinian groups which claim to be part of
the Rejection Front and specialize in Anti-Jewish attacks: the PFLP of Doctor
Habash, the Abu llidal group, and others. Although officially disowned by

Yasir 'Arai‘at, they are in their element within the Palestinian domain. It

was they at the Copernic attack, and at the murder of Edwin Dowel: and his wife
in Paris on 26 November 1980. Edwin Dowek was an Israeli who organized tourist
travel between Israel and Bypt. These Palestinians have carried out numerous
attacks in Europe, always against Jews, in Anvers and Vienna among other places.
In France they use extensive support facilities which enable them to carry out
their "missions" unimpeded. The man who placed the bomb outside the Rue
Copernic synagogue was met by accomplices who gave him the explosive, took him
to the place, and subsequently put him on the first plane to Beirut with his
false Cypriot passport.

Then there are the Armenians of the ASALA [Armenian Secret Army for the Liber-
ation of Armenia], a clandestine Armenian organization which emerged in Beirut
around 1975 and has since carried out dozens of attacks on Turks to avenge

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the Armenian genocide by 'I‘urks early in this century. The head of ASALA goes
under the name Agop Agopian, but not much is known about him. However, ASALA
is very close ideologically to the Palestinian extremists. .

Beirut has the strongest Armenian comunity in the world, which explains
ASALA's location there.

What about the Libyans? Officially, they are very discreet, and their services
operate secretly, never getting involved in a direct action. On the other
hand, there is proof that they supply money, weapons, and passports to those
within their sphere of influence, all in Beirut. Those invited to train in
Libyan camps also leave from Beirut. Obviously, that training establishes ties
and makes it possible to later ask for services.

The Libyans provide to the Basque ETA logistic support without which the ETA
would no longer be in operation. They also give a lot of assistance to the
Irish IRA. The Libyans' main opponents are the Americans and the Jews.
Several of the attacks carried out by Palestinians have in fact been remote-
controlled by the Libyan services.

Beirut also serves as a staging point for Iranian teams when the Ayatollah's
goverment does not want to be directly involved. The commandos who tried to
assassinate Shapur Bakhtiar and who did kill on Avenue Foch the nephew of
Princess Ashraf, sister of the Shah of Iran, operated out of Beirut. Cer-
tainly, there has not been and never will be proof of all these actions. They
are verbal commands, references, and there is no written trace. Often, the
killers are later themselves executed in one of the countless street battles
in Lebanon and the circle is complete. Also, it is extremely difficult to
know who has killed and why, especially because everything is so tangled up.

Take the Copernic incident. The explosive used was Czechoslovakian:
penthrite. It is a s0phisticated product which you cannot simply buy in a
drugstore. All right. However, the police discovered that the explosive used
by the unidentified terrorists at the Armenian church in Paris was also
penthrite. The Swiss police have proved that penthrite was also used in
several Armenian attacks on 'Iurks.

Moral: They are getting supplies from the same source. In the Copernic case
it is more likely that the killer was supplied by the ASALA networks.

You ask me why the French police were not able to find out? Well, it is not
so easy. The present Armenian extremist groups are often descended from mem-
bers of the pro-Soviet Komintern or Armenians of the Mamouchian group which
fought the Nazis. These people have a long tradition of clandestinity and are
very difficult to infiltrate.

8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another interesting fact: On 22 July 1980, Salah e1 Bitar, a Syrian political
emigre--the Syrian president had put a price on his head—was killed by a shot
in the head on Avenue Roche. The weapon used was a 7.65. A settling of
accounts between Armenians and Turks. Old disputes.

On 26 November 1980, a killer breaks into the travel office of the Doweks and
kills both of them. They were Jews who arranged tourist travel between Israel
and Egypt. This time, the weapon was recovered. It was a 7.65 Beretta. The
ammunition used in all three murders came from the same Czechoslovak batch.

This is a demonstration of the permeability of the various terrorist networks.
One never knows, and they themselves do not know, for whom they work. However,
they all have one thing in comon: their contacts with the intelligence ser-
vices of the Eastern countries—of the Soviet thion and Bulgaria.

It is an obvious temptation to say: The people are all manipulated by the KGB,
which pulls all the strings and sends than out like human puppets to carry out
its evil tasks.

I believe the truth is a little more subtle and more complex, because you do
not manipulate the militant Leftist Christian as easily as a hothead leftist
ready to put a bullet in your head for a passing smile.

Certainly, the Soviet Union bears a signiﬁcant responsibility in respect to
world terrorism, but its involvement is mst often indirect and accanpanied by .
extensive precautions. For example, no recent example is_ known of a K63
officer himself carrying out a "personal hit." For a number of years now, the
major services have refrained from this kind of game: There are too may ways
to retaliate.

By contrast, in the obscurity of Beirut, when you scratch the Palestinian,
Armenian, or Libyan surface a little, you find evidence of the Eastern presence.
In the way of weapons, first of all. The Soviets and the Czechoslovaks have
organized a huge arms traffic through the international traffickers based in
Northern Europe and even in the united States. The Russians sell their old,
outdated weapons and the Czechoslovaks sell new material. It is all at low
prices, challenging any competition, and without an option to return if not
satisfied. It is still astounding to see that all, or almost all, the weapons
used in terrorist attacks come from the East.

In January 1981, the grenade thrown under the car of a Turkish diplomat was
Soviet, the Copernic explosive was Czechoslovak, the RPG-‘I's used against the
Phoenix nuclear plant were Soviet, and the ammunition for the weapons used in
the three murders was also Czechoslovak. All the Palestinian groups are
equipped with Soviet guns, especially Kalashnikovs and RPG-‘I's, and with
Czechoslovak explosives.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At. another level, the collusion is even more obvious. The Soviets operate

in the long tern. The naJority of the con-anders of all terrorist actions have
taken political or technical training courses at Czechoslovak camps or in the
Soviet universities for foreigners. The Soviet leadership concentrates on
inviting young people, through various organizations. They love young people.
During these visits, they discretely identify those most likely to be influ-
enced and invite them to come for study at nunnha University in lbscov, for
example. Those who really become inersed and vho agree to a direct contract
with the KGB will be "established ," that is, they will be sent back on sane
pretext in order to "whitewash" them. A perfect exanple: Illitch Ranires,
better known as "Carlos." Officially, expelled from Rumba university; in
fact, a KGB agent. His career is well known. The Libyan services at one
point wanted to get rid of him, for sordid material reasons. The Soviets made
clear that this would be regarded as an unfriendly gesture toward them.

Carlos would be allowed to continue to serve.L He still serves. There will be
an operation in which the Soviets will not appear, but which they will have
organized.

There are dozens of nini-Carloses in the small Palestinian or Armenian groups.
They tend not to be ungrateful to those who have helped, med, and pampered
them. They ask only the opportunity to prove their gratitude.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse SA

9920
cso: 3100/632

10
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM FRANCE

FLNC LEADER 0N VIOLENCE, REPRESSION, RATIONALB
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 9 Apr 82 pp 46-47
[Interview with an PLNC leader by Jean-Francois Luciani]

[Text] The PLNC [Corsican National Liberation Front]
is ready to fight to the finish. Sometimes rejected,
but more often accepted by a large part of the popu-
lation, they number between 500 and 1,000 underground
fighters, who are totally convinced that victory-
that is to say the island's indepencence-is now in
the muzzles of their guns and the bursting of bombs.
One of their leaders explains to Jean-Francois Lucisni
why the Movement now believes in violence alone.

[Question] You were unaninously condemned by public opinion after your attack
on a Foreign Legion recreation camp during the night of 11-12 rebruery, which
caused one death. Even the Corsican nationalists withdrew their support.
Don't you feel that you made a mistake?

[Answer] We have explained the objectives of the Sorbo-Occagnano operation:
to neutralize the Foreign Legion and to destroy the buildings. What happened
is one of the risks run if there is armed resistance to our operations. Of
course, violence is not commendable, but it has always been our people's means
of resistance. In our country, the problem is not deciding whether violence
is moral or imnnral, but deciding whether or not it is necessary. In Corsica
it is felt that violence is justified when you are right. In 5 years of
special status, considering the increased colonization following the guarantees
extended by the status, our people would be crushed, absorbed, drowned in
French assimilation, and permanently lost. Time is working against us and
leaves us no other choice. We are aware of this situation. Our problem is
not to find out whether our people will accept violence or not, but to explain
to them the danger which threatens them. If they realise the danger, then an
arsed struggle is inevitable. Today this awareness has changed. in part be-
cause of the illusion of change which the status promises, and the fulfill-
ment of personal anbitions hinted at by it. Our problem is to prove that
special status is not the change our people have been waiting for. The state
is currently benefiting from the clamp on our country's political, social,

and cultural life which it is maintaining with difficulty while awaiting

11
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special status. But this is not going to last. The unsolved problems will
resurface quickly.

[Question] Why are you making these attacks at this time?

[Answer] The French State and international opinion must be reminded that
following the political change in France, the Corsican national problem
remains unchanged; that we expect the new power, in the name of its political
principles and after its international stands in support of people fighting
for their liberation, to apply the same principles to our people; in other
words , to recognize our national rights. We wanted to put an end to the
campaigns which were saying that the Corsican problem was solved, the nation-
alists dispersed, and the FDIC in trapents. Furthermore, we struck on a

day when Corsica was receiving three ministers. Judge for yourself.

[Question] Runors corroborate the idea that you were saturated or infiltrated
by former unofficial police.

[Answer] If this were so, it would be easy for us to deny or to refuse
responsibility for this action. However, we assume couplets responsibility
with all the political consequences.

[Question] It is claimed that there are two factions within the FUR-one
pro-fascist (Rightwing), the other Marxist-and that it will be the Marxist

faction which will take over the other.

[Answer] Hhile we do not claim any Marxist philosophy, we condemn and formally
reject any Fascist idea or action. These argmnents are only poison which we
are obliged to ward off. Yesterday, we were Qadhdhafi's rivals; today, we
must be Fascists, that is obvious. But, of course, we expected this.

[Question] Have you mnsged to build your movement?
- [Answer] Our ability to organize is growing daily.
[Question] Have you abandoned the strategy of a split?

[Answer] Despite everything, there is a change in France which we feel is
important for the French. Today what we call "French nationalism" is taking
on a new aspect. We are obliged to take this into consideration, and, on the
other hand, we must avoid serving the interests of the Right. Consequently,
we have reviewed our strategy, this is obvious: the truce is proof of this.
But, this does not mean that we have abandoned it, since we have responsi-
bilities with regard to our people. The interests of our people cannot be
sacrificed to the success of the Left in France.

[Question] Do you still claim, as the National Liberation Front in Algeria
did in its time, to exercise power through a single party?

[Answer] we refer yuu to page 106 of our little white book where it says:
"The task of the patriots united within the Front is to lead the political

12
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and military struggle until colonialism and the clans have been defeated,
and to restore to the people, and to them alone. the political, economic,
and cultural means to control their destiny."

[Question] Are you being financed or assisted by outsiders?

[Answer] We have just one kind of support-our people's-and one kind of
assistance-the commitment and sacrifice of our activists. Of course, we do

not refuse the political support of people who are struggling for their rights,
just as we give them ours.

[Question] Hhat do you think of Francois Hitterrand's policy on Corsica:
general amnesty, special status, the means to control your own affairs. a
general assembly elected through universal suffrage; in short, a turnaround
which doesn't seem to be very well assessed here?

[Answer] This policy is limited only to increasing the traditional power of
those interest groups which are the "clans" in Corsica through a status about
which there is nothing special except its name, and to satisfying some
personal interests. Of course, there is the freeing of the prisoners! But,
at the same time, this is a trap. If we are speaking of generosity, then let
them grant us what they give the Palestinians or the Salvadorans: in a word,

the recognition of our rights as a nation.

[Question] How do you explain the fact that the government is not using
repression?

[Answer] we are not about to teach a Leftist power what the rights of a
people are. The new French administration knows very well that special status
is only a political maneuver to make the nationalist movement wait a little
longer, and that the Corsican problem has not been solved. It knows very
well.that it can only be taken care of by a true political solution. Accord-
ing to all evidence, repression does not solve anything. 0n the other hand,
contrary to what they want to make us believe, we do not think that the govern-
ment is convinced that Corsicans unanimously condemn violence.

[Question] Bomb attacks and violence can strengthen the camp which does not
want special status, and give the nationlist candidates an additional handicap.

[Answer] Those who don't want the status are the first to condemn violence.
They only see the limited interest of their clan. we are speaking of the
rightwing clan as well as the leftwing clan; since, we must admit, part of
.he Left. the most representative part on the electoral level, does not want
the status. And the nationalists will be the political surety for a status
which limits itself to making Corsicans Frenchmen who are a little special.
We want to be full-fledged Corsicans.

[Question] Some nationalists went "worthwhile" violence. In other words,
they would like you not to intervene until they are politically strong enough.
“hat is your opinion?

13
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR(MHW(1AL.US£GDNLY

[Answer] Those who speak of "worthwhile" violence are dreaming of an £118:
which is simply an armed extension under orders to a specific legal reformist
policy. Making the PING just a group which sets off bombs is denying armed
struggle as a political means. in order to allow complete compromise with
and surrender to colonialism. It is denying the political leadership of the
FLNC. 0n the other hand, our position leans that the armed struggle for
national liberation will be brought to term and that colonialism will be
defeated. Obviously, this is not done to reassure the fringe group of busi-
nessmen who are hiding behind the movement for legal autonomy.

[Question] Other nationalists even hope that you will be "Zorro, the arbiter
of justice."

[Answer] If need be, this wish justifies the popularity of our movement.
But, if we are Zorro, then there is no question of leaving the political
initiative to just anyone.

[Question] Don't you think that room to maneuver is tight for everyone: the
government, the nationalists, the clans, and yourselves?

[Answer] That's true. But, we have one advantage: the firm belief that we
are moving in the direction of history. A people marching toward freedom is
not stopped. To do this it would be necessary to destroy them. The French
State does not have the political power.

[Question] You are hostile to the clan system. But, on the other hand, some
nationalists think that the clans represent a part of your culture.

[Answer] It is true that on a cultural level, the clan is the most traditional
Corsican form of expression. Corsican culture is a culture of the people,
"paisana," kept alive by the most disadvantaged social class, "i paisani," and
it is in this class that the clan, with its policy of assistance, is gaining

a foothold. But what we condemn in the clan is its political expression which
originates in its vocation of controlling the power of the state. The special
status will only reinforce this trend. Nothing can be done against these
political practices without cutting the colonial ties which bind us to France.

[Question] Doesn't the movement which is being launched--special status.
morelizing political customs-condemn you to vanish?

[Answer] This would perhaps be so if there really was a movement; but the
colonial situation remains unchanged. The electoral system will remain as
falsified as it was, despite the proportional vote. The power will remain
with the clans. The monopolising of the eastern coast by colonists has not
been questioned. The freeze and the occupation of the coastline are continu-
ing, real estate speculation is resuming. The economic dependence of our
country is becoming accentuated. The University of Corsica remains poorly
adapted to the aspirations and requirements of our people. The Foreign Legion
is permanently installing itself. Our language and our culture are far from
being rehabilitated and finding their place in education, public life and the

FTII(IHH(1A1.USIECNULY
cultural policy of our country. Colonization is increasing and becoming
standard. Since 10 Hay. construction of second homes has increased by 40
percent. And do not forget that Corsicana will soon represent only half of
the island's p0pu1ation. See how far off the ark we are. Aa long as we
refuse to bring up the national aspect of the Coraicen problem, no political
structure whatever will settle anything.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Oogediprease SA

9693
cs0: 3100/631

15
mmrmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOMS! MG

Possum roman Imcmcn mm: in IN mmmv as:
Psris LE mum. oasxmumm in French 9-16 m 82 p Ice
[Article by 311th Schellss "mm of s Diplont"]

[Text] A series of questions. all of which bean to dste gone umnswered. hes
been rsised by the lost recent of all the terrorist sets recently consitted on
French territory: the Iunder on 3 April of Yscov Barei-sntm. the ltZ-yver-old
secoui secretsry of the Isreeli esbssey. who we killed by severe). pistol shots
fired by s uonan in the entrsnoe hell of his residence.

In the opinion of Israeli Albeeesdor Heir ﬁoeeme. the arise beers the earl: of
the Pm. He told the press so, loud uni oleer snd sosewhst hestily (the police
investigntion ma not yet begun) mommy erm- arriving on the under scene--
s circuutmce which did not allow tine for reﬂection. The no issued on
inediste denisl. first in Beirut and later through Ibrahi- Souss. its repre-
sentative in France. (hedit for the under no lster olsined first by the
Hovenent of Arsb Revolutionary Brigades. en unknown oranisstion. end subse-
quently by the Lebanese Arned Revolutionary Faction. when nae had been

evoked previously.

This wasn't good enough. however: Anbsssedor heir Roseanne persisted in his
accusations, which were echoed in Isrsel by the lost isportsnt sinisters of the
Begin ministration. Defense Hinister Ariel Simon sew the under of the
diplcmt es s "violstion of the oesse-fire" in southern Iebenon: Hinister of
Foreign Affairs Itshsk Shuir snnoumed that Israel "will hsve recourse to
force to sash temriss. its leaders and its bases." The world is ewsiting
Israeli rewiasls--but whet for! will they take?

Is the P10 reslly the guilty party. however? In Paris. in respome to the
virulent ststenents of the asbeesador, certain subtly distilled ”intelligence“
indicsted thst Bsrsinsntov had probebly been on sgent of the Hoesad (the
Israeli secret services). In Belgium. where he had been stetioned before coe-
ing to P‘z-ance. had he not been seeigned to ”teleconuniostions”?

It was believed thst Esrsmntov had recently received thrests. given the feet
thst s police-an we on duty dey end nidat st his residence. ihe surveillsnce
hsdbeenmvedonlysfwdsysbefonﬂsem-perhepsbecunetbeuoond
secretary believed he no longer hed resson to be anxious, but sore probsbly

16
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
because the wards were needed elsewhere to protect sore iaportant pereonages.
Lastly. one wonders. is it not strange that eabasey officials showed up only a
few ainutes following the dram. and that they took possession of an attache
case, found near the body. and sole papers found in the clothing of the de-'
ceased?

The attack on Bersinantov. in short, was probably not a nnifestation of ”blind
ten-arias" but rather a "settling of scores" between secret services. In such
case it was probably the Syrians who were behind the under.

“Hint an extraordimry delusion!” Anbassador heir Rosenne protested. "Barsi-
nantov never received any special protection. No attache case was ever renewed
fro- the scene. As {or his identity docuaents. his Diners' Club card. and
certain other papers relating to his duties, it is true that we did renews then,
by agreesent with the French police. that could be sore norlal." he asked. ”in
view of the fact that he was a diploaat?“ Ami. of course. what could be sore
norasl than to deny that Bareimntov was a ”spy“?

One thing seeas probable to the investigators. who are accepting only the theory
that it was a political crises nesely, that neither the ainiscule French terror-
1st groups of the far Right nor those of the far Mt appears to be iaplicated.
as organizations, in the case. The police had at the very outset undertook to
follow these two trails. but apparently returned eapty-handed. One lust there-
fore be satisfied with the detersinstion that there are disturbing aililarities
between this crine and those perpetrated on 12 Hove-bar i981 agaimt (hristian
(mam, charge d'aﬂaires of the Aserican eabassy in Paris. who airaculously
survived. and on 18 Janmry 1982 against Charles Ray. assistant ailitary attache
of the sale eabassy:

i. All three attacks took place in front of the victim' residences.

2. All the weapons used were 7.65 caliber pistols, and all the anunition used
bore the Czechoslovak Geco trademark.

3. The crimes were coanitted by a man or a wouno-acting alone and on foot--
who subsequently escaped into the crowd.

1+. These were the ease arsed Lebanese revolutionary factions that had claiaed
responsibility for the two previous crises. As of last Tuesday it did not
appear inpossible. moreover. that Ray and hrsinntov were killed by the sale
weapon.

There reaains one more question: Is, or is not. all of this connected in any
way with the bloody crime at the Capitals? Could it possibly prove to be one
more episode in that bloody chain of events which Gaston Deﬂerre so such
feared following the explosion on the train and the repeated tlu'eats ads in the
name of "Carlos"? The opposition, in any event. is losing no opportunity to
point to "the laxity. the weakness. the tacit coaplicity of the govern-ant."
shanelessly exploiting this somber series of events while neglecting to Iention
the unsolved crises of the precedine 7-year tern.

17
FOR OPTIC! (I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

The gavel-mat intends to demonstrate its willingness to turn the epotuyst on
the pest asses es wen es those of the present. It has ecoonunsly euthorlsed
the emlning nglstretes 1n cherge of the Gin-101. Gold-en end copes-hie cues
(Just es 1n the Ben Berke use) to inspect mun mee thet hsd heretofore
mined secret. In this Her-es the Isreen uhssedor hue]: echowledgsd»
the govern-out hes bandit all its resets-see to beer dining the pest few deys.

The lure desire to solve e cese is not elweys em, however. Today's govern-
ment leaders ere discovering. in their turn. the delights of these investin-
tions of terrorist sets counted by e lester hem.

(DWIGHT: 1982 "lo Nonvel 0mm"

10992
coo: 3100/569

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KREISKY 0N FOREIGN POLICY, RELATIONS WITH ITALY
PM210909 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 19 May 82 p 5

[Undated interview in Vienna with Austrian Glancellor Brno Kreisky by
Piero de Garzaroli: "Kreisky Buffeted by the Storms"]

[Excerpt] Vienna— [Question] lierr thcellor, why is there so little talk
about Austria, almost to the extent of a conspiracy of silence against you?
Do you not consider this international lack of interest rather too demora-
lizing?

[Answer] I have already said this on other occasions. I prefer Austria

to make the news in the cultural or sporting fields rather than in politics.
We are a neutral state, and when one lapses into politics there is always

a tendency to provide misinformation about a particular country. This is why
we are not in the least interested in being the center of political atten-
tion: sport and culture, or culture and sport, suit us fine.

[Question] But your recent invitation to Libyan leader al-Qsdhdhafi
prompted considerable uproar abroad, and here in Austria too there was no
absence of criticism and polemics. “as it a good or a bad thing to have
him cone to Vienna? In other words: Did the diplonstic results vindicate
the detente gesture?

[Answer] It was an excellent initiative, even looking to the future. inasmuch
as it helped a little to break the ice. It will take time to understmd

its consequences. In my view there is no point in excluding souone such

as sl-Qadhdhsfi from the" group of democratic states. Indeed, it is imossible
to do without him when one is willing to accept several billions from

Libya but then lacks even the courage, as the Austrians say, to "greet him
under the lime trees," in other words, to be seen with him.

I consider such a stance rather abiguous from the moral viewpoint: one
accepts money, but.... Of course al-Qadhdhafi holds and defends opinions
that are certainly not ours. In this regard, we already have some familiarity
with cot-mists and we must mfortmately also take into account Latin
America's my parafascist regimes. Therefore we cannot always choose our
partners.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In my opinion, one must add to all this the fact that al-Qadhdhafi renains
someone with whoa one can still talk, as long as one can inspire trust in
him. In the last analysis he is intelligent, and obviome a revolutionary
who has grown up mder conditions different fro. ours.

[Question] So do you respect him?

[Answer] Al-Qadhdhafi is a noteworthy person and I am pleased to have
received him in Austria. Nevertheless, I do not intend to portray him in
mrealistically rosy hues.

[Question] How do you answer Israel's constant charges that you have been
too pro-Arab and not at all pro-Zionist, bearing in nind that Austria was
one of the first Western nations to recognize the PLO?

[Answer] In my dual capacity as socialist and internationalist I an the
friend of all peoples, including those of the Middle East. My idea about
Zionism remains the same: There is no single solution to the problem.

One solution is of course to go to Israel, and this applies to all Jews
unable to exist as Jews in other parts of the world, who are entitled to
feel like free men. However, one must not forget the coexistence of several
antagonistic currents within Zionism. Begin represents one tendency.

Nahum Goldman another.

[Question] You are no admirer of the Israeli prime minister, but what is
your opinion of the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Sinai? Hill it help
resolve the Middle East crisis?

[Answer] I have never supported the Camp David accords because I believe

that one of the essential aspects of the Middle East problem, the Palestinian
problem, was not resolved there. It is moreover a problem at the center of

the Arab world of which we are now aware from two aspects: Not only has it
remained unresolved, but no path to any alternative solution has been indicated.

0n the other hand one must welcome every step taken toward peace. I would
add: Every small portion of peace obtained must be protected.

[Question] I read something you said some years ago: "Austria has no
foreign policy, only its neutrality." Is this still true?

[Answer] In the past 25 years Austria has developed its policy of active
neutrality. What does it mean? It means that we have worked within the
United Nations. Especially within the Security Council, that we involved
ourselves in the Helsinki negotiations and in the Gancm North-South sunnit
and that we have adopted a stance on the Palestinian question-~a stance
that has meanwhile spread throughout the world.

[Question] Some people argue that this neutrality is sometimes rather
unbalanced, as in the case of your scolding of the United States, the
friendship you have shown toward the Third world, your supplies of Steyr
light tanks to Argentina....

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answer] No, it is not true. We have now suspended consignments of tanks
to Buenos Aires.

[Question] Austria belongs neither to the EEC nor to any other bloc.
"hat is your opinion of the slow and laborious progress of the united Europe?

[Answer] There is no doubt that we are in the midst of a process of col-mity
integration which is advancing despite certain setbacks-a process whose
milestones are represented by the Comeil of Europe and the European
Parliament in Strasbourg. ‘Ihe idea of the mited Europe has now become the
motive force of our continent's political pragmatism.

[Question] What about East-Heat relations?

[Answer] The detente policy is experiencing a very critical phase, but we
are well aware that there is no option for Europe other than the path of
detente. This proves the role that belongs to Europe's ninor neutral states
within the context of relations between the two alignments-a role which
has already emerged during the Madrid conference.

[Question] What is the secret of your "minor economic miracle," based on
the containment of inflation, low mewloynent and the holding power of
the schilling?

[Answer] It is very simple: It stems from the coincidence of the interests
expressed by the employers and workers in agreeing on a realistic economic
and social policy. Despite the rather widespread opinion that such a pact
is impossible, we achieved one by learning the correct lesson from our

history.

[Question] You are referring to your model of so-called "Sozialpartnerschaft"
--a unique model or’ restrained bargaining that cannot be exported. Is it
still working now that "Austria Fells" [happy Austria] is beginning to feel
the pinch of the economic crisis?

[Answer] We can in no way spare Austria the effects of the world recession;
we can only make them less burdensome. For the time being, by using a
so-called reformist policy-—or, if you prefer, one based on Keynesian
liberalism-we have managed to achieve stability in ewloyment levels, in
prices and on the currency market. It is an excellent record, so I do not
foresee a gloomy future for Austria.

[Question] Last, let us examine bilateral relations, which have long been
tainted by the Alto Adige issue. Have you anything to say in this regard?

[Answer] With Italy? Comercially, things are very good. Politically--
and I must say this quite frankly-we have no other neighboring comtry
with which, even at the "top levels," we have so few contacts as Italy.
Things are better with ngary, much better with Germany and Switzerland.
The exception is Czechoslovakia, with which relations have become somewhat
frozen. I realize the anxiety that my remarks will prompt, but it is the
truth.

FOIOFIICIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Whose fault is it. bearing in mind that Italy still has to
repay the state visit to Rona by President Jones 11 years ago?

[Answer] I would say at once that it is both oomtries' fault. Perhaps
we have been insufficiently energetic, but it seem to so that not many
efforts are made in Italy either.

[Question] One final question: What do you think of President Pertini?

[Answer] I consider him an exceptional person: Hie vitality and resolve
are amazing. I would like to conclude with the following observation:

At one time we were the vassals. a satellite, of Ger-my and Italy, a poor
country and the invalid of Europe between the wars. All that belongs to
the past. Now we are nobody's satellite.

comucm': 1982 Editrice LA STAHPA S.p.A.
080: 3106/ 208

22
FOIOII'I'ICIALUSEONLY
MG! 10 mmmoml. NATION an! AS W
Kris Is mum. onsnmmm in French 9-16 Apr 82 pp 39-uo
[Article by Jacques Julliard: "me Siren Song of Proportiorsl Representation”'|

[Text‘I Having observed silence during the cantonal caspaign. Francois Hitterrand
continued that policy after the votes were counted. This in itself was eloquent
consent. however. for it was interpreted as waning that he intended to have the
parliaaent adopt a change in the systea of voting for the coni municipal
elections ”and perhaps (inasauch as nothing has yet been decided for the future
legislative elections.

A return to proportioml representation has long been a part of the platfon of
the Left. Over and above the considerations of Justice which are always invoked
in its support. proportional representation has the special feature of rendering
the political parties independent of each other. There would be no need to be
part of a coalition in order to receive one's due. for with 25 percent of the
total vote a party would always receive roughly one-quarter of the seats. Under
the majority-vote electoral systes. however. a party could very well be defeated
in every district in the second-round voting and find itself without a single
seat. Or on the other hand, with the aid of a withdrawal in its favor. it could
score a clean sweep-oand that was the wonderful surprise that awaited the social-
ists last June.

Guy Monet 's Booserang

In smary, the majority-vote electoral systen is the syste- of optimistic par-
ties and confident alliances. and proportional representation is the systea of
cautious parties and precarious alliances. Whereas the lajority-vote syste- ie
to suffrage what the community property systes is to marriage. the proportional
representation systea can be likened to a legal separation-and its inclusion
(in 1972) in the "Cannon Prograa" of the socialists and couunists spoke voluaee
concerning the hidden agendas of both sides then and thereafter.

The district voting system has deserved well of the republic, however. Without
barking back to the heroic days of 1889. when its ”establishment enabled Junie-
ter of the Interior constans to slash Boulanger's plebiscitary initiative. it
is well--before going any farther-to recall that this systes played an essen-
tial role in our contenporary political life by eneuﬂng the stability of the
national institutions and coapelling the Left to unite in order to win.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is known that upon his return to power in 1958 de Gaulle decided-against the
advice of lany of his intimates. including Michel Debreuto “establish the
two-round. absolute-sajority arrondissesent voting system. which the Pom-t):

logic and subtle huaor of universal suffrage. After having several tiles
voted for de Csulle by referendum. the voters gave his the seas prise that it
would give Mitten-and in 1981--a plurality which the operation of the two-
round voting systea converted into an absolute Iajority. Guy hollet's hrain-

‘l'hie election put in place What was to becone one of the basic pillars of the
system the identification of the pea-liaaentary IaJority with the Residential
majority. It was because he had failed to establish this analge- on a durable
basis that Valery Giscerd d'Estaing experienced such difficulty in the closing
period of his 7-year tern in office. Not that de Gaulle hisself adapted easily
to the yoke which he found himself weMng. partly against his will: for
although the system had the effect of attaching the deputies solidly to the
president, it also tended to make the latter dependent on the toner. De Gaulle
found even the victory of his own partr-mider the aegis of hspidounin the
1968 "election of the great panic” hard to take. It was to reestablish the
independence and preeminence of the presidential function that he ran in the

__.-——____._____
' Gaspar-ed with the 38 percent vote for the socialists in June 1981.

2!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘ "" FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the ujoritywote electoral system doom 3 dieunited Left. The only
course reuining to the Left was to unite-4t least as for as election: were

only once and that the stupidity of the Riga-which not long ego meeented the
Left with an unparalleled victory-will not soon be repeated. In the light of
the cantonel elections one lust acknowledge that when the comniete lose two
votes one will undoubtedly go to the P5 (out of loyalty to the left) but the
other will revert directly to Chino (for the sake of Poujediet continuity).
Under these circumstances the Left is anything but seemed of again receiving
a lejority in the forthooning legislative elections. and e adority tor the
Right in 1986 would guarantee a. painful conclusion to the preeidentiel ten in

any reserve. The logic of the election process forces everyone to choose
between the majority and the opposition. Only a. moportionel-repreeentetion
election would be able to reconstitute a center-4nd therefore a new reeerve
for difficult tiles.

and that the PS had chosen to abundan then to the unlnppy fete to which the
appeared to be destined, in the hope of saving its own ekin. If proportion].
representation were to be extended to the legieletive elections. that would on

25
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Second. that whereas a second victory by the Socialist Party appears to be out
of the question the risk of total defeat is not. Under these circa-stances one
would assune that it is better-Mud: the imtxulentality of proportional
representation-We ensue to the party the ilportant role that will as:

its electoral potential by reducing the possibdlity of a “depreciaticn' am
likewise of an 'appnciation”) in 9mm.

lastly. that the president has reselved upon (or is resigned to) an increasing
dissociationo-in proportion as his 7-year tern goes {maidubetueen the
Injority that elected hin president and the pexliuentary sajority. It is

disregard.
Clarity and Efficacy

"All discussion of sethods is a discussion of circulatances,” mum said.
In fact. the belief is widesm-eed in mace that individml election cysts.
do "wear out" and that it is therefore advisable to replace the. periodically.
The mjority-vote oyster-whose principal function is to produce a coherent
sajoritr-mould accordingly. after a quarter of a entry. be replaced by the
systen of proportioml representation: a system which is less capable of
distortion and sore respectful of the equilibriun of the forces involved and
of the diversity of temper-enema.

It is obviome possible to be seduced by this cosplex of political consider-
ations and theoretical arguments. I believe. however. that it would be a dis-
service to the nation to return to proportioml representation. In a country
of a pluralist tradition (in conuadistinction to a Wparty tradition) such

second round of voting. it offers the voters clear-cut alternatives and pro-
duces a sajority that is equally clear-cut. Reportional representation. on
the other hand. defers the proble- of a Iajority until after the election all!
thereby deprives the voter of his principal preemptive. which is to act as
arbiter. It was not so long ago tint the opacity of the existing institu-
tions. together with the fragility and instability of the coalitions, conbined
to threaten the existence of democracy itself. In that context dc (hulls's
nost inportant achievenent was not ending the war in Algeria but was, first and
fore-oat. avoiding civil war an}. subsequently calming Prune with stable insti-
tutionsuor. in any case, institutions as stable as the nation could tolerate.
The Left-which had at first cosbated these institutions. subsequently supported
then and in tine benefited fro- thes-onou has the prisordial duty of preserving
the"

wPYRIGIﬂ‘: 1982 "le Nouvel Observatetu‘”

10992
mo. moo/569

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
onus on Eamon mums. 16! m. mmm. no:
Paris L8 mum oasmmwa in Brena: 9-16 Apr: 82 p In

[Interview with socielist deputy and 'nusber three' Inn in the P3 Poul Quilee
by Ksthleen min]

[Btcerpt] [Question] Why hold e. senimr for the psrty leadership i-edintely
after convening an executive con-ittee end perlissentsry working session?

[Answer] The task of the P8 executive couittee was to derive precticel lessons
from the centonel elections. ‘lhe senimr for the leadership should lead to the
formulation of specific propossls thst will enable the Socialist hrty to plsy
its role to the hilt end, in s sense. get its second wind.

In addition to those of its tasks to which I shall refer es Isterisl tssks end
which are obvious (the training of the ective senbers. the orwunstion of the
federations. end so forth), the petty hes en isportent role to phy on three
levele--a role which it has, in certsin sress, somewhat neglected du'im the

pest yesr.

First of all. it has an ideologicsl role. The P3 is in the best position to
explain the socialist progre- in en its espects, and therefore to spell out the
ultimate purpose of the governmental notion. It is also, however. the only
organisation sble to combat the Right in the political stem uni reply-451m: by
blow-to the letter's systesstic cespeisn of denimtion of the policy currently
being inplenented.

Second. it has a. pray-auntie role. we should strengthen our study consittees
which were reactivated following Valence. and formulate specific propossls in
respect to economic and social utters end utters concerning civil rights and
foreign policy-and do so without react! to the positions adopted by the govern-
.Qnte

Lastly, it has a. role of nintnining lisison between the government and the
people and between the people and the govern-sot. He should erplsin. mi
defend, the government's policy but nice trensnit to the govern-em the infer..-
tion. criticiens and evaluations offered by the French people and by Socialist
my ”We

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we met put a halt to the assimilation which is too often ow to occur
between the party and the governsent. He must, in fact. free ourselves fro-
our inhibitions. This seninar will. I hope. revitalise the socialist dynalic.

[Question] You said-~in addressing the executive conittse of your partyuthat
these cantonal elections ”could not be won.” Isn't it rather easy to lake this
kind of a posteriori "prognostication"?

policies. Indeed. the first phase will not be whieved until the end of the
spring session of permanent. 'the fact is that during this first period we
have becoae the object of dissatisfaction in various sectors: allow our advei~
series. who did not believe we would carry out our pron-as: aaong our political
friends. who believe we are not loving forward fast enough: and sung the un-
conitted electorate who rallied to us betwun 10 Hay and 1n June and now find
that their own situation has nonetheless not ilproved.

Certain errors on our part have uplified this medictabls voter backlash.
First of all. the process of mainating the socialist camidatss did not always
tm out well: certain sections imagined that the P8 label alone was suffi-
cient to win election. Secondly. the caspaign of the hiatus systentic.
intelligent and well-organized campaign-waned us to react In an uncoordiuted

fashion: either too violently, which nde us appear to be guilty of partisan-
ship. or too wildly. which gave credence to the wildest rusors that were circu-
lated about us. lastly. the truth is that certain aeasmss and statenents of

the govermsnt appeared to be impportuns. poorly prepared or poorly explained.

[Question] Would you make the ease Speech today-wasting it in the sale tens--
that you node at the Valence congress?

[Answer] is a politician I have one serious fault: I detest hypou'isy. no do
sonsthim without saying so is not my conception of political action. For ny
part. I believe it is better to explain what one intends to do, an! to say why
one is going to do it. inasmuch as I see nothim wrong in asking for the loyalty
of upper—level civil servants. 'Ihat's the problem I brought up at Valence. It
is consistently the underlying cause-«ad with eqml intemitynof our current
difficulties. Hy only regret is that at Valence I spoke the taboo use of
Robespierrs, which by its aers power of evocation had the effect of distorting

‘y ”8M0

[Question] Are you a candidate for the nosination for the office of myor of
Paris?

[Answer-1 I have represented Paris in the masher of Deputies for the past 16
years an! s- therefore in a good position to appreciate the lisduds of the
Chirac syste- in the capital. However. it is the socialist party sesbers of
Paris and the executive ocuncil of the party that will mainats our candidate.
I-br the nonent. no one has taken sides. A nunber of condition lust first be

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

net in order that the nominee will hsve the next-u- dtsnos of defesting chino.
men s11 this beeches clean: I shall Iske ly decision lmoun. I know this
stmgsle win be difficult, but I do not believe it is (loo-ed to tsiltme.
mine is eomideredtohesgood-yor. Thetisu'ue. He'sthehestwor
Paris has had for s comm-beam he is the first one.

(DWIGHT: 1982 “Is Nouvel Ohsmstmm"

10992
(:80: 3100/569 sun

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY