FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10416

26 March 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 12/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm

JPRS publications contain informtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tires within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(20110 12/32)

CONTENTS
AFGHANISTAN

Kabul Seen Following Stalin's Nationalities Policy
(THE qumgr, 13 m 82) onesoono.ooeooeoeoeooooooooooeo0--

IRAll
Briefs
Alleged Divisions Within Todd:
LEBANON
Article Reviews Issues To Be Discussed by Next Arab Summit _
(”mm AIP'ARABI, 27 NOV 81) 0.0s-ootoooooooeooooolOoo0.00o
MOROCCO
Moroccan-French Relations Examined
(Editorial. Simon Mallq; AFRIQUE-Asm. 15-28 Feb 82) ..
SYRIA
Regime's Her on Muslim Brotherhood Expected To Be Renewed
(AL-Hm AL—‘ARABI, h-io Dec 81)
Roman Incidents Said To Prosage Regime's Demise
(AIr-HATAN AIF'ARABI, 26 Feb-h Mar 82)
TUNISIA

Tunisian Solution to Problems Could Be Model for Others
(Habib Bouleres; JEWE AFRIQUE, 2‘: Feb 82)

Leader' s Deteriorating Health, Succession Considered
(AL-"AM AIF'ARABI, 22-28 Jan 82) Dos-onoooeooooooceeeoooo-o

l3

16

20

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prmier Discusses Future Diplomatic Steps
(Florence Ra'd; Alp-VAT“ AL-‘ARABI. 22-28 Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . .

‘a'ESTERlI SAHARA

Resolutions on Western Sehnre Examined
(Kenel Djaider; Among-A313, 15-28 Feb 82) .... W.

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KABUL SEEN FOLLOWING STALIN'S MTIOMLITIES POLICY

London THE ECOMJHIST in English No 7228, 13 Mar 82 p 50

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

 

The Russians are using a subtle new tactic
to try to control Alghanistan. They are
encouraging local culture and traditions
in dillerent pom cut the country in the
hope that Afghans will turn away lrom
thoughts at national identity. which is the
mainspring ol their resistance to Soviet
occupation. This policy 0' divide-and-
rule worked well tor the Soviet Union
itselt in its early days. The Alghan minis-
try at tribes and nationalities is now
becoming a replica ol the Soviet depart-
mutt cl nationalities lounded in 1917.
with Stalin at its head.

The Bolahevih government. under Le-
nin. believed that the Modem are. at
central Asia were a partlcularthreattoa
communist state ruled tram Mm. lt
mom todestroytherelip‘omandran’al
bonds linking ethnic grows. Local per-
sonalities were used to play up local
values. That is what is now happem'ng in
Alghanistau.

Alghanistatt's ministry ot tribes has
two departments. The nationalities de
partment deals with settled ethnic poops
such as the Uzbeks. Tadzltiks. Turbo-
mans and Hmras. Their mother tongues
are being made ollicial. their cultureeare
encouraged and much is made 0! their
amnities with their cousins across in the
Soviet Union. The aim. it seems.iato
create units which can. where appropr'v
ate. be merged with their counterparts in
Turkmenia and other Soviet areas.

The tribal department in the ministry
deals primarily with the Pathans. who

cso; 1.600] 323

l

._--._—

ermstttutc abttut hall the rumination 0!
Afghanistan and ate the backbone til the
resistance. The ministry is said to he
planning the creation at a Pathan repub-
lic divided into sub-regions on tribal
lines. Ofﬁcials are out to undermine the
Pathans' sense 0! common identity. Each
tribe will have its own administration.
Tribal chiefswill ineﬂectbeoornmissars
and their children will be altered privi-
leged education.

The ministry's tribal department is also
thought to have the job at organising
local militias to delend government-con-
trolled villagea against guerrilla attacks.
Within the department is a group known
as Akhwan which tries to stir up trouble
on Alghara'stan'a border with Pakistan. in
the hope 0! cutting the guerrillas' supply
routes. Akhwanwouldliltetoseethe
border sealed and Pakistan put on the
delensive by tribal unrest and the resur-
rection ot Pakistani Pathans' demand tor
a homeland. .

There is also a semi-regular lorce
known to the government as the "loyal
resistance". it includes many lormer
agents and informers Irom the Alghan
seaet service. Khad. who have been
lorced out at guerrilla-controlled areas.
During a recent Russian-Afghan opera-
tion in Parwan province. north ol Kabul.
their local knowledge led to the deaths 0!
several hundred opponents o! the govern-
ment. The guerrillas are still trying to
recover trom that setback.

The Economist Newspaper Ltd, London 1982

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IN

BRIEFS

ALLEGED DIVISIONS WITHIN TUDEH—Divergenoes within the Iranian co'uunist party,
the Tudeh. are beconing accentuated because of the increasingly bloody repres-
sion practiced Ly the Khoneyni regim. According to progressive diplomatic
circles in Tehran, the possibility that the leadership of the party night
explode under the vigorous pressure of grass-roots militants cannot be excluded.
Ihese militants reject the complicity of some of their leaders with the re-
gine's nost reactionary elements. lbreover, many fomr ’rudeh leaders, who
were excluded from the party in 1979. are now conducting a vigorous campaign
in Europe against the present leadership, denouncing its activities favoring
the repression of Iranian progressive elenents. [Text] [Paris Al'RIQUE-ASIE

in mm No 260. 1-14 m 82 p 31] [copramm 1982 Afrique-Asie]

cso: 4619/64

2
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LEBANON

ARTICLE REVIEUS ISSUES TO BE DISCUSSED BY NEXT ARAB SUM?
Paris ALPHATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic “0 250. 27 Nov 81 pp 21-22

[Artic1e: “Fez Documents: This Is How Lebanese Army Hill Be Rebuilt; $100
Million Required as First Installment to Implement Military Service")

[Text] The 12th Arab summit has four major issues: The issue of South Lebanon,
the Palestinian issue, interbArab relations and Arab-international relations.
The preparatory meeting of the Arab ministers of foreign affairs which will
conclude its proceedings with the publication of this edition has discussed
four very confidential working papers prepared by the Arab League General
Secretariat on the four issues. AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI correspondent in Fez has
read the four papers, with their supplements, in full and has gathered the
working papers and the Lebanese, Jordanian, Palestinian. Iraqi. Syrian,

Sudanese and Libyan proposals to present them in this exclusive report.

We begin with the first paper on South Lebanon. The very confidential report
prepared for the rulers and presidents says that the Israeli enemy is
occupying the border strip area with some of its military forces, that it
prevents the UN emergency forces from carrying out their tasks and reaching
the international borders and that it shells the southern villages, coastline
and Palestinian resistance locations scattered there with its field and
naval artillery under the pretext of fedayeen operations at times and the
pretext of attacks with Katyusha rockets against its settlements at other
times. The enemy is also engaged in constant air reconnaissance operations
and in air raids against civilian and military targets-raids that have
reached as far as Beirut. the capital. The enemy has also been carrying out
small~scale commando operations against specific military targets, beginning
in the South and extending to the heartland of Lebanon.

The forces safeguarding the peace and obstructing an Israeli sweep are the

UN emergency forces and a group of the Lebanese Army working within the
framework of these forces. These forces are currently facing the Israeli
aggression against the border areas and Israel's obstruction of

iaplementation of the UN resolutions concerning Lebanon. This is at a time
when the Palestinian resistance forces are densely present in the South and
when they carry out artillery and rocket attacks against Israel. These forces.
and South Lebanon along with them, are exposed to the Israeli retaliatory
operations.

3
FOR 0FF1C1A1.USEIONL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, a real cease-fire is prevailing between Israel on the one side
and the PLO on the other. The collapse of this cease-fire may lead to
exposing the south to several possibilities that may re-kindle the war of
attrition which erupted in the middle of 1981 and which may develop into a
storming operation that could expose the South to occupation.

The position of the forces facing the Israeli aggression against South
Lebanon can be considered a position of non-defense because it is not a stable
position and because it lacks discipline and control. The presence of armed
forces with an unstable defensive structure, lacking controls and operating

in the absence of a Lebanese army capable of shouldering the burdens of
defense against Israel constitutes a situation that fails to secure a
constant defense of the South and a situation which will inevitably lead to
the outbreak of a war as a result of which South Lebanon will be lost. A
Stable defense in the South requires bolstering the defensive capability of the
Lebanese army against the Israeli aggression in its capacity as a regular
force. It also requires enabling this army to shoulder the burden of defense
and of filling the existing vacuun resulting from the absence of an effective
legitimate and regular military presence capable of obstructing the outbreak
of any surprise war whose timing is controlled by the enemy.

Plan to Rebuild Lebanese Army

The study report deals with the present condition of the Lebanese army with
precise details, beginning with the land forces. then with the air forces and
then with the naval forces. The report reviews the conditions of the
inhabitants in the operations area and the South's defense needs. It is
evident from reading these details that the plan to rebuild the Lebanese army
calls for the formation of seven mechanized infantry brigades, along with
their general support units. The nucleus for these brigades has been formed.
Some of the equipment of this nucleus is Iodern and some is old and needs to
be completed [renewed]. The general completion percentage is 50 percent for
light equipment and 30 percent for heavy equipment. The training level and
the morale are good and can be made excellent if Arab support and confidence
are achieved.

As for the air forces, they include two squadrons of intercepter Mirage and
Hawker Hunter aircraft. The Mirage squadron needs to undergo maintenance.

These squadrons also need to be reinforced with new aircraft. The naval forces
also need to be reinforced to enable then to carry out their reconnaissance
and interception operations so as to insure a minimum degree of observation
and control of the Lebanese coastline within the framework of a complete
coastal defense system. As for the air defenses, they must be rebuilt

through conventional means and a combat brigade within the antiaircraft
division must be bolstered hunediately until a missile network is built

within the framework of a complete air defense system intended to safeguard
Lebanon and its field formations.

The report also recommends that the steadfastness of the inhabitants of the
border areas of South Lebanon be bolstered by training these inhabitants in

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developmental, human and military terms to carry arms in the face of the
Israeli aggression within the framework of a legitimate organization
controlled by the Lebanese authorities concerned and compatible with the
complete defense plan.

Generally, the report says that the South needs the have border control and to
insure reconnaissance and infiltration-prevention operations with a force
consisting of a reinforced brigade stationed south of al-Litsni—Rashayya line
and a reinforced brigade stationed north of sl-Litani-Rsahayya line to
confront any possible land aggression against the south. There is also the
need to insure the engineering requirements of the operations area with a

force consisting of one field engineering battalion and to reinforce the
frontline air defense units with an air defense regiment for every brigade.
There is further the need to reinforce the coastal defenses with a number of
coastal guard boats, to reinforce anti-armor defense in the face of the enemy's
superior armors and to insure air defense for the vital utilities in the
interior, along with the need for the capability to replace three brigades by
three similar brigades and to re-station the army forces in Tyre, al-Nabatiyah,
Hasbayya and Harj'uyun.

Regarding the PLO, the report proposes coordination within the framework of

the concluded agreements, the Security Council resolutions and the Tunis summit
resolutions, within the framework of the Lebanese sovereignty and through the
Joint Arab Command which will determine the method of coordination and the

method of action in the common Arab confrontation against the Israeli enemy.

As for the other Arab countries, the military situation in South Lebanon may
make it necessary to request field support according to the development of
the battle.

Thus, in an immediate initial phase. it is necessary to complete equipping the
three mechanized brigades and to provide some of the support they require,
either in the form of in-kind aid of financial aid or in both forms. In-kind
aid is preferred in order to reduce the time required for equipping the
brigades and to save the long periods of time needed for the delivery of arms.
It is also required to strengthen the steadfastness of the southerners and to
conscript at least 6,000 southerners and then to complete the parallel plans
to reinforce the other forces. This is in addition to contributing to the
aid needed to implement the military service law that is scheduled to be
applied in order to complete the personnel and to absorb the conscripts,
beginning with the South.

The report is coupled with detailed statistical charts demonstrating the needs
for the various kinds of equipment and weapons and munitions (enough for at
least 5 days of combat). The financial aid required to build the three
infantry brigades is estimated at $900 million and the aid to implement the
military service law at $100 million as a first installment and then at $60
million annually. The aid required to train the southerners is estimated at
$50 million as a first installment and then at $25 million annually.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The report recommends that in-kind weapon aid be advanced within a period not
exceeding 1 February 1982 and that the equipment for the basic training be
supplied within a period not exceeding 1 April 1982. The report also requests
that financial aid for other defensive purposes and for the purchase of
munitions be supplied by 1 January 1982 as a maximum. The report concludes by
urging the need to bolster the international operations area, to insure the
deployment of the UN forces up to the borders and to insure stable security
by deploying the Lebanese army in the Tyre. the port, al-Nabatiyah, Arnun.
Hasbayya and Harj'uyun barracks before 15 December 1981.

A number of documents are attached to this report. The first concerns the
damage sustained by both the Lebanese and Palestinian sides as a result of

the Israeli attacks in July 1981, such as the destruction of bridges, buildings,
vital economic installations and nearly 560 homes in Beirut and the South.

The report than enumerates those killed and wounded, listing 336 Lebanese and
252 Palestinians killed and 938 and 503 Palestinians wounded in the period

from 1 December 1981 to 1 July 1981. in addition to 50 other killed and

wounded persons from various nationalities.

The second document recounts the events to which Lebanon has been exposed and
the third document is a confidential Lebanese memorandum on "the confrontation
to replace the peaceful efforts." The memorandum is based on the defense
policy approved by the Lebanese Council of Ministers on 15 March 1980 in
implementation of the army law. This policy calls for fighting the Israeli
occupation, for coordination with the Arab sisters and for abidance by the
joint Arab defense treaty, Security Council resolution No #25 (March 1978) and
by the subsequent resolutions. This document points out clearly that Lebanon
alone is shouldering the burdens of the Arab-Israeli war even though it is
not a confrontation state and is not in a legal state of war with Israel.
Lebanon is shouldering the burden because the real confrontation is confined
to what is happening on its territories in the fora of Israeli violations of
the truce agreement and of the Security Council resolutions despite Lebanon's
abidance by them and despite the Palestinian resistance's declaration of its
readiness to abide by the agreement and the resolutions, especially by the
latest actual cease-fire.

The memorandum also contains a reference to Lebanon's determination to regain
its territories and to cooperate with the Arab countries and the PLO to
safeguard its safety and unity. It also contains a reference to Lebanon's
readiness to accept all military aid, both in-kind and financial. from any
source whatsoever as long as it is not conditional and is compatible with
Lebanon's needs and plans, keeping in mind that the Lebanese defense budget
has allocated nearly 10 billion Lebanese pounds to equip the land forces in
the immediate initial phase.

The fourth supplement attached to the document is the Lebanese draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council in connection with the Israeli
attacks and published on 20 July 1981.

The fifth supplement is Ambassador Philip Habih's statement on 25 July 1981 on
suspension of the military operations. There are other supplements connected
with the report of the UN secretary general on Security Council resolution

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
No 090 (1981) and the Security Council resolution of 19 June 1981 which put
its finger on the issue of South Lebanon. The supplenents also include a
copy of resolution 490 itself, a copy of the resolutions of the second session
of the Joint Arab Defense Council which was convened at the Arab League in
Cairo on 5 February 1975. These resolutions specify the kinds of weapons
which each of Syria, Egypt. Libya and Saudi Arabia had pledged to supply to
Lebanon and the sums of money which each of Kuwait (1.89 pounds sterling),
Saudi Arabia (5 million), UAR (1.5 million) and Qatar (2 million) had pledged
to give the Lebanese Government so that it may purchase the necessary weapons.
This is in addition to another reference to an Egyptian pledge and an Iraqi
pledge for financial and reconstruction aid.

Israeli Invasion

The report concludes by asking: “bet if the cease-fire in South Lebanon breaks
down?

It answers: The official sources expect an Israeli invasion of the UN forces
operations area. After striking the Palestinian resistance, evicting the ,
southerners, occupying the South and forcing the UN forces to depart, another
west Bank will energe. The official sources also expect a penetration
operation beginning with the gap existing in the Uh forces zone and

proceeding in the direction of Jizzin and al-Shuf with the sin of expanding
the Israeli control area and of touching off an explosion in Lebanon and
another penetration operation along the Hatj'uyun-al-Biqa' axis in the
direction of al-Biqa' to threaten Syria's safety from the west and to lure the
Syrian forces operating in Lebanon into a direct confrontation which will

lead not only to touching off an explosion in Lebanon but also to an all-out
Arab-Israeli war. There is also the possibility of resunption of the war of
attrition at varying degrees of intensity, along with con-ands operations of
which the Lebanese capital itself will not be safe. This is a situation that
blocks the path in the face of any just solution to the Palestinian issue
within the framework of the United Nations. Moreover, this situation
undermines the Arab stability on the one hand and. on the other hand, wipes
out the possibilities of restoring peace to Lebanon, which is what the Arab
League is trying to do through the Arab Followup Omnnittee.

Lebanese Paper
Hhat does Lebanon propose to face all this?

It proposes five basic measures which it has submitted to the conference in a
written memorandum:

1. Urge the UN secretary general to fora a UN liaison, coordination and
documentation committee within the framework of Security Council resolution
No 688 to take charge of reinforcing the cease-fire established in accordance
with resolution No 490 in cooperation with the UN forces. the UN Observers
Connittee and the parties concerned in the South.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Insist on the full implementation of resolution No (025, including complete
Israeli withdrawal in accordance with the (19149) truce agreement, on
restoring the Lebanese sovereignty and on establishing the state's authority.

3. Assist the Lebanese army. reinforce it with the aid it needs and enable
it to gain the minimal reasonable degree of the capability to shoulder the
burdens of defense in the face of Israel.

Io. Brett all kinds of political and economic pressures to coupel the
governments concerned to implement the Security Council resolutions. to deter
Israel and to conpel it to proceed on the path of a comprehensive solution.

5. Establish a practical plan to begin reconstructing the South inediately
with the Arab funds allocated on a defensive basis—a reconstruction in which
the Lebanese army and the international organizations participate.

The Lebanese memorandum says that this plan gains its effectiveness from a
general tendency toward peace coupled with readiness for war should a war
erupt. provided that the timing of such a war is not in the hands of the
enemy and provided that there is full preparation for it while the dialogue
for peace remains open and continuous.

Therefore, a plan must be formulated to strengthen the Lebanese army and a
careful military plan must be drawn up to provide inediate field support in
case hostile Israeli operations are carried out, provided that the decision
remain in the hands of Lebanon and that a timetable be set up to work within
the framework of the UN and of bilateral and collective relations with the
countries supporting Israel.

Lebanon also proposes assessing the possibilities of an aggression. the
possibilities of movement, the means of pressure available, the possible
joint measures and the military and economic capabilities. It also proposes
assessing the objective conditions required to insure the independence of the
Palestinian decision in harmony and coordination with Lebanon's sovereignty
and with realizing peace in the South as a starting point for peace in the
area.

After reviewing a number of Arab and international resolutions concerning
Lebanon. the memorandum concludes with the working paper concerning the latest
Lebanese call for a sumit to deal with the issue of South Lebanon.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-UATAN AL-'ABABI

8494
cso: 44041175

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOROCCAN~FRBNCE RELATIONS EXAMINED
Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 259, 15-28 Feb 82 pp 8-9
[Editorial by Simon Malley: "Morocco-France: Hassan's Blackmail")

[Text] "Officers, we know what you are thinking. We are aware of your disillu-
sionment, your bitterness, your discouragement, your impatience. We also know
that some look to desperate solutions in order to try to rectify the military
situation in the Sahara and that others are even thinking of resorting to attempts
at coups in the hope of changing the economic and social situation. I know all
that and I know which ones of you are thinking along these lines. But I beg you
to have patience a little longer! I promise you that you will soon learn news of
considerable historic importance, news that will shake international public
opinion and make our country the object of the admiration and respect of all
nations in the world...."

It was substantially in these terms that King Hassan II addressed the higher
officers of the Moroccan Armed Forces (PAR) three weeks before flying to Paris,
where he was to meet with President Francois Mitterrand.

Actually, things are going very badly in the Moroccan kingdom. Not only is there
deep malaise within the army following its successive defeats at the hands of the
POLISARIO Front and as a result of its inability to crush the war of liberation
waged by the Saharan people, but neither the massive military. economic and
financial aid programmed by Washington nor the repression. torture and assassina-
tion of Moroccan patriots have succeeded in putting down a people in revolt.

President Ronald Reagan mav well have assured the Moroccan sovereign that the
United States will never let him fall. but can the kins forget the fatal destiny
of the Shah of Iran. despite the oft-repeated commitments of presidents Nixon,
Ford and Carter? When the domestic situation suddenly grew worse in Tehran,

was the American ambassador himself not personally instructed to insist that the
Shah abdicate in order to protect his life and prevent his country from being
carried away in a "radical" revolution?

The Weinbergers, Haigs, Carluccis, Wests, even the boss of the CIA, William

Casey,will proclaim in vain that Washington will never allow the "Free World"
to lose Morocco as it lost Iran. And yet, the backing and protection of an

FINI()FFIC1AJ.IEHE(NULY
FIHICHNWCJAI.USE(NHLY

administration whose imperialist, racist, war-mongering policies arouse popular
indignation are more of an obstacle than an asset to the Moroccan monarchic
regime, which heads a starving population overwhelmed by unemployment, poverty,
misery and the rapacious exploitation of the feudal lords and comprador bour-
geoisie that have tasted of the delights of corruption which they enjoy as a tee
sult of their status as the subcontractors and agents of the multinational com—
panies that are expanding throughout the country. The Moroccan people, ac-
quainted with the horrors of colonialism and the abeolutism of a decadent monar-
chv - having experienced them in person - know that it is not under the umbrella
of American imperialism that they will find freedom, democracy and prosperity.

King Hassan II therefore needed a new ”trick," another maneuver in order to gain
time, deceive his people once more, divert their attention from the evils and
suffering they endure.

Yesterday, it was -- directed against Algeria -- the holy alliance in which the
parties of the "legal" opposition became involved in the hope -- both naive and
stupid -- of "catching? the king in a war aimed at weakening him and at creating
the conditions that would lead to his ouster. In their prisons, dungeons, holes
and oblivion, those who had those thoughts are undoubtedly bitterly meditating
upon the foreseeable failure of such calculations. They have even become virtual
targets for killers at the right time, killers who have already been tested in
the "clean liquidation" of opponents deemed to be beyond hope. One must hope
that international opinion is sufficiently alert so that their lives may be safe.
Likewise, one must hope that these "opponents," whose responsibility is equally
great for the prolongation of a murderous war, will demonstrate the necessary
political courage to recognize that the king, that imitator of Guy Mollet -

who thought that by overturning President Nasser he would eliminate the Algerian
FLN - is and will remain the main enemy of his own people, the incorrigible
adversary of their rights and freedom.

The new "trick" was easily dreamed up by King Massan 11. Has he actually its
author or was the idea given to him by certain American or other advisers? What
difference could it make! The thing to remember is that the monarch thought that
the only way to capture the imagination of Moroccan and international public
opinion, now disabused and no longer believing in him or his regime, was to
repeat the "gesture" of Anwar Sadat when, to the almost general consternation of
the Arab world but to the acclamation of a Heat "astounded by the fine gesture?
he landed in Jerusalem on 19 November 1977! Naturally, it was not to Jerusalem

that the king of Morocco intended to go but to Algiers! Yes, to Algiers, with
which he had broken off diplomatic relations and against which he had ceaselessly

waged a destabilization campaign for nearly 20 years.

But in order for the Algerian Government to agree to receive him, in order that
his offer not be rejected and that a summit meeting with President Chadli Bend-
jedid take place, he needed one or more intermediaries. He first of all tried
Tunisian Prime Minister Mohamed M'Zali, who, in an interview granted to LB MONDE,
launched the idea of a Chadli-Hassan meeting. The test balloon was rapidly de-
flated by Algiers and the head of the Tunisian government backed down. The atten-
tion and efforts of royal diplomacy then concentrated on Paris.

10
F0!‘0Fil(1Al.lEﬂi(MVLV
“Imagine, if you will," the king and his emissaries hinted, "what a fine role
President Mitterrand could play if he were the sponsor of such a reconciliation!
I make no condition. I do not even ask that during my trip we discuss the Sahara
question. All I want is for Algiers to accept me. We can leave it up to destiny
to do the rest."

"Destiny" or rather, the unleashing of the psychological services of the Western
powers allied with or friends of Morocco? "Destiny" or the pressures of press
campaigns controlled, financed and inspired by the Heat and especially in the
Third world? "Destiny" or the mobilization of all those who want to save the
horoccan throne and who will exploit the event in order to emphasize the "feat"
and the "courage," the "temerity" and "shrewdness" of His Majesty? Just as they
did on the day when Sadat landed in Jerusalem and pronounced his speech in the
Knesseth.

The ploy was obvious, too obvious, so obvious, in fact, that only the naive could
be taken in by it. As if chose Moroccan sorcerer's apprentices and their insti-
gators could for a single minute believe that those statesmen or better, the
simple Algerian citizens, could be mistaken about the real meaning and under-

lying significance of the trap in which Hassan II and his allies wanted to force
them to step.

Indeed, who would not understand - in Algiers as well as among progressive
opinion groups all over the world - that by saying he was willing to go to Al-
giers, the king was pursuing a single objective: consolidating his prestige and
dealing a blow to the POLISARIO Front by sowing trouble in relations between
Algerians, Libyans and Saharans? “ho could doubt for an instant that by trying to
involve President Mitterrand in such a maneuver, he was killing two birds with

one stone? If his "initiative" should pay off, he would isolate Algiers on the
international scene and give the French chief of state a "historic" role. If it
failed, he would turn to world opinion and say: "See the sacrifice I made? But
you can do nothing with these Algerian hegemonists!"

Machiavellian? Some will say so, would say so, especially if the Moroccan sover-
eign had succeeded. But from his very first talks. he understood that President
Mitterrand had no intention of lending himself to such a plan. One cannot learn
precisely whether the king pulled the plug from the very time he submitted his
plan personally and directly to the French president. The fact is, however, that
the latter, forewarned and undoubtedly alerted by the leaders of the French
Socialist Party (who do not hide their feelings of hostility for the tyrannical
Moroccan regime), adopted a totally unambiguous attitude: keeping to strict neu-
trality in the Saharan conflict, while supporting the Saharan people's right to
self-determination. FUrthermore, he supposedly stated that he would only inter-
vene if the parties directly involved would ask him to do so. It was clear that
Francois Mitterrand had no intention of getting his fingers burned in an affair
in which world opinion is on the side of the Saharan fighters in their national
liberation struggle.

Hassan therefore failed, but he did not thereby have to lose the challenge to
the higher officers in the PAR. He could not return emptyhhanded, especially

ll
F0!1OFFH3AI.UBEGMNLY
FOIlOI‘1C1AI.USEi0NLN

given the imminence of the signing of the Algerian gas agreement that he had
futilely tried to sabotage and that was going to make Algeria a privileged partner
of France. He therefore had to give pledges to Francois Mitterrand in the hope
that the latter would not undergo the preponderant influence of the Socialist
Party, its leaders, cadres and members. A kind of blackmail thus began.

Superbly ignoring the official positions of the Arab League, Bassan II went

against the current and supported the visit by the French chief of state to Israel,
which he considers, unlike the 21 other members of the League, to be positive.
Disdaining any preliminary consultation with those involved, he promised that he
"would prevent" (sic) the Gulf states from withdrawing their funds from French

banking institutions. Peigning to ignore his military agreements with Washington
for the rehabilitation and utilization of Moroccan bases by the American Air Force

and Navy, he lied to Mitterrand, insinuating that he would be willing to reject
the political-military strategy drawn up by the Reagan administration in the

Atlantic, the Arab world and Africa if.... Totally forgetting about his support
for the Fahd Plan, he pledged not to call the Arab summit conference in Pea be-

fore Egypt's reintegration into the Arab League.

In exchange for what? For Francois Mitterrand's announcement that he would visit
Morocco before the end of 1982. That he would agree to have lunch with him at
his chateau at Bet: in 01se. That France would remain open to future efforts to
normalize relations between Rabat, Algiers and Nouakchott. That the Elysee

would abstain from contradicting the statements or plots of Moroccan spokesmen on

the results of his visit and the state of relations between the two countries in
order to give "official" Moroccan propaganda free rein.

Consequently, when the king "defied anyone to find the slightest cloud" between
him and President Mitterrand, when he asserted that Mitterrand was in perfect
agreement with him about his analysis of the Saharan conflict and the way to re-
solve it, when his spokesman and cousin Ahmed Alaoui wrote in his daily that "in
the eyes of Francois Mitterrand, Hassan II is a loyal ally who is loyal in his
commitments, honorable in his conduct and respect for his word," it was not sur-
prising that the Elysee should remain totally - although uncomfortably - dis-
creet.

0n the other hand, one can well imagine the comments of thousands of Moroccans —-

if they were free to make them -- who have suffered and continue suffer the crimes
of the tyrant in Rabat, what the parents and families of the thousands of torture

victims, those who gave their lives to defend their rights as free and dignified
men and women, think of that "loyalty," that "sense of honor," that "respect for
his word."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11,466
cso: «519/129

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
REGIME'S “All (1! mm nmmmon EXPECTED TO 38 mm
Paris AL-UATAN AL-'ABABI in Arabic No 251, 4-10 Dec 81 p 23

[Article: "Black Sunday in al-Azbakiyah; Lebanese Hours in Heart of Damascus;
Is Regine Preparing for New Round of Oppression Against Brotherhood"]

[Text] Beirut--Danascus, which has gone to Lebanon to prevent the Lebanese
war from coming to it, experienced last Sunday a storm of flames and fire in
the Lebanese style. As usual, the Muslim Brotherhood is accused. But the
dimension of the new events carries further political indications that the
flaw in the ruling political establishment is intensifying and that troubles
are accunulating in the face of the regime with all its structures. as well
as other indications.

This tine, the outcoee has been weightier than the outcose of the familiar
incidents which are summed up in clashes between Syrian patrols and groups of
opponents. It is true that the Syrian authorities have coenitted terrible
atrocities inside and outside the cities and the prisons, or the cities which
they have turned into soeething siailar to prisons. to stifle the opposition
voices. But "Black Sunday" has left official and popular circles fearful
that internal turnoil will be renewed on a large scale in the casing phase.

One hundred killed, more than 150 wounded, three buildings turned into debris
and a 3-aeter hole on a main street-theee are the outcone of the mined car
which exploded in al-Azbakiyah quarter in front of the military police
headquarters. As usual in such incidents. many popular stories are mixed
with the official reports. But the first threads of the incident itself can

be sorted as follows:

At 1130 on Sunday, an ordinary tourist car was proceeding at high speed
through the crowded Baghdad Street in the center of Damascus which separates
the city's old quarters from its new quarters. The car tries to stop in
front of the military police command. As usual in such cases, the guard on
duty proceeded toward the driver and asked his in no uncertain terns to nave
elsewhere. The driver did not obey the order and got into an argument with
the guard. intentionally seeking a clash with him. Bullets were then heard

and it is said that they were ained at the driver.

13
F0RI0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same moment, the car exploded unexpectedly through, it is assumed. the
use of an electronic control located at a close distance. when smoke
started to rise from the nearby buildings and from the police building

itself , the security forces surromded the quarter. Firefighters and
ambulances were allowed to pass. But because the ambulances were not enough.
the army was forced to send helicopters. The operation to evacuate the
casualities lasted more than 3 hours.

Liberation of Lebanon?

In Beirut, an organization calling itself the Organization to Liberate Lebanon
Bron Aliens (most probably an intelligence branch) hastened to clai-
responsibility for the incident. This organization had previously claiaed
responsibility for similar incidents in the Syrian deterrence zones and in
some Palestinian zones. But the Syrian media, which have shown the incident
with all its ugliness, have hastened to accuse the Muslim Brotherhood. This
accusation has been interpreted to mean two things: First. to undermine the
size of the internal national opposition by depicting it as no more than
religious opposition and, second, to prepare the ground for a new round of
oppression against the Brotherhood itself by preparing the domestic and
foreign public opinion for such a campaign.

Because it hasn't yet been proven whether the Organization to Liberate Lebanon
From Aliens exists or not. the assumption that a certain Lebanese circle is
the one which carried the latest operation in Damascus continues to be present.

War Against Brotherhood

The Syrian authorities had previously accused the Muslim Brotherhood of being
responsible for the explosion aimed against the headquarters of the Soviet
experts in Damascus last October. The Soviet TASS agency contributed to this
accusation. The explosion in the Soviet headquarters was previously one of
four announced explosions witnessed by Damascus in the past a months. The
first of these explosions occurred at the government headquarters. the second
at the headquarters of the air forces command and, the third at the military
police headquarters. By reviewing the four incidents. it is noticed that they
have been aimed against sites that are presumably the safest in the Syrian
capital. This means that those who take part in or carry out these operations
are not far from the ruling Syrian "house!"

The persistent question is: Will the war between Damascus and the Brotherhood
be resumed?

The answer is most probably "yes." The years 1979 and 1980 witnessed a series
of pursuits and successive operations between the Muslim Brotherhood and the
special forces entrusted with protecting the Syrian regime and the ruling
family. The oppression exercised by the authorities in Bamah. Aleppo and Home
at the end of last year and the first quarter of this year resulted in the
death of at least 3,000 elements of the special guard and of the opposition.
In June 1980, Syrian President Bafiz al-Assd was exposed to an assissination
attempt in which a hand grenade was thrown in his direction in the middle of

1h
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a street. In the wake of the attenpt, the president issued a law providing
for the execution of any Syrian belonging to the Muslin Brotherhood
organization. however. the law pardons those neubers who surrender to the
authorities before 27 August 1980. Official Syrian sources say that 700
nenbers of the Huslin Brotherhood surrendered before that date and that the
war against this organization ended with the end of last year.

But "Black Sunday," regardless of whether created by the Brotherhood or by
the regime itself with the purpose of pursuing the Brotherhood. means that
the Syrian opposition is growing in a nanner that threatens the ruling

establish-ant from within and from outside and that the coming phase in Syria
will not be a call: one.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Ala-HAT”! AL-‘ARABI

8494
080: 440M175

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

HAHN! mam SAID TO PRESAGE REGDE'S DENISE
Paris Ala-WAT»! Alr'ARABI in Arabic N o 263, 26 Feb-lo Mar 82 pp 25-26

[Unattributed article: "Damscua at the Day of Reckoning. Syrian Regime Under
Oxygen Tent"]

[Text] Is llamah cal-‘1 The official sprian cos-eat issued by the Ministry of
Information last Monday—the only col-lent on the bloody events in 20 days-
said that everything had becoae quiet by the end of the week and that inter-
rogations of the accused were continuing. Statements by the Syrian opposition
confirm that couplete sections of the city were destroyed before it became
"caln." While Washington and the Western media remain mysteriously quiet,
diplomatic reports which have arrived in Paris and other European capitals

in the last few days indicate that the Syrian regime, which regained the upper
hand by force, is only left with options of force on a huge scale in the near
tern a: both the donestic and foreign levels if it seriously wants to avoid
being overthrown in a civil war.

A long period will pass before all the circumtances that caused events in
Hsmah to explode are revealed and before the nunber of victims who fell in
[government] operations using heavy weapons is revealed. These operations were
such as an Arab city has never known before, excepting some in the Lebanese
war, under various conditions of relations between a regime and its people.

Yet a Long tine will not pass before repercussions of the ﬂamsh massacre are
felt on the entire Syrian domestic scene because any military dictatorship,
regardless of how such it exaggerates in striking popular uprisings, is a
candidate for decay from within, though it be a silent decay not expressed by
the media due to official censorship of information.

In any case, there is a consensus among strategic political observers in all
Arab and foreign capitals that the Syrian rsgiu has lost, for the first tine
since its inception, its inpregnability which up until now has formed its
protective ultrella. These observers also agree that the Syrian role in Leban-
on and its temporary continuation have become prime candidates for basic
reconsideration in light: of the evaluation by officials themelves of the
events of the last 2 months, events which are naturally linked to the size of
the internal opposition, and not to interference by intelligence organizations

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
froa either side. The Syrian regine—cnd this is well-known-has depended
since it was established on direct Soviet support and hidden American support.
These two types of support are what has ensured, until now, conditions for
[Syria's] survival, at the expense of thousands of victims from among the
Syrians as well as the Palestinians and Lebanese. Since the battles of Hal-ah
the regine itself has entered a stage of increased dependence. It now needs
intravenous feeding and oxygen bottles more than it needs the help of intell-
igence agencies or oppressive weapons. For no intelligence agency, no matter
how effective, can undermine any third world power which enjoys firm popular
support.

Before the full "harvest of Banah" is reaped on the domatic and foreign levels

in Syria, there are five significant spontaneous conclusions which must be
drawn:

1) The Arab and Islamic reaction to what transpired in Syria was not, in any
capital, syspathetic with the Syrian Government. The Syrian leadership is
isolated regionally and internationally due to a hunter of sociological, poli-

ticsl and economic factors which, in the end, are sufficient to cause a domes-
tic eruption.

2) The massacres which were perpetrated in Bamah and other Syrian cities
removed the last fig leaf covering the Syrian regime's genitals and revealed
the truth to various international and Islamic organizations concerned with
human riguts. The issue today is not a natter of searching for the "missing"
in the darkness of Syrian jails, but rather one of searching for the "legality"
of the Syrian regime itself and its right to survive under international law
and accepted [human] rights agreements.

3) Syrian adherence to Soviet strategy and the manuevering it practices within
the context of this adherence vis-a-vis Ansricsn is something which cannot
continue. There are demands which have become clear, which cannot be delayed
and which the Syrian regime must answer to since it has lost the majority of
the "trump cards" which it had to play in the past.

to) The infection which spread to the Syrian deterrent forces in Lebanon and

cause the clashes in Tripoli in northern Lebanon to erupt is another indica-

tion that the internal make-up of the Syrian army is not healthy. It is also
an indication that this army, which the regime attenpts to clothe in sectar-

ian garb, is ripe for an uprising or perhaps a series of uprising before set-
tling on a final formula based on national pan-Arab concepts of utilizing the
military establishment for mre than just to serve the narrow internal poli—

tical goals of one falily.

Four Thousand

Let us return to Hamah to say that Western sources estinate that the nurber of
civilian victims of the clashes is 6,000 dead while the number of military dead

is estimated at 1000 from among those who were charged with quelling the popular
uprising.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The veracity of this nulber can be demonstrated by a recent statement issued
by the "Islamic Revolutionary Conand in Syria" and by stories carried by Arab
and foreim newspapers about people who escaped from the encircled city.

ing were: the northern part of 8 March street, both sides of which were total-
1y destroyed; the Hatiyir district; and the 'Alamin district. Military opera-
tions destroyed four mosques, felled the large clock tower building as well

as the government residence building, destroyed houses along both sides of the
'Alamin district and a mater of houses in the Bayadah quarter and the Mahatah
quarters. Seventy tanks and pieces of equipment were destroyed, as were the
'Abaysi bridge and the mayor's hone. All the defense cowany centers were
shelled, and these include the Kalb stmt center, the national hospital center
and the municipal playing field center.

The statement also said that the nayor of Hamah's brother was one of the vic—
tim as well as Abu—‘Umar Tallas, the nephew of Major General Hustafa Tallas,
the Syrian sinister of defense. He worked as a supervisor at the central tele-
phone exchange. Also among the victims was "Uthnan 'Addi, chairman of the youth
of the revolution. Those who escaped from the defense coIpany centers were
forced to take refuge in the al-Baytari mdical college where they were pursued.
The total extent of the killing and plundering has not yet been detersrlned.

American and British newspaper reports say that Syrian tanks eliminated entire
sections of the~city and that tanks supported by artillery and forces nunbering
an estimated 12,000 along with party militia and intelligence agents turned
the old section of the city into rtbble. After 2 weeks of fighting the odor
of dead bodies was per-eating the city and government forces were opening fire
on anything that moved.

Rescue Fla-ah

As with other Syrian cities the "infection of llamah" spread last week to the
Lebanese city of Tripoli. There were about 100 dead and injured in clashes
between the deterrent forces and the public as well as internal clashes within
the deterrent forces.

The "Hid'ler Security Comittee" was activated to strengthen the cease-fire,
which had broken down three successive times, in cooperation with political
parties in the city, the Palestinian resistance and the leadership of the
deterrent force. Lebanese security reports indicated, however, that the city
was still brinning with runners and that graffiti and placards had been spread
thromout the city calling for the "rescue of Hauh."

Other reports say that the events in Tripoli began as a result of division
in the ranks of the deterrent force itself, one side wanting to go to Hamah
to help the rebels there, and the other side trying to thwart this effort.

.18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
opposition carried out an operation in the heart of Damascus. One of the rebels
took a car carrying a large package of dynamite into the Ministry of Informa-
tion building which is used for the shipment and distribution of the newspaper
AL-BA'TH. It exploded, causing a great deal of daaage to the building and
leaving 76 dead and 135 wounded. The operation was intended to punish and warn
the Syrian propaganda apparatus, which promotes the regim domestically and
abroad and which covered up the clashes of Hannah and the massacre perpetrated
there by the government.

Reactions

Reactions to the events in Syria have spread through the various world capitals,
particularly the Islamic ones. The International Islamic Omission for Hum
Rights chaired by former Algerian President Ahmed Ben Bella has condemed

the "collective annihilation carried out by the Syrian regime's special for-

ces and defense cowanies."

A letter signed by the secretary general of the Islamic front in Syria, Mam-
aad Abu—al-Nasr al-Bayanuni and addressed to Ben Bella indicated that Syrian
forces had blockaded the city for 3 weeks andﬁnad boabed it with planes. heavy
artillery and missiles. The letter implored other huaan rights organizations
to bear, along with the Islamic commission. "its responsibility in defending
the persecuted people of Syria against their executioners and to fora delega-
tions to enter Hannah and look into the practices and acts of the regime against
the defenseless public.

Acting for the commission, which he chairs the former Algerian president sent
a long letter to the Syrian president affirming the conission's concern over
what was taking place in Syria and condeaing it for the undemocratic authori-
tarian and violent way in which the regime quelled the public's riglts.

The letter said that it was not acceptable for Syria, which rests on a rich
heritage of spiritual and hunane civilizations, to carry out the likes of this
terrible tragedy. The letter also called for the withdrawal of the regime's
forces and the release of political prisoners including the former president
Nur-al-Din al—Atasi, Major General Salah Jadid, Yusuf Za'in and tens of other
previous leaders who have been arrested. The letter also called on the regime
to restore respect to the basic human rights of humans and citizens in Syria.

Has Damascus entered the great day of reckoning? The weeks ahead will have
the answer.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL UATAN Al. ARAB]:

cs0: “04/363

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TUNISIAN SOLUTION T0 PROBLEMS COULD 32 noon. FOR OMS
Paris JBUNB AFRIQUE in Frmch No 1103, 24 Feb 82 p 28
[Connentary by Habib Boulares: "A 'Tunisian Model'?"]

[Text] Nearly 13 years ago, Tunisia reversed its economic policy. In
September 1969 suddenly abandoning the policy consisting of generalizing
the establishment of cooperatives in trade and especially in agriculture,
Tunisia embarked on a liberal course.

Mr Ahmed Ben Salah, responsible for the economy in the 1960's, paid dearly
for it. Arrated, prosecuted and sentenced to 10 years imprisonment in
1970, he escaped in 1973 and has been living in exile in Europe ever since.
In the following years, the new prime minister, Hr Hedi Nouira, greatly
advanced a liberalism that allowed bold businessmen and many parasites to
prosper. The parvenus in the industrial sector and especially those in

the service sector became the target of criticisms, and the real differences
in incomes caused reactions among the working classes, which were exaggerated
by the feeling of frustration of one group and the ostentatious behavior

of the other.

What is happening in Tunisia is not unique, and many countries in the Third
World have gone or are going through this delicate phase during which the
passage from a state of need to that of relative well-being is accompanied
by an exacerbation of social conflicts. These conflicts becone serious when
the state brings to bear the whole weight of its apparatus to silence the
demands and at least gives the impression to be on the side of the wealthy
against the frustrated even if, academically, it can justify its step
because of the need to consolidate a national capital able to take up the
challenge of underdevelopment.

The attack on Gafsa in January 1980, by a cot-lands group coming from Libya
via Algeria, was certainly an act of aggression conceived outside of Tunisia.
This drama, however, was only possible, and the Tunisians did not doubt this
for a moment, because of the political and social deterioration of the
internal situation. Hr Mohamed Hzali who succeeded Hr Nouirs did not fail

to insist on the urgent need to reduce the differences between the classes
and the regions of the country. After a relative quiet, marked by a gradual

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

normalization of relations between the government and the unions, the social
tensions, which reappeared 3 months ago, have become more an‘. more unbear-
able. The feeling of frustration is aggravated by real differences between
the different activity sectors and by the disappointment caused by the
setback suffered by the political democratization process during the
elections of 1 November 1981. From this to saying that the actual strikes
also take on a political dimension is a short step quickly taken by many
Tunisians. It seem evident that social and political partners are eabarking
on a dead end course in Tunisia. Not to meet the legitimate social demands
is to face the risk of letting tensions degenerate into clashes. To meet
all demands makes sense only if both the policy of development and the
administrative structures of the national economy are radically modified.

It also seems that the time has come to gather around the table not only to
representatives of the production forces but also the representatives of
the political trends to start a broad exchange of ideas on the theme that
is the min point of all these fragmentary debates, namely: "The position
of the worker in a developing society."

The answer that Tunisia could give to this crucial question would contribute
to avert the troubles that threaten it by bringing about a minimum national
consensus. The answer could also serve as an example, since these diffi-
culties are comon to numerous countries that are trying to balance the
imperatives of egalitarianism and the requirements of the returns on invest-
ments. The answer is still within reach as long as the forces that face
one another have organizations that can speak for them. It will be purpose-
less if the conflicts degenerate into confusion. This is not excluded and
it would be a pity.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

C50: [619/142

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
men's “MIMTHG HEALTH, 80003881“ mm
Patio AL-Iﬂm AL-‘AIAII in Arabic No 258. 22-28 Jan‘ 82 pp 24-25

lzrticle: "Bourgui a to Mieia: 'You Are based at Ky Illneee--‘1'he Anazing Thing
Ie My Good liealth'ﬂ

/ch§/ The increaeing burden of illneee on aabib Bourguiba ie provoking anxiety
anong mnieiane at a critical period which ie marked by internal eocial tenaion
and tha difficult circmatancee the Maghreb ia going through ee a coneequence of
the Sahara conflict and Libya'e radical policiea.

(hoe again, Preeident nabib Bourguiba, 79, her beco-a accuetoned to illnaee. To-
day he ie in the United Statee for nadical anelyaea and exaninetione in mneroue

hoepitale and eenatoriuae in Philadelphia and tlorida, in which a umber of najor
American doctore are taking part.

Acconpenying bite on hie trip are hie wife, nee Hajda Vaeeile, and hie foreign nin-
ieter, Hr Beji Ceid ee-Sebei, who will be holding inortant convereetiona with
Anarican officiale bearing on the general eituetion in the Middle Seat, develop-
nente in the Maghreb, bilateral reletione between the two countriee, and runieia‘e
role in the area in the foreeeeable future. in the light of probable donaetic
Tunieian dwelopnente.

'l'he preeidential declaration ieeued Monday ll January acknowledged the preeident'e
delicate phyeicel condition and etated that it required the utmoet reet and care.

‘l‘hie acknowledgment ie in keeping with the official tendency to inform the people

of the etate of the preeident'e health. in order to foraetall runor and goeeip.

Anxiety over Preeident Bourguibe'e health hae afflicted renior officiele einca
laet November. 0n the few occeeiene when he baa appeared or talked at public cel-
ebratione, he hae eeened to be euffering fro- a difficulty in epeaking. The lat-
eet official declaration pointed out that the preeident wee euffering fron a
ewollen inflametion in the gua and jaw, eccqenied by pain in the right hand.

The fecte, which are no eecret to the Mieiane, are that Preeident Bourguiba hat
a long hietory of etruggling with illneae, owing to hie euffering during the period
of the fight for independence. the exhauetion reeulting free: hie grave reeponeibil-
itiee in the 26 yeare that have elapeed eince runieia'e independence, and hie

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

advanced age. Hith hill. the words of our Arab post. "You are amazed at ny illness--
the amazing thing is my good health" holds true.

In spite of that, very few people indeed know specifically what President Bourgiba's
illness is. The most likely thing, though. is that he has been suffering since

1967 from heart problems in the fern of a gradual hardening of the arteries and a
disturbance in the circulatory systsn. In 1975 he started suffering fron a nervous
ailment which he hinsalf has spoken about at tines, saying that it sometimes keeps
hill from sleeping for days at a tins.

President Bourguiba's health problems have made hin an almost permanent customer

of fauna European apes, especially in France and Switzerland. In addition, he

has regularly been visited at his official residence in the Carthage Palace by a
number of famous European an. Anerican doctors. During his latest v.’ sit to the
United States. he stopped in Paris for 68 boners, where he held quick medical con‘
sultstions with his French doctors.

It is no secret. either, that health problans have proapted President Bourguiba to
follow a careful program in his diet activity and treatnent, and to be extremely
sparing in the tins he allots to pursuit of his official responsibilities. achiever,
at the sense tine. he has snared all observers with hie exceptional ability to hold
himself together and surmnt theee troubles. Today, after King Busayn, among Arab
rulers, he has seniority in tenure, while illness has caused preeidente younger
than him. such as his Algerian neighbor the late president aweri Boeneadiana, to
pass away.

from the country tone at a stage which is of utnost inportanca for this small Arab
country. Although the president's intervention in the details of everyday politi-
cal and official life has diminished, he still doninates the general course of
hanisian politics through the force of hie personality, hie hietoric stature, and
hie broad powers in a manner that no one disputes. Consequently. his decisions,
which are not subject to preview or change by any body besides him, always leave a
strong mark on the course of events, domestic affairs and ‘Iunieia'e Arab and inter-
national relations.

The reason for ‘l‘unisia's anxiety is that the president's teaporary or permanent
absence will leave a large political vacum. and vacuum with the people. especi-
ally cinca bourguibe has no known successor. In recent years he himself has pre-
vented the emergence of power centers in the govern-ant and party and has withheld
his blessings and endorsement of the succession of any of his senior aides and
party leaders.

Perhaps President Bourguiba, as a farsighted statesman, through past experience
with people and his assistants, in failing to designate a particular person to
succeed hin, has the sin of having power invested and delivered in a quiet nanner
through legitimate and constitutional channels, after a long life, and then of
leaving it up to the people to choose the right person.

Adding to the mnisiens' anxiety for the future is the fact that the domestic sit-
uation is characterized by sons of the negative manifestations of features of

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
development in the third world. There ie aocial and political teneion ariaing
fro- the fact that all thinga change with ti. while the ruling institution contin-
uee to etand on the firm fomdetione on which it waa eatabliahed cloae to a quart.
er century ago: political and raligioua currente and trende have riaen to pronin-
ence that are totally at variance with the philoaophy of the Deetourian Socialiat

Party, in ite doeeatic policy and applicationa of it or in their view of Tuniaie'e
role on the Arab and international ataga.

The najority of young people atand in bewilderment in the ease of auch contradic-
tione, and the ruling party. in epita of ite attqte to liberalize itaelf, haa
not, by the edniaaion of officials, acco-aodatad all the young peopla‘a powara and
activitiea. Meanwhile other oppoeitior currente and trenda are in a atate of

great diviaion and fragmentation. depriving then of the ability to abaorb and ac-
co-Iodata the new generationa.

Pro- the economic atandpoint. while the liberalization policy followed in the
aaventiea led to the flowering of the bourgeoia claaa. a quarter of the population
atill livea below the internationally-recognized poverty level. There ia ll. per-
cent unenloynent in the labor force, and 30 percent of the uneqloyed are young
people under 30. Inﬂation ia riaing, eapecially with reepect to baaic couodi-
tiea; the country'e phoephate, oil and olive oil reeourcee are not enough to cope

with inert require-ante, and the balance of pay-enta deficit conea to about $1
billion a year.

The decade of the aeventiee opened Maia up to foreign inveatnent. which wee in-
deed auccaaaful in eatabliehing induatriee and providing job opportmitiea; how-
ever, France, in particular, cloaed the doora once again in the lid-awentiea to
inorta from Miaia, and the criaia of receaaion returned.

There ia an urgent need for rapid economic referee, and the current cabinet of

Mr Mohamed Hazali is aware of thie. Three quartera of texea are indirect and de-
volve upon the working claaaee. Poraign inveatnent met be directed toward agri-
culture, houaing and the fight ageinat inflation and unenploynent inatead of being
confined to touriat aervicea or eeey projects with a guaranteed rapid payout in
the inveatore who benefit.

The circmatancea the whole Heghreb ia going through are aleo a aourca for anxiety.
mnieia haa alwaya been a factor for peaceful coexiatence eeong aocially and
politically different reginee which haa inarted a practical coloring to the alogan
of Haghreb unity. aere ia where ‘mniaia'a awarenaaa of the dangera of the atruggle
in the Sahara and Preaidant al-Qadhdhaffi'a advanturee in the area coeee in.

The attainment of a cart of reconciliation between Morocco and Algeria has been
one of the perennial objectivea of Tuniaian policy. It appeare that Mr Heali re-
cently participated in quiet diplonetic afforte ained at the attainment of recon-
ciliation between the two fraternal countriea and that he haa not caaaed offering
Libya an olive branch, in apita of ite poeition, which ie not underetood here,
and recently reeulted in depriving Tuniaia of unbarahip in the Arab organization
«PIC. The Tuniaiane aapire to a rapid aolution to the problan of the deter-ina-
tion of the continental offahore ahelf in territorial watara eo that they can an»
ploit oil and gaa reaourcee.

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

While Tunisia's Arab role has been steadily growing, because of its acco—odation
of the League of Arab States and its solid relations with conservative countries,
its relations with the West are marred by arguments on econonic «meetions. especi-
ally with France. l‘here is a feeling that Maia is in greater need of assistance
to alleviate its econonic crisis and dispel the causes of social tension than of a
flow of modern weapons, on the prdse that ‘runisia's stability is connected more

to its econonic progress than to the development of its defence and security
systeu.

(I: this point specifically there is consensus among political leaders that develop-
nants of the arned forces in the event of President Bourguiba's departure will pave
the way for probable interference by the arny in politics and that unisia will

succub to the vicious circle of the military that has iqaired the future of a
large nuaber of third world cmntrias.

The Tunisian constitution itself is not totally clear on determining how the pres-
ident is to be chosen. It stipulates that in the event of resignation, total dis-
ability or death the prime ninister will assus the position until the electoral
term of the National Assembly ends, when a new president will be elected.

On the basis of this constitutional provision, lir Hohamsd Hzali is in line to as-
sums the tasks of the presidency, in View of his position as prime minister. Pro-
ceeding from that, ‘runisians are nonitoring Hzeli's domestic and foreign policies
closely and are studying the features of his personality in order to become sequent-
ad with the nan who say someday batons president of the country and make sure that
he will guarantee then the relative stability they have known in Bourguiba's era.

Duali's personality endears him to people and to adore of the opposition. lie is
calm, modest, an experienced administrator and a well-educated graduate of the
Philosophy Department of the trench Sorbonne University. He nade his way up in
adninistration as a teacher, a youth and sports director, and a radio and tele-
vision director. then moved about in various ninisterial positions until he became
prime minister in 1980. '

Hzali is the loyal son of the ruling institution; he is the product of its think-
ing and attitudes and he believes in the distinctive particular Tunisian character,
in its Islamic Arab context. Hence his support for Arebication, through his nega-
zine Ill-Pm, which he has been issuing for nor: than a quarter century.

Hsali's failure to be zealous in expressing his party affiliations has made him
acceptable to other political and social currents and he has friends in the religi-
ous current and the labor unions and anong eqloyers. his relations with ‘l‘unisien
intellectuals in particular and with intellectual and cultural currents in the
Arab world in general are also strong.

Hzali occupies a prominent position alongside his official one; he is the secretary
general of the ruling Destourian Socialist Party. however, some observers say that
some wings of the party personnel are opposed to the liberal policy of openness
that he has followed and to his call for party and political pluralisn to end the

single-party monopoly.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
However. Hzeli coneolideted hie poeition in the petty when he gdled on chelleng-
ing the oppoeition in free generel electione. He won the gable when ell the op-

poeition pertiee feiled in ﬂowed»: to obtein e eingle eeet in perlienent end the
Deetourien Petty won 96.6 percent of the votee.

however, while the election victory eupported hie poeition in the party, it hed
little effect on the oppoeition currente' View of hie cell for liberelieetion.
which node the- douht the eerioueneee of the perty'e liberel policy.

In epite of ell thet, Heeli etill ie e fector for peece, concord end etebility
both within the perty. eince hie cebinet includee repreeentetivee of verioue tend-
enciee, end within the nein oppoeition currente, which coneider hi- to be e poei-
tive fector for dielomse, which Neeli hee elweye been euioue to etreee. Since
eeeunins hie poeition, he hee been eet on introducing chengee into the policy of
hie predeceeeor Hedi louire; he hee linited the epreed of the influence end power
of bueineeenen, hee ellowed the uergence of new pepere, hee cerriod out legio-
letive electione, end hee entered into e netionel front with the Generel mnieien
l'ederetion of Lebor (wortere' unione) in e netionel front which ren in the elec-
tione in the fece of the other oppoeition currente.

In reeponu to criticien, Heeli eeye, "Pereonelly I wented to eee tone oppoeition
nenbere win eeete in perlienent. but it wee not in ny power to help then." He then
eeeerted, in e televieion interview. "Plurelien will continue end grow in Mieie
fro. now on end "the oppoeition thet took pert in the electione ie recouired in
tect, end I do not rule out the poeeibility thet in deye to cone Proeident hmgnihe
ney decide to recognize theee orgenieetione, which ere pereitted now."

Other hence Preeentayd

the fect thet meli'e none ie being circuleted vigorouely ee e cendidete to eucceed
Preeident Bourzuibe doee not keep one fron eeyin; thet other ne-ee hove been reieed;

if they hewe not been reieed ee vigorouely, eurprieee end new dewelopnente cen gen-
erelly pley e role in nettere of thie eort.

In eny event. there ere proninent pereonelitiee in the heert of the ruling arseni-
eetion. Hr hunji ll Keeli hee etood out eince hie reeisnetion fron hie einieteriel
poeition, when he denended nore flexibility in deelins with the Generel Mieien
Pederetion of Lebor. a. returned on director generel of the perty ee e eucceeeor
to Mr “oh-ed Seyeh. leeder of the herd-line wing.

There is Beji Ceid ee-Sebei, ninieter of foreign effeire, who returned to the perry

fold efter e ehort period of cooperetion with Mr Ahned Heetiri, leeder of the hove-
nent of Demcretic Socieliete.

In eddition, there ere Driee Guise, reher helkhoje, rich-ed Seyeh. Hebib Manila
Jr end I‘eieb Beccouche, eecretery generel of the Generel Meien lederetion of
Lebor.

Outiede the ruling orgenieetion, there ie All-ed Heetiri. who pleyed e eejor role
in the perty end in power towerd the end of the eixtiee end the eerly eeventiee.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

then use definitively test out in 19% when he worked es s lewyer end issued the
newspeper AL-wanm, which he turned into the orgen of the Moment of De-ocret-
ic Socielists.

liestiri seys thet his novenent in fighting for greeter liberelisn end independence
in the lsbor union novel-sot end for inlentetion of e system of petty plurelisn.
lie elso cells for essertion of the mnisien identity, like his for-er tolleegues
in the ruling perty.

Among these people, there ere others who night not betas cendidetes for the presi-
dencybut could by virtue of their stetus end centrelity pley e greet role in sup-
porting end betting one cendidete or snother. Among th- perheps ere Hejde ﬂessile
end Mr llsbib Achour. cheirnen of the lunisien Generel Pederetion of Lebor.

Mejde vessile, beceuse of the stetus she enjoys thrmgh her husbend end her sociel
end politicel interests. pleys en influentiel role in Tunisien public life end
events. elthough she hes elweys stressed thet she hes no politicel eisitions end
seys thet the only thing thet concerns her is the future end stebility of runisie
end its young people end the role of mnisien worsen. She hes sons reservetions
ebout the notion of perry pluralisn.

Hr Achwr ney perheps heve been e strong cendidete for the presidency were it not
for his ego; he is over 70. Achour hes linked his trede union struggle with thet
of his old fried Bourguibs, end his lsbor leedership went under the bsnner of the
single perty efter independence in 1956.

However. thet hes not inhibited the energence of disputes between hie end the re-
gins, which heve csused his: to drew close to end beck ewey fro- the circles of de-
cision-sting. This dispute reeched its peek during the Generel Lebor Pederetion's
protest egeinst Hedi Nouire's policies in the seventies . then the bloody clssh
with the euthorities in 1978, his eppeerence in person st triel. his sentencing to
prison, then the reduction of the sentence end his releese lest yeer, when he was
permitted to return to the presidency of the federetion.

Thus Achour. by virtue of his lebor leedership end the historic ective role the
lebor noveaent enjoys in the country, could pley the role of "kingmker" when the
time tones to choose.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL'R'ATAN AL-'ARABI

l 1887
080: 4506/ 196

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm Dismisses m nnmrtc stars
Perle AL-HAIAN AL-‘Auu in Arabic in Arabic No 258, 22-28 Jan 82 DD 25, 25

IZrtlcle by Florence Ie‘d: "Hob-ed Hall to AL-UA‘l'Al AL-‘AIABI: A Second Per
Before Next Junej/ .

[1085/ The 'l‘unieien prlne ulnieter. Hob-nod lull, upecte that the next Arab eu-
Iit conference will be held in the city of For next Hey. He erpreeead thie predic-
tion to AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘AIAII at a neetlng it held with hie in Perle. lie eleo dealt
with a Ina-her of new develop-ante on the Arab and lnternatlonel etagee.

I
In hie lateet vieit to France, the Melee prine einleter. “oh—ed Mull, held a
eeriee of neetinge with eenior French oﬂiciale, noet coneplcnonely hie neetlng
with the French preeltlent, Prentoie Hitterrand, and the prime minister, Pierre
heuroy.

The importance given to Mr Huh-ed heeli'e wieit to trance, which took no note than
26 houre, can be attributed to the role Mela ie anticipated to play in Frence'e
reletione with the haghreb coImtrlee and in the canton of the niddle beat.

The visit ie not the tiret contact between eociellet France end the tunicien gov-
erment. Hzeli previouely net with Preeident Hittarrend laet 5 hove-her and Premier
Pierre Heuroy ie aleo preparing to vleit Mela next lo Nov-tar.

AL-HAI'AN AL-‘AIABI hee learned tron circlae on both eidee that trance'e relations
with the Maghreb countriee and the ulddle Beet criele were the noet inortant tub-
jacte diecneeed in the talke. Juet before hie trip to Perle. hull eaid "rho
Heghreb cen play a big role in relatione between France and the Arab worl .” lie
aleo refrained tron all criticlen ol the trench poeitlon on the Hiddla ﬂeet. con-
eidering that French policy “nltieetely hee the goal of the eetabliehent of a
.Paleetinien etate on the ﬂeet Bank and the Gaza Strip."

He net with Preeier mall and put a umber of queetlone to hi- on the reenlte of
hie diecueelone with the French party and the neat recent dmlopnente on the
Arab etege.

/§ueetiog7 European and Arab public opinion,hevlng tollowad the marl-ant in
pluralien, hae drawn negative conclneione {alluring the diecloenre of the election
reenlte. What le your evaluetion of thie erperleent‘l

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Ensueﬂ That is now an old issue.

/§uestiog7 But we in mum Al-‘MI have criticised what took place, and we ere
interested in knowing your opinion on the subject.

lgnswegl the iQortant thing about the elections that took place in Meta is the
new state of affairs daodiad first in the existence of a recognized opposition
party. the Communist Party, and than in the presence of such active new organiza-
tions as the Unity of the People (teqorery board), and the D-ocratic Socialists.
Then, in the past, there was no question that opposition newspapers would be issued
while today the number of opposition papers in french and Arabic exceeds the number
of regine papers.

we respected the law on the democratic gene in the course of the elections and nade
good on all the pronisas we nade regarding the election canaign, in terns of giving
people equal tine to appear on television and talk on the radio. The citizens saw
opposition candidates discuss their ideas, opinions and alternative policies. Not
only that, but they criticised an! condo-ted without censorship. I do not think
this sort of thing exists in countries of the third world or the Arab countries.

I also believe that our organization (the Rational l'ront), which includes leaders
fro. the Destourian Party. which is present everywhere and has its traditions,’ its
public, and a history of 50 years of existence, alongside the Tunisian General
l'aderstion of Labor. the Federation of hloyers, the Ho-ens' Pederation, and sons
independents, has reduced the chances of the other organizations.

what one east say is that we embarked on the electoral caapaign with zeal and have
made rapid achievslasnts in a year and a half and in all fields. I can stress that
in nunerical tern no opponent obtained enough votes to entitle hi- to win.

l§uestiog7 Does that neon that the assdly will renain as it wee?

lénsweg/ Personally I do not believe so. there are numerous political forces in
the front. First, there are the labor forces. represented by 27 deputies; the
secretary general of the Labor Federation declared before the elections that would
constitute a bloc of voters. There is also a bloc of independents who have ex-
pressed their opinions noet seriously and frankly in a discussion on the current
general budget. Moreover, the door is not closed to recognition of the other
organizations for the next 5 years.

Hy conviction is that politics is always characterized by dynanisn. There is a
possibility that these organizations will be recognized, and I believe that we
have taken an advanced step along the road to liberalization and progress, can-
bining socialisn, which is the resistance of exploitation for the sake of respect
for nan, and denocracy, which neans addressing oneself to freedoen and dignity
without succubing to the uneven process we see in awe countries or slipping into
the political frsgnentetion which is the prelude to foreign intervention and chaos.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
misia and France

[Questing] It has been observed that sonsthing akin to a revolution has occurred in
relations between France and the Maghreb cantries. The France of Giscard was
closer to Morocco while the France of Hitterrand is drawing close to Algeria,
Polisario and Libya at the expense of its relations with liorocco. Where does
Innisia stand in these relations?

lgnswazl First one must note that relations between trance and Morocco have not
gotten worse in President hitterrand‘s tern; the King of morocco is going to visit
Paris shortly. trance-Algerian relations were not in decline in the previous
period; although they were characterised by sue stagnation, rresidant nitterrend's
visit to Algeria eli-inated mch misunderstanding.

‘mnisian-Prench relations are good and their foundations are being deepened in the
cultural and econonic contexts. Ue recently signed a cultural, scientific and
technical cooperation protocol. the text of the protocol specifies the tasks
which Inst be carried out in various cultural, technical and scientific fields.
Attention is being concentrated on the issue of determining the technical fields
to receive priority and prograldng within the sixth development plan. Agreenent
has also been reached on the subject of grants and exchanges of visits betwen
university personnel and artists and preparation of joint progr-s. Agreement has
also been reached on the subject of pronoting the Arabic language and seeking to
pronote the foundations of Arab civilization. the preferred inatruent for
activities of this sort will be the Inczituta of the Arab World, which will soon
open in Paris.

A mnisian-Prench agreement for the eatablisI-ent. use and maintenance of an under-
saa cable counsnications system between Misia and trance has also been signed.

That is the third of its kind; it will be ready in 1983 and will contain 280 lines
in addition to the 600 existing ones.

A Suanit inHey

l§uestiog7 have the recent inter-Arab contacts reached a point which can per-it
the setting of a fixed date for the second Per su-it? "hat is unisia's official

position on these efforts?

lénswegl I have already declared 'mnisia's official position in this regard. this
nay be smarirad as agreement on the unification of Arab ranks behind a united
initiative which would be an alternative to Cu David. Prince Fahd preeented his
initiative at the first axe-it. however, this initiative will not becons a
practical plan until the Arab sm-it endorses it, even if that is done by editing
and rounding out soee aspects of the plan. At the Baghded St—it, an agreement
was nsde that we would not present individual country plans. but rather a nation-
wide one. and I think that inter-Arab contacts have helped eliminate sue obstacles
in the way of this initiative by developing sons of its sections to allow for an
invitation to a second nesting in la: in the nonth of Hey or June.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lguestiogl Day after day Beirut is turning note and more into a ceastary of dip-
lo-ate, from the American ambassador Malay (1975) to the trench .basaedor Dal-are
(1980), (rm the Iraqi embassy disaster to the assassination of the Algerian ninis-
tor without portfolio. now do you view the war in Rbanon, in this stage specifical-

1??

IAnswegl we are really sad over the use of these nathods, especially the physical
elimination of diplo-sts, who are considered messengers on their missions. In any
event, these 1m elimination acts are the result of the existence of a
Palestinian cause which has not yet been resolved.

Cam Devid Is the Obstacle

l§uestiog7 What is your conception of the stage following the withdrawal from
Sinai as far as Arab-Egyptian relations go?

lgnswegl Former President Amer el-Sadat affronted the dignity of individuals in
the Arab world in the past, having transgreseed against the dignity of the Arab
nation by signing the Cam David treaty. President ansni luberak has at least not
affronted these feelings and still retains his coqoeure and balance. Egypt has
chosen its own path and has alienated itself fro- the Arebs by continuing along the
Gen) David line and through its position regarding the Palestinian cause. while
el-Sadet has bequeathed personal and political hostility between himself and the
Arabs, no obstacle reusins now that he has gone except the political aspects, which
is the Can David line. If Egypt retreats fro- theae agree-ants it will find its
place in the Arab ranks, although so far the matter seems out of the question.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI

11887
080: 4504/196

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RESOLUTIONS 0N WESTERN SAHARA BXAHINED
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 259, 15-28 Feb 82 p 10
[Article by Kanel Djaider: "Nairobi I, II, 111"]

[Text] The can is once again confronted with the question of the Western Sahara.
The 18th Summit Conference in Nairobi precisely defined the role and duties of its
inpleaentation counittee. The highest African organization had entrusted it with
the task of organizing and carrying out a free, general, regular referendu-
throughout the Western Sahara in order to enable the Saharan people to exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination.

What then has happened since that summit conference? With the sense of theater
for which he is known, Eassan II had nevertheless solemnly accepted the organiza-
tion of the referendul. He even pledged, before his African peers, to see that
the Saharan people would sake their decision as soon as possible. And yet, as
everyone knows, no measure, no nova has yet been taken in the direction of
negotiations with the POLISARIO Front by the king. 0n the contrary, Rabat has
only intensified its efforts in the sense of continued war and internationaliza-
tion of the conflict, accentuating even further the very grave threat weighing
over Northwest Africa and the entire Haghrebian region.

The danger is now greater than it has ever been, due to the coaaitnent of one of
the superpowers - in this case, the United States - alongside Morocco. And it,
can only warded off by a peaceful solution that will necessarily lean negotiations
between the two parties to the conflict.

Washington Involvement

The OAU, which constantly calls for a ceasefire, must impose negotiations in
order to be successful. It is very obvious that in order for there to be a
ceasefire, there must be agreement between the two belligerents, which presumes
that the latter will decide it together, through negotiations. Rabat and the
POLISARIO Front lust therefore sit down at the same table and discuss the prac-
tical terms of a halt in hostilities, necessary for the organization of any
referendum. The POLISARIO Front does not view a ceasefire as an end in itself.
The Saharan soldiers will not put down their arms until they have adequate guar—

antees, such as the withdrawal of Moroccan troops fro- the territory of the
western Sahara and their replace-ant by an interim international administration.

FINICINNCIAI.USILIIULY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

Among the members of the implementation committee, there are some who believe

that by giving too much weight to the idea of the ceasefire, it is totally possi-

ble to remove the means of reaching it. It is not any coincidence that Hashington
so ardently supports both the Moroccan occupation and the "concerns" of the imple-
mentation comittee.

Political observers who closely follow the evolution of the situation in the
region confirm the view of the Saharans, who state that a "pa: americana" is
being imposed on them.

In 3 months, Rabat successively received American Deputy Secretary of Defense
Francis "est, Ronald Reagan's security adviser, Gen Vernon "alters, the No 2 man
in the CIA, Bobby Ray Imman, the very influential Senator Charles Percy, and
finally, before ﬂassan II's trip to France, the secretaries of commerce and
agriculture, Malcolm Baldridge and John Brock. This entry in force (oil research
off the coast of Tarfaya, a study of the bituminous schists, the coming adoption
by Parliament of an "adequate" investment code), mainly aimed at consolidating
the throne, is expressed by an accelerated "South Americanization" of the coun-
try. Hashington will very soon be able to decide the fate of Morocco 100 percent.
Alexander Haig's visit to Rahat on 11 February is undoubtedly significative of
the American determination to get a solid foothold in Northwest Africa.

In the hierarchy of the new concerns of the White House in Africa, Morocco occu-
pies the privileged place of the future regional policeman and support base for
the Near East. Furthermore, the country arouses even greater interest since the
changes in France on 10 May. On this subject, the trip that Hassan II made to
France last month revealed the extent of Moroccan concerns over the commitments
made by the French Socialist Party during the election campaign of candidate
Mitterrand and in the face of the prospect of the political act which the opening

of an office of the POLISARIO Front in Paris represents. The king of Morocco
tried during his stay to advance only those points of agreement existing between

him and the president of the French Republic. Consequently, with enthusiasm
contrasting with the reserve observed by all other Arab chiefs of state, he ap-

proved the visit which Francois Mitterrand plans to make to Israel and confirmed
the coming official visit by the French chief of state to Morocco.

Responsibility of OAU

As for the Moroccan-Saharan conflict, he mentioned it only in order - once more -
to refuse to recognize the evidence: His adversary is the POLISARIO and not A1-
geria. By shutting himself up in this attitude, Hassan II "links peace to his
fate," as Fadel Ismail, the POLISARIO's representative in France, emphasized.

It is nevertheless certain that this "Nairobi III" will have pointed up the re-
sponsibility of certain countries in the OAD, whose objective is to give Morocco
the respite it needs to step up its economic and military potential through the
United States.

Even better, in certain African diplomatic circles, it is not excluded that mem-

bers of the implementation committee, "Trojan horses of Washington and Rabat,"
want to engage the committee in separate negotiations with the POLISARIO Front,

33
FOI<OIIIClAl.lEﬂI(H‘LY
on the one hand, and ﬂorocco, on the other. The operation would enable the imple-

mentation conittee to take Rahat's place, which would have the affect of gaining
time once again for Haesan II.

He can therefore understand the insistence with which the POLISARIO Front con-

stantly underlines its refusal to see "any fragmentation or atomization of what
must be an overall agreement." "The ceasefire is not only a technical measure."

one high Saharan official recently told us. "It is an elainemtly political mea-
sure that requires political, military and diplomatic guarantees (....) Proceed-

ing in any other fashion is to put the cart before the horse," he added.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11,464 _
cso: «519/129 END

”MUSEMY