FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10127
19 November 1981

USSR Report

TRANSPORTATION

(FOUO 7/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP 0F
MATERLALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
TRANSPORTATION
(r000 7/81)

Conn-ms
MISCELLANEOUS
Metro in Wenty cities: 50th Anniveiury of Soviet Subway
Construction
(A. mgovt’ov; mmosmY, No 3. 1981) OOOIOOCOOIOOIOOOOOCOO
Improved Transportation Systems Needed for Tyunen

(V. A. Vasilyuk; NEPTYANAYA PWSHLBNNOST' SERIYA
REHEPROMYSLOVOYE STROITEL'STVO, No 8, 1981) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

- a - [III - USSR - 38d

CAD I‘m” e ' IIC‘I.‘ (\‘l‘ V
METRO IN TWENTY CITIES: 50TH ANNIVERSARY 0P SOVIET SUBWAY CONSTRUCTION

Moscow MBTROSTROY in Russian No 3.1981 pp 6-18

[Article by A. Lugovtsov, chief of Metrogiprotrans: "50th Anniversary of Soviet
Subway Construction: The Subway in Twenty Cities"]

[Excerpts] The Moscow Metrostroy [Administration for Construction of the Moscow
Subway]. which is celebrating its semicentennial, has become the springboard for
development of Soviet subways. The main directions of their planning and construc-
tion were the basis of this interview with A. S. Lugovtsov. chief of the lead
Metrogiprotrans [exact expansion unknown] planning and surveying institute: 7

[Answer] It can be said definitively that the future of many major cities is
linked with construction of a subway. During the last decade the number of cities
in the country with a population of over a million persons doubled. Just from data
of the All-Union Survey of 1979. 18 cities have surpassed the one-million level of
inhabitants. and six have cone close. In the majority of cases the crossing of
this threshold complicates the solution to the surface transport problem. Social
need thus poses the task of expanding the geography of the most effective form of
public transport--an off-street form providing mass high-speed. regular, comforta-
ble transportation.

The subway. born of the city's needs. becomes an active part of its life in the
very period of its formation and later becomes an important city-forming factor by
giving rise to certain construction activities. Today it is difficult to picture
Moscow. Leningrad, Kiev, Tbilisi. Baku. Khar'kov and Tashkent without high-speed
underground lines. The Moscow Subway System is constantly increasing the overall
length of the network. It will increase 29.4 km in the present five-year plan.

The Leningrad Subway is celebrating its 25th anniversary, the Kiev its 20th, and
the Tbilisi its 15th. During every 24-hour period the 46 station lobbies of the
city on the Neva and the [27 escalators deliver up to two million persons to the
underground platforms. Three high-speed tunnel routes interconnect practically all
rayons of the city. In Kiev. Tbilisi and Baku. where two lines each already are in
Operation. the subway takes up to one-third of citywide transportation.

A subway has opened in Yerevan. The prestartup time is approaching in Minsk.
Cor'kiy and Novosibirsk. Preparatory and tunneling work has begun in Kuybyshev.
Sverdlovsk and Dnepropetrovsk. Feasibility studies are being drawn up for subways
in Rostov-na-Donu. Alma-Ata, Omsk. Chelyabinsk and Perm'. A TEO [feasibility
study] already has been approved for Riga.

FOR onrcrnluss ONLY
tun ups-sauna. tum \uuu

The overall amount of construction and installation work in subway construction
will rise 45 percent in the current five-year plan in comparison with the previous
plan. The start-up of some 100 km of new lines is planned.

[Question] Anatoliy Stepanovich! Tell us how hydrogeological and other local
features affect a Solution to key technical problems. the selection of methods of
performing the work. planning and technological structures, and the configuration
of transport complexes as a whole.

[Answer] There are no cities with identical geological engineering. urban develop-
ment and other conditions. let alone combinations of these conditions. Every new
city where a subway is born is a new page in planning and construction. an invaria-
ble creative search and enrichment of experience previously obtained.

For example, in surveying the Tashkent subway route. we encountered an unusual soil
environment:unstable locssialrock. This required the development of effective
steps to design reliable foundations for facilities and continuous tunneling. The
hot climate made it necessary to create special ventilation systems. A zone of
high seismicity left an imprint on the nature of tunnel components. which were made
of sectional elements with rigid and yielding joint connections and reinforcing
seismic bands.

All these tasks had to be accomplished for the first time in our practice.

in its three years of operation. the Tashkent Subway has withstood 25 earthquakes
with an intensity to 6. and it must be said that it withstood them excellently.

Let's take Minsk. which is not such an exotic example. The unique planning pattern
of its center-two almost equivalent city nuclei stand out along the basic archi-
tectural axis—~forced more than one version of track construction to be studied.
The geology forced the acceptance of shallow tunnels (usually deep tunnels are more
preferable in a densely built-up center with monuments of historical architecture).
There was a threat that surface transport would be shut down for the period of con-
struction.

But the optimum design solution was found. In conformity with it. future transfer
complexes were located in the most important passenger—originating junctions. One
of the central stations was laid out in the plan so that it would be able to
receive simultaneous passenger flows from Lenin Square and the railroad station (at
first we assumed it was possible to erect only subway stations of the serond sec-
tion in the vicinity of the train station). Construction of shallow taxis of tun-
nels was envisaged as being by the covered method convenient for the city. The
nonsng tunneling is done by a unit with a set of equipment for erecting a continuous
pressed concrete casing. designed in our institute. A significant part of the line
under construction already has been developed successfully.

A new "bouquet" of special features has been identified now in the T80 development
Stage of subways in Rostov-na-Donu and Alma-Ata. and they are forcing us to seek an
appropriate approach both to the question of drawing up a general arrangement for
high-speed underground transportation in each of these cities, and to selection of
the depth of the r0utes. In Alma-Ara in particular the deep layers (Quaternary

FOR OFFICIALZUSB ONLY
deposits) literally are larded with boulders. And in Rostov—na-Donu it will be
necessary to undertake capital mining work under rather narrow streets, in unsta-
ble. water-saturated soils, and with a difficult crossing of the Don and its
tributary. In all probability. shallow tunneling is contraindicated here. but
deep tunneling is fraught with serious technical complications. "hat is to be
done? Re are deciding. There are no ready-made solutions.

The conditions of Dnepropetrovsk advance a different range of problems: obtaining a
smooth contour of the tunneling. mechanization of the building of deeply embedded
single-vault stations in fractured granites. and so on.

[Question] The Soviet school of subway planning is based on the diverse experi-
ence in building them in different cities around the country. what long-range
developments are contained in the latest plans of Hetrogiprotrans and its affil-
iates?

[Answer] 1 would have to answer this question rather diffusely. I'll note the
most important ones. Among them are the compact transfer junctions of the combined
type according to the direction of train traffic. with parallel station platforms,
as well as of the central and central-end types with short passages. Architectural
solutions of stations with an organic combination of functional and esthetic ele-
ments. Highly effective systems of tunnel ventilation with new reversible devices;
traction units at electrical substations with semiconductor rectifiers and dry
transformers; as well as an automatic speed regulating system permitting an
increase in carrying capacity of the lines. More economic and less labor-intensive
components of deeply embedded stations: columnar with double-row cofferdama. and
pylons with a reduced pier width. Large-size reinforced cement and aluminum water-
tight canopies for escalator tunnels. The technology and tunneling equipment for
mechanized tunneling.

The experience of Leningradites. who in January of this year set a world record
for digging IHlnnCI runsin extending the Hoscow-Petrograd line--l.250 m per

month--gave a new impetus to the identification of organizational and technical
reserves for increasing average construction rates in each specific geological

engineering situation.

Our immediate program includes an increase in the industrial features of components
and methods of building stations by the open method and vestibules; a reduction in
their material consumption; and the adoption of tieless tracks convenient to oper-
ate.and Other arrangements.

[Question] Speaking of architecture...

[Answer] The underground space limited to standardized dimensions and the absence
of a facade in the ordinary meaning of the word regulate the work of the subway
architect. moreover. far from all finishing materials can be used because of
operating conditions. The station type and its volumetric-spatial solution cannot
vary within broad limits, since it depends directly on geological engineering.
Nevertheless. there are many known achievements in our underground architecture. I
believe they stem from the special attention to the architecture of subway stations
and the creation here of a pleasing. artistically sonorous spatial environment.
This is a priority of Soviet Subway construction.

FOR OFFICIAL3USE ONLY
FOR Ui‘l'iUlAl. U38 ONLY

He proceed from the Moscow experience in developing an architectural concept of new
subway lines. And it seems to me that we are departing further from the extremes
in interpreting the architectural and artistic "filling" of stations which occurred
in a number of instances. and approaching that reasonable measure of which much has
been said but which is difficult to achieve. We still see attempts to oversaturate
the appearance of subway stations in new cities.

Creative discussions of architectural plans greatly contribute to their improve-
ment. It is advisable to hold such discussions not only in the final planning
stage but even when the concept has jelied. In selecting means of architectural
expression it is important to have a concrete disclosure of the interconnection of
functional and esthetic elements. The organic alloy of architectural, artistic and
engineering solutions subordinated to a specific idea and assuming a laconicism of
architectural expressiveness is the backbone of this interconnection. I emphasize
that a synthesis of architecture and the fine arts in the subway must bear not a
mechanical. but a naturally merged character. The creative union of architect.
artist and engineer is so necessary for this reason. The engineering interpreta-
tion and creation of the optimum structural basis is of great importance in the
search for new volumetric-spatial solutions. One of the achievements of recenr
years was the rebirth of shallow. single-vault stations in Moscow. Khar'kov and
Tashkent. A vault of variable section with internally broadened abutment and tie
beam reinforced with Spaced frames-~that is the variety of single-vaulted stations
of the Khar'kov subway. These components have been given seismic stability in
Tashkent. The appearance of new arrangements in combination with a diversity of
artistic treatment has enriched the architectural appearance of the subway as a
whole.

The best models of underground architecture are being created in a unique, imagina-
tive manner by developing national traditions in a truly innovative way and in the
process of mutual enrichment of experience.

Every city where a subway is being built has many centuries of history. The
interiors of subway stations uniquely recreate the spirit of revolutionary trans-
formations and the traces of preceding centuries. and they accumulate the modern
times rich in events. The ideological influence of the works of architecture is
continuous, and the years are not lessening it.

[Question] What milestones in the further development of the Moscow subway are
being planned today?

[Answer] The institute has begun a new phase for branching out the network of the
capital subway in coordination with the long-range general plan for city develop-
ment being drawn up by NIiPI Genplana [Scientific Research and Planning Institute
for the General Plan]. Design decisions will be based on the radial-ring structure
previously adopted and which has proven itself.

It is important to provide for a consolidation of the network and a more even dis-
tribution of passenger flows in connection with an increase in city size and size

of the population. There unquestionably will be an increase in the number of dia-
metrical lines. It will not be sufficient to have only the Ring Line as the dis-

tributor of passenger flows. In speaking of this. we also have to consider their

expected increase in concentric directions.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
which is more advisable? A second ring or a combination of chord lines? 0r per-
haps a combined system of phased adjoining ring and chord sectors will be the lost
acceptable. The main criterion for our feasibility studies is the speed and con-
venience of transportation.

[Question] Won't the question of building express subway lines in Moscow arise in
connection with this?

[Answer] I believe they will not be required in the foreseeable future. In New
York. for example. express lines in combination with local lines in the Hanhattan
area were the result of an excessive concentration of passenger flows in a narrow.
elongated territory. and in some other cities they are the result of an uncon-
trolled increase in travel distance on local lines.

It also has to be borne in mind that the gain in time of travel through a consider-
able increase in distances between stations turns out to be a loss for lesser
travel distances. He adhere to the viewpoint that the lengths of runs must be set
with consideration of providing comfortable movement for the majority of passen-
gets.

The rationally planned outlines of the structural basis being developed for the
capital subway will contribute to a further increase in flexibility of its system.
the degree of carrying capacity. and speed indicators. Precise coordination in
development of the subway and city construction depends on us to a certain extent.

[Question] Please comment on the basic provisions of general plans for development
of other subways in the country.

[Answer] Consideration is given in developing the plans not only to future city
construction, estimated passenger flows and the foci of their gravitation. but

also to the principle of building a subway network providing an opportunity for
traveling from any given point to any other with no more than one transfer. As a
rule we are using systems of three or more lines with their intersection in a cen-
tral part of the city. The triangle formed by the transfer junctions is the struc-
tural basis of the plan.

A successful design version was found in forming the subway network in Dneprope-
trovsk. Not an intersection. but the contiguity of two lines at the same level
with the shortest combined-type transfer has been provided in the vicinity of the
future "Prospekt ll'icha" station. Approximately the very same decision was
planned for the Hoskovskaya station in Gor'kiy.

1 would also like lo highlight such important provisions of the general layouts as
assurance of an effective interaction of subway lines with other types of transpor-
tation by creating multilevel traffic systems; and the organization of a uniform.
maneuverable network of high-speed suburban-city lines by having subway lines
adjoin railroads in peripheral areas. I believe that a redundancy of passenger
vehicle parking areas in the vicinity of subway terminal stations also would be

of significant importance. This should contribute to a comprehensive improvement
in transportation services for the population.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UrflClAL USE ONLY

Facts and Figures

The Glavtonnel'metrostroy [Main Administration for Construction of Tunnels and
Subways] is the largest association of contracting, industrial and planning-design
organizations carrying out the construction of subways, transportation tunnels and
various underground facilities in our country.

There are 13 administrations of construction projects (trusts) with 86 primary
line organizations engaged in building subways and tunnels. They are the terri-
torial construction and installation administrations (trusts)--Hosmetrostroy.
LenmetrostrOy, Kievmetrostroy. Tbiltonnei'stroy [Tbilisi Tunnel Construction],
Baktonnel'stroy [Baku Tunnel Construction]. Armtonnel'stroy [Armenian Tunnel Con—
struction]. Khar'kovnetrOstroy. Tashmetrostroy [Tashkent Subway Construction].
Bamtonnel'stroy [Baikal-Amur Railroad Tunnel Construction]. Hinskmetrostroy. Gor-
metrostroy [exact expansion unknown] and others. They are equipped with highly
productive tunneling and construction machinery. have skilled personnel and have a
well-developed industrial base. These administrations build complete subways and
tunnel facilities under general contract conditions, using specialized organiza-

tions.

The conduct of scientific research and development of new models of equipment is
the responsibility of the Tunnels and Subways Department of the All-Union Scien-
tific Research Institute of Transport Construction and the SKIS [Special Design and
Technological Bureau] of Glavtonnel'metrostroy.

Thirteen industrial enterprises function in the Glavtonnel'metrostroy system. More
than 220,000 In3 of precast reinforced concrete, 360,000 In3 of concrete commodities.
32,000 tons of cast iron tubing. and almost 10,000 tons of metal components are

delivered to construction sites each year.

The manufacture of precast reinforced concrete components for tunnel casings is
accomplished at ZhBK [reinforced concrete components] plants of construction admin-
istrations. The largest of them is the Ochakovo Plant of Hosmetrostroy.

The Cherkizovskiy ZhBK Plant of Mosmetrostroy produces 40,000 m2 of marble and
18,000 m2 of polished granite each year for finishing subway stations.

Produrtion of heading machines and tunnelling complexes and production of cast ir0n
tubing for large-diameter tunnels (8.5 m and 9.5 m) has been organized at the
ﬂoscow Machinery Plant of Glavtonnel'metrostroy. Nonstandard equipment. vehicles.
machinery and means of small-scale mechanization for all kinds of tunneling work
are manufactured at this same enterprise as well as at machinery plants of con-

struction administrations.

The noscow Subway network is 193 km long with [15 stations; the Leningrad Subway
is 71.6 km long with 41 stations; the Kiev Subway--28.é km with 21 stations; the

Tbilisi--l9 km with 16 stations; the Baku--21.9 km with [2 stations; the Khnr'kov--
18.2 km with 13 stations; the Tashkent--l6.7 km with 12 stations; and the Yerevan
Subway is 7.6 km long with 5 stations.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“

| .eklno’O
QYuzhnayh
v. Yasenevo v,’

""0 s

\izezn' 1~

; Udel' “Syn LFNIHCRAD \

  

      
    
  

 
  

  
  
 
 
 
 

O 3 [Kousomoi' x

5 ska a

5 :Petr gradskaya \‘

_ 1- _ Aiuakovskavj
x Prosbe 3-153..,ﬁ$vg

 
 
  
  

Kreshchat

"O
O
n
a
a
o
0

§
1 ommosuv‘tknya

-— Existing lines
a... Under construction

m"... Future 1 lnes

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zhdanov-

Krasnogvardeyskay

Unmersuexpo,

skaya

 
    

0':
. 'uuu

d Orekhova
‘9

/
Av“ vunﬁvmw vvu an...

TRILISI

6“‘uclﬂo
ﬂiikrotayoa

o
I

3

I

\‘oltzal 'na'ya Shaumyan

. I31:
Varkptil ‘ ‘59

Sawgorio. ,
Béky sovctl.

 

12L rolampo y YBREVAN
zaqu

up,
ruzhba :9

Yeritasardakae

        

  
 

Q Tashke
b‘

Sabira
‘Rakhllovmhlzuhvs

    
  
     

    

kn

 
   
    
 

’Sverd 10*
s‘
0 j

J gl’roletars

\Aio _/J

 

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
/ xuvnvsnzv

d ‘ “‘0
..‘

rosp ekt u‘ «““'
“rim?“

glosm- 0.“;
douiyu ugsL 9&“99ekJ'N

535331453 "'0
Kryl' yé
chetov

   

  

Ploshchad':
Petrovskogo:: 8

Studenc es-

P
' fcgkaya
W; Zavod stays
5

   

Ploshchad ' 9

h 1 ;
1905 gods . a 32.3.53“ {:2 -
o,,,,,.....»w f. verd] ov
erkh

' ol ogradskayz'm,
Shckakovskaya b /'\

Q NOVOEiBIRSKI
loshchad'
a) lnina ya“) \

S 1 hi I' sdeI-‘bgacununalp‘lo,’
okzal'zo' ‘. “ 0".

   
    
   

 
 
 
 

  
  

o
‘0

   

    

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE URL!

Stages of the Great Path (Chronicle of Construction Starts)

 

Moscow
Operating
lst Section

Rirovskiy Radius:
Sokoi'niki-Park kui'tury .......................

 

Arbatskiy Radius: 1935

Kalininskaya-Smolenskaya .......................
2d Section:
Arbatskiy Radius:

Smolenskaya-Kicvskaya .......................... 1937
Pokrovskiy Radius:

Pioshchad' Revoiyutsii-Kurskaya ................ 1938
Gor‘kovskiy Radius:

Pioshchad' Sverdlova-Sokol ..................... 1938
3d Section:
Zanoskvoretakiy Radius:

Ploshchad‘ Sverdiova-Avtozavodskaya ............ 1943
Pokrovskiy Radius:

Kurskaya-Iznayiovskiy park ..................... 196h
4th Section:
Koi'tsevaya liniya:

Park kul'tury-Kurskaya ......................... 1950

Kurskaya-Belorusskaya .......................... 1952
Arbatskiy Radius:

Arbatskaya-Kievskaya ........................... 1953
Kol'tsevaya liniya:

Bclorusskaya-Park kul'tury ..................... 1950
Pokrovskiy Radius:

Izmayiovskiy park-Pervomayskaya* ............... 1956
Frunzcnskiy Radius:

Park kul'tury-Sportivnaya .....;................ 19S
Rizhskiy Radius: [sic]

Prospekt Hira-VDNKh ............................ 1958
Filevskiy Radius:

Kievskaya-Kutuzovskaya .........;............... 1958
Frunzenskiy Radius:

Sportivnaya-Univcrsitet ........................ 1959

 

*The previously operated run was closed with the opening of the new Iznaylovskiy
park-Iznayiovskaya sector.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400070042-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Continued from rcvious a e

 

Moscow
Operating

Filevskiy Radius:
Kutuzovskaya-Fili . ........... ..................

Pokrovskiy Radius:
Izuaylovskiy park-Pervomayskaya ......... ..... ..

Pilevskiy Radius:
Fili-Pionerskaya ...............................

Kaluzhskiy Radius:
Oktyabr'skaya-Novyyc Chercnushki ...............

Pokrovskiy Radius:
Pervomayskaya-Shchelkovskaya ...................

Fruuzcnskiy Radius:
Universitet-Yuao-Zapadnaya .....................

Kaluzhskiy Radius:
Novyye Cherenushki-Kaluzhskaya .................

Gor'kovskiy Radius:
Sokol-Rechnoy vokzal ...........................

Filevskiy Radius:
Pionerskaya-Holodezhnaya .......................

Kirovskiy Radius:
Sokol'niki—Preobrazhenskaya ploshchad' .........

Zhdanovskiy Radius:
Taganskaya-Zhdanovskaya .................. ...... 1

Zamoskvorctskiy Radius:
Avtozavodskayawkakhovskuya .....................

Kaluzhskiy Radius:
Oktyabr'skaya-Pioshchad' Nogiua .......... ..... .

Zhdanuvskiy Radius:
Taganskaya-Ploshchad' Nogina ...................

Rizhskiy Radius:

Krusnoptcsncnskiy Radius:
Plushchad' Nogina-Barrikadnaya .................
Oktyabr'skoye polo-Plancrnaya ....... ... ....... .

Ploshchad' Nogiua—Prospekt Mira ................
Krasnopreanenskiy Radius:
Barrikadnaya-Oktyabr'skoye pole ................
Kaluzhskiy Radius: l
Novyye Chcrcmushki-Belyaycvo ......... .......... I
I

11
FOR OFFICIAL us: nNIv

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02IO9: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400070042-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE URL!

[Continued from previous page]

 

Moscow

Operating

Rizhskiy Radius:
VDNKh-Medvedkovo .... ....... .................... 8.3
Gor'kovskaya ...................................

Kalininskiy Radius:
Marksistskaya-Novogireyevo ..................... 12
Shabolovskaya ..................................

Under Construction

Serpukhovskiy Radius:

Serpukhovskaya-Yuzhnaya ........ ................ 13.9
Zamoskvoretskiy Radius:
Kashirskaya-Orekhovo ........................... 6.6
Serpukhovskiy Radius:
Serpukhovskaya-Biblioteka in. Lenina ........... 2.8
Zamoskvoretskiy Radius:
' Orekhovo-Brateyevo ............................. 3.4
' Kalininskiy Radius:
' Marksistskaya-Novokuznetskaya .................. 1.6
Future
Serpukhovskiy Radius:
Yuzhnaya-Krasnyy mayak ......................... 1.3
Kaluzhskiy Radius:
Belyayevo-Yasenevo ............................. 6.5
Serpukhovskiy Radius:
Krasnyy mayak-Krasnyy stroitel' ................ 3.3

Timiryazevskiy Radius:
Novoslobodskaya-Ul. Rustaveli ..................

Ul. Rustaveli-Otradnoye ........................ } 11.5
Novoslobodskaya-Bibiioteka in. Lenina .......... 3.5
Leningrad
Operating

Kirovsko-Vyborgskaya Line:

Avtovo-Ploshchad' Vosstaniya ................... 10.8

Ploshchad' Vosataniya-Ploshchad' Lenin: ........ 3.6
Moskovsku-Petrogradskaya Line:

Tekhnologicheskiy institut-Park Pobedy ......... 6.6

Tekhnologicheskiy institut-Petrogradskaya ...... 5.9

'12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4
Leningrad
Operating

Kirovsko-Vyborgskaya Line:
Avtovo-Dachnoye ................................

Nevsko-Vas11eostrovskaya Line:
Vasileostrovskaya-Ploahchad' Aleksandr; Nevakogo

Hoskovsko—Petrosradskaya Line:
Park Pobedy-Hoskovskaya ........................

Nevsko-Vasileostrovskaya Line:
Ploshchad' Aleksandra Nevskogo-Lononosovskaya ..

Hoskovsko-Petrogradakaya Line:
Hoskovskaya-Kupchino ...........................

Kirovsko-Vyborgskaya Line:
Ploshchad' Lenina-Lesnaya ....onooouat0000000000
Leanaya-Akademicheskaya ........................
Avtovo—Proapekt Veteranov ......................
Akademicheskaya-Kousomol'skaya .................

Nevsko-Vaslleostrovskaya Line:
Vas11eostrovskaya-Prinorskaya ..................
Lononosovskaya-Obukhovo ..... ..................

Under Construction

Moskovsko-Petrogradskaya Line:
Petrogradskaya-Udel'nsya .......................

Pravoberezhnaya Line:
Ploshchad' Aleksandra Nevskogo-Ul. Kollontay ...

Future

Nevsko-Vasileostrovskaya Line:
Obukhovo-Rybatskoye ............................

Pravoberezhnaya Line:
Ploshchad' Aleksandra Nevskogo-Ploshchad' Kira

Hoskovsko-Petrogradskaya Line:
Udel'naya-Parnasskaya ..........................

Pravoberezhnaya Line:
U1. Kollontay-Ul. Narodnaya ....................

Zhdanovsko-Frunzenskaya Line:

Ploshchad' Mira-Bogatyrskiy prospekt ...........
Ploshchad' Hira‘UI. Bu Kuna oooon-ooooo-aoooovoo

1.5

8.2

2.2

6.1

6.9

3.7

b.3

5.5

6.0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

; Continued from -

Existing

Svyatoshino-Brovarskaya Line:
Vokzal'naya-Dnepr ..............................
Vokzal'naya-Zavod "Bol'shevik" .................
Dnepr-Darnitea .................................
Darnitsa-Komsomoi'skaya ........................
Zavod "Bol'shevik"-Svyatoshino .................

Kurenevsko-Krasnoarmeyskaya Line:
Ploshchad' Kalinina-Krasnaya ploshchad' ........

Svyatoshino-Brovarskaya Line:
Kowsomol'skaya-Pionerskaya .....................

Kurenevsko-Krasnoarmeyskaya Line:
Krasnaya pioshchad'-Proepekt Korneychuka .......

Under Construction

Kurenevsko-Krasnoarneyskaya Line:
P1. Oktyabr'skoy Revolyutsii-Tsentral'nyy stadion
Prospekt Korneychuka-ceroyev Dnepra
Tsentral'nyy stadion-Orekhovatskaya ploshchad'

Future

Syretsko-Pechorskaya Line:
Zolotyye-votota-Hechnikova .....................

Tbilisi ‘
Existing

let Section:
Didube-Rustaveli ...............................
Rustaveli-3ooaragvintsev .......................
300 aragvintsev-Samgori ........................

2d Section:
Vokzal'naya-Deiisi .............................

Under Construction

ist Section:
Didube-TEVZ 000.000ooooteootottootooocotet000.00
TEVZ'Gldani cogooooooooooooooocanto-0.0.00.to...
Sangori-Varketili colon-000.000.000.00....000...

Future

lat Section:
Bol'ahoye Digomi-Hoskovskiy prospekt ...........

 

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000400070042-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Continued from revious

      

Existing

1st Section:
Baky Soveti-Narimanov one.cocoosooooooouoooooooo

2d Section:
28 APrel-Shaulyan o000000....Doooooooooooooooooo

1st Section:
Nariﬂanov-platforuﬂ Depo ooasoaooonooooooooc'ooo
NariEGHOV'UlduZ 0....0cocoonnuooooooooooooooo-o.
UldUZ'Neftchilyar oooooooo .aooooooosoooooooooooo
28 Aprel-Nizami 000.000.00.00.00QOOOOIOOOOIICOOO

Under Construction

2d Section:
Nizani-Hikrorayon ..............................

Future

Hikrorayon-Ulduz .................................
Neftchilyar-Akhnedly .............................
28 Aprel .........................................

Khar'kov
Existing

Sverdlovako-Zavodskoy Diameter:
Ulitsa Sverdlova-Hoskovskiy prospekt ...........
Hoskovskiy prospekt-Proletarskays ..............

Under Construction

Saltovsko-Shevchenkovskiy Diameter:
Soyetskaya-Barabsshova .........................
Barabashova-Geroyev Trude ......................

Future

Alekscyevsko-Gagarinskaya Line:
Prospekt Pobedy-Odesskaya ......................

Tashkent
Existing

lst Section:
Sabira Rakhinova-Oktyabr'skoy Revolyutsii ......
Oktyabr'skoy Revolyutsii-Haksima Cor'kogo ......

Under Construction

2d Section:
Pakhtakor-Tashkent .............................

. 15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400070042-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4

NU“ V5.58“ UM.- Hui-o

Continued from -revious -a:e

Tashkent
Future
. Tashkent-Aviagorodok .............................
Yerevan
Existing

ist Section:
David Sasuntsi-Druzhba .........................

Under Construction

David Sasuntsi-Ploshchad' Spandaryana ............
Oktemberyan ......................................

Future

2d Section: _
Druzhba-Elektrolampovyy zavod ..................
Druzhba-Achapnyak on...soooooooeOunce-cocooo'eoe

Minsk
Under Construction
Hoskovskaya-Institut kul'tury ....................
Future

Hoskovskﬂya-Yostok ..ooooooooooaooounces-00000....
Prospckt Pushkina-Avtozavodsksys .................

Gor'kiy
Under Construction
Hoskovsksya-Komsomol'sksys .......................
Future

Kalin1n8kaya-Gor'kovskaya assoc-soooeasooooooooooo
Moskovskaya-Heshcherskiye ozere ..................

Novosibirsk
Under Construction

Leninskaya Line:
Krasnyy prospekt-Studenchesksys ................
Sibirskaya-Vokzal'nsya .........................

Future

Leninsksya Line:
Krasnyy prospekt-Ploshchad' Kslinina ...........
Studencheskaya-Ploshchsd' Karla Hsrkss .........

 

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Continued from revioua

 

Kuybyshev
Under Construction
Oktyabr'skaya-Kirovskaya ......................... 1
Future

Oktyabr'shaya-Pioshchad' Revolyutsii .............
Kirovskaya-Kryl'ya Sovetov .......................

Sverdiovsk
Under Construction

ist Section:
Chkaiovskaya-Prospekt Kosnonavtov .............. 1

Dnepropetrovsk
Under Construction

ist Section:
, Komnunarovskaya-Oktyabr'skaya ploshchad' ....... 1

Future

2d Section:
Zavodskaya—Pravda ..............................

Riga
Future

lst Section:
VEF-Zasulauks o...-.u..ooocacooaonooouoooonova-o
Zasulauks~lmanta ...............................

2d Section:
Ploshchad' Lenina-Plyavniyeki ..................

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070042-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Contribution to the Depository of Subway Construction

Leningrad:

The performance of high-speed tunneling at the Lemmetrostroy has become a tradition
already numbering more than three decades.

In 1949 a creative collective of scientific workers. designers and builders of
Lenmetrostroy made the first Soviet mechanized heading machine. Beginning in
1950311 the tunnel runsof the Leningrad Subway have been built with mechanized
heading machines.

The design of the KT 1-5.6 mechanized tunneling system was developed. with an
arched conveyor block placer for installing casing pressed into the rock.

Technology is being created for through heading of lateral tunnels using mechanized
systems in a uniform cycle with adjoining tunnel runs; working of the rock and
installation of the upper vault of a single-vault station is being mechanized.

Precast reinforced concrete casing of tunnel runs has beenintroduced. using units
of a simple form. assembled and pressed into the rock. In comparison with types
used previously. this type of easing provides an opportunity to increase tunneling
rates, to reduce consumption of material and labor expenditures. and to raise the
quality and working conditions of production.

Deep, single-vault stations have been built.

The principle of pressing the easing into the rock is implemented for vaults of
large span in building single-vault stations.

The design of columnar stations is perfected. Steel columns rest through blocks on
the lower monolithic reinforced concrete beam, which in turn hinges on precast
reinforced concrete units closing the lower part of the casing. Such a design
decision permits using the additional volume obtained for accommodating offices.

A
Reinforced cement components were introduced, particularly large-component water-
tight canopiea for stations and escalator tunnels. They are installed in the form
of triphrhinged arches which are not connected with the main bearing casing. and
they have high technological. operating and architectural qualities.

Automatic control of train traffic is established on the basis of a centralized
programming-modeling system.

An automated system for control of the technological process (ASUTP) is being
developed. This work is broken into several phases. In the first, which is to be
completed in 1982, the work of the mine surveyor and heading machine operator will
be replaced by an EVM [electronic computer]. It is planned to automate rock load-
ing and mechanize the delivery and installation of bands. One person will direct
these operations from a console. In subsequent phases automation is to take in all
processes. including hauling the rock and taking it to the surface.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A brineless freezing of soils has been introduced, using liquid nitrogen which
vaporizes in the refrigerating column (without refrigeration units). Thanks to the
low evaporation temperature of liquid nitrogen (-195'). nine times less time is
spent for freezing.

Kiev:

In constructing the Arsenal'naya Station in sticky clays and fluid loans an inter-
mediate vestibule was built at the surface and lowered to the design level under
the protection of an ice and soil wall.

The deep Polytechnical Institute Station was built of precast reinforced concrete
components.

in cutting the city gravity-flow collector in clay soils. a casing was introduced
made of reinforced concrete units stressed by being thrust against the rock by the
Opening of a wedge block. This allowed complete elimination of injection and a
reduction in consumption of reinforcement by 3-& times.

The technology of building tunnels with single-section casings was developed, using
the KMO-l mechanized system.

Tbilisi:

A casing of single-section units 1.5 m long was used in building shallow
runs between the Konsomol'skaya and Delisi stations.

Centrifugally precast. prestressed columns with spiral reinforcement and with high
bearing power were installed in the Isani and Prospekt Tsereteli stations. The
columns weigh 3.5 tons with an outer diameter of 6‘ cm. The components are econom-
ical. transportable and easily installed.

Two deep single-vault stations (Polytechnical Institute and Vokzal'naya-II) were
built in rocky soil out of monolithic concrete and reinforced concrete.

A complex was built consisting of a mechanized underground passage with horizontal
platform passenger conveyors from the Sangori subway station to the Kakhetinskiy
Highway. The passage was built under difficult conditions under 13 operating rail-
road tracks without interrupting train traffic. Carrying capacity of the conveyor
in one direction is 61,000 persons per hour.

Baku:

A working method was used involving the simultaneous use of a caisson and deep
water drawdown in tunneling between the 26 Baky komissary and the 28 Aprel stations
in fine sandy loams alternating with clays and in sandy loans with a hydrostatic
ground water pressure of 4.5 gauge atmospheres.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR VIBLLLAL U’I URL!

The 28 Aprel-Nizami tunnel runs were built under difficult hydrogeologicai
conditions by the heading method in combination with a caisson, water draw-
down, freezing and ccmentation.

A standardized reinforced concrete casing made of continuous section units
with circular joints without connections has been used in tunnel run sectors.

Wide use has been made of glued, bituminized, waterproof rolled materials made
on a cellular fiberglass basis--fiberglass roofing material and bituminized

fiberglass in place of waterproofing on bituminous cement.

Khar'kov:

A design has been introduced of a single-vault station built by the open method
with a monolithic reinforced concrete vault installed by using movable metal
form work. This permits diversifying the architectural finishing of the vault
by applying various elements on the form work.

A method has been used for reinforcing silt-sand soils with a heavy inflow of
ground waters (on the Sovetskaya-Prospekt Gagarina run) by means of injecting
chemical reagents through special holes bored in the tunnel casing. Carbamide
resins (UKS [exact expansion unknownl) with a K bond were used as the binder,
while a three-percent solution of oxalic acid was used to speed up gelatinization.

The Dzerzhinskaya columnar station is being built with a platform 13 m wide,
and column spacing was increased to 9 meters at the Barsbashova station.

The progressive flow line method of building facilities has been adopted every-
where. which reduces construction time 15-20 percent and lowers labor input
20-30 percent and production cost 12-15 percent.

Tashkent:

The problem has been solved concerning seismic stability of station components
and subway tunnel runs being laid down in very moist,unstable loessial rock.
Components, made of precast and monolithic reinforced concrete. are designed
not only for receiving permanent and temporary loads, but also for the action
of inertial forces of rock movement during an earthquake. Maximum use is being
made of precast components with continuous longitudinal rigid and yielding
seismic bands.

The method of erecting a casing pressed into the rock under conditions of
erector tunnelling has been tested in building the run between the Pakhtakor
and Ploshchad' Lenina stations.

Yerevan:

A casing of precast reinforced concrete units with cylindrical joints without
tension braces and with two supplementary inserts has been developed for build-
ing tunnel runs. A reinforced concrete jacket with metal insulation is installed
within the component. The metal saved per running meter is 4,152 kg.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New types of ties-~we1ded angle brsces between units and tie bolts along the
axis of e1ements--have been developed for the purpose of preventing the deforma-
tions of sectional rings of casings from seismic forces. The ties consist of
metal rods 18 an in diameter. embedded in holes with expanding cement.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Hoskovskaya prsvds". "Metrostroy". 1981

690“
C80: 8144/0170

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FCII¢JFFTCIAI.IISELCNWLY

MISCELLANEOUS

IM?ROVSD TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS NEEDED FOR TYUHEN

Moscow NEFTYANAXA PROHYSHLENNOST' SERIYA NBPTEPBDHYSLOVOYB STROITEL'STVO in
Russian No 8, 1981 pp 16-18

[Article by V.A. Vasilyuk: "The Economic Problems of Improving Transportation Ser-
vices For the Tyumen' Petroleum and Gas Extracting Region")

[Text] Transportation availability is one of the basic factors in the development
of the petroleum and gas extracting areas of Tyumenskaya Oblast. At the present
time the extracting industry of the Middle Priob'ye is shifting to the north and
nsrumaJrclimatic and economic-geographic conditions are changing. The lake and
swamp density of these territories comes to 80 percent. The new deposits have dif-
ferent geological characteristics which make the process of drilling difficult and
reduce productivity and the average yield of each new well compared to the Middle
Priob'ye. As a result of this, the volume of freight being supplied for drilling
has been increasing substantially. The transportation system which serves the
petroleum and gas extracting industry of the Tyumen' North includes railroad.
river, maritime, motor vehicle, and air transport. All of the mainlinas are iso-
lated and removed from one another by 200—500 kilometers.

The geographic location and length of the existing railroad network does not fully
meet the needs of the areas extracting hydrocarbon raw materials. New railroad
lines which would ensure the delivery of freight without excessive transshipments
are needed. Practice shows that when freight is delivered by mixed transportation
methods the cost of the hauls is lowered. but the expenditures for loading and un-
loading operations increase substantially. In addition, with fivefold tranashipnenta
15-20 percent of the freight is ruined while in route. The Main Administration for
Petroleum and Gas in Tyumenskaya Oblast brings in 98 percent of its material and
technical resources by railroad, and of this amount, only 60 percent directly into
the petroleum extracting areas, and the other 60 percent is transferred onto river
vessels and delivered to the bases of associations in the extraction areas. Then
some of the freight is transferred to small ships and delivered to the deposits

on small rivers, some of the freight is taken to the deposits by motor vehicle trans-
port, and the rest is kept at the bases until the onset of winter and the beginning
of the operation of winter roads. The winter roads are used for delivering as much
as 700,000 tons of freight to the deposits. The development of the railroad net-
work and an increase in the amount of freight deliveries by the Northern Sea Route
has not decreased the role of river transport. The rivers of the 0b'-1rtysh basin
continue to be chief waterways. Within Tyumensksya Oblast the navigable river sys—
INJR‘OFFICIAI.1£5E:(HNLY

ten includes the rivers Ob', Irtysh, Tura, Tobol, Agan, Vakh, Lyamin, and also Pur,
Taz, and Nadym. In the latitudinal current of the 0b' the river fleet performs
hauls 160~l90 days, and at the sore northern small rivers and the Nizhnyays
0b'--from 120 to 80-30 days.

Motor vehicle transportation performs most of the freight hauls in the petroleum
and gas extracting areas. The relationship between interfield and intrafield motor
roads with basic servicing is 2:1. On the average. there are 6.5 units of motor
vehicle-tractor equipment per kilometer of motor vehicle roads with basic ser-
facing in the Tyumen' North. The increase in the need for such equipment is con-
nected with the constantly increased difficulties in developing new deposits. In
the future the need for this equipment will increase.

The experience connected with developing the deposits of the Tyumen' petroleum and
gas extracting region has demonstrated the necessity for an overall approach to in-
proving the transportation system. Different types of transportation are used in
internal and external freight hauls, sometimes without regard to economic expedi-
ency. In the development of new deposits intra-area and inter-field freight hauls
will be performed at the level of 80 percent by motor vehicle transport. and the
rest by helicopters (more rarely. airplanes). At the present time the lowest

cost for freight hauls is on river transport, and the highest on railroads. Host
of the freight is brought to the Tyumen' North by river transport during the nav-
igation period whose length is around five months in the north Priob'ye, and not
more than four months in the Far North. As a result of the seasonal operation of
river transport it is necessary to equip bases for the storing of material and
technical resources, which leads to a substantial "freezing" of resources.

In recent years the freight turnover of the riverports has been increasing annually
and, for this reason. a large part of the freight is delivered through southern
ports with a large overrun, which with the short navigation period reduces the in-
dicators of fleet use.

The experience in operating one of the railroads in this area during 1975—1980
shows a decrease in transportation expenditures in petroleum field construction.
However, at the same time, on account of an insufficiently developed network of
inter-field motor vehicle roads with hard cover, which holds back the work of the
motor vehicle pool, the share of transportation expenditures increases. The over-
all tendency in a change of transportation expenditures and the additional expend-
itures connected with them can also be traced in analysis of the expenditures re-
lated to one million rubles of construction and installation work. To a substant-
ial degree an improvement of railroad and motor vehicle freight flows will be pro-
moted by an expansion of the network of rail and motor roads. New lines will en-
sure supply for the petroleum and gas extracting industry and for construction
subdivisions. However, to develop a system of motor vehicle roads in the Pri-
polyar'ye on the basis of increasing the length of dirt-log roads and winter roads
is economically inexpedient. It is essential to have a scientifically substanti-
ated technology for the construction of inexpensive and reliable motor vehicle
roads. Otherwise, it would be expedient to build railroad lines. Let us examine
an example. The amount of earth work in making an embankment for motor vehicle
and railroads at a given latitude is the same, and the upper part of the construc-

23
F0!‘0§FKJA1.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion of a motor vehicle road in its amount of cost is more and its operational
periods are shorter than a railroad. With a minimum width of the motor vehicle
road of six meters per kilometer it is necessary to have 850 cubic meters of
ferroconcrete_ plates, and on the rail base with a width of two meters (replacing
the ballast and ties with ferroconcrete plates or frames)-200 cubic meters. When
freight intensity falls off the rails and the under-rail foundation can be used
repeatedly on newly built inter-field lines, while the motor vehicle road plates
quickly become unserviceable as a result of active cryogen processes.1 At this
latitude the valley river complexes lave sands, pebbles, and sandy loam; the water
divide sectors are more frequently represented by sandy loams, loans, and clays.
Since the vegetation and soil strata are of negligble strength, dirt can be taken
by the open method for the earthen right-of-way; in zones where timed ground is
widespread hydromechanization is used. The forced development of the transport-
ation system is the result of the tendency for construction industry enterprises
to move near to the sites of industrial and housing construction.

It would be useful to create enterprises for the production of road cover plates
involving the thermal processing of ferroconcrete products. Local small grade
sand is used to prepare heavy concrete; one cubic meter of mass for 2.6 tons of
products. The on-site production of road cover plates will make it possible to
decrease the cost of road surfacing by 50 percent. However, the problem of intra-
area freight hauls and of the thoroughfare importation of freight cannot be solved
solely through the construction of inter-field roads and railroads. It is clear
that in the North river transport will preserve its leading place for a long time,
while urgent freight will be delivered from the bases to deposits by aviation.

In the development of the most remote petroleum deposits the basic freight will be
delivered by motor vehicle transport on winter roads, while during the warm time
of the year this will be done by aviation (helicopters). The III-8 and III-6 heli-
copters are the basic ones in the petroleum extracting areas. In order to improve
the transportation network in the North it is necessary first of all to solve the
problems of the siting and construction of support railroads, and also of railroad
branches to individual deposits, railroad sidings, dead ends, and areas: and to
determine the economic and geographic rationality of siting a network of motor
vehicle inter-field roads with hard-top surfacing. This will make it possible to
decrease the river freight flow and, consequently, the additional construction of
storage bases, and also hauls on winter roads. It is also necessary to substant-
ially decrease the use of expensive air transport for inter-field comaunications.2

The chief task of the development of the transportation system is to provide the
necessary material and technital resources for areas where petroleum and gas de-
posits are being developed. It is advisable to create a support transportation
network in an area out of railroad lines and hard-top motor vehicle roads. This
will make it possible to decrease the adduced expenditures per ton of freight by
ten times compared to the supply system which has developed.

In order to increase the capacity of permanent railroads it is necessary to build
sidings and loading and unloading areas and to raise the level of the mechaniza-
tion of loading and unloading work.

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INMIOFFNJA1.USEZONL¥

The successful work of river transport in petroleum and gas extracting areas needs
an improvement of the condition of piers, an expansion ofthesphere of river trans-
port on small rivers by means of lengthening, an increase in the transshipment cap-
acities of ports, and the construction of new and expansion of existing take-off
and landing strips at a number of deposits. A further increase in petroleum and

gas extraction in the Iyunen' region depends upon the correct solution of th. pro-
blems of improving the transportation system.

FOOTNOTES

1. A.V. Cruzdov, "Neslivayushchiyesya merzlotnyye porody v pripolyarnykh

rayonakh Zapadnoy Sibiri," "Prirodnyye Usloviya Zapadnoy Sibiri," No. 7,
MGU, Moscow, 1980.

2. I.D. Karyagin and V.S. Bulatov, "Razvitiye gszovoy promyshlennosti Severe
Iyumenskaya Oblast, " Moscow, "Nedra," 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsii,
upravleniya i ekonomiki neftegazovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOENG), 1981

2959
C50: 1829/001 END

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY