FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

JPRS L/10116

16 November 1981

USSR Report

LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(FOUO 15/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS RE?RODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR 0F?1C1Al.USEtoNLN

JPRS L/lOllG
16 November 11

USSR REPORT
LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(POUO 15/81)

CONTENTS

BIOCHEMISTRY

Journal Outlines Medical Industry's Goals for let Year of
11th Five-Year PlanOOOOUOIOUOUICC0.000.....0.......'.'.......... 1

BIONICS

Goals of and Prospects for Development of Neuronal Technology..... 5
BIOTECHNOLOGY

Mechanisms of Interaction of Internal and External Analysers...... 13
PHYS IOLOG Y

Direct Transfer of Conditioned-Reflex Guatatory Aweraion.......... 33

Electrophysiological Correlates of Perception and Cognition..I.... 38

Abstracts Fran the Book 'Description and Recognition of Objects
in Art1f1C1.1 Intellect sy’tus'OC00......IIOIOOC'OOOIOOOOOOOIOO “4

Mathematical Simulation of Elementary Reasoning................... 59
RADIATION BIOLWY

Gamma-Installations for Research and Radiation Biology............ 55

- a - [III - USSR - 213 SET

FOR OFFIC' ' ' US" ON! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HUMAN FACTORS

Joint Work of Hachine and Hanan Operator in Search

situationteueone.orI000Oooooeooscoeooooeooooooo...0000000000003!

Method for Comprehensive Evaluation of Training of Operators
of Peripheral Conputer Units and Its Technical Realization......

PSYChOLOGY
Research Methods in Engineering Psychology and Industrial

PSVCMIOSYOOOOOOOOOOOOIor.o0one00000000CocosooooioneoooeoooeooI.

-b-

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

58

65

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOCHEMISTRY

UDC 66|.|2.0l3:331.876.4

JOURNAL OUTLINES MEDICAL INDUSTRY'S GOALS FOR 181‘ YEAR OF 1111! FIVE-YEAR
PLAN

Moscow RHIHIKO-FARHATSEVTICBESKIY ZHURNAL in Russian Vol IS, No 3, Her 81
pp 5-7

[Article by editorial staff]

[Text] The 26th Congress of the USSR Communist Party has just concluded.
It marks a historic new frontier in the development of Soviet society er.
route to Col-mien. The resolutions of the Congress clearly reflected

the Party's genuinely citizen-oriented policy. one that embodies the ideas
of Lenin and the October Revolution and is permeated with revolutionary
spirit and a bold approach to the solution of pressing problem.

workers in the radical industry, like all Soviet citizens, unanimously
approve and support the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the posi-
tions and conclusions set forth in the report made to the Congress by L.I.
Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the CPSU Central Col-ittee, and have
taken it upon themselves to iwleaent the- throng! steadfast effort.

In conformity with the down: entitled "Principal directions to be taken
in the economic and social developunt of the USSR in l98l-l985 and the
period up to 1990." workers in the medical industry must solve criticsl
problems pertaining to the further expansion of this branch. in order better
to provide the populace and public-health institutions with drugs. the tools
of radical technology. and other products intended for use in andicine.

Discussion of the draft of this door-ant by the personnel of enterprises
and organizations produced a new elevation of political and occupational
mrale. Workers in the medical industry made many valuable proposals
directed at improvemnt of work in their individual sections and at enter-
prises. associations, and facilities serving the entire industry, as well

as at elimination of existing shortcomings and deficiencies. Nev socialist
obligations have been adopted for I981. ~

Having accoaplished the planned tasks for I980- and the IOth Five-Year Plan
as a whole. workers in the publitvhealth industry, inspired by the resolutions

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the 26th CPSU Congress, are filled with resolve to implemnt the Party's

sweeping plans and to make a worthy contribution to further improvement of
health care for Soviet citizens.

The most important socialist obligations taken on by the personnel of a num-
ber of industrial associations and enterprises in the chemical-pharmaceutical
industry for 1981 are described below.

"Akrikhin" Order of the Red banner of Labor Chemical-Pharmaceutical Plant

To fulfill the annual production plan ahead of schedule (by 30 Dec 8]) and
produce goods with a value of 300.000 ruble .over and above the planned level.
To increase production (in comparison with 980) of hydrocortisone acetate
and diprasine by a factor of 2. of potassium orotate by 201, of carbocho-
line by 382, of nitroxoline by 602. of sulfapyridasine by 251, of 6-mercapto-
purine by 582, of amidOpyrine by 602, of prednisone acetate by 252. and of
progesterone by 251. To effect the entire increase in output vithout
enlarging the workforce. To save 300,000 rubles in raw-material costs,

I million kH-h of electricity. soo Seal of thermal energy, and 1000 tons

of conventional fuel. To obtain savings totalling 2.5 million rubles from
introduction of 1.80 inventions and innovators' suggestions and no less than
65,000 rubles from iuplementation of measures for scientific organization

of labor. To save 700.000 rubles as a result of introduction of the latest
scientific and technical developmnts. To have engineering and technical
personnel draw up no fewer than 430 personal working plans directed at

improving production efficiency. To render supervisory assistance to the
Noginskiy Sovkhos.

"Oktyabr'" Leningrad Order of the Badge of Hanor Industrial Chemical-
Pharmaceutical Association

To fulfill the annual production plan ahead of schedule and. in conformity
with the contingency plan, to produce additional medical goods with a

total value of 200,000 rubles. To provide the entire increase in production
through isproved labor productivity. To put into production and submit

for clinical testing five new drugs.

"Biostimlyator" Odessa Industrial Chemical—Pharmaceutical Association

To fulfill the annual production plan ahead of schedule and to increase
output by 6.62 over the [980 level, 842 of the incremnt coming from im-
proved labor productivity. 'l'o exceed the production quota for medical

goods by 200,000 rubles, with consumer goods accounting for 130.000 rubles
of this total. To save (in comparison with the specified levels) l6l.000
kN-h of electricity, 2I80 Gcal of thermal energy, and 5000 rubles in

raw materials and semifinished goods. To obtain a savings amounting to
200,000 rubles as a result of introduction of new technology. In attempting
to contribute to the social davelopnent of personnel. to take an appropri-
ate part in the remdelling of the Ogonek youth camp. 'l’o organise an

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

auxiliary fans for vegetable production at the subsidiary Kolkhos inni
5J1. Kirov. To improve the skills of 560 workers and engineering-technical
and maintenance persormel.

“Sintez” Kurgan Plant for Drugs and Medical Goods

To increase standard net output by 5.61. To .produce consusler goods with a
total value of no less than 600,000 rubles. To introduce six new hiﬁl-
efficiency technological processes. To begin serial production of four new
types of products. To fabricate pilot models of three new types of products.
To obtain a nominal annual savings of 300,000 rubles by iapleuntstion of
organizational and technical measures and 95,000 rubles from implenntation
of reasures for scientific organisation of labor. Provisionally to free

55 workers through technically progressive measures. To make use of (090
suggestions and inventions for a savings of 850,000 rubles. To save

6.! million kw-h of electricity and 17.5 Goal of thermal energy. To reduce
the cost of goods produced by 70,000 rubles. To provide 6.2 million rubles
of capital investmnts. To put into operation new production facilities
with an area of 2604 n2. To train 300 new professional workers, improve
the skills of 560 workers and 65 engineering-technical personnel, and train
l20 individuals in allied professions. To assist the sovkhoses and kol-
khozes of .the region in sowing and harvesting.

"Hosudpreparaty" Order of the Red Banner of Labor Industrial Association

To fulfill the annual production plan for the lost important types of goods
ahead of schedule, by 30 Dec l98l. To produce and market goods with 'a value
of IS0.000 rubles in excess of quota. ‘l‘o overfulfill the plan for improve-
ment of labor productivity by 2.92. To reduce the cost of finished goods

by 50,000 rubles, with savings on raw and senifinished materials providing
30,000 rubles of this total. To save 2.] million kH-h of electricity,

I350 tons of conventional fuel, and l0,000 Gcsl of thermal energy. To
obtain profits of 75,000 rubles in excess of quota. To put into practice
500 innovators' suggestions and obtain a nominal savings of 500.000 rubles.
In conformity with the social-development plan, to inprove the educational
level of the association's workers with no loss of productivity, sending

77 individuals to specialised middle and higher educational institutions

and 39 to schools for working youth. 10 provide all types of instruction,
including economics courses for administrators and 15“) workers and engineer-
ing-technical personnel. To obtain a savings of 250,000 rubles through
introduction of new technology and autolution and mechanization of produc-
tion. To assist the subsidiary sovkhos in improving agricultural efficiency.

"l-‘armakon" Leningrad Industrial Chemical-Pharmaceutical Association

To fulfill the approved annual production plan ahead of schedule, by
29 Dec 8|. To produce goods with a value of l00.000 rubles in excess of
quota. To market products with a total value of 70,000 rubles in excess
of quota. To inprove labor efficiency by 31 in comparison with 1980.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10 provide the entire increase in output by improving labor productivity.

To reduce the cost of finished goods by 30,000 rubles. To obtain a profit
of 30,000 rubles in excess of quota. To begin comrcial production of

five new drugs. To obtain a savings of 192,000 rubles as a result of imple-
mntstion of progressive scientific and technical measures. To save raw
materisls with a value of 25.000 rubles, 800,000 ”4-1: of electricity,

730 tons of conventional fuel. and 5500 Seal of thermsl energy. To obtain
a savings of 150.000 rubles through implementation of suggestions fron
innovators and inventors. To train 25 individuals in second professions

and improve the skills of 2A0 workers through advanced training. to take

an active part in rendering supervisory assistance to agriculture. the plant
school and kindergsrden. snd other allied facilities. To continue social-
ist campetition with the Akrikhin Chemical-Pharmaceutical Plant.

These socialist obligations have been adopted at tastings of enterprise and
association personnel with leading production uorkers. members of party,
union, and YCL organisations, and representatives of economic administration.
COPYRIGRT: "Khimiko-farmstsevticheskiy rhurnal". 1981

3:78
080: IMO/342

l.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

BIONICS

uoc 6l6.8-09l.8l(088.8)
GOALS or AND PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPMENT or NBURONAL rsamowcr

Kiev OTBOR I PEREDACHA INFORMATSII in Russian No 62, 1980 (manuscript
received 17 May 79) pp 109-55

[Article by V.l.. Kuznetsova, V.L. Kus'menko and 1.14. Isygel'nyy, L'vovl

(Text) The progress being made in contemporary computer technology is

due to a combination of work in two areas, i.e., improve-ant of components
through utilization of the latest achievennts in physics and technology
and intensificiaion of the search for new theoretical principles upon which
to base computer devices, including multivalent IN] and neuronal tSl '
logic. Attempts by researchers to combine the advantaps of these two
major trends have led to intensive study of the mechanisms of information
processing by the htlaan nervous system and to efforts to use these mechan-
isms in computer design. It can be assumed that some computers will be
constructed in conformity with the principles underlying the processing
and storage of information in the human brain, utilising components that
simulate the behavior of neurons and neuronal networks. Hodern computers
are generally intended for solution of formalised problems. One advantage
of devices based on neuronal networks is the fact that they will permit
solution of nonformalized problems. such as those associated with image
recognition or with the control of coupler behavior in an environment
varying in a probabilistic and stochastic manner. The main distinctive
feature of such computers will be their capacity for sel f-organisation and
self-programing, possibly conjoined with an ability to make nonlogical
decisions, i.e., to decide amng equiprobable alternatives. It is expe-
dient to use data on the evolution of biological structures in designing
them. what we have in mind here is naturally not rota duplication of the
arrangement of neural networks. 0n the contrary. the evolutionary pathways
tor colloidal systems are extreuly limited and our task is to go beyond
biological evolution, i.e., models of cerebral systems may contain types of
neurons that do not occur in nature (it they are needed for the creation
of better computer systems) or have not as yet been discovered.

Many neuronal models have now been devised in the USSR and abroad and are

suitable for use in the construction of neural-network models applicable
to computer technology, automatic control systems, intonation transmission

and processing systems, image-recognition systems, etc. since many of them

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are not sufficiently effective free the standpoint of information process-
ing in the neuron. it is necessary to establish nore precise general cri-
teria for the optimal design of circuits utilizing nerve-like components,
which will make it possible to characterize the ways currently being devel-
oped for simulation of neurons.

The desigi of nerve—like components has necessitated solution of two prob-
lens. The first is the creation of high-speed electronic models of the
nervous systen. in order that its behavior can be studied in cases where

the capabilities of ordinary electrophysiological uthods are limited (e.g.,
in studying networks that process sensory infornation, in sttespting to
determine the mechanisms of real-tine memory, in constructing models of
nervous-systen pathology for diagnostic purposes, etc.). The solution of
these problems will of itself justify expending effort in the creation of

a wide range of neuronal models, although far from exhausting their possible
applications.

The second problem is that of the use of nerve-like components and networks
composed of such conponents in technology.

In accordance with these goals, two approaches have been enployed in work-
ing out the principles for construction of nerve-like components and net-
works. The first and historically earlier approach is a product of

attempts to copy natural snslogs as closely as possible (2. 20. 26), dupli-
cating both the information-carrying and physiological properties of neurons.
The second approach consists in simlsting the coqonents of a neural net-
work as an information-processing systen (12, IS). He are justified in
speaking of neuronal technology in this instance.

The term "neuronal technology" refers to the use of the principles of infor-
mation processing in neurons and neuronal networks in the design of elecH
tronic devices. In contrast to neurocybernetics, a science that is pre-
dominantly theoretical, neuronal technology is concerned with practical
problems and, without obliging itself to duplicate a biological analog

exactly, attempts to solve problens pertaining to the use of such an analog
for purely technical purposes. ‘

The need to divide the approaches esployed into "mdelling of neurons" and
"neuronal technology" is a conseqence of the fact that they belong to dif-
ferent scientific disciplines, the former to biology and physiology and

the latter to bionics. i.e.. neuronal technology is that branch of bionics

which utilizes the principles of information processing in neurons to create
technical devices.

There are at present several major trends in the development of neuronal
technology. One of then entails the creation of general-purpose nerve-like
components that would per-it the construction of networks with any desired
degree of complexity, the only restrictions being those inposed by the Indels
themselves “2, IS). This is obviously a promising direction to take, since
it is most feasible in technological terms and gives the conponents and

circuits of neuronal technology pneral applicability.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another area of concentration entails the introduction into neuronal net-
works of components different from the basic structural unit, i.e., the
nerve-like component. Thus. Pelt (12] describes a model of a neuronal net-
work containing a random-number generator. a control unit, a triggering
unit, and a clock-pulse generator. It mat be noted at this point that,

as in the design of any couple: measuring and information-processing system,
uniformity and regularity of structure are of great importance in the design
of ul tracomplex neuronal networks. These requiresents are especially sig-
nificant in making the transition to microelectronic technology. It would
the re fore seem that the most effective approach is not introduction of

additional units into the network but inlementation of the necessary functions
of such units by the set of neurons employed.

In devising neuronal nudels, researchers quite often attempt to reproduce

the maximum number of properties inherent in the neuron in a single mdel.
The mdel frequently includes components carrying out functions that appear
at first glance to be uncecessary (e.g., nonlinear frequency enhancement

of the processed signal to provide a clearer response to changes in the

input signals 02). attenuation of the input signals, etc.) and these compli-
cate both the mdel and the diaracter of the transformations to which the
information is subjected. Howey". such circuitry can considerably increase
the effectiveness with which a neuronal network functions in solving non-
formalized problems.

Another trend that serits attention is that of the development of nerve-
like components based on a minimum number of elements. The coeponents
described by Ivashchenko and Donov [lo] and by Nagum et a1. [25] fall into
this category. The history of work in this field illustrates the convo-
luted manner in which neuronal technology has developed. The first nerve-
like components [19. 22] had a simplified form, a consequence of the re-
latively unsophisticated nature of the technology and electronics of the
tine. Increasingly more coaplicated and cumbersome mdels were subsequently
created in order to reproduce more exactly the information-carrying prop-
erties of neurons [20]. These could not be utilised to construct complem
networks. The next stage in the developunt of neuronal technology in-
volved a reduction in the number of elements needed to create a nerve-like
cosponent. This "simplification" resulted from tha use of ooqaonents em-
bodying ore extensive information-carrying properties; their effective-
ness was a product not of their circuit design but of their internal physical
processes (the avalanche transistor, thyristor I61, tunnel diode [2S].
multigate transistor, liquid crystal, etc.). Hodern integrated-circuit
technology can be used to create such nerve-like elements. The "sisplifi-
cation" of nerve-like components can. in our opiniOn, be of particular value
as we save toward their use as the basis for molecular and supermolecular
cybernetics. Combined utilization of contemporary achievements in the physics
of supermlecular structures and neuronal technology can lead to the crea-
tion of dynamic self-propagating cybernetic systems.

The creation of integrated circuits composed of nerve-like elements and
based on an optimum array of circuit components is also a pressing matter.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, the underlying goal of the developnnt of neuronal technology is
not the construction of nerve-like components but the creation of devices
that can be used in the national economy. It is natural and expedient to
employ not neuronal models but neuronal-network mdels constructed fron them
for the development of such devices. In designing neuronal-network nodels,
the researcher must take into consideration the fact that, in addition to
the rigid steric structure of the neuron-neuron connections dictated by ‘
sorphogenasis [l6], operative neuronal networks are formed randomly [7, 161
and specific networks are formed for the sccosplisllsent of definite tasks.
Here each neuron can function in several mtworks at different tines.
Hence it follows that qualitatively new components or mdifications of
existing neuronal models are required for creation of a dynamic neuronal-
network structure. One achievement in this area is the network Iodel pro-
posed by Pal: [I2], which consists of nerve-like cosponents with inputs
capable of undergoing a change of function, thus making possible to obtain
a stochastic organization for the string of signals in the network.

However, the masher of types of nerve-like elements qualitatively specialized
for performance of complex functions is not yet sufficient for construction
of complex neuronal networks. The nervous systen contains mre than “DO
different types of neurons [l3] that have been shown to exhibit morpholo-
gical differences (this does not preclude functional differences). In

this connection, ue mist seek new functional designs for nerve-like cospo-
nents. The list of neuronal nodels that can provide the requisite diversity
might include models of recognitive neurons, distributive neurons, amun-
ciator neurons, cosparison neurons, and other special types whose develop-
ment would facilitate the construction of coupler networks.

12.
fo
1) . 4— —a- I
a a 6 1mm.“ 0 :5...th

C

He feel that one pronising epproad: to this problem is the use of the organi-
zational principles of wltivelent components mid structures (9, 17] for the
creation of nerve-like cowonents and networks. It has been shown [6. IO.
23] that a neuron can be described not only as an analog elennt but also
as a discrete threshold-type elennt. Proceeding fron our investigations.
it should be noted that the processes by which intonation is transformed
in existing nerve-like co-ponents can be described by one of the three func-

tions f(S) shown in Fig. la, b, and c, where

5’: gaffes: — gbiflshig

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here to is the frequency of the pulse train at the output from the nerve-

ut
like component. fexc and finh are the frequencies of the pulse trains at

the excitatory and inhibitory inputs respectively, to is the spontaneous-
activity frequency, .i are,the weights on the excitatory inputs, and bj

are the weights on the inhibitory inputs. The characteristic curve in

Fig. la describes a threshold-type logic element that operates on the "all

or nothing" principle. Figure lb shows the characteristic curve for a

similar element possessing infinite-value logic with upper and lower thres-
holds, while Fig. It represents an element of the sue type with spon-
taneous activity, which increases its sensitivity and extends its capabilities.

when the circuit of a nerve-like cosponent includes certain additional
features, e.g., quantization of the working frequency range, it is possible
to construct neuronal networks with a rearrangeable information structure,
whose operation can be described with the aid of multivalued logic. The
neuron has a multiplicity of excitatory and inhibitory inputs with weights
0i and a single output. with appropriate normal izstion. the input par-ieters

x and output par-\eters y vary within the limits 0 £ x \< l and 0\< y \< I.
These parameters simulate neuronal signals (pulse frequencies) and do not
change sign. Moreover. the neuron has upper and lower excitation thresholds.
Its operation can consequently be described by the expression [5]:

$1: 20:11-9-

4-!
where 9 is the threshold; in arithutic representation [I8], this gives

y(xl'x1-"' 0’s) = (9+ l)& Emu—881210.11,

III [III

and an analogous arithmetic representation of the multivalued logical func-
tion [18]. Attempts have been made to construct such models [9. 2)).

The logic of development of modern electronics also dictates the creation
of nerve-like elements based on digital technology. which can specifically
provide a considerable improvement in the precision with which inﬁormation
can be transforned and an increase in operating speed. Attempts have been
made to move in this direction [3, lb], but achievement of significant
results will require more intensive efforts. which will make it possible
to construct complex neuronal networks that are no longer internediate
stages in information processing of the perceptron type 1111' but self-
organizing systems capable of making independent decisions even when there
is an information deficit, i.e., under conditions or quite substantial
indeterminacy.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At this point, we met set forth the basic principles of the structural
organisation and self-organization of such systems.

The first principle is that the system nust include a sufficiently large
set of components. This multiplicity is necessary in order to permit sig-
nal fluctuations. while ﬂuctuations are undesirable in a system operating
in conformity with a rigid program, they are-necessary in an ultracomplex
system capable of unforeseen actions. This is a consequence of well-known
rules of information theory U].

The second principle is that the network must be capable of self-formation
of feedback circuits. It should be noted that two types of neuronal feed-
back circuits are distinguished, i.e., honostatic and heterostatic; these
are apparently interconvertible. The purpose of honostatic circuits
(neuronal networks linked by negative feedback) is maintenance of equili-
brium within a given program. In all probability. heterostatic circuits
(neuronal networks with negative and positive feedback exhibiting aperiodic
fluctuational activity) play a considerable role. The functional rhythm
of the neurons in a heterostatic circuit depends on many factors. Depending
on the manner in which the primary circuits (houostatic and heterostatic)
are connected to form second- and third-order circuits. the system-rhythm
pulsations can acquire a wholly individual character. In this case, the
exogenous action of receptor models can have an organising influence on
the rhythmic operation of an ultracomplex network.

It also is important to provide the system with an initial program. The
existence of an initial program is dictated by the need to compare newly
arriving information with it. The initial program mst obviously be similar
to a genetic progran or instinct in a biological system and is determined

by the system properties, although it can be introduced from without.

In order to create conditions for self-organization. it is also necessary
to simulate the system's intrinsic requirements, its "attitude" toward
external factorspsince a system lacking such properties cannot develop.
For example, a system cm require homeostatic balancing under full-load
conditions.

The goals of neuronal technology as a branch of bionics are thus extremely
interesting and far-reaching. The most important objective is the creation
of a wide variety of initial couponents (neurons and general-purpose net-
work submits). followed by the development of subcircuits of increasing
complexity and hierarchic systems.

It will be possible for neuronal technology to solve these fundamntal
problems in the near future. As for the subsequent development of organi-
zational principles for complex and ultracoaplex networks. it will obviously
follow upon the establishment of a basis for an integrated-circuit tech-
nology for neuronal-network elements comprising large numbers of nerve-
like components linked into suhcircuits. Utilization of the internal

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl’ICIAL USE ONLY

information-manipulating properties of materials is considerably more pro-
mising in those cases where they are to some extent identical to those of
neuronal structures. Such properties are displayed, for exaqle, by the
hierarchic system of supemlecular compounds in polymers.

2.

3.

(O.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

nrnuocmuv'
Hiener, N., "Cybernetics", Moscow, Sov. radio, 1963; 326 p.

Dudkin, Km. and Gauzel'man, V.Ye., "A functional model of the neuron,"
"Tee. v Vsesoyuz. konf. po bionike" (Abstracts of Papers Presented at
the 5th All-Union Conference on Bionicsl, Moscou, Nauka, I973, pp 36-38.

lvanov. Yu.N. and Kogorod, 8.11.. "One model of an inhomgeneous inter-
calary-neuron network," "Problemy neyrokibernetiki" [Problems of Neuro-
cyberneticsl, Rostov-on-Don, Izd-vo Rost. un-ta, 1976, pp 69-72.

Ivashchenko, v.6. and Donov. V.G.. "A functional model of the neuron
utilizing thyristors," "Issledovaniya po bionike, razdrashimosti i
vozbuzhdeniyu" [Studies in Bionics. Irritability and Excitation],
Kazan', Izd-vo Kazan. un-ta. I976. pp 97-102.

Kirvelis, 0.1. and Pozin, N.V., "Sou problems of neuronal logic,"
"Voprosy bioniki" [Problems of Bionicsl. Hoacou, llauka. 1967. pp 163-173.

Klini, S.K., ”Event representations in neural networks and finite auto-
mate," "Automate", Moscow, led-v0 inostr. lit., I956, pp IS-l6.

Kogan, A.B., "Organization of nerve cells in neuronal ensenbles,"
"Sovrenennyye problemy neyrokibernetiki" [Current Problems in Neuro-
cyberneticsl, Leningred, Nsukn, 1972, pp 6-20.

Kuzne tsovs. v.1... Kuz'senko, v.1... end 'l‘syge'l'nyy, 1.14., "A neuronal
model with background activity utilizing frequency-volts; transducers,"
"Hnogoznachnyye elennty i struktury" utiltivalent Coqonents and Struc-
tures]. Kiev, Nauk. dudta. I978. pp 94-99.

Kuzne tsovs, V.l.. and Tsygl'nyi, I.H., "Use of certain aspects of the
theory of mul tivalent structures to describe neuronal netvorks." "Hate-
risly VIII konf. molodykh uchenykh fiz.-me|:h. in-ta AN USSR. Sektsiya
otbora i peredachi. inform." [Proceedings of the 8th Conference of

Young Scientists working at the Physics-Mechanics Institute, Academy of
Sciences of the UkrSSR. Information Gathering and Transmission Section].
L'vov, 1977. pp 92-97. VINITI Archives No 993-79.

l0. McCulloch, v.5. and Pitts, H., "A lcgical enuuration of ideas pertaining

to neural activity." "Automate". Moscow, lzd-vo inostr. lit., I956.
pp 362-3810.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'2.

'3.

I10.

'5.

l6.

l7.

IS.

I‘.

20.

2'.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Minsky, H. and Papert, 8., "Perceptrona", Moscow, Mir, I97l.

Pak, v.c., "Problems in the technical realization of the learning-capable
element of a decision-naking eyeten," "Probleny neyrokibernetiki"

[Problems of Neurocyberneticsl, Roatov-on-Don, Izd-vo Roat. un-ta, 1976,
pp l26-l38.

Polyakov, 6.1., "Osnovy eiateaatiki neyronov kory bol'ahogo nozga
cheloveka" [Taxonomic Principles for the Neurons of the Human Cerebral
Cortex], Moscow, Hediteina, 1973, 307 p.

Popov, V.A., skibenko, 1.1'. and Vaailenko, A.s., "One digital model
of the neuron," PROBL. BIONIKI, I977. No 18, pp 8l-85.

Popov, S.A., "Intonation feedback with delay in a nervous-ayaten
model," Kazan', 1977, pp 29-32. VINITI Archives No 649-77.

Pribru, K., "Languages of the Brain", Moscow, Progress, I975.

Rakov, M.A. (Editor), "Realizateiya anogoznachnykh atruktur avtonatiki"
(Implementation of Multivalent Structuree in Automation], Kiev, Nauk.
dulnlta, 1976, 350 p.

Samoilov, Ink. and Chernov, N.l., "Algebraic representation of logical
functions," ODNOROD. TSIFROVYYB WCHISL. STRUKTURY, I978, N0 9. pp 93-101.

Tasaki, J., "Conduction of the Neural Impulse", Moscow, led-v0 inoetr.
1it., I957, 186 1).

Taylor, H., "Computational devicee and the nervous ayeten," "simulation
in Biology", ﬂoacou, lad. inoatr. 1it., I963, pp. 203-228.

Tuzov, V.H., "Opportunitiee for conetruction of formal neurone based on
ml tivalent conbinational harmonic-frequency conponenta," "Hnogoznach-
nyye elenenty i stmktury" [Multivalent Conpmnta and Structureel,
Kiev, Nauk.dumka,- 1975, pp IOS-llb.

Hodgkin, A., "The Nervoua Inpulae'f, lbaoov, Hit, I965, 125 p.

Ecclee, J., “The Phyaiology of Nerve Cello", Hoacov, led-vo inoetr. lit.,
I959, 227 p. '

Gulrajani, R.H., Roberge, LA. and Hathieu, P.A., "A field-efuct
transistor analog for the study of bunt-generating neurone," PROC.
IEEE, I977, Vol 65, No 5. pp 807-809.

25. Naguno, J., Arimoto, 8., and Yeehizawa, 8., "Artificial neuron," PROC.

IRE, I962, Vol 50. No 10, pp 209a-2104.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunka", I980

24 78

(:80:

”360/350
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCTAL.USE10NLY

BIOTECHNOLOGY

UDC 612.825.5:612.882
MECHANISMS OF INTERACTION OF INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL ANALYZERS

Leningrad NEKHANIZNY VZAIMODEYSTVIYA VNUTRENNIKHH I VNESHNIKH ANALIZATOROV in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 8 Aug 80) pp 2. 132-1l2. 1H9

[Annotation, bibliography and table of contents from book "Mechanisms of Interaction
of Internal and External Analyzers", by Professor Vladimir Senenovich Raytses,
Institute of Physiology iaeni I. P. Pavlov, lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1350 copies,

150 pages]

[Text] The monograph correlates data from the literature and the author's own
materials from electrophysiological investigation of the functional organization
of the central sections of the internal (visceral) analyzers and the mechanisms of
the interaction of visceral afferent signals with sensory streams entering the
nervous system from somatic. vestibular and visual receptors. Current data is
reported on the participation of the hypothalanolinbic structures of the brain in
the central control of sensory processes and in the nechanisns of the interaction
of intero- and exteroceptive signalling. The book examines the significance of
visceral signalling to the formation and realization of certain forms of emotional
reactions and purposeful behavior. as well as to disturbances in the enotional

sphere under conditions of visceral pathology. Bibliography: ﬂﬂ9 titles: 50
figures; 5 tables.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Adrianov. 0. s. "0 printsipakh integrativnoy deyatel'nosti nozga“
[Principals of the Integrative Activity of the Brain]. Moscow. 1976.

2. Ayzikov. G. S.. Halikova. S. N. and Radkevich. L. A. 'The Effect of
Vestibular Afferent Inpulses 0n the Activity of Individual Neurons of the
Nuclei of the Vestibular Complex in Kittens." NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 8.

No 5. 1976.

3. Ayrapet'yants. E. Sh. "Vysshaya nervnaya deyatel'nost' i retseptory
vnutrennikh organov" [Higher Nervous Activity and Receptors of the
Internal Organs]. Moscow-Leningrad. 1952.

0. Ayrapet'yants. E. 8h. and Batuyev. A. 8. 'Printsip konvergentsii

analizatornykh sisten" [The Principle of Convergence of Analyzer Systems].
Leningrad. 1969.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

1".

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ayrapct'yants. E. Sh. and Vasilevskaya. N. Ye. "Visceral Signalling and
the Thalamus.” USP. FIZIOL. NAUK. VOL 6. 1975.

Ayrapet'yants. E. Sh. and Sotnichenko. T. S. 'Limbika' [The Lilbic
System]. Leningrad. 1967.

Amvros'yev. A. P. "Anatomiya afferentnykh sistem pishchevaritel'nogo
trakta" [Anatomy of the Digestive Tract Afferent Systems]. Minsk. 1972.

Anokhin. P. K. "The Neurophysiologicai Bases of the Electrical Activity
of the Cerebral Cortex" in "Sovremennyye problemy elektrofiziologicheskikh
issledovaniy nervnoy sistemy" [Current Problems in Electrophysiological
Investigation of the Nervous System]. Moscow. 1969.

Anokhin. P. K. "Biologiya i neyrofiziologiya uslovnogo refleksa" [Biology
and Neurophysiology of the Conditioned Reflex]. Moscow. 1968.

Anokhin. P. K. "Systemic Analysis of Integrative Activity of the Neuron
and the Concept of Its Degree of Freedom” in "Sistemnyy analiz
integrativnoy deyatel'nosti neyrona” [Systemic Analysis of the Integrative
Activity of the Neuron]. Moscow. 1979.

Arushanyan. A. V. and Belozertsev. T. I. "The Effect of Strychnine and
Corazol on Certain Types of Supraspinal and Segmented Inhibition of the
Cerebrospinal Reflexes." in 'Naterialy nauch. konf. po probl.
'Fiziologiya i patologiya kortikovistseral'nykh vzaimootnosheniy i
funktional'nykh sistem organizma" [Materials of Scientific Conference on
Physiology and Pathology of Corticovisceral Interrelations and Functional
Systems of the Organism]. Vol 1. Ivanovo. 1965.

Arshavskiy. Yu. 1.. Berkinblit. N. B. and Gel'fand. I. N. ”Organization
of Projection of Somatic Nerves in Different Regions of the Cerebellar
Cortex of Kittens." Vol 3. No 2. 1971.

Astvatsaturov. H. I. 1939. cited in Bykov. K. N. and Kurtsin. I. T..
"Kortiko—vistseral‘naya patologiya' [Cortico-Visceral Pathology].
Leningrad. 1960.

Ayupova. R. S.. Akhmediyeva. Z. Kh.. Kurbenova. G. V.. Grinin. V. V. and
Tashenov. K. T. "On the Question of Interoceptive Influences From the
Stomach on the Bioelectrical Activity of the Hypothelamus." TR. IN-TA
FIZIOLOGII AN KazSSR. Vol 23. 1977.

Baklavadzhyan. 0. G. "Vegetativnaya regulyatsiya elektricheskoy
aktivnosti mozga” [Vegetative Regulation of the Electrical Activity of
the Brain]. Leningrad. 1967.

Baklavadzhyan. O. G. "Electrophysiological Analysis of the Representation
of Visceral and Somatic Afferent Systems in the Hypothalamus." report
summary in "Ix s"yezd Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-vaJ'Vol u. Leningrad. 1970.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

2".

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Baklavadzhyan. 0. 6.. Adamyan. F. A.. Avetisyan. E. A. “Reactions of the
Neurons of Frontal and Posterior Lobes of the hypothalamus on Stimulation
of the Vagus and Sciatic Nerves to Light Stimulation." FIZIOL. ZMURN.
SSSR. Vol 63. 1977.

Baklavadzhyan. o. G. and Astvatsatryan. E. G. I'COIIparative Electro-
physiological Investigation of Nypothalamic Projection of Afferent
Systems or the Celiac and Sciatic Nerves." FIZIOL ZMURN SSSR. V01 59.
1973.

Baklavadzhyan. 0. G. and Bagdasaryan. K. G. ”The Reaction of Neurons of
the Anterior and Posterior Regions of the Mypothalamus to Stimulation of
the Celiac and Sciatic Nerves to Light Stimulus." NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol
8. 1976.

Baklavadzhyan. O. G. and Bagramyan. Z. A. "Analysis of Induced Potentials
of the Limbic Cerebral Cortex." NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 2. 1970.

Bakuradze. A. A. and Chkhenkeli. S. A. "Some Mechanisms of the Condition
of Formation of Satiation' in "Mekhanizmy neyrogumoral'noy regulyatsii

vegetativnykh runktsiy" [Mechanisms of Neurohumoral Regulation of
Vegetative Functions]. Leningrad. 1970.

Batuyev. A. S. 'Multisensory Convergence 0n Neurons of the Associative
Fields of the Cortex“ in “Mater. Vsesoyuz. konf. po elektrofiziologii TsNS'

[Materials of the All-Union Conference on Electrophysiology of the CNS].
Leningrad. 1971.

Batuyev. A. S. and Gafurov. B. 6. "Reactions of the Cortical Neurons To
Viscerosomatic Stimulation.” NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 3. 1971.

Bezhenaru. I. 5. "Investigation of the Neural Structures of the Brain
Stem Nhich Create Rapid Reactions in the Reticulospinal Pathways.”
NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 3. 1971.

Beller. N. N.. Musyashchikova. s. S. "Induced Potentials of the Limbic
Cerebral Cortex or the Cat uith Stimulation of the Mesenteral Nerves."
FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR. Vol 51. 1965.

Beiov. V. P. "Personality Features and Psychosomatic Interrelation: in
Patients with Gastric Ulcer (of the Duodenum) and Chronic Nonspecific

Colitis." ZHURN. NEVROPATOL. I PSIKHIATR.. V01 21. 1971.

27.

Berdashkevich. A. P. "Issledovaniye dvigatel'nogo povedeniya krys pri
gipotalanicheskoy samostimulyatsii Iozga' [Investigation of the Motor

Behavior of Rats in Hypothalamic Autostinulation of the Brain].
author's abstract of candidate's dissertation. Moscow. 1973.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

3".

35.

37.

38.

39.

“0.

HI.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Beritashvili. I. 3. “Structural and Functional Bases of Mental Activity"
in "Strukturnyye i funktsional'nyye osnovy psikhichheskoy deyatel'nosti'
[Structural and Functional Bases of Mental Activity]. Moscow. 1963.

Beteleva. T. G. "The Effect of Prolonged Light and Auditory Stinulation
on Activity of Neurons of the External Geniculate Body of Rabbits" in
"Probleny fiziologii optiki.” Leningrad. 1969.

Bekhtereva. M. P. 'Meurophysiological Aspects of Hulan Mental Activity.”
USPEKHI FIZIOL. MAUK. Vol 1. 1970.

Blagoveshchenskaya. M. S. “Topicheskoye znacheniye nerusheniya zvuka.

vestibulyarnoy funktsii. obonyaniya i vkusa pri porazheniyakh golovnogo
mozga" [Local Significance of Disturbances in Hearing. the Vestibulery
Function. Snell. and Taste in Cerebral Injuries]. Moscow. 1962.

Bogovarova. Ye. F. "Materials for Physiological Description of

Interoceptive Inhibition of Cerebrospinal Motor Reflexes" in "The Cerebellun
and Regulation of Function]. Kiev. 1963.

Bratus'. M. V. "Mozzhechok i vistserotseptsiya' [The Cerebellun and
Visceroception]. Leningrad. 1969.

Bratus'. N. V.. Levchuk. O. V.. Moroz. V. M.. Solov'eva. L. A. and Yenchik.
G. V. "Participation of Certain Cores of the Brain Stem in the Formation
of Induced Reactions of the Cerebellar Cortex in Somatic and Visceral

Stimulation.“ report summary. in "XII s"yezd Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-va.."
Leningrad. 1975.

Bulygin. I. A. "The Effect of Stimulation of Internal Organs on the
Cerebrospinal Reflexes and the Role of the Brain." BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL.
I MED.. Vol 12. 19u1.

Bulygin. I. A. "Issledovaniye zakononernostey i Iekhaniznov

interotseptivnykh refleksov' [Investigation of Patterns and Mechanisns of
Interoceptive Reflexes]. Minsk. 1959.

Bulygin. I. A. "Afferentyye puti interotseptivnykh refleksov" [Afferent
Pathways of Interoceptive Reflexes]. Minsk. 1966.

Bulygin. I. A. "Organization of Visceral Afferent Systems" USPEKHI
FIZIOL. MAUK. Vol 8. 1977.

Bulygin. I. A. and Soltanov, V. V. "Elektrofiziologicheskiy analiz
vistseral'nykh afferentnykh sistem" [Electrophysiological Analysis of
Visceral Afferent Systems]. Minsk. 1973.

Bykov. K. M. "Kora golovnogo nozga i vnutrenniye organy" [The Cerebral
Cortex and the Internal Organs]. Kirov. 1992.

Bykov. K. M. and Kurtsin. I. T. "Kortikovistseral'naya patologiya"

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“2.

"3.

au.

"6.

N7.

"8.

"9.

50.

51.

52.

53.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Corticovisceral Pathology]. Leningrad. 1960.

Vaynshteyn. I. I. and Sinonov. P. V. 'Emotsiogennyye struktury mozga i
serdtse' [Emotion-Generating Structures of the Brain and Heart]. Moscow.
1979.

Val'dman. A. V. "Results of. and Outlook for. Functional-Morphological
Investigation of the Action of Neurotropic Agents on Regulation of
Physiological Functions" in "Neyrofarnskologiya protsessov tsentral'noy

regulyatsii' [Neuropharnacology of the Processes of Central Regulation].
Leningrad. 1968.

Val'dman. A. V. ”Principal Problems in the Investigation of Emotional
Behavior in Experiments on Animals" in 'Eksperimental'naya neyrofizologiya
emotsiy" IEXperimental Neurophysiology of Emotions]. Leningrad. 1972.

Val'dnan. A. V. and Kozlovskaya. M. M. I'Correlation of Sonatovegetative
Manifestations of Emotional and Behavioral Reactions." FIZIOL. ZHURN.
SSSR. Vol 55. 1969.

Vasilevskaya. N. Ye. "0 funktsii i strukture vistserokhimicheskogo

analizatora" [On the Functions and Structure of the Viscerochemical
Analyzer]. Leningrad. 1971.

Vedyayev. F. P. "Analysis of the effects of electrostimulation of
Certain Linbic Structures." MEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 1. 1969.

Veiikaya. R. R. "On the Influence of the Hypothelanic Nuclei on
Electrical Activity of Neurons of the Visual Cortex.“ MEYROFIZIOLOGIYA.
Vol 7. 1975.

Velikaya. R. R.. and Il'in. K. G. lInduced Reactions of the Neurons of

the Visual Cortex in Stimulation of the Hypothalamic Formations." FIZIOL.
ZHURN. URSR. Vol 23. 1977.

Vinnikov. Va. A. "Tsitologicheskiye i molekulyarnyye osnovy retseptsii.
Evolyutsiya organov chuvstv" [Cytological and Molecular Bases of -
Reception. Evolution of the Sense Organs]. Leningrad. 1971.

Voronin. L. L.. Skrebitskiy. V. G. and Sharonova. I. N. 'Microelectrode
Investigations of Convergence of Signals of Different Sensory Modalities
in the Cerebral Neurons." USPEKHI FIZIOL. NAUK. Vol 2. 1971.

Gadzhiyeva. N. A. “The Effect of Heterosensory Reactions 0n Induced
Activity of the External Geniculate Body.” IZV. AM AZSSR SER. BIOL.. Mo 3.
1970.

Gadzhiyeva. N. A. and Rzayeva. N. "Electrophysiological Investigation
of Integration of Dernosomatic and Visceral Inpulses in the Somstosensory

Cortex and Specific Thalanus Under Different Function States of the
Reticular Formation of the Brain Stem." report summary. in "IX s'yezd

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5“.

55.

S6.

5?.

58.

59.

60.

6|.

62.

6“.

65.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-va.' Vol 2. Leningrad. 1910

Gal'perin. S. I. "Znacheniye interotseptsii (chuvstvitel'nosti)
vnutrennikh organov v regylyatornoy roli vysshikh otdelov nervnoy
sistemy" [The Significance of the Interoception (Sensitivity) of Internal
Organs to the Regulatory Role of Higher Branches of the Nervous System].
author's abstract of doctoral dissertation. Leningrad. 1936.

Ganitkevich. Va. V. 'Zhelch' i deyatel'nost' nervnoy sistemy" [Bile and

Nervous System Activity]. author's abstract of doctoral dissertation.
Donetsk. 1968.

Gasanov. G. G. ”The Role of the Posterior Region of the Limbic Cortex of
the Cerebrum in Interoception of Metabolic Unconditioned Reflexes from the
Stomach." DAN SSSR. Vol 159. 1964.

Gershuni. G. V. "Organization of the Afferent Stream and the Process of
Differentiation of Signals of Different Durations," ZhVNH. Vol 15. 1965.

Gershuni. G. V.. Kozhevnikov. V. A.. Maruseva. A. M. et a1. "Changes in
the Electric Responses of the Auditory System to Different Forms of
Higher Nervous Activity" in "Elektroentsefalograficheskoye issledovaniye

visshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti' [Electroencephalographic Investigation of
Higher Nervous Activity]. Moscow. 1962.

Gokin. A. P. "Properties of the Synaptic Activation of Intermediate
Neurons of the Thoracic Segments of the Spinal Cord of Dermal. Muscular
and Visceral Afferents." NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 2. 1970.

Gokin. A. P. and Preobrazhenskiy. N. N. "Synaptic Mechanisms of Inter-
action between Somatic and Visceral Influences in the Spinal Cord" in

"Mekhanizmy 0b"yedidneniya neyronov v nervnom tsentre' [Mechanisms of Union
of Neurons in the Nervous Center]. Leningrad. 197V.

Gorgiladze. G. I. "Investigation of the Mechanisms of the Dual
Function of Vestibular Apparatus." DAN SSSR. Vol 158. 1969.

Gorgiladze. G. I. "Microelectrode Investigation of the Reactions of
the Neurons of the Vestibular Nuclei in Cats Hith Polarization and
Caloric Stimulation of the Labyrinths." in 'Fiziologiya vestibularnogo
analizatora" [The Physiology of the Vestibular Analyzer]. Moscow. 1968.

Gorgiladze G. I. and Smirnov. G. D. "The Effect of Vestibular Stimulation
on the Neuronal Activity of the Visual Cortex of the Cerebrum of Cats"
ZhVND. Vol 17. 1967.

Grashchenkov. N. I. "Gipotalamus i ego rol' v fiziologii i patologii"
[Hypothalamus and Its Role In Physiology and Pathology]. Moscow. 196V.

Gromova. Ye. A.. Gil'man. I. M. "Comparative Analysis of the Rising
Influence of the Hypothalanus on the Cerebral Cortex and the Behavior of

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

.luO

75.

76.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unanesthetized Cats." ZhVND. Vol 19. 1969.

Dmitriyev. A. S. "Labirintnyye i ekstralabirintnyye mekhanizmy nekotorykh
somaticheskikh i vegetativnykh reaktsiy na uskoreniye' [Labyrinth and

Extralabarynth Mechanisms of Certain Somatic and Vegetative Reactions to
Acceleration]. Minsk. 1969.

Dmitriyev. A. 8.. Burko. Ye. V. and Tropnikova. G. K. "The Role of the
Vestibular Nuclei of the Nedulla Oblongata in Formation of Neurohumoral
Reactions of the Organism to Labyrinth and Extralabyrinth Stimulation"
report summary. in "III s"yezd Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-vaf'Vol 1. Alma-Ate.
I979.

Durinyan. R. A. "Tsentral'naya struktura afferentykh sistem' [Central
Structure of Afferent Systems]. Moscow-Leningrad. 1965.

Durinyan. R. A. "How Should the Physiological Significance of the
Thalamocortical Representation of Visceral Afferent Systems Be Under-
stood?’I in "Hekhanizmy interotaeptsii" [Mechanisms of Intaroception],
Ivano—Frankovsk. I967.

Durinyan. R. A. "Several Concepts of the Mechanisms of Visceral
Sensitivity“ in "Problemy interotseptsii. regulyatsii fiziologicheakikh
funktsiy i povedeniya" [Problems in Interoception. Regulation of
Physiological Functions and Behavior]. Leningrad. 1976.

Dutov. A. H. "Rol' vistseral'noy afferentatsii v deyatel'nosti
vestibulyarnoy sistemy" [The Role of Visceral Afferentation in the
Activity of the Vestibular System]. author's abstract of doctoral
disseration. Ivano-Frankovsk. 1971.

Dutov. A. H. "Reaction of Neurons of the Vestibular Nuclei to
Interceptive Stimulation." BYULL.EKSPERIM. BIOL. I "30.. V01 6!. 1979.

Dutov. A. H. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. "On the Interaction of Vestibular
and Viscerosomatic Afferent Stimulation on the Neurons of the Vestibular
Nuclei" in "Funktsional'nye i strukturnyye oanovy sistemoy deyatel'nosti i
mekhanizmy plastichnosti mozga” [Functional and Structural Bases of the
System of Activity and Mechanisms of the Plasticity of the Cerebrum].
Moscow. 1975.

Yevtushenko. 0. Ye. "Influence of Interoceptive Impulses on Nono- and

Polysynaptic Responses of the Plexor Notoneurona" FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR.
Vol 10-11. 1963.

Yegorov. B. B. "Nekotoryye oaobennosti afferentnykh svyazey neyronov
vestibulyarnykh yader' [Several Properties of the Afferent Connections

of the Neurons of the Vestibular Nuclei]. author's abstract of candidate's
dissertation. Moscow. 1967.

Yemel'yanenko. I. V. "The Effect of the Status of Alimentary Excitability

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

8”.

85.

86.

88.

89.

FOR 0FF1C1AL USEZCMNLY

on Emotional and Behavioral Reactions.“ FIZIOL. ZURN. URSR. Vol 21.

Yemel'yanenko. I. V. “The Significance of Interoceptive Signalling in the
Regulation of Emotional Behavior“ BYULL EKSPER BIOL. I NED.. author's
abstract of candidate's dissertation. Ivano—Frankovsk. 1977.

Yemel'yanenko. I. V. and Raytses. V. S. "The Significance of Intero-
ceptive Signalling in the Modulation of Emotional and Behavioral
Reactions." BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I NED.. Vol 66. 1976.

Yermolayeva. V. In. and Chernigovskiy. V. N. "Participation of Certain

Structures of the Limbic System in the Performance of Visceral and Somatic
Signalling." DAN SSSR. Vol 159. 1964.

Yesakov. A. I. "On the Question of Efferent Regulation of Receptors (0n

the Example of the Cheaoreceptors of the Tongue)." BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I
"50.. Vol 51. 1961.

Zhukova. G. P. "On the Neuronal Structure of the Vestibular Nuclei in
Predators.“ ARKHIV ANAT. GISTOL. I ENBRIOL.. Vol "9. 1965.

Zhukova. G. P. "On the Neural Structure of Vestibular Nuclei in
Predators." ARKHIV ANAT. GISTOL. I ENBRIOL.. Vol 99. 1965.

Zhukova. G. P. "Rollandovo Substance and its Place in the Analyzer
System." USPEKHI SOVREN. BIOL.. Vol 61. 1966.

Zabolotnykh. V. A. "Investigation of the Activity of the Neurons of
Hypothalamic Branch of the Alimentary Center Under the Influence on the
Nechanoreceptors of the Stomach and the Introduction of Insulin or Glucose
to the Vascular Bed.” DAN SSSR. No 153. 1963.

Zayko. N. S. "The Activity of human Taste Receptors in the Aspect of
Their Interaction with the Interoceptors of the Stomach.” report summary.
in "XI s"yezd Vsesoyuz. o-va fiziol..' Vol 2. Leningrad. 1970.

Zilov. V. 6.. Rogacheva. S. K. "Effect of Electrical Stimulation of
Different Regions of the Cerebral Cortex on the Alimentary Reaction of
Rabbits." ZhVND. Vol 25. 1975.

Zubilov. Yu. N. and Kosilov. P. A. 'Electrophysiological Character of
Afferent Influences From the Internal Organs on the Reflector Reactions of
Motor Centers." NAUCHN. SOOBSHCH. IN-TA FIZIOL. AN SSSR. No 2. 1959.

Ignatov. Yu. D. and Medvedev. 0. 3. ”Analysis of the Interaction of the
Somatic and Vegetative Afferent Inputs on the Segmentary Level." doctoral
thesis. in "111 Vses. konf. po fiziol. veget. nervn. sistemy." Yerevan.
1967.

Il'inskiy. 0. B. "Nekhanoretseptory. Voprosy fiziologii sensornykh sistem"
[Hechanoreceptors. Questions of Physiology of Sensory Systems]. Leningrad.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90.

9‘.

92.

93.

9".

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

IO].

102.

FOR OFFICIAL U...'. ONLY

1967.

Il'inskiy. 0. B. "Fiziologiya mekhanoretseptorov' [Physiology of
Hechanoreceptors). Leningrad. 1975.

Istamanova. T. I. "Funktsional'nyye rasstroystva vnutrennikh organov

pri nevrastenii' [Functional Disorders of Interal Organs in Neurasthenia].
Moscow. 1958.

Kazakov. V. N. “Representation of Pulmonary Receptors in the Cerebral
Cortexes of Cats.” FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR. Vol 53. 1966.

Kazakov. V. N. 'Funktsional'naya organizatsiya i svyazi orbitofrontal'noy
kory' [Functional Organization and Connection of the Orbitofrontal Cortex].
author's abstract of doctoral dissertation. Odessa. 1971.

Kalyuzhnyy. L. V. "Variation in Induced Potential In Different Motivated
Reactions of Rabbits." DAN SSSR. No 189. 1969.

Kassil'. V. 6. ”Reception in the Gastrointestinal Tract and Alimentary
Behavior" in "Problemy interotseptsii. regulyatsii fiziologicheskikh
funktsiy i povedeniya." Leningrad. 1976.

Kassil'. V. 6.. Ugolev. A. N. and Chernigovskiy. V. N. "Regulation of
Selection of Consumption. Food and Metabolism." USPBKEI PIZIOL. NAUK, VOL
1, 1970.

Kashtanov. S. I. "Convergence of Somatic and Vegetative Afferent Inpulses
at Individual Neurons of the Hypothalamic Region of the Brain.‘ in
"Funktsional'naya organizatsiya deyatel'noati uozga" [Functional
Organization of the Activity of the Cerebrum]. Moscow. 1910.

Kekcheyev. K. Kh. 'Interotseptsiya i propriotseptsiya i ikh znacheniye
dlya kliniki" [Interoception and Proprioception and Their Significance
for Clinical Practice]. Moscow, 19ﬂ6.

Kislyakov. V. A. "New Data on the Mechanism of the Function of the
Vestibular Apparatus. (Dynamics of the Cupula. Nystagmus. Experiment
with Hodeling)." In "Problemy sovremennoy fiziologicheskoy nauki"
[Problems of Modern Physiological Science]. Leningrad. 1971.

Klimov. P. K. Nozdrachev. A. D. and Chernigovakiy, V. n. "Afferentation
in the Sympathetic Pathways of the Stomach. Associated With Its Notor-
Evacuation Activity." FIZIOL ZHURN. SSSR. Vol 59. 1973.

Koval'zon. V. H. ”0n the Cerebral Substratum of Self-Stimulation" in
"Fiziologiya cheloveka i zhivotnykh' [The Physiology of Man and Animals].
Vol 15. "Fiziologiya emotsiy' [The Physiology of Emotion]. Moscow. 1975.

Kozhechkin. 0. N.. Zhadina. s. D. and Bondar'. G. 6. "Variation in
Spontaneous and Induced Activity of the Neurons of the Visual Cortex of

21

FOR 0FF1C1AI.lﬁHE(NULV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Rabbit with Stimulation of Different Regions of the Hypothelanus."
ZhVND. Vol 25. 1975.

Kozlova. I. A. ”Rol' interotseptorov v regulyatsii obnena mikroelenentov
(nedi. zheleza. tsinka) i sopryazhennykh s nini uetalloproteidov" [the
Role of Interoceptors in the Regulation of the Metabolism of Microelenents

(Copper. Iron. Zinc) and the Metalloproteins Combined with Then]. author's
abstract of doctoral dissertation. Ivano-Frankovsk. 1971.

Kouendantov. G. L. "Ustanovochnyye refleksy" [Regulating Reflexes].
author's abstract of doctoral dissertation. Moscow. 196V.

Koryukin. V. Ye. "The Influence of the Hypothalaaus on Cardiovascular
Activity Under Conditions of Cululation of Acceleration.“ ZHURM. USMMYKH.
NOSOVYKH I GORLOVYKH BOLEZREY. Vol u. 1977.

Kostyuk. P. G. "Neuronal Mechanisms of Supraspinal Visceronotor Reflexes'

in 'Mekhanizny interotseptsii" [Mechanisms of Interoception]. Ivano-
Frankovsk. 1967.

Kostyuk. P. G. and Preobrazhenskiy. N. M. 'Supraspinal Control of the

Sympathetic Processes in Visceral Reflexes." BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I MED..
Vol 62. 1966.

Kostyuk. P. G. and Preobrazhenskiy. N. v. "Mekhanizny integratsii
vistseral'nykh i soaaticheskikh afferentnykh signalov" [Mechanisms of
Integration of Visceral and Soaatic Afferent Signals]. Leningrad. 1975.

Kotlyar. B. I. and Florov. A. G. “Reorganization of the Activity of
Neurons of the External Geniculate Body in Sound-Light Associations.“
ZhVND. Vol 21, 1971.

Kratin. Yu. G. "Analiz signalov mozga" [Analysis of Cerebral Signals].
Leningrad. 1977.

Krauz. V. A. "Sravnitel'naya kharakteristika deystviya ryada
tsentral’nykh M- i M-kholinolitikov na razlichnyye struktury i sisteny
golovnogo mozga' [A Comparative Description of the Action of a Number of
Central M- and N-cholinolytics on Different Structures and Systels of the
Cerebruu]. Leningrad. 1969.

Kullanda. K. H. "On the Representation of Internal Organs in the Cerebral
Cortex and Cerebellum of Cats and Dogs. Report I..' BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I
HED.. Vol "3. 1951.

Kullanda. K. M. Ibld. Report II. BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I MED.. Vol Q3, [sic]
1957.

Kunan. E. A. and Skrebitskiy. V. 6. "Interaction of Visual and Auditory
Afferentation in the External Geniculate Body of the Brain of Rabbits.”
ZhVND. Vol 18. 1968.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11“.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

1211.

125.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kurashvili. A. Ye., Borodkin. 0. S. and Koryukin. V. Ye. "On the Role of
the hypothalamus in the Formation of Vestibular Reactions." VESTN.
OTORINOLARINGOL.. No 6. 1975.

Kurtsin. I. T. I"The Effect of Afferent Impulses of the Digestive Tract
on the Course of the Cortical Processes." FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR. Vol 25.
1938.

Lakcmkin. A. I. and Hyagkov. I. F. "Golod i zhazhda" [Hunger and Thirst].
Moscow. 1975.

Latash. L. P. and Kunan. E. A. “Variation in the Reaction of Neurons of
the Visual Cortex to Flashes of Light in Nypothalanic and Reticular
Stimulation." NEYROFIZIOLOGYA. Vol 3. 1971.

Lebedeva. V. A. 'Hekhanizay khemoretseptsii" [Mechanisls of
Chemoreception]. Noscow-Leningrad. 1965.

Lebedeva. V. A.. Filippova. L. V.. and Chernigovskiy, V. N. 'The
Reaction of Tissular Chemoreceptors of the Small Intestine to Changes in
p602. pH and H2603 in Perfusion Solutions." l-‘IZIOL. ZNURN. 888R. Vol 62.
1976.

Levchuk. 0. V.. Bratus'. N. V.. and Grigoryan. R. A. "The Properties of
Electrical Reactions of Neurons of the Cortex of the Cerebellul of Rats
in Stimulation of the Vague Nerve and Nerves of the Limbs.“
NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol a. 1972.

Leshchinyuk, LI. "Primeneniye neyrotropnykh sredstv dlya analiza
tsentral'nykh mekhanizmov vestibulyarnogo nistagna' [The Use of
Neurotrophic Agents in Analysis of Central Mechanisms of Vestibular
Nystagmus] in "Informatsionnyye naterialy (Ob"yed. nauchn. Sovet
'Fiziologiya cheloveka i zhivotnykh')" [Information Haterials (Association

of Scientific Council on The Physiology of Man and Animals of the USSR
Academy of Sciences)]. Vol 15. 1968.

Lobanova. L. V. I'On Certain Functions of the Caudate Nucleus.‘ report
sumary. in ”IX s'ezd Vaesoyuz. fiziol. o-va" [Ninth Conference of the
All-Union Physiology Society]. Vol 2. 1970.

Lobanova. L. V. and Smirnov. 3. I. ”Reflection of Visceral Signalling
in the Impulse Activity of the Caudate Nucleus." FIZIOL. ZHURN. 888R. Vol
62. 1976.

Luriya. R. A. "Vnutrennyaya kartina bolezney i iatrogennyye zabolevaniya'
[Internal Picture of Diseases and Iatrogenic Disorders]. Moscow, 191111.

Hakarenko. Yu. A. "Properties of the Central Hechanisus of Reinforcement
in Reaction of Self-Stimulation and Their Connection to the Basic

Biological Motivations" in I'3trukturnaya. funktsional'naya i
neyrokhimicheskaya organizatsiya emotsiy' [Structura1. Functional and

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

13?.

‘33.

13".

135.

u 51'. ,

137.

138.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Neurochemical Organization of the Emotions]. Leningrad. 1971.

Nakarov. V. A. “The Role of the Amygdaloid Complex in the Mechanism of
Convergence of Stimulation: of Different Sensory Hodalities on the
Neurons of the Cortex of the Cerebral Hemispheres' DAM SSSR Vol 19~. 1970.

Hakarchenko. A. F. and Dunaburg. A. D. "Mezhutochnyy mozg i

vegetativnaya nervnaya sistema” [The Interstitial Brain and the Vegetative
Nervous System]. Kiev. 1971.

Makarchenko. A. F.. Velikaya. R. R. and Il'in. V. N. "The Hypothalanus
and the Visual System." FIZIOL. ZHURN. AN URSR. Vol 23. 1977.

Merkulova. 0. s. 'Interotseptory i skeletnaya muskulatura" [Interoceptors
and the Skeletal Musculature]. Moscow. 1959.

Merkulova. 0. S. and Popova. T. V. "Variation in the Bioelectrical

Activity of the hedulla Oblongata in Stimulation of the Receptors of the
Urinary Bladder." FIZIOL. ZﬂURN. SSSR. Vol 53. 1967.

Hogendovich. H. R. "Chuvstvitel'nost' vnutrennykh organov (interotseptsia)
i khronaksiya skeletnoy muskulatury" [Sensitivity of the Internal Organs
(Interoception) and Chronaxia of Skeletal Husculature]. Leningrad. 1991.

Mogendovich. M. R. "Reflektornoye vzaimodeystviye lokomotornoy i

vistseral'noy sistemy" [Reflector Interaction of Locomotor and Visceral
Systems]. Leningrad. 1957.

Moiseyeva. I. A. "The Effect of the Hechanoreceptors of the Stomach on

Higher Nervous Activity." TRUDY IN-TA FIZIOLOGII IN. I. P. PAVLOVA AN SSSR.
Vol 1. 1952.

Hokrushin. A. A. ”Change in the Cortical ReSponses to Repeated Stimulation
of the Celiac Nerve of the Cat." DAN SSSR. Vol 227. 1976.

Husyashchikcva, S. S. "Induced Potentials in the Cortex and Underlying
Structures of the Cerebrum of Cats in Stimulation of Visceral Systems" in

"Nekhanizmy vyzvannykh potentsialov mozga'[Hechanisms of Induced Cerebral
Potentials]. Leningrad. 1971.

Musyashchikova and S. S. Chernigovskiy. V. N. 'Kortikal'noye i
subkortikai'noye predetevitel'stvo vistseral'nykh sistem" [Cortical and
Subcorticai Representation of Visceral Systems]. Leningrad, 1973.

Masyaahchikova. s. S. and Sinyaya. M. 8. "Activation of 6011' and

Burdakh 's Nuclei of the Hedulla Oblongata by Visceral Afferent Systems."
NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 6. 1979.

Musyashchikoa, S. 8.. Sinyays. M. S. and Hokrushin. A. A.

"Neuorphysiological Analysis of Visceral Afferent Systems." FIZIOL. ZHURN.
SSSR. Vol 62. 1977.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
139.

1N0.

1H1.

1N2.

1M3.

11m.

1N5,

196.

1N7.

198.

139.

150.

151.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nyakushko. V. A. 'Vzaimodeystviye afferentnykh interotseptivnykh i
eksterotseptivnykh vliyaniy na strukturakh yader bluzhdayushohikh nervov“
[Interaction of the Afferent Interoceptive and theroceptive Influences
on the Structures of the Vagus Nerve Nuclei]. author's abstract of
candidate's dissertation. Dnepropetrovsk. 191V.

Narikashvili. S. P. "Associative Region of the Cerebral Cortex
and Its Interaction with the Sensory Zones.” ZhVND. Vol 19.
1969.

Naumova. T. S. and Popova. N. S. "0n the Role of the Analyzers in
Systemic Activity." USPEKHI FIZIOL. NAUK. Vol 3, 1972.

Nevzorova. T. N. "Psikhotropnyye sredstva v somaticheskoy meditsine”
[Psychotropic Agents in Somatic Medicine]. Moscow. 1972.

Nozdracnev, A. D. "Electrophysiological Description of Afferent and
Efferent Inpulses in Vegetative Nerves in Long-term Experiments." FIZIOL.
ZHURN. SSSR. Vol 52. 1966.

Nozdrachev. A. D. 'Vegetativnaya reflektornaya duga' [The Vegetative
Reflex Arch]. Leningrad, 1978.

Orlov. V. P.. Nerten. A. A.. Yankovskiy. G. A. and Tayban. I. L.

"Induced Potentials of (Deyters') Nucleus in Stimulation of the Neural
Elements of Bones. Cutaneous and Muscle Nerves.“ FIZIOL. ZNURN. 888R. Vol
6". 1978.

Pavlov. I. P. "Chief Laws of the Activity of the Central Nervous System.
as Ascertained in Investigation of Conditioned Reflexes“ in "Poln. sobr.
soch.." Vol 3. Moscow-Leningrad. 1949.

Pavlovich. N. V. "Toward Electrophysiological Analysis of the Mechanisms
of Viscerosomatic Reflexes in Inflammation.“ PATOL. FIZIOL. I EKSPER.
TERAPIYA. Vol 10. 1966.

Pavlovich. N. V. "0n the Question of the Interaction of Somatic and
Visceral Afferent Systems on the Spinal and Thalamic Levels." report
summary. in "XI s"yezd Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-vali Vol 1. 1978.

Pavlovich. N. V. "The Interaction of the Afferent Pelvic and Sciatic
Nerves in 6011' 's Nucleus." report summary in "XIII s"yezd Vsesoyuz.
fiziol. o—va."Vol 1. Alma—Ata. 1979.

Pavlovich. N. V. and Raytses. V. S. "Pathophysiology of Associated

Interceptive Influences on the Skeletal Nusculature” in "Hater. III. Ukr.

Konf. patofiziol." [Materials of Third Ukrainian Conference of
Pathophysiologists]. Odessa. 1966.

Pityk. N. I. "Reactions of the Neurons of External Geniculate Bodies of

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1NC1AI.USE(NNLY

the Cat on Somatic and Visceral Stimulation.“ NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 9.
1973.

Pituk. N. I. ”The Influence of Stimulation of the Cortical Representation
of the Vagus and Celiac Nerves on the Activity of the Neurons of the
Visual Cortex" in "Mater. I-y Vsesoyuz. konf. po fiziologii vegetativnoy
nervnoy sistemy" [Materials of the Fourth All-Union Conference on the
Physiology of the Vegetative Nervous System]. Yerevan. 1916.

Pityk. N. I. "On the Participation of Interoceptive Afferent Stimulation

in the Processes of Sensory Integration in the Neurons of the Visual Zone
of the Cat.” NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 9. 1977.

Pityk. N. I. I'Participation by the Interoceptive Afferent Signals in the
Polymodal Reactions of the Neurons of the Anterior Lamina Tecti of the
Cat.“ NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 10. 1978.

Pityk. N. I.. Raytses. V. S. and Khananashvili. M. M. "Convergence and
Interaction of Visceral. Somatic and Visual Stimulation on Separate
Neurons of the External Genioulate Bodies of the Cat.‘ FIZIOL ZHURN. 388R.
Vol 61. 1975.

Polyakov. G. I. '0 printsipakh neyronnoy organizatsii mozga' [0n the
Principals of the Neural Organization of the Brain]. Moscow. 1965.

Preobrazhenskiy. N. N. “Synaptic Processes of Motoneurons in Adequate
Stimulation of the Interceptors" in "Mekhanizny interotseptsii.‘I Ivano-
Frankovsk. 1967.

Preobrazhenskiy. N. N. and Limanskiy. Yu. P. "Activation of the
Reticular Neurons of the Medulla Oblongta by Visceral Afferents.”
NEYROFIZIOLOGYA. Vol 2. 1969.

Provodina. V. N. "Electrophsyiological Analysis of the Rising Influence of
the Frontal Regions of the Mypothalamus on the Cerebral Cortex in
Unanesthetized Rabbits." BYULL EKSPER. BIOL. I MED.. Vol 26. 1969.

Razumeyev. A. N. and Shipov. A. A. 'Nervnyye mekhanizmy vestibulyarnykh
reaktsiy" [Neural Mechanisms of Vestibular Reactions]. Moscow. 1969.

Raytses. V. S. "On Changes in Higher Nervous Activity in Experimental
Pathology of the Stomach.” BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I MED.. Vol 1!. 1956.

Raytses. V. S. "The Effect of Stimulation of the Meohanoreoeptors of the
Stomach on the Bioelectrical Activity of the Cortex and Subcortical
Formations of the Cerebrua Under Normal and Pathological Conditions."
FIZIOL. ZNURN. SSSR. Vol 1H. 1958.

Raytses, V. S. "K patofiziologii interotseptsii (reflektornyye vliyaniya
s patologicheski izmennogo zheludka i ikh korrelyatsiyaY'EThe Patho-

26

FOR 0F11C1AI.USEGDNL¥
16".

165.

166.

‘67.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

physiology of Interoception (Reflex Influences From the Pathologically
Changed Stomach and Their Correlation). author's abstract of doctoral
dissertation. Leningrad. 1962.

Raytses. V. S. 'Interoceptive Influences on the Fine Reflexes of the
Labyrinth." BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I "$0.. Vol 56. 1966.

Raytses. V. 3. "Functional Organization of Visoeromotor Reflexes Under
Normal and Pathological Conditions" in 'Hekhanizmy interotseptsii.‘I Ivano-
Frankovsk. 1967.

Raytses. V. S. "Central Apparatuses and Mechanisms of Viacerosomatic

Integration (According to the Data of Electrophysiological Investigations).'
USPEKHI FIZIOL. NAUK. Vol V. 1973.

Raytses. V. S. 'Neurophysiological Aspects of the Interaction of the
Vestibular System with Other Sensory Systems of the Organism." KOSNICH.
BIOL. I AVIAKOSMICH. HED.. Vol 8. 197“.

Raytses. V. s. "Neural Mechanisms of Visceral. Somatic and Sensory-
Specific Signalling in the Subcortical-Trunk Relay of the Visual and
Vestibular Analyzers" in "Sovremennyye tendentsii v neyrofiziologii"
[Current Trends in Neurophysiology]. Leningrad. 1977.

Raytses. V. S. and Dutov. A. H. “The Role of Visceral Afferentation in
the Activity of the Vestibular System." KOSHICH. BIOL. I "30.. Vol 5.
1971.

Raytses. V. 3.. Dutov. A. M. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. "The Functional
Interaction Between the Visceral. Somatosensory and Vestibular Systems."
report summary. in "X1 s"yezd Vse-soyuz. fiziol. o-vaJ'Vol 2. Leningrad.
1970.

Raytses. V. 8.. Pavlovich. N. V. and Belokon'. L. I. "Electrophysiologieal
Analysis of the Viscerosomatic Integration at the Bulbar. Thalamic and

Hypothalamic Levels” in ”Hatr. XI Vsesoyuz. konf. po elektrofiziologii
TsNS." Vol 2. Leningrad. 1971.

Raytsea. V. S. and Pityk. N. I. "The Functional Interaction of Specific
(Visual) and Viscerosomatic Afferent Stimulation in the External

Geniculate Body" in "Funktsional'no-strukturnyye osnovy sistemhoy
deyatel'nosti i mekhanizmy plastichnosti mozga' [The Functional and

Structural Bases of the Systemic Activity and the Mechanisms of the
Plasticity of the Brain]. No a. 1975.

Raytses. V. 8.. Pityk. N. I. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. ”Hodeling of the
Effect of the Hypothalamolimbic Structures of the Brain on Reactions of
the Visual and Vestibular System" in "Hater. n-y Vsesoyuz. konf. po fiziol.

veget. nervn. sistemy" [Materials of the Fourth All-Union Conference on
Physiology of the Vegetative Nervous System]. Yerevan. 1976.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17“.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

18".

185.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Raytses. V. S. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. "On the Functional Organization of
Visceral and Somatic Afferent Connections of the Vestibular Nuclei."
PIZIOL. ZHURN. sssn. Vol 58. 1972.

Raytses. V. s. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. I'Modulation of the Activity of

the Neurons of (Deyters)' Nucleus in Electrostimulation of the Hypothalamus
and the Liabic Structures of the Brain." FIZIOL. ZHURN. 3883. Vol 6a.

1978.

Raytses. V. 8.. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. "The Participation of the
Hypothalamolimbic Structures in the Regulation of Vestibular Functions."
report summary. in "XIII s"yezd Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-va." Alma-Ata. 1979.

Rsytses. I. V. "The Effect of Electrostimulation or the Hypothalamus and
Limbic Formations on Vestibulosomatic Refletes.' KOSMICH. BIOL. I HED..
Vol 11. 1977.

Raytses. I. V. and Shlyakhovenko. A. A. “The Effect of Stimulation of the

Motivation Centers of the Hypothalamus and Amygdaline Region on Vestibular
Nystagmus.’ BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL. I NED.. Vol 79. 197k.

Rzayeva. N. N. and Gadzhiyeva. N. A. "The Interaction of Dermo-Somatic
and Visceral Induced Potentials in the Sensomotor Cortex of the Rabbit."
IZV. AN SSSR. SEA. BIOL.. No a. 1975.

Rozhanskiy. N. A. "Ocherki po fiziologii nervnoy sistemy' [Synopsis of
the Physiology of the Nervous System]. Moscow. 1957.

Roytbak. A. I. "Induced Potentials or the Cerebral Cortex"
in "Sovremennyye problemy elektrofiziologicheskikh

issledovaniy nervnoy sistemy' [Current Problems in Electrophysiological
Investigations of the Nervous System]. Moscow. 196a.

.Savin. B. N. "Gipervesomost' i funktsii tsentral'noy nervnoy sistemy"

[Overweight and the Functions of the Central Nervous System]. Leningrad.
1970.

Samsonova. V. 6. ”Change in the Electrical Activity of the Brain of
Animals and Han in Stimulation of the Vestibular Apparatus" in "Fiziologiya

vestibulyarnogo analizatora" [The Physiology of the Vestibular Analyzer].
Noscou. 1968.

Sergeyev. A. A. "Fiziologicheskiye mekhanimy deystviya uskoreniy"
[Physiological Mechanisms of the Action of Acceleration]. Leningrad.
1967.

Serkov. F. N. and Bratus'. N. V. "Electrical Reactions of the Hippocampus
in Stimulation of the Vagus Nerve" in "Sovremennyye problemy
elektrofiziologii TsNS [Current Problems in the Electrophysiolcgy of the
CNS]. Moscow. 1967.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
186.

187.

188.
189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

19“.

195.

196.

197.

198.

FOR OFVNCJAI.USEI)NLY

Serkov. F. N. and Hakul'kin. R. F. "Induced Potentials of the Nippocaap.’
FIZIOL. ZNURN. SSSR. Vol 52. 1966.

Sechenov. I. M. 'Izbrannyye proizvedeniya" [Selected works]. Vol 1,
Moscow. 1952. (1863)

Sechenov, I. M. "The Physiology of the Nerve Centers." Ibid. V01 2. 1956. (1891)

Sidneva. G. M. "Vestibulo-vegetativnyye reaktsii pri opukholyakh

golovnogo mozra. vosdeystvuyushchikh na gipotalano-gipofizarnyye
obrazovaniya" [Vestibular-Vegetative Reactions to Cerebral Tumors Acting

on the Hypothalano-Nypophysial Formations]. author's abstract of
candidate's dissertation, Leningrad. 1967.

Silakov. V. L. and Khanayeva, Z. S. “Impulse Activity of the Neurons of
the Frontal Tubers of the Laaina Tecti After Disengagenent of

Corticifugal Regulation.“ NEYROFIZOLOGIYA. Vol 10. 1978.
Simonov. P. V. 'Chto takoye euotsiya? [Nhat is EIotion?]. Moscow. 1966.

imonov. P. V. 'Teoriya otrazheniya i psikhofiziologiya enotsiy" [The
Theory of Reflection and Psychophysiology of Emotions]. Moscow. 1970.

Simonov. P. V. "Conditioned Reactions of Emotional Resonance in Rats" in
"Neyrofiziologicheskiy podkhod k analizu vnutrividobogo povedeniya"

[Neurophysiological Approach to Analysis of Intraspecies Behavior].
Moscow. 1976.

Sklyut. I. A. and Vil'ner. 8. Ya. "0n the Question or the Role of

Subcortical Nodes in the Regulation of Vestibular Reactions," ZDRAVOOKHR.
BELORUSSII. Vol 12. 1966.

Sosnovskiy. A.. 1969. quoted in Sudakov. K. V. "Biologicheskiye
uotivatsii" [Biological Motivations]. Moscow, 1911.

Spevak. S. Kh. "Roi' serotonina v mekhanizaakh realizatsii intero-
tseptivnykh goneostaticheskikh obnennykh refleksov" [The Role of Serotonine
in the Mechanisms of the Realization of Interoceptive Noneostatic Metabolic
Reflexes]. author's abstract of candidate's disseration. Baku, 1967.

Stadnichenko. L. I. "Analiz elektricheskoy aktivnosti nekotorykh
vegetativnykh nervov pri golode. zhazhde i nasyshchenii (dannyye

khronicheskikh opytov)" [Analysis of the Electrical Activity of Certain
Vegetative Nerves in Hunger. Thirst and Satiety], author's abstract of
candidate's disseration. Voronezh. 1969.

Sudakov. K. V. "Neurophysiological Mechanisms of the Rising Activating
Effects of the Hypothalaaus on the Cerebral Cortex in Nutritional

Deficiency" in "Fiziologiya i patologiya gipotalanusa" [The Physiology and
Pathology of the Hypothalaaus]. Moscow. 1966.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

20a.

‘95.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sudakov. K. V. 'Biologicheskiye motivatsii' [Biological Motivations].
Moscow. 1971.

Supin. A. Ya. "Neyronnyye mekhanizmy zritel'nogo analizatora" [Neural
Mechanisms of the Visual Analyzer]. Moscow. 19?”.

Syabro. P. 1.. Dmitrichenko. A. M.. Bozhko. V. A. et al. “The Interaction
of Somatic and Visceral Afferent Systems on the Structures of the Spinal

Cord and CerebrumII report summary. in 'XII s"yezd Vsesoyuz. fiziol. o-va
in. I. P. Pavlova.I Vol 2. Leningrad. 1975.

Tolmasskaya. S. S. "0 nervnykh mekhanizmakh koordinatsii somaticheskikykh

i vistseral'nykh funktsiy organizma' [Neural Mechanisms for Coordinating
Somatic and Visceral Functions of the Organism]. Moscow. 196A.

Tonkikh. A. V. "Gipotalamo-gipofizarnaya oblast' i regulyatsiya
fiziologicheskikh funktsiy organizma' [The Hypothalmic and Mypophysial

Region and the Regulation of the Physiological Functions of the
Organism]. second edition. Leningrad. 1968.

Ugolev. A. M. and Chernigovskiy. V. N. "The Role of Interoceptors and
the Development of the Behavior of Higher Animals." DAN SSSR. Vol 126.
1959.

Khanayeva. Z. V. "Projection of the Periphery in the Frontal Iubers of
the Lamina Tecti of Cats.” SOBSMCH. AN GrquSR. vol 6V. 1971.

Khananashvili. M. M. "Eksperimental'noye izucheniye tsentral'nykh
mekhanizmov zritel'noy funktsii' [Experimental Study of the Central
Mechanisms of the Visual Function]. Leningrad. 1962.

Khayutin. S. N. "Vzaimodeystviye motivatsionnogo i sensornogo
vozbuzhdeniya na odinochnykh neuronakh zritel'noy kory' [Interaction of
Motivated and Sensory Stimulation on Single Neurons of the Visual Cortex].
author's abstract of candidate's dissertation. Moscow. 1971.

Khilov. K. L. "Funktsii organs ravnovesiya i bolezn' peredvizheniya“
[Functions of the Organs of Balance and Motion Sickness]. Leningrad. 1969.

Tsimmerman. 6. S. "Ukho i mozg' [The Bar and the Brain]. Moscow. 197A.
Chvalun. A. V. "Quantitative and Qualitative Changes in Induced
Potentials In Light As A Function of the Zone of Stimulation of the
Intestine" in "Mater. IX Vsesoyuz. nauch. konf. po probl. kortiko-

vistseral'noy patologii'I [Materials of the Ninth All-Union Scientific
Conference on Problems of Corticovisceral Pathology]. Baku. 1971.

Chernigovskiy, V. N. "Afferentnyye sistemy vnutrennikh organov"
[Afferent Systems of the Internal Organs]. Kirov. 19V3.

Chernigovskiy. V. N. ”Interoceptors and the Skeletal Musculature.

30

FOR OFFNJA1.US£40NLY
213.

21a.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

22".

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report I. The Effect of Stimulation of Interoceptors of the Intestine
and Urinary Bladder on Skeletal Muscles." FIZIOL. ZHURN. SSSR. Vol 33. 1991.

Chernigovskiy. V. N. 'Interotseptory' [Interoeeptors]. Moscow. 1960.

Chernigovskiy. V. N. 'Znacheniye interotseptivnoy signaliaatsii v
pishchevom povedenii zhivotnykh” [The Significance of Interooeptive
Signalling in the Feeding Behavior of Animals]. Moscow-Leningrad. 1962.

Chernigovskiy. V. N. 'Neyrofiziologicheskiy analyz kortikovistseral'noy
reflektornoy dugi" [The Neurophysiological Analysis of the Corticovisceral
Reflex Arch]. Leningrad. 1967.

Chernigovskiy. V. N. 'I. M. Sechenov's Thoughts on 'Dark' Perceptions and
Their Subsequent Development." IZV. AN SSSN. SEN. BIOL.. No 1. 1977.

Chernigovskiy. V. N.. Klimov. P. K. and Nazdraohev. A. D. I'Vagus

Afferentation and Motor-Evacuation Activity of the Stomach.‘ FIZIOL.
ZHURN. 388R. Vol 58. 1972.

Chuppina. L. N. “The Interaction of Potentials Induced by Electrical
Stimulation of the Hypothalamus and Flares of Light in the Primary
Visual Cortex of the Rabbit." report summary in "XI s'yezd Vsesoyuz.
fiziol. o-va." Vol 2. Leningrad. 1970.

Chkhenkeli. S. A. "Electrical Activity of Certain Structures of the
Brain in Hunger and Satiety" in 'Problemy fiziologii gipotalamuaa." Vol
2. Kiev. 1968.

Shapiro. B. I. "Optiko-vegetativnyye svyazi mezhutochnogo Iozga”
[Optico-Vegetative Connections of the Interstitial Brain]. Leningrad.
1965.

Shapovalova. K. 8. "Convergence of Visceral and Somatic Inluences on the
Neurons of the Posteroventral Nucleus of the Thalamus.‘ ZhBND. Vol 21.
1971.

Shapovalova. K. B and Shiryayev. B. I. I'l'eatures of the Influence of
Visceral and Somatic Afferent Stimulation on the Activity of the Neurons
of the Posteroventral Nucleus of the Thalamus.” DAN SSSB, Vol 184. 1969.

Shapovalova. K. B. and Shiryayev. B. 1. "Features of the responses of
the Neurons of the Posteroventral Nucleus of the Thalamus Induced by
Stimulation of Different Modalities.“ in "Nekhanizmy vyzvannykh

potentsialov mozga" [Mechanisms of Induced Cerebral Potentials].
Leningrad. 1971.

Shvyrkova, N. A. and Shvyrkov. V. 3. "Activity of the Neurons of the
Visual Cortex in Feeding and Defensive Behavior." NEYROFIZIOLOGIYA. Vol 7.
1975.

31

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFT1CIA1.USE10NLY

225. Shlyakhovenko. A. A. "Induced Potentials of the Vestibular Nuclei in
Stimulation of Visceral and Somatic Nerves." BYULL. EKSPEB. BIOL. I HED..
Vol 76. 1971.

226. Shlyakhovenko. A. A. '0 funktsional'noy organizatsii vistseral'nykh i
somatichheskikh afferentnykh svyazey vestibulyarnykh yader" [0n the
Functional Organization of Visceral and Somatic Afferent Connections of

the Vestibular Nuclei]. author's abstract of candidate's dissertation.
Ivano-Frankovsk. 1972.

227. Shpayer. Ye. A.. 19ue. cited in Tsimlerman, G. S. 'Ukho i Hozg' [The
Ear and the Brain]. Hosow. 197V.

228. Shuleykina. K. V. "Sistemnaya organizatsiya pishchego povedeniya'
[Systemic Organization of Feeding Behavior]. Moscow, 1971.

229. Shumilina. A. I. “Neurophysiological Analysis of Systemic Organization
of Conditioned Reflexes“ in 'Kiberneticheskiye aspekty v izuchenii raboty
mozga" [Cybernetic Aspects in the Study of Cerebral Function]. Moscow. 1970.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Forewordaaooosaaaeeoeaeeaeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaeeneeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeoee3

IntrodUCtionseeaaeeeeeseeeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeDeleoeeeeeeeees

“hapter 1. Concise Information on the Horphofunctional Structure of the
Internal (Visceral) Analyzers......................................8
Chapter 2. Central Apparatuses and Mechanisms of Viscerosomatic

Integration-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeleeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeezs

Chapter 3. Viscerosomatic Influences on the Reactions of the Vestibular

systemeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeug

Chapter a. Convergence and Interaction of the Viscerosomatic and Visual
Afferent signalsoeocooontottoootICOOOOIOI0.000.00.01.000000000000068
Chvpter 5. The Participation of the Hypothalamolimbic Structures of the
Brain in Central Control of the Sensory Processes.................88
Chapter 6. Visceral Signalling and Elements of Behavior.....................109

conCIusionSeeeeso...eeeeeeeaaeeapeaceseeIeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeabeeeeaaeeeeeeeaaaa126

Bibliography-eseeseapeaaeeeesataseeoeeeeoeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeee‘BZ

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel’stvo "Nauka". 1980

9380
C80: 18u0/357

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PEYSIOLOGY

UDC 6l2.8.0|5
DIRECT TRANSFER OF CONDITIONED-REFLEX GUSIATORY AVBRSION

Moscow DOKIADY AKADBHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 259, No 5. I98! (manu-
script received 6 Mar 8|) pp 1265-1267

[Article by G.A. Vartanyan and 1.“. Makarova, Scientifirkesearch Institute
of Experimental Medicine. USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, Leningrad)

(Text) The first experiments on duplication of habits of the conditioned-
reflex type by administration of a cerebral extract from irradiated donor
animals to unirradiated animals were carried out in I965 (I, 2]. They pro-
duced many contradictory opinions, with some audaors totally denying that
this phenomnon could exist (3]. however. many data have now been massed
that basically confirm the existence of the "transfer" phenonnon in ver-
tebrates [lo-6]. Analysis of the literature showed that the success of
"transfer" depends in large measure on the model selected. Attempts to
"trmsfer" complex reactions have generally been unsuccessful. It can be
assumed that "transfer" of complex forms of conditioned-reflex activity

is naturally hampered by the multistage. multilevel organisation and funk
tional lability of the nervous mechanisms responsible for complex adap-
tive behavior. It is therefore best to use reactions characterised by
rapid induction. stability. and simplicity of expression, since the func-
tional systems responsible for such reactions are at least to some extent
genetically predetermined.

The gustatory-aversion reaction developed in l955 17]. provides one such ms- _
del. These researchers induced aversion to a saccharin solution by con-
joining its ingestion with irradiation of the experimental animals with
large doses of ionizing radiation. The gustatory-aversion reaction was
subsequently subjected to extensive study in order to find different methods
for evoking it and to establish the mechanisms of its central organisation
(8). It was found that the processes underlying the formation and expres-
sion of the gustatory-aversion reaction are most probably functions of the
phylogenetically ancient gustatory visceral system and require only minim
support from other cerebral centers. A number of data. however, indicate
that higher levels of the central nervous system participate in this reac-
tion [9). The great biological significance of the gustatory-aversion

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reaction and its high induction rate (1-3 joint presentations of the con-
ditioned stimulus and unconditioned reinforcement are adequate for 1w:
fixation of the reaction) enable us to regard it as a phenomenon similar
in its mechanisms to natural conditioned reflexes and enhance its value

as a model for ”transfer." A number of researchers [10, 11] have "trans-
ferred" gustatory-aversion reactions by administering homgenised arebral
tissue from donor rats to intact animals. The gustatory-aversion reaction
was induced in the donors by conjoining ingestion of saccharin with ex-
posure to ionizing radiation.

The present investigation was conducted to determine whether it is possible
to "transfer" a gustatory-aversion reaction induced pharmacologically by
the cerehrospinal-fluid method, which is physiologically the most adequate
technique and corresponds to a natural pathway for neuropeptide transport
in the central nervous system 1112, 131.

We employed the procedure described by Reinis ill for induction of the
aversion reaction. The donor rats were deprived of drinking water for 3
days; they were permitted access to water for only 15 min per day, in
special cages equipped with graduated waterers. 0n the fourth day, the
animals were presented with 0.12 saccharin solution instead of water (also
for 15 min) and, after 30 min, they were injected intraperitoneally with

a 0.5 14 LiCl solution in an amunt equivalent to 22 of body weight. A
similar procedure was carried out on the sixth and ninth days. The aver-
sion reaction thus induced was found to have been retained when the donor
rats were tested 1.5 months after its induction. The recipient rats were
also deprived of drinking water. These animals were daily presented with
their choice of two graduated waterers containing water and saccharin solu-
tion (for 15 min). The mount of liquid drunk was precisely determined

and only those animals that preﬁerred the saccharin solution were selected.
"Transfer" of cerebrospinal fluid from the donors to the recipients was
carried out 9 days after induction of the aversion reaction in the donors,
since this represented the optimum interval after 1m: fixation of the
reaction in the donors [15]. For this purpose,~0.1 ml of oerebrospinal
fluid drawn from the auboccipital cisterns was injected into the suboccipi-
tal cisternae of the recipients. lhe operation was carried out under
shallow ether anesthesia. The recipients were then tested daily for 6 days.

The rats in the two control groups were subjected to the sure conditions
as the recipient animals. After a stable saccharin-consumption background
was established for the first group of animals, the intact rats were in-
jected suboccipitally with cerebrospinal fluid and the mount of liquid
ingested was observed for 6 days. The rats in the second control group
were not interfered with at all and we merely observed their saccharin
and water consumption levels for 12 days. This period was divided into
two 6-day intervals md the saccharin-consumption levels for the first
and second intervals were coapared. '

The experimental group consisted of 80 animals, 1.0 of which were donors
and 1.0 recipients. The first control group consisted of 20 animals (ten

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'03:

Solution consumd, ml
- to u e 0. '0! ~s .

   

Fig. I. Consumption of saccharin solution (0.12) in experimental and
control groups. I) kperimental group, recipients (n - 60) receiving
subdural injection of cerebrospinal fluid NJ to!) from aversion-condi-
tioned donors; II) first control group, recipients (n - )0) remiving
subdural injection of cerebrospinal fluid from normal, non-aversion-condi-
tioned rats; III) second control group. sniaals (n - 15) not given injec-
tion of cerebrospinal fluid; a) average aaount of saccharin solution con-
sumed over 6 days prior to injection of donor cerebrospinal fluid (before
"transfer") (I). injection of cerebrospinal fluid from normal animals (II).
and midpoint of observation period (over first 6 days) (III); b) average
amount of same solution consumd after administration of donor cerebra-
spinal fluid (after "trmsfer") (I). administration of carebrospinsl fluid
from normal animals (II), and midpoint of observation period (over second
6 days) (III).

Pig. 2. Water consumption and total liquid consumption for animals in
experimental group before (a) and after (b) subdural injection of cerebro~
spinal fluid (0.! ml) from aversiorhconditioned donors. I) Average water
consumption (over 6 days) by recipients (n - 1.0); II) aver-- total fluid
(water + aacchsrin solution) conausption (over 6 days) by n :ipients (n - 60).

intact donors and ten recipients. The second control group consisted of

IS recipients. In addition to evaluating the mounts of saccharin con-
sumed by the recipients before and after "transfer” of cerebrospinal fluid,
we determined the aaount of water drunk and the total amount of liquid
ingested.

It can be seen froa Fig. I that the recipients exhibited a reliable reduc-
tion in saccharin consumption (p ( 0.05) as a result of administration of
cerebrospinal fluid taken from a donor in which the aversion reaction had
been induced. The control recipients that received cerebrospinal fluid
from intact donors not only failed to display any decrease in saccharin
consumption but even exhibited a slight rise. Ssccharin consumption by

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the recipients in the second control group, which reflected the "sponta-
neous" fluctuations over the 12-day test period, rose toward the end of
this period. Hater consumption clearly increased after the recipients
were given cerebrospinal ﬂuid from donors with a pronounmd aversion
reaction (1) < 0.05). while the total amount of liquid consumed was not
altered as a consequence of “transfer" (Fig. 2).

The data obtained enable us to draw the following conclusions. First of
all, the reliable reduction in saccharin consumption by the recipients
after administration of cerebrospinal fluid from doaors with a gustatory-
aversion reaction proved the existence of direct ”transfer" of gustatory-
aversion reactions in rats. Secondly, the results of our investigation
confirmed earlier data on the role of the cerebroapinal fluid as the most

important pathway for neuropeptide transport in the central nervous system
[12, I3).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Reinis, 8., ACTIV. NBRVOSA SUPER., I965, Vol 7, No 2, p I67.

2. Bahich, F.-R., Jacobson, A.L., Bubash, S. and Jacobson, A., SCIENCE,
I965, Vol 149, No 3686, p 656.

3. Byrne, ILL. et al., SCIENCE, 1966, Vol l53, No 3736, p 658.
4. Ungar, 6., PIZIOL. CHELOVEKA, I977, Vol 3, No 5, p 87.

S. Vartanyan, G.A. and Balabanov, Yu.V., BYUL. EKSPER. 8101.. I MBD.,
I978, Vol 86, No 8, p ".7.

6. Sherstnev, V.V., Polctayev, A.B., and Dolgov, 0.N., USP. FIZIOL. NAUK,
I979, Vol I0, No 3, p 66.

7. Garaia, Jo, Kimeldorf, Dal. 1M Roelling, RoAv. SCIENCE. I955, Vol 122,
p ‘57.

8. Rilley, A.L. and Baril, I..L., ANIMAL LEARNING AND BEHAVIOR, I976,
Vol lo, No 18, p 18.

9. Bures, Ja. and Buresova, 0., "Methanizmy Uprsvleniya pamyat'yu"
(Mechanisms of Henry Control). Leningrad, 1979.

IU. Moos, u.s., LeVan, H., Mason, 8.1., Hebron, 0.1.. and Mason, 11.0.,
EXPERIENTIA, I969, Vol 25, No II, p IZIS.

II. Levan, IL, Hebron, 0.1... Noos, ".8.. and "seen, II.C., 1311)., Vol 26,
No 6, p 668.

12. Vartanyan, G.A., "Vysshiye funktsii mozga v norme i patologii" (Higxer

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cerebral Functions Under Normal And Pathological Conditions), Leningrad,
I979, 1: l9.

l3. Balabanov. Yu.V. and Varlinakaya, Ye.l.. "Teoretichoakie oanovy
patologicheskikh soatoyaniy" (Theoretical Principles of Pathological
States), Leningrad, I980. p I76.

14. Aleksanyan, z.A., Bumsova, 0. and Burn, J., PHYSIOL. BEHAVIOR, 1976.
Vol H. p I73.

15. Ungar, c. and Irvin. L.N., mums, 8967, Vol 214. No 5087, p453.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akadelnii hank SSSR". 1981

24 78
CSO: 184 0/335

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES 0P PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

Prague STUDIA PSYCHOLOGICA in Russian Vol 21, No 3, 1979 (manuscript received 9 Apr
79) pp 162-166

[Article by J. Radilovs and T. Radil, Institute of Physiology, Czechoslovak Academy
of Sciences, Prague]

[Text] This work is concerned with the study in man of evoked
potentials, in particular of P 300 waves. in response to visual
stimuli. A technique was applied which allowed us to sort into
two groups and to average separately the evoked potentials in
relation to how the stimulus was interpreted; subjectively.
correctly or incorrectly, with certainty or uncertainty, although
the subject was incorrect objectively. The results point to the
fact that given a correct response with subjea:certainty, the

amplitude of the P300 wave was greater in the majority of cases.

Uncovering the nerve mechanisms involved in psychological processes and understanding
their conscious components is an important but extremely difficult task. It can be
accomplished only by experimentation on human subjects. Modern electrophysiological,
computing and experimental psychological approaches have openedup new possibilities
m ’1ly in the field of objective analysis of mechanisms for perception and cognition

(Audil et a1., 1979). However. in spite of the complex nature of the nerve processes
involved. we should consider the impact of the stimulus effect. With this in mind.

we can define accurately the temporal parameters of nerve processes which are thebaaia
for perception and cognition. Therefore. we can detect the relationship between the
processes. physiological correlates of which can be recorded using electrophysiological
and other methods, and the psychic components about which it is possible to obtain in-
formation using experimental psychological methods. Based on natural scientific and
philosophical points of view, is the premise that, despite all qualitative differences,
we are not dealing with two parallel processes. Building on principles of dialectic-
materialistic monism, we consider that the "neurophysiological" and "psychological"
levois of phenomena are only two aspects of complex activity in the neuronal networks.
rcsprusible for the entire complex process of perception and cognition. Therefore.

we can suggest positively the causal relationships between simultaneously occurring
physiological and psychic events during perception and cognition, despite the fact

that these very methods of analysis provide us only with correlates for a certain
tomprral congruence of processes.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A psychophysiological approach to the study of information intake is considerably
more complex than a neurophysiological one which deals only with the neuronal
mechanisms for coding and decoding and sometimes with motor reactions in response to
stimuli. For analysis of information intake by man, it is necessary to bear in mind
that during the process of indentification of a stimulus. results of perceptive and
cognitive learning, the imprints of which are retained in memory. have a significant
influence on a perception teat. Moreover. identification depends on a specific per-
ceptive-cognitive program which was created previously and also retained in memory.
Thus. cognition depends to a significant degree on the nature of the perceptive-
cognitive task presented to the subject by the investigator and formulated with re-
lated psychological instructions. Without doubt, even in the case of physically
identical stimuli. the quality of which in all likelihood is coded and decoded by
identical neuronal mechanisms, this very identification can be altered fundamentally
in relation to a change in the program for perception and cognition. It stands to
reason that there is no place in this scheme for any kind of indeterminate phenomenon;
reflection of the stimulus in the brain results from a complicated interaction between
codification and decodification mechanisms "proposed" and retained in different parts
of memory. Using this approach, we can show the effect of "internal dynamic functional
structures" of perception and cognition on the basis of which cognition occurs. Un-
doubtedly, a similar structure has its own neuronal basis which can be studied success-
fully using objective approaches even though an important component of it is the con-
scious-subjective process.

This study is concerned with objectiveexsminationof perceptive and cognitive processes
related to consciousness. From the methodologic point of view, it is advantageous to
construct an experimental situation. during which peripheral codification and decodi-
fication mechanisms, given repeating stimulation, are not altered. The sensory systems
are usually studied in this way to analyze the differences in responses given the
effect of different stimuli. With this approach, it is suggested that the internal
state of the system does not change. However, this theory is not only without foun-

dation, but also changes in the internal state are the object of a special study. There-
fore, it is important to maintain a constant quality of stimuli in any study on the

nature of information intake. Furthermore, it is advantageous to create an erperimen-
tal situation during which the quantity of internal states of the interpreting system

is wholely circumscribed. A final approach is the use of only two perceptive-cogni-
tive states. This approach was used in our tests, described in this report.

Given the presence of two internal perceptive-cognitive states. the possibility arises
for classification of evoked electroencephalographic responses into two groups in re-

lation to which perceptive-cognitive programs for the stimulus are perceived. It is
important to note here that the stimulus is retained from the point of view of its

own basic qualities. The evoked electroencephalographic responses are averaged into
two unrelated groups; at the end of the test it is possible to compare the form of

both evoked potentials.

For this analysis. we used the technical apparatus shown in figure 1. It consisted of
an LAB 8 computer and units of an SUP programmed apparatus. Each separate evoked
potential was retained in the computor memory in a nonaveraged form prior to activa-

tion of the sorting program which transmitted it to one of the two parts of the compu-
tor memory where a procedure for sorting was carried out within the framework of one

or another group of evoked responses which corresponds to one or another perceptive-

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSl-l ONLY

cognitive state of the subject.

This system allowed us to overcome the problem of the
latent period of the evoked potential which is significantly shorter than the latent
period of the psychic process of cognition.

I IUﬂONS

 

\l." \ ‘I ,.,_ n_ l -_.»_'-- . .u-.' |‘- _.‘u._. L." 7",.“

._..-.nnu k: !i .: .g -I\I||’.-'IlIl-I

Hi: I‘.

. I.u:u .7 ' ,.I

Figure 1. Technical Apparatus which Consists of an LAB 8 Computer

and Units of an SUP Programmed Apparatus and Projection
Equipment

-u the above mentioned tests. both internal perceptive-cognitive states corresponded
to which stimuli were correctly or incorrect recognized (Radilova et 31.. 1979).

This test represents a variant of a solution to the problem referred to in experi-

mental psychology by the name "7:2" (Miller. 1956). The essence of this problem
consists of how much information can be absorbed in a parallel fashion by an individual.
In figure 2. a sample stimulus is shown. Using a projection tachistoscope. randomly d15-

 

Pnt '.' llpuurp "Immo-

Figure 2. Sample of stimulus

trihured squaresuith surface dimensions of 3 x 3 cm were presented on a 48 x 31 cm
screen. Similar pictures were used with 6. 7. 8. 9 and 10 elements. The randomness

at Ih-lr distribution was limited by the fact that they could not be placed in the
Conlwr of the screen. that is in the area of eye fixation and that the squares were never

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arranged in a row. The task of the subject who received related instructions was
to determine the number of squares which appeared on the screen. The results were
conmmnicated to the investigator who then pressed one of two buttons connecting the
electrical charge of the evoked potential to one of two groups for averaging. After
an acoustical stimulus of a 20 ms duration. the shutter of the projection tachisto-
scope was turned on. This length of projection time was adequate for completing of
the task, but inadequate for scanning of the stimulus with saccaduc eye movement.
Stimuli consisting of different distribution in space and number of squares were
alternated in a random order. After classification of evoked potentials by the in-
vestigator. slides were alternated automatically in the projection tachistoscope.

In one experimental series. 30 tests were conducted. The most constant components

of evoked potentials were the primary positive component. the primary negative com—
ponent and the latent positive component. manifested with a latent period of approxi-
mately300ms (P 300 wave) (figure 3). We also found that the amplitude of the latent
positive component was frequently higher when the task was completed correctly. that
is.when the subject evaluated correctly the number of squares in the stir lus presented
(in 70 percent of the tests). In 20 percent, no difference was detected, in 10 percent

a difference in the reverse direction was detected. As the criterion for the difference
in amplitude, we selected a difference exceeding 20 percent.

In the second series of experiments, the criterion for classification was certainty
or uncertainty of the subject as to whether he recognized correctly the number of
squares in the stimuli. In this experiment. it was not important to determine
whether or not the subject accomplished the task correctly. In other words. given
certainty by the subject. the correct and incorrect responses were classified in the
same group of evoked potentials and vice versa. The results were similar to those
found in preceding tests. Given subject certainty, the amplitude of the latent
positive component (P 300) of averaged evoked responses was greater in the majority
of cases.

Similar results were found in experiments conducted in our laboratory (Grabowska et al..
1979) where subjects were given the task of identifying a very weakly illuminated
series of 10 letters (A. B, C, E. F, L. 0, P, T, 2). Only one letter was shown on

the screen for a period of 20 ms and the letters were alternated in random order.

The criterion for classification was correctness of recognition. The form of the
evoked response was distinct from the previous tests because threshold stimuli were
used. Regardless of this, in the majority of cases. the amplitude of the latent
positive component was greater given correct cognition.

Although interpretation of different components of evoked potentials is extremely
complicated from the neurophysiological point of View, it is clear that different
waves. including the latent positive wave (P 300) represent the summarized electrical
phenomena originating in large numbers in neuronal elements in time and in space.

The increase in wave amplitude in the summarized evoked responses signifies an
increase in the quantity of neurons participating in a given phase of the process of
perception and cognition. Increase in the amplitude given correct cognition and
cognition with certainty of the subject about correctness of the solution could
possibly be interpreted as a consequence of the fact that. in the process of percep-
tion, a large quantity of nerve elements are involved. The variation in number of

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L... «—‘

I'm 5 Yup-mum." mvmunuu .a‘mimmni

Mud-u- \nnaunu mum: l1 '3") man up:

:quu-IJul-‘V ocuuumuu In: npxy; unnum-
n: u ”nun-u.

Figure 3. Evoked Potentials fron the Occiput Region. Amplitude
of the P 300 Have was Greater given Correct Cognition
(shown on top) of Identical Stiuuli

activated neurons in the course of the experilent is probably the cause (that is, the
ueurophysiological 58818) for variation in the level of stimulation-vigilance or

attention.

Thosu- tests showed that the latent component of evoked electroencephalographic

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mtentals is the correlate of the psychic process related to cognition of visual
stimuli. Similar types of tests can aid in uncovering the mechanism for activity of

the nerve substrata in complex psychic processes involved in perception and cognition.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Crabowska, A.. Radilova. J.. Radil. T., Haras, L., "Letters recognition and
evoked potentials." ACTIV. NERV. SUP., in press, 1979.

2. Miller, G.A.. "The magical number seven. plus or minus two: Some limits on our
capacity for processing information." PSYCHOL. REV., 1956, vol 63, p 81-.

3. Radil. 1., Radilova, J., Bohdanecka. 2.. Indra, M., Lansky, P.. Haras. L.. "A
system for psychophysiological correlation between subjective interpretation and
bioelectric manifestations of visual stimuli,” ACTIV. NERV. SUP.. in press. (1979)

6. Radilova, J.. Radil. T., Haras, L., "Detection of the number of stimuli and
evoked potentials." ACTIV. “31w. sum. in press. (1979)

COPYRIGHT: Unavailable

9139
C50: 8164/1890

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORlOFFﬂJAI.USE(MVLY

UDC 621.391.19

ABSTRACTS FROM THE BOOK 'DESCRIPTION AND RECOGNITION OF OBJECTS IN ARTIFICIAL
INTELLECT SYSTEHS'

Moscow OPISANIYE I RASPOZNAVANIYE OB"YEKTOV V SISTEHAKH ISKUSSTVENNOGO INTELLEKTA
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 30 Jun 80) pp 2-4. 135-137

IAnnotation. foreword and abstracts from book "Description and Recognition of
Objects in Artificial Intellect Systems". edited by Doctor of Medical Sciences
V. S. Gurfinkel' and Candidate of Technical Sciences V. S. Fayn. Institute of

Problems of Information Transmission, USSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka". 2300 copies. l37 pages]

ITextl This collection includes articles that refer to the following three pro-
llvms: mathematical modeling of variability in a number of objects which are of
pratiral importance (speech process. certain types of images. etc.). use of

mathematical methods in medicine. and certain aspects of voice control of a
vnmputPr in man-machine systems.

It is designed for specialists in the field of artificial intellect. pattern recog-
nition and in related fields.

Foreword

Time has made noticeable corrections in the interpretation of the problem of pattern

recognition. and in the understanding of its essence and place in modern scientific
and technical knowledge.

”no of the primary manifestations of this development is the clearer realization
that the task of strict recognition is secondary in a certain sense in relation to
nunlhvr task. nnmely. detection and description of the essence of variability in
the rvcnnnizcd object. In all those cases where the essence of variability has
hcvn null studied, organization of the recognition process on its basis has
already been sufficiently investigated. Construction of a description of variabi-
lity ulso has value independent of recognition. since this affords a solution to
another problem in the field of artificial intellect. namely. artificial generation
of changes in the object (design, speech synthesis. automatic multiplication, etc.).
All of this has resulted in the appearance in recent years of a large number of
worrs on mathematical modeling of the laws governing a certain variable phenomenon
or uhlect. This trend also appears in this collection: the articles of Ye. F.
Yurkov and V. S. Nauornov. A. S. Omel'chenko and V. S. Fayn, Ye. P. Ponomarev

66

FOI.0§11C1AI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Yu. N. Prokhorov. V. N. Sorokin.and A. P. Vaynshtok treat a search for

descriptions of the laws which characterize the variability of objects in diverse.
practically important tasks.

Detection of the essence of variability or its ties to externally observed charac-
teristics of an object is unfortunately a very difficult problem‘which cannot
always be resolved even today. A classic example of this type is the problem of
seismic prediction or zoning. The tasks of medical diagnosis which are also
exceptionally difficult are no less urgent. However, the urgent need for their
resolution is a powerful stimulus for the application of new efforts. In this

collection. these tasks are covered by the articles of A. H. Alekeseyevakaya and
V. S. Pereverzyev-Orlov,P. Ye. Kunin and V. P. Karp, and Yu. 3. Pogel'son.

Yet another problem of artificial intellect which is covered in the collection is
organization of dialogue in the man-machine system. One of the methods of
satisfying the requirement for maximum comfort and natural functioning of man in
rhissystem hero gchthemachine the capability of understanding commands given

by voice. Studies which have already been made in this area for a number of years
are represented by the articles of S. N. Krinov. V. P. Savel'yev. c. I. Tsemel'.

as well as A. V. Vasil'yev. S. S. Raksheyev and V. H. Chizhkov. and S. H. Shevenko.
The originality of the suggested methods and urgency of the topics raised will be

of undoubted int:rest to specialists in the field of pattern recognition and
prediction.

UDC 621.39]
FINDING THE EMPIRICAL RELATIONSHIP USING ONE-DIMENSIONAL FUNCTIONS

[Abstract of article by Yurkov, Ye. F. and Nagornov, V. 5.]

[Text] A method is described for finding the relationship between quantities from
experimental data using one-dimensional functions. An algorithm is presented for
discovering one-dimensional functions and results of an experimental verification
of the method.
Three illustrations. eight bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391.19
METHOD OF TRANPORNINC FLAT CURVES BASED ON MOVING REFERENCE POINT METHOD
[Abstract of article by Omel'chenko. A. S. and Fayn. V. 8.]
[Text] A new method is analytically worked out for transforming flat curves. It
simulates the local interactions between the points of the curve. It is based on
the theory of differentiated varieties. The method is applied to solving one of

the problems of correcting charts of the ice situation.

Three illustrations. six bibliographic entries.

45

FINRCHOWCJAL.USE(NULY
FORTOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

UDC 621.391.19

LOCAL EVALUATION OF INFORMATION CONTENT OF FLAT CURVE

[Abstract of article by Omel'chenko, A. 5.]

[Text] A possible approach is examined for evaluating the complexity of tabu-
lating a curve for the particular case which is widespread in practice where it is
necessary to have not only a global. but also a local estimate when the complexity
of the curve (evaluated by a traditional plan) significantly varies on different
sections. An algorithm is presented which makes the local evaluation of complexity.

The algorithm is applied in one of the problems of correcting charts of the ice
Situation.

Three illustrations. three bibliographic entries.

UDC 534.62

ADAPTIVE LINEAR FILTERING OF SPEECH SIGNALS
[Abstract of article by Ponomarev, Ye. P. and Prokhorov. Yu. N.l

[Text] An examination is made of recurrent algorithms for adaptive linear fil-
tering of a speech signal from a mixture with additive white noise. The presented
nlnnrlthm contains a block of recurrent evaluation of the parameters for the

“LVh signal model. and a block for isolating the signal from the noises. The
relative independence of these blocks results in a comparatively simple procedure
Ior processing the signal. The algorithms of recurrent evaluation of the para-
meters make it possible to construct both an evaluation of the autoregression
parameters. and the parameters of a multiple-stage model. Conditions for the
validity of the evaluations are presented. Results of digital modeling done on a
real signal are given.

Th -e illustrations. eight bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391.192.2

MECHANICS OF TONGUE MOVEMENTS
[Abstract of article by Sorokin. V. N.]

[Text] A description is made of the movements of the tongue as a solid body

undo: the influence of shifting of its root and turning of the lower jaw, as well
as a model for elastic deformations of the lingual surface. Results are given
from approximating the x-rays of the vocal tract by natural functions of elastic
lldi.unl10ﬂs. The experiment used speech material in the form of x-rays of all
vowel sounds of Swedish pronounced in a drawn-out manner, and x-ray film frames

of thr basic forms of articulation of Russian pronounced at a rapid rate both in
isola!ion and in syllables. The experiments made it possible to pinpoint the type

nl hnundnry conditions for the tongue root. The average error of approximation
on the anterior portion of the tongue was about 62 with five employed natural
Iunriions.

Three tables. seven illustrations. l3 bibliographic entries.
66 '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.391.146

ASSESSMENT OF INTERFERENCE-RESISTANCE 0F SPEECH REJECTOR ANALYSIS

[Abstract of article by Vaynshtok, A. P.1

[Text] The interference-resistance of speech rejector analysis is discussed.
Results are given of computer experiments to evaluate the parameters of the for-
mant fluctuations in an artificial three-formant signal distorted by noise.

One table. one illustration. five bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391

PROBLEM OF 'THO PHYSICIANS' IN PATTERN RECOGNITION
[Abstract of article by Alekseyevskaya. H. A. and Pereverzyav-Orlov, v. 5.]

[Text] Different physicians describing one patient in terms of general vocabulary
give the terms a different meaning, and consequently speak in different languages.
It is noted that it is possible to reduce formalisms of the decisive and prog-

nostic rules type obtained with one physician to the languages of other physicians.

UDC 621.391.19

METNOD 0F RETROSPECTIVE RANDOHIZATION T0 COMPARE EFFECTIVENESS 0F ALTERNATIVE
TREATMENT VARIANTS

[Abstract of article by Kunin. P. Ye. and Karp, V. P.]

[Text] One of the possible approaches is examined for comparing the effective-
ness of alternative treatment variants where retrospective data are used in
contrast to "blind sampling" in the comparison of comparable groups of patients.

One table, two bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391

REDUCING RESELECTION IN CONSTRUCTINC DIVIDING SIGNS

[Abstract of article by Fogel'son, Yu. 8.]

[Text] A reselectinn algorithm is examined in teaching programs of object recog-
nition. An iteration process is suggested which searches for the combinations

of parameters that norm good divisions of the objects of classes presented for
training. This process is based on the concept of gradual "pulling" of the
necessary parameters by those that were selected in the previous iteration. The
convenience of using the algorithm for tasks of medical diagnostics is shown.

Three bibliographic entries.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.391.199
SIGNIFICANCE OF FREQUENCY CHANGES IN MAIN TONE FOR AUTOMATIC SPEECH RECOGNITION
[Abstract of article by Krinov, S. N.. Savel'yev, V. P. and Tsemel'. G. 1.]

[Text] The expediency of using the dynamics of the main tone for segmentation of
the speech signal is examined. in particular. combinations of vowel-voiced con-
sonant which comprise a part of coherent pronunciation. The temporal position of

the frequency maximum of the main tone and its relative increment depending on
the context and speaker are studied.

One table. two illustrations. six bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391.199
NORD GROUPINC BY SIGNS OF REFERENCE SOUNDS AND SOUND COMBINATIONS

[Abstract of article by Krinov. S. N.)

[Tcxtl An examination is made of a grouping algorithm (divisions into groups) of
any set of words according to the signs of the reference sounds and sound combi-
nations. The code (number) of the group is a sequence of numbers which code the
types of sound combinations between neighboring vowels of complete formation. The
algorithm of word recognition which uses the grouping algorithm is described.

-- illustration, six bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391.199

AUTONOMOUS PRODUCTION OF WORD SIGNS
|Ahntract of article by Vasil'yev. A. V.. Raksheyev, S. S. and Chizhkov. V. H.]

[Trxt] A system for obtaining the original description of pronunciations lasting
to I 6 s is examined. In order to form a temporal sequence of signs. a device is
"and to isolate signs and a display which is connected to a writing machine.

The use of this system made it possible to abandon the use of a computer to

ublnin statistical material necessary for working out a word recognition algorithm.

Thrcv illustrations. five bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.391.19
MACHINE 'UNDERSTANDING' OF TEXTS IN NATURAL LANGUAGES

lihstuart of article by Shevenko, S. H.]

[Toxtl Tho ideas and formalisms used in active and theoretical systems for
undvrhlnndiﬂu natural language are examined. A critical approach to modern lin-
guinltr concepts of machine "understanding" is suggested from the viewpoint of
urntrmﬂ linguistics nminly presented in the works of Soviet scientists.

at bibliographic entries

CnPYRlCHT: izdatel'stvo "Nauka", I980

903!)

cs0: l8uO/356 ‘8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 S9| .5]3.5:5|
MATHEMATICAL SIMULATION OF SWAIN REASONING

lbscow DOMY AKADBHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 259, No 2, I981 (linu-
script received 16 Oct 80) pp SO9-5l2

LArticle by V.N. Kozlov, Moscow State University imeni MAI. loamnosov]

[Text] The purpose of the present investigation was to construct a model

of the functional mechanisms of the animal nervous system that provide the
basis for the purposive behavior observed, for example. in luv. Krushinskiy's
well-known experiments perfomd to study elenmntsry reasoning (I). It

also proved possible to interpret the conditioned reflex within the true-
work of the model obtained; a somewhat simplified version of the model can
be applied to the problem of image recognition (2, 3].

The most characteristic property of elementary reasoning in animals is
their ability to distinguish certain very simple environmental patterns

and utilize them in devising behavioral programs. It is significant that
behavior based on elementary reasoning can (in contrast to learned behavior)
be carried out when an animal first encounters an unusual situation in its
habitat. One example of the manifestation of elementary reasoning in
animals is their capacity for extrapolation of the mvement of. a stimulus,
i.e.. their ability to predict the future position of a saving stimulus

and to act in conformity with this prediction III.

The model is based on the following action scheme. A given environmntal
situation is used as the basis for selection of one‘of. the set of situations
stored in the animal's memory as an environ-ntal mdel. Having a knowledge
of the properties of this mdel, the animal can then assun that the sen
properties are present in the environmental situation and select purposive
behavior on this basis.

In structural terms, the mdel to be described can be represented in the
form of a system that interacts with the environnnt and consists of the
following subsystems (Fig. I).

Subsystem cs is the encoding system. The result of its operation is 8,
i.e.. the code for the emirmmentsl situation. The situation code consists

1.9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a pair of sets (NJ). If, for exmple, a situation involves a nudaer

of objects arrayed in a certain manner, then M is the set of objects and T
characterizes their relative positions ad is the set of all numbers having
the form r(a,b)/r(c,d), where a, b, c, and d are arbitrary objects belonging
to set H and r(a,b) and r(c,d) are the distances between the corresponding
objects. If the situation is temporal, i.e., involves a sequence of events
taking place over a period of tile, )1 is the set of events and T is the

set of all numbers having the form t(A,b)/t(c,D), where A, B, c. and D are
arbitrary events belonging to set M and t(A,b) and t(C,D) are the tiam
intervals between the corresponding events.

The mdel memory is the set of codes for certain situations, to the elements
of sets M and 'r for which weights reflecting the importance (significance)
of the elements in the situation have been assigned. During the course

of the animal's interaction with the environ-ant, the weights on the ele-
ments of the situation codes in the memory are reassigned from low-signi-
ficance elements to more significant eleaents. The basis for this reassign-
ment mechanism was the hypothesis that the most characteristic elements

of a definite situation are those that are sost frequently encountered.

The "Operator" subsystem implements a certain procedure utilised to work
with the information contained in the memory and is governed by the "guide
to action" for a given environntal situation. The "implementation" sub-
system comprises effector organs and organises purposive behavior in the

environment on the basis of the information contained in the "guide to
action."

The "operator" subsystem functions in the following manner. The concept

of similarity between situations is introduced. When a given environ-
mental situation arises, the sost similar situation is sought in the memory
and the situation found is termed the guide to action. The objects in-
volved in the environmental situation and the guide to action are subjected
to a definite type of comparison when they are found to be similar, a pro-
cess that makes it possible to utilise the information contained in the guide
to action to organize behavior in the environnntsl situation in question.

For exmaple, let the guide to action be situation A (Pig. 2), where a, b,
c. and d are objects present in the animal's surroundings, e.g., tables,
chairs, instrument control panels, etc., while In is a feeder containing
food. Let the environmental situation be situation 3, which differs from
situation A only in the absence of object m, i.e., the feeder. The absence
of the feeder in situation 3 may mean that it has been hidden behind some-
thing and is therefore not visible. Objects a, b, c, and d in situation 3
are compared with objects a, b. c, and d in situation A in determining the
similarity of the two situations. By using situation A and the known loca-
tion of feeder m with respect to objects a, b, c, and d in this situation,

it is possible to determine the presused location of the hidden feeder in
situation B.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now let the guide to action be temporal situationJCI (Fig. 3) and the envi-

ronmental situation be temporal situationxz. In situations K! and 16,
points Ill, H2, etc. represent certain events tdting place at discrete ins-

tants, while the intervals between points correspond to the times separating
these events. Temporal situations can reflect the unfolding of certain
events with time, e.g., the movement of a stimlus. It is readily seen

that the guide to action}?I for environmental situationjfz makes it possible
to assume that events Ill. and as will take place in the future and to organise
behavior in conforsity with this prediction.

It should be noted that the environmental situation was represented as a
"fragment" of same situation in the memory solely for the sake of greater
clarity in the above exmnples. In order to make a prediction, it is in

no way obligatory that the memory cantsin precisely that situation a "frag-
ment" of which is percein in the environnent. The environnntal situa-
tion can lack some elements of the situation in the mnory, can contain

new elements not in the memory, can have altered relative element positions,
etc., so that the prediction in some sense utilises and analogy of the
situation.

If the distance separating the environmental situation and the guide to
action is small, actions taken on the basis of the guide can be interpreted
as resulting from learning by the animal. In actuality. if the guide to
action, i.e., the situation stored in the memory, is the ante as or very
similar to the environmental situation, this mans that the animal has
already encountered the same sort of environmental situation, is failiar
with it, and acts on the basis of its knowledge of the situation.

 

a m b s d A
s e o a e
. h r d U
1-} e o o e
‘ i
g Floa~ 2 I
'g II. II, II, II. ll, ’ I
‘5 e o o o O I I
Fig: 1 f. 2' I” “g i

Fig. |. Block diagram of model.

Fig. 2. Situation in memory and environmental situation in determination
of location of hidden feeder.

Pig. 3. situation in memory and environmental situation during prediction
Process.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the distance between the environmental situation and the guide to action
is sufficiently great, one can consider a rather high degree of "abstrach
tion" to be required, since any action is undertaken on the basis of a situ-
ation in the memory that differs quite substantially from the environmental
situation. In this case, the animal does not have intonation on either

the specific environmntsl situation or situations rather similar to it.
This obviously corresponds to what Krushinskiy called the first presenta-
tion of a situation and we are therefore dealing with the case that be
described as requiring elementary reasoning.

In this interpretation, actions based on learning and those requiring reason-
ing appear to be the antipodes of the sam functional mechanism. Actions
based on learning can be regarded as a special and, in a certain sense,
primitive case of the operation of the uchanism responsible for actions
requiring reasoning.

let us now consider how a conditioned reflex is represented in the model.
Let a temporal situation ABX|x2C be stored in the memory, where AB desig-

nates the conditioned stimulus and elesent C involves reinforcement. Those
elements that can vary from situation to situation are designated as xlxz.

The iMuction of a conditioned reflex consists in presentation of a condi-
tioned stisulus AB n tines, followed by reinforcement. within our con-

ceptual framework, this is nothing other than repetition of situation ABX'XZC

n tines. There is an increase in the weights on the corresponding situ-
ation elements in the memory. Figure 4 provides a partial illustration
of the process: an increase in the weight on an element represented by a
letter is reflected in an increase in its size. If the memory contains
some situation that also starts with A8 (e.g., 017,32“), the "guide to

action" when AB appears in the environment is not this situation but situ-
ation ABX'XZC. The prediction is consequently of stimulus C, with appro-

priate behavioral_ sequelae.
If conditioned stimulus AB is presented but reinforcement c is not given,

the weights on the corresponding elements are reduced. Ultimately, situ-

ation Asx'xzc ceases to daminate when an is presented (the conditioned

reflex fades away).

Similarity between situations is introduced in the following manner. We
are given the situations A - Gay“) and B - ("3.13) with “MA" - n, HHBI -
= m, and n) m (IHAH and [Hall are the sizes of sets "A and H3). we will
consider some transformation y: "3-) HA‘ Proceeding from considerations

of maningfulness, we can introduce some class gbof situation-similarity
functions, each of which takes into account given characteristics of situ-
ations in evaluation of their similarity. Re assure that, for each i,

some number Ei(x) is assigned to each element x of the code for any situation,

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this being the weight on the element in similarity evaluation at level i.
Over and shove class , we can then introduce sons "integral" similarity

function that takes into account in unified for. the properties deseri ed
by the individual functions belonging to this class. We assume class

to consist of three functions (91’ p2, and p3). Faction pI evaluates the

nunher and significance of the elements of sets us and “A that are compared
with one another for a given representstion *. Function p2 evaluates the
hunter of identical elements of sets “A and MB col-pared. Function p3

evaluates the similarity of the relative positions of the objects cowrising
situations A and B.

Each of the functions p‘, p2, and p3 is defined by a system of axioms.

These axioms are derived frOm considerstions of meaningfulnees related to
behavioral analysis. The overall sinilsrity PM,” between situations is
defined as P(A,B) - nuiar(p1 + p2 + p3), whens the maxim is taken over all

possible representations +915 9 HA.

In investigating this model. use case up with a number of statennnts char-
acterizing its properties. In this article. in will limit ourselves to
an interpretation of the significance of the analytic results.

It was show that the sicuation code
mains unchanpd when there is a

um
shift, slewing. sinilarity transfor-
Istion, or symtry transformation
of the situation as a whole, i.e.,
the nodal "ignores" these situation

transformations. In can in a definite
sense he assuned that it evaluates
the situation objectively, i.e.,

appreises. nothing but the situation.
the aforenntioned transformations
can be perceived only if there are
frames of reﬁenence external to the
situation. In this case. however,
it must be considered that one is

no longer dealing merely with the
situation at hand but with son-
thing more extensive, since the frame of reference is "tied" to objects
that do not enter into the situation.

 

Fig. Io. Increase in Heights
on elemnts of situation
stored in memory during in-
duction of conditioned reflex.

It was shown that functions p'. p2, and p3 can only be nomtonic functions

of a certain special for. of argument.' The sense of the corresponding
hypotheses is that, within the frameuork of the assusptions made in con-
structing the model, the form of the functions that can be used in deter-
mining the similarity of situations is not arbitrary but quite clesrly
prede te ruined .

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is not always necessary to know the exact degree of similarity between
situations: it is sometims sufficient to have only an estimate. i.e.,

the range of similarity values. The limits of this range depend on certain
characteristics of the situation and may be valid for entire classes of
situations having these characteristics. Sons: estimates of this type

were obtained for the model. '

Calculation of similarity represents a certain procedure. The concept of
the coqlexity of calculation of the similarity between situations is intro-
duced and can be interpreted as the difficulty of determining similarity,
which reﬂects the actual difficulty in operating with situations. Couples-
ity estimates have been made. The degree of complexity is rather high in
the general case. However, one can limit the class of situations to be
considered to those that are in a definite sense "reasonably" organized in
relation to one another (a strict definition can be given of "reasonable"
organization). Corplexity is significantly reduced in this case.

A modification of the model that is applicable to the image-recognition
problem has been constructed in the form of a computer program with which
experiments have been conducted.

The author wishes to express his deep gratitude to L.V. Krushinskiy and
v.3. Kudrysvtsev for their assistance.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. L.V. Krushinskiy, "Biologicheskiye osnovy rassudochnoy deyatel'nosti"
[Biological Bases of Reasoning], lsd-vo mu. Moscow, 1977. '

2. v.u. Kozlov, in collection: Problemy kibernetiki [Problems of Cyber-
netics], No 28, Nauka, Moscow. 1976.

3. V.N. Koalov, ZHURN. WSSB. NERVN. DEYAT., Vol 8’0, No 2. p 306. 1976.
COPYRICRT: Iadatel'stvo "Nauka". "Doklady Altldemii wk SSSR", I981

26 78
080: 18/00/3109

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROR‘OFIWCIAL USIZCﬂVLY

RADIATION BIOLOGY

UDC: 621.039.55
GAMMAoINSTALLATIONS FOR RESEARCH AND RADIATION BIOLOGY

Moscow GAMMA-USTANOVKI DLYA RADIOBIOLOOICHBSKIKH ISSLBDOVANIY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 20 Peb 81) pp 2-6. 60

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Gamma Installations for
Research and Radiation Biology". by Aleksandr Nikolayevich Gladilkin.

Igor' Vasil'yevich Ignatov. Rostislsv Aleksandrovich Kuzin et a1., Bnergoizdat,
810 copies. 60 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This is a presenation of problems in creation of gamma devices intended primarily
for carrying out radiobiological studies to ensure radiation safety and,
especially, radiation safety for space flights. The devices can be used to
solve a wide group of problems in general radiobiology. radiation hygiene,
radiation resistance of components in electronic equipment and in some areas of
agriculture and public health.

The book is intended for specialists working in the area of modeling radiation
effects using gamma radiation while conducting experimental research on radio-
biology. radiation resistance. etc. It is also helpful for engineering and
technical workers involved in the development of galls-radiating devices.

10 tables, 26 illustrations. 37 bibliographic references.

Foreword

The past 10 years have been marked by intensive growth in research on near-earth
space using artificial. unpiloted. earth satellites.

A logical extension of the process of space research was to be the process of
mastering space, wherein a man is obliged to remain aboard a piloted spacecraft

for extended periods. This stay in space involves hazardous radiation factors
of effects on the cosmonaut such as galactic and solar cosmic radiation.

55

FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AL USE(NVLY

The requirement for ensuring spaceflight safety called forth the broad formulation
of radiobiological experiments to study the radiation effect of the emanations
of cosmic space.

Based on requirements for devices to model the radiation effects of space emana-
tions, a unique system of 52 "Lyustra" gmmma devices, for modeling the chronic
effect of galactic space radiation on large laboratory animals, and a "Kobal't"
gamma device, for modeling the acute effects of solar burst emanations. have been
developed and implemented. The "Lyustra" gamma devices have made it possible,

for the first time, not only in the USSR but, also, in the world, to conduct an
experiment over the course of six years in which 246 dogs have been chronically
irradiated with doses ranging from 25 to 150 rads per year*. The radiobiological
findings contribute to the solution not only of radiation safety of space flights,

but, also, of standardizing radiation effects for individuals working with
ionizing radiation sources.

The "Yenot-i" and "Yenot-Z" gamma devices are intended to model chronic and acute
radiation effects on small laboratory animals over a wide range of dosages. These
achieve a radiation effect of a various temperal character (acute, fractionated,
chronic and combined effects) in order, primarily, to answer questions of effec-
tive doses. The devices make it possible to conduct a large number of experi-
ments with variations of chronic and acute irradiation of animals.

The "Svet" gamma device is intended for experimentation to determine the coeffi-
tents of relative biological effectiveness of heavy charged particles. This

.cvlce has the same range of dosage powers which is available in accelerators

of protons and heavy ions with various energies.

The "Start" gamma device was created and used for ground processing of different
versions of on-board experiments in which animals are irradiated aboard a space-

craft; it has also been used for a long time to irradiate components of electronic
and other equipment.

“We "Integral" and 00-3 gamma devices were created for experiments in radiobiology
under natural conditions-on mountains and aboard spacecraft under flight condi-
tions. The "Integral" device is small and light in weight, and can be carried

by any type of transport. The 0U-3 responds to the requirements imposed on

space technology; it has successfully passed a group of ground tests and has been
used to conduct an experiment in radiobiology with small laboratory animals aboard
the "Kosmos-690" satellite.

The book presents some findings of research in radiobiology obtained using all of
these devices.

The design features of the gamma devices were determined by their function and the
use of 60Co and 137Cs gamma radiation point sources. The radiation and physical

*Extra-systemic units (rad, ter, roentgen, curie) are used here and below. These
are easily converted to SI units, a? follows: 1 rad - 0.01 6y: i bet - 0.01 J/kg;
1 R s 2.58.10-4 C/kg; 1 c1 - 3.7-10 ° Bq.

56

FOR 0F?1C1AI.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parameters of the devices were obtained through calculation, and then thoroughly
studied experimentally.

These devices can be used, and are being used. not only for research in space
radiobiology, but also to solve a wide group of problems of general radiobiology,
radiation hygiene and radiation resistance.

The authors are deeply grateful to N. A. Tufitulova for her help in preparing the
manuscript for publication.

Table of Contents
Foreword........................................u...o.........o......... 3

chapter 1. Gamma devices for modeling radiation effects during long

space flights...noes-oaronononsosoroaoaaaoooosooooonaaoooooo S
1.1. Requirements for devices for modeling........................ 5
1.2. Gamma-system for chronic and acute irradiation of big groups
of large laboratory animals.................................. 6
1.3. Radiation and physical parameters of the gmuaa-systen........ 12
1.“. Some results of nedical and biological research using gamma

devices for chronic and acute irradiation of dogs............ 17

Chapter 2. Laboratory gamma devices for research in space radio-
b1°IOSYaaaanoaoooaaoaaaaasaaaaaaasassssoti0.00000.tloacsssa 21

2.1. Gamma-device for processing different versions of large-
scale experiments in radiobiology............................ 21
2.2. Gamma-device for experiments to determine coefficients of
relative biological effectiveness............................ 25
2.3. Gamma devices for chronic and acute irradiation of small
laboratory animals...........................p....o-......... 29

Chapter 3. Small-scale gamma devices for research under full-scale
COHdiciOUSoaosocovasooooqoooaooooaoooaoacatattoosocsaoosasao 34

3.1. Requirements for devices intended for use under full-scale

conditionﬁ......o.......o..................o......-..o..oo.o. 36

3.2. Device for experiments under mountainous conditions.......... 38
3.3. Calculation of radiation and physical parameters of an

on-b°ard sma-deviceoolOOOOOOOOOCOCCO......CIOOOOCIODOOCIOO. ‘2
3.‘. construction of an on-bo‘rd gal-a'devicesoaassaaosseaosoooooo “4
3.5. Experimental research on radiation and physical parameters

of an 00-boﬂrd gamma devtceos0.000000000090000.saunas-0000000 a6
3.6. Some findings from radiation biology research aboard the

specialized "Kosmos-690" biological satellite using an
0U‘3 on-board 1rrad1&tot..................-..-............... 53

Bibliography...0.006...O...O....I'IOOOOOIOOI....00....OOOOOOD'COO'IOIOQC 58
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. 1981
6900

650: 1860/309
57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HUMAN FACTORS

UDC: 681.51:007.5
JOINT HORK OF MACHINE AND HUMAN OPERATOR IN SEARCH SITUATION

Kiev 0TBOR I PEREDACHA INFORMATSII in Russian No 61, 1980 (manuscript received
7 May 79) PP 14-19

{Article by B. P. Gazdayka, T. N. Lunik, V. V. Rudenko, A. N. Svenson and N. T.
Tyunaya, L'vov, from collection "Information Screening and Transmission" edited

by L. Ya. Hizyuk (chief editor) et a1., an interagency Ukrainian collection,
founded in 1965, Izdntel'stvo "Naukova dumka“]

[Text] Current systems of mass screening [selection] of information, such as aerial
photography, taking photos of earth from artificial satellites, photographic and
television studies of the ocean floor and others yield an enormous amount of

‘zndl information amounting tohundredSof thousands of frames within a relatively
snarl period of time. of this volume of information, only a small part is of
real interest in each specific case. This part must be retrieved from the overall
array of spatial signals that one generally calls the background. As a rule,
such retrieval [searching] work is done by a human operator with professional skill
in recognizing objectsunderchanging retrieval conditions. In this case, the
operator's visual system is considered to be ideal [1], considerably superior to

the capabilities of modern automatic systems with regard to adaptability, univer-
sw!ity and imperviousness to interference [noise].

However, there are both physical and psychological limitations inherent in a human
upcrdtur, which haVe a substantial influence on the efficiency of his work. These
limitations include, first of all, fatigability that leads to decline of reliabi-
lity of operator performance as a function of time.

in operator retrieval systems, monotony related to visual perception and processing
of a large quantity of patterns, a significant part of which contains no useful
infurmation, is an important factor that causes fatigue.

In uldvr to determine the effect of operator fatigue on efficiency of performance,
A study was made on a unit specially developed for this purpose, which simulates

rather completely the psychophysical conditions of retrieval system operator work,
where the presented image is in the form of a television frame.

This device made it possible to deliver to thecperator images with different types
of backgrounds, configurations, dimensions and contrast of objects. The operator's

tusk included continuous tracking during a specific work session of the image in
a tested background on the screen of a videomonitoring device and determining

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his opinion as to the presence on the screen of the sought object. with specified
dimensions and shape, by means of controls.

During the experiment, smooth rectangular objects of a constant brightness with

a 4:1 ratio between the sides and relative contrast of 0.15 to 0.75 in relation to
average background brightness were displayed to the operator. Such presentation of
the retrieval object conforms to a broad range of tasks, since most sought objects,
which are products of civilization, have rectilinear elements in their structure,
unlike objects of natural origin around them which usually have arbitrary outlines.
The dimensions of the object of retrieval were in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 of the
length of a line. The sharpness of the image displayed to the operator changed
from 500 to 50 lines. The image was changed from a contrasted to ”diffuse" one.

Operators who had previously undergone a course of instruction and training parti-
cipated in the experiment.

The experimental studies of operator retrieval work with consideration of fatiga-
bility were conducted with increasing duration of sessions of continuous work up
to 4 h, with a work load that was uniformly distributed in time.

The experimental results, which were recorded after every hour of work, were
evaluated on the basis of the average cost of decision making or degree of risk,
determined by the following equation [3]:

= cum + cfana (1)

where Pm = nm/n and is the probability that the operator will miss [or skip] an
object; Pfa =nfa/"f, probability of false alarm;’ylis the number of objects
skipped by the operator; n is the total number of objects presented to the
operator; "fa is the number of frames in which the operator gave false alarm;
n is the number of elementary frames viewed by the operator; CI,C are the cost
I mistakes referable to missing objects and false alarm, respectively (first and
second type of mistakes) determining the cost of these errors under concrete re-
trieval conditions.

Figure 1 illustrates the values of risk R as a function of operator working time
T with varying sharpness of image m1>mz>m; and Cm - Cfa - 0.5.

Analysis of these functions R - f(T) shows that the results of operator retrieval
work at the first moment of time are determined primarily by objective factors of
the retrieval operation (sharpness of image, dimensions and contrast of the sought
object, etc.) .

The relative increase in risk AR (difference between values of R at the start and
end of the work period related to l h of work) with increase in duration of the
session remained virtually constant and could serve as the quantitative estimate
of fatigabiiity of the operator.

The functions illustrated in Figure l are similar to the results of studies of
attention reported in [5, 6]. They demonstrated that concentration of attention
diminishes from the 15th min of observation on, then stabilizesat a certain level
(25-302 unnoticed signals) and, starting in the 65th min of work no stimuli
(moral or material), no improvement of working conditions for purely operator
retrieval led to improvement of attention for the next 30 min. Only frequent

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

breaks (3-5 min every 30 min of work) made it possible to retain reliability of
retrieval at the initial level, which is determined by the retrieval conditions
and organization of the work place.

On this basis, we can recommend a session
of 20-30 min with brief (5-15 min) breaks

,ly between sessions for practical organization
f_——.__‘_i._..—--—-':"""—n of operator retrieval. However, if it is
”u q necessary to provide for continuous re-
i—..,.1—""r‘.——ﬂr trieval, such organization requires an
a: increase in number of operators.

a
| ;.—.——1T"”ﬂr’—ﬂ"n , In theory, it is possible to try to automate

0 u 2 5 th the entire process of retrieval and recogni-
tion by classical methods, but this is un-
Figure l. likely to lead to results that could be

applied to practice: examination of each
segment of a frame to find a specified
pattern in it (for example, building of
a specific type, part of a road, submerged
weight [cargo?] in the case of underwater
photography, etc.) requires the use of
rather complex algorithms [2], as a result
of which the entire process of automatic
retrieval of useful information turns out
to be considerably longer than manual
Figure 2. retrieval. This is attributable chiefly
to the fact that an automatic system
would meticulously examine parts of a
frame known to be empty for the purpose of detecting in it all isomorphic variants
u' the specified pattern, whereas an operator would discard the frame.at first
3! mute.

 

TL” situation could be significantly improved if the task of retrieving useful
.ntormation is reduced to the task of retrieving simple patterns [images), which
refers to the typical details of a geometric structure of the sought image, the
number of isomorphic variants of which is rather small, for example, segments of
straight lines.

Experience has shown that straight lines, as examples of simple patterns. are
rather widespread and, on their basis, one can solve the problem of automatic
preselection of signals.

However, the drastic restriction of tags [signs, features] of the sought pattern,
l.e.. reduction of volume of useful information about the object with partial
automation of the retrieval process, would result in singling out, along with
useful objects, some false ones containing some of the tags inherent in useful
objects.

One can reduce the quantify of false alarms at the second stage, the stage of
identification of patterns on each of all the preselected informative frames by

the operator. In this case, the operator's duties include making the final
decision as to the presence or absence of the sought object in the presented frame.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the operator is relieved of the obligation to constantly monitor the pre-
sented image and thereby also of processing a large amount of monotonous informa-
tion, which is equivalent to reducing the duration of an operator work session.

In this case, it is proposed to organize the joint work of a machine and operator.
Then the task of the automatic unit includes preprocessing of the image and
issuing a warning signal about the presence of the object on a frame at the time
this frame is shown to the operator; the operator's task is to analyze the image
after the machine's signal and make the final decision as to whether the object
discovered by the machine is referable to the category of sought or false objects.

Evidently, the range of practical organization of the retrieval operation in a
machine-operator system is determined primarily by the probability characteris-

tics of the automatic retrieving device. Since, with such organization of retrieval,
the operator evaluates and identifies only the objects fixed on by the machine,

the automatic retrieval device must have zero or close to zero probability of
skipping an object Pug. This is associated with an increased probability of

false alarm by the machine PfaAt and, as will be shown in the following, under
specific conditions of retrieval this cannot serve as an obstacle to the practical
use of the proposed system, since the operator is able to "correct" the machine's
mistakes [4].

Statistical experimental studies were conducted using the proposed scheme of
organization of retrieval.

The experimental methods and testing conditions did not differ from those described
above. To simulate the operation of an automatic retrieval device, each operator
work place was equipped with individual audio signalization, the use of which was
attributable to the fact that the channels for perception of visual information

are loaded. The audio signal reporting presence of an object (sought or false) on
a frame was delivered from the instructor's console just prior to delivery of

this frame to the operator.

The results of the experimental studies of joint machine and operator work are
illustrated in Figure 2 in the form of magnitude of risk R as a function of dura-
tion of session T with probability of false alarms by the machine PfaA - 0.01

and with PmA - 0 for different sharpness of image m and CIn - cfa - 0.5.

A comparison of the results of the operator's independent work (Figure l) and
Operator work with the machine (Figure 2) shows that the use of the machine-
operator system lowers the value of R to almonst one-half, both during the first
hour of work and the entire work session.

With the use of machine--operator system, the degree of operator fatigability
decreases to more than one-third (AR - 0.01), as compared to retrieval by the
operator (Figure 1. AR - 0.025). Under particularly favorable conditions

3n; = 500 lines), the operator virtually fails to get tired and retrieval relia-
bility is close to the possible maximum throughout the work session.

Let us single out three different schemes of organizing television retrieval sys-
tems: automatic, operator and combined machine-operator.

Figure 3 illustrates the experimental (by the method described previously) mean
cost of risk R5 of the machine-—operator scheme as a function of the machine's

61

FOR 0511C1AI.USBIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

probability characteristics with m, . 500 lines (solid line in Figure) and m; - 50
lines (dash line), various correlations between costs of first and second type

of mistakes c., Cfa, and various values of probability of machine skips PmA,
namely: curves 1 and l'-P,A - 0.1; 2 and 2'- .A- 0.05; 3 and 3'-F.A - 0.

 

Figure 3.

Analysis of the illustrated functions R2 - f(RA) shows that when the risk is low

for the automatic device, ratio RA/CIn does not exceed 0.8-1.0, with ml . 500 lines
and 0.0l-0.015 with m; - 50. maximu fEfficiency can be obtained with automatic
retrieval (Figure 3, b, c, d). Hith increase in RA/%%_ and Pan - 0, it is more
efficient to use the combined machine--operator schemea(Figure 3a). If the pro-
bability characteristics of the machine become worse, it is more efficient to use
operator retrieval. Hith decrease in sharpness of the image, the range of appli-
rntiuu of automatic retrieval broadens.

A better idea about the choice of organizational retrieval scheme can be gained by
examining Figure 4, which illustrates the range of effective use of one of three
(under curves a, b, c) possible organizational retrieval schemes as a function of
prubeility characteristics of the machine PmA and correlation between cost of
misankes of the first and second type. Cn/Cfa, m, - 500 lines (Figure 6a) and

m; = 50 lines (Figure 4b); with PmA - 0. the areas are marked by solid lines and
with PmA>0 the areas are marked by dash lines.

62

FOR OFFNJA1.USE|DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

75?:

Figure 6.

Thus, with PmA - 0, there are only two areas in which there is minimal risk: 1) auto-
matic retrieval (area under curve a); 2) use of machine--operator scheme (area
between curves 0 and b).

The area above curve b is the area of impossible levels of machine risk with speci-
fied cost of mistakes Cm and Cfa and probability of machine skips PmA-

With PmA>0, the area of operator retrieval appears. Thus, with PmA I 0.025 the
area of operator retrieval is between curves a, b, c (see Figure 6, a and b). Fur-
ther increase of PmA leads to disappearance of the area of the machine-operator
scheme and only two areas remain-~automatic and operator retrieval.

On this basis, it can be concluded that it is desirable to use the combined machine-
operator scheme only if the machine has PmA equal or close to zero. In this case,-
the risk involved in such a retrieval system would be lower or equal to the risk

in operator retrieval. The condition of equality is met only if the automatic
device has the maximum possible risk, i.e., when the probability of false alarm

PfaA tends to one.

There is analogous decrease in area of the machine--operator system with decrease
in sharpness of the image (see Figure 6b). in this case, automatic retrieval
acquires much weight (the area of automatic retrieval becomes wider).

The findings we have obtained, which are qualitative rather than quantitative,
indicate that there are three areas, in each of which one of three possible orga-
nizational schemes for constructing the retrieval system is the most efficient.

For this reason, it is necessary to conduct in the future some quantitative studies
of the efficiency of possible methods of constructing retrieval systems as related
to specific retrieval conditions, including the type and statistical characteris-
tics of the background, shape, dimensions and contrast of the object, parameters

of ash I?! media, probability characteristics of the automatic device, cost [price]
of mistakes of the first and second type.

The results of such studies would make it possible to define the optimum scheme

for constructing a retrieval system assuring minimal risk, depending on objective
retrieval conditions. 63

INJR OFTNCJAL USEICHULY
1.

2.

3.

lo.

50

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Clezer, V. D. and rsukkerman, I. 1., "Information and Sight,” Hoscov——Leningrad,
Izdatel'scvo AN USSR [Ukrainian Academy of Sciences], 1961, 182 pp.

Kovalevskiy, V. A., "Methods for Optimum Decisions in Image Recognition,"
Moscow, Nauka, 1976, 328 pp.

Krasil'nikov, N. N., "Statistical Theory of Image Transmission," Moscow, Svyaz',
1976, 134 pp.

Lomov, B. F., "Han and Technology," Moscow, Sov. radio, 1966, 334 pp.

Noyman, Yu. and Timpc, K. P., "Organization of Labor," Moscow, Bkonomika,
1975, 103 pp.

Vcnda, V. F., editor, "Ergonomics," Moscow, Kit, 1971, 421 pp.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", 1980

10,657
cso: 1840/348

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘9

UDC 331 .015," .002

METHOD FOR COMPREHENSIVE EVALUATION OF TRAINING OF OPERATORS 0F PERIPHERAL
COMPUTER UNITS AND ITS TECHNICAL REALIZATION

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEMY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 10-"
[Article by R. S. Grayfer. engineer]

[Text] The proposed method and its technical realization concern the solution of
one of the major tasks of ergonomics—the creation of technical devices for
instruction and training of operators (1).

"Remote" and "on-site" peripheral computer terainals (user stations. data
recorders. data preparation devices. etc.). through which the user interacts with
the computer. are widely used in data processing systems (DPS) and ACS [automated
control systems]. Both "professional" operators (DDPPT [Devices for data
preparation on punched tape]. DDPC [Devices for data preparation on cards] and
DDPHT [Devices for data preparation on magnetic tape] operators) and operators
combining production and operator functions (foreman. warehouseman. TCD [technical
control department] controller. etc.) may work with different peripheral terminals
(PT). Coapared with the professional operators' functions. the indicated specific
nature of the l'nonprofessional" operators' work is responsible for increasing the
reliability of system functioning: the "nonprofessional" operator's functions have
an additional internal Justification owing to deliberate prediction of the
consequences of errors made. This makes possible an increase in the human
operator's reliability as the result of the feature of "self monitoring" of
performances (2). The efficiency and accuracy of data file editing is increased.

because it is possible. for example. for an error made in calculating the movement
of a material and detected during data verification to be compared at the

warehouse-en's workplace with the actual stock of the material; the operator's

self monitoring is improved. since he develops and reinforces associations between
item: (or events) and their numerical expression.

To a significant extent. the indices of the quality of the functioning of DPS's
and ACS's are a function of the level of the operators' training and experience.

This relationship is primarily expressed in a decrease in the number of repeat
calculations of tasks on the computer thanks to the increased reliability (absence
of errors) of the collection and preparation of rapid information.

It is advisable to employ special training programs and devices in order to
develop skills and work experience on computer PT's in the operator. The economic
effect of using such programs and equipment say be substantial. inasmuch as it is

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the result of the action of such factors as reduction of the time necessary to
introduce DPS's and ACS's to a project. i.e.. acceleration of entry into
industrial operation; increase in the operators' training and experience level:
reduction of physical wear on the data preparing devices in the Hc [hardware

complex]. and reduction of the number of labor-intensive hand operations by the
human instructor .

Up to the present. industry has not produced PT operator training devices. This
unsatisfactory situation may be explained by the fact that. first. the necessity
of the described devices has not been fully realized. second. sound technical
requirements taking into account both the general information model of training
systems (3) and the specific conditions for operating PT's. have not been
developed for the construction of their structures. PT operator training devices
belong to the class of "training equipment" for developing stable skills and
experience in specific functions in operators.

Analysis of known training equipment which might be used as analogs for PT
operator training devices showed that along with the typical nature of the
functional-logical structure. this training equipment has specific shortcomings.
The basic ones relate both to the method of task presention as well as to the
method of evaluating the level of the operator's training: the work rate is
compulsorily imposed upon the operator. This rate is synchronized with the
read-out rate of the coded task by the tape-transport mechanism. although in
practice an independent data input rate is more practicable: the level of the
operator's training is evaluated according to the dynamics of indices. either
.‘\ductivity or absence of errors. The self monitoring index is not taken into
consideration here; the operator's training is evaluated ineffectively owing to

the delay in statistical processing of the recorded elements of the task and the
operator's response actions.

As the analysis presented suggests. in training equipment analogs the criterion
for evaluating the operator's training is one of two personal indices of his
activity computed: absence of errors or productivity. The indicated criterion.
however. is inadequate for evaluating PT operators' training. inasmuch as the
quality of their activity directed at developing or modifying data arrays on DPS's
or ACS's is determined by the aggregate of their absence of errors. self
monitoring. and productivity indices (It).

The study (5) substantiates an inferred criterion for evaluating the operator's
experience in work on closed control systems. taking into consideration not only
tne activity indices but also the indices of the operator's physiological
condition. measured by special methods. Full use of the integrated method (5) in
order to construct PT operator training devices is not rational. since in this

case the structure of the operator training device (or system) itself becomes
complicated; this is undesirable.

The method described in the article for evaluating the level of PT 0 erators'
training proposes an integrated index R(I)'-—- RIP“). K“(')- ”(0- K‘°“) . the
comp>nents of which are the characteristics of the work and self-monitoring
operations. which vary in time: D'(0 = the probability of the operator's making
mistakes; K°° = the probability of his detecting errors actually made; "(0 = the

66

FOR 0FTWC1AL.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operator's productivity in symbols per second; K°°(l) : the probability of the
operator's "detecting" a error actually not made (a false error).

The advisability of such a selection of components for the integrated index is
substantiated by the fact that. first. the named characteristics are mutually
independent and. second. the characteristics may be used as arguments in
mathematical modeling of an operator-device system under the assumptions of the
"structural method" of evaluating the reliability of a man-equipment system (6).

It is advisable to subordinate the selection of the structure of the integrated
index RU) to the requirement of simplification of the technical realization of

the training device. Hence a mathematical linear form of representation is
suggested:

R m - on. law) I + as. M” (01+ «Mum! + .

+0.0.IK‘°U)I. _ _ m (1)
where 010'" IT?)- and 0. (ﬁr-7.7) are. respectively, the relative ratings and the
weighted coefficients of the characteristics.

The magnitude of the value R (t) varies within the range of 0< R(t)<1 when the
following combination of conditions is fulfilled:
. . _ __
o<o,“--. ﬁ)<|; 305-13, n5(i-l.d)>0.
l-i _ ' -

The necessity of using the relative ratings of the characteristics is dictated by
the differences in the size and relative magnitude of their values. Relative
ratings may be written in the form:

 

mo. -
0.IB°(!)l--$P—:,T: enxwm- is : --
' n'(o ’- Ru

e.lnwi-= T‘ 9.fk'.9(01,=w(0—-

where 67’. I7”. I}. R” are the standardized values of the characteristics.

It is advisable to select the standardized values of the characteristics with the
guidance of the following assumptions: the standardized value of the value must be
maximally or minimally attainable (the principle of optimizing the benchmark). In
order for the index R (t) to maintain a monotonic relationship. characteristics.
increase in the values of which results in an increase in the values of the index
R (t). must be standardized at maximum. and. in the opposite case. at minimum.
values. On the basis of the indicated assumptions. we may write: 3'5 min V“):

R50 1:- mu KO. “)2 ﬁ - mg; n (I); T“ - min K“ (I).

The cxperiaents conducted (Ii) made it possible to determine the extreme levels of
the averaged (by group of operators) values of the characteristics after
completion of training: min 5° (0'- 5-IO" (per sylbol);-mu WHO-0.9: max run-,2
symbols/s: min K'°(l)= 0.03. Based on the interrelation of the weighted

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONLY

functioning of the DPS and ACS (greatest influence Ape. least AK”) the following
expert evolutions were made: 31 = 0.6; 32 : 0.3; a3 = 0.06; a4 = 0.0“.

The method described may be realized on an autonomous device (7) the flow-chart of
which is presented in the figure. Tasks in the form of brief alphabetic and

performs it using the response input unit RIU. Performance of the task generally

indices--selected by the unit for determining the error correction index UDECI and
the unit for determining the "beginning and end of question" index UDBEQI.
respectively: and 2) alphabetical and numerical symbols, entering the other input
of the RCU unit through the response storage unit RSU. In the RC0 unit the tasks
received are compared with the results of their performance. when the compared
values coincide. a signal appears at the output of the "absence of error" signal
former AESF. In the opposite case, the signal enters the output of the
error-signal former ESP. Both signals reach the counter unit CU. which is

errors detected by the operator and in the counter for false errors "detected" by
the operator. In the opposite case. recording is permitted in the counter for

n,- ' a” . n" N (2)
°=T, K“: 7:, K‘°=T§_n‘_ ; 1777—.
Here n, is the number of errors made (generated) by the operator: N is the number
of completed symbols of the task; n°°is the number of errors actually made and
deLucLed by the operator; n‘° is the number of errors not actually made but

"detected" by the operator (false errors): T is time spent on completion of the
task.

0n the basis of data from the output of the unit for setting standardized
coefficients USSC and the enumerated "professional" characteristics, the
integrated index R (t) is determined in the training index computing unit TICU
according to formula (I). In an analogous manner. on the basis of data from the
outputs of the USSC unit and of the unit for setting the operator's "professional"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

18'
19.
20.

21.

23 .

BF [error-319181 for-er]

more [unit for setting
operator's "professional"
characteristics

TICU attaining index computing
unit

0001'! [unit for comparing Opera.-
tor's training indims]

nu [display unit]

RIU response input unit]

1811 response storage unit]
unscI [unit for deterrdlung error
correction indent]

11mm [unit for determine the
"beginning and end of question"
1M9!)

GNP [counters {or nunber of
presentatiom]

CDQ [counters for duration of
question]

TIC [tine inteml generator]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time interval generatorTTG. The performances of the devices and the task
presentation rate are determined by the programmed control unit PCU. Here both
the independent rate. which is dependent only on the time for completion of task
mastery by the operator. and the compulsory rate. which is assigned by the PCU
unit. are possible.

with "nontime-sharing” DPS's and ACS's. it is advisable to include the described
autonomous device in the system of technical devices. Hith advanced time sharing
systems. a centralized method of training operators (a training class) at the

timesharing computer center. for example. using terminals connected with a common
mini-processor. is more economical.

BIBLIOGRAPﬂY

1. Zarakovskiy. G. H.. Korolev. B. a. Hedvedev. V. I.. Shlayen. P. Ya.
"Vvedeniye v ergonomiku" [Introduction to Ergonomics]. V. P. Zinchenko.
editor. Sov. Radio. Moscow. 197a.

2. Kotik. H. A. "Samoregulyatsiya i nadezhnost' cheloveka-operatora"
[Self-Monitoring and the Reliability of Human Operators]. Valgus. Tallin.
197”.

3. Harchenko. Ye. K. 'Hashiny dlya obucheniya" [Training Machines].
Vysshaya shkola. Moscow. 197".

u. Gubinskiy. A. I.. Grayfer. R. S.. Abezgauz. M. I. and Borshcheva. T. N.
"Reliability of Information Processes in A08" in "Teoriya i praktika
nadezhnosti vychislitel'nykh i radiotekhnicheskikh ustroystv" [Theory and

Practice of the Reliability of Computer and Radiotechnical Devices].
Mokslas. Vil'nyus'. 1975.

\‘I
o

Bulat. A. A.. Denisov. V. G.. Kuz'minov. A. P.. et al. "0n the Integral
Method of Evaluating the Experience of Operators on Control Systems" in
'Sistema 'chelovek i avtomat'" [The 'Man-Robot' System]. Nauka. Moscow. 1965.

6. "Hetodicheskiye rekomendatsii po otsenke nadezhnosti i effektivnosti sistem
'chelovek-tekhnika'" [Recommendations on Evaluation of Reliability and
Effectiveness of "Han-Equipment" Systems]. A. I. Gubinskiy. editor. AN SSSR.
Moscow. 1971.

7. A. 3. [expansion unknown] 616651 (USSR).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinoatroyeniye". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya",
198!

9380
C80: 18u0/375

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

UDC 158.1+62.506.23+156.4
RESEARCH METHODS IN ENGINEERING PSYCHOLOGY AND INDUSTﬁIAL PSYCHOLOGY

Leningrad HETODOLOGIYA ISSLEDOVANIY P0 INZHENBRNOY PSIKHOLOGII I PSIKHOLOGII
TRUDA: CHAST' 2 in Russian 1975 (signed to press 22 Oct 75) pp 2—6, 158-160

[Annotation. foreword. bibliography and table of contents from book "Methods
of Research in Engineering Psychology and Industrial Psychology". edited by

A. A. Krylov. doctor of psychological sciences, Izdstel'stvo Leningradskogo

universiteta. 5260 copies, 160 pages]

[Text] Part 2 of this collective monograph (the first part was published in

1976) considers information processing by operators, basic methods for studying
information processing interactions between can and technological devices and

also certain questions related to engineering psychology design and standardization.

This book is intended for specialists working in the areas of engineering
psychology, industrial psychology and ergonomics. Nine tables. 26 figures.
38 bibliographic citations.

Editor's Foreword

(Text) The creation of automated systens of control. in which a person perforns
control functions, are most typical of the new for-s of organization of manu-
facturing processes. For this reason. every day sore and more of the activities
people perform on the job have taken on characteristics typical of operators'
and the number of kinds of jobs where people function "purely" as operators is
continually growing.

The particulars of an operator's work have posed new problens for psychologists.
Solution of these problems has required the development of new sethods of
research. of theoretical concepts and of ways to ilplenent scientific data in
practice. In a relatively short period of tine. it has been possible from tinid
attempts to match individual functional psychophysiological mechanisms with
technological devices to move to the development of hypotheses about the organi-
zations of the activity of the brain as an infer-scion processing system; fro-
individual suggestions for rstionalizing certain types of industrial activity

71

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR‘0F11C1A1.USEGDNLV

to complex methods of engineering psychology design and assessment of opera-
tors' tasks.

Methodological problems in the area of engineering psychology and industrial
psychology have currently also taken on special significance because of the fact
that questions involving optimizing the individual's on-the-ﬁob activity are
becoming more and more complex and the fact that qualitative changes in the
nature of an activity necessitate new approaches to its study. The principles
of a systems approach and quantitative analysis turn out to be absolutely essen-
tial for transition from taking account of separate human characteristics in

constructing equipment to the engineering psychology systems design of an
activity.

This, however, should not be understood as a renunciation of substantive psyv
chological research and qualitative analysis. Soviet engineering psychology
and industrial psychology must solve problems which are significantly broader
than merely making it possible for people to perform job tasks and operations
quickly and accurately. Technology and also the conditions and organization

of work must. furthermore, fully meet demands for well-rounded human development
and human improvement in a socialist society. Meeting these demands in practice
necessitates in-depth study of the work activity of a person and of the person
himself as perforaer of the work. The information processing aspect of psycho-
logical research tskes on special significance in connection with the creation
of automated systems of control and engineering psychology design.

This book, the second part of the collective monograph "Methodology for Research
in Engineering Psychology and Industrial Psychology", examines questions related
to information processing and operators' activities, the fundamental methods for
studying information processing interaction between people and technological
devices and also certain questions related to psychological engineering and
standardization.

The book develops several ideas for a systems approach to the study of the

vganisation of information processing in the brain system (the concept of
"switching"). A number of methodological principles for research are considered,
not only in general form, but concretely as applied to typical problems in
engineering psychology. This is especially relevant to the study and evaluation
of devices for displaying information, instrument panels and panels of control
units. Certain methodological problems. for example, from those related to
evaluation of the characteristics of information flow in signals, to the study
of principles and methods of composition and questions of standardization are,
basically, only formulated.

Chapter I, Nos. 1 and 2 were written by A. A. Krylov, No. 3 by V. H. Vodlozerov
and V. G. Naberezhnyy; Chapter II, No. 4 by A. A. Krylov, No. 5 by V. A. Gsnzen
and P. A. Kudin, No. 6 by T. P. Zinchenko; Chapter III, No. 7 by Yu. H. Zebrodin,
No. 8 by T. P. Zinchenko, No. 9 by I. M. Lushchikhina, No. 10 by A. I. Naftul'yev;
Chapter IV, No. 11 by M. H. zibert, G. S. Nikiforov and A. A. Krylov. No. 12 by

F. S. Pinskiy, No. 13 by Yu. A. Simonenko. B. P. Shaytor and I. H. Yusupov,

No. 1‘ by G. V. Sukhodol'skiy: Chapter V, Nos. 15 and 16 by G. V. Sukhodol'skiy,
and No. 17 by S. A. Hikhaylov.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

10.

11.

12.

13.

15.

FOR OF1HC1A1.USE1MVLY

Bibliography

Rozenblatt, P., "Printsipy neyrodinamik" (Principles of neurodynanics),
Moscow, 1965, 480 pp.

"Mehhanizmy deyatel'nosti neytralnogo neyrona" (Mechanisms of activity of
a neutral neuron). Moscow-Leningrad, 1966, 266 pp. Authors: G. A. Vartanyan,
N. N. Vasilevskiy, A. A. Manina, D. M. Menitskiy and L. 2. Pevzner.

Polyskov, c. 1., “0 printsipakh neyronnoy organisatsii mosga" (0n the
principles of neuron organization of the brain), Moscow, 1965, 168 pp.

Hooldrich, D., "Mckhsnizmy mozga" (Brain mechanisms), Moscow, 1965, 364 pp.

Belenkov, M. Yu., "Uslovnyy refleks i podkorkovyye obrazovaniya mosga"
(The conditioned reflex and subcortical formations of the brain), Moscow,
1965, 304 pp.

Luria, A. R., "Osnovy neyropsikhologii" (Fundamentals of neuropsychology),
Moscow, 1973, 376 pp.

Krylov, A. A., "Chelovek v avtonatizirovannykh sistemakh upravleniya"
(Man in automated systems of control), Leningrad, 1972, 192 pp.

Temnikov, F. Ye., Highly organized systems. In the book: "Bol'shiye
sistemy. Teoriya, metodologiya, modelirovaniye" (Large systems. Theory,
methodology, modeling), Moscow, 1971, pp 85-96.

Bernshteyn, N. A., "Ocherki po fiziologii dvizheniy i fiziologii aktivnosti"
(Studies in the physiology of motion and the physiology of action) Moscow,
1966, 352 pp.

Boyko, Ye. 1., “Vremys reaktsii cheloveks" (Human reaction time), Moscow,
196“, 440 pp.

Sukhodol'skiy, C. V., 0n the formation of the skill of tracking a moving
target by a human operator. In book: "Probleny obshchey i inzhenernoy
psikhologii" (Problems in general and engineering psychology), Leningrad,
1964, pp 80-89.

Anokhin, P. K., "Biologiya i neyrofiziologiya uslovnogo refleksa"
(Biology and neurophysiology of the conditioned reflex), Moscow, 1968,
5&8 pp.

Gaaze-Rspoport, M. 6., "Avtomaty i zhivyye organizmy" (Robots and living
organisms), Moscow, 1961, 224 pp.

Setrov, M. 1., "Obshchiye printsipy organizatsiys sistes i ikh metodologi-
cheskoye snacheniye" (General principles of systems and their methodological
significance), Leningrad, 1971, 120 pp.

73

FIH!(Hﬂﬁ(]Al.USE|DNLY
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

26.

27.

28.

29.

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

Setrov, H. 1., "Organizatsiya biosistem" (Organization of biosystams),
Leningrad, 1971, 276 pp.

Setrov, H. 1., "Osnovy funktsional'noy teorii organizatsii" (Fundamentals
of a functional theory of organization), Leningrad, 1972, 166 pp.

Loehlin, J ., The personality of Aldous. Discovery, 1962, July, Vol 23,
No 7, pp. 23-26.

"Hodelirovaniye psikhologicheskoy deyatel'nosti" (Modeling psychological
activity), Moscow, 1969, 384 pp. Authors: A. A. Bratko, P. P. Volkov,
A. R. Kochergin and G. I. Tsaregorodtsev.

0:: modeling the human mind. In book: "Bionika", Moscow, 1965, pp. 179-186.
Authors: N. H. Amosov, E. T. Golovan', 5. Ya. Zaslavskiy and V. S. Starinets.

Levi, l., Introduction. In book: "Emotsional'nyy stress", Leningrad, 1970,
pp. 19-20.

Marshchuk, B. I... Platonov, K. K. and Pletnitskiy, Ye. IL, 'Wapryazhennost'
b polete" (Tension in flight), Moscow, 1969, 120 pp.

Welford, A. T., Evidence of a single-channel decision mechanism limiting

performance in a serial reaction task. Quart. Exp. Psych, 1959, Nov.,

Helford, A. T., Sensory motor measureaent (Overview and evaluation after 12
years). In book: "Inzhenernaya psikhologiya" (Psychological engineering),
Moscow, 1964, pp. 617-671.

Telford, c. IL, The refractory phase of voluntary associative responses.
J. Expt. Psychol, 1931, Vol. 110, pp. 1-36.

"Inzhenernaya psikhologiya v primenenii k proyektirovaniyu oborudovaniya"
(Engineering Psychology as applied to design of equipment), Ed. K. D. Morgan,
A. Chapanis, D. S. Cook III, M. U. Land, Moscow, 1971, 1.88 pp.

Smith, C. Yu., Visual backward associations and tracking. In book:
"Inzhenernaya psikhologiya", Moscow, 1964, pp. 517-558.

Kremen', H. A., "Experimental studies of the features of the tracking process
as a function of input signals." Abstract of doctoral dissertation, Leningrad,
1966, 26 pp.

Adams, 0., Behavior of the human operator in the tracking process. In book:

"lnzllcnernaya psikhologiya za rubezhom"(Enginecring psychology abroad),
Hoscow, 1968, pp. 476-516.

Poulton, Ye., Simple methods for measuring errors in tracking. In book:
“Inzhenernaya paikhologiya za rubezhom", Moscow, 1967, pp. 364-370.

710

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
30.

31.

32.

33.

3b.

35.

36.

37.

38.

FIHICHWWCIAL USE1MNLY

Sergeyev, G. A.. Sukhodol'skiy. G. V. and Vodlozerov. V. H.. Study of the
statistical characteristics of a human operator in non-stationary input
effects. In book: "Han and robot system", Moscow, 1965, pp. 185-196.

Miller, 6., The magic number seven, plus or minus too. On some limits of
our infatuation processing capacity. In book: "Inzhenernsya psikhologiya",
Moscow, 1964, pp. 192-225.

Smith, S. L., Thomas, D. 0.. The coding of color and form on information
displays. In book: "Inzhenernaya psikhologiya as rubezhom", Moscow,
1967, pp. 197-213.

A comparative study of recognition and identification of one dimensional
and multidimensional visual codes. In book: "Brgonomika. Vyp 2. prrosy
zritel‘noy rabotosposobnoati" (Ergonomics. Part 2. Issues in visual effi-
ciency). Moscow, 1971, pp. 120-158. Authors: V. K. Gayda, T. M. Guntseva,
Yu. M. Zabrodin and T. P. Zinchenk.

Herzog, J. H., Manual control using the matched manipulator control technique.
1333 Trans on nan-machine systems. 1968, Vol HHS-9. No 3. pp. 59-60.

"Inzhenerno-psikhologicheskiye trebovaniya k sistemam upravleniya"
(Psychological engineering requirements for systems of control). Moscow,
1967, pp. 111-112.

Zimkin, R. V., 0n the question of the visibility of the dial on aviation
instruments. In book: "Sbornik trudov VIA, pssvyashchennoy Prof. V. N. Dolganov"
(Collection of works VHA, dedicated to Prof. V. N. Dolganov), Leningrad,

1935. pp. 185-195.

Zimkin, N. V., Psychophysical evaluation of the dials on aviation instruments,
"Trudy Tsentral'noy laboratorii aviatsionnoy meditsiny GVT, Tom II" (Hbrks

of the central laboratory of aviation nedicine of the Civil Air Fleet.

Vol. II). Hoscow, 1937, pp. A8-60.

Epple, N. A., An attempt to simplify the pointers and dials of aviation
instruments. "Grazhdanskaya aviatsiya", 1935, No 8, pp. 19-21.

Contents

“1t0r'5 Foreword“................c....o................................ 3

Chapter I Infomtion processing by operators...............-oo.......... 5

1. The organization of the information control process in the
brain syste‘OOtOOIOODOOOOOO'DOD.OOI.0....DOD'OIOOOOOOIOOOOODO"0 5

2. The concept of "svitching"...u...nu.............no.......... 18
3. The interaction of the functional mechanisns for information
processing in an integral activity.............................. 32

7S

FOI10FFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR10FFNWAI.US£1DNLY

Chapter II General psychological principles for organizing control

processeSOsaaaassessoossoosassassonaasOsloossss'soosssoonostos

6. Certain theoretical aspects of optimizing the activity

of the human operator in an Automated System of Control.........
5. Principles and modes of composition as applied to problems

of designing control rooms......................................
6. Psychological principles for constructing information processing

Iodel...seeaoaoslssasssoaosoooooooosossosIsossosssooooosooosoots

Chapter III The organization of human information processing links in
Automated Control Systems.......................o............
7. Evaluation of the characteristics of signal flows...............
8. Coding of Visual 1nformation.......c........o.....o.oo.oo..-..o.
9. Study of acoustic signals in linguistic con.mnications..........
10. Engineering Psychology deaisn of control unicssasoeaeooasoossase

Chapter IV Methods of studying and evaluating the readability of

display.asessssoosbsosaossseas-000000000soosssasaosossosoeooeo

11. Laboratory studies of the readability of displays and the use
of the computer in engineering psychology experixents...........
12. Evaluation of the reading devices on precision pointer

instrumtSOQooo'eaassseocsaaooesesoseseaoosoossOsosoossosooooas

13. Phatures of experimental studies and optimization of symbolic
and Pictorial displays.O.IO.IOOOOOODOOOOOOIIOI'ICCC09.0.0000...0
16. Methods of a priori engineering psychology evaluation...........

Chapter V Evaulation of the layout of the panel and questions of
standardization......................o.............n.o.......o.
15. Evaluation of the layout of instrument and control panels.......
16. Certain questions of standardization in ergonomics and
engineering psychology.............o......o....o...ooo.........o

Appendices......c......o...o.....o.............o..u.nno.ooooooo...o......
Literature citations.possess.so.o-asesooooseeesoeeveesealIaeooseoooeosoae
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta, 1975

9285
C80: 1840/351 - END -

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

50
40

68

53
53
61
73
80
89
89
99
106
120
123
123
127
136

158