mu OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10665
16 July 1982

USSR Report

TRANSPORTATION

[FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
mspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sue-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. ﬂords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the polio
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGH' LAHS ANP REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP 0F
mmms REPRODUCED llEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F TIIIS_PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Tmsvomnou

(P000 5/82)

CONTENTS

HOPOR VEHICLE

Costs of Road Construction in western Sibsris Discussed
(A. O. Chudinovsldkh, H. I. Mkushsv; mm
mm' smn mamas mm'srvo,

"0 3, 1982) 00.00.00.0000.00.0.0...OCOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOO.

Truck Uss Profitability Rsportsd
(mum P0 MM'IIB‘H WWII
mm ‘mm’ 1980) 0.......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

RAILROAD
Instructions for Uss, m1. of Contents of Passagsr Train
Sohsduls

(mm mm PISSAZHIBSKIKB POW
(MOB) M 1981-1982

- . - [III - ussn -

mo haw-In I" nmv
"WWMV

man WHICH

cats (I new cousrsucnou 1" WESTERN sneeze DISCUSSED

lbscov mama HMSHLBW' seem mmoumovars STROITBL'S‘NO in
Russien No 3, 1982 pp 3-5

[Article by A. G. Chudinovskikh end I. I. Ibrkushev from the
Ciprotp-enneftegsz [Stete Institute for the Design end Plenning of the
Tyunnn‘ Oil end Gee Industry] 8028 [Council for the Study of Production '
Forces] .of the USSR Goeplen: "Motor Vehicle Reeds of Verious Designs in the
Oil end Gee Fields of Western 8iherie") ‘

[Text] One of the importsnt problems in opening up the oil end gee fields
of Western Siberie is choosing efficient roed designs. A number of reseerch-
ers consider thet it is necessary to build only dirt roeds for delivering
freight to the oil fields. This is beceuse mejor roeds will not be fully
used es the fields ere developed end the cost of constructing nejor roeds

is 600,000 ,to 800,000 ables per kilometer. The needs of oil end ges

fields for freight transport cen else be met by using winter reeds end

by developing cross-country trensportetion. Sometime it is expedient to
eccelerete developsent of herd-surfe'ce motor vehicle reeds.

Let's examine the erees of inst efficient use of verious kinds of motor
vehicle roeds in Hestern Siberien conditions. It is well known thet using
the more cepitel-intensive roed designs permits e future reduction not only
of specific trensportstion expenditures, but else of the long-range need for
motor vehicle equipent. There is en inverse relstionship between expendi-
tures for roed end motor vehicle fecilities: es expenditures for developing
e roed system ere decreased, expenditures for developing the motor vehicle
industry end fecilities ere increesed. Thus, it is expedient to find the
optimu- canbinntion of construction end operetionel expenditures for roed
fecilities end expenditures for purchesing end meinteining motor vehicle
equipment, so their overell totel will be uinimel.

In trensporting freight. the correletion between trensport end construction
expenditures is meinly determined by the overell volume of delivered freight
end the roed length. Zones heve been defined for expedient use of herd-
eurfece roed designs, dirt end log rosds end winter reeds, depending on
these peremeters end elso besed on celculeted technicsl end economic indices
which were obteined stetisticelly for the regions being considered. This
reseerch wee conducted in the 8018 of the USSR Gosplen, besed on dete ob-

teined by Giprotyumenneftegss .

MWLWONLV
roe OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

In co-puting the cost of building and maintaining roads, consideration was
given to their type, standard service life. and expenditures for renovat-
ing those roads whose service life was less then the calculated period

for opening up and exploiting oil fields (in the calculations, the period
was equal to so years). For a comparison, roads in categories III, IV and
V, with reinforced concrete surfaces, were assured (Construction Horns and
Rules, Part II. Section D, Chapter 5. 'hvto-obilnyye dorogi. Nor-y
proyektirovaniya." [Motor Vehicle Roads. Planning Norms] Hoscow, USSR
Gosstroy, 1973). Based on a permissible traffic intensity and its con-
puted value for the overall freight traffic being analyzed, the necessary
number of traffic cones across winter roads and dirt roads was selected.

Graph. Zones for Bxpedient Use of Road Designs, Depending on Road Length
and Overall Volume of Delivered Freight

 

Key:
1. Road length in kilometers
2. Overall volt-so of delivered freight in thousands of tons.

The mean weighted values of road designs under the geomorphological condi-
tions of the lay of existing routes in the regions being examined were taken
as indices for the cost of building and maintaining roads. The correlation
of transport and construction expenditures for type III bogs were not ex-

amined, since the Hestern Siberian territory is characterized, to a consider-
able extent, by non-uniforlity.

Setting up and operating a notor transport system in the oil-extracting areas
of Western C'beria has its own regional specificities. All the existing and
planned roads in those areas are characterised by a production orientation:
the freight traffic along the roads is strictly directed towards the oil
fields and inter-industrial facilities. The basic volue of freight is
during the period when the oil fields are being opened up; later, transport
falls off sharply and ceases when the oil field is depleted if the field is
the only tensinal point for a road in question. Therefore, the service life
of roads cannot exceed the overall period of operation for the oil fields

which they serve. These peculiarities were taken into account while

WWWONLY
roe OHIO“. use ONLY

determining the calculated dynamics of freight delivery and the ensuing traf-
fic intensity.

The dynamics of freight da livery depend on a ember of various factors.

Distorting the dynamics of delivered freight has an impact on overall trans-
port expenditures (insofar as the method of discounting cost indices was
widely used in the calculations). It was established that distortion of
transport expenditures for individual freight traffic volues which were
examined did not exceed 10 percent of their calculated value.

To calculate the transportation component of freight shipment expenses, the
method of defining technical and operational indices for rolling stock was
used (H. 8. Khodosh, ”Gruzovyye perevorlti, avtomobil'nyye perevozki"
[Freight Traffic, lbtor Vehicle Traffic] lbscow “Transport", 1980).

While making this calculation, expenditures for repeated shipments of
freight and transport of workers' crews, duty crews and others were taken

into consideration, in addition to expenditures connected with transporting
needed industrial freight.

Zones for expedient use of road designs, depending on road length and the
overall volt-a (during the entire period of drilling, building up and ex-
ploiting oil fields) of delivered freight (see the graph). It is obvious
from the graph that type II dirt roads are transitional from type III winter
roads to type I herd-surface roads. The zone for expedient use of type 11
extended in a narrow band and was limited to an overall freight volume of
1.1. million tons, with a road length no greater than 18 kilometers.

The zone for expedient use of type Ill winter roads extended along the

' x-axis. These roads can be efficiently constructed when there is a sub-
stantial distance to haul small-voltmue freight (overall limit 3 million
tons). Beginning with a route length of 80 to 100 kilometers, the limiting
line for use of winter roads is parallel to the x-axis, that is, any in-

crease in freight traffic necessitates construction of hard-surface type
roads.

When the overall freight traffic exceeds 3 million tons, it is expedient to
construct type I hard-surface roads.

The most complicated problem is selecting the type of road designs for a
freight delivery distance of up to 20 kilometers and freight traffic up to

1.4 million tons. For each specific inetance, special calculation must be
performed.

The tones, represented in the graph, for expedient use of road designs,

can be aodified when specifying the area of road construction, the geo-
morphological conditions, and when considering indirect effects arising in
adjacent branches, under the influence of selective variants for road and
industrial construction. In the future, we must explain, first of all, how
the limits of the zones under consideration are modified when there are
changes to the technical and economic parameters on which the calculations

MWWONLY
POI OFFICIAL OBI: ONLY

are booed. Secondly, we not study the change in zone limit. when there it
an additional calculation of indirect effects, connected with the nae of
ecarce road construction ntetiale, with the additional use of unmet.

with the impact of an accepted deciaion on the effectiveneu of developing
branches of epecialization. etc.

COPYRIGRI‘: Vaeeoyuznyy nauchno-iuledovatel'ekiy inatitut organizeteii,
uprevleniye i ekononikineftegezovoy pronyohlennoeti (VNIIWNG). 1982.

9887
030: 182 9/ 2 11

”MANNY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

moron VEHICLE

TRUCK US! mutant!" W

Kiev smvocmx P0 WM'W Wﬂnll mm ANGUS! in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 19 Feb 80) pp 2-5, 159-160

[Annotatiom introduction and table of contents fron HANDBOOK on mnrmr
TRUCK USE]

[Text] ‘l'hia handbook presents data for selecting a truck nodal to conforn

to specific operating conditions. and for effectively perforaing particular
transport processes and calculating the optiaal driver work no'rns. Tables
are presented for the mat widely used askss of van-type trucks and duty
trucks. and also for tractor and uni-trailer rigs. ‘lhe handbook is intended
for engineering and technical personnel of the notor transport industry and
the planning organizations, and lay be helpful for V02 students studying
corresponding specialties.

Resolution No 695 of the crsu CC and the on: Council of Hinisters. dated
12/07/79. ”On lnroving Planniu and Strengthening the Bffect of the '
Economic ”schema in Raising production Effectiveness and Bork melity" in
contributing to accelerated resolution of the task posed by the 25th CPSU
Congress relating to further iaproveasnt of planning and control of the
national econoay. ‘l'he neasurea outlined by the resolution and directed
toward better planning are based on consistent inlenentation of the
socialist econoeic principles.

One of the basic ways to iaprove planning and raise the effectiveness of
truck transport operations is extensive use of the econoaic-asthsnatic
nethods end oolputer-hesed aids in the planning and the aanagenent decision
asking process. Conprehensive efforts are being node in the Ministry of
Motor Transport of the ms: to inrove the forts and nethods of control
on various levels. The introduction of counter-based autonstic control

systas (A08) will contribute to the identification and mat rational
utilization of the aateriel. labor and financial resources of the industry.

This progree is being carried out in the franmrk of a unified objective-
oriented program for autonation of control of the industry and will for- the
basis for the organiution in the future of a unified auto-sted systea for
data collection. storage and processing and control of the industry.

5
ma omcm. use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first operating phases of the ACS in the Kiev, boners. Odessa and
Vinnitsa truck transport adsinistrative regions are assisting in the solution
of the any problesa of optisal planning of the transportation of saterials,
petroleusu products and sail cargo ship-ants to the trade network of the
cities of the republic. planning for the require-ants relating to petroleus
products. tires and so on. The quality and rationality of the plans are
isproved when solving the technical-econonic planning probless with the aid
of coquters, since the entire range of factors influencing the various
indexes of notor transport operations is taken into account and the resources
are utilized sore rationally. For ample, thirty thousand fewer trucks

were required for transporting sugar beets during the 1978 harvest period

on the basis of the calculations ends of the transport vehicle requirensnts.

Solution of the questions of daily planning of freight shipnents requires

a data base for analyzing and selecting the optiaal ship-ent variants. At
the present tine the volume of this data base is still inadequate for
operating the Joint Data Processing Centers (KIV‘Is) and the ACS. He hope
that the data presmlted herein will in sons degree broaden the data base
and that the use or these data will contribute to adopting unified planning
standards for rotor transport vehicle profitability for all the KIV‘rs and
the conputer centers, which will reduce significantly the volume of effort
involved in daily ship-ant plans, in ecomsic plans and financial calculations
and in the analysis of expected results fros the operations of the enter-
prises, their subdivisions (truck convoys and truck operating brigades) and
individual trucks.

The profitability of sotor transport under various shipping conditions is
evaluated according to actual data on the operation of several thousand
trucks. We consider the latest changes in the regulations (tariffs, prices,
none and so on) and also the results of experinental use of the handbook
data under the specific conditions of operation of the notor transport
enterprises and the “We of the Vinnitsa Motor Transport Adninistrative
Region, where these data have received a favorable evaluation and are being
used with success at the present tins.

Truck profitability has been analyzed for the various truck sodels with
sileage utilization factors ranging fron 0.5 to 1.0 (0.45 in nining operation
operations) and trip lengths fron one to 100 Inn. The data are presented

for freight classes I and II. Calculations were not asde for freight classes
III, IV, V, since their share in the overall voluns of freight carried is
insignificant.

In calculating the data of the tables for class I freight, we used a truck
capacity utilization factor of 1.0; for class II freight, we used 0.71.

In the calculations, we used the following block speed nornsz in the city
23 Ice/h for trucks and truck ”zilcra with a capacity of 7 tone; 22 kllh

for units with capacity 0' er 7 tons: outside the city on group I roads,

we used 102 knlh; on group III roads, 25 kl/h. For mining operations, the
theoretical truck aileage notes were taken to be 40 percent lower than those
established for unpaved rural roads.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The notes for vehicle delays in perforning loading and unloading operations
are based on pricing docusent lIo lMl-OZ: "Unified Truck Freight Tariffs"
with the use of sechanised loading and unloading.

The folloviu conventions are used in the tables: '1': is the turnaround
tine. haurs: 8‘, is shipuent voluse, tons; P is freight turnover. ton-b;

8d. Bf. 81. In. 30c. I”, 2,, I" are respectively the expenditures on
driver pay including bonuses, moor fuel. lubricants. tire wear and repair.
operational repair and servicing. sllovsnces for ssjor overhaul. allowances
for reconditioning, overhead. rubles; 23 is the sun of all the costs. rubles;
I. is the incone fros ship-eats. rubles; cm are the charges for road
construction. rubles. constituting 20 percent of the incone obtained in

the process of operation of the tutor transport fleet.

Counts and suggestions should he directed to: 252601, Kiev, 1. GSP,
Kreshchstik, 5, ‘l‘ekhnita Press.

TABLE 0' mm C O O O . O O O O O O O O O . PAGE
PormrdsseOOssssessssssssesssoeseeses 3
PNPIT W ”81m VAR-m! m s s o s e e s s s s s e s s s s e s 6
Profitability indexes for using the following vans on
City .treet.: “2-51 e e e s s s s s s o s e s s s s s s s a a s s 28
“2-5” . U 0 . ' O O . 0 O O C Q C C O I O O C C O 32
lug-150, ZIL'I“ s e s e s s s a s e s a e s s e a s 36
2110-130 0 v s e s a s e s e e o . s e s . a a s s s (.0
zne-lwp M417 Can‘t s e e e s s s s a a s e e e ‘6
“Ml-5320 s e s s s e e e s o s s e s s s e e s s 68
“Ml-5320, 60.8350 tr.u.r s o a e s s s s s s s s so
On group I roads:
GA2.51A truCk s s e e o s e e e s e e s e s s . o s 53
“2-5” s s s s s s e e s o s o s e a s e s s a o s 56
zu’). 50. zn-l“ s s s a s a s s s s e s s a s a e o 60
ZIL-I30. s s s e s s s e e e s e e s e s e e a e 64
zns-lmﬁ 60'817 trailer . e a s e s e s e s s e e e 70
“2.5320 s o s e . e e e s e e s s s a e s s a s 7’.
m-sazo' 60.8350 CrIHOY e s e a s s e s e e e a 78
PROFIT “I!" 081!” m was . . s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8‘0
Profitability Indexes for using the following duspst are
0:: city streets:
“2-93 . . O O O O U C C U . . O 9 C O O O O O O l O 1“
zns'sss s s s s s s s s s e a s o s s s s s s o e o 107
zno-SSSa s o o s s e e e e s e s s s s s s s s o s s 108
m-m3l . C . C 0 . O O Q C C 0 O O . I I O O O O I 109
‘ra-2563 C C O O . O O C . . O C . C O . . C O C Q 111
W'“o ' s a s e s e e s e e e s a e e e e e o a 112
On Group I roads:
“2.93 s o e a s s s s s e s e a s s s e s s s s s 113
zu-sss . O O . . U . U . C O O O 0 O O O . | . . 11‘
Ins-555 s s s s s s s a s s s s s s e e e s e e a a 116
”-503, . C O O O O I O O D . 0 O O . O O O O . . . 117
Kta-2s6‘ . . . . . . O . . . O C I O C C O . . O O 118
wz-“o . . O . O O C . O O O O I . O C O . O O . 119

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROFIT W 05110:; DUMP TRUCKS Ill MINING ormuons . .
Profitability indcxu for dmtero on group III roads:

211-585 0 o
TIL-535 . .
"AZ-5033 .
KIM-2563 .
30152-540 .

o
o
o
o

PROFIT um USING mama/mt
Profitability indoxcs for tractor/trailers

on city streets:

.00.

o o

.00...

cos...

m-m.......

zu-lm. o
"AZ-50¢
on group I roads:

0 o

KAz-608 truck

ZIL-130V. 0
“2-506
Referemu.........

COPYRIGII‘I' :

9576

C80: 1829/ 236

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coco

8

0

00-000

Izdatel 'stvo ”Tamika. " 1980

O

o
o
o
o
o

00.0

00000-

n...

0.0...

on...

not.

a...

00......

00......

too-

00......

00......

0000.00.

000.

121

121
122
122
123
123
12‘

135
137
140

1“
158
156
158
POI omcuu. US! ONLY

MIND

INSTRUCTIONS YOR USE. run 0! cams 0' PASSM mm scum;

lbscow MSPISANIYB WIMI‘YA PASSAZEIRSKM WW (DAM!) NA 1981-4982
in Russian (signed to press b Aug 81) pp 1-5. 386

[Instructions for use and table of contents of book "Short Schedule of Passenger
Train Traffic for 1981-1982," edited by 3. A. Taulin. lsdatel'stvo ”Transport",
50,000 copies, 386 pages]

[Text] ﬂow To Use the Train Traffic Scudule
Numbering of Trains

Each train is given a special nusber, even or uneven, which defines its cate-
80?! (Nos 1-98 are express trains. Nos 101-698 are passenger trains. Nos 6001-
6998 are suburban trains. Nos 951-968 are nixed freight-passenger trains, and
Nos 901-968 are nail-baggage trains).

Train nuehers were established on the following principles: (1) one integer indi-
cates that umber under which the train departs from the original station and
arrives at the final station of its route; (2) a train number which has frac-
tional digits indicates that the train umber changes from even to odd or odd to
even along the route depending on the established nunbering of trains in the sec-
tions; the nmerator indicates the train nunber under which it departs from the

initial or final station.
Table [ushering

The table nunhers are assigned to particular units consisting of one or several
rail sections. Table nunbers oeitted fro. the order have been left open deliberv-
ately in order to be used later when other trains are included in the schedule.

Tine Used on USSR Railroads

The coqutation of tine for all USSR territory is done according to the interna-
tional systen of ties zones except that in all zones (fro- the second to the 12th)
clocks are saved one hour forward cowared to the international tonal tine.

Moscow tine is used universally in the USSR railroad systen. ﬂeeces tine differs
free East European tile by one hour and free Central luropean tine By two hours.

mmmonu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To convert the train schedule to local zonal the, it is necessary to add to
Hoscou tine (the second zone) one hour in the third zone. two hours in the fourth,
three hours in the fifth, and so on.

If we know the zone in which the particular station or city belongs and add to the
time indicated in the schedule the train nulﬁer sinus two we will obtain local
time; conversely, if ve know local zonal tile and subtract the number of the zone
minus two fro. it. we will obtain Hoscov tine.

Hours and minutes in the schedule are always shown in Moscow time (unless there is
a special reservation).

Days are counted froe zero (26 hours 00 minutes) to 210 hours.

The time zones of the USSR are shown on the up of railroads appended to the
schedule.

Explanation of Symbols and Ahbreviationa Found in the "Schedule"
Days of the Week:

Monday -- 1
Tuesday — 2
Wednesday - 3
Thursday - 4
Friday - 5
Saturday - 6
Sunday -- 7

“Chet." - even austere

"Nech." - odd numbers

V orA - train does not go to the station

-- (dash) - train does not stop

* — brief train stop not precisely fixed by the schedule
4- - runs in su-er

++ — runs in winter

For the Passenger Train Traffic Schedule (Ter-
ninala in the City of Moscow, pp 6-10): mes
of Cars in the Train

"VR" - dining car
"KB" - car with buffet coupsrtnent
"SV" - first-class sleeping car with double compartments

"H" - first-class. car with four-person conpartnenta and reserved berths
"P" - second-class car with reserved berths
"2h" — second-class, non-reserved car

In the Station Nane Calm:

"0t." or "Otpr." - departure
"Pr." or "Prih." - arrival
"Pl." — station platform

10
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the headings of the Tahlee of Train Schedules

The upper part of each table indicates the nane of the cowany train, its category,
the nunber under which it travels in one direction, the amber of the train
traveling in the opposite direction, the terminal points of its circulation. and
a brief indication of the days on which the train trevels.

The nunbers found after the names of the train routes or after the indication of
their period of operation have the following neanings:

l) the train operates throughout the entire u-ser period,
that is, in June, July, and August; the period of oper--
ation of the train nay change later depending on the flow
of passengers;

2) the train operates in July and August;
3) the train operates only in August.

Trains not marked hy the nunbers l), 2), and 3) are circulating constantly during
the effective tine of the schedule.

How To Find Train Departure or Arrival Tires for Any Station

To find the table in which a particular station is included one should first find
the nuns of the station in the alphabet and then find the appropriate table by
the nunber set alongside the station nane. It aust be kept in mind here that the
reference nu-bers do not indicate pages, but rather table nudoers.

After finding the table which includes the necessary station, one should look at
the vertical column to the-left and right of the station nane, which show train
nunbers and the tines that they pass each station. If there is a dash (-) oppc-
site the station. this neana that the particular train does not have a stop; if
the abbreviations "Pr.”or "0t." are next to the station this scan: that the indi-
cated tine corresponds to the arrival or departure of the train; the synbols V

or A asan that the particular train does not pass thrnugh the particular station;
the syd>ol * indicates a brief stop by the train not exactly recorded in the
schedule. In the tables of schedule: cowiled for trains traveling in both di-
rections, the schedule of trains placed on the left auat be read tron top to bot-
toa, while the trains on the right are read iron the button to the top. Sone
tables with a large nunber of trains in a section are compiled separately for each
direction of travel, in other words, trains are put only on the right of the sta-
tion ease; the tine of train travel in these tahles aust always be rend fron top
to bottom The symbol ' is added above the table nuaber for the numbers of tables
showing the opposite direction.

. How To Compile a Trip Route
To cowile a route for a trip by train. iron the nap of USSR railroads appended

to the schedule one nust select the nest appropriate direction and write doen in
sequntial order the numbers placed along the rail lines. The schedqu of trains

MOWALUSEONLY
FOI10FFKJA1.USE(N¥LY

printed in the reference tahlea under theaa nunhera rill give the conplete trip
along the choeen route. When conpiling the route of a trip one Iuet leap in land
that the ehorteat diatance in not always the fasteet in tine. Therefore. one
nuat pay attention to particular care that travel without trenafera (the Table of
Non-Tranefer Travel by Particular Cara).

now To Deter-ine the Coat of a Trip to Paeaangere

To calculate the coat of a trip to paeaengere one nuat add up the nunher of kilo-—
etere ahovn in the tables for the eelected route and than, after obtaining the
total diatance, uee the calculation tahlee in the aection ”Rail Paaaenger Rates" to
determine the coat of travel to paeaengere. It nuat he kept in nind that when add-
ing distances the total number of kiloaetera doea not alvaya correepond to the
tariff diatancea (acne dietancee euch aa ahort tripe to deadend etatione and travel
through large junction pointa ouch as the Hoacov and leningrad rail centera are

not counted). Therefore there any he a alight difference hetveen the diatance de-
terndned on the baaia of tablee in the achedule and the diatance shown in Tariff
Manual No 6. which in the basic annual for calculating the anounta that paaaengera
pay to travel by Soviet railroads.

Table of Contente Page
How To Uae the Train Traffic Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Schedule of Paaaanger Train Traffic (Tar-ﬁnale in the City of Hoacov) . . . . 6
Non-Tranafer Tripa by Particular Cara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
International Trains and Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Alphabetized Liet of Stationa and Stopping Pointa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Train Traffic Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Passenger Traina and Routea of Travel in the Principal Directiona . . . . . , 335
Railroad Paaaengar Rates (Tariffa) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368

Principal Rulea of Conveying Paaaengera. Hand-Carried Articles. and
Baggage on the Railroada of the USSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 380

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Traneport". 1981

11.176
080: 1829/238 END

12
FOR OIIHCJAl.lEI£(ﬂ'LY