FOR OFHUAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10674
21 July 1982

Worldwide Report

LAW OF THE SEA

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

ms publications contain information primarily fro- foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body or an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGlT [A98 AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING mRSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINAIION
0F nus PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
Law or THE SEA

(9000 4/82)

Coureurs

mums AFFAIRS

'HAINICHI' View: UN Sea Lav Calderon“ Convention
(EditoriakMAIﬂICHI DAILY HUS, 15 My 82) ..............

MUSTANDNGHHAMCA

man-am AFFAIRS

Briefs
Division of Continental Shelf

SUB-SAHARA}! AFRICA

MAURITIUS

British Sovereignty Over Chagoa Archipelago Disputed
(Jonathan “'W “WASH, 10 m 82) ooeooceoeeeee

USSR

Soviet Jurist Discusses Freedom of the Seen
(8. A. Gureyev; SOVETSKOIB GOSUDARS‘WO I PRAVO, Mar 82)..
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WRLDWIDE AFFAIRS

'MAINICHI' VIEWS UN SBA LA" (1)3?ch wmIOII
ov170949 Tokyo uncut DAILY am in English 15 Hay 82 p 2
[Editorial: ”For New Ocean Order")

[Text] The United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea recently adopted an international
convention establishing rules for the use and exploration of the seas and seabed. Thin

is the first step toward establishing order in the oceans under the changed circustances
of the 20th century.

The convention which wound up nearly nine years of hard bargaining since Deco-bet, I913.
eontainn sol-e 320 art iclen and eight annexes covering. asong others. seabed Dining end
the establishment of a lZ-nauticai-nile territorial sea lisit and a zoo-am.- exclusive

'(‘i'lInulC tone for coastal states with the right of innocent passage through territorial
seas and narrow straits.

it is indeed heartening to note that the convention. although sorely s draft pending the
ratification of the countries concerned. received supporting votes free 130 countries
including Japan, France and alsost all Third iiorld nations. The convention is to be
signed in Caracas. Venezuela. in Decesber this year. and will seat likely go into effect
in the latter part of the 1980s.

0n the other hand. it in regrettable to note that the fill Conference on the Law of the Sea
which originally sought the adoption of the convention by consent had to lake n decision
on it by vote. Foe. countriea ~- the United States. Israel. Venezuela and Turkey -- voted
against it. while i7 nations. including the Soviet Union. hritnin. Heat Cersany and
several Eastern European countries abstained. ‘ihe absence of the two great powers. the
United States and the Soviet Union. sesns great probleas ahead for the convention.

Although the United States and the Soviet Union did not vote. it does not lean that they
will stay out of the convent ion per-anently. The Soviet Union abstained because it felt
it was being discrisinated against cospared with the United States on the question of
protection of advance investment in seabed develop-eat.

The Soviet Union. about the middle of this April. sade a decision on its own develop-eat
or embed renources by a presidiun decree. The decree is to be abolished if international
agree-mt on thin matter is concluded by 1988. Thu». the Soviet Union is liltely to take
part in the convention in the future.

0n the other hand. the prospects for U.S. participation are rather din under the present
circumstances. in the ninth session in 1980. a draft convention was drawn up unofficially
upt‘nlnr. the way for early conclusion of the conference. However. the tenth session in
mu and the llth session this year encountered rough sailing sainly because the U.S.

side changed its position and refused to comply with the general trend.

1
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tlu- Iiwmnn administration which was inaugurated in 1981 ads an aboat-face fro- the position
of the Carter ministration which agreed to e'comensus process at the conference. The nev
real-e desanded that the draft convention. especially with regard to the passage concerning
seabed develop-ent. should be thoroughly resppraised.

The 0.5. contended that it could not protect its national interests or those of private
enterprises. nor could it obtain ratification at the Senate if the proposed convent inn
were not rewritten.

In the llth session. the United States aade some concessions but eventually it voted
agoinnt the convention. deeanding that its adoption be decided not by consent but by

vote. As it opposes the seabed develop-eat clause. there is a possibility that the Uni ted
Staten nay not participate in the convention at all.

The United States at present plays a very ieportant role in develop-ant of the seabed.

Its participation is. in a sense. considered essential. especially at this tiae when the
vorld depends on the United States for seabed developesnt technology and necessary capital.
its absence is likely to reduce the proposal of seabed developeent by an international
organ to a care pipe drea and. furthemre. dosage the authority of the convention itself.

The United States, too. will suffer a great deal for failing to participate in the conven-
tion. Japan; a leading esritiae nation. should call on the United States to exercise its

wisdom and take part in the convention. We all have to exert our uteost to lake the
proposed convention the constitution of the sea in the true sense of the tern.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News [1982]

080: 5200/2085

2
l OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

DIVISION 01' CONTINENTAL “Mo-minions end Libysns will open talks on the
division of the continentel shelf at the end of the south of Hey. But with
the three-month deadline to reach en egreaent, set by the International Court
of Justice (The Segue). expiring on May 26. on extension vill certainly be
imposed; noreover, such on extension wee enticipeted by the International Court
of Justice. [Text] [Peris mm. AFRIQUB in French no 1115, 19 Hey 82 p 75]
[comzcn'rz Jeune Afrique (RUPJIA 1982]

080: 5200/5007

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITIUS

33111811 sovnnclm om CMAGOS ARCIIIPBLAGO DISPUTE)

Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French 10 May 82 pp 32-33
[Article by Jonathan M'Maruis: "Negotiations with a Trap in The-"l

[Text] It's not Just before the people of Saint-Male that
Great Britain flaunts its old colonial denons. without
nantioning Ireland. there are still nunerous axe-plea of

the "confetti of the hire" free which a savage beast could
energe. Bron the Chsgoe Archipelago. for example. with the
scandal of Diego Garcia.

The statue of the peoples of the Chagos Archipelago“, expelled fros their
islands between 1965 and 1973. was the subject of an agree-ant reached in
Port Louis, Mauritius, on 27 March. On this date a nultiparty Mauritian
delegation—cosposed among others, of political figures. including Paul
Berenger, secretary general of the we! [Bhutitian Militant Move-ant]. and
representatives of the Chegos Islanders Fraternal Organization [Conite
Ilois-OP], led by Minister of Social Security lailssh Purryag-u-net with a
delegation iron the British rereign Office, led by Sir uonard Allinaon.
under secretary of state.

By the tens of this agreement. the Chagos Island col-unity, nedasrs of which
have for acne years been called "the Palestinians of the Indian Ocean," is

to receive 80 nillion rupees“ fron the British Govern-ant as a "final"
settle-ant and 20 nillion rupees fros the Mauritian Govern-ant in the forts
of land. ‘lhat is to cone into effect in June. after the new Mauritian par-
lianent, elected in the sane nonth, will have approved legislation concerning
establish-ant of a special body created to nanage this sun of money.

The difficult negotiations between the two parties—the final phase lasted
for a week—were narkad by a characteristic piece of blackmail on the part
of the British. The latter included in the agreelsnt a clause under which
Mauritius. whatever its new government say he. could no longer claia
sovereignty over the Chegos Archipelago once the settle-ent is paid.

* The Chagos Archipelago includes, in particular. the island of Diego Garcia.
** One French Franc equals 1.7 Mauritian rupees.

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At a certain moment. the british delegation even brought out the point that
compensation would not be paid OXcept on condition that this clause was
approved. Faced with the categorical rejection of this clause by the
Mauritian side and especially by the Chagos Islanders and a refusal to give
in to this shameful and typically colonialiat blackmail, the British delegae
tion agreed. with London's approval, to separate the two aspects of the
dinpute; that is, Diego Garcia from Mauritian sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago and compensation for the Chagos Islanders. toward whom Great
Britain, which forced them into exile in 1965. has responsibilities and
moral obligations.

It was a: this stage of the negotiations that Paul Berangar asked the British
delegation for a copy of the agreement which it was proposing. At several
points the text made mention of the British Indian Ocean territory (BIOf),

a colony created by the British out of Mauritian and Seychelles territories
annexed in 1965. Since then, the Seychelles claimed and obtained the return
of their islands. The Mauritian delegation then insisted that the term BIO?
be abolished, as its very mention could be interpreted as "da facto"
recognition of the cession of the Chagos Archipelago.

After having brutally announced. and in the purest colonialist spirit, that
"you must sign or we will take back the money offered." the British ended up
by taking out the reference to the B101. However. they insisted that it
appear at least once, in the absence of which, they alleged. the text of the
agreement would have no validity before the British Parliament.

Two Mauritian amendments seeking to indure that "this agreement is without
prejudice to the question of Mauritian sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago" were subsequently rejected by the British. It was at this
point that the latter began to use a shaaeful and unacceptable procedure in
the old tradition of "divide and conquer." Addressing themselves to the
representatives of the Chagos Islanders, the British held out to them an
offer of 6 million pounds sterling. in this way going over the heads of the
other Mauritian delegates.

At the sane time the Mauritian Ministry of Justice informed the delegation
that, from its point of view, the mention of the term B10? in the agreement
did not exclude an eventual Mauritian claim to the Chagos Archipelago. The
Ministry also explained to the Mauritian delegation that there were three
stages in the processing of an agreement of this kind: the delegations
initial the agreement; the governments sign it officially; and it is sub-
sequently ratified by the parliaments of the two countries.

The Mauritian delegation thus had to choose between initialing the agreement
in the light of the advice of the Mauritian Ministry of Justice and than
consulting other experts in the field of international treaties-perticularly
as the agreement could not enter into effect before the elections scheduled
for 11 June--or asking the British to leave the draft text on the negotiating
table while waiting for experts to examine it in detail.

Taking into account the impatience and even despair of the Chagos Islanders,

which certain parties were beginning to utilize, the Mauritian delegation
chose to initial the agreement.

FIMRIJFIICIAI.lk§E10hﬂJY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lastly. to insure that the agreement, as drafted. would not be prejudicial
to an official demand before some international body and before the inter-

national cos-snity for the return of the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius. the
HIM, the Chagos Islanders Fraternal Organization, and the organisations
supporting the islanders' cause first of all sought the views of an inter-
national lawyer, in this case Prof Andre Oraison. and celled for en examina-
tion of the text by a group of experts fron several countries. meanwhile
asking the Mauritian Government to delay the official signature of the
agreement. '

Professor Oraison, author of a study on the Chagos Archipelago, in which he
supports the view that Mauritius has the right to clain this archipelago.
holds the view that the text of the agreement could be interpreted as "de
facto" recognition by an independent Mauritius of the ceesion of the Chagos
Archipelego during the colonial period.

without the vigilance of the m4. and principally of its secretary general.
Paul Berenger. as well as a nud>er of lawyers, would huritius have supported
a second ceesion of the Chagos Archipelago. and this time on a permanent
basis? This was the more possible, since the Mauritian Goveth alleged
that the use of the term BIO?! did not constitute an obstacle to a clain to
the Chagos Archipelago.

Whatever the case, the British objective was, through this agreement as
initially drafted, to permanently "muzzle" a future government formed by the
MMM and the PSM [Mauritian Socialist Party], as the present government never
sought to challenge the occupation of the Chagos Archipelago by the British.
It is clear. to the British and, noreover, to the Americans. that the m4
and the PSM, in power tomorrow with a solid case and international solidarity
already secured, will make the retrocession of the Chagos Archipelago and
the dismantling of the base on Diego Garcia real objectives of struggle.

People of Saint-Malo? No, from the Chagos Archipelago

During the last 17 years the sufferings of 9102 families of Chagos Islanders
deported to Mauritius by the British have revealed the revolting and anti-
patriotic attitude of the government under Prine Minister Sir Seewoosagur
Rangoolan toward these uprooted people. The present government has never had
the interests of the Chagos Islanders at heart. Between 1965, when Great
Britain detached the Chagos Archipelago fron Mauritius at the request of the
United States so that a nilitery base night he built there. and 1973. the
islanders were forced to move away.

In Mauritius there was simply no plan to welcone these "Palestinians of the
Indian Ocean." A study carried out by Herve Sylva. a Mauritian teacher. at
the request of the Mauritian delegation, makes it clear that since they were
forced into exile the islanders have been housed under indescribable condi-
tions. In the shanty town areas of Port-Louis, Roche-Bois, Cassia and Pointe-
sux-Sablas, for example, it was noted that up to 31 persons were living in

3 roons. that 21 other persons lived in 2 rooms. that 16 others were in a

FOROI'I‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l-room efficiency flat, and that 8 families were living in cenps set up for
cyclone refugees. These figures clearly reflect the situation in which the
whole Chagos Islander cos-mity lives.

There have been aeny cases of premature death, of suicide and even of
insanity. A nuaber of Chagos Islanders have been forced into prostitution

to support their families, to say nothing of the situation of uneqloynent
which affects asny heads of faailies, with the usual consequences.

In 1972, or 7 years after the detachnent of the Chagos Archipelago, the
British Government granted coqensetion of 650,000 pounds sterling. for the
rehabilitation of the Chagos Islanders over and above a sum of 3.0 million
pounds sterling paid to the Mauritian state to cogensate it for the loss of
the archipelago. In view of the "good will" displayed by the novernmsnt,

it was necessary to have several denonstrationa sponsored by the Chagos
Islanders Fraternal Organization and a number of hunger strikes before the
government of Prime Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam agreed to pay part of
this coqensetion to the Chagos Islanders in 1978.

A new hunger strike had to be organized in Decenber 1980 to insure that the

582 adults and 727 children, who had received nothing, would also he oospen-
sated.

In view of the indifference displayed by the govern-ant eight Chagos
Islanders wonen began a third hunger strike in April 1981. This was the
longest (20 days) in the history of the Chagos Islanders novenent. An agree-
ment put an end to the hunger strike on 11 April 1981. On the one hand it
provided for the paynent of the second installment of compensation and, on
the other hand, for the establishnent of a multiparty Mauritian delegation
charged with going to London to negotiate for the pay-ant of 158 aillion
rupees in additional compensation. The London negotiations, held in June and
July 1981, were broken off, as we know, by reason of the attitude displayed
by Great Britain and the gap between the Mauritian demand (158 million
rupees) and the British offer (31 nillion rupees).

It should be emphasised that the Mauritian Government, which has the habit
of playing on the misery of the people to aaka then swallow a long snake, as
it were, had previously arranged secretly, and in coaplicity with Great
Britain, for the visit of a British lawyer, Bernard Sheridan, for the purpose
of persuading the Chagos Islanders to accept a sun of 1.25 million pounds
sterling in exchange for renouncing any right to return to their native
island.

It was the FM! which, in January 1980, denounced this scandal in which the
government of Prina Minister Sir Seewoosagur Wolam was involved and the
purpose of which was to legitiaise the abandonment of the Chagos Archipelago
to the benefit of Great Britain and the United States, which are using Diego
Garcia for ailitary purposes.

* In 1972 the British Pound was worth 12 French Francs.
Certain medaera of the government of Sir Seewoosagur Rangoolan, who did not
hesitate to claia in parliament and in the press that "Diego Garcia is
British," did everything in their power to persuade the Ganges Islanders to
renounce their rights to Diego Garcia. These ministers. who are more inclined
to defend British interests than those of their own country, exploited the
misery and despair of the Chaps Islanders by making than believe that the
only chance of getting compensation from London was to renounce all their
rights to Diego Garcia once and for all.

If it has become clear today that Sir Seewoossgur Rangoolam was personally
and directly responsible for the detachment of the Chagos Archipelago fron
Mauritian territory in 1965; it is still he and his government who bear the
responsibility for the abject misery in which the people exiled fron Diego
Garcia now live.

Even if we consider that financial conpensation. however substantial it say
be, can never make up for the suffering which the Chagos Islander lety
has endured since 1965, the exiles fron the Chagos Archipelago have been

supported in their struggle to obtain compensation by the m and various
other organizations.

The initiative taken by Sir Seewoosagur Rasgoolaa to arrange for a resuqa-
tion of the negotiations in London, after their breakdown: in July 1981, can
only be interpreted as a rescue operation undertaken in view of the elections
in June. in which his government is seriously threatened.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

5170
080: 5200/5656

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

SOVIET JURIST DISCUSSES FREEDOM OF 1113 SEAS
Moscow SOVBTSKOYB MUMBSTVO I PRAVO in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 104-110

(Article by Doctor of Legal Sciences 5. A. Gureyev, senior scientist, Institute of
State and Law, {SSR Academy of Sciences: "Freedom of the High Seas']

[Text] The World Ocean now has enormom significance to the life of peoples on

our planet. It is criss-crossed by marine routes handling cargo equivalent to about
80 percent of international trade. The World Ocean is also a "treasurehouse' of
significant living and mineral resources making an inortant contribution to pro-
viding the populations of different countries with foodstuffs and their economies
with minerals. This is why all states are devoting a great deal of attention to

the proceedings of the Third UN Conference, which has the job of developing and
adopting a new convention on the law of the sea. The draft convention on the law
of the sea, which was drawn up at the conference,‘ developed the basic principle
of international law of the sea-~freedom of the high seas.

Formation of the Principle of Freedom of the High Seas

This principle evolved in the lSth-l'lth centuries during an acute struggle
between the major feudal states of those times—Spain and Portugal, which

capitalist means of production was undergoing development, mainly Bngland and France,
and later on Holland, which argued for recognition of freedom of the seas, on the
other ((1) , pp 8-241 (2) pp 45-56) . The demands for development of worldwide economic
ties between states on the basis of international division of labor in the interests
of the bourgeoisie of all countries gradually led to increasingly broader recogni-
tion of the principle of the freedom of the high seas. It was conclusively con-
firmed as a conventional norm of international law in the second half of the 18th
century ((1), p 16; (3)). As A. L. Kolodkin validly noted, "the principle of free-
den of the high seas arose in the era of capitalism's maturation and rise to the

top, in the period of decline of feudal claims to the right of ownership of the

seas, and it was confirmed as a rule of international law as the result of establish-
ment of the capitalist means of production, in the period of formation of the world-

wide market Ed victory of bourgeois revolutions“ (4)-
'A decision was made at the 10th Session of the Third UN Conference on the Law of

the Sea (1981) to make the previously developed unofficial text the official draft
convention on the law of the sea.

FOR 0mg“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

graph cables from its own shores to the shores of other states expressing their
consent to establish coumication" ((2), p .333). the laying of the first cable
between Dover and Calais in 1851 and later on of the Atlantic cable between Europe
and America necessitated international legal protection of submarine cables. It

was with this purpose that the International Convention on Protection of Submarine
‘nelegraph Cables was adopted in 1884.

This principle arose out of a conflict between two theories: "freedom of the air-
space” and extension of the sovereignty of a state to the airspace above its terri-

tory ((5), pp 51-64) . Both conceptions were proposed for discussion during the
diplomatic conference held in Paris in 1910.

Article 1 of the enisting 1944 Convention on International Civil Aviation states:
”Every state has full and exclusive sovereignty over the airspace above its terri-
tory." The order of granting permission to foreign aircraft to fly over state terri-
tory, including territorial waters, was also documented in international law of the
air. Concurrently with recognition of the principle of a state's sovereignty over
the airspace located above its territory, ”freedom of the airspace“ was limited to
space located outside the limits of the territories of states, and the principle of
Freedom to fly over the high seas was confirmed in international law.

The principle of freedom of scientific research on the high seas became a conven-
tional rule of international law, in my opinion, in the late 19th and early 20th

centuries. Although scientific research on the World Ocean has a distant history,
it did not transform into an independent form of man's activities on the seas and

oceans until the late 19th century. circtmnavigations of the planet by Russian
navigators~-I. F. Kruzenshtern and Yu. P. Lisyanskiy (1803-1806) and P. P. Belings-

gauzen and n. P. Lasarev (1819-1821)--laid the basis for fundamental scientific re-
search on the World Ocean. But scientific research on the World Ocean began develop-

ing especially swiftly following World War II, in the era of the scientific-technical
revolution. Major scientific research fleets are now appearing in many countries.
Research is being conducted in both national and international programs. Not only
scientific research vessels but also platforms, buoys, subuersibles. oceanic data
collection systems and other apparatus are being employed for this purpose. The
Soviet Union is making a substantial contribution to scientific research on the
World Ocean. A resolution of the UN General Assenbly dated 21 December 1968

approved the International Decade of Ocean Research in 1971-1980.

In addition to the decisive contribution made by states to the development and con-
firmation of the principle of the freedom of the high seas, we should also mention

the contribution made by individual scholars as well as by nongovermnent and intra-
governmental international organizations to development of the concept and content
of this principle and to codification of international law pertaining to this area.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The content of the principle of the freedom of the high seas is revealed and its
basic elelents are spelled out in particular in a declaration drawn up by the
Institute of International Law at one of its conferences in (loan) in 1927, and
in the draft 'Laws on Marine Jurisdiction in Peacetine,‘ prepared in 1926 by the
International Law Association. Later on the effort to codify international law
on the regise of the sea was conducted by the UN Coulission on International Law,
which prepared drafts placed at the basis of the 1958 Geneva conventions on the

law of the sea. In then, universally recognized principles and rules of the regime
of the sea, to include the principle of freedom of the high seas were codified and

developed further. The 1958 Geneva Convention on the High Seas clearly describes
the essence of the principle of the freedom of the high seas: "me high seas being
Open to all nations, no state may validly purport to subject any part of the- to
its sovereignty." Further on the convention indicates the inherent elements of the
freedom of the high seas, which are organically interrelated and which, in their

sum total, make up a.single whole ((6). PP 62-68). the freedom of the high seas
"couprises, enter aha: 1) freedom of navigation; 2) freedom of fishing: 3) freedom

to lay subiarine cables and pipelines) 4) freedom to fly over the high seas' ((6):
pp 211-230). mus this list is not exhaustive in nature, as is indicated in another

provision of the Geneva convention, according to which: "mese freedoms. and others
which are recognized by the general principles of international law shall be emer-
cised by all states...“ (Article 2). hey include, for example, the freedom of
scientific research on the high seas (7,8).

Each of the elements listed here also has independent significance as a less-general
principle in relation to the more-general--the freedom of the high seas. Thus it

was validly noted in the Soviet legal literature that the principle of the freedon
to fly in international airspace (this applies to all aircraft above the high seas

and to civil aircraft above Antarctica) is one of the fundamental principles of
international air law ((5). p 48). which is a subdivision of general international
law.

The definition of the high seas rest upon, besides their legal characteristics

(l--they are not under the sovereignty of any one state; 2--they are open to all
states on an equal basis), a geographic characteristic--their location outside the

limits of territorial waters.

Influence of the Principle of Freedom of the High Seas on Development of other
Principles and Rules Regulating the ﬁghts of the Sea.

The principle of innocent passage of foreign vessels through the territorial sea
came into being under the influence of the principle of the freedom of the high seas
and achieved broad international recognition. Obviously without the right of inno-
cent passage, all states would in fact be deprived of the possibility of exercising
the freedom of navigation and developing normal worldwide economic ties and cooper-
ation in other pursuits. The English lawyer J. Brownlee validly noted that from

a historical standpoint, the right of innocent passage is associated with the pro-
vision that "the maritime regions are in principle the high seas, with some limita-
tions in favor of the coastal states." "As a question of policy," he continues,
"innocent passage is a sensible form of compromise between the need for marine

cosmunication and the interests of a coastal state” ((9) p 308).

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe principle of the freedom of the high seas also had an influence on the develop-
ment of the freedom of innocent passage of vessels through international straits
connecting two parts of the high seas, and their overflight by aircraft ((10): (11).
pp 119-136). From the standpoint of international law, the regime of navigating in
straits cont ecting two portions of the high seas, in which the principle of the
freedom of navigation and the freedom to fly is in effect, cannor be defined by

any principle other than the freedom of passage through them by vessels and flight
over them by aircraft.

International straits have tremendous significance to development of cooperation
between states in foreign economic ties, and to ensuring the security of states.
Docmnentation of the principle of the freedom of passage through such straits in

the new convention on the law of the sea, developed at the 'ihird w Conference, is
extremely isportant for the reason that most states have now expanded their terri-
torial waters to the lZ-mile limit. under these conditions many of the most impor-
tant straits are within the overlapping territorial waters of coastal states. A
balanced and mutually acceptable solution to this important problem was reached in
the draft convention on the law of the sea (12). ﬁle solution is based on the
principle of combining the freedom of passage and the guarantees that states
bordering on straits would be able to exercise rights accounting for their interests,
thus ensuring both the safety of passage of vessels and flight by aircraft on one
hand and the security of coastal states on the other. According to the draft all
vessels and aircraft enjoy the right of transit passage through straits utilized
for international shipping and connecting one region of the high seas (economic zone)
with another region of the high seas (economic zone) , and that no obstacles may be
placed in the way of such passage. Transit passage is an exercise of freedom of
navigation and flight solely with the purpose of continuous and swift transit
through a state (articles 37 and 38 of the drafts). There met be no interruptions
in transit passage (Article 44).

me principle of the freedom of the high seas, which includes the principle of

the freedom of navigation, is having an influence on the development of the princi-
ple of archipelago passage through marine corridors and of flights through air corri-
dors established by an archipelago state in archipelago waters (clause 2, Article 53
of the draft convention on the law of the sea). Archipelago passage through such
corridors is an exercise of the right of normal navigation and flight solely with

the purpose of continuous, swift and inhindered transit from one portion of the high
seas or economic zone to another portion of the high seas or economic zone. Such

marine and air corridors cross archipelago waters and contiguous territorial sea,
and they include all normal routes of passage used as routes for international

shipping or flight over archipelago waters (clauses 3, 4 Article 53 of the draft).
If an archipelago state does not establish marine or air corridors, the right of
archipelago passage through marine corridors may be exercised on routes usually es-
ployed by international shipping. There must be no interruptions in archipelago
passage (articles 54 and 44 of the draft convention).

Modern Trends in the Developmnt of the Principle of Freedom of the High Seas

The problem of establishing the status of 200-mile economic zones is having a direct
influence on development of the principle of the freedom of the high seas today.
The Third a: Conference on the Law of the Sea revealed two opposing positions on
this issue. The 'territorialist" delegations voted for establishing a 200 nautical

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mile limit for territorial waters or for bringing the regime of the economic zone
as closely as possible in line with the regime of territorial waters. ‘l‘hey asserted
that an economic zone is not a part of the high seas, and that it is a zone am:
generic, in which the rights of noncoastal states mist be clearly restricted only
by stricly defined freedoms.

Another sizeable group of delegations, including the USSR, voted in the conference
in favor of recognizing the economic zone to be part of the high seas having excep-

tions favoring coastal states, ones which would be established by the new conven-
tion on the law of the sea (particularly in regard to sovereign rights on living

and mineral resources). Inasmuch as this proposal, and others like it, were not
reflected in the unofficial sumary text to be used in the negotiations, the {BSR
delegation proposed including, in the draft convention, the provision that no state
could subordinate any part of the sea within the limits of the territorial waters
to its sovereignty. A similar proposal was made by the 'Group of Fifty-Wee"—
that is, intracontinental countries enjoying a geographically disadvantageous posi-
tion. and almost all sea powers. Despite the fact that the unofficial smary
text for negotiations and the draft convention on the law of the sea do not directly
foresee the appropriate provisions, we would have to agree with the West German lawyer
G. Jaenicke that following the sixth session of the conference, a balance was
reached between the rights of a coastal state and the rights of other states in

an economic zone--that is, a certain coapromise was reached on the issue of the
economic zone's legal status ((13). PP 488-489, 491). Moreover the provisions on
the status of the economic zone contained within recent drafts of the convention
provide, in my opinion, the grounds for the conclusion that this zone is in fact
interpreted as part of the high seas, with some exceptions in favor of the coastal
state, as is evidenced by the following facts.

According to Article 55 of the draft convention on the law of the sea, an
economic zone is a region which is within the limits of the territorial sea and

is contiguous to it, and consequently to which the sovereignty of the coastal
states does not extend. According to Article 58 of the draft convention, within
an economic zone, “all states enjoy the freedoms, indicated in Article 87, of
navigation and flight, of laying submarine cables and pipelines and of other forms
of uses of the sea which are legal from the point of view of international law,
which relate to these freedoms, such as those associated with the operation of
vessels, aircraft and submarine cables and pipelines, and which are cospatible
with other provisions of this convention.“

of interest is the fact that this article contains a reference to Article 87, "The
High Seas.“ mm the freedom that are exercised in an economic zone are unawigu-
ously qualified as freedoms of the high seas. Jaenicke validly notes that “these

freedoms, therefore, apply to the economic. zone in the same quality and in the same
volume as they apply to the high seas“ ((13), p 490). According to clause 2,

Article 58 of the draft convention, articles 88-115 (that is, all of the basic
provisions of Section VII, “The High Seas”) and other corresponding norms of inter-

national law apply to the economic zone, inasmuch as they are not incompatible with
Section v of the draft convention pertaining to the economic zone. ‘l‘hus Article 89,
which states that 'No state has the right to purport to subject any part of the
high seas to its soveriegnty," also applies to the economic zone. ‘lhus we avoid

the danger of “creeping jurisdiction“ and gradual transformation of an economic zone
into sea space under the sovereignty of a coastal state--that is, into territorial
waters ((13), p 491).

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It simply foresees jurisdiction in relation to scientific research and protection
and conservation of the marine environment, and it cites the appropriate provisions

of the draft. Article 56 of the draft thus does not have independent significance.

and it must be applied to the issue of the extent of a coastal state’s jurisdiction
over a particular area only in combination with provisions concerned with a parti-

cular form of activity in the econo-ic zone. In and of themselves. however, the
concepts "sovereign rights," "exclusive jurisdiction“ and 'jursidiction' do have

concepts "sovereign rights" and ”jursidicticn" does not exclude the notion that a
coastal state also enjoys exclusive rights in relation to scientific research and
control over pollution. In this connection he concludes that for practical purb

the previous drafts of the convention. and that the coupronise represented by the
phrase "jurisdiction foreseen in the present convention“ is only an apparent con-

Let us examine the trends in development of the basic freedoms of the highseastoday.

a) Freedom of Navigation and Exclusive Jursidiction of a State Over Vessels
Carrying Its Flag

According to the 1958 Geneva Convention on the high Seas a vessel lust sail under
the flag of one state only and, save in exceptional cases expressly provided for
in international treaties and in the convention itself. it is subject to its ex-
clusive jurisdiction on the high seas. Exceptions to exclusive jurisdiction are,

according to the convention, in particular: the right to pursue a foreign merchant
vessel for violation of the laws and regulations of a coastal state; intervention

in a vessel's acts of piracy and engagement in slave trade. All of these provi-
sions have been carried over the draft convention on the law of the sea. Excep-
tions to the exclusive jurisdiction of a state over vessels of its flag on the
high seas are established by all states on a voluntary, nutual and equal basis in
the interests of developing cooperation between then in various areas, to include
in international shipping.

It should be noted that additional exceptions to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
state over vessels of its flag on the high seas, based on the freedom of naviga-

tion. are now undergoing formulation or have been formulated. Such exceptions

nay occur in the following cases: 1) accidents leading to pollution of the see

by oil and other harmful substances (see the existing 1969 international convention
concerned with intervention on the high seas in cases of accidents leading to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pollution by oil, and the 1973 protocol supplementing it): 2) unsanctioned broad-
casting from vessels on the high seas (Article 109, Subclause 'c', Clause 1,

Article no of the draft convention on the law of the sea); 3) violations of inter-
national rules and standards of preventing pollution, halting pollution and contain-
ing pollution by a foreign vessel in an economic zone, as a result of which a coastal
state may subject such a vessel to inspection and even initiate pursuit, on the

assusption that certain conditions are complied with (Article 220 of the draft con-
vention).

b) The Freedom to Fly

The draft convention on the law of the sea carries over the provision of the (hneva
Convention on the High Seas according to which freedom of the high seas includes
the freedo- to fly. mis means that every state. be it coastal or noncoastal,

has the right to fly its civil and military aircraft over the high seas, including
economic zones, unhindered.

c) The Freedom to Lay swearine Cables and Pipelines

This freedom of the high seas is also included in the list contained in Clause 1,
Article 87 of the draft convention. Moreover it is qualified in the article that
the freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines is enjoyed by a state in con-
pliance with the provisions of Section VI, “The Continental shelf.“ The reference
is primarily to Article 78 of the draft, according to which ”the exercise of a
coastal state's right in relation to the continental shelf must not infringe upon
shipping and other rights and freedoms of other states foreseen by this convention,
or cause any unjustified interference in the exercise of these rights.“

we should consider, furthermre, Article 79, which indicates that all states have
the right to lay submarine cables and pipelines on the continental shelf in accord-
ance with the provisions of this article. 'mese provisions include: l) a coastal
state may not impede the laying or maintenance of cables and pipelines, subject to
its right to take reasonable measures for the exploration of the continental shelf,
exploitation of the natural resources of the latter and prevention, containment and
maintenance of control over pollution by pipelines; 2) the route for such pipelines
on the continental shelf are deternined with the consent of the coastal state. In
my opinion this is the point of view from which we should interpret the provision
of the draft convention according to which all states enjoy the freedom of laying
submarine cables and pipelines in an economic zone (Clause 1, Article 58). Although
according to Subclause “a" of Clause 1, Article 56 the regime of the economic zone
extends to all natural resources, including nonliving resources on the sea bed and
within its subsoil, the actual utilisation of aineral resources is governed by the
regime of the continental shelf.

d) Freedom of Fishing ((16) a pp 659-707)

Examining the freedom of fishing today, we would first need to note that the action
of this freedom is limited only to those areas of the high seas which are within

the limits of ZOO-mile econooic zones. In an economic zone. a coastal state enjoys
the sovereign rights to explore, exploit and conserve living resources, and 1'0 con-
trol these resources (Subclause "a” of Clause 1, Article 56).

15
non omcm. use ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus regulation of fishing in economic zones is within the certency of coastal
states (articles 61 and 62 of the draft). In this case the quite deliberate use of
the term "sovereign rights" in application to living resources means, in my opinion,

that a coastal state's rights pertaining to this issue are the broadest in cospari-
son with its other rights in an economic zone. Second, we need to turn attention to

the fact that because fishing gear is undergoing significant technical improvement,
the responsibility of all states to seek ways to cooperate in the conservation of

the living resources of the high seas is becoming an increasingly more isportant
element of the principle of the freedom of fishing on the high seas. Existing in
a close mutual relationship, the freedom of fishing and conservation of living re-
sources are, in my opinion, elements of the single principle of freedom of reason-
able and scientifically grounded fishing on the high seas.

Conservation of living resources on the high seas beyond the limits of economic

zones is within the cowetency of states engaged in fishing. In this connection we
need to turn attention to the statement in Article 87 that all states enjoy the

freedom of fishing in cospliance with the conditions spelled out in Section 2.

This section. which is titled “Control of the Living Resources of the High Seas

and heir Conservation.” foresees that: 1) All states have the right to allow their
subjects to engage in fishing in the high seas in compliance with a nuber of con-
ditions (Article 16 of the draft); 2) all states inlement measures fomd necessary
to conserve the living resources of the high seas, or they cooperate with other
states in the inplementation of such measures in relation to their subjects.

e) Preedom of Scientific Research

The principle of the freedom of scientific research was stated for the first time
(in universal international conventions) in the draft convention on the law of the
sea among other fundamental principles composing the freedom of the high seas;

this is an undoubtable merit of the draft. But at the same time it is important
to consider that the action of this principle is limited to those areas of the high

seas which are outside the limits of economic zones. In the latter, the coastal
state exercises jursidiction in relation to marine scientific research. This
jurisdiction is not exclusive for the following reasons. Coastal states exercising
their jurisdiction have the right to regulate. grant permission for and conduct
marine scientific research within their economic zone and on their continental

shelf. Such research is conducted by other states and cospetent international
organizations with the consent of the coastal state. But under normal cirtmstances

the latter gives consent for marine scientific research exclusively for peaceful
purposes and to expand scientific knowledge on the marine environment for the

good of all mankind. At the sam time a coastal state may refuse to give consent
to another state or to a cospetent international organization to conduct scientific
research, at its osm discretion and in cases strictly established by the draft,

and particularly if such scientific research has direct significance to the explora-
tion and exploitation of living and mineral natural resources by the coastal state.

Despite this provision, coastal states cannot refuse to give consent for scientific
research projects that are to be conducted on the continental shelf beyond the

200 nautical mile limit and outside these regions which coastal states may at

any time officially declare to be regions of present or future-within reasonable
time--exploitation or exploration of the natural resources (Article 246 of the
draft convention on the law of the sea).

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such are the basic trends in development of the principle of the freedom of the

high seas today, and of their realisation in the draft convention on the lav of
the sea.

The USSR and other socialist countries are making a significant contribution to
the proceedings of the Third m Conference on the Law of the Sea. They are deci-
sively in favor of preserving the universally recognised principles of the inter-
national law of the sea in the new convention, to include the freedom of the high
seas and the freedom of passage of marine vessels through international straits
joining two portions of the high seas, and of flights over them by aircraft; they
are also in favor of a balanced and ritually acceptable solution to the issue as
to the status of the economic zone and other fundamental problems of the law of

the sea. The freedom of the high seas has exceptional significance to many develop-
ing states, which need to expand economic and oouercial ties with other countries
and which are developing their own national merchant marines.

The freedom of the high seas is a universally recognised imperative principle of
modern international law. It is the most incl-tent legal means of ensuring peace-

ful coexistence among states with different socioeconomic systems, and development
and deepening of their cooperation in different areas.

BIBLIOGRAPKY

l. Holodtsov, S. V., I'Ills:Ihdunar:odno-pravovoy rezhim otkrytogo morya i kontinentalk

nogo shel'fa" [The International Legal Regime of the High Seas and the
Continental Shelf], Ibscov, 1960.

2. Kolodoos. 0., “Meshdunarodmye mrskoye pravo" [International Law of the Sea],
Moscow. 1975.

3. Kunz. J. , ”The Changing Law of Nations (Essays on International Law) ," Ohio.
1968, p 35.

4. “Sevremennoye mahdunarodnoye mrskoye pravo. Reshim vod i dna Hirovogo
okeana" (Modern International Law of the Sea. The Regime of the waters and
Floor of the World Ocean] , mecca, 1974, p 26.

5. “Hezhdunarodnoye vosdushnoye pravo" [International Air Lav], Book 1, Moscow,
1980.

6. .t-uodkin, A. I... "Hirovoy okean. Hezhdmarodno-pravovoy rezhim. Osnovnyye
problemy" [The World Ocean. The International Regime. Basic Problems],

Mm. 1973.

7. Vysoﬁskiy, A. P., "Pravovyye problemy svobody nauchnykh issledovaniy v Hirovom
okeanc" [Legal Problem in the Freedom of Scientific Research in the world
Ocean], Kiev, 1974, p 160.

8. Calfisch, I... and Piccard. J.. "The Legal Regime of urine Scientific Research

and the Third mited Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,“ ZBITSGRIPT FUR
MSIANDISCHES OPPBNTLIGIBS REGIT UND VOLKERIGGT, vol 38. No 3-4, 1978, pp

848-901 .

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Brounli. Ya., "Inﬂammation pravo" (International Law], Vol. 1, Moscow, 1977.
Barabolya. P. 0., “Problem of International Struts," in ”$0qu gosMarItvo
1 uzhdunarodnoye norskoyo pravo' [m0 Soviet State and International Law of the
Seal, macaw. 1977. pp 19-33.

mush-o. A. K., and Dzhavad, 1:0. 101.," mum's pravo" [Law or the Sea). macaw.
1974.

A/Cont. 62/I..78, 28 August 1980.

Jaenicke, 6., “Die Dritta secrechtskonfomz dcr Vominten Nationen. Grund-
problm in Inasmuch." 2211501!!!” m msumscns omens. 33cm
IND VOW, V01 38, No 3-4, 1978.

A/Cont. 62/». 8/10". 1/Part II, 6 nay 1916.

Gundung, I... 'Die exlusive nirtshchaftuoneﬂ zzn'scmurr run ammmsams
OMIGES mu (MD VOLKBRRBCBT, Vol 38. No 3-4, 1978.

Holfrun, 11., “Die Fischer“ auf ache: Soc,” muscular-r m AUSMNDISGBS
OPPENTLICHBS REC"? IND VOLKBRRBCJH', V01 38, bio 3-4, 1978.

(99!!!!me Izdatol'ctvo 'Nauka', "Sovetskoye Gorudarstvo 1 praw', 1982

11004

$0:

5200/1000 m

18
FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY