FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10667
19 July 1982

East Europe Report

SCIENTIFIC. AFFAIRS
(FOUO 4/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or namen.preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the polio
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGﬂ' MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENTIFIC Asmns

(P000 4/82)

Comeurs

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Joint cssn-ussn Aerial Reconnaissance Experiment Deewcribed
(Jiri Sin; GEODE‘I‘ICKY A WWI“? 0320K, No lo, 1982)

CZICBOSLOVAKIA

Current. Future Chenicel Fiber Production Surveyed
(Milan Drezdil; cannon PRMSL, No 2, 1982) ...........

-e- [III-BE-GSPOOO

FOIOFHCIALUSIZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Imam. AFFAIRS

JOINT CSSR-USSI AERIAL WSW mum amen
Prague GEODETICKY A WC“ OBZOR in Czech No 6, 1982 pp 96-97

[Article by Engi- Jiri Sins. CSc, Center for Renate Terrain Sensing, Institute of
Geodesy. National Enterprise. Prague: ”first Joint Czechoslovak-Soviet kperinent
With the Alt-30 Flying Lshorstory"l

[Text] The first joint experiment, under the Caechoslovsk-Soviet intergovernnen-
tal agreement on cooperation in renote terrain sensing. was held on 9-29 March
1982, on the territory of the 0883. At the invitation of the Czech Geodetic and
Cartographic Office (Cesky urad geodeticky a kartografieky). to which the CSSR
govern-ent's resolution No 2‘9 of 1977 had assigned the task of coordinating the
gathering and practical application of data fron renots terrain sensing for the
needs of the Czechoslovak econony. the 0883 State Co-ittee for liydroneteorology
and Control of the Living anironnsnt sent to Czechoslovakia its All-30 flying la-
boratory with a teen of five scientists and specialists. so that aerial anitispec-
trsl and thernal photographs could be taken of areas inportant from the viewpoint
of the further developnent of our agriculture, forestry, nanagsnent of water re-
sources. geology and cartography.

The All-30 flying laboratory use equipped with an MIG-6 ll Zeiss Jena nultiepectra
aerial canera, a set of three an aerial caneres that have franc constants of 50,
100 and 200 as. and a Basselblad 500 EL hand-held aerial canera of the Center for
Renate Terrain Sensing (Stredisko dalkoveho pruamm lens), and with a Vulkan two-
channel ecsnnig infrared redioneter. The new Soviet thernoviaiun (Vullran) systen,
which recordson file strip the therlsl inage of the earth's surface or of the sur-
face of a body of water, in the range of reflected and natural radiation. was used
specifically on this project for the first ties on such a large scale and outside
the Soviet Union. The All-3O airplane has nodern navigation aids that enable the
navigator to keep the two-engine turhojet. flying at speeds of 600 to 500 bib and
at altitudes up to 7000 a. on the planned course within an error of 50 a.

The ground control surveys vere ads by two team of scientists and technicians.
nanely: on the East Slovakia plain. by staff nanbers of the m: 883 [$83 Punis-
try of Agriculture and food] and )MB 383 [SS]! Hinistry of forestry and Water na-
sources], under the methodological guidance of the Slovak Acadeay of Sciences In-
stitute of Geography (Geograficky ustev SAV); and on the Intercoms progran's
Stritez test range in Trebic Okres. by staff embers of the Center for Renate Ter-
rain Sensing and of the Czechoslovak Acadsuy of Sciences Institute of Geography
(Geograficky ustav CSAV) in Brno.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISE ONLY

 

Pig. 1

 

Fig. 2

The primary purpose of the experiment's scientific program was to explore the
earth's natural resources. The season of the year, the use of infrared photography
and rhe recording of the thermal image make it possible to determine the acreage

of fa"-Iund that is waterlogged, and to what extent. Research in this direction
rnnceniratcd on the East Slovakia plain and covered an area exceeding 150,000 hect-
ares. The entire area was sensed twice by different procedures, so that multi-
spcctral photographs on a l:50,000 scale. black-and-white infrared photographs on

a l:lS0.000 scale. color infrared photographs on a 1:100.000 scale, and a thermal
scan in the 3—5 pm and 8—13 Lm parts of the spectrum were obtained. The selected
areas where control measurements were made on the ground were sensed four times by
similar methods. but on larger scales (1:65.000 to 1:25.000).

In the basin of the Udava River (Humenne Okres) repeated photographing and thermal
svnsing were conducted to obtain data for a model of runoff after the melting of
the snow cover, and to determine more accurately the supply of water in the snow
cover. Solution of this task is one of the topics of the bilateral scientific and
technical cooperation with the Soviet Union in the area of remote terrain sensing.
For the geological and geomorphological investigation of the volcanic mountain
ranges in Central and Eastern Slovakia, multiSpectral photographs were taken on a
1:50.000 scale, and an aerial photogranmetric survey on a 1:30.000 and 1:100.000
scale was made of the Vihorlat range. of the area between the two branches of the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘

hodrog River. and of the Stavnica range. For the classification of timber stands

in the Kremica Mountains region. for the purpose of forestry research. ”d 0! C01-
lege instruction of the interpretation of 0P7. [dalkovy pruzlum Zens; renote terrain
sensing], inaccessible nixed tinber stands were photographed free the air in black

and white on a 129,000 scale against a background of snow cover, and in infrared
on a 1:22.000 scale with the Basselblad canera.

The experiment's scientific progran investigated also questions of protecting the
living environment. To determine the extent of dassge caused by non to the envi-
ronnent in Inch-frequented recreational areas or in areas with a high density of
vacation cottages. mltispectral and color infrared photogra-etric surveys were
made of the vicinity of the Zenplinsha Sirava reservoir. and of the Kninice dan
near :rno. These survey provide objective and neaningful data for territorial

p ann ng.

The parsseters of the aerial surveys were always selected so that the photographs
could be used in geodesy and cartography, geology. forestry and the nsnsgelsnt of
water resources, to correct and update the basic and topical ups on scales of
1:10.000 to 1:200.000.

The results of the experinent with the All-30 flying laboratory will be used also
to solve certain tasks of basic and applied research. for this purpose, with the
cooperation of the Center for knots Terrain Sensing and the Czechoslovak Acadeny
of Sciences Institute of Geography in Brno, a coordinated program was held on 16
March 1982 at the Intercosmos progm's test range in Trebic Okves, in the cOurse
of which nultispectral photographs were ends with the HIP-6 canera aboard the
All—30 flying laboratory. from altitudes of 6200 and 3100 meters, while simultane—
ously photographs of the seas spectral paraneters were taken with the nultispec-
tral caners of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences Institute of Geography, fro-
an altitude of 500 eaters, aboard an Alt-2 airplane of the Slovsir Enterprise. At
the sane tine, the spectral reflectance. of various objects, and the tenperature and
moisture content of the soil and of the air were neasured free the ground.

During the six flying days when the weather was favorable. eight flights were made
from the airports in Bratislava and Kosice. The Ali-30 flying laboratory logged

a total of 26 hours and 50 ninutes in the air. In all, the laboratory received
for processing over 9000 francs of black-and-white zonal (lultispectral) shots,
black-and-white and color infrared survey shots. infrared photographs taken with
the Basselblad caners, and photographic recordings of thernal sensing covering an

area of 209,000 hectares.

A press conference was held at the close of the experiment. It was attended by 31
journalists. and by party and governunt officials of the Slovak Socialist Repub-
lic. The press conference included an exhibit of acne of the results of the surveys
in East Slovakia. and an inspection of the Ali-30 flying laboratory. While the air-
plane was at the Bratislava airport, excursions were organised for the ssnagers

and scientific staff nenbers of the interested organisations. More than 100 per-

sons participated in these excursions.

The first joint Czechoslovak-Soviet uperinent with the Alt-30 flying laboratory
ended successful. without any unforeseen events and organisational coeplications.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thanks to the detailed preparations and the anxious effort exerted by all the parti-
cipating organs and organization. The obtained remote terrain sensing data will be
distributed to the interested organizations in Hay and June 1982. and the first data
to be processed will be the ones obtained in Best Slovakia. A preliminary assassnent
of the feasibility of their practical application. My by organizations of the '
Ministry of Agriculture and Food, and of the Ministry of Forestry and Hater Resources.
is expected in Septeaber of: this year. An evaluation of the eupsrinsnt's scientific
contribution, free the viewpoint of the objectives of the bilateral Czechoslovak-
SOViet scientific and technical cooperation in remote terrain sensing, will be made
before the and of 1982. Full md conprehensive practical application of the obtain-
ed data, by all interested organizations. will take about tvo years.

COPYRIGHT: sm—Naltladatelstvi technicke literatury. Prague, 1982.

1014
cso: 2402/57

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI10FFKJAI.UBB(NWLY

CZICIDSLOVAKIA

CURRENT, 101013 CHEMICAL FIBER PRODUCTION 8URVEYID
Prague cannicrr PRUHYSL in Czech No 2. 1982 pp 105-111

[Article by Milan Dreedil. State Planning Col-dasion. Prague: "Current Status
and Prospects for Development of Chemical Fibers Abroadandin Czechoslovakis"]

[Text] This article briefly summarises foreign and domestic
developments in the production of chelical tihers. In the
second part. tendencies and problems connected with the
prospects for further development in this field. particu-
larly in relation to the raw esterials. investment and other
capabilities, are traced. and forecasts for Crechoslovekia
are presented.

Introduction

Cheeical fibers. along with plastics. are the most rapidly developing products
of the modern chemicel industry since the Second World "hr. Thanks to the
rapid grovth in output of these products. they have gradually attained a domi-
nant position. alongside cotton. along starting materials for the textile in-
dustry end other industries, as well as producing important structural changes.
Their rapid growth was supported by several factors, especially the need to
limit land erea used for the production of natural fibers and to use it in-
stead for growing food. progress in fibers research end development (discovery
of new fiber-forling polymers, steady improvement of production technology.
expanded selection end range of applicstions, nodernizstion of the textile
industry). the unprecedented growth of the petro-chsmical hsse. increasing
population. changes in styles of life and work, increased expenditures on at~
tractive clothing. domestic furnishings and engineering materials. In terns
of the starting eaterials used. there are fibers based on natural products,
such as cellulose. glass and Intels. and synthetic products, which ere hesed
on high-eolaculsr-weight fiber-forming polymers. The purpose of this article
is to evaluate briefly the developoent of the production of cheeical fibers.
i.e. cellulosics end synthetics, abroad and in Czechoslovakia. end to indi-

cate several directions of their future developeent.

Development of Chemical Fiber Production Through 1980

In contrast to the eajority o£:other industries. the chemical industry did
not originate in an artisan trade, but resulted from consistent transfer of
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scientific research results into industrial practice. In addition, from the
beginning, the development of the chemical industry was based on systematic
objectives and relied less on trial and error than other industries had. As
soon as the theoretical basis was sufficiently well known and well developed,
the industry developed rapidly, often progressing by jumps.

This tendency was particularly apparent in the development of chemical fibers.
and especially synthetics. So long as man lacked an adequate conception of
the composition and structure of the material which surrounded him. it was
obviously impossible for him to plan and systematically carry out the conver-
sion of materials. As a result he was unable to provide the necessary manmade
fibers for his clothing. the second basic necessity of life. and for thousands
of years he had to turn to plant and animal products, i.e. fibers and bio-
polymers. It was only after he increased his knowledge of the nature of the
chemical elements. the structure of chemical compounds and the laws governing
chemical processes in the 18th and 19th centuries that various ways of modify-
ing natural fibers and creating chemical ones, particularly fibers based on
cellulose, were found. Thus from the point of view of basic textile raw mate-
rials, the year 1886 marks a milestone. for in that year the first chemical
fiber was produced from nitrocellulose on the basis of a patent by H. de
Chardonnet. Further important discoveries in the field of chemical fibers
were not long in coming. The most effective of these on an industrial scale
was the adoption of the viscose method in 1892 (invented by Cross, Bevan and
Beadle), which was successfully used to produce viscose staple. But it was
only in the 1920's that the pioneering work of Prof H. Staudinger. a Nobel
Prize winner. resulted in a thorough knowledge of the macromolecular structure
of cellulose. In the 1930's and early 1940'. this work led to the discovery
of the polymers which, with the exception of polypropylene. are the most im-
portant for synthetic fibers today. namely 6.6-polyamide, 6-polyemide, poly-
ethylene terephthalste, and polyscrylonitrile. Although the main patents for
the production of certain synthetic fibers date from much earlier (1913 for
PVC [polyvinyl chloride] fiber and 1931 for PVA [polyvinyl alcohol] fiber),

it was 6.6-PAD [polyamide] discovered by Carrothera, which in 1939 was success-
fully brought out on an industrial scale by the 0.8. du Pont company, producer
of the first thousand tons of nylon (the trade name came from the words "New
York, LONdon").

The promising emergence of synthetic fibers was temporarily halted by the war,
but research work never ceased, and in 1960 the Englishmen J. R. Hhinfield and
T. J. Dickson were awarded the basic patent for the production of polyester
fiber, while in 1962 J. Zettner and H. Genes were able to patent the produc-
tion of polyacrilonitrile fiber. After a brief interlude necessary for the
reconstruction of industry destroyed by the war, nothing could prevent the
production of chemical fibers from expanding rapidly.

In 1950 the highest prewar level in the production of viscose and acetate
fibers was exceeded. and in the late 1950's and particularly the 1960's the
production of synthetic fibers began to increase rapidly. Their unprecedented
growth is graphically illustrated by the fact that between 1960 and 1970 the
output of these products increased 7 times. while between 1960 and 1980 it

6
FOI¢OFFKJALI£HEONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increased 15 tines. Table 1 describes the trend of chenicel fiber production
in the 20th century.

Table 1. World Output of Chemical Tibers (thousands of tons)
me .1232 £2.52 12$ 1.999. 1.912 129.9

All che-ical fibers 1 15 1.132 1.681 3.303 8.131 16.221
cellulose fibers 1 15 1.121 1.612 2.600 3.631 3.630
synthetics - - 5 69 703 6.700 10.591

Source: TEXTILE 0mm, mks AG

The table sakes it clear that the production of cellulose fibers increased
rapidly. particularly in the 1950's. then began to level off in the 1960's.
while in the 1970's output began to fluctuate by 3200.000-600.000 tons a year.
The sari-us was achieved in 1973, when 3.661 nillion tons of cellulose fiber
was produced worldwide. The rapid developsent of synthetics began in the
second half of the 1950's as a result of the rapid increase in production of
polyanide. polyester (PBS) and polyacrylonitrile (PAN) fibers. The sari-In
annual growth worldwide occurred in 1969. 1971-1973. and 1979. Trends in the
output of cellulose fibers are shown in Table 2.

Table 2. "orldwide Output of Main Types of Cellulose Fibers (thousand tons)
__1900 _9192 __19‘0 22$ 1—999 19.22 999
A11 cellulose fibers 1 15 1.127 1,612 2 600 3.631 3.630

9
textile and cord 1 15 562 876 1.131 1,391 1.200
filanentﬁ .
viscose staple - - $85 738 1.669 2,060 2.630
and cable

*lncluding acetate and triacetate file-ant
Source: TEXTILE om, mka AG

It is evident fron Table 2 that initially the producers concentrated their
full attention on continuous filanent, which could be used to replace natural
silk. since the very low silk production capabilities could not keep up with
densnd. The production of viscose staple was begun only in the late 1920's.
but it expanded very rapidly. particularly in the late 1930's, when the tense
international situation caused a siseable drop in inorts of strategic late-
rials such as wool and cotton on world nsrhets. with the result that in 1960
the output of viscose staple had already surpassed that of textile filanent.
During the war the output of cellulose fibers dropped by nearly 50 percent.
but rapid restoration of capacities disrupted by the war revivified the in-
dustry. so that by 1950 the 1960 sexism had already been considerably ex-
ceeded. In the period between 1950 and 1970 production continued to increase.
while producer interest began to turn lore and sure to viscose staple. which
is suited to a under of remarkable applications in nixtures with natural
and synthetic fibers; in the 1970's the rate of increase was sonewhat lower
as a result of great pressure to eliminate hernful eaissions and improve the

”OFFICIALUSIONLY
FOI‘0F11C1AI.USE(NNLY

environment. Recently, cellulose fibers have been experiencing a certain
resurgence, new second- and third-generation sodifications have appeared. and
acne producers have begun to expand and Iodernise their production facilities.
The trend of synthetic fiber production is shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Horldvide Output of Main Types of Synthetic Fibers (thousands of

tone)
1960 1950 1960 l 70 1280
All synthetic fibers 5 69 703 4.700 - 10.591
polyenide 5 56 ‘00 1,905 3.071
polyester - - 122 1.665 5,083
polyacrylonitrile - 3 109 1,003 2.012
other synthetics - 10 6‘ 1‘7 625

Source: TEXTILE ORGANOI. Bnka AG

The category of "other synthetics” includes PVC [polyvinyl chloride], PVA
[poly-vinyl alcohol]. polyurethane fibers and other less frequently used vari-
eties. This survey does not include polyolefin fibers (polypropylene. poly-
ethylene and fibers produced free sheet and strip) because statistical account-
ing on these began only in the 1970's and data for 1980 were not available at
the tins of writing.

It is clear fron Table 3 that the production of synthetic fibers begen to pick
up speed in the late 1950's. Initially PAD fiber had no competitors. but the
situation gradually began to change as the possibilities for use of polyester
and polyacrylonitrile fibers increased. In 1972 world output of polyester
fibers first surpassed that of polyenide fibers; this trend has continued.

The increasing popularity of polyester fibers (with excellent physical and
mechanical characteristics, a vide range of applications. extensive possi-
bilities for nodifying their properties and the like) was not significantly
harmed even by the oil crisis of the mid-1970's. Currently polyesters account
for fully 48 percent of vorlduide output of synthetics (polyaaides account for
29 percent. polyacrylonitrilea for 19 percent and the others for 6 percent).
and they have good prospects for the future: by the year 2000 the output of
polyester fiber is expected to approach that of the soot widely-used textile
fiber. cotton.

The situation in the production of chemical fibers is further described by
Tables a and S, which shov trends in the relative proportions of filament and
staple fibers.

FOI‘OIINCIAI.UGEGDNLN
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. Relative Proportion of ﬁlament and Staple Fibers (percent)
1920 l9£0 .1939 ‘ l 60 1910 ”00

All chemical fibers 100 100 100 100 100 100
staple - 52 65 53 56 56
filament loo ‘0 55 57 ‘6 M

Source: m2 om, Inks AG

Table 5. Relative Proportions of Filament and Staple ribers Among Various
Mcal Types (percent. for 1979)

 

Filament Staple To_ta_;
Cellulose fiber 35 65 100
All synthetic fibers ‘6 56 100
polysnide 80 20 100
'polyester 103 57 100
polyacrylonitrile 2 98 100

Source: 1-qu om

It can be seen fro- 'l'able 6 that the relative proportions of filament and
staple fibers have gradually shifted in favor of the latter. Among individual
types of synthetic fibers, however. the relative proportions differ rather
considerably. While textile. tecl'mical and cord filansnt and cable predomi-
nate in the case of polyamides. the situation is just the opposite in the case
of polyester and acrylics, where staples. cables and the like predominate.

A glance at the worldwide statistics (more detailed data are available fro-
1979 on) indicates that the United States has no coapetitor as the largest
producer of chemical fibers, with an output of 3.905 million tons. It is
followed by Japan (1.760 million tons) and the Soviet Union (1.111 million
tons), then by Taiwan (591,000 tons). the United Kingdom (579,000 tons) and
South Korea (501,000 tons). 0f the other socialist countries. East Gemny
has 11th place. Poland 15th place, Rolania 16th place and Czechoslovakia 19th
place worldwide. At first glance the high ranking of the two Asian countries
nay appear surprising. The reason for it is that the chemical industries.
and particularly the synthetic fiber industries, developed extremely rapidly
in Taiwan and South Korea during the 1970's with considerable capital partici-
pation of Japanese, West German. American and other companies, based on the
most under-n processes, and at present these two countries not only have cap-
tured mat Asian markets. but are also providing uncomfortable competition
on Uestern European markets with their fibers and finished textiles.

As for cellulose fiber, the largest producers are the Soviet Union (635.000
tons), followed by Japan (376,000 tons), and in third place the United States
(278,000 tons). where output has been declining for several years. The can
countries produce about a third of all of the world's cellulose fiber output,
and other than the Soviet Union, East Germany and (recently) Romania occupy

9
POROFHCIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important positions. Czechoslovakia is in 14th place worldwide. In the case
of synthetic fibers, the United States is securely in first place (3.484 mil-
lion tons), followed by Japan (1.363 million tons), west Germany (760,000
tons), Taiwan (521,000 tons), South Korea (477,000 tons) and the Soviet Union
(076,000 tons). Among the socialist countries, the largest producers of syn-
thetics other than the Soviet Union are Poland (153,000 tons), Romania
(160,000 tons) and East Germany (133,000 tons): in 1979, Czechoslovakia was
in eighth place.

Production of Chemical Fibers in Czechoslovakia

Czechoslovakia began to produce chemical fibers only after the republic was
founded. In 1919 a small viscose textile filament plant in Horavske Chrastove
with a capacity of 250 tons per year began operation. In 1920 two other small
plants began operation in Theresiental (now Rudnik near Hostinny) and Senice
nad Hyjavou, while in 1921 a factory began operation in Lovosice; this was ex-
panded in 1935. In 1936 another viscose textile filament factory was opened
in Batizovice (now Svit); its production capacity was increased in 1953, and
facilities for coloring fiber material were added. The first viscose staple
was produced in 1942 in the Vistra plant in Bratislava. while staple produc-
tion in Bohemia was begun by Spolana Neratovice in 1947; an additional small
staple production unit was also installed in Svit. In the early 1950‘s a
rayon textile and cord filament plant began operations in Bratislava; it was
one of the most modern of its time in Central Europe. In 1953-1956, the units
in Rudnik and Lovoaice were reconstructed to produce viscose cord filament.
This ended the development of viscose fiber production in Czechoslovakia, for
in the late 1960's and the 1970's, as a result of the rapid development of
synthetic fibers and in the interest of improving the environment, the viscose
staple plant in the Chemosvit Svit National Enterprise was shut down (1967),
as were those in Rudnik (1971) and in the ChZJD [expansion unknown] National
Enterprise in Bratislava (1978), as well as the textile filament in the
Chemosvit National Enterprise (1978). Viscose fiber is currently produced

in Neratovice (staple), Lovosice (cord filament), and Senice and Bratislava
(textile filament).

The history of our synthetic fiber production began during the occupation,
when the research institute of the Bats Plants in Zlin (now the Research Insti-
tute of Rubber and Plastics Technology, Gottwaldov) developed and produced
the first polyamide fiber on the basis of a specially-designed process, with-
out foreign licenses. In July 1967 a pilot unit with a capacity of 0.6 tons
per week was started up, and at the end of 1949 this facility was transferred
to the new Silon chemical combine in Plans and Luznici na Taborsku. There
the first 52 tons of Silon polyamide textile filament was also produced in
1952 (the trade name was invented by the writer T. Svatopluk), and Czecho-
slovakia thus became the seventh producer of synthetic fibers in the world.
The leading position in the production of polyamides was taken over in the
1960's by Chemlon Humenne National Enterprise. which began production in a
facility for manufacturing polyamide textile filament (using Soviet documen-
tation), a facility for polyamide cord filament (from the Zimmcr Company.
west Germany), and other units for polyamide textile filament (ACO Company,
Holland) and high-strength polyamide cord filament (Teijin, Japan); in 1969

. 10
F(”I(JFF1C1Al.lﬂiE,CH§LY
FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

it reconstructed the polyanide cord filament unit to nanufacture polyanide
cable. Now Che-ion Hunenne produces more than 90 percent of all Czechoslo-
vakia's polyamide fiber output. The obsolete polyamide textile and technical
filament facilities at Silon Plans were dismantled in 1980 after more than

30 years' operation.

Silon Plans nad Luznici was also a pioneer in the production of polyesters;
in 1959 it produced its first tons of polyester staple on license from ICI
(England). In 1966 this enterprise started up what was then a unique produc-
tion facility for polyester staple with continual polycondensation and spin-
ning. obtained free Zinmer in "eat Gernany. The Slovensky lodvab National
Enterprise in Senice began the production of textile polyester filament in
1969. and in 1978 it expanded its capacity to include additional facilities
for polyester textile filament and granulated polyester; two-thirds of the
latter is delivered to the Chemlon National Enterprise. which also began the
production of polyester textile filament in 1978.

we are one of the leading countries in the production of polypropylene. A
pilot polypropylene staple line began operation in as early as 1965 in the
Chenosvit National Enterprise. a larger facility began operation in 1970 at
CHZJD Bratislava, and a large—capacity facility was also put into operation
there in 1979. In addition. CEZJD Bratislava installed a pilot polypropylene
cable line in 1972 which was used primarily to produce carpets and household
textiles; a larger facility went into operation there in 1975. and an addi-
tional large-capacity operation. east of whose output is intended for export
to the CEHA countries, is now being completed. In 1976 Chenosvit began the
production of polyester textile filament on a seniconnercial scale, and in
1980 this facility was replaced by a unit with a capacity of 6,000 tons a
year, the largest of its type in the world.

Other well-known types of synthetic fibers (acrylic fibers. polyvinyl chloride
staples, polyurethane filament. polyvinyl alcohol fiber and the like) are not
produced in Czechoslovakia. The main reasons for this intentional production
structure is that at the recommendation of CEMA's operating bodies we spe-
cialize in the production of polypropylene fibers, an area in which we have
rich research and production experience and sufficient starting materials.
i.e. granular fiber-grade polypropylene, and have developed and tested nuner-
ous applications. In contrast, the develop-ant of polyacrylonitrile produc-
tion was not provided for in the guidelines for the Czechoslovak chemical
industry prinarily because Czechoslovakia has available neither a materials
base nor the production technology and equip-eat and has done little work

in the field. with the exception of applications work. Nor is there any plan
to begin production of polyvinyl chloride, polyurethane. polyvinyl alcohol

or other less known types of synthetics here, especially since Czechoslovakia
consumes only niniscule quantities of these products. The same is true of
the special types of synthetic fibers with "upgraded use characteristics.”
e.g. aramid fiber, PAD-b and the like.

Table 6 surveys the production of chemical fibers in Czechoslovakia.

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. Production of Chemical Fibers in Czechoslovakia. 1920-1980
(thousand tons)

1920 1960 1950 1960 1970 12§0

All chemical fibers 0.3 5.4 27.0 61.9 100.8 163.5
cellulose 0.3 5.4 26.9 58.9 69.3 54.9
sy'nthetic - " 001 3.0 31.5 10806

It is clear from Table 6 that cellulose fiber productiou developed especially
rapidly in 1950-1960. when output more than doubled, while production subse-
quently leveled off and after 1979 showed a considerable drop of sore than 20
percent because of the shutting down of an ecologically undesirable viscose
staple production facility in Bratislava, and subsequently of a ssaller unit
producing textile filanent at Svit. Synthetic fibers have shown dynalic
growth in the last two decades. In 1960-1970 output increased 10.5 times,
while in 1970-1980 it was up alnost 3.5 tines. The develop-ant of synthetic
fiber production structure in the last few years is interesting (Table 7).

Table 7. Share of Individual Fiber Types in Overall Output of Synthetica

(percent)'
1950 1960 1970 1980
All synthetic fibers 100 100 100 100
polyanide 100 88 68 105
polyester - 12 29 33
polypropylene - - 3 22

Table 7 shows that the share of polya-ide fibers has gradually fallen as the

output of polyester and polypropylene fibers has risen. Polypropylene fibers
have an important place in the production structure (accounting for more than
a fifth of output. as a result of production specialisation within CEHA), at

a level considerably higher than the world average.

In addition, in 1980 Czechoslovakia produced 15,000 tons of polyolefin fibers
from poly-er strip and sheet (the usual starting laterials are polypropylene
and high-pressure polyethylene granules), which have been a fully adequate
replacement for linen, jute and sisal in the production of sacks, tarpaulins,
packaging materials filter textiles and the like. The primary producer of
these fibers, worldwide output of which (including textile varieties) has ex-
ceeded a million tons, is the VHJ Lanarsky prunysl Trutnov.

The attention which has been devoted to the production of synthetic fibers in
Czechoslovakia in recent decades is indicated by the fact that in the last two
five—year plans, Kcs 6 billion has been invested in this sector. He now pro-
duce about 1,000 varieties of cheaical fibers in various final for-s. sore
than 600 workplaces and organizations, priasrily in the textile and rubber
industries, as well as production associations, locally Operated enterprises
and conauners in the Ministry of Agriculture and Foodstuffs. the Ministry of
General Engineering. and the Ministry of Electrical Engineering. The share

12
FOR OIIWCJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of synthetic fibers is increasing nost rapidly in the textile industry. Hhile
' in 1960 it was only 2 percent. in 1970 it had increased to 16 percent. in 1975
to 23 percent. and in 1980 to at least 32 percent. In the knitting and wool-

ens industries the anoint of synthetics used has already exceeded 50 percent,

while they will continue to have a relatively sasll share in the cotton indus-
try. anounting to only 10 percent in 1980.

Prospects for Future Development of Chemical Fibers Horldwide

The future development of chemical fibers worldwide is very closely associated
with the economics of the various countries and is governed by a mater of
factors including the raw materials situation, the level of technolou in pro-
duction, finishing end other processing. and the differing require-eats of the
public as regards clothing, household and technical textiles. Even recently.
forecasts of output and use of chenical fibers differed little from the levels
actually attained, and in a number of cases predictions were even exceeded

as a result of the very rapid growth of this sector. But the most important
turning point came in the mid-1970's, when as a result of the oil crisis and
economic difficulties in a amber of capitalist countries. the long-tern fore-
casts of development in chemical fibers suddenly became unusable, for the un-
desirable consequences of these circumstances had a pronounced effect on this
industry and considerably changed views about future development. Nor were
those who developed forecasts of development of fiber production in 1981 much
wiser. Although in 1976-1979 production picked up sonswhat, 1980 again
brought sons elements of crisis. such as limitations on production resulting
fro- nonuse or elimination of production capacities, important problems in

the capitalist textile industry and so on (although these problem did not
affect the socialist countries and some Third world countries in Asia and
South America); as a result worldwide output of chemical fibers again dropped
below the 1979 level. Nor are western experts optimistic in their estimates
of develop-eat in the near future. A particular basis for this attitude is
the expected further cutting back of production capacities in Western Europe,
with the primary purpose of decreasing the high costs to producing coqanies.
Experts estimate that by 1985 the denand for synthetic fibers in Hestern
Europe will have to adjust to output levels which have decreased to 500.000-
600.000 tons below the current level. Only in this way would it be possible
to utilize about 90 percent of available production capacity. which would
assure the required profitability. Producers of cheaical fibers in the United
States and Japan face similar difficulties.

Because of this complicated situation. it is difficult to forecast develop-
ment of chemical fiber production in the longer tern. Nonetheless, our con-
sideration of the further developnent of this progressive branch of chaistry
nust be based on sone suitable forecasts. The following are the main require-
nanta.

1. In spite of the continuing interest in conventional natural naterials
(cotton and wool) and cellulose fiber, we may expect that synthetic fibers
will be the fastest-growing textile neterials in the near future and that
polyester filament and staple will continue to hold the lead in this sector.
since they offer the widest range of applications.

MWMOMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. He may assume that before the end of the century no other type of textile
fiber whose mass production could exceed that of the currently used types of
textile materials will appear.

3. In all probability no chemical fiber with universal properties will be
developed and put into production before the end of the century, because
fiber processors require characteristics which are not mutually compatible.
We may expect significant further progress in the development of processes
and equipment for fiber production, much more efficient use of basic and aux-
iliary raw materials, better energy conservation in manufacturing processes,
more extensive use of automation. continuous processes, data processing and
the like, a considerable increase in labor productivity and the introduction
of new, advanced methods of processing chemical and particularly synthetic
fibers. Research and development in the chemical fibers field will concen-
trate primarily on special types and on modifications with desirable use
characteristics, while attempting to achieve suitable combinations of more
desirable properties at an acceptable price.

A. The fiber production and textile industries will devote much more atten-
tion to the solution of ecological problems, particularly the elimination or
recycling of gaseous, liquid and solid wastes. According to estimates of
future fiber production, we may expect that in the year 2000 some 7 to 10
million tons of waste will be produced annually. About 5 to 10 percent of
this total will consist of wastes from the production of fibers. about £0 to
65 percent will be waste from the textile and clothing industry. and the re-
mainder will consist of used textiles. But there still exists no economically
feasible process for separation or utilisation of mixed fiber (abOut 30 per-
cent of the total amount of waste). The successful solution of this important
problem not only would help to improve the environment, but also would make
possible effective utilization of this hitherto neglected source of valuable
raw materials.

Now let us make some observations on the prospects for production of the main
types of textile fibers. Experts disagree on the share of total textile fiber
output which will be occupied by the main types of natural fibers. There is
full agreement that an increase in the output of wool and natural silk is
unlikely, especially since silk requires 4 times more land area to produce it
than does cotton, while wool actually requires 1,000 times more area, even
though in this case it is land unsuited for crop production. But forecasts
differ regarding cotton. which is currently the most widely used type of tex-
tile fiber. One school of thought holds that the land area devoted to it
will decrease steadily but cotton yields per unit area will increase, so that
by the year 2000 output will be at least what it is now, and more probably
will be higher. However, there is also a completely opposite viewpoint. For
example, representatives of the American Bnka Company forecast that by the
year 2004 most cultivated land will he used for growing food. and cotton pro-
duction will decrease to a minimum. One of the main arguments for this view-
point is that from the beginning of its growth period to the end of the life
of a clothing product, cotton uses up more energy than fibers such as poly-
ester. Our view is that cotton output is likely to be maintained at approxi-
mately the current level, or to decrease slightly, with the difference being

11;
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Ftﬂlfﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEEIONL¥

made up by synthetics. and that the use of cotton-synthetic mixtures will in-
crease only slightly, while use of mixtures of cotton and viscose or acetate
will decrease considerably.

Estimates of the future output of cellulose fibers (viscose and acetate) show
the widest divergence. while most Heat European and Japanese producers agree
in predicting stagnation or slow growth of output through the year 2000, some
American companies. particularly Chants: and It? Bayonier. make forecasts of
cellulose fiber output which may be excessively optimistic: they consider
that by the end of the 20th century output of cellulose fibers will rise to
8-16 million tons, i.e. 2.5-6 times the current level. They support their
forecast by the assertion that the polymer starting material. i.e. industrial
cellulose, is continually renewed in nature, in contrast to oil. and is not
subject to the same limitations on growing area as cotton. In addition, they
assume that the problem of emissions and wastewater will be solved and that
there will be a number of innovations in the product selection, including ex-
tensive use of next-generation fibers. One is more inclined to the soberer
views of organisations such as Lensing (Austria), Bayer (west Germany) and
Teijin (Japan). which quite justifiably call attention to the fact that the
machinery and process equipment used for this oldest type of chemical fiber
do not meet future demands. and that radical modernisation would require con-
siderable investment expenditure. both for emission control and waste water
purification and for improvement of the production process itself. including
making it continuous, automating it and concentrating production. Accord-
ingly they expect only a modest increase in output and consumption of cellu-
lose fibers, to about 6-b.5 million tons. in the year 2000.

In the past 20 years the world output of synthetic fibers has increased 15-
fold. But the last 5 to 7 years, a period begun by the oil crisis, have re-
vealed certain problems in this sector. The most important of these is limit-
ed capabilities for delivery of the basic starting materials for synthetics
production. starting with oil, and the closely associated, increasing pres-
sure to save energy, along with difficulties in providing machinery for fiber
production and processing, the necessity of producing auxiliary substances
(primarily dyes, brighteners, preparations and oils) for synthetics, license
barriers and other factors. 0n the other hand a number of factors clearly
support a further increase in the output of synthetics. They include. for
example, the increasing world population, increasing per-capita fiber con-
sumption. the limited increase in output of natural and cellulose textile
fibers, progress in fiber production and treatment technologies and in appli-
cations. great potential for conservation, improved labor productivity and
the like. Between 1960 and 1980 the share of synthetics in total textile
fiber consumption rose from 5 percent to 39 percent. This share will con-
tinue to increase, even if somewhat more slowly than previously.

For illustration we present several forecasts of the future growth of produc-
tion of different types of textile fibers through the year 2000.

15
ms omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8. Forecasts of Output of Textile Fiber Through the Year 2000
(millions of tons)

 

2000
1980 1 2 3 6 5
All natural fibers 16.5 13.0 12.0 13.0 15.5 16.5
Cellulose fibers 3.6 6.0 8.0 3.0 6.0 6.5
Synthetic fibers 10.6 35.0 30.0 35.0 25-30 25.0
All textile fibers 28.7 52.0 50.0 51.0 66.5- 66.0
69.5

 

Natural fibers include cotton, wool and natural silk.

Key: 1. UN forecast. March 1977. 2. Forecast by Chemtex Company, USA.
February 1981. 3. Forecast from "Lexicon of Chemical Fibers" ("est
Germany). 1979. 6. Forecast of West German experts. 1978.

5. Author's forecast.

This survey makes it clear that the forecasts differ most with regard to cheer
ical fibers and sometimes contradict one another as a result of the forecast-
er's profession and company affiliation. If we assume that in 2000 the world
population will be 5.5-6 billion, the annual increase in production and con-
sumption of textile fibers would have to range from 0.7 to 1.2 million tons.
close to the figures for the boom years of the 1960's and early 1970's. These
forecasts involve primarily an increase in chemical fibers. since. with the
exception of No 6, they forecast a stagnation or decrease in the output of
natural fibers.

Prospects for Production in Czechoslovakia

No complete conception of the prospects for development of chemical fibers in
Czechoslovakia through the year 2000 has yet been worked out in detail and

in all its implications. There exist only some limited studies, which do not
deal comprehensively enough with this problem. Although they are based on
conceptions of future consumption of textile fibers by the processing sectors
(textile and rubber industries, and other consumers) and on population curves.
they do not take sufficient account of the factors which are critical to the
further development of chemical fibers in Czechoslovakia (raw materials, in-
cluding oil. energy. investment and foreign exchange capabilities, technical
progress and the like).

The most specific conceptions of the prospects for chemical fibers in Czecho-
slovakia are those for the Seventh five-Year Plan. No such pronounced growth
as took place in the preceding two five-year plans is planned for 1981-1985.
He can expect the greatest growth in polypropylene fibers as a result of the
gradual coming on stream of new large-capacity polypropylene textile filament.
cable and staple facilities. There will be only a small increase in the out-
put of the other types of synthetic fibers, resulting primarily from inten-
sification measures (polyester staple. polyamide cable).

16
FIIICHﬂﬂCJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the Seventh Five-Year Plan the output of cellulose fibers will stay
level. or say even decrease temporarily toward the end of the period as a
result of necessary reconstruction of the viscose staple production facility
in the Spolsns Neratovice [raj Enterprise.

Accordingly, the chemical fiber producers must devote more attention to im-
proving quality and to innovation in product selection than previously. This
task is even more important in view of the fact that we import a considerable
quantity of chemical fibers (the figure will be nearly a third of total con-
sumption in 1985). end since most of the imported selection. especially syn-
thetic fibers. is extreaely demanding in terns of foreign exchange. The cen-
tral economic organs have long been intensively studying the probleaa of
quality and provision of the needed selection, and analyses have indicated
that there are realistic ways of improving the present state of affairs. The
nest important of these is the pursuit of anti-import programs with extremely
rapid payback, financed by recoverable foreip exchange credits. The main
aim of such measures is to make available to domestic producers certain scarce
types of fibers, particularly those which we import under unfavorable price
conditions for convertible currency (continuous synthetic filament. formed
fiber, polyamide cable, modifications, special varieties and the like). Prepa-
rations are now being made to implement several suggestions involving recover-
able foreign exchange, and others are being developed. During the Seventh
Five-Year Plan the main col-sodity for export to the socialist countries re-
mine polypropylene fiber, which we will exchange with these countries for
scarce textile raw materials (cotton. viscose staple, acrylic fiber and the
like) or isportant chemical products.

In 1986-1990 our attention is likely to be concentrated priurily on expand-
ing the output of selected types of polyester fibers (technical filament and
(staple), which will become scarcer in the 1980's. Reconstruction of the
Spolana Neratovice Kraj Enterprise is expected to be cowleted. The increase
in output of polyamide fibers is likely to be miniaal. end the increase in
polypropylene fibers is likely to involve priurily cable for domestic tex-
tiles and export to the socialist countries and polypropylene textile fila-
ment. in which areas it will be necessary to expand the output of smooth-
surface and coarse-denier fiber for the wool industry (domestic textiles and
carpets). An increase in the output of polypropylene staple will depend to
a considerable degree on successful development and production of cotton-like
products which would at least partially replace cotton and other scarce
fibers.

The developnent prospects for chemical fibers in Czechoslovakia after 1990
will be highly dependent on the long-term conception of our light industry.
i.e. whether it will continue to be an important export sector to both so-
cialist and nonsocialist countries, or whether it will concentrate primarily
on meeting domestic needs. In this period the problems of cellulose fibers,
both textile filament and viscose staple and cord. will require solution
(obsolete aschinery. emissions. poor quality» limited selection and the like).
Along the other types of fibers. as in the Eighth Five-Year Plan the prinry
attention will be devoted to expansion of polyester and polypropylene produc-
tion, and the importance of synthetic fibers for a wide range of technical
applications will increase.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In general terns, we may state that development of chemical fiber output
in Czechoslovakia during the near future will aim at the following basic
goals:

«isproving the use characteristics and quality of fibers;

-expanding the selection of nodificetions. special fibers and advanced-
generation fibers for clothing, dosestic and technical purposes:

—'decreaaing consumption of raw eaterials, auxiliary naterials and energy;

“increasing the labor productivity of production units. introduction of con-
tinuous processes, automation. extensive use of data processing equipment
and the like;

-the search for suitable replace-eats for imported fibers. particularly
natural fibers.

Research and development in the chemical fibers field in Czechslovakia will
continue to he performed primarily by our own Ianpower and in cooperation
with other can countries. Deliveries of sons raw neterials (caprolactan.
dinethyl tersphthalate) and auxiliary materials (dyes end preparations) will
remain a bottleneck during the 1980's. as will the provision of machinery
and equipment for new fiber production facilities; as previously, we will
depend primarily on West Germany for iaports.

Conclusions

Chemical fibers will continue to hold the decisive poaition among starting
materials for the textile. rubber and other industrial sectors in coming
years. In particular, the importance of synthetic fibers will continue to
grow; in the period through the year 2000 they will account for most of the
growth in output of fiber materials. Although natural and cellulose fibers
will continue to hold the attention of producers and processors, their share
of total textile materials will decrease steadily. The efforts of research.
developnent. production, processing and application of chenical fibers will
focus primarily on:

«increasing efficiency and labor productivity in the mass production of
cellulose and synthetic fibers;

—developnent and further expansion of the number of modifications and spe-
cial fiber types in accordance with purchaser requirements;

“introduction of increasingly modern and effective processing technologies:

—the development of new, nonconventional designs for the production of ten-
tile surfece configurations;

-coqarehensive utilization, and the further solution of ecological problems
in the production. processing and use of chemical fibers. including effective
utilization of fiber production and textile waste.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOI’FICIALUSEONLV

While, the Monaco of eocielut econouc integration in the fiber
field, coordination of invent-eat progra- 1n ﬁber production, and abuse
of fiber types V111 continue to now in the eocunet can.

comma: 8m. leiledetelotvi ‘l'eclmicke Lucretia-y, Prague. 1982

8480
080 : 2602/66 In

19
I'OIOI'I’ICIALUSEONLY