FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10530

19 May 1982

Translation

.NONCONTACT METHODS OF

MEASURING OCEANOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS

Ed. by

S.V. Viktorov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

Jens publications contain inforution primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was aumrized or extracted.

Unfaniliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Governaent.

COPYRIGIT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING (ENERSBIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NONCONTACT METHODS OF
MEASURING OCEANOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYE HETODY IZMERENIYA OKEANOGRAPICHBSKIKH PARAMETROV
in Russian 1981 pp 1-119 . .

[Annotation, foreword and selected passages from book "Noncontact
Methods of Measuring Oceanographic Parameters,” a collection of
reports of the Third All-Union Seminar, Leningrad, 17-19 January 1978.
edited by S. V. Viktorov, candidate of physical and mathematical
sciences, Leningrad Division of the State Oceanographic Institute,
Moscow Division of Gidrometeoizdat]

CONTENTS

Annotation 1
Editor's Foreword 2

Active Microwave Methods. K.I. Volyak, R.H. Glushkov. Yqu. Yelen'yanov.
v.3. Komarov. S.Ye. Kontorov. 5.”. Mudrova, A.Ye. Popov and V.A. Starostin 5

Radio Altimeter Study of Surface Sea Haves. A.Ye. Basharinov (deceased).
A.l. Baskakov, A.A. Kalinkevich 8

Study of Possibility of Deteraining Sea Have Height by Hultifrequency
Correlation Method Using Satellite Radio Altimeters. A.Ye. Basharinov,
A.A. Kalinkevich. A.I. Baskakov 12

Variations of Characteristics of Two-Dimensional Spectrum of Radar Images
of Sea Surface Derived from Meter Hovenent. A.A. Zagorodnikov.
K.B. Chelyshev. V.H. Chegrenets 13

Angular Spectra of Sea Haves According to Remote Measurement Data.
Ye. O. Zhilko. A.A. Zagorodnikov, K.B. Chelyahev 17

Results of Measuring Sea Have Parameters and Atmospheric Turbulence by
Ground Incoherent Radar. Yu. B. Gagarin. 6.1. Dyatlov. Ye.0. Zhilko.
Ye. M. Heshcheryakov 20

-a- [I-USSR-G-POUO]

, FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

Measuring Sea Have Parameters by a Doppler Meter for Various Aircraft
Flight Conditions. Yu.V. Baytsur. Yu. 3. Gagarin. Ye.0. Zhilko,
$.I. Miroshnichenko

Energy Characteristics of Radar Signals Envelope and Their Relation
to Have Parameters. v.6. Vazhenin’ A.A. Kalmykov, N.M. Kharlova

l
I

Estimates of State and Physicochamical Surface Properties of
Bodies of Water by the Data from Spectral Measurements of
Microwave Radiation. A. M. Shutko

Results of Microwave Radiometric Sounding of Bodies of Water with
Different Temperature and Salinity. G. I. Chukhray, A. M. Shutko

Spectral and Polarization Characteristics of Microwave Radiation of
Foam Formations. V. Yu. Rtyzer, Ye. A. Sharkov

Measuring Small-Scale Elements of Haves and Foam During Microwave
Studies of the Sea Surface. 3. M. Andreyev. V. V. Vinogradov,
B. A. Pomytkin

Problem of Determining Hind Velocity at Hater Surface
by Measurements of Microwave Emission of Earth-Atmosphere

System. P. V. Lyushvin

Experimental Results of Joint Use of Infrared and Microwave
Radiometers for Remote Determinationof Sea Ice characteristics.
V. V. Bogorodskiy, A. N. Darovskikh, Ye. A. Martynova, V. A. Spitsyn

Microwave Study of Sea Ice. P. A. Nikitin

Use of Method of Infrared Radiometry to Study Time Variability
of Heat Exchange of Eastern Arctic Seas with Atmosphere.
A. I. Paramonov

Application of Infrared Radiometry in Studies of Par Eastern Seas.
A. A. Visnevskiy

Asymptotic Study of Laser Pulses Reflected from Sea Surface.
V. Yc. Rokotyan

Possibilities of Determining Marine Hydrosol Concentration by Remote
Laser Methods. S. F. Korchagina, A. L. Kravtsov, A. S. Lezhen.

V. I. Khalturin

Remote Detection and Identification of Oil Pollution at Sea by Fluorescent
Spectra. V. A. Torgovichev, V. F. Krivolapov, T. N. Klimova.
V. Yu. Maslov. G. Ye. Nefedov

Application of Method of Statistical Tests to Calculate Ocean Reflectivity
Undcr Laser Irradiation. A. S. Lezhen. N. V. Urikova

F!)RIOF11CLAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

21

25

29

39

63

67

51

S7

61

65

66

68

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Push and Drift of Ice in Head of Gulf of Finland as Applied to
Problems in Hydraulic Engineering (According to Aerial Phozographic
Survey Data). V. V. Drabkin, M. L. Monosov

Experiment in Deciphering Zones of Highest Biological Productivity with
Respect to Multizonal Space Images of Hater Environment.
G. P. Vanyushin

Some Results of Aircraft Measurements of Currents in Lakes and
Reservoirs. Ye. D. Yegorikhin, T. N. Pilatova

Application of Analog-Digital Devices for Interpreting Aerospace Data.
V. A. Mikhaylov. V. P. Usachev

Influence of Spatial Averaging on Accuracy of Location Have
Recorder Measurement of Wave Profiles. N. I. Seregin, A. A. Kalmykov

Comparative Analysis of Using Electromagnetic and Acoustic Vibrations
for Ship Location Have Recorders. N. A. Nekhonov, A. A. Kalmykov.
Yu. I. Kirpa. V. G. Vazenin

Some Results of Aeroacoustic Measurements of Sea Surface Time-Space
Characteristics. A. P. Aleksandrov, E. S. Vayndruk, 6. Yu. Narodnitskiy

Informativeness of Sea Surface Amplitude Scattering Characteristics
During Local Irradiation. 6. Yu. Narodnitskiy

Optimal Calibration in Remote Sounding of Ocean. 8. V. Dotsenko,
B. A. Nelepo, L. G. Salivon

Reproduction of Averaged Field by Satellite Measurements.
S. V. Dotsenko, A. N. Nedovesov

Influence of Certain Factors on Accuracy of Satellite Determination of
Underlying Surface Temperature. Yu. M. Timofeyev, M. I. Trifonov

Reproduction of Sea Wave Spectra by Measurements by Moving Sensors.
A. V. Kats. I. S. Spevak

Problems of Compressing Oceanographic Information During Remote
Measurements. N. N. Volynskaya, I. F. Kon'kovr

C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.46

NONCONTACT METHODS OF MEASURING OCEANOGRAPEIC PARAMETERS

Moscow NEKONIAKTNYYB METDDY IZMERENIYA OKBANOGRAFICBBSKIKH PARAMETROV in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 2-5

[Annotation and foreword from book "Noncontact Methods of Measuring Oceano-
graphic Paraneters." a collection of reports of the Third All-Union Seminar.
Leningrad. 17-19 January 1978. edited by S. V. Viktorov, candidate of physical
and mathematical sciences. Leningrad Division of the State Oceanographic In-
stitute. Moscow Division of Gidroneteoizdat]

[Text] Annotation

A study is nade of the results of theoretical and experimental research aimed
at creating noncontact methods and neans of measuring oceanographic parame-
cars.

The problems of using instruments installed on board aircraft and spacecraft
to measure the characteristics of sea waves. ice. the surface temperature of
the sea and pollution of the sea surface with petroleum products are discussed
in the greatest detail. The collection contains the following sections:

1. Active Microwave Methods.

2. Passive Microwave Methods.

3. Measureaents in the Infrared Range.

4. Laser Methods.

5. Space and Aerial Surveying in the Optical Range.

6. Ultrasonic Methods.

7. Procedural Problens of Noncontact Measurements.

The collection is designed for a broad class of scientific workers and engi-

neers studying the natural resources of the earth and the world ocean and also
students in the advanced courses of the corresponding specialties.

FOR OFTNC]A1.USE|JNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Editor's Foreword

In the program document "Basic Areas of Development of the National Economy of
the USSR in 1976-1980" adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress. along with other
highly important goals, the goal has been set for Soviet science "to expand
comprehensive studies of the world ocean." This far-reaching endeavor re-
quires significant expenditures. the creation of special hardware. and the in-
volvement of highly qualified specialists. The necessity for reinforcing and
developing scientific research organizations engaged in ocean research and the
study of the possibilities of efficient use of the resources of the sea is en-
tirely obvious. for with every year the ocean is becoming to an ever greater
degree a province of scientific and production activity. an arena for the ap-
plication of the forces of many countries. The ocean is the "hydrocosmos";
the study of the ocean is a no less difficult matter than the study of outer
space.

The classical methods of studying the world ocean by instruments carried by
ships and buoys do not fully correspond to modern requireeents. they do not
provide a complete picture of processes occurring in the ocean. The growing
practical requirements of science and the national economy require the appli-
cation of qualitatively new measurement techniques which will provide regu-
larly available information about the basic oceanographic parameters from the
entire body of water making up the world ocean.

The possibility of a new approach to the solution of this problem can to a
significant degree be supported by the use of noncontact methods of measuring
oceanographic parameters with the help of instruments installed on spacecraft
and aircraft.

In the above-eentioned document the goal was set "to expand research in the
application of space hardware to study the earth's natural resources. in mete-
orology, oceanology. navigation. communications and for other needs of the na-
tional economy." Attaching great significance to the development of noncon-
tact methods and the creation of modern measuring devices based on these meth-
ods, for a number of years the State Oceanographic Institute (COIN) has pro-
noted the coordination of various forms of activity of the numerous scientific
research and design-development organizations and institutions of higher
learning working in this field. One form of such coordination is the holding
of all-union seminars on the problem of "noncontact measurements of oceano-
graphic parameters."

The first seminar was held on 4-7 September 1973. in Sevaetopol. and it was
primarily devoted to noncontsct methods of measuring the parameters of sea
waves. The Second All-Union Seminar on "Noncontact Methods of Measuring
Oceanographic Parameters." held on 18-20 November X975. in Sevastopol. summed
up the results of the work in this field by a number of scientific research
and design organizations of the country in the ninth 5-year period.

The third all-union seminar, held on 17-19 January 1978 in Leningrad. was the

largest and most representative gathering of specialists in noncontact oceano-
graphic measurements. Opening the seminar. chairman of the Presidium of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR Geographic Society. corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences
A. P. Treshnikov emphasized the urgency of the development and introduction of
noncontact methods into oceanographic research practice. and he called on the
participants in the seminar for "active discussion of reports. heated. but not
malevolent creative discussion."

The work of the third all-union seminar was participated in by about lSOrepre-
sentativea of 62 institutions of the Main Administration of the Hydromstsoro-
logical Service. the USSR Academy of Sciences and union republics. the USSR
and RSPSR ministries of the institutions of higher learning. the Ministry of
the Fishing Industry and other ministries and departments of the country.
About 60 original reports were heard and discussed during the seminar.

In order to improve the effectiveness of the third seminar. the following for-
mat was introduced in the practice of holding all-union seminars on noncontact
methods of measuring oceanographic parameters. Along with plenary sessions.
there were five parallel sections on basic research areas. Reports of the
section chairmen were heard in the concluding plenary session. These reports
discussed the course and results of the section discussions. they singled out
the most interesting reports. they characterized the general state of the art
and level of performed research. Thus. along with the possibility of entering
into detailed discussions of his own basic topic in the section. each semi-
nar participant was able to obtain a compactly formulated view of the stats of
'the art of work in adjacent fields. A new format for holding an all-union
seminar was greeted with interest by the participants. and it was approved.

In the seminar resolution adopted at the concluding plenary session on 19 Jan-
uary I978. it was noted that during the time since holding the second e11-
union seminar. definite progress had been made in the development of noncon-
tact methods and the creation of hardware for measuring oceanographic parame-
ters based on them. Nevertheless. difficulties were also noted in connection
with the organization and coordination of scientific research work. the pro-
duction of new types of equipment. and the introduction of the results of the-
oretical and experimental work into practice. (Resolutions of the Third Semi-
nar on "Noncontact Methods of Measuring Oceanographic Parameters" published
for discussion in "Automation of_ﬂydrometeorolsgical Data Gathering and Pro-
cessing." EKSPRESS-INPORMATSII VNIIGMI-MTsD. Mo 6 (58). 1978)

when compiling the present collection. it was recognized as expedient to group
the reports presented for publication in the following areas:

1. Active Microwave Methods.
2. Passive Microwave Methods.
3. Measurements in the Infrared Range.
4. Laser Methods. .

5. Space and Aerial Surveying in the Optical Range.

, FOR PPRCML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Ultraeonic Methods.
7. Procedural Problems of Noncontact Measurements.

It must be noted that regrets that in view of the limited size of the
collection. a number of reports are only represented by annotations. and some
of the reports are not reflected in the collection at all.

I consider it my duty in the name of all the seminar participants to express
appreciation to the directors of the USSR Geographic Society for setting up
conditions under which the plenary and section meetings were held.

In conclusion. I should like to note with gratitude the efforts of many co-
workers of the Division of Space Oceanography and Aerial Techniquea of the
Leningrad Division of the COIN with respect to the preparation for and holding
of the seminar. I thank B. A. Pouytkin and H. D. Latkin. who participated di-
rectly in the preparation of thie collection for publication.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudaretvennyy okeanograficheskiy inatitut (Leningradskoye
otdeleniye). 1981

10845
050: 8146/1010

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ACTIVE MICROWAVE METHODS
UDC 551.501.8l:502.55:665.Z(260)
STUDY OF OIL SLICKS AT SEA BY SIDE-LOOKING RADAR

Moscow NEKONIAKTNYYB HETODY IZHIRENIYA OKBANOGRAPICBBSKIKB PARAMETROV in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 6-8

[Report by K. I. Volyak. R. H. Slushkov. Yu. N. Yemel'yanov. V. B. Komarov.
S. Ye. Kontorov. E. H. Mudrova. A. Ye. Popov and V. A. Starostin]

[Text] Annotation. Results are presented from studies of
petroleum pollution of the see over large areas using bipo-
larization side-looking radar. It is demonstrated that
this type of radar is a highly efficient means of opera-
tional monitoring of pollution.

The primary goals of the study and monitoring of petroleum pollution of the
sea surface are as follows: I) determination of the pollution sources; 2) de-
termination of the surface area covered by the petroleum; 3) estimation of the
thickness of the petroleum layer; 4) indication of speed and direction of
drift of the oil slick. Prospective means of remote sounding permitting com-
prehensive solution of these problems include side-looking radar (RLS 30).
Using this type of radar installed on board an aircraft. it is possible in a
comparatively short time to measure the distribution of the specific backseat-
tering cross section over a quite significant area of the underlying surface.
By comparison with optical methods of indicating pollution. side-looking radar
has important advantages: it is possible to make the radar survey at night
and through a cloud cover.

In the centimeter wavelength band. the primary mechanism of the backseattering
of electromagnetic waves by the sea surface is the resonant Bragg effect,
where the scatterer is the small-scale ripple with Bragg wavelength [1]:

A3 - “/2 sin 0.,
the wave vector of which is parallel to the plane of incidence (la is the in-

cident radio wavelength. 6. is the angle of incidence reckoned from the verti-
cal). Por large angles 69 Z 60 to 70' where A3 = lo/Z. reflection from large

' FOR (in-10M. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gravity waves before breaking also becomes significant in the horizontal po-
larization [2].

The specific effective scattering cross section 00 is proportional to the
spectral plane 8(A3) of the Bragg component of the wave action. It is known
[2] that the presence of a thin film on the surface of the water greatly in-
creases the damping decrement of small-scale ripple. which leads to a signifi-
cant decrease in the backseattering cross section 00. According to the data
of [A]. a film about 0.1 micron thick on a wavelength of lo - 3 cm at large
angles Go ~ 87° leads to a drop in the level of the received vertically polar-
ized signal by more than 20 decibels by comparison with a smooth sea surface.

Remote observations of petroleum pollution were made in November 1976 in the
Caspian Sea in an area of intense oil production (Neftysnyye Ksmni) using an
experimental model of a bipolarization centimeter-band side-looking radar in-
stalled on board an aircraft. A special electronic camera (EFRU) recorded
the distribution of the scattering cross section so in a aide-looking strip

IS km wide on photographic film. The near edge of the scanning strip lay 6 to
6 km from the flight path.

The short-wave suppression effect of the oil slick was observed clearly on
both polarizations. However. the image contrast between the clean and pol-
luted sections. as should be expected according to the calculation of [6]
based on the Bragg scattering model. was significantly better in the vertical
polarization. for the average signal level on the horizontal polarization in
the given range of angle 00 a 70 to 86° is 20 to 30 decibels less than on ver-
tical polarization. In addition. the contrast on horizontal polarization is
worse as a result of the signal spikes connected with large breaking waves.
inasmuch as large waves are much less subject to the damping effect of an oil
slick.

The dynamics of an oil slick over a 26-hour period were easily traced as a
function of meteorological conditions with the help of side-looking radar.
Thus. according to the observations on 26 November, with a northeasterly
wind at 5 to 8 m/sec. the leeward part of the continuous slick was seriously
broken up in 1 hour. as a result of which the slick diminished by several
times in size (only the southwestern part of it was left). During the next
4 hours the wind intensified to 12 m/sec without changing direction. and the
solid slick in practice ceased to exist.

The dynamics of the development of oil slicks in the open sea were observed
analogously. Radar images of fresh oil slicks in the Black Sea (in the vicin-
ity of the port of Batumi) permit estimation of the rate of spread of the
slick. its rate of drift under the effect of wind and also simultaneous detec-
tion of the source of the pollution.

The results of the performed research shows that by using side-looking radar
installed on board an aircraft. sources of petroleum pollution are completely

reliably detected. the area and outlines of the oil slick and also the dynam-
ics of its development are determined. The determination of the thickness of
the slick obviously requires the application of other procedures. for example.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combination of emulator-band aide-looking radar with a uter- or deciutar-
band acattaroaatar or uith pauive inatrunanta.

l.

2.

3.

(O.

BIBLIMRAPHY

Bass. 1’. 6.. and Fuchs, 1. 1‘1. . “888°78'1in V01“ na statistichaaki narovnoy
poverkhnoati" [Have Scattaring on a Statistically Unavan Surface] , Hoacov,
Nauka. 1972.

Long. H. H” IRE! TRANS.. ”-22. No 5. 1976. p 667.

ph1111p3,0. 11.. "Dirimnika varkhneso aloya okaana" [Dynamics of tha Upper
Layer of the Ocean]. Moscow. Mir, 1969.

Galayev. Yu. 14.. Kalnykov. A. 1.. Kurokin. A. 5.. at a]... 12V. AN. SSSR.
FIZIKA Am. I OKEANA, V01 13. No 6, 1977, p 606.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudaratvennyy okeanograficheakiy inatitut (Leningradakoya

ordelcniye) . 1981

108105

CSO:

8146/1010

, FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.46:621.396.969

RADIO ALTIHETER STUDY OF SURFACE SEA WAVES

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYB METODY IZHMIYA OKBANOGRAFICHESKIKH PM in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 9-12

[Report by A. Ye. Basharinov (deceased). A. I. Daskakov and A. A. Kalinkevich]

[Text] Annotation. It is demnstrated that by recording
the average shape of an echo it is possible to evaluate the
disturbed state of the sea surface. Calculations are pre-
sented for two types of sounding signals: a simple radio
pulse and LR! pulse.

In the vertical sounding node, the data on the degree of disturbance of the
sea can be obtained from analysis of the average shape of a pulse reflected
from the sea surface. Let us find the expression for the average shape of
echo and let us investigate its dependence on the intensity of the disturbance

and characteristics of the radar.

Let us use a phenonenological nodel of the sea surface [1]. which is a set of
independent elementary reflectors. The echo is a superposition of partial
signals with respect to the irradiated region having rsndon, independent and
uniformly distributed phases in the 0 to Zr interval. Let the transnitting
and receiving antennas of the radar be latched, and let the receiver consist
of a filter matched with the sounding signal and an envelope detector. Then
the signal at the filter exit

.1 a “'0 I. - 2’.
u(¢J‘&[§,I/%7‘3§ F(0..%. 972$?“ ii )(i 17 (1)

where on is the effective reflection area of the elementary reflector oriented

normal to the direction of incidence of the radio wave; on, On are the coor-
dinates of the n-th reflector; Ken. ¢no t) is the normalized coefficient de-
defined by the antenna radiation pattern (DNA) and the surface backscattering
pattern (DOR); Raw", ¢nv t) is the distance fron the radar to the n-th re-
flector; o(t) is the sutocorrelation function of the sounding signal; ”d

the Doppler frequency shift. The dependence of the echo on the Doppler gr:
quency and the dependence of F(6. 0, t), 8(8. e. t) on time can be neglected.
for in practice the relation VT“ sin 0 < 0. 25A is always satisfied. where V is
the radar velocity. Tu is the sounding pulse duration (Tu S 10' sec).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

acre let us consider that the 0.5 power radiation pattern width does not ex-
ceed o. < 30’. and its axis is oriented alaost nornal to the average surface
level. The echo is characterized by its autocorrelation function

 

r’rm) - . . ' . .
20.1,).5/ngrm”in/(2W4. rub/é, 7.2% A.
w a». {trio} (2)

r
where g'gﬁi ; gray/“7.3,. z/LN,2'.%’-’s ‘l‘he altitude (ll) of the radar

above the sea surface is appreciably greater than the zone irradiated on the
urface (r). K.) is the Fresnel coefficient. a“, is the roughness parameter [1].

The averaging in (2) is realized by a set of random reflectors arranged along
the Z-axis with probability density described by a normalized distribution
law.

The radiation pattern is approximated by a Gaussian curve. and the expression
for the DOR is taken from [I]. The angle of deflection of the radiation pat-
tern axis from the normal to the average surface level will be denoted by 83;
the axis of the radiation pattern is projected on the coordinate x—axis. and the
angle 6 is reckoned from the X-axis (the plane X0! is matched with the average
level of the sea surface).

I. Let. for example. a short radio pulse with Gaussian envelope v(t) -
exp(-gztz) be emitted. where g - FIT... '1‘“ is the pulse duration at the 0.66
level. The expression for the average power characterizing the average shape
of the pulse reflected from the sea surface will be obtained from (2). setting
t1 ' t2:

, 12:".‘c’cn e23 ‘ ' 3
nr. "73'312/333-01P(‘£55‘2\5 .'££' “£)[§ ‘p/ég 'ﬁty' ( )

016 65 u-‘(/~ .1 £6 6!" I « a"!
where " -- ”at”? - f“)
count the influence of the sea wave height on the shape of the reflected echo.
0(t) is the probability integral. From (5) it follows that in order to in-
crease the sensitivity of the averaged shape of the echo to the intensity of
the wave action. it is necessary to use shorter sounding pulses. but this will

lead to a decrease in the energy of the echo. The solution can be found by
using complex signals.

 

_._.,
IL/g": "-4 is a parameter taking into sc-

2. Now let a signal with envelope of Gaussian form and intrapulse linear

frequency modulation gum v(t) - «pl-(g, - jk)tz] be emitted. where I: -
mm/Z’l‘u. D - l + k g” ‘ Afu’l‘u is the conpression factor; gD - FAfu. Let us
find the expression for the averaged form of the echo:

1 r - l I I ((
merger—”‘53:..- (ef , ewe we]. m
9

, roe omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where y = Jl/sAf + 20 . From a comparison of (3) and (4) it is obvious that
for identical band width of the sounding signals and peak transmitter power.
the energy of the echo with LP! is greater than the energy of the reflected
radio pulseby Hiccomprcssion factor (0) times. For solution of the problem
of measuring sea wave height by the form of the reflected pulse. the operating
conditions of the radar with a restriction with respect to pulse duration

0. > arctg (2 to 3/cTu7H) is preferable from the point of view of acceptable

antenna sizes and simplicity of stabilization in the nadir. The dependence of
the average form of the echo on the radar characteristics and intensity of the
wave action is presented in Figure l (T - 20 nanoseconds, B - 600 km. a; - l
to 4 meters. 00 - 0.5 to 5’. es - 0 to 0.8°). Thus. recording the leading
edge of the echo, it is possible to estimate the mean square height of the sea
waves. The processing of the echo is constructed by the following principle.
Let us approximate the leading edge of the echo by the exponential polynomial

0(J)=o,.a,ém,t‘oq,r.’ (5)

The numbers of the node points of the approximation will be denoted by j - —2.
-l, 0. +1. +2. where the central point corresponds to t - O. the readings
will be considered independent. taken after an interval At I Tu (Figure l).
The approximating polynomial is selected by the least squares method. The de-
pendence of a; - 12Ata1 and a; - lZAt’a; on the sea wave height as presented
in Figure 2. that is, by the value of these coefficients it is possible to es-
timate the intensity; here

a“ P‘.‘ 8724;?El '9‘ ', I?" ~Pz'2P-1'2Pl 'E‘ ’ . (6)

where P5 is the value of the readings P(t) at the node points of the approxi-
mation.

 

s

«a won on In mm

Figure 1. Average form of the echo as a function of the radar characteristics
and sea wave intensity: l-Oo - 2'. oz - 1 meter; z-oe. - 2‘. a; -
4 meters; 3-eo - 5‘. o; - 6 meters; a-eo - 1'. a; - b meters; 5-
so - 0.5', o; - 4 meters; 6--6o - 0.33‘. o; - 4 meters; 7--e. -
0.8°. a; - 4 meters.

For measurement of the sea wave height. each arriving echo is gated by a ridge
of S nanosecond gate pulses with corresponding weights. and then a; (or an) is

10

I")! 0FF1C1Al.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculated by the algorithm (6). The ridge of gates is started by a pulse
from the tracking system of the radio altimeter. After averaging by the known
function 350 - f(oz). an estimate is made of the mean square height of the
sea wave in the investigated region. The required number of averaged echoes
is presented to obtain measurement accuracy of oz - 0.25 meter with a signal]
noise ratio in the receiver of 10 decibels; Tu - 20 nanoseconds; 8° - 2‘;

05-03H-600nm.

0204) 0.5 1.0 2.0 3.0 0.0
u 3.35:. 2.530 81!. 1.150 5.000

The given method of measuring sea wave height by the shape of the echo offers
the possibility of resolving five to six intensity gradations.

 

I [,0 a,

Figure 2. Coefficients of the approximating polynomial a as a function of the
mean square wave height.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zubnovich. S. 6.. "Statisticheskiye kharakteristiki radiosignalov.
otrazhennykh ot zemnoy poverkhnosti" [Statistical Characteristics of Radio
Signals Reflected From the Earth's Surface], Moscow, Sov. radio. 1968.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Lsningradskoye
otdeleniye). 1981

10845
CSO: 8144/1010

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.46:621.396.969

STUDY OF POSSIBILITY OF nummmc SYA HAVE HEIGHT BY mnnmum
CORREJVI‘ION HBTHOD USING SATELLITE RADIO ALMS

Moscow NRQH‘AKMYB HB‘I‘OUY IZHERBuYA oxmocmmursxnn PARAMBTROV in Rus-
sian 1981 p 13

[Annotation from report by A. Ye. Basharinov (deceased). A. A. Kalinksvich and
A. I. Baskskov]

[Text] Annotation. A study is node of the correlation method of deter-ﬁning
sea wave height from an aircraft or spacecraft with vertical sounding by short
microwave pulses. The correlation coefficient is found between the signals
corresponding to the signal hands. the width of which is conparahls to the
width of the sounding signal. and the central frequencies of which are sepa-
rated hy AP. The correlation processing algorithm is defined. An analysis is
performed for sounding by pulses with rpm,” - 20 nanoseconds with a height -
600 nn.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningredskoye
otdeleniye). 1981

108510
050: 8144/1010

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.969:551.b6

VARIATIWS 0P CHARACTERISTICS OF mo-ommsmw. SPEBTRUII 0P RADAR IMAGES 01'
SEA SURFACE DERIVED FROM METER MT

Moscow NEKWTAKTNYYE Hm IMIYA WWICHESKIHI PM in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 16-17

[Report by A. A. Zagorodnikov. K. B. Chelyshev and V. a. Chegrenets]

[react] Annotation. Results are presented fron theoretical
and experimental studies of errors in determining the parsn-
eters of the two-dimensional energy spectrum of waves ob-
tained by a radar wave meter with respect to projections and
cross sections on board a flight vehicle.

The three-dimensional tine-space random field of the z-coordinates of the re-
lief of a disturbed sea surface in the linear approximation can be represented
by a superposition of a set of saving planar harmonic components [1] vith
different wave numbers. directions of propagation and amplitudes. As a result
of their ergodicity. normalness and existence of a functional relation (dis-
persion relation) between the tins and space frequencies. the comlete statis-
tical characteristic of the wave field is given by the two-dimensional energy
spectrun or correlation function. For deternination of the spectrum. full-
sized realizations of the wave relief field over a significant area of the sea
and for a prolonged observation period are needed.

Under flight conditions. as a result of the limited measurement time and non-
coincidence of the dimensionalities of the analysing remote sensor and the
wave field on board the flight vehicle it is possible to obtain only under-
sized realizations of this field (projection and cross section). The determi-
nation of the space and time characteristics of the wave action by these real-
izations (projections and cross sections distorted as a result of movenent of
the measuring instrument carrier) is acconpanied by significant errors.

For geonetric representation of an arbitrary saving plane wave (out of the en-
tire set) in an affine space {x. y. t) by a set of surfaces of constant phase
of the wave characteristic. the fields determined by an arbitrary noving
point neter with respect to cross sections are found as projections of a seg-
ment of the trajectory of motion of the ester truncated by the average planes
of the constant phases. on the ties axis and on the plane of the space coordi-
nates. The wave period and length are determined here. respectively.

13

, FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recently. remote on-board meters [2], coupled to side-looking radar. have
found application in studying the wave field. In the direction transverse to
the motion. the radar information about the wave field arrives with half the
speed of light and is in the form of an image line on the display. In the
longitudinal direction the information arrives with the speed of movement of
the analyzing sensor carrier. These sensors are categorized as linear with
respect to the method of forming the image. It is convenient to investigate
the obtained image by arbitrary cross sections. For analysis of the errors in
measuring the wave characteristics. in this case it is convenient to use coor-
dinate transformation. as a result of which one of the coordinate axes coin-
cides with the trajectory of motion of the point sensor or with the direction
of the cross section with respect to the radar image in the case of a linear
sensor.

For performance of these transformations. a study was made of the transition
from an affine space {x. y. t} to metric space {1, y. t} by introducing the
provisional time coordinate x - cot (co - l m/sec). Applying the correspond-
ing linear coordinate transformation in matrix form to obtain the empression
for the uniform spectrum of the tpace cross section of the image and using the
approximation of Yu. H. Krylov for a two-dimensional wave spectrum. we find
the expression for the average sea wave length along an arbitrary cross sec-
tion of the radar image of the sea surface obtained by the moving linear sen-
sor:

- A aw)
A-"-*WWEEWW= (1)
=14 LU”). '

Here

. ﬂw- o a. ".02 .
"- rum/.1 ”(ma/21’ ": mm ~

x,‘ is the deformation coefficient; Ko (7 + 1:) is the average wave length of the
frozen relief (twovdimensional spatial cross section) of the sea surface in
the direction y + (a with respect to the primary direction. The deformation
coefficient characterizes the systematic error in measuring the average sea
wave length as a function of the magnitude of the velocity H and the direction
of motion of the sensor with respect to the primary path of the wave '1. the
average phase velocity of the wave (3). the width coefficient of the angular
spectrum of the wave In. The analysis of the relation obtained indicates
stretching of the measured wave length during movement of the sensor in the
sector of azimuthal angles :60 along the direction of the wave path and com-
pression in the sector 120 to 260'. When moving along the line of the crests
the distortions are minimal.

The expression for the width coefficient of the angular spectrum (the three-
dimensionality coefficient) of the wave mu defined by ths_rstio of the average

wave lengths in_the direction of the crest line “cast I Am and in the pri-
mary direction As - Au“. is obtained in the form

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uith an increase in the speed of the carrier (more precisely. the ratio 11/?)
the measured three-dimensionality coefficients of the wave action. just as the
average wave length. approach their true values. At low speeds. such large
distortions are possible that the spectrun obtained by the measurement results
turns out to be isotropic with significant anisotropy of the real wave action.
The absolute measurement errors of the coefficient of the angular spectrum in-
crease with an increase in the true value. and the relative errors decrease.

The angular displacement of the measured direction of the primary path of the
waves with respect to the true direction is determined by the function

A 9. % - on.“ (0,4: K," 6/"). (3)

For checking the assumptions and the approxiumtions during the calculations.

an experiment__wss run to determine the distortions in the measured average

wave lengths A“. the coefficients of the angular spectra tau and the directions
of the primary path of the waves as a function of the flight azimuth of the
carrier. As the sensor of the information on the wave structure. the "Toros"
side-looking radar was used. The flight path was a series of rectangular

tacks (r1. r2, .... with radiation from the left side and the right side). en-
suring that radar images with four directions of irradiation differing by 90'
were obtained for one segment of the sea surface [2]. The obtained images

were processed under laboratory conditions on an experimental two—dimensional
harmonic analysis setup. By the transparencies of the obtained spatial two—
dimensional wave spectra. relations were co-structed for the average wave
length (Figure l) and the three-dimensionality coefficient (Figure 2) of the
waves as a function of the number of the flight tack. The analysis of the re-
sults demonstrated that the maximum errors occur when moving along or opposite
to the main direction of the sea wave travel. For the two wave systems existing
during the measurements, these errors reach the following magnitudes, respectively:

a. for the sea wave length 20 to 25 percent (theoretically expected 15 to 20
percent);

b. for the angular spectrum coefficient 25 to 60 percent (theoretically ex-
pected 30 to 45 percent);

c. for the directions of primary travel of the waves 20 to 25° (theoretically
expected 20 to 30°).

Minimum distortions of the results were observed when moving along the crest
line of the waves. Thus. the theoretical conclusions regarding the magnitudes

and nature of the distortions of the wave measurement results caused by move-
ment of the information sensor were confirmed experimentally.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1.

Figure 2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

1, la": la" 10"} 11’“ 1.“, 5”" J

Experimental dependence of the average eee veve length on the di-
rection of motion of the Deter.

'V": “'1 U)

      

I. 1,"? I.“ w? {,w w? mi J

(rm) (rt/w) (Am) mu) (:0!) (rue) Inna)

EXperinental dependence of the enguler epectrun width coefficient
of wave action on the direction of notion of the neter.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Krylov. Yu. 14.. "Spektrel'nyye netody ieeledoveniye i reechete vetrovykh
voln" [Spectral Method of Inveetisetion end Calculation of Hind-Driven
Hevee]. Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdet. 1966.

2. Beloueov. P. 3.. et el.. "Study of See "eve Perenetere by Side-Inching
under." "Trudy emporium po eoveteko-enerikenekom ekeperinentu 'Bering'"

[Horke of the Synpoeiun on the Soviet-American "Bering" aperinent]. Len-
ingrad. Gidrooeteoiadet. 1975.

COPYRIGHT:

10865

Goeudaretvennyy okeenogreficheekiy inetitut (Leningredekoye
otdeleniye). 1381

C80: 8144/1010

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.969:551.lo6
ANGULAR SPECTRA OP SPA WAVES ACCORDING 1'0 ems mm DATA

Hoscow NEKONTAKTNYYB HETODY 1mm. (XMOGRAFICHBSKIIH PM in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 18-20

[Report by Ye. 0. Zhilko. A. A. Zagorodnikov and K. B. Chelyshev]

[Text] Annotation. The results of experiments in measuring
the width of the angular spectrum of waves are discussed.

A small number of papers are known in which the angular spectrum of sea waves
8(0). characterizing the wave energy distribution by directions was studied
[1-4]. The most widespread approximation of the integral angular spectrum is
a function of the type

5(e)-Nc06"'9. (1)

where N is the normalizing factor. 6 is the direction of propagation of the
spectral components. The first hypothetical information about the value of
the coefficient m characterizing the width of the angular spectrum of sea
waves is contained in the papers by R. Arthur. v. Pearson and I. N. Davidan
[1-3]. These studies demonstrated that individual narrow bands of the fre-
quency spectra have different values of the coefficient m. In [6] it is con-
sidered that the low-frequency components have m - 3. for frequencies in the
vicinity of the maximum m - 2. and high-frequency comenents from the equilib-
rium interval m . 1.

There is also information about more significant scattering of the values of
the coefficients m - 2 to 10. This scattering is explained by the following:

a. there are insufficiently substantiated theoretical prerequisites about the
value of m;

b. the stereophotographic survey used as the basic tool in determining 8(9)
cannot give high measurement precision as a result of limited size of the
plots (no more than 0.5 x 0.5 km);

c. the accuracy of contact sensors recording the integral picture without
separation into individual wave systems is also inadequate.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to obtain reliable data on the values of the width of the integral
angular spectrum it is necessary to have a realization of the image of the sea
wave relief with large dimensions (5 x 5 km. 10 x 10 km). Such realizations
can be obtained. for example. using side-looking radar or ordinary aerial pho-
tographic surveying.

The procedure for measuring the angular spectrum function by radar images and
aerial photographs is discussed in [5]. Their essence consists in the fact
that the method of two-dimensional harmonic analysis permits determination of
both the angular spectrum of each system of waves individually and the angular
spectrum of a narrow band of spatial frequencies and vicinities of the vave
number.

After obtaining the function 8(0) its width can be determined at the 0.5 level
of the maximum value by the formula

"1%. (2)

In a number of. cases. by the energies of sea waves it is possible to determine
9‘9 value of the coefficient m with respect to the average crest length.
“crest: and the average wave length. A. in the general direction of propaga-
tion of the wave energy.

«I . (1%.):- 1 . (3)

The authors had at their disposal a large quantity of experimental data in the
form of radar and aerial photographic images obtained in 1970 to 1976 in the
Bering. Baltic. Kara and Black Seas.

The values of the coefficient m were determined by two methods (see expres-
sions (2). (3))-

uni/ml...

 

'II “J! l M 9 '

Figure l. Realization of angular spectra.

The realizations of the angular integral spectra are presented in Figure l. for
an example. Curves l, 2, 3 were obtained for aerial photographic inges taken

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

after small time intervals at distances of 100. 50 and 25 km from the shore.
Analysis of these spectra permits the dynamics of the development of sea waves

to be traced; thus, 100 km from the shore (Curve 1) the angular spectrum is
more narrow.

In Figure 2 the function m(k) is presented which was obtained by analysis of
one wave system. From the graph it is obvious that the low-frequency compo-
nents have a more narrow spectrum (larger value of m).

I"!
(I
u

(I

(O

l
'00 1,8"). I"

Figure 2. Angular coefficient as a function of the spatial frequency of one
wave system.

An analysis of the results permits the following conclusions to be drawn:

1. The coefficient m for individual wave systems varies within broad limits
from 2 to 45. which permits us to talk about the presence of narrowly direc-
tional, narrow-band angular spectra.

2. The results of the calculations by formulas (2). (3) are quite close.

3. The width of the angular spectrum varies as a function of the spatial fre-
quency on which the measurements are performed.

BIBLIOGRAIHY

1. Arthur. R.. "Difference in Direction of Propagation of Haves Caused by a

Constant Wind." "Osnovy predskazaniya vetrovykh voln. zybi i priboya"
[Fundamentals of Predicting Wind-Driven Haves. Swell and Breaking Waves].

collection of translations edited by V. B. Shtokman. Moscow. lad-v0

2. "Vetrovyye volny" [Wind-Driven Waves]. collection of translations edited
by Yu. H. Krylov, Moscow. Izd-vo inostr. lit-ry. 1962.

3. Zagorodnikov, A. A.. and Chelyshev. K. 3.. "Application of Optical Pro-
cessing for Have Measurements by Remote Methods." TEDDY COIN. No 117.
1973.

4. Krylov. Yu. H., "Vetrovyye volny i ikh vozdeyetviya na sooruzheniya" [Wind
Waves and Their Effect on Structures]. Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat. 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Gosuderstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye
otdeleniye). 1981

10865 19
CSO: 8160/1010

FI"1(NWHCIA1.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.969:551.46

RESULTS OF MEASURING SEA HAY! PARAMETERS AND ATHDSPHIRIC TURBULENCB BY GROUND
INCOHERENT RADAR

Moscow NBCMIAKI‘NYYB mam Imus mocmrcassrnm PAW in Rus-
sian 1981 p 21

[Annotation from report by Yu. 3. Gagarin. G. l. Dyatlov. Ye. O. Zhilko and
Ye. M. Heshcheryakov]

[Text] Annotation. Results are presented and discussed from an experimental
determination of the parameters of sea vaves and atmospheric turbulence during
radar sounding of the sea surface and cloud formations by incoherent radar.

The results of the experimental studies permit the following conclusions to be
drawn:

1. Synchronous measurements of the current sea wave height using a radar ate:
and contact wave recorder at the same point on the sea surface duonetrated
practical coincidence.

2. Accuracy of measuring the sea wave parametera is higher. the more intense
the wave action.

3. when measuring the parameters of atmospheric turbulence, low reliability
of the amplitude methods for quantitative determination of the turbulence in-
tensity was confirmed.

la. The possibility of using a mean frequency meter of the interperiod fluctu-
ations of the echo intensity to determine sea wave and atmospheric turbulence
parameters, which permits expansion of data obtained from shore and ground
stations to improve the quality of hydrometeorological forecasts. was demon-
strated.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye
otdeleniye). 1981

10845
050: 8164/1010

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 621.396.969:551.Io6

mums SEA HAVE PARAMETERS BY A DOPPLER METER FOR VARIWS AIRCRAFT FLIGd'!‘
CWDITIGIS

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYE HEW! Imus mocmmnssrm PAWV in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 22-25

[Report by Yu. V. Bsytsur. Yu. 8. Gagarin. Ye. 0. Zhilko and S. I.
Miroshnichenko]

[Text] Annotation. A study is made of the results of meas-
uring sea wave height by an aircraft radar wave meter for
various carrier flight conditions and ways to improve the
meter.

The degree of infornativenesa of the meter is detenined by the possibility of
encompassing large sea surfaces by simultaneous measurements. The aircraft
meters of sea surface parameters on this level have sipificant advantages
over ship or shore measurements. However. measurements from an aircraft have
a number of peculiarities which can prevent reliable data from being obtained.

The purpose of this experiment was to study the peculiarities of the function-
ing of an aviation Doppler meter for measuring sea wave parameters under vari-
ous aircraft flight conditions and ways to further improve the meter to in-
crease the reliability of the results.

The operating principle of the meter is based on using the linear dependence
of the Doppler frequency shift of the signal reflected by each elementary re-
flector of the sea surface on its radial velocity with respect to the radar

[I].
The experimental flight studies were performed in the Blatk and Caspian Seas.

0n the basis of the studies. relations were constructed for the readings of
the sea wave parameter meter as a function of various aircraft flight condi-
tions and evolutions.

Figure 1 shows the measurements of sea wave height as a function of aircraft
flight speed during horizontal flight. An analysis of the graph shows that
with an increase in horizontal flight speed of the aircraft. no stable trend
toward increased instrument error in determining the sea wave height is ob-
served.

21

, FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL

a" ._.
(I
Q‘

A—

I
:5! m ’50 "MA:-

Figure 1., Measurements of sea wave

Figure 3.

Figure 5.

Key: 1.
2.
3.
4.

heights as a function of
aircraft speed during
horizontal flight.

”'3 H:
u
u '
II
a o l V‘s/sec

Readings during flights
gaining altitude.

USE ONLY

‘aqvub

7 ' lﬁﬁhec

Figure 2. Readings during flights

losing altitude.

 

' U U "ml!”

Figure 4. Comparative readings of

aircraft and contact wave
recorders.

 

Functional diagram of the automatic control unit for the operation

of an aircraft wave recorder.

From the memory cell output
Lou-frequency filter 0-2 H:
Threshold circuit ...

AND circuit

5.
6O
7.
8.

Control signal

Band pass filter ... a:
Detector ...
Comparison circuit

Figures 2 and 3 present the functions for the instrument readings during

flights losing and gaining altitude.

The analysis of these graphs shoes that

with an increase in vertical velocity Vv of the aircraft. the instrument er-

rors increase.

The average amplitudes of the sea wave envelopes huav. re-

corded by the vave meter are presented in Figure 4 (the y-axia). The measure-
ment of the results obtained using the n4-16 urine wave recorder at the sane

cine are plotted on the x-axis.

22

FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.US£1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During operation of the wave meter under conditions of evolution of motion of
the flight vehicle. the amplitude of the reflected signal varied from large
values going beyond the linear part of the amplitude characteristic of the re-
ceiver. to inadmissibly small values. Similar signal variations were traced
with a period of 1.0 to 10 seconds. In both cases the wave meter readings
contained significant errors. In addition. significant errors arose in the
case of a small ratio of the signal voltage to the effective value of the
noise voltage of the receiver.

The noted deficiencies require observation of the amplitude of the reflected
signal with respect to the receiver noise. which coeplicates the work of the
operator and requires high qualifications of him. For simplification of work-
ing with the instrument and to iaprove the reliability of the obtained re-
sults. on occurrence of the above-noted situations the wave meter must be au-

tonatically switched off and a signal sent that exact measurement of the wave
parameters is impossible.

The functional diagram (Figure 5) of a control unit for the operation of a
wave meter contains three channels. The first two of them monitor the level
variation of the lowest-frequency components of the signal (from 0 to 2 Hz).
When the amplitude of the low-frequency components exceeds the value of 0.“.
the threshold circuit 1 responds. and when the mlitude drops below 0.13.
threshold circuit 2 responds. The values of Um and um. are determined for
each type of radar by their amplitude characteristics.

The third channel of the automatic control unit monitors the signal/noise ra-
tio. The functional diagram of the channel is constructed under the assum-
tion that a signal reflected from a disturbed sea surface has a narrower
spectrum than the spectrum of the noise samplings of the receiver. Actually.
for the 3-cm radar wave range the frequency band of the echo does not exceed
150 Hz. at the same time as the spectrum of the noise sampling of the receiver
is in practice uniform in the range from 0 to l/2T Hr. where T is the radar
sounding pulse repetition period.

The third channel consists of a low-frequency filter with pass band from 15 to
25 Hz and a filter with band from 265 to 255 Hz. signal detectors at the fil-
ter outputs and comparison circuit which monitors the voltage ratio at the de-

tector output.

A signal from the third channel output, halting the operation of the wave ne-
ter. arrives if the voltage at the output of detector I does not exceed the

voltage at the output of detector 11 by a given number of times. The required
signal to noise level ratio is selected beginning with the required accuracy

of the measurements .

At the output of the control unit there is an MID circuit. which sends the
signal to operate only when favorable conditions have been met with respect to
all channels.

Checking the serviceability of such a control unit produced positive results.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of the results obtained it is possible to draw the following
conclusions:

1. The deviation of heights measured by a multichannel Doppler nster con-
pared to data obtained by contact vave recorders used abroad is 3 to 17 percent.
The observed wave heights of 3 percent guarantee are 2.7 neters in this case.

2. the variation in flight speed of the aircraft from 250 to 500 h/hr during
scanning of the radar antenna in the :30“ sector with respect to the ground

speed vector. is in practice not felt in the operating errors of the instru-
ment.

3. Losing and gaining altitude by the aircraft with a vertical velocity of
3 value does not introduce additional errors when measuring the wave height.
Increasing the vertical rate of descent of the aircraft to 10 III/sec in-
creases the vave height neasureaent error to 15 to 25 percent.

a. For siaplification of working with the inetruaent and in order to i-prﬁve
the reliability of the obtained results. auto-ation of the wave recorder control

is necessary .
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zagorodnikov. A. A.. "Use of the Doppler Spectrum of a Radar Signal To

Measure Sone Sea Have Parameters." METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA. No l.
1971.

COPYRIGHT: Goaudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye
otdeleniye). 1981

10855
050: 81104/1010

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.396.96:SSIJoG6

MERCY CHARACTERISTICS OF RADAR SIGNALS ENVELOPE AND THEIR RELATION TO
HAVE PARAHE‘I'ZRS

Moscow nummms WY IMHA OKEAIIWRAPICMIIB PAW in Rus-
sian 1981 pp 26-30

[Report by V. G. Vazhenin. A. A. Kalmykov and N. H. Kharlova]

[Text] Annotation. Results are presented in this paper
from experimental studies of the energy characteristics of
an echo (normalized autocorrelation function and spectrum)
during vertical irradiation of the sea surface and with
comensurate dimensions of the irradiated area and the av-
erage sea wave lengths.

“me possibility of using radar with LPN for measuring the sea wave profile and
estimating the basic oceanographic parameters is demonstrated in [l].

The peculiarities of using radar (small heights. vertical irradiation) are
giving rise to significant dependence of the energy characteristics of the
echo not only on the irradiation conditions. wave length and intensity. but
also the ratio of the dimensions of the irradiated area and the geometric di-
mensions of the sea waves and the state of the sea surface [2].

Fluctuations of the echo envelope with small dimensions of the reflecting area
vary in accordance with variation of the slopes of long sea waves passing
through the irradiated area [3] which pereits use of the spectrum of the echo
envelope to measure the slope spectrum of the sea surface and. correspond-
ingly. the spectrum of the sea wave height. In [6] the presence of a relation
of the spectra of the echo envelope and the fluctuation spectrum of the sea
surface for the irradiated areas. the dimensions of which are appreciably less
than the average sea wave length. is demonstrated.

In the given paper results are presented from experimental studies of the
characteristic of the echo envelope (correlation function and spectrum) when
using antennas with wide radiation patterns and co-ensurate dimensions of the
irradiated area and the sea wave lengths.

In the experiment a 7-cm-hand LEM radar was used. The block diagram of the
experiment is presented in Figure l.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

in the figure rrm is the LFH generator. CM is the mixer. 0 is the beat sig-
nal filter,-u is the frequency discriminator. an is the amplitude detector.

Experimental studies were performed for vertical irradiation from stationary
scaffolding (H - 12 meters) of a disturbed sea surface (wave height to 2 to

3 meters). The ratio of the dimensions of the irradiated area and the average
sea wave length in the given experiments was 0.6 with a radiation pattern
width of the antennas of e - 60' and 0.8 for e - 80'. The remaining radar
parameters. the experimental conditions and also the procedure are described
in [I].

 

Figure 1. Block diagram of the experiment.

Key: l. LFH generator 6. Have recorder \
2. Modulator 7. Frequency discriminator
3. Control 8. Amplitude detector
4. Mixer 9. Pen recorder
5. Filter

Figure 2 shows the normalized correlation function (a) and the spectrum (b. c.
d) of the echo envelope (2) and the sea surface (1) for 0 . 60’ (a. b) and
e - 80° (c) for linear polarization and 6 - 60’ for circular polarization (d).

Discussion of the results:
I. The obtained results indicate the presence of a relation of the character-
istics of the echo envelope to the sea wave parameters. This permits their

use for estimation of the wave parameters and the reflected signal envelope
characteristics.

2. With vertical irradiation of the sea surface from low altitudes. the fluc-
tuations of the echo envelope can be divided into two components:

a) low-frequency. caused by large gravity waves.

b) low-frequency. caused by fine structure superposed on large waves.

26

FOR‘0FFK]AL.USEIDNLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

I.” Hz

Figure 2

3. For comeurete di-eneions of the irredieted area end see wave lengthe.
the spectrum of the echo envelope cen contain one or several peaks on frequen-
cies approximately corresponding to the harmonics o‘. the min energy carrying
component of the sea waves.

The obtained spectra of the envelope and eleo the qualitative enalyeie of syn-
chronous recordings of the echo envelope and the see veve ection indicate that
in the wave elope spectrue observed during the experiments. peaks occur at
frequencies close to the harnonice of the basic wave cosponent.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo. Under conditions under which the euperinent was run. the correlation in-
terval of the high-frequency coaponent of the echo envelope fluctuation is on
the order of 0.1 to 0.2 second. and it is primarily determined by the fre-
quency properties of the snail waves.

5-. A variation in the ratio of the diameter of the irradiated area and the
average sea wave length from 0.10 to 0.8 and also changing of the emitted and
received polarization of the nicrowave signal fro. linear to circular under
the conditions under which the experiment was run does not lead to significant
changes in the frequency and tine characteristics of the echo envelope.

6. The results of the experinental studies presented in the given paper. just
as in [1]. indicate that at low altitudes and with vertical sounding the LR!
radar. which has wide antenna radiation patterns. can be used to measure the
basic parameters of sea waves.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vazhenin. V. 6.. and Kalnykov. A. A.. "Use of Continuous hission Radar
To Measure wave Heights and Sea Level." "Neltontaktnyye netody imrsniya
okeanograficheskikh paranetrov" [Noncontact Methods of Measuring Oceano-
graphic Parameters], Moscow. Gidroneteoizdat. 1977. pp 125-128.

2. Zagorodnikov. A. A.. "Dependence of the Spectrum of a Radar Signal Scat-
tered by the Sea Surface. on the Dimensions of the Irradiated Section and
Intensity of the Sea Haves." RADIOTWIKA I ELEKTRONIKA. No 3. 1972.
pp 477-487.

3. Zanarayev. B. D.. and Kalnykov. A. 1.. "Possibility of Determining the
Spatial Structure of the Disturbed Sea Surface." IZV. AN SSSR. FIZIKA
ANOSPERY I (RNA. Vol 5. No 8. 1969. pp 724-729.

&. Parfent'yev. V. N.. and Prakhov. V. P.. "Correlation Functions of the
Envelope of a Radar Signal Reflected Fron Real Earth Surfaces."
"Nekontaktnyye netody iznereniya okeanograficheskikh paranetrov." Moscow.
Gidroneteoizdat. 1977, pp 165-167.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudaretvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye
otdeleniye). I981

10845
C50: BUM/1010

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PASSIVE KICRWAVB WINDS

UDC 551.“.09

ESTIMATES OF STATE AND PHYSICOGIBH'ICAL SWAG PROPERTIES OF BODIES OF WATER BY THE
DATA FROM SPBLTRAL mum-rs OP MINA“ MIMI“

Macaw NBKON‘IAKTNYYE arrow Immua mm rmmov in Main
1981 pp 31- 3/.

[Article by A. H. Shutko]

[Text] Annotation. An analysis is node of the effectiveness of
determining hydrophyeical parameters by the data fra spectral
neaeurennte of microwave radiation.

The sensitivity of the microwave radiation field to variations of the ”suture 'r,
the chemical cowoeition of the water Indiv- S, the intensity of the waves 1,
the packing of floating ice P, the oil slieh thidtness a. and unwind:
caraneters differ significantly with respect to epectrun (Figure l).

12- tax/N]

    

Jan

Figure 1. Spectral sensitivity of radiation field:
I. - 31‘5““. t/". K/. C; 28- 31“,“ I35, u’loe It «I‘lee
and °c;b 2b - arb /as, x/'/.. a io'lu and ao'c;
3 - 3Tbr1wc/3y,r§ﬂrsec“1) at 6-0'. 1373/11“.
Key. 4 — or wright/31> x/°/-; s -- "bright/3° 102 , K/Iicron
a. bright

These differences are the basis for nthods of deteruining the hydrophysical
parameters Qj mder couple: meteorological omit-ﬁrm according to the data from
simultaneous Insure-eats of the radioenission H.033? ﬂit on waves of

29

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

A ,...,xi [1. 2]. In order to obtain reliable hydrophysical intonation, the solution
whit “aspect to Qj must be stable in all intervals Q moo (Q .1“ for sole
ambiguity of the radiation-hydrophysical relations d errois in measuring the

brightness. This problem is solved by selecting sections of the spectrum “admiring
the determinant of the system of radiation-hydrophysicsl equations or minimising the

masuremnt errors. rder t 0 ve this p lem. a broken linear approximtion
of the fmctions ”313% (Qj)-1§fz£t(QJ)-TREP t(0:, .1“). (Figure 2a)

artful/“3,“? ”4/.-.)' ‘ "ai (‘1 4;...) (1)

is used considering the indeterminacy factors indicated in Figure 2b.

It is demonstrated that when using the wave band of 0.851530 on. the solution with
respect to the parameters ‘1', y, S in the absence of influence of atmospheric
paramters and considering the water reserve of the clouds with an error of l to 32

is the most stable in the section of the spectrum Al-S to 10 en; 12-0.8 to 1.6 cu;
AJ-ZS to 30 on in the intervals of onsao’c; 068(601. 09525 meter/sec.

I5: ‘0 .7. 5)
.ﬁzﬁﬁm “-2
WEJL‘EL

‘ ll 0

Figure 2. General form of the spproxinstion (a) and error
sources: parallel shift (1)); variation in curvature (c),
random variations in radio brightness (d), fluctuation noise (e)

The approximate expressions (2)-(6) permit estintion of the errors in determining
the parsmters T. y, S as a result of the following:

a) Parallel displacement of the radiation functions
unmet" )"ferqraZ,.-IJ;.:16,)";‘):‘M.‘45:”, (2)

V f V
p¢tcr : ‘Iz‘lg -‘O’xl. t (3)

b) Variation in steepness

a r/, «m «pet/"(anitLdI-atz Aid-run], (a)
6.00! . g; g": (4," d:)-l’; (,1 Id" WU. (5)
30

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 158 ONLY

cyan-15,1444» ~~0th;.'*;lv§(';"';) -'¢,.I'{."7)] (6)

(M'brightz is deternined analogously),

c) Rondo. variations in radio brightness

4'7 3000767.,5. ' ﬁr. IQ). (7)
d) Fluctuation noise
:7. nan/Wm. warm; 1' (s)

The errors in the estinetea of the pareneter y are determined by analogous relations.

The error in deternining the salinity is related to the error 61' by the approximate
expression

457,, a -/;,:/‘}.))7. (9)

Variations in steepness of the radiation functions on the wave X3 lead to the errors

(10)
as an,“ (ymjﬁdﬂqﬁxjr no; . .01
Key: 1. bright
For randon variations of the radio brightness
a} s (qty/4.7," (417747,, .47,‘ )]. (11)

The error as a result of fluctuation interference
u
a: . /:,‘_ [VII/3, )'.7:,’, ”(16,, 15,7. (12)

The spectral intervals that are optinel for eetinating other hydrophysical oars-store
in different codinetiona of then and also the errors in eetiuting these pareneters
are defined by the ease procedure. For exslple. for the paranoters T and I".

such sections of the spectrun are 11 and )2. The relations for estinatins the
errors are analogous to (2)-(8).

The estinates show that for r-s‘c; 7-10 n/sec; 8-351. an 31' ri 9-0.2 K the errors
are: a'r-o.3°c; ”-0.25 nleec; as-o.bsx.. For oE-og-og-gg-Ii! .351 slug-201 the
errors are AT-O. 12'c; Ay-0.5 n/eec: A3-—0.752..

The influence of atmospheric pars-stern is coasidered approxinetely by the
expressions (7) and (11). In the general case a Joint solution with respect to

X, Qh dro and Q“, is necessary with einultneom consideration of the hydrophysical
and azmspheric para-eters.

31

. MWIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The graphical representation of the systen of radiation hydrophysical equations for
different pai f channels (11. l ) is the two-dimensional radiobrightness fields
ng‘l‘Rﬂsht. A It 81“} (Figure 3. 4 . The procedure for optimizing l ,1 comists
in select ng th _8pectral intervals which insure maxim lengths of t ’ezpartial
vectors q j and q k and the closest angle between then to 5/2, which fully
corresponds to the condition of maximizing the determinant (3).

The inverse problem of determining the nature and intensity of the disturbances
Q3 is solved beginning with orientation and extent of the vectors

f, " - 0,- g’ " where /£"/ 41071.): v70 7", 7'.

Key: 1. bright

The temperature insbde the disturbed region is determined by reducing the values of
g from the region 01.1" corresponding to the given region, in the mdisturbed
reference zone c" considering the nature of the spectral function characteristic of
the given disturbing factor and the values of the optical thickness r (or the

integral water content R) defined by the readings of the shortwave channels for the
given region (Figure lo).

In this procedure it is useful to use the neasurenent data in the infrared band of

waves to monitor the state of the atmosphere and the surface temerature in the
absence of cloud formations.

The efficiency of the given methods is confirmed experimentally [3-5].

   

Figure 3. 'No dimensional radiobrightness Figure 4. Procedure for estimating

fields for tetperature variations hydmphysical paramters considering
618 5‘1 (8-02.; T-O to 30'C) (1); the influence of atmspheric components
' , v :
wave intensity (2) 018.5%. (7-11, T-Tl); “Y 1. bright
salinity (3) éx x (T-‘i‘z. s-o-sl).
8.5 30 .1.

Partial vectors: I -- {’1 A (1-11):

_ 8.5 1
II -- q (T-Tl).

A8.5M

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

3.

MOWMLISEONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Author's certificate No 319918. A. H. Shutko, "bathed of. Microwave Radiometric
Determination of the Surface State of ladies of later," punished in

RADIUI'EKHNIKA I SIMON!“ [Radio Engineering and Electronics], Vol XXIII.
No 10, 1978.

Author's certificate No 335613, A. u. Shutko, "Method of Determining the

Surface Temperature of Bodies of Hater fro. Plight Vehicles." RADIO‘IWIKA I
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol XXIII, No 10, 1973.

Shutko, A. H. and Kutuza, B. 6.. "Radiophyeicel Studies of the Planets,"

ITOGI NAUKI 83R. RADIUI'EIGINIKA [Scientific Results, Radio Engineering Series],
No 16, VINITI. bbecov, 1978.

Basharinov. A. Ye., et 31., in the collection ISSLBDOVANIYA V OBLASTI
RADIOWNIKI I EIBKTRONIKI 1954-19710 cc [Research in the Field of Radio
Engineering and Electronics, 1956-197], Moscow, Izd. m AN SSSR, 1976.

Besharinov. A. Ye., Gurvich. A. S. and Yegorov. S. 1., RADIOIZLUCEENIYB

ZEMLI KAK PLANET? [Radio Emission of the Earth as e Planet], Moscow. Hath,
1976.

COPYRIGi'r: Gosudaretvennyy okeanogreficheekiy inotitut (leningradakoye otdelenzlye),

1981

10865

C80:

8144/1010

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.66.09

RESULTS OF MICROWAVE RADIOHETRIC szDING 0P BODIES 0P warn VIE DIFFERENT
TEMPERATURE AND SALINI‘lY

Moscow WMMTNYYB HBTODY IMMA WWICHBSKIU PWV in Rmsian
1981 pp 35-38

[Article by c. I. Chukhray and A. H. Shutko]

[Text] Annotation. Data are presented from experimntal studies
of the characteristic of microwave radiation of bodies of water
with temperature variation within the limits of 10 to 25°C and
salinity in the range of 0 to 300 g/liter. The measurements
were performed from on board the aircraft laboratories of the

IR]! Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences in seven spectral
sections in the wave range of 0.8 to 1!) cm. The experimental
data are compared with the results of mdel calculations.

The dependence of the characteristic of the natural microwave radiation in the
centimeter and decimeter wave range on tewerature and salim‘ty gives rise to the
possibility of determining the indicated parameters by the mthods of microwave
rsdiometry [1].

The radiobrightness temperature is a fraction of the emisaiwe power and thermodynamic
tomerature within the limits of the thickness of the effectively emitting layer
which, depending on the salinity and temperature of the aqueous medium is (1/10 to
1/3) of the emission wavelength. The radiative characteristics of the water surface
in the absence of foam formations are determined by the Fresnel radiation coefficients,
the magnitude of which depends on the coaplex dielectric constant of the media.

In accordance with the model representations [2], the parameters determining the
values of the complex dielectric constant are functions of tenperature and salinity,
and they also depend on the chemical composition of the aqueotm medium.

In order to investigate the influence of temperature and salinity of the water
surface on its microwave radiation characteristics. in 1975-1977 the IRS Institute
of the USSR Academy of Sciences performed experiments in bodies of water, the
salinity of which encompasses the entire concentration range of natural water

(0 to 300 grams/liter). The temerature dependence was investigated in eaperiaents
performed in the sale regions du:ing different seasons of the year. The set of
measuring equipment installed on board the laboratory aircraft includes seven

roe OFFICIAL USE ONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radioneters in the 0.8 to I!) on range. has fluctuation sensitivity is 0.3 --
to l K.

The investigated bodies of water include the following: a) the Dnestr Linen and
the Black Sea (salinity 0 to 15 glliter). b) the Inter Strait. the Alur Lilian,
Sakhalin Bay (salinity 0 to 35 g/liter), c) the Azov Sea. Lake Sivash. the salt
lakes on the Arabatskaya Spit (salinity 13 to (GD-250) g/liter), d) the Caspian
Sea, the Bay of Kara-Bogu-Gol (salinity 15 to (250-310) gran/liter).

Figure 1 shoes an example of recording this signal on a wave length of 18 can when
flying over the Dnestr Linan and Black Sea.

lumpkue’ / / "N,“ (2)

(1) up" \‘ m

I
I
24) 5, 451:5)
(alps! k $32k

:h
I“!
h———(

Figure 1. Map of the region of operations (I -— flight path) and
example of recording signal while flying on
path I; wavelength 18 cu; Septetber 1977
Key:

1. Dnestr Lima

2. Black Sea

3. ~15 g/1iter

4. bright

5. Zatoka

6. -(0 to 2) s/liter

 

Figure 2. Map of the operation region (I -- flight path) and variations
of the radiobrightneas intensity during flights along path I;
wavelength 2!) cu; Septeﬁer 1976 (1); variations in salinity along
path I during performance of the experimts (2)
Key:
1. Tatar Strait; 2. Sakhalin Lake; 3. bright; 6. S g/liter

35

, FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
'3,
.

FOR omcm. USE ONLY

thn u... Munro in Is obvious that with an increase in salinity the radiobrightnesa
lc-Inpt-rnlul'u ml this «we length decreases. The region propagated by water from the
lint-sir Ll'man is clearly recorded in the sea.

From Figure 2, in which variations of the radiobrigitnesa intensity on the 2!) cm
wave are presented for flights over the bodies of water in the Far East and varia-
tion of the water salinity along the flight path is also presented, it is obviom
that the minimum salinity (the estuary zone of the Amr Linen) correspond to madman
radiobriyitness; an increase in salinity (to the south and north of this zone)
corresponds to a decrease in radiobrightness.

The dependence of the radiation contrast for a 30 cm wave on the salinity is illustrated
in Figure 3. The radiation contrast is the difference in values of the brightness
temperatures for current values of the salinity and minimum value of 2 g/liter for
this region. In the sane figure the calculation relations are presented for a
temperature of 10 and 15°C corresponding to the maximum values of the water tepera—
Lure along the flight path during performance of the experiments. Within the limits
of the measurement error, experimental and calculated values agree with each other.

0 '0 20 JD 56"

 

Figure 3. Radiation contrast as a function of salinity;
wavelength 30 cm; September 1976. l - experimnt;
2, 3 - calculation for water teuperature of 10°C (2) and
15°C (3)
MN:
a. bright
h. S gram/liter

As follows from the spectral measurement data, the radiation intensity on wave-
lengths greater than 10 cm decreases with an increase in salinity; the absolute
magnitude of the contrast is greater the longer the wavelength. In the centimeter
wave band the variation in radiohrightness is within the limits of error of the

experiment.

The Htvopncss of the mineralization relation of the radiation contrast on a 30 cm
wave in the range of salinities of 0 to 35 g/liter and temperatures from 10 to 15°C

1 18 4.39.07 K/(g—utcr‘l).

4

5.:

as

Y roe omau. use ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Examples of making a signal recording during ﬂights over a body of water
with high salinities are presented in Figures o and 5. Here variation in the

signal level is also observed with variation in salinity. As follows fro. Figure 5,
an increase in salinity is felt differently in the radiation intensity in the
centimeter and decimeter wave bands: on a 2.25 cu wave the signal level increases,

and on a 30 ca wave, it decreases with an increase in salinity. The distribution
zone and the salt deposits in the dried up part of the bay are recorded.

azzmmun muautg)
(8’ {wow-'—

I
(10)!» o Iﬂhw {ELM/I

a “has

  

.__.._ (11)

.—._

Figure 4. Map of the operation zone (I -- flignt path) and examle

of realizing a signal recording during flights along path I; wavelength
20 cm; July 1975.

      
 
 

   

  

Key:
1. Lake Sivash 7. Arabatskaya Spit
2. Arabatskaya Spit 8. Solyanoye Lake
3. Azov Sea 9. 1m to 250 g/liter
lo. Solyanoye take 10. ~(80 to 100) g/liter
5. Thu 11. ~13 g/liter
6. yfgnd
m.....-..— 3.... axial“.
0' l
” (8)-l- (9) Iowa:
Q
I I
' g
5 h an '3;
x " 2
(s I' '
(1) E -I.$o )
3
Figure 5. Map of the operations zone (I - flight path) and example
of making a signal recording during flights on path I;
wavelength: 1 to 2.25 cm, 2 to 1) cu; Hay 1977
Key
1. Caspian Sea 5. ~15 g/liter 9. Kara-Bogaz-Gol Bay
2. Dried up part 6. Fresh water zone 10. Dried up part
3. Kara-Bogaz-Col Bay 7. (250 to 310) s/liter
1., Thright 8. Caspian Sea

37
[0| OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experimental results were interpreted using published data on the values of the
couplex dielectric constant of solutions of different salts and mixtures of the.
contained in the investigated natural bodies of water.

The experimental results confirmed the basic relations calculated on the basis of
model representations.

The obtained data indicate the possibility of remte determination of the temerature

and salinity of natural bodies of water with respect to the natural elission in ,the
microwave range.

BILIOCRAP'II‘!

1. Basharinov, A. Ye., RADIOIZLUGENIYE ZMI mm mm [Radio 3.188100 of the
Earth as a Planet], Moscow, Nauka, 1974.

2. Debay, P. and 2810:, 6., TEORIYA mmamsm SVOYSTV mum. [Theory of
Electrical Properties of Molecules], macaw-Leningrad, mm, 1936.

COPYRIGiT: Cosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Ianingradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
cso: 8146/ 1010

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
mammal!“

UDC 551.66.07/08:537.87
SPECTRAL AND POLARIZATIN CHARACTERISTICS OF HICWAVB RADIATION 0P FOAM POMHONS

Moscow mrm HBTODY IMMIYA murmur PM!” in Rusian
1981 pp 39-62

[Article by V. Yu. Rayzer and Ye. A. Sharkov]

[Text] Annotation. Results are presented fron nasurenents of the
radiation coefficient of a water surface covered with foam fornations
of different types. An electrodynalic mdel of the foal edit- to

proposed in the form of a solid layered-nonmiforl structure with
effective dielectric parameters.

The possibilities of studying microwave enission of a foam corver under natural
conditions are limited in view of its structural variety and dyn-ic nature. There-
fore in order to study the physical nechanisn of the phenonenon, laboratory experi-
nents are required. In this paper sale results of such research are presented.

The disperse fornations -- enulsion multilayer and nonmiforn foa layer — were
created on the water surface in a laboratory flu-e. The thickness of the single
layer h‘d. d is the bubble diameter (d-0.2 to 2.0 -). The nonmifora foals layer
consisted of two types of structures-Mien at the interface with the water sur-
face and polyhedral. Its total thimeas was h=10 -.

The neasurenents were perforled using highly sensitive radio-attic equipnent in the
ranges of 1-0.2, 0.8. 2, 8 ad 18 on [I]. The experiments daonstrated the following.

1. The wavelength range of 1-0.8 to 8 ca had the greatest sensitivity to the
dynanic structure of the foal layer.

2. The increase in radiohrightness teperature of the surface in the range of
x-o.2 to 2 us was connected with the presence of an enulsion single layer (tn/19.1).
In the range of 1-8 to 18 en the radiobrightness contrasts were observed only on the
Qpesrance of a thick layer of fan of polyhedral structure.

3. The rougmess of the boundaries of the foam layer was not felt in the qualitative

nature of the polarization functions in the nillineter range. The degree of polari-
zation of the radiation decreased with an increase in the layer thickness (Figure l).

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effort to Interpret the experimental data based on a model of the transient

(”G‘It'i'lfli.‘ layer with parameters corresponding to the statistical mixture of water
and air did no: give satisfactory results [2]. The calculated values of the radia-
tion coefficient turned out to be appreciably below the experimental values. A
physically more adequate mdel can be based on individual properties of foam bubbles
in the microwave range. The attenuation characteristic °e and scattering characteris-
tic as of the bubbles were calculated by the Hie theory for spherical two-layer
particles by the author of the procedure of [3]. It was demonstrated, in particular,
that in the range of 130.8 cm, °s<<°e (6<<d, 6 is the thickness of the bubble shell),
and the scattering is of a purely dipole nature. These facts permit solution of the
problem in the quasistatic approximtion and me of the Lorenz-Lorents formula for
the effective dielectric constant of a polydiaperae media (the particles are
suspended in the air)

e‘ﬁé‘l » x - gin/fannedm m

where N is the particle concentration, d(r) is the polarizability of an individual
particle of radius r, P(r) is the normalized distribution function of the particles
with respect to sizes (IP(r)dr-l). The polarissbility of a hollow spherical shell
defined by the first term of the expansion of the His series is given by the
formula [to]:

_ a' '(e.-1)(ze.+u(r-q3j
d’ Iv if.‘1X2£.*i)(I-g§*3é,qf ’ (2)

where q-1-5/ r and to is the dielectric constmt of the shell material (for water
I u
co-t o-it 0).

The values of Ce found in this way can be med to construct the electrodynamic
model of the "water-foam" system. As the calculations have demonstrated, the
presence of sharp bomdaries in the two-layer model leads to interference effects
in the spectral relations for the radiation coefficient of the system for layers
with thicknesses of h-l to 10 I, which qualitatively contradicts the experiment.
The transient dielectric layer, for example. with parameters that vary by the
hyperbolic tangent law, eliminates this deficiency [2].

Figure 2 shows models in which both the dispersion properties of the emulsion
structure according to (l)-(2) and the disturbance of integralness of the smooth
water surface by its bubbles are illustrated. In the case of s nonuniform foam
layer, the role of the polyhedral structure in the formation of radiation reflects
the smooth dielectric transition from the emulsion monolayer to the air. Both
models correspond well to the experimental data.

The. radiation transport theory also gives quite high values of the emissive power
of the investigated surface. In the approximation of a nondissipsting medit-

which it is possible to consider a nondisperse layer of bubbles of uniform thickness
to be, the radiation coefficient of the system KP is defined by the expression

‘ -11".ch
I or e (F 3b.’? r
If, 1 p (3)

40

FOROFFICIALUSONLY
u. '
. 1' o I ’
u 0
’ s
’e
u
a
u
_ f
—L_L__'.l
“ I a. M 9

Figure l. Polarization functions of the radiation coefficient of
the water surface covered with tons (1-0.8 CI; 10-30 R).

l — h-lO In; 2 — h-l III; 3 - slooth water surface;

A, e,'-r; A. 0.0 -B - experiments; - calculation by (3);
6-0.05 III.

 

 

Figure 2. Blectrodynanic nodels of the "water-foam" system
a -- enulsion structure h1-1.3 II; hz-l -;

b -- nonmiforn structure h1-10.3 III; hz-lo an; 113-8 .3

the transient layer is given by the hyperbolic taunt lav.

where rP is the Fresnel reflection coefficient of water surface and r-hfoe(r)l’(r)dr
is the 'optical thickness" of the polydisperse layer. As follows fruit (3). the
equation for 1 leads to snoothins of the polarization differences in the angular
functions (9(6). In the uillineter range this is Ianifested such are strongly
than the experimnt shows (see Figure l). ‘lhe spectral functions rpﬂ) calculated
by (3) coincide well with the experimental function in the case of an emulsion
layer of thickness htl to 2 II.

The authors than): I. B. Vasil'kov for the assistance rendered in performing the
computer calculations.

101

4 FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
l.

2.

3.

4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Amirkhsnyan. V. R.. Bespslovs. Ye. A., Bulntov. H. 0., et s1., TRUDY
[Works of the min Geophysics Observatory], No 371, 1976, p 136.

Bordonskiy, 0.8., Vssil‘kovs. I. 3.. Veselov, V. 11., st s1., mmn TKKSTY
DOKIADOV NA 7-0M VSBSOYUZNOH SMOZIUHE P0 DIFRAK‘rSII I RASPROSTRANBNIYU VOLN.
[Brief Texts of Reports at the 7th All-him Symosiun on Have Diffraction
and Propagation]. Rostov-ns-Donu, Vol 2, 1977, p 272.

Doubrovskiy, 1.. A., IZV. AN SSSR [News of the USSR Acoduly of Sciences].
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean, Vol 10, No 7, 197‘. p 720.

Van de Hulst, 6., RASSEYANIYE SVB‘IA mm GASTITSAHI [Stuttering of Ltd“:
by Small Particles]. 11.. Moscow, 1961.

OOPYRIGﬂ‘: Gosudsrstvennyy okesnogrsficheskiy institut (Leningrsdskoye otdeleniye),

1981

10845

CSO:

8146/1010

62

MWLISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IIDC 551. $21

MEASURING SELL-SCALE arm 01’ WAVES AND FOAM HIRING HICROVAVB STUDIES 017 THE
SEA SURFACE

Moscow mmm mmm IMHA mammsxm RWV in Russia
1981 pp 63-106

[Article by B. M. Andreyev. V. V. Vinogradov and I. A. Posytkin]

[Text] ﬁnnotation. A study is nade of the results of natural

studies of foam cover and the gravitational-capillary range of
wind waves for ocean and lake conditions.

The enissive power of the water surface in the microwave ranp varies within broad
limits and depends on the state of the sea—the presence of wind waves and foan on
its surface. The experimental relations proposed by different authors for the
radiobriuxtness tewerature of the surface as a function of the degree of covering
of the see by foes pernit estimations of the driving wind velocity.

In order to obtain natural data on this problen. the Leningrad division of the

State Oceanographic Institute participated in 1976 in the work of the Soviet-American
“HEX-76 Expedition, during which on board the scientific research ship ”Akadenik
Korolev" comrehensive oceanographic studies were ends in the North Pacific. me
wind waves and fees were photographed using the Aura-37 care, which was fastened

to a special suspension on the navigating bridge 15 Intel's above sea level. The
pictures were taken fro. the leeward side of the ship.

The perspective photographs of the see obtained during this operation offer the
possibility of determining the basic elenents of wind-driven waves and estimation
of the area of the sea surface covered with foam.

However, the processing of perspective inges is a comlicsted and difficult latter
in view of variability of the scale of the photographs over the area of the frame.
In order to siwlify the processing of the photographs. we used a special photo-
graviuetric grid taking into sccomt the scale and magnitude of the perspective
distortion of the fraue caused by the inclination of the optical axis of the instru-
Ient. under the condition of taking the photographs when the ship us on an even
keel. The processing reduced to analysing the foe- and the wave elemts.

b3

. POI! OFFICIAL [Bl-3 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At first, the wave crests were distinguished on the photograph. Depending on the
length of the wave crest, the cross section of the profiles was taken in which the
wave lengths were measured--the photogravimetric grid was applied to the photographs
for the measurements. By using the meter on the photograph, the distance between
the wave crestswas determined which was transferred to the graphs on the scale for

the given distance from the ship, which made it possible to determine the wavelength.
A statistical series was used for the processing.

The sections of the sea covered with foam were determined on the photographs with the
help of a master curve. The master curve was applied to the photographs in such a

way that the grid lines were parallel to the principal horizontal of the photograph.
Then using a measuring rule, the length of the section occupied by the foam or pure
water was found on each of the applied lines. Reducing the obtained distances occupied
by foam to the total length of all the lines, the amount of foam was found in per-
centage ratio of the entire section of the body of water.

As a result of processing a large nusber of wave and foam photographs it is possible
to draw the conclusion that the photographs give a distorted picture of the wave
situation near the hull of the ship, both with respect to the wave parameters and
with respect to the mutt of foam. When sighting the camera or microwave radioseters
up to angles of 45°, the data correspond to the true picture of the wave field; at
sighting angles of more than 65' the data on the amunt of foam are low, and the
radiometer readings are distorted.

Simultaneously with photographing a wavy sea surface, a visml determination was made
of the waves and foam from the direction finding bridge at a height of 15 meters in
the parts of the body of water not subjected to the influence of the ship's hull.

The processing and analysis of the obtained materials for the Pacific Ocean during
the SAHBX-76 experiments and also analogous data obtained on the "Bering" expedition
in 1973, made it possible to establish that there is a relation of the type

P- 0.12 - it2

between the area of the sea occupied by the foam and the wind force not exceeding
15 to 20 m/sec, where P is the relative area of the sea surface occupied by foam in
percentages; w is the wind velocity. Ila/sec.

The degree of coverage of the ocean with foam directly connected with the wind
velocity offers the possibility of estimating its contribution to the radiobriﬂltness
tonperature of the water when interpreting microwave nasurements.

Analogous work with respect to photographing small-scale characteristics of a
disturbed surface was done also in small inland bodies of water such as Krasnoye
Lake on the Karelian Isthmus with an area of about 15 kmz. The survey was also
made using the AFA-37 camera installed 7 meters above the water surface on a special
mast with small support area. The scale of the survey was 1:100.

The best quality photographs of the water surface in the presence of waves were
obtained mder cloud conditions of force 8. The photographs were taken with surface
illumination in the photographed zone by sunlight and inthe shadow of clouds. The

’06

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plunl‘onr-‘Iphs were taken at solar angles of 15 to 20', with average wind velocity of

A to 6 m/sec. with gusts up to 10 n/aec. the fetch reached 5 Ins, and the wave height
was up to 30 us [sic].

0n the photographs made in sections illuminated by the sun, in the glare zone, an
image of waves in the gravity-capillary range of the spectra- was obtained; the
minimum recorded wave lengths were 1 cm. A statistical analysis of the wavelength
distribution of the gravity-capillary range of the spectral demonstrated that the
wavelength distribution in this section of the spectrum differs somewhat from the
wavelength distribution in the gravity range--less selective variability is observed
in one section obtained on the image of one wave of the basic system, and much more
selective variability on the cross sections located on the other waves of the basic
system. The predominant dimensions of the waves in the gravity-capillary range were
in the given case lo to 5 cs with respect to wavelength. '

A characteristic feature of the imge of small capillary waves with lengths of

1 to 2 cm is sharp variability of the direction of propagation exceeding 50°, and a
partially observed relation of the wave system of minimum dinensions to the waves
of predominant sizes of the gravity-capillary range of the spectrum.

The three-dimensionality index of the capillary-gravity waves is less than the
developing and steady-state wind waves of the basic energy bearing region of the
gravity range, the crest length of the capillary-gravity waves in individual cases
can exceed 10 time the wavelength of this range.

The photographs taken with a wind velocity of 2 to lo m/eec did not offer the
possibility of recording waves in the capillary range as a result of their small
dimensions, which is confirmed by the dimensions of the individual hotspot sections.
In the photographs obtained for a wind velocity of 5 to 9 m/sec, the dimensions of
the individual hotspot sections were less than 0.1 I: on the fill. that is, no more
than 1 cm in nature; when photographing in calmer weather the average size of in-
dividual hotspots was 0.2 an or more, that is. it exceeded 2 cm in nature. A decrease
in surface curvature by more than twofold indicates a significant decrease in the
surface slopes. that is, small wave heidlts in the gravity-capillary range. Their
existence is confirmed by the fact that the maximum dimensions of the individual hot
spots for small wind velocities are also less than 0.1 ml. but, few of them are
observed, and they are arranged randomly, which does not offer the possibility of
deciphering the waves in the gravity—capillary range of the apectrus developed in
the presence of a weak wind.

Conclusions:

1. Perspective photograph; of a disturbed surface with small angles of inclina-
tion of the optical axis permits us to obtain an image of the characteristic of the
state of the sea surface. By the photograph it is possible to determine the ammt
of foam and the plat characteristics of the waves in the gravity-capillary range of
the spectrum. The scale of the photograph is selected insofar as possible within
the limits of 1:100 to 1:330. The photographic latitude of the film and its
sensitivity must be maximal.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. According to the data of marine measure-eats by the authors, the anomt of foam
on the surface of the sea depends on the square of the wind velocity if the wind
velocity does not exceed 15 to 20 II/aec.

3. The characteristic diaensiona of the wavelength of the gravity-capillary range
with a wind velocity of S to 9 II/aec according to the measurement data for a small
body of water are 6 to 5 cn and 1 to 2 cl, waves of smaller dimensions are related

to larger waves. The variability of the wavelengths in the capillary-gravity range
is determined by the gravity waves of the basic energy bearing region of the spectra.
“within the limits of one wave the variability is call. Por adjacent gravity

waves strong variability of the plan characteristics of the capillary-gravity waves
is observed.

COPYRIGHT: Goaudarstvennyy okeanograficheakiy inatitut (Inningradakoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
C80: 8144/1010

46

POROFHGALIISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY

“DC 551. 521

PROBLEM OF DETERMINING WIND VELOCITY AT HATER SURFACE BY MEASUREMENTS 0F HICRDVAVE
DIISSION 0F EARTH-ATMOSPHERE SYSTEM

Moscow amourmt amour Immun Wmsm rmmv in Russian
1981 pp 47-50 .

[Article by P. V. Lyushvin]

[Text] Annotation. A method is proposed for separation of the
microwave emission of the atmosphere and the sea surface in the
total emission of the earth-atmosphere system by simultaneous
masurements of wavelengths of 0.8, 1.35 and 1.6 cm. An angle
of its me is presented in the experimental data. By the pro-
posed method it is possible better to find the actual values of
the microwave emission of the sea surface and the atmsphere;
consequently, it is possible more precisely to determine the
wind velocity at the surface of the water and the integral
characteristics of the atmosphere in storm regibus.

l. The determination of the wind velocity at the surface of the water, the total
mass of the water vapor in the atmosphere and the water reserve in the clouds is an
important problem of satellite hydrouteoroloy.

At the present time when calculating these characteristics the methods of ground
them-microwave imaging radar are used ll, 3, 1.], In order to solve these problems
from satellites, it is necessary first to separate the contributions of the
atmspheric emission and the emission from the sea surface to the total radio
emission of the earth-atmosphere system. In the methods with respect to remote
determination of the wind velocity at the sea surface. as a rule, the mean statisti-
cal distorting influence of the atmosphere is considered or cloudless meteorological
situations are selected. when finding the integral characteristics of the
atmsphere by microwave radiometric measurements. it is asstmled that the ocean
emission does not depend on the state of its surface. Such assmtions limit the
possibility of the application of these methods and lead to significant errorsll, lo].

tions of the emission of the atmsphere and the sea surface in the total emission of
the earth-atmosphere system with respect to frequently used simultaneous measure-
ments on wavelengths of 0.8, 1.35 and 1.6 cm.

47

FOR OFFICIAL we ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. For calculation of radiobrightness teweratures (rbright) from artificial earth

satellites, we use the sinplified solution of the radiation transport equation in
the atmosphere from measure-ants in the nadir of the following type:

2..., - gag out-'13) . 1; a ‘I':( 1 4:3) om ~11 ). (1)

where To is the tewerature of the sea surface, ‘1 is the sea surface emission
coefficient on a wavelength A (for a smooth water surface rx-x smoth)’ fl is

the optical thickness of the atmosphere, T1 is the radiobrightddaa' teqerature
of the atmosphere.

In a system of three equations of the type of (l) for wavelengths of 0.8, 1.35 and
1.6 cu q and 1'; are known (the temperature of the sea surface will be considered
known with accuracy to 12K; between the optical thickness of the atmosphere and the
natural radiation of the atmsphere there is a relation .close to functional [1]).
In order to solve the system, it is necessary to supplement it by three equations
(conditions) relating the system parameters. The conditions of quasiconstancy of

the ratios Ar, on pairs wavelengths (“1"‘l‘ﬁ. smooth) from references [1, 2] are
taken as the two equations:

azq, A1,,” - 1.3 1 0,2; (2)
AlldS/‘ﬁﬁ " "I ’ OJ- (3)

Let us find the third equation from the condition of equality of the relations
between the atmospheric emission on the investigated wavelengths. for individual
meteorological situations, for examle, in the- absence of clouds, the mgnitude of
the ratio between the radiation of the atmosphere on pairs of waves (especially, for
the pair of waves of 0.8 and 1.6 cu) is constant. In the presence of hydro-steers
in the atmosphere, constancy of such relations is not maintained [1, 3]. A stable
relation between the radiobrightnesa tenperatures of the atmosphere on these wave-
lengths for any meteorological conditions has been obtained for analysis of the
materials of model calculations of the radiotherml emission of the atmosphere by
the data of 400 rsdiosondes of the weather ships of the North Atlantic kindly made
available to us by Ye. P. Dowkovskaya [6]:

o.e 1‘ I:
’M-v ' “ms/ha '0'“) ' (1.)

where T; is the radiobrightness tenperature of the stnosphere calculated by the
radiosonde data; TA. 9 is the radiobrightness temerature of the atmosphere
calculated by this relation.

In a total of 21 of the cases out of 600, 1'1 P differed from ‘1' .6 by more than
202. Equation (4) was checked out on indepenSCnt data on the rad othermal emission
of the atmsphere [3]. For model calculations of the radiobrightness teQeratures
of the atmosphere Tl.6, P differed from 1.1.6 basically by no more than 102, and

for the experimental data, by 202.

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equation for the relation between the attenuation of the edssion exp(-r ) by

the :tmnsphcre and its natural emission I" was obtained by the above-described
dam [lo]:

exu-T; )- I - P 10" 1') . (5)

B is a numerical coefficient equal to 3510.2 for the tropical atmosphere,
3. 710.2 for the tewerate atmsphere and 3310.2 for the polar atmosphere.

When solving a system of equations (1) to (5) for 0.8, 1.35 and 1.6 cu waves. the
errors in the deterained radiobrightness teqeratures of the atnosphere on 1.35 and
1.6 cm waves are 15 to 20:, and the Iicrowave emission of the sea surface. 13 to ’4 K.

3. This method was checked on the medals frol the Soviet-Andean "Bering" exper-
inent. For the measured values of the radiobrightness teweratures on wavelengths
of 0.8, 1.35 and 1.6 ca “bright A are presented in reference [4]), values of the
microwave emission of the atmosphere and the sea surface (x110) were calculated by
the abovedescribed method. The figure shows the behavior of the licrowave eniasion
of the sea surface on a wavelength of 1.35 cm (K1.35To) along the flight path of a

"Gawain-990" aircraft from 2 March 1973, and also the behavior of the wind velocity
at the water surface (V, n/sec) [2].

:5 van (a)

         

m at: «I a: an mu (1,)

Results of deter-lining the microwave emission of the sea surface
«1.3 '1‘ ) on a wavelength of 1.35 cm with respect to the path
(1), win velocity (V) and water surface (2)
Key:
a. V, n/sec
b. ° north latitude

From the figure it is obvious that the microwave emission of the sea surface follows
the behavior of the wind velocity and seems a maxim value when the wind velocity
reaches 20 III/sec. The dotted line on the figure indicates the extreme possible
values of x1351}, which can occur during calculations by this procedure. when
analyzing the nicrowave emission data for the sea along the path, it is possible to
isolate regions of values of K1. 351'0 corresponding to the wind velocities of less
than 12 n/sec, from 12 to 18 II/sec and nore than 18 Ilsec. The obtained increase

in the nicrowave emission of the sea with an increase in wind velocity as a whole
coincides with analogous values presented in references [1. 2].

(.9

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Io. The application of this mthod during microwave measurements will permit better
separation of the microwave emission of the atmosphere and the sea surface in the
outgoing radiation of the earth-atmosphere system; consequently, it permits better
necogiition of the storm wave zones, more precise calculation of the integral
atmospheric characteristics, and expansion of the class of solved hydrometeorological
problem without creating additional apparatus.

In conclusion, I express my appreciation to Ye. P. Mkowkaya for constant attention
to this work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Basharinov, A. Ye., Gurvich, A. S. and Yegorov, S. T., RADIOIZLUCHBNIYE ZEHLI KAK
PLANETY [Radio Emission of the Earth as 3 Planet], lbscow, Nauka, 1974, 188 pp.

2. Vilkheyt. T., Fowler, 11.. Stanbach, G. and Gloersen, P., "Detenination of
Atmospheric Parameters by Microwave Measurements During the 'Bering' Expedition,"
SOVETSKO-AMERIKANSKIY EKSPBRDBNT "BERING" [Soviet-American "Bering" Experiment],
Leningrad, Cidrometeoizdat, 1975, pp 15-62.

3. Corelik, A. 6., Kalashnikov. V. V., Raykova, L. S. and Prolov, Yu. A.,
"Radiothcrmal Measurements of Atmospheric lbisture and the Integral Water Content
of Clouds," IZV. AN SSSR. FIZIKA ADDSFERY I OKEANA [News of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean], Vol 9, No 9, 1973, pp 928-936.

1.. Donbkovskaya, Ye. P. and Rabinovich, Yu. 1., "Analysis of the Results of
Measuring the Radio Wavelength Endssion of the Atmosphere during the 'Bering'
Experiment (Version A)," SOVETSKO—AHERIKANSKIY EKSPERIHEM‘ "BBRING,"
Leningrad, Cidrometeoizdat, 1975, pp 63-60.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
080: 8166/ 1010

50

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 551.321.6:621.38ﬁ.326

BXPERIMTAL RESULTS OF JOINT USE OF INFRARED AND HICRWAVE RADIOHRTERS FOR
REFINE DETERMINATION 01’ SEA ICE CHARACTERISTICS

Moscow usxou‘mtmrs Heron! lZMBRDIIYA mmrcsssxm 9mm: in Russian
1981 pp 51-56

[Article by V. V. Bogorodskiy, A. N. Darovskikh, Ye. A. Hertynove and V. A. Spitsyn]

[Text] Annotation. A study is made of the results of an experiment
to investigate the characteristics of ice by passive methods in the
infrared and microwave bands.

In the experimental studies of the drifting snow-ice cover performed in the spring
of 1977 in the Arctic, a set of infrared (spectral range 8 to 16 microns) and
nicrowave (wavelength 1.6 cm) equipment was used, swplemented by aircraft
actinonetric instrunnts. The goal of the experiment was as follows: 1) the study
of the possibility of practical application of the method of infrared radiometery
to estinate the thickness of the ice cover; 2) obtaining the characteristics of
radiothernal emission of ice of different age gradations; 3) determination of the
morphological characteristics of the ice cover.

Renate measurenents were accompanied by obtaining monitoring data and other informa-
tion about the parameters of the snow and ice cover and the distribution of the
meteorological elements in the ice layer by contact means when landing the An-2
aircraft on the investigated ice fields. During the period from 19 April to 10 May,
15 ice fields of different age were examined, which were the most miform with
respect to thickness and naxinal with respect to extent. Data on the air temera-
tore, wind velocity, radiation budget and teaperature of the mderlying surface
measured by an infrared radioneter was used to estinate the thickness of the ice.
The calculation was perforned according to the expression obtained from the solution
of the equation of themal conductivity for the miforn steady-state problem [1].
The calculation results are presented in Table 1. As can be seen, in a nuﬁer of
cases the thicknesses of the ice cover determined by its natural infrared radiation
agree satisfactorily with the control measurements. At the see time, for points
No 3a and No 8 the error in the analysis reaches 65 to 501. The existing diver-
gences can be explained by a nutter of estates: nanely, the errors in the model of
the snow and ice cover used in the calculation, inaccuracies in determining the
hydroeeteorological parameters and, in particular, deter-ining the radiation budget
of the surface of the snow and ice cover, errors in neaauring the surface temera-
ture by the infrared radioneter.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Estimate of the Thickness of the Snow and Ice Cover by
its Natural Infrared Radiation

 

 

 

fa 7': ..:"'".'°. ’9' v a (p)
"'"I . r/ca a/c r)
. K
”H ' g: (f) (a) (k) 535
(8) o: g
I. a:
:3 OH:
.0. III
06.05.77 ‘
SI -l6.l 15.1 5.6 0.25 ~16. -l§. -9. 5.1 015.2 I.052 I." 0.0” 0O 66
09.05.77
6 46.5 l7.5 6.6 - 40.7 47.9 -7.I [.7 4115.2 I.059 I.“ 0.056 I) 53
05.05.77
7 40.0 19.0 2.0 0.25 49.6-19.6 45.7 1.. I015.2 I.055 .22 .015 so 9
06.05.77
8 45.6 10.6 5.1 I.22 -15. 46. -ll. 6.0'015.2 ..m..,1 0.065 95 .5
m.os.77
10 45.5 15.5 mods-12.41. 4.1.9 015,: .055 .0 0.05: so 60
Key:
a. Date, point No R. v, lI/sec
b. Turf-ace, °c 1. P, nbars
c. Radiation n. F. cal/c112 -nin
d. Thermodynamic n. Qcal/cng—nin
e. hsnow' cn o. “cal/cm: -nin
f. "snow e/cn p. nice, on
8- Tb’ °C q. Contact measured
h. Teuperature at the interface r.. According to the infrared radiometer
i. Air-snow data

j. Snow- ice

 

Table 2.
Age characteristics of ice qbrigh? K <o>
Gray ice (10-15) cm 230 0.93
Ora y-white (15-30) cm 239 0.97
Thick first year white ice (30-70) cm 21.1 0.98
First-year ice of medium thickness

(70-120) on 239 0.98
Thick first-year (120-200) ell 228 0.95
Hultiyear >200 cm 216 0.88

In the centimeter range, as a result of powerful absorption of radiowaves in the body
of the ice there is no direct dependence of the radio wavelength emission on its
thickness, beginning with gray ice (11-10 to 15 on). However. as is noted in [3],

for the microwave region of the apectrun strong dependence of the radiation
coefficient of sea ice on its age gradations is characteristic. Table 2 gives

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

the average values of the brightness teaperatures and radiation coefficients of ice
of different age obtained as a result of flights over the investigated'ice fields. The
first-year white ice has the greatest coefficient of eldssion. Increasing the

brine content in gray ice leads to reduction of <c> to 0.93. The decrease in the
emission coefficient of nultiyear ice, in spite of the almst deaalinated radiating
layer, is caused by scattering of the radio waves on air bubbles in the upper layers
of the ice cover.

For statistical estimation of the brightness tewerature range characteristic of

ice of defined age. on malysis is nede of the results of neasureuents perforned
during one day of flying over 342 ice fields with a total extent of 120‘ km. Figure 1
shows the distribution histogram T r t for white ice (a), first-year ice of Indian
thickness (b) and thick ice (c), mitigar ice (d). Table 3 contains statistical
characteristics of the brightness telperatures of various types of ice. It is
obvious that for each age gradation of ice there is a characteristic range of values
of Tbright (for fixed air teQerature). However, with great probability (0.92) it

is possible to distinguish only thin, first-year ice and first-year ice of nedirn
thickness from multiyesr and thick first-year ice. 0n converting to grey and newly
formed ice. a reduction in Tbright to the brightness telperature level characteristic
of nultiyear ice is noted. The indicated albiguity of the interpretation is elin—
inated with simultaneous use of the informtion obtained by the infrared channel.
Figure 2 shows a fragment of the synchronous recording of radiation and brightness
teweratures illustrating the possibility of estimating the thickness of the ﬂoating
snow and ice cover by a set of infrared and microwave equipment.

ﬁ‘

{2

   

§

.§
-

A
H
v
Ila-Muen- hymn-om

ﬁt

Figure 1

Key:
1. Probability density
2. Brightness teweraturc, K

53

FOR OFI'IOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3

 

Age characteristic of the ice (runny 0230

K

 

    
    
  

  
   

Confidence interval
Probability Probability Probability

  
     

0.8 0.85 0.9
Newly forued ice 215 6 - - -
Cray ice 222 3 - - -
Cray-white ice 241 lo - - -
Thin first-year white ice 240 6.3 234-265 2310-266 233-246
First-year ice of Iediun 233 6.1 225-260 226-280 223-242
thickness
Thick first-year ice 220 8.6 209-23) 208-231 207-233
Hultiyear ice 216 9.0 203-226 202-226 200-228
(3)
:0 Hus:
:5?” lMMuulll’
gi W mun-u (‘)
3
i": 4‘ ”mus-ruin! (5)
8 ' .
_(2)'" I
§. |
! I I
.5315: '
=g n... '
(1) yucca: Jvhnfl m
( I Mﬂl,lﬂ‘ﬂ
Figure 2
Key:
1. Brightness temperature, K S. Nultiyesr ice
2. Radiation telpersture. °c 6. tine, microseconds
3. Newly formed ice 7. 5 hours 14 duutes 30 seconds
[4. First-year ice of media thickness 8. 5 hours 15 minutes 20 seconds

“.,__

2 5pm"): (1) ’

Figure
Key: 1. tine, seconds

3

510

FOIOI-‘I'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The surface of the ice fields is nonuniform both with respect to its electric
characteristics and with respect to geometric characteristics. Therefore, the
recorded fluctuations of the thermal emission of the ice fielrk can be considered

as a random process both in time and in space. Since- the time interval of recording
is significantly less than the time scale of the processes, under the influence of

which the thermal emission is formed. the investigated random process can be con-
sidered steady-state.

For statistical investigation. measureiunts were selected which were performed on
multiyear and first-year ice extending more than 1000 meters. The diacretenese of
the readings was 0.5 second. As the basic characteristics, the autocorrelation
fmction R(r) and the dispersion a2 were selected. The results of the calculation
denonstrated that all the autocorrelation functions can be reduced to two types
(Figure 3): I - functions monotonically decreasing with tim (dR/dr<0); II -
fmctions with oscillatory nature of decrease (dR/drusim variable). The
characteristic feature of the autocorrelation functions type II is pester time of
complete daaping of the correlation. Here the attenuation til 11. where

dR/drlt. '0. is approximately equal to the time of colplete attenuation of the
correlatun for type I functions. The presence of type II autocorrelation functions
permits the assumtion of the existence of statistical relations with large and
small autooorrelation radii. Small autocorrelation radii (60 meters) of both the
radiation and brightness tenperatures for first-year ice coincide with the spatial
variability of the thicknesses (50 to 70 meters) obtained in reference [2]. The
large autocorrelation radii (100 to 300 meters) are obviously related to the spatial
distribution of the unevennesses of the upper boundary of the ice, and they require
additional experimental refinement.

The performed research permits the following conclusions to be drawn:

1. For the existing level of accuracy of determination of the factors forming the
thernal relief of the underlying surface. the lethod of infrared radiomtry is
effective only for estimting the thickness of young ice.

2. The complex we of infrared information and dcrowave channels will permit
indexing of the following age groups of sea ice: newly formed ice, first-year white
ice of Edit!!! thickness, first-year thick and multiyear ice.

3. The application of the apparatus of correlation functions when processing the
recorded values of the natural thermal emission of the floating snow and ice cover
offers the possibility of determining some of its morphological paramters.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Bogorodskiy, V. V., Hartynova, Ye. A. and Spitsyn, V. A., "Study of the
Poi-nation of Natural Thermal Emission of Snow and Ice Cover of the Arctic Sea

as Applied to the Problems of Infrared Radionetry," TRUDY 060 [Works of the
Main Geophysics Observatory], No 399, 1977, pp 87-1110.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Buzuyev. A. Ya. and Dwovtsev. V. P., "Statistical Characteriatim of Some
Parameters of the Ice Cover in the Arctic," TEDDY AANII Works of the Arctic
and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute], Vol 303, 1971, pp 166-179.

3. Rabinovich. Yu. 1.. Loshchidov, V. S. and Shul'gina, Ye. 11.. "Analysis of the
Results of Measuring the Characteristics of the Ice Cover (Version 6),"
SOVETSKO-AHBRIKANSKIY EKSPERIW "DEW" [Soviet-Amrican "Bering" Experiment].
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1975, pp 294-313.

COPYRIGIT: Coeudaratvennyy okeanograficheekiy ineritut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
CSO: 8145/1010

56

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR 0PM“. USE ONLY

UN 551.521:551.667
MICROWAVE 311M 0? SBA ICE

lbscow mm B‘DODY IZHBRDIIYA ammonium va in Rmsian
1981 pp 57-60

[Article by P. A. Nikitin]

[Text] Annotation. A study is ends of the results of nodal calcula-
tions of neural microwave emission of sea ice. A comarison of the
calculated data with the experimental data indicates the applicability
of a nodel of thermal radio wavelength eaission of radon nonmiforn
layered aedia with nonuniforn teqerature profile for description of
the investigated phenomenon. The frequency and angular relations are
presented for the eaissive power of Arctic pack ice. It is damn-
strated that the experimentally observed increase in the enisaive
power of annml ice (by comariaon with pack ice) is causal to a
higher degree by the tenerature distribution with respect to thick-
ness of the ice than by scattering.

For proper interpretation of microwave intonation obtained wing licrowave
radiontera installed on board an aircraft or artificial satellite, it is necessary
to know the radiation characteristics of the sounded surface. thfortmately,
experinental work in studying microwave emission of sea ice is not of a systelatic
nature, and statistically justifiable relations have still not been obtained. his
deficiency can he ends up for to acne degree by nodal calculations.

As is known, real sea ice is a nonisothernal layered aadiua with air, brine inclu-
sions and other nonmifornities. Taking this into account. a nodel of thernal
radio wavelength emission of a randonly nonuniforl layered ”diu- with nonunifor-
teuperature profile was selected for perforling the calculations. The dielectric
constant of this media can be described as follows:

5 = email) (tab-0.
MM“. do!!! am<<e¢.

A detailed description of the mdel with derivation of the basic relations is pre-
sented in reference [1]. The output parmters for the calculations are the
dielectric constant, the characteristics of its variability and the teqerature
profile. The scattering coefficients (Kp). phue factors (P) and radiobrightneas
temrature (Thriglnt) on be calculated by these data for vertical (3) and horizontal
(r) polarizations:

$7
MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KPr ‘ggé/nggj;

are . I

. m Mitewwosggg ,
KP. 2cos0 141(le '

Pin _2_[144k’l’cos’0] pu-_-___2cos’20 .
'3 '1¢4k’(.’c_os’5vms’25 ' ‘ ‘144k't‘oos‘oo'cos'28’

7" :p%[ri * ”ﬁe—$9}
0' “[Kp'Vlm-AJ[1-[24]P‘"+/§]P”J} ’2.

Ask
Kp'ﬂ '

Here k-Zl/X is the wave mater, y is the absorption coefficient, Bo are the
Fresnel coefficients, 60 is the sighting angle, T(z)-'l' Vr'exp(-Gs) i the :tempera-
ture profile. The correlation function for Hz) is <E?21)'E(zz)>-Ae exp(-Izl-zzll'l).

me data on the electrophysical characteristics of first-year and lultiyear (pack)
sea ice obtained mder natural conditions by the coworkers of the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute are presented in [2]. The values of

y. A and 1 for pack ice were calculated by solving the inverse problem with respect
to the experinental data from [3]. The results of calculations of the radiobrigxtness
temperature normalized for the thermodynamic temperature of the ice surface (which is
mually recorded by remote nasurements) are presented in Figures 1-6.

  

    

 

Wm pm“ (‘)

u-' um I"

1! l
U 0

17 ‘

3 Q. 1

( § _._ 1

‘5 1' “ \\\\\\\\ J

W
o to w u 0, o 2 s 0 sun
Figure 1. Microwave emission of pack ice Figure 2. Microwave edssion of marine

for different sighting angle:
1 -- 15-0; 2 - A-0.1, l-0.01;
3 - (3-0.2, 1-0.01; -- erperiaental
data from [3]; T(z)-258-lb exp(-0.01 2)
Key: .

a. Tbright/No)

Arctic ice:

I -— first-year ice, II -- pack ice;
I -- uniform nediu. 2 - considering
scattering and distribution 1(3).

3 - experimental data fron [6].

Key: 8. “dam/NO)

S8

MOMOMJJSBONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

(‘2 I mt 0-0' (I)
is

ﬁll")
I (0

Z ' :14:

U 0

i 1 i ' ‘ I z 0 I an
Figure 3. Microwave cussion of pack ice Figure 6. lucrowave eniasion of first-
with different scattering parameters: year ice with different internal
1, 2, 3, lo -- 1‘(r)-‘l‘(0)-258 K, tewerxure profiles:
5.- sz)-272-16exp(-0.022); ' 1 - T(z)-272-25 end-0.12).
l - A-o, 2 -- A-0.2, L-0.0l. 2 - ‘r(z)-272-1lo exp(-0.3¢),
3 -- A-0.01. 2-0.1; 10.5 - (3-0.1. 3 — '1'(z)-272-llo exp(-0.lz),
[-0.01 b .. T(z)-T(0)-258 K
Key: Key:

a. ThridltIT(o) a. Wright/7(0)

Analysis of the obtained variables permits certain conclusions to be drawn:

The selected nodel of radiation is entirely applicable for calculations of the
natural microwave radiation of sea ice, which is confined by coasting (see
Figure 11) the calculated and independent experimental data fron [lo];

With an increase in ti:e vertical telperature gradient, the valm of Tbri t/r(0) also
increases. the more. the longer the enisaion wavelength (see Figure III-g): 5 and
Figure IV). This is entirely legal. for the absorption coefficient in sea ice is
inversely proportional to the wavelength and, than, the long wave edsaion is
formed in a thicker layer. the effective teqerature of which is higher than NO).
The increase in effective tewerature also explains the feet that Tbright of first-
yesr ice turned out to be higher than Tb of nultiyear ice even at b3 on where
the scattering is insignificant (for aqua g“on, although the salinity of the
nultiyesr ice is appreciably less and, consequently, the enissive power not be mine

[31;

In connection with the fact that the scattering is of a selective nature. the posi-
tion of the niniaul on the spectral curve can indicate peculiarities in the internal
structure of the ice;

Obtaining the angular and spectral. relations of the eniasive power of sea ice can

be used when developing the corresponding procedure for interpreting the microwave
neasurennts.

S9

FOIOFFICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Taang, L. and Kong, J. A., "The Brightness Teuperature of a Half-space
Random Medium with Nonmifon teqerature Profile," RADIO 861., Vol 10,
No 12, 1975, pp 1025-1033.

2. Bogorodskiy, V. V. and Khokhlw, G. P., "Anisotropy of the Dielectric Constant
and Absorption of Arctic Drift Ice in the Mex-wave Range," 230nm.
MOESKOY FIZIKI [Technical Physics Journal], Vol 57, No 6, 1977, pp 1111-
1305.

3. Gloersen, P., Nordberg, IL, Schmge, ‘1‘. J. and ﬂilheit, I. 1., "Microwave

Signatures of First-Year and Hultiyear Sea Ice," 30m. 01’ GEOPR. 338., Vol 78,
No 18, 1973. pp 3564-3572.

1., Cloersen, P., Chang, ‘1'. c.. "iiheit, ‘1‘. ‘1'. end Cowbell, II. J., "Polar Sea
Ice Observations by Means of Microwave Radiometry,” Doc. 1-652-73-361
Noveﬂaer 1973, Goddard Space Flight Center, Mtyland.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheakiy inatitut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye).
1981

10845
C50: 8144/1010

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 536.521.2550.“

USE 01" METHOD OF INFRARED RADIONBTIH m STUDY TIME VARIABILITY OF HEAT
BXOIANG‘B OF EASTER! ARCTIC SEAS WITH ATMSPHBRE

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYB END! IZIERENIYA WWW PWV in Rmsian
1981 pp 61-66

[Article by A. I. Paranonov]

[Text] Annotation. An analysis is nde of the experimental data
from measuring the surface teaperetures of the Clutch! and

Eastern Siberian Seas in Septeﬁer for 1. years obtained by

an infrared radiometer installed on an ice reconnaissance aircraft.
The spatial distribution of the teaperattn’e field is considered

to be a random process. The teQereturee are interpolated to the
nodes of a regular grid at which the heat budget coaponents are
calculated. The interyear variations of the heat fluxes are
considered as fluctuations around a mean value.

The study of the thermal interaction of the polar seas with the atmosphere is an
urgent problem of mdern hydrometeorology. The difficulty of such a study is
deternined by the significant mine of inforlation about the actual distribution of
the physical parameters defining the heat exchange process. A variety of causes and
interrelations permit consideration of their distribution in space and
variability in time a random process. The temperature of the boundary layer or the
film is ilportant for calculations of the heat exchange elenents of two media.

The heat engineering interaction of the waterenov-ice surfaces vith the atmosphere
creates a conplex therml relief over the entire area of freezing sees. If we
limit the investigated process to the time interval during which it is possible to
consider the telperature on the average independent of tin, then are obtain the
three dimensional hydrometeorological tewerature field which can be called the
teaperature surface, thermal relief. For practical construction of the theml
relief. as is shoun in referencesI3-‘Sl. it is possible to use the data of infrared
radiometry of the mderlying surfaces.

In 1973. in the eastern sector of the Arctic, annually during the fall the Arctic
Institute takes regular measureunts of the surface teqerature of the seas by an
infrared radiometer installed on an ice reconnaissance aircraft. The work schedule

on the aircraft is put together so that each 10-day period of the month studies are
made of the sane region. However, in the given region there is no repetition or

unified scheme for constructing the tacks. Thus, for processing the aerial survey

61

MOMMUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data Lin-re is a set of random routes in a defined research area. along which the
random Lcupcrature distribution of the underlying surfaces is menured. The nethods
(If obj-Tillie analysis of hydroancteorological fields are applicable to such data [2].

A ten-day period was selected as the unit time interval. At first, the operation
of smoothing of the temereture field was performed, that is. calculation of the
weighted anean values and uniform sections of its microscale fluctuations. Here the
packing of the ice and amber of different age gradations of it in the smoothing
section were determined (hereafter these data were used to estimate the surface
albedo). The operation of mathematical interpolation of the smoothed experimental
values of the teqnerature was realized by calculating the approximation coefficients
am of two-dimensional functions by polynomials on the Minsk-32 comuter.* At the
nodes of the grid the temperatures F(x,y) were restored by the algorithm

.. r1. _.. _
Margy» r'?’ i

where m and t, the powers of the polynoanials with respect to the argnnents x and y,
are selected equal to I-t-3, and the new origin of the coordinates (0, 0) was located

at the center of a rectangle. The coordinates x, y were found on the parallels and
meridians of a Mercator-projection map.

0n the basis of analyzing regularity over the course of several years of tenerature
observations, the research region was defined. Then this region was divided into five
rectangles including the western part of the Chukotskoye [Chukchi] Sea (rectangle In
in Figure l). Proliv bonga [Longs Strait] (5), the coastal zone of the East Siberian
Sea (1) and two regions north of Hrangel Island (2, 3). The separation was made both
from geographic and from physical argnnaents, considering the snare uniform structure
of the underlying surfaces. The rectangles differed in size (see

Figure l), but they had the same grid spacing (with the exception of the area of
Proliv Dongs), equal to 75 and 45 km with respect to latitude and longitude,
respectively. In Proliv Longs. the grid spacing was half as large. Thus. in the
first rectangle there were 75 nodes, in the second rectangle there were 50, in the
third, 91, in the fourth 47, and in the fifth, 78 grid nodes. For each rectangle
its own approximation coefficients were calculated. By the reproduced temperatures,
the thermal relief of the entire region was constructed. figure 1 shows the teapera-
ture surfaces of the second and third 10-day periods of Septeniner 1973. Analysis

of these data reveals the state of the thermal relief in the temeratures, its con-
figuration and variability in time. Such temperature surfaces were defined by

10-day periods of September and by years. The investigation of the interyear varia-
hllity shows large tewerature fluctuations around the average value in different
years. For Proliv Longa, such data are presented in Table l. The reproduced
tenperatures at the grid nodes were subjected to statistical processing.

 

*l'he POLDV program was developed by K. Ye. Chernyy at the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Thermal relief of the entire region in tvo 10-day periods
of Septewer 1973
Key:
1. Utangel Island

Histogram of the tewerature distribution in Pmliv Longs on the average for
Septewer are presented in Figure 2 for a 10-year period. Analyzing Table l and
Figure 2. it is possible to draw the following oonclmions.

ﬂ

Q!

    

-: l 07‘:
Figure 2. Histograms of average Septewer tenperatures (Proliv Longs)

l. Fluctuations of several degrees Kelvin in the mean monthly teweratures for
Scptcsber between different years exist. 2. The average teqersture for 4 years
of observations in Septeber is close to 0‘6 (0.61'0). 3. The distribution
envelope of the average monthly temerature is the sun of several envelopes stbject
to a law close to normal distribution. Each such envelope reflects the correspond-
ing quantitative and physical characteristics of the underlying surfaces. for
exawle. the presence of warm water (t>0’C), cold water along the ice of different
packing (t<0'c). and residual ice (t<—2°c).

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Statistical Values of the Mean Monthly Tapersture ('C)
in Septeliaer by Years

 

1. Average for 4 years

Table 2. Average Thermal Plumes (Real/(mz-nonth» in Septeﬁer

 

By the known values of the underlying surface temperatures, smoldering the average
albedo and the values of the perennial meteorological elements at the grid nodes,

the mean monthly values were calculated by the heat balance coaponenta of the surface
of the turbulent flow P, the latent heat LE, radiation budget R and resultant flow q
[1]. Table 2 gives the average values of these flows for Proliv Longs in Septelber.

Analysis of the states and the fluctuations of the thermal processes on the surface
of the polar seas by the infrared radiomtric data continues.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Budyko, M. 1., ATLAS TBPIDVOG) BALANSA M000 SHARA [Heat Budget Atlas of
the World], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1963.

2. Gandin, L. S. and Regan, R. I... STATISTICHBSKIYE MBTODY INTERPRETATSII
[ETEOROIDGICHESKIKB DANNYKFI [Statistical Methods of Interpreting hteorological
Data], Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat, 1976, 359 pages.

3. Bogorodskiy, v. V. and Martynova, Ye. A., SOBSTVBNNOYE TZPLOVOYE Inucmms summo-
LEDYANOCO POKROVA ARKTICHBSKIXH mm [Natural Heat Emission of the Snow and
Ice Cover of the Arctic Sea], Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1978, 37 pages.

a. Bogorodskiy, V. V. and Paramnov, A. 1., RADIOOKEAMLOGIYA [Radio Cosmology],
Leningrad, Gidroaeteoizdat, 1976, 26 pages.

5. "Oceanographic Investigations During the AIDJEX Emerinent," in AIDJ'BX BULLETIN,
No 27, 1971.. pp 125-133.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy inati tut (leningradskoye otdeleniye) ,
19 81

1081.5
cso: 8144/ 1010
61.

l-‘OIOFI-‘ICIALUSEONLY
roe OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

1100 5%.521.2:550.46
APPLICATION OF INFRARED RADIOETKY IN STUDIES OF PAR EASTER! SEAS

Moscow mmnxmrs usrom Imnsmm mommm mm in Rmsian
1981 p 67

[Article by A. A. Visnevakiy]

[Text] Annotation. A discussion is presented of the operating experience ming
infrared radioneters of different types in the Kolyna Administration of the
Hydrometeorological Service during 1967-1977. Undisputed advantages of the Mirb3
infrared radiometer (Leningrad Division of the State Oceanographic Institute—
Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute) over its predecessors are noted both with
respect to conpactness and with respect to operating stability. Nevertheless, the
complexity of calibrating the instrument is noted. Operating peculiarities of the
Mir-3 radiometer at law teweratures in the fall and winter are diseased. 802
results are presented from air observations of tamer-stores in the Far Eastern seas.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudsrstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (leningradskoye otdeleniye).
1981

10845
CSO: 8164/1010

65

POROFIICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.66.08

ASYMPTOTIC STUDY OF LASER PUISBS unwrap FROM SBA SURFACE

noscou mommm mama! IZHBRENIYA momrcnsm 2mm in Russian
1981 p 68

[Article by V. Ye. Rokotyan]

[Text] Annotation. A theoretical study "as node of various sounding conditions of

the sea surface by short pulses and narrow light beam. Asmtotic formulas were
obtained which relate the shape of the recorded pulse to the shape of the sounded

surface.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy inetitut (Inningrsdokoye otdeleniye).
1981

10845
cso: 8144/ 1010

66

mmmomv
5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.463.5535..“
POSSIBILITIBS 0P DETEWUG MARINE “180801. “WON BY mm: LASER ramps

Moscow momma rumor manna mmcmsxm va in Russian
1981 p 68

[Article by S. F. Korchagina, A. L. Kravtaov, A. 8. Datum md V. I. Khakm’in]

[Text] Annotation. A procedure is proposed for determining the urine hydroool
concentration based on recording return light bu- during sounding by two lasers.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy inotitut (Leningradakoye otdeleniye),
1981

1081.5
680: 8166/1010

67

FOIOFFICIALIBBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.46.08

REPDTE DETECTION AND IDENTIFIQI’ION 01’ OIL POLLUTION AT SEA BY FLUORESCDIT SPECTRA

[Article by V. A. Torgovichev. V. P. Krivolapov, ‘l‘. N. 'Klinova. V. Yu. Haslov and
C. Ye. Nefedov]

[Text] Annotation. A report is presented on the performance of a
series of laboratory and natural experiments to study the fluorescence
properties of plutonium products and sea water, and also for renote
detection and identification of the oomosition of oil slicks on the
sea surface.

At this time there are a nder of different methods of remote detection of oil
slicks on the sea surface [1]. Microwave radioneters. radar, on-board caueras,
infrared thernographs, and so on are med for this purpose. These system can detect
and map oil spills under defined conditions. .but none of then are able reliably to
classify the type of petroleum product earning the pollution.

The possibility of using the uethod of laser-radar (lidar) fluorouetry for renote
detection and identification of oil slicks is based on the known fact of selected
absorption (1-220 to 1.00 nu) of petroleul hydrocarbons with subsequent powerful
Stokes fluorescence (S.F.) in the 300 to 600 mu range. The primary factors limiting
the possibility of detection and identification of oil slicks by fluorescent spectra
are the great width and variety of the 8.1’. spectra of petroleun products and also
the fluorescence of sea water [2].

The first attempt to use the method of lidar fluoronetry for reaote monitoring of
oil slicks at sea was made by a group of Amrican researchers [3]. 0n the basis of
laboratory analysis of the fluorescence spectra of various types of petroleu and
petroleum films on water surfaces, they created the helicopter lidar with nitrogen
laser (lo-337.1 nu), and they performed a series of full-scale experimts. The
results obtained convincingly proved the prospectiveness of this method for detection
and mapping of oil spills. However, the S.P. spectra of clean and polluted sea
surfaces presented in [3] have noticeable similarity with respect to shape although
they differ by two or three times with respect to intensity. The position of the
spectral peak (Am) of the fluorescence of various types of oil films and the SJ.
of sea water differs by no more than 10 to 3) nu on excitation by a nitrogen laser.

68

MOWUSEONLY
The intensity of lidar signals depends on the wave state of the sea surface'and the
sounding angle [1]. and of sea water fluorescence can vary by I) to 50 In for
different bodies of water ]. Therefore the problen of uniqueness of deternining

for the investigated excitation region. At the same tile, jut as in [3]. great
similarity of the S.P. spectra of different petroleua is noted. However, for solu-
tions of products and vapor of volatile fractions the differences in the 5.1’. spectra

are more noticeable and. consequently, the conditions for their identification are
more favorable.

the sea water and the surface contaminated by petroleum products. Measurements were
performed using the tR-IK lidar developed at the Central Aerologicel Observatory [4],
which is a remote laser spectrometer. For excitation of fluorescence, the emission
of the third (lo-354.7 nm) and fourth (lo-266 nu) harmonics of a 100 kilowatt pulsed
NszAG-laser was used. The fluorescence iron the investigated surface was gathered

x
shift for petroleum products is ~90 mi in this case, and the 8.1”. intensity 3?
sea water decreases by ~3-fold.

69

non OFFIGAL USE ONLY
00' 650 500 ”l “I J an

Figure 1. Frequency dependence of the lider fluorescent spectre of

oil slick (7 nicrons) on the sea surface as a function of radiation
excitation wavelength:

3 -- Xo-3Slo.7 nm. b - 10-266 on; 1 -- oil. 2 -- diesel fuel,
3 -- sea water
The experimental studies that we perforned demonstrated that the method of lider

fluorimetry permits remote detection, napping ad identification of oil slicks on
the sea surface by lasers with a wavelength of 266 nu.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
magma“ use on“

 

(b)

Metamouwwwmmam

Figure 2. Fluorescent spectra of petrolex- products on the sea
surface (lidar):
1 -- lazut [fuel oil] (2’. hours after the spill), 2 - diesel oil

(fresh spill), 3 - bilge Hater. lo -- "clean water" (after a
storm)

Key:

3.

lo.

a. Relative mite
[1. nm

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bogorodskiy. V. V., Kropotkin, H. A. and Sheveleve. ‘1'. Yu., HB'IODY I
TEKHNIKA OBNARIZHENIYANEPTYANYKH ZAGRYAZNBNIY V01). [Methods and Equipment for

Detecting Petroleu- Pollutants of Water], Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdst, 1975.
p 21..

Karabashev. G. S. . "Modern Achievements in the Study of the Fluorescence of
Materials Dissolved and Suspended in See Water," I S”YEZD sown-sum
OKEANOLOmV [First Congress of Soviet Oceanologists]. No l. FIZIKA OKEANA.
I‘DRSKAYA TEKHNIKA [Physics of the Ocean. Marine Equipment], pp 157-158.

Fantasia, J. F..and Ingres. 3. C-, "Develop-eat of an Experimental Airborne
Laser Remote Sensing Systen for Detection and Classification of Oil Spills,"

moc. or 1111: 9th 1mm. sue. on me smsmc or mum. vm.
15-19 April 1971., pp 1711-1745.

Zakharov, V. H. and Kostko. 0. K., MOMMCHBSKAYA LAZBIWAYA WKATSIYA
[Meteorological Lider], Leningrad. Gidrouteoizdat, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudaretvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningrsdskoye otdeleniye).

1981

10845

60:

8144/ 1010

71

POIOFFICIALUSEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 551. 66.07

APPLICATION 0? METHOD OF STATISTICAL TESTS 1‘0 CALCULATE ocnn mam-run
UNDER LASAR IRRADIATION

Moscow momma Heron! warms momrcazsnm va in Marin
1981 p 7:.

[Article by A. S. Lethen and N. V. Urikova]

[Text]. Annotation. A study is mde of the application of the Monte Carlo Iathod to

study the characteristics of the propagation of laser eeission in the urine environ-
ment. The probabilities of the transitions of wandering particles in different

directions were determined in a mdel by the scattering indicatrices. A study was
made of the penetration of protons into the water and energetics at the surface.

A three-dimensional model is reduced to one-dimensional and two-disensional Iodels
considering the probabilities of survival of the protons in the given nediul.

The obtained results agree well with the exponential law of intensity duping with

depth of penetration. In addition. estilates are presented for the intensity of the

radiation emerging at the surface after Iultiple scattering in the surface layer of
the sea.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy inatitut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
C80: 8164/ 1010

72

MOFHCIALUSEONLY
5‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPA“ AND AERIAL SURVEYING IN m OPTICAL BANG

UN 551.1065. 7

PUSH AND DRIFT 0? ICE IN THE HEAD OF GULF OF FINLAND AS APPLIED 1'0 PROBLEMS IN
HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING (ACWRDING m AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHIC SURVEY DATA)

Moscow unmnxmm IBTODY IZHBRBNIYA omnocmncassxm mammov in Russian
1981 pp 75-77

[Article by V. V. Drabkin and H. L. Honosov]

[Text] Annotation. Three periods characterized by different effect
of the ice cover on hydroengineering structures have been isolated by
the results of processing aerial photographic surveying and aerial
rsdiogeodetic data in the head of the Gulf of Finland. In order to
calculate the ice loads on the sites of the designed structures. it
is recomnded that optimal values be selected for the dinnsions

of the largest pieces of ice and their drift rate.

At the head of the Gulf of Finland in the winter three periods can be isolated which

are characterized by different effect of the ice cover on hydroengineering struc-
tures:

1. During the growth of the shore ice the ice drift appears to be least dangerous

with regard to its effect on hydroengineering structures. The ice is of insignifi-
cant thickness and cannot pose a threat to the structures, in particular, if the

shore ice sets up in a short period of time, at low teweratures and with little
wind.

2. Winter push and drift of the ice during surge. "inter push and drift of the
ice occur during the period after final set-up of the shore ice. when the shore ice
is broken during surges and high Hinds, and they are the lost dmgerous for hydro-
engineering structures. The thickness of the ice when the shore ice breaks open

can vary from 10 to 50 cm. In the entire history of flooding breaking of shore ice
Dre than 60 cm thick has never been observed.

3. Ice drift in the spring. Ice drift in the spring occurs after the shore ice
breaks open and before comlete disappearance of the ice sheet. During the period
the strength of the ice decreases, degradation can reach degreeb orS. This drift-

ing of the ice is usually less dangerom for hydrodynanic structures than winter
drift because in the spring the ice has less strength.

73

POROFF'ICIALIBEONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

During set-up of the shore ice loads created by the drift of thin pieces of ice are
Insignificant.

In the winter, in the presence of pushing storm winds from the western quarter
and rises in water level at the head of the Gulf of Finland and in Neva Bay, the
shore ice separates from the shore and the entire ice mass is pushed fron west to
east. During such pushes. ice heaps are found on the shoals, cribworlta, islands
and shorelines, and in the open sea, his-locking zones and ice reefs are formed.

In both severe and moderate winters the approach of ice from the direction of the
sea has low probability, for stable shore ice is present at the head of the Gulf of
Finland.

During mild winters after the shore ice breaks up in the spring. it undergoes partial
degradation and is carried way, if there are prolonged winds from the western quarter,
drift ice can come in frcn the sea to the head of the Gulf of Finland and into the
vicinity of Yuzhnyye Vorota. The movement of this ice complicates navigation and

can cause hon-locking and ice heaps on the structures. Drift ice does not reach
Severnyye Vorota as a result of the preservadon of shore ice north of Kotlin Island.
Here the ice sheet primarily thaws out locally and usually disappears only after
adjacent regions are clear of ice.

It is known that hydroengineering designers are the most interested in the drift of
maximum sized pieces of ice in the vicinity of the structures [1].

One such piece of ice 23.8 kmz in area was recorded by an aerial photograph on

13 April 1971; as it entered the head of the Gulf of Finland on the phototaclt fron
Cape Stir-sudden to Cape Shepalevskiy. Three successive drift vectors of the ice
field were obtained-46.7, 13.1 and 18.0 cm/sec with directions of 99, 99 and 68°,
respectively. The wind was northeasterly, 6-9 m/sec. During the period from

13 to 16 April the average daily drift of this piece of ice was 3.3 cmlsec, and
from 16 to 17 April, 7.4 cm/sec.

The largest piece of ice recorded by aerial photography on 20 April 1974 at
Yuzhnyye Vorota had an area of 1.5 km2 (1.8 ka0.8 kn), degradation and reefing of
degree 1. The ice moved at a- speed of abut 10 ell/sec under the effect of northerly
and northwesterly winds blowing at 8-10 m/sec.
Using the aerial photographic data, V. V. Drabkin and A. S. Kurochltin at the
Leningrad Division of the State Oceanographic Institute derived the following
formula to calculate the speed of the ice drift at the head of the Gulf of l’inland
as a function of wind velocity:

u = 1.63 V + 6.60,
where H is the ice drift rate, cm/sec;

V is the wind velocity, m/aec.

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY

During the breakup of the head of the Gulf of Finland and Rave Bay, the nexinn
long-ten wind velocity does not exceed 16 nlsec; therefore the trim drift rate
of the ice will not exceed 30 ell/sec according to this forsula.

Sis-sing up the results of the discussion, it is possible to draw the following
conclusions:

During winter surges the hydroengineering structures can be subjected to static
pressure of the entire mass of ice in the head of the Gulf of Finland;

In the vicinity of the designed structures. the dynamic loads from: drift ice from the
Gulf of Finland and Neva Bay can be expected after the spring debacle;

For calculation of ice loads under the effect of drift ice, it is recon-ended that

the maxim dineneions of the ice field be taken equal to the following: 1ength

2.0 kn, width 1.0 lul, area 2.0 knz; with nsxim drift rate of 30 est/sec.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Korzhavin, K. N.. VOZDEYSTVIYE L'DA NA INZEENERNYYB SOORUZHENIYA [Effect of Ice
on the Engineering Structures], Ind. so AN SSSR, Novosibirsk, 1962. 198 pages.

COPYRIGHT: Goeudarstvennyy okesnograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10855
cs0: 8166/1010

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 551.66:629.786.2:639.2.001.5

EXPERIMENT IN DBCIPRERING ZONES 0F HIGHEST BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY WITH RESPECT TO
HULTIZONAL SPACE IMAGES OF WATER ENVIRONMENT

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYB MBTODY IZHBRBNIYA OKEANOGRAPICHESKIKB PARAHBTRDV in Russian
1981 pp 78-82

[Article by 0. P. Vanyushin]

[Text] Annotation. The distribution of the phytoplankton
concentration can be determined by the image brightness of a body
of water in the central range of 0.5 to 0.6 microns inside regions
having approximately identical content of inorganic suspension in
the surface layer of the water. The boundaries of these regions
are established on the basis of issge brightness of the water
environment in the spectral ranges of 0.6 to 0.7 and 0.7 to 0.8
microns. Results are presented from experimental decoding of the
phytoplankton concentration distribution with respect to materials

from the space survey and satellite observations of the northwest
coast of Africa.

The study of the relations between the brightness (optical density) of multisOnal
images of the water environment and oceanological characteristics is at the present
time one of the procedural problems of studying the ocean from space. Discovery of
these laws is necessary, in particular, for interpretation of the remote sounding
data in the interests of the fishing industry. The study of zones of increased
productivity is directly connected with finding the relation between the optical
density of multizonal images of the water environment and the structure of the most
important biological element-the phytoplankton. The difficulty of studying phyto-
plankton concentration by noncontact methods consists in the necessity for exact
determination of its contribution to the spectral brightness of the water.

0n the basis of an analysis of numerous published data it is possible to propose
that the brightness of the water in the spectral range of 0.5 to 0.6 micron depends
on the number of particles of phytoplankton and inorganic suspension, and in the
spectral zone of 0.6 to 0.7 micron. primarily on the number of particles of
inorganic suspension. Separating the investigated body of water into regions having
approximately equal inorganic suspension content in the surface layer of the water
with respect to brightness values (optical density) of its image in the spectral
range of 0.6 to 0.7 (0.7 to 0.8) micron, it is possible to consider that in the
spectral range of 0.5 to 0.6 micron the brightness variations of the water in the

76

FOIIOFIIChtlIlﬁliﬂﬁlY
FOI!OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

central parts of the isolated regions take place as a result of differences in the
phytoplankton concentration. This method of discovering the zones of increased
productivity was proved when processing the space survey data and the data from
satellite observations off the northwest coast of Africa.

The experiment was performed in April 1976 in the region bounded by the coordinates
17 to 26’ north and 16 to 22' vest. The survey data obtained by the multizonal
scanning equipment of an artificial earth satellite were used.

The ships of the USSR Ministry of Fishing (the AtlantNIRO) performed full-scale
measurements. The space information was in the form of images of the experimental
region in four spectral ranges 0.5 to 0.6. 0.6 to 0.7. 0.7 to 0.8, 0.8 to 1.1
micron in the fora of transparent positives. The picture was taken at 1052 hours
local time on 30 April 1976.

The ship observations included determination of the following characteristics:

depth (meters). color (on the Porel-Wood color scale). relative transparency (meters,
by the Secchi disc). the phytoplankton biomass for the 0 to 100 meter layer (g/m3),
the water temperature in the surface layer, the wind direction and velocity. wave
direction and height. All the sections were taken in the latitudinal directiOn
with interval between stations of 10 minutes of the grade grid on the average. The
distance between sections was also 10 minutes. The hydrologic conditions of the
investigated body of water give rise to high biological productivity in the presence
of spectral gradients of important oceanographic characteristics (water temperature,
color. relative transparency. phytoplankton concentration, inorganic suspension
concentration. and so on.

Before comparing the space images of the water surface with the satellite observa-
tion data, external conditions of the survey on which the albedo of the ocean depends,
were analyzed. Research data were needed to discover whether it is possible to con-
sider the image of the body of water as a united whole or whether it must be

analyzed by parts. The influence of the atmosphere on the ocean emission was taken
the same for the entire test area, for the experimental region was small (100X160 km),
and it was within 280 km of the shore (for the center of the region). The following
survey conditions were also analyzed: solar angle, angle of sight. wave height and
direction. On the basis of this work. the conclusion was drawn that variations in

the values of the optical density of the image of the water in the experimental
region primarily reflect the distribution pattern of the oceanographic parameters.

According to the preposed procedure. the investigated body of water was regionalized
with respect to relative content of inorganic suspension in the surface

layer of the water on the basis of optical density maps in the spectral ranges of
0.6 to 0.7 and 0.7 to 0.8 micron. The maps were constructed on the basis of
measuring the optical density of transparent positives using the Gretag densitomster
and a multichannel image analysis system 181-150 [1]. The inorganic suspension is
present in the surface water of the experimental region. These are sand and dust
particles carried along by the constantly moving air flows from the Sahara Desert.

Pour regions were isolated. The correctness of the method was indirectly confirmed
by the relative transparency measured at the stations which were located within the
parts of the body of water with relatively equal suspension content (see the
table).

77

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No of region 1 2 3 3
No of stations 11 6+1 8 4
Average value of relative 9.3:%:E 031.0 11.2.1:2 1§:2.0

C ransparency , meters

Some lack of correspondence of the average values of the relative transparency to the
quantitative distribution of the inorganic suspension for regions 1 and 2 occurs
because the values of the relative transparency are also influenced by the phyto-
plankton particle concentration. Thus, for region 1, the average plankton biomass is
0.17 glm3, and for 2, 0.89 g/m3. This indicates that with identical relative
transparency the part of the water in which there is note inorganic suspension in

the surface water will appear brighter on the space image in the spectral range of
0.5 to 0.6 micron. When analyzing variations of the optical density of the inage

of the water environment from the phytoplankton concentration in the spectral range
of 0.5 to 0.6 micron, inside the regions with relatively identical inorganic suspen-

sion content, a defined law was discovered which is traced well for all bodies of
water (Figure l).

  

1'» a» an
I , .
' (b)

'1! 'llasnIMu nu!)

Figure 1. Relation between phytoplankton concentration and
optical density of the image of the water in the spectral range
of 0.5 to 0.6 micron for bodies of water with approximately the
same inorganic suspension content (1, 2, 3, 6, respectively for
water with high, medium, "intermediate," and low relative
inorganic suspension content)
Key:
a. g/m3
b‘ D0.5-0.6 micron (positive)

0n the basis of the obtained laws, the phytoplankton concentration distribution map
constructed initially by the results of the ship observations (Figure 2) was
corrected.

Thus, the deciphering of phytoplankton concentrations by the data from multizonal
space surveys, in our opinion, must be carried out after the investigated body of
water has been regionalized with respect to the amount of inorganic suspension in

the surface water. The given nethod was tested when processing the satellite and
ship measurenent data in the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Northwest Africa,

and it gave promising results which demonstrated the possibility of discovering zones
of increased biological productivity based on the phytoplankton concentration dis-
tribution with respect to multizonal space information.

78

FOR oat-1cm. use ONLY /"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Phytoplankton concentration distribution in the
experimental region in g/II3:
a -- according to the ship observer-ion data, b —- according
to the results of analyzing nultizoml space inages
Key:
1. clouds

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bunblis, V. 1., Vanyushin, G. P. and Potaychuk, S. 1., "Experience in Studying
Hater Objects Using Television System to Process Hultizonal Information,"
DOKLAD NA I VSESOYUZNOY KONFBRENTSII P0 0WD OPY'l‘OH ISPOL'ZOVANIYA
KOSHIGESKOY INFORHAISII [Report at the 1st All-Union Conference on Exchange of
Experience in the Use of Space Information], Moscow, 21-24 October 1976.

2. Yerlov, N., OPTICl-IBSKAYA OKEANOGRAFIYA [Optical Oceanography]. Moscow, Mir,
1970. ~

3. Szeklelda, K. 8., "Observations of Suspended Material fro. Spacecraft Altitudes,"
DBUTSCHBS HYDROGRAPHISCHES INSTITUTE, Hunts, No lo, 1974, pp 159-170

COPYRIGHT: Gosndaratvmnyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningrsdsltoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
C80: 8146/ 1010

79

ms omcm. use ONLY
l-‘OR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.66.082:528.7
SOME RESULTS OF AIRCRAFT MEASUREMENTS 0P CURRENTS Ill LAKES AND RESERVOIRS

Moscow mom-m HE'DODY Immm omocmucnzsxml PM in Russian
1981 p 83

[Article by Ye. D. Yegorikhin and '1‘. N. Pilstovs]

[Text] Annotation. Results are presented from assuring currents in Lake Chudsko-
Pokovskoye, Nsrvskoye and Uglegorskoye Reservoirs. 0n the basis of experience
accmulsted since 1965, procedural instructions were developed for serial Insure-
nents of currents in lakes and reservoirs.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudsrstvennyy okesnogrsficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye).
1981

108105
680: 8144/1010

MOWUSEONLY
FOIIOIIHCJAI.USE|0NLJ

UDC 551.56.08:556
APPLICATION OF ANALOG-DIGITAL DEVICES FOR INTERPRETING AEROSPACE DATA

Moscow HERMAKTNYYE amour IZHBRENIYA ammucnnsnrn mum-mm in Russian
1981 pp 84-87

[Article by V. A. Hikhaylov and V. F. Usachev]

[Text] Annotation. When interpreting aerospace data for cases of
imaging blurred outlines occurring in oceanographic research, the
application of analog-digital devices is urgent. The basic methods
of automating the processing of photographic images are investigated.
The operating principles of analog-digital devices deve10ped at the
State Hydrological Institute for the solution of certain labor-
intensive problems of processing aerospace data based on the
standard Pallada phototelegraphic unit are presented. A procedure
for isolating the given objects anddetermining their areas is
discussed.

In oceanographic research. on the basis of the specific nature of the investigated
object. it is impossible to get along without using photographic methods. When
investigating bodies of water, the aerial photographic survey data, space photograph
data and satellite pictures are used in a wide range. In recent years the flow of
photographic information has grown significantly, at the same time as the processing
of the images remains quite labor-intensive and little mechanized. It is obvious
that automation of these processes is extremely necessary. The most effective are
the machine methods of processing [1, 2]. In spite of the broad capabilities of
computers, the existing technical difficulties limit the application of such methods.
In addition, the cost of processing the images is quite high, and it is expedient to
use computer-based devices only to solve highly complex problems. Accordingly, in
the organizations which are engaged in processing photographic images, efforts are
made to develop simpler analog or analog-digital devices [3]. These devices have
also been developed at the GGI [State Hydrological Institute]. The most significant
event in the development of analog-digital devices is the creation of equipment
which will permit elementary processing based on sinple and available means in the
network of the Administrations of the Hydro-eteorological Service. Therefore. as the
basis for the devices, a set of Pallada phototelegraphic units has been adopted.

The transmitting equipment converts the image to an electric signal which is sub~
jected to corresponding processing by the analog-digital attachment and the reverse
conversion of the processed signal to a photograph image is carried out by means of
the receiver.

81-

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USIIHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The analog-digital attachment is a separate module. Simplicity, reliability and quite
high parameters of the device are insured by the application of integrated micro-
circuits in it.

When processing photographic images of the water surface, the most urgent problem is
isolation of zones with different optical density of the images, discovery of the
causes of the differences and determination of the magnitudes of the areas occupied
by each zone. Nonuniformity of the optical density of the photographic image can
result from different causes: glare on the water surface, different degree of exanr
ination of the bottom for shallow depths, different concentration of suspensions and
pollutants, the presence of oil slicks on the surface, a different degree of wave
action, and so on. Therefore the first step in the study is recognition and segre-
gation of the objects having even, complex configuration on the outline and also
determination of the areas of these objects. The generally accepted method of
isolation of objects on the image reduces to quantization of the initial image on
two levels. Quantization is done by a precision low-frequency comparator. The
“Kvant-l" device permits isolation of objects (or their outlines), the optical
density of which is higher than a given value and determination of their area with
the help of an electronic counter.

In cases where it is necessary to isolate and determine the area of objects, the
optical density of which is within the given limits with upper and lower bound, more
complicated equipment is needed. Using the "Kvant-Z” device it is possible to isolate
various formations on the initial photographic image such as swamps. forests, ice
fields with dszerent degree of degradation, and so on. In addition, it is possible
to obtain so-called isophotos. Using various light filters, it is possible to process
color photographic images and other descriptive information.

In many cases, in order to simplify the analysis of the investigated photographic
image it is expedient not to reproduce all parts of the image, but to replace it by
a simpler image similar to it, for the reproduction of which a smaller amount of
information is needed. In practice, for the sdlution of many hydrological problems,
six quantization levels with variable step size are sufficient. Restriction to six
quantization levels arises from the fact that the reproduced quantized image in the
black and white version with a large mater of levels loses its "cartographic"
appearance and requires additional visual deciphering. 0n the other hand, the
possibility of varying the quantization step size makes it possible to obtain high
detail of reproduction of the tone fluctuations in the given range of optical densi-
ties, redistribution of gradations, enlargement of the optical density range of the
investigated section of the image. An analogous "Kvant-3" device permits realiza-
tion of the described quantization. The most responsible step in processing the
image on the "Kvant-Z or 3" devices is choice of the quantization threshold, for

it determines the converted image obtained. It is obvious that for every case its
own values of the thresholds must be selected as a function of the nature of the
image.

Electronic frequency filtration of an image permits significant improvement of the
quality of the images having high noise content, defocusing, blurred and uneven

outlines. The joint inclusion of an integrator and differentiator permits isolation
of low and high frequencies corresponding to the investigated photographic image,

82

FINR()FF1C1A1.IEHE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is required to isolate the oceanological intonation on low-quality photo-
graphs.

in the "Pailsda" transaitting phototelegraphic equip-ent, a balancing modulator is
used, the characteristic of which is linear. By varying the balancing of the
nodulator. it can be lads nonlinear. Partial reversal of the photographic inage
occurs in this case. This aethod of image conversion per-its in some range of

densities isolation of nonunifornities poorly visible in the initial photographic
image.

An advantage of analog-digital devices is their speed (it is determined by the speed
of arrival of the data). The cost of such devices is appreciably lower than that of
digital devices, and the image processing is also cheaper. Unconditionally, the
developed and used devices for electronic processing of photographic image are still
far from perfection. However. the analog-digital devices are simple in operation and
can be used for processing images in organizations not having conputer centers and
also in combination with various counters.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Grishin, H. P., Kurbanov. Sh. M. and Harkelov, V. P., AV'IOHATICIBSXIY won I
OBRABOTKA FOTOGRAPICHESKIIOi IZOBRARHENIY “A m [Automatic Cowuter Input and
Processing of Photographic Images], Moscow, Energiya, 1976, 145 pages.

2. Rozenfel'd, A., RASPOZNAVANIYE I OBRABOTKA IZOBRAKHENIY S POMSHCH'YU
WCHISLITEL'NYKH HASBIN [Recognition and Processing of Images Using Couputers],
Moscow, Mir, 1972, 228 pages.

3. Kersha, V. 0., "Inge Processing by Electronic Analog Devices," IZV. VUZOV.
GEODEZIYA I AEROPOTOS'TMA [News of the Institutions of Higher Learning.
Geodetics and Aerophotography], No 6. 1976. pp 53-56.

COPYRIGer Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye).
1981

10855
030: 8144/1010

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ULTRASONIC KETIDDS

UDC 537.876.2:621.396.96

INFLUENCE OF SPATIAL AVERAGING 0N ACCURACY OF LOCATION HAVE RECORDER MEASUREMENT
01’ “AVE PNFILES

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYE HBTODY IZ'HERBNIYA OWOGRAFIGESKIKH PAMTROV in Rmsian
1981 pp 88-90

[Article by N. I. Seregin and A. A. Kalmykov]

[Text] Annotation. In this paper, on the basis of digital
simulation a study is made of the influence of the relation of
the dimensions of the irradiated area and wave period on the
accuracy of measuring the wave profile by a pulse ultrasonic
wave recorder. and models of the meter errors are presented.

One of the basic error cowonents in measuring a wave profile by a location wave
recorder is the error caused by the effect of averaging of the measured parameter

(in the given case, range) within the limits of the irradiated section of the surface.
Averaging leads to the appearance of an error which can be considered as a bias of .
the measured range relative to the true range combined with filtration of the hid:-
frequency components of the sea wave spectrum. The degree of spatial averaging is
conveniently characterized by a relative parameter. As such a parameter it is
possible to propose the relation between the wave period and the dimensions of the
irradiated area (in the case of vertical sounding, the irradiation spot diameter):

:'-15 /Dn . (1)

An estimate of the influence on the wave profile measuring accuracy of a pulse ultra-
sonic wave recorder was made on the basis of digital simulation of the signal
reflected from an elongated rough surface [1]. The experiment was performed for the
conditions of moderate wave action (wave height h -1 meter, wave length AB-ZO meters)
with meters using differential and integral metho of processing the echo. The
basic results of the study are illustrated by the figure in which the relations are
presented for the relative measurement error Gnu-amulhn. where 6.,“ is the mean
square error in measuring the wave profile, as a function of the ratio of the wave
period and irradiation spot diameter. The results indicate the great advantage of
the integral method of signal processing and permit estimation of the parameters of
the meter antenna system with given accuracy.

86

FOR Ol'l-TCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the variation of the ratio of the irradiation spot dimensions and the
wave period. redistribution of the relative contribution of the bias and filtration
effects to the total averaging error takes place. The separation of the averaging
error into two components manifested for different a served as the basis for con-
structing two types of models of the meters. '-

‘l'he modelsof the first type (for the case 322) were obtained on the basis of the
mthod of successive approximations. and they relate the geometric parameters of the
wave to its profile measurement error. They have the following form:

ai ‘ [(i‘ﬂjlf); (2)

where Ai is the mathematical expectation of the range measurement error to the i-th
point of the wave surface;

hi, Bi are the values of the first and second derivatives of the wave surface at the
i-th point;

P is the meter parameter vector.

For a meter with differential processing of the echo, the model looks like the
following:

,&¢.o¢..g at“; for A“). (3)

"' ¢-°a.i~t[1"-rfe.“‘.‘/K)l for i<o,

where each of the “k (it-1,2,3) is related through the regression equation to the
meter parameters.

The accuracy of the models was estimated by averaging the relative error in measuring
the wave profile characterizing the accuracy of the meter to the deviation of the
output of the model reduced to the wave heidlt from the output of the meter called
hereafter the model error (6'). For «1-2.5 the following results were obtained:

a) For the differential method of processing
6meaa'0'3’ 6.-0.05.
b) For the integral method of processing

cum-0.01.3, «Sn-0.018.

Models of the second type used in the entire range of variation of u but having
higher effectiveness for small values were obtained by the method of identification
of linear dynamic systems [2]. and they are the difference equations of the follow-
ing type:

,6 . o. 1'“ ° ‘Ja-q-c)‘ ‘3 ‘a-) ' ‘a‘Nj‘Q' ‘J’Wj'd v (A)

where x1 is the wave height at the i-th point;

85

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

y1 is the meter output at the i-th point;

1 is the shift parameter which depends on the irradiation spot diameter;
a. h are the coefficients which depend on the meter parameters.

0n the basis of the realized nonlinearity of the transformation of the range
intonation by the meter with differential processing of the signal, models of the
type of (4) were only obtained for meters with integral processing.

The estimate of the accuracy of the linear model for u-0.8 gave the following
results: “mass“, 4, 6n-0.13.

The obtained model can be used to analyze the accuracy characteristics of pulse

wave recorders and to compensate for the averaging errors in secondary processing
devices. A gross estimate of using first type models to compensate for the meter
errors with differential processing of the signal demonstrated that as a result of

secondary processing the wave profile measurement error can be reduced by approx-
imately three fold (for n-2.S).

(g) ‘an
'1

(0

(2 I

2
I 2 9 f 4

Figure 1. Relative error in measuring the wave profile as a function
of the ratio of the wavelength and the irradiation spot diameter:
1 -- for the differential nethod of signal processing,

2 -- for the integral method of signal processing
Key:

3- “mas
BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Zubkovi ch , S. G. , STATISTICHBSKIYB WBRISTI KI RADIOSIGNALOV, om'm

0T ZMOY POVERKHNOSTI [Statistical Characteristics of Radio Signals Reflected
from the Earth's Surface], Moscow. 8017. radio, 1968.

2. Box. J. and Jenkins, 0. 1).. ANALIZ vmmrm RYADOV, PRDGNOZ I UPRAVLENIYB
[Time Series Analysis, Forecasting and Control], Part 2, Moscow, Hir, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
cs0: 8144/ 1010

86

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”DC 621. 396.964-535.853.68

WARATIVB ““3818 01' USING WC AND ACOUSTIC VIBRATIWS FOR SHIP
WORTH)“ HAVE RBQRDBRS

Hoscou NBKONTAKTNYYB HEIDI” IMMIYA WMKIRB rmmv in Russian
1981 p 91

[Article by N. A. Nekhonov, A. A. Kal-ykov, Yu. I. Kirpa and V. G; Vazsnin]

[Text] Annotation. A study is made of the possibility of using location and ranging
devices emitting both electromagnetic and acoustic vibrations to measure wave

parameters from on board loving ships. The Ieasuresent error corponents are

estinated, and the require-eats on the basic characteristics of ship location wave
recorders are defined.

COPYRICKI: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
CSO: 8164/ 1010

87

MOMlISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 536.9:551.66.086
SOME RESUETS 0P AEROACOUSTIC MEASUREMENTS OF SBA SURFACE TIME-SPACE CHARACTERISTICS

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYB METODY IZMBRENIYA OKBANOGRAPICEESKIKE BARAMBTROV in Russian
1981 pp 92-96

[Article by A. P. Aleksandrov, E. S. Vayndruk and 6. Yu. Narodnitskiy]

[Text] Annotation. Results are presented from measuring the basic
characteristics of sea waves in the coastal zone obtained when

testing an aeroacoustic nave meter based on the method of vertical
pulse sounding. The synchronous time series of y-axes of the
wave oscillations measured at five separate points of the sea
surface were used to calculate the frequency spectra of the wave
oscillations, the slopes and steepness, the frequency-angular
spectra of the surface, and so on. A study was made of the
amplitude fluctuations of the signals reflected by the sea
surface. Metrologic characteristics 9f the wave meter and the
possibilities of its application for comprehensive studies of

the sea surface are discussed.

The wave meter is based on the method of vertical sounding of the sea surface by
ultrasonic pulses, during the propagation of which to the surface of the vater and
back the distance to the water and then the y-axes of the wave oscillations are
determined. The wave meter is a system of five independent synchronously operating
acoustic wave recorders, the receiving and transmitting antennas of which are
arranged in a "cross," that is, at the corners and center of a'square with a 2 meter
diagonal.

The hardware part of the wave meter is basically described in [1]. Brief technical
specifications for the wave meter follow:

Ultrasonic frequency of the sounding pulses 40 kilohertz,
Sounding pulse duration 0.1 to 2 milliseconds,

Sounding frequency 2 to 10 hertz,

Acoustic power of the individual radiator ~0.l watt,

Irradiation spot diameter (with respect to 0.5 power level) 0.2 meter,

88
IIMICHRHCJAJ.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Slope and steepness masurement base 1 or 2 meters,
Hardware error in measuring the y-axes of the wave oscillations 10.01 meter,

Distance from the receiving-transmitting system to the average water level 5 to 15 m.

"hen the receiving-transmitting system is installed on a stationary base the wave
meter provides synchronous digital measurements at 5 points of the sea surface of
the y-axes of the wave oscillations within the limits of :5 meters in the wave fre-
quency range to 1.5 hertz with mean square error of lo to 5 cm; measurements of the
slopes and steepnesses of the sea surface in two mutually perpendicular direction:
(determined by the finite difference scheme on a l or 2 meter base) in the wave fre-
quency range to 0.5 hertz; the almlitudes of the acoustic echoes; the distribution
of the sea wave slopes with respect to directions, and so on. The statistical

characteristics of the wave action are calculated by the results of these measure-
Dents.

The discussed results are obtained when testing a wave meter near the shore in the

presence of the influence of waves reflected from the shore on the overall wave
picture.

The operation of the wave meter was monitored by the results of synchronous measure-
ments of the y-axes of the wave oscillations by one of five acoustic wave recorders
and the resistive (string) wave recorder designed by Kukulin installed at a distance
of 0.15 meter from the irradiation spot center. Figure 1 shows the dispersion
spectra of the y-axes of the wave fluctuations on a logarithmic scale for acoustic
and string wave recorders (synchronous measurements). 0n low frequencies the
spectra are identical. The ”spectral noise" of the acoustic wave recorder on fre-
quencies above 1.5 hertz determines the actual limit of the frequency resolution of
the waves of a given version of the wave recorder.

The accuracy of measuring the y-axes of wave oscillations was estimated by the
regression equation relating the y-axes of the wave oscillations by the readings of
the resistive and acoustic wave recorders. The graph of this equation has the form
of a straight line running through 0, which indicates absence of a systematic error
in measuring the y-axes by an acoustic wave recorder. The mean square scattering of
the readings of the acomtic wave recorder with respects to the readings of the
resistive wave recorder does not exceed lo to 5 cm, which agrees well with the theoret-
ical estimates of the error of the acoustic wave recorder.

In Figure 2, for example, energy spectra of the waves and the slopes (on a
logari_t.hmic scale) are presented according to the data from an individual realiza-
tion (h-OJoZ meter, r-4 sec, ifs-3.5 m/sec).

In the laws of the decrease -in high frequency sections of the spectra of the y-smes
(to frequencies of 1.5 to 2 hertz) approx-laced by a power function Alf“, the
exponent for different realizations varies within the limits of J. to -5. An
analogous law of the decrease of the high frequency spectra of the slopes (consider-
ing the filtering function of the slopes measured with respect to a finite base)

is characterized by the exponent from -1 and less. The variability of the spectra
of the steepness from measurement to uasurement is more significant.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The frequency-angular spectra were calculated by the procedure discussed in [2, 3]
and providing for approximate representation of the frequency-angular spectrum in
the form of its expansions in a Fourier series with respect to angles. The initial
calculation data are time series of the y-axes, slopes and steepnesses of the
waves in two orthogonal directions. As is known, there are other schemes for cal-
culating the frequency-angular spectra with respect to multipoint measurements of
the wave action proposed by Barber, et a1. [6], but the advantages of one method of

calculation or another have not been analyzed with sufficient clarity in the litera-
ture.

Figure 3 shows typical frequency-angular spectra (for three frequencies) for an
individual realization (the dotted lines) calculated with respect to five coefficients
of the Fourier series using time series of the y-axes and slopes of the waves.
Consideration of these spectra reveals the approximate nature of the calculations

of the angular distribution of the wave energy, which is the result of expansion in

a series of a total of five terms. which explains both the characteristic two-lobed
form of the angular distributions on low sea wave frequencies (one of the lobes is
"spurious") and the low angular resolution. In the graphs in Figure 3 the solid
lines indicate the angular spectra for the same realization calculated by seven terms
of the expansion using the time series of the steepnesses of the sea surface. (In
order to carry out the expansion in a series of nine terms, it is necessary to con-
sider the mixed spatial derivative 322/3x3y, but the system of five wave recorders
arranged in a "cross" does not permit this to be done.)

AS is obvious, consideration of two sore terms of the expansion gives some improve-
ment in the precision of the spectra, in particular, their directionalneas is

increased, the finer structure appears and also the second (spurious) lobe is
diminished.

At the same time, the problem of further improvement of the angular resolution of
the frequency-angular spectra remains an urgent problem which, in the given case,
requires an increase in the number of wave recorders. It is also necessary to com—
pare different methods of calculating the frequency-angular spectra; other calcula-
tion schemes can possibly give better results with a smaller number of primary
measurements.

The possibilities of an acousti: wave mater are not exhausted by measuring the
mentioned parameters. with respect to the amplitude characteristics of the signals
reflected by the sea surface some of the characteristics of high-frequency waves can
be measured in the range up to ~10 hertz. Theoreticallysuchcharacteristics of the
sea surface as foam and spray formations, the presence of polluting films, and so

on can also be investigated. That is, the aeroacoustic method permits comprehensive

studies of important characteristics of the sea surface simultaneously with the
basic wave characteristics.

In order to obtain wave characteristics from a ship by an acoustic wave meter, it
is necessary to solve the complex technical problem of highly accurate recording of
spatial displacements of the receiving-emitting system caused by the movement and
rolling of the ship and also the theoretical problem of reproducing true space-
frequency characteristics of the waves.

90
IV)R¢0I1ﬂ(1Al.lﬁ3Ei(lVLY
(a)
'—J_J

a: 1.0 u I 1.52 J Wu
Figure 1. Normalized spectral densities
of the dispersions with respect to
synchronous measurements by an acoustic
wave recorder (l) and a resistive
wave recorder (2)
Key:

a. hertz

  

u .u so u I 1,52". (s)

Figure 2. Spectral densities of the
dispersions of the y-axes (SB) and t
slopes of the sea surface (salopex a

sslopeY) for one realization
a. hertz c. 8.10 , s
b. 83, cuz-sec d. SelopeY
spex
e. slope

 

Figure 3. Angular distributions of the spectral density of the
dispersions (E) on several frequencies for the realization in
Figure 2. The dotted lines are the calculation by five coefficients,

and the solid lines, by seven
Key:
1. hertz; 2. cnz-sec

91

FOI‘OIIHCJAI.US£1MNLY
1.

3.

4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aleksandrov , A. P., Vayndruk, E. S.. et 31., "Hardware Complex for Measuring
the Characteristics of the Sea Surface by the Acoustic Sounding Method,"
NEKONTAKTNYYB MENU! IZHBRENIYA OMGRM’ICHESKM PARAMETROV [Noncontsct

Methods of Measuring Oceanographic Parmters]. Hoscov, Gidroneteoizdat,
1977. pp 105-108.

Krylov. Yu. 11., SPEK'I'RAL'NYYE HETODY ISSIEDOVANIYA I RASCHBTA VETROVYKR VOLN.

[Spectral Methods of Investigation and Calculation of Hind-Driven Haves],
Leningrad. Cidroneteoizdat, 1966.

Trapeznikov. Yu. A., "Study of the ﬁlo-Dimensional Spectral Density of a Navy

Surface at Several Points," TRUDY COIN [Works of the State Oceanological
Institute]. No 122, 1974. pp l0-58.

Davidan, I. IL, MBTODY RASCHE'IA SPEKTRA VOL". SBRIYA ORANGLOGIYA [Methods of
Calculating the Wave Spectrum. Ocemology Series], VNIIGHI. Obinsk, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),

1981

10845

C50:

8144/1010

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

UDC 551.463. 26

INPORMATIVKNESS OP SEA SURFACE MLITUDB SCATTERIM CHARACTERISTICS DURING LOCAL
IRMDIATION

Moscow mums arrow IMHA omnncnssnm rmmov in Russian
1981 pp 97-100

[Article by 6. Yu. Narodnitskiy]

[Text] Annotation. A study is made of the possibility of obtain-
ing information on the short save part of the sea surface spectrum
(ripple) by the aaplitude characteristics of scattered signals
during operation of an ultrasonic wave recorder. It is demonstrated
that by the data from neasuring the frequency and time correla-
tion intervals of the anplitude fluctuations the mean square
values of the y-axes and the vertical velocities of the ripple
covering the irradiated section of the sea surface can be
obtained. and the mean square slope of the ripple can be found by
the regression dependence of the amplitude of the scattered
signals on the synchronously measured slopes of large waves.
Experimental data are presented fron determining the characteris-
tics of ripple obtained using the hardware couple: of an aero-
acoustic wave recorder.

During operation of the main part of the noncontact meters of sea wave parameters,
the measurement results encowass only the long wave part of the surface spectrum
(large waves) determined by the s) >tia‘l resolution of the instruments. Thus, for
example, reliable results of user “at! taken by the ultrasonic wave recorder
under standard operating conditions enemas the frequency range up to approximately
1 hertz. At the sane tine the infonnation about the higher frequency part of the
spectral (ripple) is needed to study the interaction of the ocean and the atmosphere.
This data can be used also for displaying the sections of the sea surface polluted
by petrolema products.

The investigation performed in this paper pertains to the conditions of vertical
irradiation in the centimeter or millimeter range simltarmomly for only a snall
part of large sea waves (local irradiation) and reception of scattered signals in
the return direction. These conditions are characteristic of the ultrasonic wave
recorder used experimntally, but the obtained results can be used to expand the
possibilities of other instrments.

93

l-‘OIOI'I‘KIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The method of measuring the mean square slope of the ripple is based on using a
natural measurement in time of the slopes of large waves to obtain the regression
dependence of the amplitude of the scattered signals on the magnitude of the
synchronously measured slopes. The halfwidth of the function on the 9-0.25 level
with respect to the maximun is equal to the mean square slope of the mevennesses of
the ripple within the limits of the base of the measured slopes of the large waves.
Some results of these measurements are shown in Figure l where the regression relations
are presented for the signal amplitude as a function of slopes of large vaves
obtained on a 2-meter base for three values of the wind velocity. Analysis of the
measurement process considering the equivalent filtering function demonstrated that
the obtained results correspond to the slope spectra in the wavelength range of
approximately from 5 meters to l or 2 centimeters. The error caused by the residual
influence of larger waves does not exceed units of percentages.

Information about the y-anes and the orbital velocities of the ripple can be obtained
by the data from measuring the time and frequency correlation intervals of the
fluctuations of the scattered signal saplitude. For this purpose, pairs of emitted
pulses are used with variable time interval between them and variable basic frequency
of one of the pulses. The time correlation interval is determined by the dispersion
of the vertical velocities of the surface elements [1], and the frequency correla-
tion interval, by the dispersion of the y-axes [3]. In the case of local irradiation,
these parameters pertain to ripple covering the irradiated section. Figure 2 shows
some of the results of measuring the indicated parameters for various values of the
wind velocity. The obtained relations as a function of uind velocity obviously are
caused both by an increase in energy of the spectral cowonents of the waves and an
increase in the upper limiting frequency of the spectrum. The analysis considering
the equivalent filtering function demonstrated that for the realized diameter of the
irradiated section of 0.2 meter with respect to the halfpower level the presented
results correspond to the surface spectrum in the frequency range of (2 to 15) hertz.
The error in measuring the vertical velocities caused by the residual influence of
the low-frequency components does not exceed 20%. For the process of measuring the
y-axes of the ripple. the more expressed influence of the low-frequency comments
is characteristic. - “’(i) " ' -- \u

(OD/cs) v.'”/‘(1) Win/t e

U V'llu/I

    
     

 

        

“0.1 0 1! 'IJ l 0,! '1! I

”nu

Figure 1. Regression dependence of scattered signal amplitude
on slopes mx in the x direction. oy1np is the mean square
slope of the ripple

l. m/sec
2. inp

910

MOM-10M. USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

.u s 4."
Ad; l I ”‘3' b)
a.»
CON
0
(I: e
1.”
o 5 lo I : Aruba)
Figure 2. Mean square velocities (a) and y-axes (b) of ripple
Key:
1. Ill/sec
7%
70
I . O
”a .5 :0 WV: (1)
Figure 3. Amplitude variation coefficient
Key:
1. Blue

For a rough estimate of the ripple state of the sea surface, it is possible to use

a simply measured characteristic such as the amplitude variation coefficient of the
scattered signals. Thus, for exalple, in the case of smooth swell, as a result of
the departures of the reflecting region of the surface from the axis of the radiator
for unfavorable slopes of the swells, very deep alplitude fluctuations are observed
(an increase in the variation coefficient to 1002 or more). In the presence of quite
steep ripple on wind driven waves the slope of the irradiated section does not cause
significant variation of the awlitude; therefore the variation coefficient differs
little from its value in the absence of large waves (about 522). In the general
case the variation coefficient is determined by the ratio of the dispersions of the

ripple slopes and large waves [2]. The experimental dependence of the variation
coefficient on the wind velocity is presented in Figure 3.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bass, P. G. and Fuchs, 1- H., RASSEYANIY'E VOLN NA STATISTICHBSKI WW

POVBRKIWOSTI [Scattering of "eves on a Statistically Uneven Surface], Moscow,
Nauka, 1972, 424 pages.

95
WWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Narodnitekiy G. Yu.. "Variation Coefficient of the Anplitude of Acoustic
Haves Scattered by the Disturbed Hater Surface During Local Irradiation,”
IZV. AN SSSR. FIZILKA ATM. I OKEANA [News of the USSR Acadely of Sciences.
Physics of the Atnoephere and Ocean], V01 XII, No 10, 1976, pp 1118-1119.

3. Heisman, D. 3.. "No Frequency Radar Interferometry Applied to the Measurement
of Ocean Wave Height," 1325 TRANS ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, AP-Zl, No 5,
1973. pp 649-656.

COPYRICH": Gosudarstvennyy okeanogrnficheekiy 'institut (Inningredekoye otdeleniye),
1981

10865
cso: 8144/ 1010

96

I708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHC‘IALUSEONLY

UDC 551.463.31

OPTIMAL CALIBRATION IN more SOUNDING 0? OCEAN

Moscow NBKONTAKTNYYB HBTO‘DY IMMIYA WRAPICHBSKIHI PAW in Russian
1981 pp 101-104

[Article by S. V. Dotsenko. B. A. Nelepo and L. G. Salivon]

[Text] Annotation. A study is made of the optimal method of
calibration per-hung use of mtheantical processing of the
time realization of the true field measured by an instrument
with a point sensor to significantly increase the accuracy of
comaring the results of remte sounding with contact measure-
nents.

The instruments for remote sounding of the ocean average the measured physical field
with respect to the resolution element, the dimensions of which are determined by
the width of the radiation pattern of its sensor and renoteness of the instrument
from the sea surface. In the case of rapid novenent of the neasuring instrument
relative to the field, the field can be considered frozen, and the signal at the
input to the nessuring receiver has the form

Y'o‘lx (-ﬁ.o)h(ﬁmﬁ.

where MK) is the hardware function of the remote instrument.

In reality, the value neasured by the remote instruent differs from Y as a result
of an entire series of causes (the influence of the atnosphere and additional dis-
torting factors), which forces calibration of the remote instrument by defined
regions (test areas). the physical characteristics of which are neasured with
sufficient accuracy. For this purpose, it is necessary, by neasuring the physical
characteristics of the sea in the test area, to calculate how they would be reproduced
by a renote instrument if the spurious factors were absent. that is, to for. the
standard value of Ye reproducing the value of Y3 with the greatest possible
accuracy. The difference in scales of averaging of the compared instruents can be
decreased if tine averaging of the instrument readings with point sensor is used to
obtain Y5, and a function that minimizes the mean square deviation of Y; from Ya

is selected as the weight function 00:), which insures optimal calibration of the
instrument.

97

“WESSON!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is possible to demonstrate [1,2] that for uniform, isotropic direct uasurenent
of the field which is nonfrozen and stationary with respect to the instrument, the
expression for the spectrum of the optimal correction function has the forn

(217(ngij ”ﬁjl'kwm‘dﬁ’? 717m; ‘1’

Key: 1. opt

where cl, Gk are the one-dimensional and Inn-dimensional spectra of the measured
field; “(3) is the apectrun of the hardware function of the reacts instnmsnt;

p cue are the characteristic tile and space scales of the field: an is the frequency;
BC is the wave vector, and the optinl calibration error is

em- £9 load/WW“? )VIMMQWM»

Key: 1. opt; 2. opt

In order to estimate the values found, sssumtions were nde that the hardware func-
tion of the remote instrument has axial syuetry, and its spectre: can be represented

in the form
de UN 1') .
I774) 0* )7 -

where x =EI‘(P+1/2)/P(P); I‘(P) is the gene function; v-n+l/2, (n-1,2,3...),
ig‘ is the radius of the hardware function, and the k-dinensional spectra of the
measured field are defined by the expression

 

51 17m )
("(4) ‘9?“ rm: (Erh‘mikfﬁmm’ (4)

 

where k-l,2,3 and P is the parameter defining the degree of decrease in the field
spectrum. Here after a mater of amplifications expression (1) assuaas the form

n z ..1 I . ‘ﬁ -
(1330.))'2£:$;;F{oii.z,p.o.,,Hi4") 31%?” (5)

Key: 1. opt

where Z,- 9-0: -l/2)/rP; F is the hypergeonetric function, do-utc/Pc, Pail/2;
v=n+1/Z: (ill-3, 1.2.... n-l, 2 ...).

Analysis of (5) for the special case where 1-0 and n is an arbitrary integer gives
a quite awkward expression which can be approﬁnated by the siwler expression

98

POIOFFICIAIJJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

t

~ ac n '
U1 (E). VAT—9 (q ”33") 151E100!!! ' ’ (6)

 

 

where c-z/l+(wtc)2 and z-Kx/oc. from which it is possible to obtain the expression
for calculating the characteristic radim of the correlation function In. The
family of functions Tn(z) is presented in Figure 1.

 

o 4190,1011:

Figure 1. Family of relations for the characteristic radius of '
the correlation function tn/rc as a function of zfor different n

 

I I} (6 (I I,‘ 1 .

Figure 2. Gain in accuracy of the optimal calibration with

respect to the unfrozen. stationary field with a field
parameter P-1/2

The results of calculations of the optimal calibration error (to /o)2 as a
function of z for ml to 4 were used to construct the graphs in ﬁgure 2. where
"'(C1/°)2/(€opt/°)23 (cl/(1)2 is the calibration error vhen using a single
instantaneous reading of the instruaent with point sensor located at..the center of
the resolution element, u is the gain in accuracy of the calibration.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI'IOAL USE ONLY

As is obvious from Figure 2, the gain is found to be significant in the region of
large 2, in spite of the fact that, as was pointed out in [2]. the investigated
case is the least favorable for calibration.

1.

BIBLIWRAPHY

Dotsenko, S. V. and Salivon, L. 6., ”Optimal Calibration of Remote Instruments
with the Application of Tine Averaging." mRSKIYB GIDROPIZICBBSKIYE
ISSLEDOVANIYA [Marine liydrophyaical Research], No 4 (7S), Sevaatopol',

izd. in! All USSR. 1976, p 92.

Dotaenko, S. V. and Salivon. 1.. 6., "lbthod of Optimal Calibration of a Remote
Instrunent," TRUUY I VSESOYUZMY KOHFEREN'ISII. PROBLEM! NAUCHNOGO
ISSLBDOVANIYA V VYSSHEY SHROIB V OBIAS‘H IZUCEENIYA I OSVOYENIYA HIROVOGO
OKEANA [Works of the lat All-Union Conference. Problem of Scientific Research
in the Higher School in the Field of Study and Exploitation of the World
Ocean]. 1977, Vladivostok. "

COPYRIGHT: Cosudaratvennyy okeanograficheakiy inatitut .(Leningradakoye otdeleniye),

1981

10845
630: 8144/1010

100

MWIJSEONLY
FOR¢0FFKJA1.US£(MVLY

UDC 551.463z31
REPRODUCTIOﬂ OP AVERAGBD FIELD BY SATELLITE MEASUREMENTS

Hosea" NEKONTAKTNYYB HETODY IZHBRENIYA OKBANOGRAPICEBSKIKH PARAHBTBOV in Russian
1981 pp 105-108

[Article by S. V. Dotsenko and A. N. Nedoveaov]

[Text] Annotation. The problem of reproducing a random averaged
field by the results of measuring it by a real instrument on
several parallel trajectories is solved. The method is illustrated
by a specific example.

In space oceanography. the problem arises of reproducing a hydrophysical field by
the results of measuring it from a satellite on several trajectories. The‘solution
of this problem is possible with the following assumptions. The remote instrument
with given resolution element measures the investigated field on a series of
parallel rectilinear trajectories. The element of the field resolution by the
instrument sensor is deterrined by its hardware function(gp(3, 1), and the sensor
itself is inertialess. The investigated random field x ; t) is uniform, isotropic
and steady state. The remote measurement instrument moves at such high speed that
the time variation of the field when obtaining the individual realisation can be
neglected. but this variation takes place from trajectory to trajectory. We shall
consider that the instrument moves along the y-axis at different distances rn from

the oy axis after equal tine intervals. and the realizations are sufficiently long
that it is possible to perform the integration within infinite limits. Then the

n-th realization of its output signal is written in the form [1]:

yaw-11km,y-szn-ov‘JHAnmdg,

where rn is the radius vector of the displacement of the n-th trajectory with
respect to the origin of the coordinates, y-vot is the current coordinate of the
trajectory of motion of the instrument, and T is the period of obtaining the
realizations. we shall reproduce the field eraged (smoothed) over some region
given by the weight function “smoothed(°g' p2) with coordinates of the center of

averaging (r., 0).

The estimate of the reproduced field is equal to

Yaié‘ Y" (9m. (7) (lg. (1)

101

Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂClAl.lEi!(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where N is the total mﬂaer of realizations, ﬂn(y) is the weight function defining
the contrlbution of each trajectory and the location of the field in the vicinity
of the point a. The averaged field in the vicinity of the point a at the time '1":

rikLi¥~’m'£°»-£°.7&)Iﬁi2(m 945431 <2>

Key: 1. smoothed

Then the reproduction error is e-Y.-Y ed‘ The optimalness criterion of the
reproduction will be the ninimalness o! e mean square error.

Let us find the set lln(y) such that it minimizes the mean square error :2. Making
the transition to the spectra. we obtain

aJimuyéﬁtamﬁntexu.;é,ﬁwaﬁmve(¢w. “’

-.’s

uhe re 0. ~
M1,): 154%,“) 3,1«t..os)da, .
u .v .. jEiJﬁiMn-IkWU
ﬁn,a(Ii)~_,‘ls,(a..4.su9H,(a..u)+L,,Mme 4mm
and
jldxa-mrw'rmn

mmrgfoigen..w)ﬁ;(a.,a‘)e 41,4“;

characterize the statistical relation between the points of the n-th trajectory and
the reproduced point of the field~a and the points of the trajectories n and k
(n.k-l.2, n... N), respectively; 33) is the frequency-amlitude spectrum of the
function "(5); 3nd: to) is the time-space energy spectra: of the field.

From (3) we obtain a system of linear equations for determining the spectra of the
weight fmctions

éﬁnwmwwwa, mam M m

The system (a) has a unique solution, for its determinant, in connection with the
proposition of the uniformity and isotropicity of the field, is positively defined
[2]. Substituting (’0) in (3), we obtain a simpler expression for the mean square
reproduction error

gum)! mum-u

-'D

102

MWUSEONLY
FOIlNﬂﬂCJAl.USE10NLY

cﬂb‘ a-o
c-a

  

u 0,:

    

- a to {Ila/t. ' I 1 N
Figure 1. Error in reproducing the Figure 2. Error in reproducing the
random field as a function of the random field as a function of the
number of trajectories spacing between trajectories
cﬂk’ «or:

 

: w 2,: 51“

Figure 3. Error in reproducing the random field as a function of

the degree of smoothing of the field for a given element of the
field resolution by the instrument

Thus. the solution to the problem of optimal reproduction of the averaged hydro-
physical field by the results of measuring it by a real instrument on several
trajectories is given by expression (1). and expression (5) defines the error

occurring in this case. It is easy to demonstrate that the error in reproducing
the random field will be minimal when the field resolution element by the instrument
is equal to the degree of averaging of this field.

For illustration of the described method and estimation of the field reproduction

error. the problem is solved in which the spectra of the field and the bell hardware
functions were taken as the mathematical model

q:

g”(A)=T S‘Lrex P(T [:1] J" ”(‘) CXP(‘—y B—oLJ/‘t’

where L, is the characteristic scale of the field, and R0 is the radius of the
resolution element.

 

103

FOR OFFICJAI.USI:(H§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result. relations were obtained for the lean square error in reproducing the
random field as a function of the nuuber of trajectories n, the distance between
trajectories N normalized to the characteristic scales, and the degree of smothing
of the field c for the given resolution element of the neasured field by the instru-
Ient H. C and 1! denote the ratio of the radii of averaging of the field and the
resolution element, respectively. to the characteristic field scale. These relations
are illustrated by the presented figures.

The solution of the stated problem permits selection of the optimal distances between

trajectories, their nusber and degree of smoothing of the field for reproduction

of it with minimal error.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Dotsenko, S. V., TEORBTICKESKIYE OSNOVY IZHERENIYA PIZICHESKIKH FOLEY OKBANA
[Theoretical Principles of Measuring Physical Fields of the Ocean], Leningrad,
Cidroneteoizdat, 1974.

2. Gandin. L. S. and Kazan, R. L., STATISTICFBSKIYB NETODY INTERPRETATSU
PETEOROLOGICHESKIIGI DANNYKR [Statistical Methods of Interpreting Meteorological
Data]. Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Cosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Leningradskoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
cso: 8144/1010

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.521.32:551.526.6

INFLUENCE OF CERTAIN FACTORS 0N ACCURACY OF SAMJJTE DETERMINATION OF UNDERLYING
SURFACE TEMPERATURE

Moscow NEKONTAKTNYYE HBTODY IZHERENIYA OKEANOGRAPICHBSUH PARAMETROV in Russian
1981 pp 109-112

[Article by Yu. H. Timofeyev and H. I. Trifonov]

[Text] Annotation. A radiation model of the atmsphere in the
window of transparency of 8-12 microns is proposed. and its
accuracy is investigated. The influence of the variations of

the emissive power on the accuracy of determining T3 is investi-
gated.

l. The problem of determining the temperature of the underlying surface 're from an
artificial earth satellite on the modern level is an extraordinarily urgent problem
in connection with the increasing demands of metec ~ology, oceanology, climatology
and a nunber of branches of the national economy for information on the theml
conditions of the underlying surface. It must be noted that although the problem
of determining '1'a is a traditional problem of satellite meteorology [1. 2], the
high requirements imposed on accuracy of knowing '1'a (Mg-0.1 to l K [3]) and not
realized in practice at the present time require further investigation of it.

The expression for ’l‘s determined from an artificial earth satellite can be written
in the following general form:

T. = 5;: {(3:.+05..[T.<rl<ialP)-"-‘~(f"‘“'3‘» m

where 3‘1 is the inverse Planck function; Av is the spectral interval of the measure-

Ipent; 1"” is the true outgoing radiation; 6 is the error in neasuring the radiation;
p is “e transfer function of the atmosphere which in the general case depends on
:98 temperature profile ‘1‘(p). the profiles of the content of absorbing components
4110'»), the absorption coefficients of these comments KM (p), the emissive power

of the underlying surface s v' Prom expression (1) it follows that the accuracy of
determining '1‘a depends on t e following factors:

1. The accuracy of neasuring the Outgoing thermal emission.

2. Regions of the spectrum and optimalness of the measurement conditions.

105

POIOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

3. The accuracy of assignment of the transfer function of the atmosphere which,
in turn. is determined by the accuracy of excluding the influence of clouds. the
quality of the used radiation model, the quantity and quality of the a priori or
independent additional information about the physical state of the atmosphere and
the accuracy of knowing the emissive power, and so on.

An analysis of the influence of the series of aboVe-enumerated factors on the
accuracy of determining '1‘, was performed in a large nutter of papers (see, for
example, the monographs [1, 2]). In this article information is presented on the
accuracy of the proposed radiation model of the atmosphere in the window transparency
of 8-12 microns and the influence of variations of the emissive power on the
accuracy of determining T3.

II. In the radiation model that we used, the absorption camed by water vapor,
ozone and carbon dioxide is considered. The transmission function of the atmosphere

in the window transparency of 8-12 microns can be described with high accuracy in
the following form:

Pu I pf. P; D: I (2)

where PE and PP are defined by various types of continuous water vapor absorption

[4], “3"ka isbdefined by the absorption in the spectral lines of various gases.
1.

When calculating PM we used a statistical model of absorption, the parameters of
which were calculated on the basis of the data of [S]. The use of this model is
justified by the smallness of the contribution to the absorption of the 1120 and (:02

lines and good approximation of the O3 absorption by this model [6].

Ill. The quality of the radiation model used to a significant degree determines the
accuracy of giving the transfer function PA and. consequently, the errors in
defining T9. In particular, our estimates demonstrated that in a wide range of
states of the atmosphere, in order to determine T3 with an error of ‘IK it is
necessary to know the transmission functions with an accuracy of 2 to 41. Accord-
ingly. the problem of checking the adequacy of the proposed radiation model acquires
special significance. This checking was done in our paper on the basis of cowaring
the experimental P35? and calculated PS3“ spectra of the transparency of the
atmosphere in the range of 770 to 1250 curl. (The experimental data accompanied

by the corresponding radio sounding data were provided to us by A. H. Brounshteyn
(Main Geophysical Observatory”.

In the figure cases of comparison of Pf? and P315 are presented. An analysis of
the comparison data permits the following conclusions to be drawn:

1. In the greater part of the investigated spectral range the radiation model used
describes the results of the observations within the limits of error of the measure-
ments (‘5 to 7%).

106

roa OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I 710 I" .77! II” ”II 9M"

Coqarison of the calculated (dotted line) and experimental (solid
line) transmission functions (0(1) is the origin of the coordinates
for the i-th spectra)

2. The divergences between the experiment and the calculation exceeding the
experimental errors are observed in the range of 1160-1250 aa'l, where the cm and
N20 absorption is not considered in the model. and in the region of the 03 absorp-
tion band 9.6 microns. which is connected primarily with absence of data on the
actual ozone content in the atmosphere.

Thus, it is possible to draw the preliminary conclusion that the proposed radiation
model agrees well with the variations in transparency of the atmosphere.

3. when interpreting the satellite measurements to obtain infomtion about '1‘3
usually it is proposed that the enissive power is equal to 1. In reality, noticeable
variations of ‘Av are observed even for the water surface. Inexact knowledge of the
emissive power leads to errors in deter-ining Tr Calculations of the outgoing
radiation for various nodels of the atmosphere and different values of CA
demonstrated that the errors in dew-0.01 lead to errors in “330.6 to 0.)} K.

The presented figures illustrate the inortance of knowing the actual values of the
emissive power of natural underlying surfaces.

107

.I'OIOMCIALIBEONLY
2.

3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY .
I
Kondrat'yev. K. Ya. and Timofeyev, Yu. 11., TEMCHESKOY‘B ZONDINVANIYE

AMSPERY so SPUTNIKOV [Thermal Sounding of the Atmosphere from Satellites].
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1970, 610 page.

Malkevlch, M. S., OPTICEESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA ATMSFERY SO SPUTNIKOV [Optical
Studies of the Atmosphere from Satellites], Moscow, Nauka, 1973.

Ivanov. c. 8., "Basic Requirements on Maaa Oceanographic Intonation."
NEKONTAKTNYYE HE'DODY IMMIYA OKEANOGRAPICHESKIKH PARAMETBOV [Noncontact

Methods of Measuring Demographic Parameters], Leningrad, Gidroneteoixdat,
1977, pp 6-10.

Roberts, R. 8.. Selby, J. B. A. and Bibernan, L. M., "Infrared Continuu-
Absorption by Atnoepheric Water Vapor in the 8-13 u Window," APPL. 0PT.,
Vol 15, No 9, 1976, pp 2085-2090.

McClatchey, R. A., et a1., "APCRL Atnoapheric Abaorption Line Paranetera
Comilation," ENV. RES. PAPER, 436, 1973.

Goldman, A. and Kyle, T. 6., "A Couperiaon Between Statistical Model and Line
by Line Calculation with Application to the 9.6 u Ozone and 2.7 1: Water Vapor
Bands," APPL. 0PT., Vol 17, No 6, 1968, pp 1167-1177.

COPYRIGHT: Goaudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy inatitut (Leningradakoye otdelaniye),

1981

10845

080:

8144/1010

108

FOIOFFICIALISEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m 551.666.326
REPRODUCTIOR 01’ SEA HAVE SPECTRA BY mum BY EWING SENSORS

Hoscov mm ram-om momma mmrcnstm “mum in Russian
1981 pp 113-116

[Article by A. V. Kate and I . S. Spevak]

[Text] Annotation. A theoretical study is made of the problem of
determining the two-dimensional spectra of sea waves undistorted by
movement of the sensor system. The relation of the frequency-
sngular spectra in a moving and stationary coordinate system is
established, and the conditions of unique reproduction are analyzed.
Explicit analytical expressions of the tvo-dimensional spectra in
term of the measurement data of a small nuﬁer of sensors were
obtained in limiting cases of a narrow angular spectrum and low
Velocity.

For neasuremnts of sea waves by a moving sensor the naasnred value, for emle,
the rise of the surface new) contains intonation both about the wave field itself
and movement of the sensor. An ilportant problem having great applied significance
is the problem of reproduction by the data of such neasuruaents of the true wave
spectrum. In the model case of one-dimensional waves. this problem was investigated
in [1]. In the present paper a study is Iade of the case of two-dimensional waves
which is of interest for full-scale measurements.

The statistically uniform and steady state rise field is coapletely characterized by
the space-frequency spectrum [2]

X‘iu) a (hr'ldo‘lf upﬂu! «IF/ZN,“ (1)

where Z(?.t) is the correlation function. 5M spectrum xudwlmeasured in the
coordinate systen having with the velocity is related to XCIm) by the doppler

frequency transformation
was: a X (it «0:77). (2)

For the nave field with dispersion law m-mkmk-ﬁt?) the following representation
occurs

X(‘.U) " g'ﬂf‘?) ’(U‘ML (3)

109

MWLIISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that Is, the total information about the statistical characteristics of the waves
is contained in the function 2(E). In particular, the spatial spectrum is equal to

W?) 914.. me...) - xm . x”). (.,)
In the majority of experiments, the frequency spectrum is measured
We) a fdPXRJ-d (5)
or the frequency-angular spectrum___ .
EM 0) if" “(lieu _ (5)

The relations (2). (3), (6) make it possible to find the relation of the frequency-
angular spectra in the moving and stationary coordinate systems

Eva-m .-. pl-U.I;£(U.’.lo S—W/n. ”‘25. o

. 9(o~..,)p(u.)):£‘(o,‘,0)/,1- 2%" w ,0. (7)
Here qu/ggu..cy€%My-fﬁz are the roots of the dispprsion equation in the moving

coordinate system, 0111. ﬂ-g/éIUkI, Uk-gﬁ/k. n(x) is the Heviside function. The spectrum
Bu(w,0) is defined by the spectrum 8(w', 6') at several points. which is caused by
nonmonotonicity of the dependence+gf the doppler shifted frequency “-Iw -EUI on the
wave Vector for a following sea (kU>0. w>0) (Figure 1). Therefore e que
reproduction of the undistorted spectrum 8(w', 6') is possible only in the absence

of spectral components of the waves corresponding to nonmonotonic sections of the
dispersion curve.

In particular. if the following sea does not exist in the spectrua (Figure 2),
then from (7) we obtain

5‘40) '("5%)Eg(u'i%o‘), who. (LCO. (8)

For uniform wave action hence we have

.- ‘— ' u ’
9(0)! (10 2-5.)99(u'4%3)r 9.3m. (9)

The reproduction of the frequency spectrum of one-dimensional waves was considered
earlier in [1], but in the presented frequency spectrum relation there is an error~-
the result differs from (9) by the absence of the factor (1+w/292). The presence

of the factor (1+u/zno) in (9) insures satisfaction of the equal ty
Idwo(w)-Idm'¢u(w'), which is a corollary of the identity z(o,0)-zu(o.0).

110

INDI*0FINCIAI.1EIE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

Figure 1. have dispersion law. Section 11 Figure 2. Example of the wave spectrum

corresponds to vaves that change direction permitting unique reproduction
of propagation on transition to a moving
coordinate system

Thus, if the frequency-angular spectrum in a moving coordinate system is known, the
problem of reproduction of the true wave spectrum in the absence of folloving seas
is solved by expression (8). however, in practice such complete information about
waves is absent (see. for example [3]). The derivatives of the correlation function
are determined by the measurements at several points

2““; . (f; «ﬁrms/M, (10)

in terms of which the coefficients Cn(w) of the expansion of the frequency-angular
spectrum in a Fourier series are expressed [3]:

Em. oI- riCoueW, c.ru;-,7’— 15)" 2%»

Z‘”(uI-5';Iae“"z"'m. (11)

If the measuring system moves, then the functions constructed analogously
E ("I 5‘..- -—-(.;r) 21"/~I (12)

are not equal to the coefficients Cn u(m) However. using expressions (1), (2), (6),
(11). it is possible to express then experimental data of e n(u) in terms of the
desired coefficients Cn(u). The complex system of linear integral equations
obtained in this way with respect to Cn(m) cannot be solved in general form.

Let us present the solution in the limiting cases.

a) Small velocities: wU/g<<l

. Ca (‘9) ' £I-(U) ‘ 5“ z [0 "enufhd O eq'Em' (all.
’ ”HQ: [9"'£..,f~I- ~e“"£,.,(u)].

*#( )‘L 16 M 06 ""6" .leﬂ‘i'yl/

m ”.3 I 4
L‘ “’33” [W iﬁ‘uu‘t ,mﬁgu‘éu

(13)

111

FOIIOFFKJAI.UBE¢NVLY
FOR OMCML USE ONLY

For large velocities mU/g>>l (large frequencies). using the expansion with respect
to 11"1 it is possible to reproduce the spatial spectrum mt). The results obtained
for this case will not be presented because of insufficient space.

b) A narrow angular spectrum: B(w,6)1‘0 for lel<ae<<1.

For counteraction, the systel of integral equations reduces to differential with
respect to laments

[1,, (u) = 2-1-de 0'5“") ' “0)". (11,)

which permits determination of the first 1 nonents with respect to I. know functions
63(0)) with an absolute error 0((A6)‘+1). In particular, the zero assent
«(wan-low) is

e: - ' -
NJ“) = h :62);R0/(1‘& )£A(U¢‘-&.)l o 0&9). (15)

 

The remaining relations have more awkward fort.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zaslavskiy, H. H., Kestner, A. P. and Pilippov, I. A.. norm-72 [MPH-72],
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1974, 641 pages.

2. Phillips 0.. DINAH’IKA W60 SLOYA OKEANA [ﬁynsnics of the Upper Layer of the
Ocean], Moscow, Mir, 1969.

3. Krylov, Yu. 11., SPEKTRAL'NYYB MB’l‘ODY ISSLBDOVANIYA I RASCEETA mom VOLN.
[Spectral Methods of Investigation and Calculation of Hind-Driven Haves],
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1966.

COPYRICBT: Cosuderstvennyy okeanogreficheskiy inetitut (leningradekoye otdeleniye),
1981

10845
CSO: 8144/ 1010

112
FOR oman. USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 53.085.6:681.3
PROBLEHS 0P COMPRESSING OCEANOGRAPRIC mmmmma DURING M mum

Hoscow NEKONTAKTNYYE m'romr Imamn ormocmrmnsnm PM in Russian
1981 pp 117-119

[Article by N. N. Volynskaya and I. P. Kon'kov]

[Text] Annotation. A discussion is presented of ways to compress
information based on adaptive digitalization of the information
received from one sensor, and the possibility of reducing the
mutual redundancy of the information received from several sensors
of oceanographic parameters.

The problem of compressing oceanographic information has arisen recently in connec-
tion with development of methods and means of remote measurement of ocean parameters.
Since almost all remote measurement means involve the application of previously

known methods for oceanographic purposes, their tine-space resolution, dynamic

range and accuracy are not matched to the variability of the ocean characteristic.
This explains the high degree of informative redundancy of remote meters. In
addition, oceanographic parameters. as a rule, are nonstesdy; therefore the sensor
characteristics are determined beginning with the requirements of sufficient resolu-
tion in the highest frequency regions of the spectra of the investigated processes,
as a result of which additional redundancy of the received information occurs.

On cosbining informatively redundant means into a unified system, the total voluae

of information exceeds the possibilities of real devices for processing and recording
measurement results. Thus, for example, the volume of information received on a
10-hour aircraft flight with continuous operation of all of the sensors is about

1200 megab its. For satellite systems to study the oceanographic parameters, the
problem of information cowression is still more urgent. At the present time there
are no other recomndations with respect to processing and storinginformation except
recs-endations to average the oceanographic information with respect to areas. as

a result of which the meaningfulness of using system with high resolution is lost.

At the present time information compression procedures have been developed which
consist in adaptive-tie digitalization of the investigated process [1]. As applied
to the study of ocean characteristics it is possible to propose more specialized
methods. Since the nutter of types of sensors used exceeds the amber of independent
oceanographic parameters. the output signals of a nuaber of sensors are in a
statistical and possibly functional relationship to each other. This relation can
be detected and considered both by investigating the properties of the current

113

MWLISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

infomation itself and by a priori determination of the contribution of each
independent oceanographic parameter to the signal of each sensor. The first path
leads to factorization of the space of the sensor signals, that is. compression of
the information consists in conversion of the signals of n sensors to values of

k factors for n>:<. A second means provides for taking the physical parameters of
the ocean as the primary paraneters, conversion of the results to prism-y

parameters and recording them. The difference in the second path consists in the
fact that the factors acquire physical nestling.

In conclusion, let us present preliminary results from estinting the effectiveness
of infatuation oppression in the example of processing the recordings of an infra-
red radiometer installed on the 11-16 aircraft. The neasurenents were performed in
the sumner and fall of 1977 in the Caspian Sea, and also in the winter of 1977 in
the Baltic Sea. The total length of the fixed profile of the surface telperature
was 3000 km, which corresponds to 832 minutes of flight tine. Digitalization was
carried out under the condition of the possibility of reproducing the telperature
profile with an error not exceeding 2.5 o (the mean square value of the fluctuation
error of the initial realisation). A study was Iade of three types of approximations:
a stepped broken line with fixed quantization levels, a stepped broken line with
adaptive levels and a broken line with adaptive values of the gradient. The total
number of readings was' found to be equal to 260, 181 and 152 respectively. In the
handbook [2] it is recomended that a digitalization interval be selected which
does not exceed 3 to 5 minutes. If we take an interval equal to 1 minute, the

effectiveness of the information compression will be, in accordance with the adopted
form of the apprcxination, 3.2, 6.6 and 5.6 tiles.

In the figure we see the distribution of the lengths of the sectims of the realiza-
tion approximated by a stepped broken line. The distribution approximately follows
Poisson's law. From the distribution it is obvious that for a nonadaptive sample

with an interval of one minute about 201 of the fixed nonuniformities are lost, that
is, the information loss is significant.

 

INM
W
9 5" II" mo e (1)

Distribution of lengths of the sections of the realisation
Key:
1. seconds

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The recounended preliminary processing of the intonation mt precede recording
it on the technical carrier. The requirenente on the cysts- following fron the
adopted information conpreeeion algorithms rust be considered when developing it.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Av'leyev, 8. Ya. and Antonyuk,Ye. 11., "Reduction of. Redundant Intonation
1n Infomtion Measuring System," IZVBSIIYA VUZOV SSSE, PRIBOROSTROYENIYE

[News of the Institutions of Higher Learning of the USSR. Instrunent Making].
Vol II, No 6, 1969.

2. RUKOVODSTVO P0 PKWY!) WNW V OWMFII [Handbook on the

Application of Aerial Methods in Oceanography]. Part II, Leningrad,
GidrOIeteoizdet, 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut (Laningradskoye otdeleniye).
1981

10865
CSO: 8144/1010

-£ND-

115

“OFFICIALMONLY