FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10245
8 January 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and laterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOOD 1/82)

CONTENTS
INTERNATIONAL
Book Critiques China's Policy Toward Asia, Africa, Latin America
(H. I. Sladkovskiy; GEGEHONISTSKAYA POLITIXA KITAXA-.
UCROZA NARODAM AZII, AFRIKI I LATINSKOY AMBRIKI, I931) . ..
Book on Detente and Ideological Struggle of Ideas
(V. I. Gantmnn; RAZRYADKA HEZHDUNARODNOY NAPRYAZHBNNOSTI
I IDEOLOGICHESKAYA BOR'BA, I981) .........................
REGIONAL

Development of Industry in Azerbaijan
(K. Allakhverdiyev, S. Gabuzova; VOPROSY BKONOHIKI, Oct 81)

Estonian Ksmsonol Must Stress Conservation of Fuel, Resources
(Ya. Ssarniyt; mmozzn 33101111, 17 Nov 81)

Estonian vocational Education in 11th Five-Year Plan
(Elmer Alas; Nouxocuns KOOL. Oct 81)

_ a - [III - USSR - 35 P1

.‘An nm~.v cor-n A§~Qn
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INIERRAT IONAL

BOOK CRITIGJES CHINA'S POLICY_ Tom ASIA, AFRICA, LATIN AMERICA

Moscow GmDIONISTSKAYA POLITIKA KITAYARUGROZA NARODAM AZII, AFRIKI I LATINSKOY
AMERIKI in Russian 1981(signed to press 31 March 81)pp 1-2, 287-288

[Table of contents and brief description of book edited by M.I. Sladkovskiy]
[Excerpts] Title Page: .

Title: GEGDlONISTSKAYA POLITIKA KITAYA-UGROZA NARODAH AZII, AFRIKI I LATINSKDY
AHERIKI (China's Hegemonist Policies-a Threat to the Peoples of Asia, Africa and
Latin America) Publisher: Isdatel'stvo politicheskoy literatury. Place and year
of publication: Moscow, 1981 -

Signed to Press Date: 31 March 1981
Number of Copies Published: 42,000
Number of Pages: 288

Brief Description:

This book sheds light on China's current strategy and tactics in Asia, Africa and
Latin America; it exposes the alliance of imperialism and Beijing's hegemonism in
the world arena against the forces of peace and socialism and the national-libera-
tion movement. The book is based on materials of the all-union scientific-theoreti-
cal conference on the theme of "China's Policy with Respect to Developing Countries,"
which was held on 25-27 March, 1980 by the USSR Academy of Sciences' Institute of

the Far East together with institutes of oriental studies, Africa and Latin America
of the USSR Academy of Sciences, with the participation of scientists from a number
of brotherly countries.

Table of Contents

The Partnership of Imperialism and Beijing's Hegemonism--a New, Dangerous

Phenomenon in World Politics by 0.3. Borisov (USSR) 3

The PRC's Anti-Socialist Course in Asia, Africa and Latin America; by

V.A. Krivtsov (USSR) 20
'1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A criticism of Chinese Policy with Respect to Liberated States by Pam Dyk
Zyong (Vietnam)

On some of China's Anti-Marxist Foreign Policy Concepts by B.A. Soborov
(USSR)

Toward the Question of the PRC's Foreign Policy Strategy and Tactics by
n. KaquIan (Gun)

The Pro—imperialism of Beijing's Hegenonist Strategy by A.G. Kruchinin
(USSR)

The Evolution of Maoist Ideas on the National-Liberation Movement by
B.N. Strizhakova (USSR)

Traditions of Expansionism and Hegemonism in Contemporary China's Border
Polich by Ye. D. SLepanov (USSR)

China and the Non-aligned Movement by R. Ya. Rysinova (Bulgaria)

China's Policy Regarding States of Socialist Orientation by A.S. Krasil'nikov
(USSR)

The PRC's Position on Questions Tied to the Restructuring of International
Economic Relations by G.A. Bogolyubov (USSR)

The Struggle of Developing Countries for a New International Economic
Order and the PRC's Policy by L. Khaysanday (Mongolia)

Beijing's Cooperation with Chinese Bourgeoisie Beyond its Borders by T.M.
Kotova (USSR)

The PRC's Economic Relations with Countries of Asia, Africa and Latin
America by A.V. Skorodumov (USSR)

China's Expansionist Policy-~a Threat to Asia's Security by V.N. Baryshnikov
(USSR)

Aggressions and Interference of China's Resctionary Group in the Countries
of Indochina by Van Nguyen Long (Vietnam)

China's Policy with Respect to Kampuchea by D.M. Pospelov (USSR)
The PRC's Great-power Course in South-East Asia by V.K. Abyshayev (USSR)

Sane Aspects of the Chinese Leadership's Policy in South-East Asia by
P. Roman'ski (Poland)

China's Foreign Policy Maneuvers in South Asia by A.V. Pedin (USSR)

Chinese-Indian Relations by Ya. Tsesar (Czechoslovakia)

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

54

67

86

92
104

110

119

129

137

150

161

175
181
192

203
211
221
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

China's Alliance with Imperialism Against the National-Liberation Movement
in Africa by T.L. Deych (USSR)

China's Policy in Africa by B. Talash (Hungary)
Chinese-Zaire Relations by R. Ya. Sobolev (USSR)

Beijing's Rapproachnent with Imperialism and the Forces of Reaction in
Latin America by E. Rey (Cuba)

Countries of the Caribbean in China's Policy by A.V. Kudryavtsev (USSR)

Beijing's Great-khan Course--a Direct Threat to the Independence of
Liberated Countries by “.1. Sladkovskiy (USSR)

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAT. 1981

(280: 1807/26

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NWT IONA].

BOOK 0N DETENTE AND mmwcicn. STRIXEGLB 0? IDEAS

lbscow RAZRYADKA HEZHDUNARODMY MYWSTI I mmLOGICHBSKAYA BOR'BA
in Russian 1981(signed to press 2 May 81) PP 1-2. 389-392

[Table of contents and brief description of book edited by V. I. Gantman and
published under the auspices of the Scientific Council for Researching Problems
of Peace and Disarmament"] '

[Excerpts] Title Page:

TitIE: RAZRYADKA HEZHDUNARODMY NAPRYAWSTI I IDNLOGICEBSXAYA 3011'“
(The Relaxation of International Tension and the Ideological

Struggle)
Publisher: "Nauka" -
Place and year of publication: Moscow. 1981

Signed to Press Date: 2 May 1981
Number of Copies Published: 7,500
Number of Pages: 392

Brief Description:

The present monograph is devoted to the investigation of futures of the ideo-
logical struggle in the conditions of relaxing international tension. 0n
concrete, historical naterial. it analyzes ideological aspects of the most
urgent problems of contemporary international relations. which are. inseparably
linked with the process of relaxing international tension.

Table of Contents
Introduction by V. I. Cantnan. doctor of historical sciences. . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . 3

Chapter 1. Contemporary International Relations and the Ideological
Struggle by V. I. Gantnan, doctor of historical sciences... . 13
l. The formation of ideology in capitalist society and its meaning
for the ideological struggle on the international scene............. 14
2. The ideological struggle on the international acme: levels and

formssoossopossessessoeassessaosssaeesseeotosooooosssoosoeoessoooell 31

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relaxation of international tension and maneuvers of imperialist
policy: from "de-ideolization" to "ideolization"...................

Foreign policy ideology and foreign policy propaganda of imperialism
in the conditions of relaxing tension...............................

2. Causes for the "Ideolization" of U.S. Foreign Policy in the

'70s by N. A. Kosolapov, candidate of histrricsl sciences........
Bourgeois ideology and U.S. foreign policy..........................
Ideological factors and components of the democratic administra-
tion's foreign policy...............................................

3. Ideological Aspects of Contemporary U.S. Military Policy and
Strategy by S. P. Fedorenko. candidate of historical sciences....

The role of ideological factors in forming and realizing U.S.

military policy.....................................................

U.S. policy in the field of arms control and disarmament and its
ideological basis...................................................

4. Soviet-American Relations and the Ideological Struggle by

I. L. Sheydina, candidate of historical sciences.................
The ideological struggle in the United States on questions of
Soviet-American relations...........................................

. U.S. attempts at an ideological offensive on the international scene

in the second half of the '70s and the development of Soviet-
American relations..................................................

5. Ideological Aspects of U.S. Foreign Policy With Respect to East
European Socialist States by Ye. D. Volkova, candidate of
historical sciences..............................................

Detente and new approaches by the United States toward problems

in relations with the countries of East Europe......................

'Tbralism" and traditions of "peaceful interference" in U.S. policy

with respect to East Burope.........................................

The influence of some domestic policy factors on the formation of

the U.S. "East Europe" course.......................................

6. The Ideological Struggle About Problems of Security and
Cooperation in Europe by Ye. S. Volk and D. G. Tomsshevskiy,
doctor of historical sciences....................................

Basic factors of diversity in Western conceptions of European

“cenrityscogo...aa.a.goonso...essences-o‘cevoa-coooocovoeeaenoeeeeee

The evolution of bourgeois ideologists' approaches to questions of

detentcoootoI..mtohueuOOOUODOOOOUCI'...O...OODOIOIO5.000.009.0000...

Western ideological conceptions of detente in the course of pre-

paring for and carrying out the all-European conference.............

Problems in realizing the Final Act and imperialists' attempts

to assume the offensive on the ideological front....................

Urgent problems of security and cooperation in Europe and the

current stage of the ideological struggle...........................

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35
65
74
76
86

106
109
126

143
144

151

171
174
181

200

207
209
221
230
244

254
FOR OFFICIAL lESI-Z ONLY

Chapter 7. Interimperialist Relations and the Foreign Policy Ideology of
Developed Capitalist Countries by V. G. Baranovskiy,
candidate of historical sciences...............................
l. Interimperialiat contradictions and the ideology of "consolidating"
imperialism........................................................
2. The ideology and practice of "Atlanticiam" and "Europeanism".......
3. The ideology and policy of "trilateralism" and "interdependence"...

Chapter 8. Maoist Foreign Policy 'Theory" in the Ideological Struggle
on the International Scene by V. V. Razmerov, candidate of
historical Bciences.‘O...OOOIIOIOCOIOOOOOOOOOICOOOCUOCCIOOIOOOOC

1. The evolution of Maoist foreign policy ideology and foreign
policies...‘OOOOOCIIOOOOOCOOOO00....0..0......COCOOICCOCDOOOOIOIOIC

2. The apology for war in the center of Beijing'a political-
ideological concept................................................

3. The theory of "three worlds" as an ideological basis for the
hoists. foreignp011CYesoesoa-eooeeeeeoooeooooeeeooeoeoeoooeoooe~a

a. The "experience" of Maoist ideology and policy and the ideological
struggle of imperialism on the international scene.................

Chapter 9. Developing Countries, the Relaxation of Tension and the
Ideological Struggle by E. M. Fedotova, candidate of historical
sciences and Yu. Ye. Pedorov, candidate of historical sciences..

1. Basic ideological prerequisites of developing countries' foreign

P011Cysnoseeoo-eeoeeeaoeeootesooooeooneosoeeeoeooooooooooeoeoeeoeeo

2. Developing countries in the ideological struggle on problems of _
international relations............................................

3. The relaxation of international tension and revolutionary
transformations in developing countries............................

a. The ideological struggle on questions of the interdependence of
relaxing international tension and the economic development of
liberated countries................................................

Chapter 10. Global Problems of Today's World, International Relations and

the Struggle of Ideas by Yu. Ye. Fedorov, candidate of
historical sciences............................................
1. Global problems: the perception and prescription of bourgeois
ideology ..... . ....... ..............................................

2. Forms of international cooperation in the mirror of bourgeois

ideolosyvoootoDOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOO...00"OIOOODOOIDOOOOODOOOOIOOO
3. Global problems and the relaxation of international tension........
Conclusion by V. I. Gantman, doctor of historical sciences.................

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel’stvo "Nauka," 1981

C80: 1807/25

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

267

268
273

'279

291
293
300
308

317

326
327
333

341

349

358
358

367
375

384
FOI!0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY

REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT OF INDUSTRY IN AZERBAIJAN
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81, pp 135-140

[Article by H. Allakhverdiyev and S. Gabuzova: "An Improvement of the Structure of
Azerbaijan's Industrial Production"]

[Text] An improvement of the structure of industrial pruduction--the leading _
branch of social producti)n in the national economic and regional plans-has a
special place in the solution of the problems posed by the 26th CPSU Congress of
the overall proportional development of the economies of the economic regions.

An improvement of the branch structure of the industry of a region is based on the
overall development of its branches. An increase in the productivity of social
labor is the chief criterion in the choice of any economic decision. The concept
of overall nature should be understood not only as the many-sided and proportional
development in any territorial subdivision of those branches of the economy for
which there are favorable natural and economic conditions, but also as the fullest
use of the raw material, production, and labor resources of a region on the basis
of the latest achievements of science and technology. The overall development of
an economy based on the best combination of branches and production, the compre-
hensive use of resources, and the development of progressive forms of the organ-
ization of social production leads to the economic blending of its heterogeneous
parts and to the development of rational relations within a region. On the basis
of the overall nature of the economy of a region and, above all, of its industry,
an equalization of the levels of economic development of the country's regions is
achieved not only for the indicators of material Hell-being, but also for the con-
ditions of production.

Overall development and the degree of the social division of labor in an economic
region depend to the greatest extent upon the degree to which the level of devel-
opment of the basic group of branches of production specialization is coordinated
with the level of development of the branches that supplement the former into form-
ing an economic-production complex, and also upon the development level of the
branches which meet the production needs of the enterprises of the former and lat-
ter groups. Branches which satisfy the material and spiritual needs of the popu-
lation are also an essential component of a region's production potential.

In the end, an improvement of the siting of productive forces makes it possible to

increase national economic efficiency and, at the same time, to speed up the accomplish-
ment of economic tasks in a concrete region.

FOR10FFKJA1.USE(HNLY
F0!JOIWWC1AI.USE¢DNLY

At the present time around one-half of fixed productive capital and more than

19 percent of the people employed in the economy are concentrated in Azerbaijan's
industry. In 1979 its share in the structure of the republic's gross social pro-
duct came to 65.7 percent, compared to 62.2 percent in 1970, and, correspondingly,
its share of national income was 48.3 and 64.8 percent. These indicators are very
close to the all-union ones: in 1978 industry's share in the 0333's gross social
product came to 66.8 percent, and 51.7 percent in national income.

In the1960's and early 1970's the average annual development rates of the social
production of the Azerbaijan 383 were behind the corresponding average union ones.
The proportion of the branches which determine scientific and technological pro-
gress was on the whole quite low. For example, the proportion of machine building
came to only 11 percent of gross output and seven percent of the fixed productive
capital of industry. After the October (1976) Plenum of the COO? of Azerbaijan
measures were taken to accelerate the development of the republic's industry and
to improve its structure. At the present time the conditions have been created

in Azerbaijan for the development of a highly industrial structure for industrial
production.

The branches of the fuel (petroleum, gas), chemical and petrochemical. and light
and food industries occupy a leading place in the structure of Azerbaijan's in-
dustry. In these branches there has been a substantial increase in final output
and a rise in the level of production intensification on the basis of a more ef-
ficient processing of initial_raw materials. Thus, by the end of 1980 the pro-
portion of output in the republic with the Token of Quality exceeded the average
union level. In 1975 209 types of output were produced with the Token of Quality,
and in 1980--l,363. There are high output quality indicators in such very im-
portant branches as the electrical engineering industry, nonferrous metallurgy,
machine building for the light and food industries, petroleum machine building, the
chemical and petroleum refining industries and others. The number of products in
the highest quality category that are being produced has increased, and the range
and geography of enterprises have expanded. The improved quality of the output
which is being produced in the republic is also testified to by exports which in
1980 increased compared to 1970 by almost 1.5 times.

8
F0!‘0FFHJAL.USE(MULY
FOR1DFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

Proportion of Output of Individual Branches in Total

Industrial Output, of Fixed Productive Capital, of

Number of Industrial Production Personnel in 1970-1980
(In Percentage of Total)

ross Output Fixed Productive Nuaber of Industrial
Capital Production Personnel
mm 1980 1970 1975 1980 1970 1975 1980

Total Industry......|00,0 100,0 100,0 100,0 100,0 100,0 100,0 100,0 100,0-
Including: '
Electrica1.8ngin-

eering............ 4,4 3,8 2,8 13,1 13,7 12,6 3,6 4,0 4,0
Fuel Industry....... 20,5 14,8 10,2 45,1 40,9 40,6 11,9 8,9 7,0
Ferrous Hetallurgy.. 2,4 1,8 3,6 3,1 2,8 3,1 2,6 2,4
ﬂonferrous Metal-

1urgy............ 1,6 2,2 2,6 2,7 2,9 1,9 1,6 2,1

Chemical and Petro-

chemical Indus-

try.............. 7,2 8,2 8,3 9,6 9,2 9,1 7,4 7,1 7,2
Machine Building and

Metal Working.... 11,0 12,7 17,0 7,0 9,8 10,7 22,7 24,9 27,9
Timber, Woodworking,

and Céﬂulose and

Paper Industry... 1,7 1,8 1,5 1,0 1,0 1,2 3,5 3,9 3,4
Construction Hater-

ials Industry.... 3,6 3,3 2,7 4,3 4,0 3,9 6,3 6,0 6,2
Light Industry...... 22,2 22,2 25,9 3,6 3,8 4,4 25,5 25,6 25,1
Food Industry....... 24,0 27,5 25,3 5,3 7,0 7,5 10,7 11,4 10,9

The petroleum and gas industry is one of the leading branches of the republic's
economy. During the 10th Five-Year Plan two billion rubles were invested in this
branch, which is 1.4 times more than during the Ninth Pive-Year Plan, 17 petroleum
and gas deposits were opened, and a substantial increase in the industrial stocks
of hydrocarbon raw materials was achieved. The five-year assignment for gas ex-
traction was fulfilled with its volume increasing by 1.4 times. The country re-
ceived a large amount of high quality Azerbaijan petroleum. Progressive well'ex-
ploitation technologies were introduced more widely and more than 80 percent of the
petroleum fields have been automated.

A great deal has been done for the resouipping of offshore petroleum and gas ex-
traction. Petroleum uorkers have obtained new highly efficient equipment for the
performance of work at a sea depth of more than 80 meters. In 1980 the average
daily level of petroleum extraction in offshore fields increased. However, the

assignments of the five-year plan for petroleum extraction in the sea were not
fulfilled.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan the importance of the petroleum and gas industry as
a supplier of raw materials for the petroleum refining, petrochemical, and chemical

IN3I1OIHHCJAl.l£3l2(ﬂNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industries will become even greater. For this reason, the task consists not only
in stabilizing the production of petroleum, but also in increasing it on the basis
of a wider introduction of progressive methods for the intensification of extrac-
tion and of the development of new deposits on land and at sea. A fundaaental
iaprovement has to be achieved in drilling and geological surveying and prospecting
work has to be strengthened in the central and western regions of the republic” and
in the deep waters of the Caspian Sea. The technical base of offshore petroleum
and gas extraction has to be thoroughly strengthened, work on the construction of
stationary platforms and hydroengineering installations has to be speeded up, and
there has to be a wider introduction of secondary and tertiary methods of producing
petroleum on land. Petroleum refining is one of the oldest branches of the repub-
lic's industry. Since 1971 overall programs have been carried out for the recon-
struction and modernization of the petroleum refining industry which are aimed at
increasing production and improving output quality, increasing labor productivity,
solving a number of social problems, and strengthening environmental protection.
During the 10th Five-Year Plan twice as much capital investments were used as dur-
ing the Ninth Five-Year Plan for the reconstruction of Baku petroleum refining en-
terprises. All of this makes it possible to improve production processes. deepen
the refining of the petroleum, and to increase the production of high octane gaso-
lines by almost 1.5 times and of high quality lubricating oils by 7.5 tines.

However, the petroleum refining industry did not fulfill its assignments of the
10th Five-Year Plan. Of 27 items in its basic products list, the plan was ful—
filled for only 15. The basic reason is in the breakdown of raw materials deliv-
eries for this branch. It is also essential to achieve more efficient processing
of the raw materials that come in, including a sharp decrease in the loss of pet-
roleum. Reconstruction has to continue there and all petroleum refining has to be
concentrated basically at two p1ants--the Hove-Baku Petroleum Refining Plant imeni
v.1. Lenin for the production of high octane gasolines and fuel, and the Baku
Petroleum Refining Plant imeni the 22nd CPSU Congress for the production of high
quality lubricating oils.

Under present-day conditions a change is occurring in the republic in the relation-
ships between groups "A" and "B" of industry in favor of the latter, which is in
complete correspondence with the course adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress which is
aimed at achieving a substantial improvement of public well-being.

One of the factors which is promoting an improvement of the structure of the re-
public's industry is the availability of labor resources. In the Azerbaijan SSR
there is a favorable tendency toward an increase in labor resources. In this con-
nection, it is essential to develop industrial production even more intensively in
medium and small cities and in rural areas. Here, the path has to be taken both

of creating in them a wide network of branches of operating enterprises in the non-
metal-intensive branches and of the construction of new productions, especially
branches which produce consumer goods and process agricultural output. Calculat-
ions show that there are real opportunities in the republic for doubling the pro-
duction of output in these regions during the forthcoming decade. This, in part-
icular, will make it possible to change the correlation between the raw material
and processing branches of industry. At the present time the republic's raw mater-
ial branches produce 13-14 percent of the output of industry compared to 7.6 per-

10
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cent in the USSR. An increase in the processing level of initial raw materials,
first of all in the chemical, petrochemical, light, and food industries, will
make it possible to increase the proportion of final output which goes directly
for production and non-production consumption.

In the future the republic will see high development rates for the wine-making
industry which will become the country's largest area for the production and pro-
cessing of grapes. In order to realize this goal it is necessary, in particular,
to create a national economic grape growing complex which will include not only the
production and processing of grapes and its by products, but also the construction
of enterprises which produce machinery and equipment for these branches.

There are large reserves in the republic for increasing and improving output in
other branches of group "8." Light industry enterprises are producing an insuf-
ficient amount of goods which meet the requirements of marary fashion. The
proportion of output which is produced from local raw materials comes to only three
percent of the production of local industry. Incomplete use is being made of the
opportunities for expanding the assortment of table wines and of the conditions

for developing fishing in fresh waters.

0n the whole, the light and food industries produce 50.5 percent of the republic's
total industrial output. However, the share of the production of consumer goods

is only 28 percent. This is connected with the fact that a substantial part of
light industry's output is made up of technical products. Heavy industry enter-
prises do not produce enough consumer goods. For example, at many machine building
and metallurgical plants this output comes to only 1.5-5 percent of total production.
The accelerated development of the branches of group "B" is a task of paramount
economic and political importance. As a result, during the 11th Five-Year Plan it
is planned to increase the production growth rates of group "B" by 35.2 percent
compared to 29.3 percent for group "A."

The machine building of the Azerbaijan SSR is constantly increasing the production
of the machinery and mechanisms needed for the overall development of the economy
of the republic and of the other economic regions of our country. During the years
1970-1979 the share of the republic's machine building and metal working increased
from 11 to 16.9 percent. Its Output increased by 3.1 times compared to two times
in industry as a whole. In addition, during four years of the Ninth Five-Year
Plan alone machine building production increased by 1.8 times, including instru-
ment making--by almost two times, and machine building for the light and food in-
dustries--by seven times. The high development rates for machine building have
been accompanied by the creation of a multi-branch and progressive structure for
this branch.

Investment policy in the republic has been directed toward the development of
electrical engineering, instrument making, radio engineering, and others whose
growth rates have outstripped not only the corresponding rates in the country's
branches, but also the average branch rates of the republic and of the country as
a whole. Thus, from 1970 through 1979 machine building output increased by 3.5
times, electrical engineering output by 2.2 times, and instrument making output
by 2.9 times.

' 11
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FIHICHHWCIAI.lEﬂ£(N§LY

At the same time, calculations performed on the basis of the materials of an inter-
branch balance show that in 1977 approximately 56 percent of the republic's need
for implements of labor was covered by other economic regions of the country whose
proportion in the total amount of importet industrial output in Azerbaijan came to
24.2 percent, and 13.4 percent of t'e exported output. The volume of finished out-
put production in the production of the means of production in the republic is
still insufficient. A change in the structure of social production on the basis

of an accelerated development of machine building will promote a rise in the level
of the overallnature of the region's economic development.

A large role is being assigned in the llth Five-Year Plan to the development of the
republic's machine building and metal working whose growth rates are planned to

be two times greater than in industry as a whole. This will promote a rise in the
level of specialization and a further improvement of branch structure of Azerbaijan's
industry. By the end of the five-year plan the proportion of machine building and
metal working output in the total amount of the republic‘s industrial production
will come to around 20 percent, compared to 16.9 percent in 1980. In the future
this branch will become one of the leading ones which will determine the special-
ization of the Azerbaijan SSR in the all-union division of labor.

It is planned to expand, reconstruct, and reequip the "Azerelectromash," "Azerelect-
roterm,“ and “Azerelectrosvet” associations.

It is planned to carry out a complex of measures to increase the efficiency of the
use of capacities and the shift coefficient of equipment, to bring about an exten-
sive introduction of the automation and mechanization of labor intensive processes,
to reduce the metal intensiveness of output, and to improve the technical level
and the reliability and service life of output.

Ferrous metallurgy whose production volume will increase by 1.5 times during the
five-year period is a promising branch of Azerbaijan's industry. It is planned

to further improve the technology of processing alunite ores into final products
and to make full use of the capacities at the Kirovabad Aluminum Plant, which will
make it possible to increase the production of alumina by almost 1.5 times, pot-
assium sulfate--five times, rolled non-ferrous metals--three times, powder metal-
lurgy output--three times, and cultural and domestic goods--l.6 times. The pro-
ducts list of non-ferrous metallurgy will be expanded. '

The republic's ferrous metallurgy will meet basically the production needs of the
petroleum and gas extraction branches basically for piping and for the extraction
and enrichment of iron ore.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan the reequipping of the Azerbaijan Pipe Rolling
Plant imeni v.1. Lenin will continue. The production of high-strength thermally
processed piping for the petroleum and gas extraction industry will increase by
1.5 times. It is planned to build a large new shop for the thermal zincing of
pump and compressor piping. It is planned to put new sections of the iron ore
deposit into operation at the Azerbaijan Concentrating Combine.

The industrial growth rates require the rapid development of the republic's power
engineering and construction bases. Meanwhile, the growth rates of electric power

‘12
FIHIC”WW(JAI.LE“E(H§LY
FOI.OF1ﬂC]Al.lEﬂECNNLY

engineering and the construction materials industry have lagged behind their over-
all growth.

At the present time the republic produces two billion kilowatt-hours of electric
energy less than is necessary for the economy's needs. The shortage of electric
energy is compensated for through acquisitions from the United Transcaucasian Sys-
tem. '

"Azglavenergo“ is being slow in eliminating the shortcomings in its work. The use
level of electrical energy equipment is low, losses of electric energy in the sys-
tems are great, ssis the specific expenditure of fuel at electric power stations,
and reliable electric energy supplies have not been achieved for the republic' s
economy during the fall-winter period.

The task of Azerbaijan's power engineering workers is to ensure an outstripping
growth for capacities during the 11th Five-Year Plan, to- put new stations into
operation which will increase the capacities of the republic' s power system by 1.5
times, and to begin the reequippingof the attire branch. Along with this, work on
effective methods of transforming solar, wind, and geothermal energy has to be act-
ivated.

"No matter how rapidly we develop power engineering, the saving of heat and energy
will continue to be a highly important state task," L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th
CPSU Congress. A search has been developed in the republic for reserves for de-
creasing the expenditure of fuel and energy resources, and the policy of developing
non-energy intensive branches of industry has Justified itself.

It is planned to bring the production of electrical energy in 1985 to 20 billion
kilowat-hours. The increase in the production of electric energy will be achieved
on the basis of the coannssioning of the Azerbaijan State Regional Electric Power
Station and the Shamkhor State Electric Power Station.

A further construction program is planned for hydroelectric power stations on the
River Kur and its tributaries on the basis of an overall use of the republic' 6
water resources. The construction of the Yenikendskaya, Kirsanskaya, Alazanskaya,
and Ismaillinskaya hydroelectric power stations is being planned.

The slow development rates of the construction materials industry is to a large ex-
tent explained by shortcomings in capital construction, a lack of coordination in
the work of the individual construction ministries and serious defects in the or—
ganization and management of capital construction and in the development of its
material base. Thus, for example, the Ministry of the Construction Materials 1n-
dustry fulfilled its five-year plan for gross output, but did not meet its assign-
ment for products list. There are shortcomings in material and technical supplies
for construction sites the responsibility for which rests basically with Gossnab
and the material and technical supply services and ministries and departments. On
account of the unsatisfactory work of a number of ministries and departments and
of contractors and clients, during the 10th Five-Year Plan around 500 million ru-
bles worth of capital investments were not utilized and more than 700 million ru-
bles worth of fixed capital was not connissioned. At the beginning of this year

13
FOI_OFFKJAI.USE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

incompleted construction came to 1.6 billion rubles, which is more than 500 mil-
lion rubles in excess of the established norm. The five-year plan for contract-
ing work was underfulfilled by 105 million rubles.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan the scope and rates of capital construction will in-
crease: 10.5 billion rubles in capital investments will be assigned for the econ-
omic and social development of the republic, including five billion rubles for con-
struction and installation work, which is 40 percent more than during the 10th Five-
Year Plan. The construction industry and the construction materials industry will
be further developed. During the five-year period the amount of contracting work
will increase by an average of 1.5 times.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan it is necessary to carry out a complex of measures
to increase the effectiveness of capital investments and to achieve the accelera-
ted commissioning of production capacities and objects and a consistent decrease
in the number of newly begun construction projects in order in the near future to
bring the amount of incompleted construction to the established norms. Certain
positive results have already been achieved in the republic in this direction.
During the last three years of the 10th Five-Year Plan the number of production
purpos construction projects decreased by 33 percent, including by 42 percent for
newly begun ones. The level of incompleted construction decreased from 116 per-
cent in 1975 to 98 percent in 1980. The policy aimed at the concentrated use of
material and technical and labor resources in capital construction will continue.
By the end of 1985 it is planned to bring the level of incompleted conStruction to
the norms which have been estimated at 65 percent.

Proceeding from the necessity for maintaining the high industrial production devel-
opment rates which have developed in the republic during the last decade, the fol-
lowing directions of improving the structure of Azerbaijan's industry are, in our
view, advisable: an optimal combination of the branches of production specializa-
tion, the branches of the infrastructure, and of the production of consumer goods
which will ensure economically effective dimensions for the development of the
.production and non-production spheres of the republic's economic complex; the pre-
ferential development of such labor intensive branches as ensure a maximum return
from invested resources with the least needs for water, fuel, metal, and capital
outlays; a maximum concentration of capital investments which are allocated for
the development of industry in the rayon centers of the republic for the concen-
tration in them of large industrial complexes, the rational use of labor, material,
and natural resources, and so forth.

The task of further increasing the socio-economic effectiveness of Azerbaijan's
economy.as a component part of the country's single national economic complex is
objectively producing the necessity for moving on to a qualitatively new level in
the development of the productive forces in the interest of ensuring the balanced
and proportional growth of the economy and of strengthening its social directions.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda." "Voproay ekonomiki," 1981

2959
C80: 1830/94

'14
FKHRIOIIﬂCJAI.lﬂﬂE(ﬂWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

ESTONIA)! KWSOHOL MUST STRESS CONSERVATION 0F FUEL. WEE
Tallinn MOIDDEZH ESTONII in Russian 1? Nov 81 p 3

[Report by Ya. Saamiyt. secretary of the Komsomol of Estonia CC: "0n the Tasks
of the Republic's Konsomol Organizations Regarding Mobilization of Konsomol Members
and Youth to Struggle for the Economical and Rational Utilization of Raw-Material.
Fuel-;:nergy. and Other Haterial Resources"]

[Text] The Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR
during the Years 1981--1985 and the period to 1990 state that the principal task
of the 11th Five-Year Plan is to ensure the further growth of the Soviet people's
well-being, based on the steady developeent of the country's national economy. an
acceleration of scientific and technical progress. and the conversion of the na-
tional economy to the rails of intensive develoment. a more rational utilisation
of production potential, multifaceted economizing on resources, and an improve-ant
in work quality. In the center of particular attention by party policy are the
problems of rational and economical resource utilization.

Proceeding from the decisions of the 26th party congress. a Joint decree was adop-

ted by the CPSU cc and the USSR Council of Ministers. entitled "0n gtepping Up Hork
With Regard to Econo-izing and Rationally Utilizing Raw-Material. Fuel-Energy. and

Other Haterial Resources."

Basing their efforts on the congress materials and the given decree. the bureau of
the Koaosonol cc discussed the tasks of the Komsomol organizations in the light of
these documents. A comprehensive plan was worked out to ensure the active partici-
pation of Komsomol members and youth in the campaign for conservation.

Ensuring an energy supply. together with outlays 'on raw materials and fuel, com;-
prise 73 percent of the total amount of expenditures for the production of indus-
trial output. Just one percent of the savings on these outlays would allow us to
increase the national income by 6 billion rubles. Approximately as much could al-
so be obtained by means of increasing the return on investment by one kopeck for
each ruble of fixed-capital costs. The total sum which could be obtained in such
a manner would ensure by almost one-fourth the amount of annual capital invest»

ments in the developaent of the country's agriculture. Hence. it is obvious how
important it is to be economical.

The successes in the development of our republic's national economy during the
years of the Soviet power are well known to all. New. during a period of 8 days.

’ 15-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

our industry produces Just as such as throughout all of 1940. Daring the last 5
years alone fixed capital increased by a factor of 1.3. and its total value anount-
ed to 13 billion rubles. During the past year Estonia's national econoay consulted
sore than 8 billion kit-hrs of electric power, 5.? million Giga-cals of heat, 2.6
million tons of petroleum products. 29 million tons of shale. 316. 500 tons of fer-
rous metals. 912,000 tons of mineral fertilizers. and many other naterial and m-
aeterial resources. It is not hard to imagine how nuch our national economy would
gain if a one—percent savings could be made on all these expenditures. In order to
do this. we lust cut down all possible losses. make more rational use of raw mate-
rials. and produce less waste eaterials which are unsuitable for re~processing.

of all materials and resources. mung the past five-year plan our republic's Kon-
sonol organizations took part in the All-Union campaign for conservation. A great
deal of work in conducted inspections was done by the Kohtla-Jirve and Nerve. Komso-
mol gorkons, the Komsomol committees of the Estonslanets Production Association and
the Kiviyli 5m [expansion unknown]. the Il'marine Plant. the Tartu Control-Appa-
ratus Plant. the Vilyandi Dairy Combine. and the Komsonol nenbers of the Balbola
Kolkhoz in Vilyandi Rayon.

The Komsomol-Youth Brigade fro: the Vivikond Nine Pit. under Sergey Popo'v's leader»
ship. is actively working to lower the production cost of a ton of shale by one ko-
peck. The brigade has fulfilled its socialist pledges. and since the beginning of
the year it has already saved 1.21s? rubles worth of naterials.

The Komsonol-Youth Section of the October nine Pit (Georgiy Kassen. chief) this
year made savings on materials amounting to 14,280 rubles. And the mubers of the
Konsomol-Youth group of BelAZ heavy-duty dump-truck drivers from this same mine pit
during the third quarter alone conserved 31,500 liters of fuel. As a result of the
common efforts of all the association's workers, Estonslanete reduced the produc»
tion cost of one ton of shale by an average of 3 kopecks. Taking part in the move-
nent entitled “More Shale for Less Outlays" are more than 20 Konsonol-Youth groups.
while only no percent of the youth are here. The association could operate for an
entire nonth on the electric power which was saved during the past five-year plan.

Remarkable work within the franework of the campaign for conservation has been ac-
complished by our electric-power engineers. The staff of the Baltic GRES‘s Koaso-
mol Spotlight conducted a monitoring, fact-finding trip. During the course of
checking up on the rational utilization of equipment it was discovered that on one
of the compressors there had been installed not a 250-16! motor, as was supposed,
but rather one of twiCe that capacity. The Spotlighters addressed a request to the
station's administration to replace this motor. As a result of this, several thou-
sand kH-hrs of electric power have been saved. During the course of another trip
it was revealed that every hour the station was "eating up" excess tons of shale.

' 16‘-
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The young transport workers actively participate in drawing up Komsonol-Youth
routes. Trains are made up of nominally economised cars. and they are hauled by
diesel and electric locomotives operating on conserved fuel and power.

Komsomol members of the-Tallinn Transport Complex also actively participate in the
struggle for an economical and rational expenditure of materials. As a result of
joint efforts. they have managed not only to reveal bottlenecks in the organization
of hauls and freight-handling operations but also to develop agitation among the
youth in the largest enterprises of the republic's capital for the rational utili-
zation of transport means, savings in time. and reduction of idle times. Thus. at
the wood-processing plant, at the hasrdu Chemical Plant. as well as at several
other groups. the Komsomol committees have enrolled youth into freight-handling
work, while at the Vol'ta Plant a special brigade for urgent work has even been
created within the Komscmol committee. One feels that these organizations under-
stand how profitable it is to speed up car turnover on the railroad.

At the same time there are considerable unutilized resources in the work of a sin-
gle transport complex. Ties between the Komsomol organisations of the city's en-

terprises require mrther expansion and strengthening. All work on increasing the
efficiency of transport operations must be put on a well-organized basis.

Along with direct savings. the rational expenditure of power and fuel depends in
large measure on new technical decisions. the newest achievements of science. and
the effectiveness of proposals by efficiciency experts. We must note the achieve-
ments of the comprehensive youth creative group. headed by V. Vasil'yev in the Sci-
entific Research Institute on Shales. For its fruitful word: in this field this
group has been awarded the Ministry's Certificate of Good Work and Conduct for
three years in a row.

Hell-targeted work on developing rational methods among youth have been engaged in
by the Kohtla-Jarva gorkom. the October and Parnu raykoms of the Komsomol. the pri-
mary Komsomol organizations of the Tihemetsa Sovkhoz Tekhnikum. the Kuusalu Kol-
khoz. the Baltic GEES, and the Fishing Kolkhoz imeni Kirov.

But. at the same time, it should be noted that the Komsoaol organizations are not
paying enough attention to such factors in working with young efficiency experts
as rendering them multi-faceted aid, as well as moral and material incentives.

For their high achievements in cconomizing on raw materials. fuel| and other re-
sources during the last five-year plan the Krengol'mskaya manufakturm Combine, the
Korma, Estonslanets. Estrybprom Production Associations. and another entire series
of groups were awarded Certificates of Good Hork and Conduct by the AUCC‘I'U, the
Komsomol CC, and ‘JJ‘JR Cossnab.

As you can see. we do have our achievements. But there are still reserves. Suf-
fice it to say that in comparison with the most developed countries we are still
lagging behind in outlays of raw materials and power to produce a conventional
unit of national income. The material consumption of certain types of output is
still too great. As before. we are still not fully extracting minerals from the
depths of the earth. Utilization of scrap metal and waste paper has been insuffi-

ciently developed. There are still considerable losses of finished goods in sto-
rage and in transport.

' 17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All these shortcomings are cited in the above-mentioned party documents, and they
also pertain to our republic.

Unfortunately. in many city and rayon Komsomol organisations during the period be-
tween the reports and the elections questions of economies and conservation are
discussed neither at the bureau sessions nor at the plenums. As a result, in these
rayons and cities the youth and Komsomol members have not been drawn into the cam-
paign for conservation and economies. Nor are these questions reflected to a suf-
ficient degree in the socialist pledges. and they are not considered in the course
of the Leninist accounting. In the final analysis, instead of economies. we have
to deal with an overexpenditure of materials and resources. as happened in the sub-
divisions of the republic's Ministry of Construction: an above-norm expenditure of
reinforced concrete, glass, linoleum is often permitted in the Tallinstroy Trust.
as well as in the Narva and Kohtla-‘Jarva Construction Trusts. And the Komsomol or-

ganizations of these trusts have not even considered it necessary to examine these
problems among themselves.

The Romsomol organizations of transport workers daily encounter the problus of ra-
tionally expending fuel and lubricating materials. If in Tallinavtotrans and the
Viljandi Motor Pool (60 9 the Komsomol committees and 'searchliyzters" have taken
upon themselves the task of monitoring their rational utilisation and have already
achieved considerable successes, this cannot be said of the ruaining Komsomol or-
ganizations of transport enterprises. Too little attention is being paid to these

problems in the taxi and bus pools of Tallinn. And it turns out that they either
have a large over-expenditure of gasoline, or they sell the extra amounts at

black-market prices.

I think that the examples cited above are sufficient for the staffs and posts of
the Komsomol Searchlight of the motor-transport workers to understand what tasks
they are confronted with and to get to work on the matter in earnest.

It is well known that in our country every second ton of steel and cast iron is
smelted from scrap metal. Utilization of secondary raw material in metallurgy is
15 times cheaper than using ore. But in many organisations and enterprises the
collection and conveying of scrap metal is considered to be an excess union. And
-- what a large amount of this old metal is still lying about and rusting in dumps.
along roads, and at plant and factory areas! Meam'nnile the Komsomol gorkoms and
raykoms chronically fail to fulfill their plans for turning over scrap metal. and
the Romsomol CC must remind them of this every quarter. For several years in a

row already the Komsomol embers of Tallinn‘s Horskoy [Maritime] Raven. on the ter-
ritory of which large industrial enterprises are located, have not been able to
fulfill their plans for turning over raw materials. Things are also unsatisfactory
in the Valga Rayon. nevertheless. a number of organisations do manage to cope with
their plans year after year. for example. the VilJandi Rayon and the Leninskiy Ra-
yon of the city of Tallinn. Could it be that the Komeomol members of the Leninskiy
Rayon have more supplies of scrap metal than their neiambors from the Horskoy Ra-
yon? He simply must pay more attention to these problems here. He would also ad-
vise our comrades from the Morskoy Komsomol Raykom to turn to their neighbors for
experience. It is not far to go for such benefits--700 meters.

‘ 18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ”cheers and other schoolchildren have also made their contribution to the col-
lection of secondary raw material. - During the third quarter the young Narvans col-
lected 35 tons of scrap metal. while their fellows fro. the Kalininskiy Rayon of
our republic's capital collected 1&6 tons. By the way, the Pioneers and other
schoolchildren of Tallinn's l-iorskoy Rayon did not collect even 100 kg of scrap me-

sociation, which is not always capable of ensuring the on-schedule reception of raw
material. Thus. on 18 September a truck-driver from the Estkolkhosstroy SHU [Con-
struction and Installation Administration] had to spend considerable time and ef-
fort to turn over the scrap metal which he was hauling. Althouyi it is well known
that from 0800 to 1830 hours scrap metal collected by Konsomol members is received
on a non-scheduled basis. But on that particular day only one out of five cranes
“38 in operation at the warehouse in Paaskule'. To unload the truck. the .

area. Inasmuch as such coaplaints as this have come in on sore than one occasion
from the Komsomol committees and schools. we expect free the nanaguent of Vtor-
chemet a more principled attitude toward the situation which has been created and
the adoption of specific measures.

The business of collecting waste paper has been fairly well organized in our repub-
lic's schools. On an average last year each schoolchild accounted for 16.6 kg of
this valuable secondary raw material. He should note the work of the Kohtla-Jarve
and Parnu Koasomol gorkoms on mobilizing Pioneers and other schoolchildren to col-
lect secondary raw material. And we would advise that their example be followed
by the Komsomol organisations of the Jogeva and Horskoy Rayons.

One of the most acute problems remaining in our republic is that of the rational
consumption of electric power. Last year 5? industrial enterprises penitted an
over-expenditure.

It should be said that savings on electric power are, perhaps. the most widespread
form of economics, and the Komsomol Searchlighters are paying sufficient attention
to this. Eut each person must be made aware of the need for a rational expendi-

ture of kit-hrs so that everyone will be careful not to leave on lights, machine
tools, or instruments without necessity.

And we must dwell particularly on the problems of economics and conservation in
agriculture. in the use of products of livestock raising and plant cultivation. In
this present year. which has been very difficult for agriculture. the field workers
by their self-sacrificing toil have ensured a satisfactorily m1 winter period for
the livestock. The harvest was gathered in. It was necessary to work by using
every single minute suitable for field operations. This summer the Komsomol men-
bers and youths, the 353D [expansion unknown] and EDSh [expansion unknown] "fight-
ers" actively participated in the Sunday and Saturday work to procure the hay;

they also made their contribution to picking fruit, vegetables. and potatoes. '
working with the slogan. "Gather the harvest without losses." remarkable results
were achieved by the young combine operators--the Komsomol members Yuri Vy'aen from

the Kamb'ya Sovkhoz, Aare Kade from the Akh'ya Kolkhoz, Yuri Kappa from the Ridala
Sovkhoz. and others.

' 19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hatching in the front ranks of the young agricultural workers'are such machine-
operators as the third-year student of the Tihuetsa Sovkhos-Tekhnikum. Kati Tame-
org (who threshed 720 registered tons of grain . averaging 20 quintals per hectare).
The rationalisation movement is spreading among the rural youth. Yuri Sepp froa
the Alliku Sovkhos of the Paide Rayon replaced the rear wheels on his Niva with
large ones. As a result, the tilt of the entire vehicle was altered. and this al-
lowed a considerable reduction in grain losses during the reaping process.

The name of lore Leas. a driver from the Vykhma Kolkhoz, Viljandi Rayon has already
for many years now been listed among the leading drivers in the republic-wide con-
petition for hauling away grain. Careful laintenance of the vehicle ant ueced to
him and an accurate attitude have allowed his to work without losses in port-
ing grain and to have a solid savings in fuel.

Unfortunately. however, matters do not stand well everywhere or always. It is
painful to see grain which has been grown with such difficulty spilling out onto
the ground through the cracks of the truck bodies and to see it spoiling in storage
facilities which have not been prepared for grain. Thus. on the Lembitu and Khallie-
te farms of Viljandi Rayon several tens of grain spoilt Just because they had been
placed for storage in areas which were unsuitable for this purpose. In the Haapsa-
1u Rayon fire destroyed 1&9 tons of hay and in Rapla Rayonuéo tons. And through-
out the republic in toto as much hay burned as could have fed about 600 head of
cattle during the winter. Such losses--the completely wasted labor of some per-
sons because of the carelessness of others-deans that tons and quintals of live-
stock products will not be obtained. It is necessary that the farm Konsonol orga-
nizations and the Komsoaol raykous draw serious conclusions for themselves and deal
harshly with those who are guilty.

From the viewpoint of strengthening the savings cycle we must maintain in the field
of vision not only the rational expenditure of raw aaterials and derived products
but also the accounting and economical consul-prion of finished goods.

Thus, at several dairy-product complexes in the republic above-non losses of silk
are being permitted. At the enterprises of the Plinistry of the Timber. Pulp and
Paper. and Hood-Processing Industry a significant portion of the wood is still go-
ing to waste. To be sure. at the progressive enterprises efforts are being made
to utilizethe waste products as well. to turn them into revenue-producers, and
here there are possibilities for the Konsonol to show itself to good advantage.

Economizing should affect each of us on a purely personal level as well. Take our
attitude toward bread. How much of it grows stale here and then is thrown away!
Yes, despite the increase in outlays for the production of bakery products. they
are just as cheap as before; the price policy,remains that of former times. But a
conservationist attitude toward bread must become a cause for the entire nation;
widespread. explanatory work must be conducted everywhere. It is no secret that
it is most frequently schoolchildren who treat bread in a most inpenissible nan.-
ner. In the school cafeterias torn-up pieces of bread lie around on the tables,
on the plates. or are thrown back and forth. Here is where the Pioneer organiza-

tion and the school's komsonol ougit to say something. Positive experience in
working in this direction has been accuaulated in Pamu. Kohtlaalarve. and Narva.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A large role in strengthening the savings cycle has been delegated to the propa-
ganda organs. In accordance with the new structure of Konsomol political educa-
tion. 122 schools have now begun classes on the topic "Conservation is a comunist
trait," while M schools have begun classes on the topic ”The develop-ent of so-
cialist competition is the inculcation of a communist attitude toward work."

Committees and Komsomol propagandists should pay particular attention to the or-
ganic ties between methods of economic management at each work place. In order to
do this. it is necessary to provide the students with sore practical assigments,
then to correct their analyses and bring the topics of their reports and these as-
sigments closer to the life of the specific group.

here attention ought to be paid to the problem of economizing and conservation by
the lecturers who speak before an audience of young persons. Analysis of the ques-
tions asked by youth testify to the fact that specific economic probluns represent
considerable interest for young fellows and girls. But we do need to tie in the
theoretical calculations more closely with the practice, with the problems which
confront specific groups.

to small contribution to the cause of economizing on and the rational expenditure
of materials. raw materials, and resources is being made by the 5.500 staffs and
posts of the Komsomol Searchlight which have been created in our republic; they
con-prise a total coa lex of 17,000 persons. During the course of their "raids"
[fact-finding trips they discover shortcomings and monitor their elimination. In
1979 and 1980 3.500 such ”raids" were conducted in order to check up on the utili-
zation of fuel and electric power. The "ssarchlighters' of Goskomnefteprodukt
have put under their constant monitoring the operation of gasoline service sta-
tions. In Tallinn alone last year 12,000 liters of gasoline were returned to the
state; the coupon stubs for them had in some mysterious way wound up in the hands
of the owners of private vehicles. Goskomnefteprodukt's Koasomol neabers invite
Searchlighters from other ministries and departments to participate in raids so
that they in turn can take over the task of monitoring the distribution and utili-
zation of assets being allocated for fuels and lubricating materials. Taking an
active part in these check-ups are Konsomol activists from the Hinistry of Light
Industry. comaunications, and Tallinavtotrans.

In the spring of this year the republic's Searchlighters conducted a ”conservation
raid." the goal of which was to check up on the utilization of production wastes
and secondary raw materials at industrial enterprises and to discover possibili-
ties for using these waste products in industry. Proposals were made to a number
of enterprises to set up production from the waste products or to find other pos-
sible uses for them.

One of the shortcomings of the Komsomol Searchlight's work is that often the pat-
rols are limited to the role of pointing things out and criticizing them. Thus.
the Komsomol menbcrs 01’ the ilorskoy Rayon discovered a pile of mating scrap
metal in Lasnanani. They noted it down and turned in the infomtion. This was
in the Spring. But the metal is still lying there to this very day under the open
sky. needed by nobody. But the Horskoy Rayon did not even come close to fulfill-
ing its plan for turning over scrap metal.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

Although on the whole the staffs and posts of the KP [Romsomol Searchlight] have
been operating quite well in the republic, we must also dwell on some other short-
comings. The Searchlighters in the organizations with fewer meabers operate inef-
fectively and passively. Often the young people are not sufficiently demanding;
they lack a sense of purpose and persistence. Here and there aid on the part of
the Komsomol committees is weak, the results of the work are not discussed at
meetings, and representatives of the administration who would be able to inform
the young people about the course of eliminating the discovered shortcomings are
not invited to these meetings. .

It must be acknowledged that the rayon staffs are not always the genuine leaders
of the Jearchlighters. Staff work has been very weakly set up in the city of Tar-
tu, as well as in the Valga and Rapla Rayons; the Tallinn city KP staff has also
lost its former position.

The task of the Komwmol Searchlight does not consist solely of discovering short-
comings. The KP staffs and posts should become a school of economic managaent
for everyone.

Guided by the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. the'decrees of the party and
the government about strengthening the savings cycle and the rational utilisation
of resources. the republican Komsomol organization has outlined its most important
tasks, and it understands that an enormous amount of work it is confronted with.

It is necessary to thoroughly and multi-facetedly analyze'the state of affairs at
industrial enterprises and to provide a principled evaluation of instances of poor
management.

In perfecting the mechanism of the economical expenditure of materials, raw materi-
als. and resources, we must make fuller use of the possibilities which socialist
competition accords us. This should be done so that the reduction of the propor-
tionate expenditure of raw materials. other materials. and resources per unit of
output produced becomes the principal indicator in summing up the results of the
labor competition among the young peeple. It is necessary to develop on a broader
basis the movanent entitled "Bvery young worker shOuld maintain a personal account
of the economies effected by him"; its goal is the maximum reduction of production
wastes, the decrease of losses, and the utilization of secondary raw uterials.

In 1980 the Romsomol members of Viljandi Rayon became the initiatozw of this move-
ment. It gained widespread acceptance among the young rural workers and transport
|'orkers of this rayon. This has also been recognized on an All-Union scale. But
here within the borders of our republic it has still not found its followers
everywhere.

'de must propagandize more widely the progressive experience of the economical ex-
pendi ture of raw materials and resources. More attention should be paid to the
problems of conservation in organizing and conducting competitions in vocational
skills and the exchange of experience.

In accordance with the decision of the Komsomol CC. during the years 1981--1985
the country will conduct an All-Union contest for the effective utilisation of
raw materials, other materials. and energy resources. Komsomol organisations

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘l-‘lt'I/tl. UHF. ONLY

must discuss the problems of conducting the contests in their own localities,
achieve the most widespread and mass participation in it by the young people.

To activate their own work is a matter of honor for the young efficiency experts.
Their creative thought ought to be directed at seeking out new ways of economiz-
ing. It is also necessary to attract groups of young scholars into this work.

He must animate the work of the Komsouol Searchlight staffs and posts. enrich its
active struggle against manifestations of negligence, thefts of socialist pro-
perty. and enlist operative househol detachments for raids.

At present accounts and elections are taking place in the Konsomol organizations.
The culmination of the canpaign will be the congresses of the republic's Koneonol
and the All-Union Eionsonol. It is necessary that the questions of economizing. as
urgent questions of our party's policy. become the subject of concerned conversa-
tion at the accounts and election meetings in workshop. primary. rayon. and city
organizations. It is necessary that the serious and concerned conversations be
folloz'cd by specific deeds.

Conraden! Allow: me to express confidence that the republic's Konsomol organiza-
tion; will do everything to inculcate in youth the inner need for a conservation-
ist attitude torand the national good. confidence that the young people will make
a x-orthy contribution to the economy and to the rational utilization of raw mate-
rials, fuel, other materials. and resources, fulfilling thereby the decisions of
the 26th CFSU Congress in the fields of economic and social develoment.

2381;
C30: 1800/ 132

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REC IONAL

ESTONIAN VOCATIONAL EDUCATION IN 11111 FIVE-YEAR PLAN
Tallinn NOUKOGUDl-Z K001. in Estonian No 10, Oct 81 pp 4-7

[Article by Elmer Alas: "Implement Party Decisions: Vocational Education in
the llth Five-Year Plan"]

[Text] The "Basic Directions for 1981-1985 and the Period Until 1990" approved
by the 26th CPSU Congress regarding the economic development of the USSR stress
that the new decade will be a major step in the establishment of comunism's
material-technological base, the development of social relationships and the
shaping of a new man.

The CPSU will in the 1980's steadily continue to implement its economic strate-
gy whose highest aim is the irrevocable raising of the people's standard of
living and cultural level, and the creation of lost favorable conditions for a
comprehensive development of a person on the basis of further increases in the
effectiveness of social production, labor productivity, and the social and
labor-related activity of the Soviet man. The success of solving these economic
and sociopolitical tasks, it was noted at the 26th party congress, is most
directly connected to the level of the education and working skills of our
youth, the growth in the social and labor-related activity of Soviet people.

At the 26th CPSU Congress it was stressed that the labor class in our society
has grown and will continue to grow. This is due not only to its numerical
growth but also to the increases in its ideological-political maturity, its
education. and skill levels. Consequently, the preparation of vocational school
students must be perfected, the responsibility of the vocational school to the
society for fulfilling these tasks must increase.

From this there follow specific tasks for state vocational education systems, for
the educational staffs of the vocational schools, for the party and other social
organizations of the educational institutions-~for all who have been entrusted
with training the young workers. the new relief of the glorious working class

of our country.

In meeting directives of party and government the personnel of the vocational
education system of the republic have accomplished a remarkable job during the
10th Five-Year Plan in broadening and perfecting the preparation of young skilled
workers. During the last five-year period the vocational education network was
expanded by three institutions, and the number of youths studying in vocational
schools increased by 21 percent. The vocational schools met the tasks of the

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lOLh five—year period: In 1976-1980 almost 35,000 qualified workers were pre- _
pared and employed in the national economy, including 8,500 in industry, 5,500
in construction. 6,000 in agriculture. At courses offered by the vocational
schools. 13,500 persons received training or increased their skills. This year
5,630 persons graduated from vocational schools.

In addition to these facts. qualitative changes must be stressed. During the
five—year period the reorganization of the schools into vocational secondary
schools and technical schools was accomplished. Currently more than 15,300
youths are studying in the 28 vocational secondary schools and 6 technical
schools of the vocational education network.'
The comprehensive success of the system has occurred thanks to the constant
attention and practical assistance of the Soviet organs and the selfless work
of the teaching staffs of our schools. It can be said that one result has been
a rise in the prestige of the vocational education system and in its importance
in solving socioeconomic problems in the republic.

Even though we accept almost 9,000 persons into vocational schools, it is by
far not enough to meet the requirements of the national economy for labor.
This has been taken into account in compiling the 11th Five—Year Plan. Thus,
38,600 skilled workers must be prepared in 1981-1985, including 29,000 in the
day courses of vocational schools. Admittance to technical schools will in-
crease markedly.

Meeting this goal will not be easy. considering employment and shortage of
labor in our republic. and the limited youth cadres. It requires that youth

be precisely distributed among the educational systuas and that the vocational
counseling and assignment be improved markedly. This need was underscored in
the speech of Comrade K. Vaino to the EC? CC congress, and in the decisions of
the congress. We have begun to establish the necessary material base for meet—
ing the task. More precisely, preparations began 2 years ago when the BC? CC
and the BSSR Council of Ministers adopted a directive regarding the vocational
training of the republic's youth. That directive approved a specific voca-
tional school construction schedule for 1981—1990. According to this directive
8 new vocational secondary schools with 720 spaces each are to be constructed
in the llth Five-Year Period, to be followed by 5 new ones, and construction is
to begin of 6 more vocational schools. The construction of new vocational schools

and expansion of existing ones will increase the capacity of the system by more
than 11,000 spaces in the two five-year periods, almost doubling the capacity.

vocational school at Sillanae opened its doors on 1 September to train skilled
metalworkers, machinebuilders, and laborers for local needs. Intensive con—
struction is underway to begin training personnel for the Tallinn light industry,
the "Talleks" and “Volta" plants, and the Machine Construction Plant imeni J.
Lauristin. A rural vocational school is being built at Kose in Harju Rayon to
train machine operators and rural construction personnel. Construction has be-
gun on vocational schools at Kohtla-Jarve and Tartu to train personnel for,
respectively. the oil shale complex and the staffs of the Ministry of Meat and
Dairy Industry, and the Ministry of Food Industry. Construction of two more

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vocational schools in Tallinn is scheduled for the llth Five-Year Period to
train personnel for the Ministry of Construction and the Ministry for Communal
Industry.

Wide-ranging tasks concern the expansion of existing vocational schools and the
creation of the lackingmaterial base, the improvement of student-teacher living
conditions. Since an expansion of student bodies in most of the existing voca—
tional schools is impossible, it is obvious how important the completion of the
outlined construction program has become. 0n the basis of the decisions of
party and government we must markedly improve c00peration between planning
organs, the concerned ministries, the local party and soviet organizations and
other builders so as to guarantee the unswerving fulfillment of state construc-
tion plans for vocational schools.

A considerable increase in new students in vocational schools will result in
marked changes in the distribution of young people between the various educa-
tional systems. Thus the percentage of 8th grade graduates entering vocational
schools rose from 29 to 25 in this year alone. This number will steadily grow
in future years and should by 1990 rise to 32-33 percent. Admittances to tech-
nical schools will increase to 2.500 by 1985.

This fact must be taken into account in the work of our vocational and general
educational schools. These questions must be explained to the parents, they
must be an important focus ofattention of base enterprises and plants.

The implementation of general secondary education has made secondary education
universal, more precisely, it has become the educational level of the majority
of workers. It is known that almost 70 percent of graduates of secondary
schools will start work in the industry of our republic. For this reason the
correct vocational information, guidance, and skill selection of the youths in -
conformance with the needs of society have become of crucial importance. Un-
fortunately, there are still great differences between the needs of society and
the interests and wishes of youth. For this reason we must make the counseling

much more effective, especially concerning orientation of laboring vocations.

Vocational guidance in itself is a large complex of means that includes a con-
siderable portion of a yOung person's life. The main emphasis is of course on

the general educational school.

Undoubtedly the home and kindergarten play an important part, but the primary
task lies with the teacher who has immediate contact with the youth, evaluates
vocations and trains his students to respect the work of a laborer and the work-
ing man. The teacher's example and his word is often decisive. We all are fac-
ing a wide field of work in giving the teaching body a correct overview of
vocational education, provide it with the most necessary information and mater-
ials for vocational guidance. This will provide the preconditions for an active
participation on the part of the teachers in these processes.

Vocational guidance within vocational schools consists primarily of increasing

the interest, respect and love of each student for the subject being taught.
In addition, a trainee must often and for various reasons be transfered to

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HDR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

another specialty or into another school, considering the trainee's personality
and the specific needs of the national economy.

Considering theplan for development of the national economy the ESSR State Voca-
tional Education Committee and the vocational schools have compiled yearly plans
of admission according to the type of school, length of study and specialties in
cooperation with the ministries and central organs. we provide information to
vocational guidance institutions about specialties and class sizes within the
plans of towns and rayons, and make the necessary vocational propaganda.

The teaching staffs of the vocational schools are steadily striving for goals
that are posted by the party and government to train the students of the voca-
tional education system and to further perfect the education.

Teaching staffs have done a great job in constructing and furnishing training
facilities that meet the requirements of the programs and are completely mechan-
ized. One should point out especially the 3d vocational school imeni A. Huurisepp,
the lat vocational school, the 15th technical school (in Tallinn), the 30th
vocational school (in helme), the 14th vocational school imeni A. Grivtsov (in
Narva), the specialized vocational school No 36, etc. The departmental system

has been implemented in vocational schools.

The cooperation of several sponsoring installations—-the "Dvigatel" plant, the
Estonian Railway Department of the Baltic Railroad, the "Punane Ret" plant, the
Tallinn Residential Construction Combine--with the corresponding vocational
schools in improving the training base and practical training has improved.
Many teachers and masters conduct productive pedagogical work. New effective
teaching methods, training aids and handouts, interdisciplinary connections and
technical teaching methods are constantly used by, for example, 5. Torri of the
lst vocational school, a Redkin of the 10th vocational school, H. Tae of the
vocational school imeni K. Karber, c. Batina of the vocational school A. Kreis-
berg, A. Sinisalu and V. Eisen of the 15th technical school, B. Ahven of the
13th vocational school, H. Vajakas of the 31st vocational school. and many
others. All of the above has positively influenced the training in vocational
schools. The connections between education and raising the student have been
strengthened. success in learning has improved, as has the quality of training:
the knowledge, skills, and experiences of students have improved. The number
of distinguished graduates of vocational and technical schools has increased;
they can enter higher institutions of learning immediately after vocational
school. There were almost 100 such youths in 1980.

One cannot be satisfied with the results by any means. A new directive about
planning. teaching and training will come into force this year, a new method of
experiments and tests has been put in force. Several new recommendations about
a perspective-thematic planning of general subjects have been issued to effect

a better connection between specialized subjects and productive training. All
of this should contribute considerably to further improve teaching management
and to raise the effectiveness of training. This requires that teaching staffs
pay greater attention to the unity of teaching and raising, general and voca-
tional training and their organic connection, to the improvement of labor train-
ing, to effective teaching methods and facilities, to learning from and implement—
ing exemplary educational experiences.

27

FOR nmnu “CF 0N! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The training of highly skilled workers demands that production-related training
be further improved and better planned, that training and productive work be '
selected correctly and comprehensively, and that it be taught on the basis of
complex production. Our aim is that the teaching facilities in the training
shops of vocational schools be as similar as possible to the working conditions

in industrial enterprises,that they will provide for the use of various work
methods, modern technology and equipment.

The acquisition of specialized knowledge, skills, and experiences is enhanced by
the students' secure grasp of general educational subjects. For this reason we
must pay greater attention to increasing the effectiveness and quality of general
education, and to improve the connections between it and vocational training.

The training and education of students takes place primarily in classrooms. For
that reason we will attempt to further improve preparation for lessons. to vary
the forms and methods. to shape a student's habit for independent work, to im-
prove the activity of the students.‘ It is in the classrooms that a young per-
sonality must be shaped, one characterized by communist conviction, preparedness
for self-denying work for the benefit of the society. Therefore each lesson must

meet its educational objective, and vouchsafe the unity of the youth's ideologi-
cal-political, vocational, and moral education.

We have begun to devote more attention to removing the gaps in the knowledge of
graduates of the eighth grade. to individual attention for poorly progressing
students, to a systematic arrangement of teaching materials.

The collegium of the ESSR State Vocational Education Committee has approved the
experiences of several school staffs and teachers. Their distribution and im-
plementation has contributed to improving the level of education and training of
vocational schools. '

A creative attitude to work, the implementation of exemplary experiences must
become a daily habit for all teachers and vocational training masters.

It must be said that there are many unused reserves for this work. The experi-
ences of those teachers and schools who constantly achieve perfect success in
training, where student attrition is low and work discipline high are still
glittle known and generalized.

Today's vocational school is not merely a place to acquire a skill. Here a young
worker's character 1nd willpower are shaped, here he acquires his ideological and
moral convictions. here a base is laid for a socially active personality. In view
of these requirements the school's educational. ideological function broadens.

The goal of school work during the llth Five-Year Period is the achievement of a
new level in the communist education of the youth, especially in the fields of
ideological—political and internationalist education, moral and skill-related
education.

The improvement of the schools' educational work must first of all be realized
by making the educational work performed in the classrooms more effective. Se-

cure knowledge of the basics of science is a precondition for acquiring the
Marxist-materialist world View. But it must not be forgotten that the student's

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DH-1H“. “SI-Z ONLY

world view does not come into being by itself as a byproduct of'acquiring
knowledge. To that end each lesson must have a definite direction.

Education through subject teaching has been in the center of attention during
the past years. A majority of the teachers accomplish this as a matter of
course, consistently, and according to the specialized nature of each subject.

I would especially like to point out the great 30b in this field done by Rus-
sian teacher L. Laidla of the lat vocational school, the social studies teachers
V. Tchukins and L. Cross of the 10th and 25th vocational schools, mathematics
teacher N. Belova of the 3d vocational school imeni A. Huurisep, and many others.

These teachers rely increasingly on student presentations, debates, various forms
of individual and group work that enable the youths to solve creative tasks, and
to evaluate life phenomena from the position of the Soviet society's value stan-
dard. In the current school year a great part will be played in raising the
ideological aspect of teaching by discussion of the materials of the 26th CPSU
-Congress, by gaining a knowledge of all the ideological richness of the con-
gress and the developmental perspectives of our country, including the home
republic, town and sponsoring plant. This work began already in the last school
year and it must be continued skillfully and in a thought-out manner. The con-
gress' ideas and the goals established should enrich the subject matter in each
lesson, so that education will be organically tied to a conception of the great
tasks facing society. and that they be communicated to each student in an under-
standable and concrete way. Of course, the contents and specifics of each sub-
ject must be taken into account, as well as the applicability of the presenta-
tion. Attempts must be made so that the students will not only be passive
listeners but that they present information, lectures and speeches in the

classes, seminars, student conferences, that they prepare appropriate exhibits,
etc.

The meaningful organization of free time plays a great importance in shaping a
young personality and its comprehensive development; it must complement HOIK
done in classes, it must increase the students' activity. we have much that is
positive in the field of technical creativity, art and hobby circles, and sports.

For several years this republic has held the rotating red flag of the All-Union
Voluntary Sports Federation "Labor Reserves" for massive sports involvement.

There are no minor matters in educational work. Teachers and principals must

in their practical work pay more attention to the achievements of science and

of exemplary achievements, they must create the necessary atmosphere of this and
establish a demanding creative environment. The successful achievement of goals
for the schools depends greatly on the level and style of school management. The
main task of our school principals is the creation of an environment of creative
work, mutual assistance, and high requirements in cooperation with social and
party organizations. This demands a considerable improvement in school manage-
ment, a delegation of specific tasks, a consistent organizing task and constant
supervision of problem solving. The weakest area in our school work is internal
control, an exchange of experiences, a discovery of better work experiences.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our school managers and teachers must understand that the school is primarily
an ideological organization that cannot be removed from life. We often organ-
ize educational mass events but forget the need for individual attention to
the student, especially problem students.

The young must be taught to evaluate social phenomena from class positions; this
is a primary task that demands constant excelling and consistency, a broad knowl-
edge and dedication from each teacher, shop supervisor, educator and principal.

For years shortages of shop supervisors and counselors have been sources of
Serious concern.

In this field we are helped little by sponsoring enterprises.

One of the most important tasks must remain the constant improvement in the pro-
fessional training of teachers and shop foremen. In the future ve want to con-
tinue to rely on the most recent achievements of pedagogics.

Means to successfully meet the above tasks of vocational education have been in-
corporated into action plans of the system's staff to implanent the decisions
of the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Kirjastus "Periodika." "Noukogudekool," 1981

9240
C80: 1815/12 END

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY