FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10073
26 October 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 38/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources

are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enchsed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FIHRCHWUCLALIJSEGMVLY

JPRS L/10(

26 Octobez

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(POUO 38/81)

Conn-:N'rs
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Tunisian-Saudi Economic Cooperation Outlined
(HARCRES TROPICAUX 31' MEDITERRANBBNS, 28 Aug 81) . . . . . . . . .

AFGHANISTAN

Kabul Troops Held by Guerrillss in Pakistan
(Alexander mat-son; m GUARDIAN, 13 Oct 81) .........u..

IRAN
Political Prospects After Bani-Sadr Prognosticatsd
(Bushang Nshavandi; PROJECT, Sap-Oct 81) . . . . . .. . . .. . . .. . .
Baluch Glief Supports Return of “anarchy
(Reta Interview; PARIS HATCH, 25 Sep 81) .................
LIDYA
Uranium Purchases Prom Niger Up Sharply
(HANGERS TROPICAUX ET PEDI‘I'BRRANBENS, 11 Sep 81) . . . . . . . . .
SAUDI ARABIA
Political Implications of Peace Plan Discussed
(AL-"AT“ AL-.MI' 21-27 An“ 81) ssssossassssssossssossa
SUDAN

Agricultural Production Statistics Given for 1980-1981
(MARCHES TROPICAUX 31‘ DEDITBRRANBENS. 11 Sep 81)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

TUNISIAN-SAUDI ECONOMIC COOPERATION OUTLINBD

[Text] Prime Minister Mohamed Heali mat with Saudi Minister of Finance and National
Economy Muhammad 'Ali Aba al-Khayl on 14 August in Tunis. The Tunisian ambassador to
Jeddah, Hr Kacem Bousnina, and the charge d'affaires at the Saudi embassy in Tunis,
Mr Muhammad Assaad, were also present. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Saudi
minister said he had transmitted to the prime minister the greetings of King Khalid
ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz Al Sa'ud and the members of the Saudi government to President
Bourguiba and the members of the Tunisian government. The discussion, he added,
dealt with the relations between the two countries and questions of common interest,

To judge from these most recent indications, Tunisian-Saudi cooperation is developing
favorably. The discussion between Mr Hzali and Mr Muhammad 'Ali Abs al-Khayl came in
fact shortly after the official visit paid by Sheikh Turhi Khsled Sudeiry, president
of the Saudi general office of publieimbrk.,to Tunisia between 9 and 13 August, when-
he had an audience with President Bourguiba and met with Mr Msali and a number of
other cabinet members, among them Minister of Foreign Affairs Beji Caid es-Sebsi,

Hr Mesri Chekir, minister attached to the prime minister for civil service and
administrative reform, Minister of Public Health Rachid Sfar, and Hinister of Social
Affairs Mohamed Bnnaceur.

The talks dealt in particular with the recruiting of Tunisian cadres to work in Saudi
Arabia, with both parties confirming the need to give new impetus to technical co-
operation. Sheikh Turki Khaled Sudeiry said in this connection that the recruiting
office for government employees which he established during his visit demonstrated

the desire of Saudi Arabia to recruit cadres from among skilled Tunisian workers on
various levels and in all fields. 8e recalled, moreover, that some 65,000 cooperative

workers, for the most part Arabs and Hoslems, are currently working in various sectors
in Saudi Arabia, particularly in education and health.

for a period of about 5 years, insofar as possible, in certain sectors, and in par-
ticular in the realm of medical services. This should allow Tunisia to train the
necessary cadres in time, as a function of the Saudi government structures.

In addition, Tunisia will shortly make available to the Saudi government a wide range
of skills, including cadres to work in the medical sector, teachers, engineers and

technicians with various specialties such as civil engineering, topography, mechanics,
data processing, etc.

1

MD 09"."l' "cu “\I’IV
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The two parties also agreed to establish the conditions for recruiting and to
guarantee its organization within the framework of coordination between the Tunisian
Technical Cooperation Agency and the Saudi Recruiting Bureau, based on the principles
adopted during the course of the joint meeting.

Let us recall, moreover, that we reported earlier (HARCEES TIDPICAUX ET IBDITEWS,
12 June, p 1585) on the signing in Tunis on 8 June, by Tunisian hinister of Finance
and Plan Hansour Noelle and Mr Mohamed Abdallah Soukeir, vice-president and general
director of the Saudi Development Fund (PSD), of a loan agreement involving 16 million
riyals (about 25 million Prench francs) for the financing of the sidi Saad dem pro-
tection project.

On that occasion, Mr Mohamed Abdallah Soukeir noted that the PSD had already allocated
credit in a total amount of 545 million riyals, or in other words the equivalent of
$161 million, to Tunisia, as a contribution to the financing of four development
projects. He stressed that with the signing of the new agreement, the total credit
grant to Tunisia was increased to 561 million Saudi riyals, or 87 million Tunisian
diners. Hr hansour Noelle, for his part, expressed satisfaction with the results of
bilateral cooperation, concretely implemented in recent months with the establishment
of a Tunisian-Saudi Investment Company for Development and the participation of the
Saudi Development Fund in joint projects.

Mr Hahsoun Jalel. president of the board of directors of the Tunisian-Saudi Investment
Company, accompanied by Mr Sedok Bahroun, president and general director of the company,
met with Minister of Housing Honcef Del nadj Amor, who presided at a work session in
which Mr Zeksria Ben Hustapha, mayor of the city of Tunis, participated, on 20 August
in Tunis. At the meeting the programs for the reconstruction and modernization of
large sectors of the city of Tunis and the possibilities for cooperation between the
Tunisian authorities and the Tunisian-Saudi Investment Company in this connection

were discussed. Proposals were established and will shortly be subjected to study.

Let us recall, moreover, that a number of businessmen have recently visited Tunisia,.
where some are financing major projects. For example, Dr Gaith Faraoun is financing
the construction of the Port Monastir tourist complex, for which the cornerstone was
laid on a August by President Bourguiba, and which will cost an estimated 20 million
diners (l diner is the equivalent of about 11 French francs). Built in the area
known as Gdamsi Island, this complex will include a hotel, apartments and tourist
residences with a total capacity of 2,500 beds. The construction work on the complex
should be completed within 2 years.

On the occasion of that ceremony, President Dourguiba was shown a mock-up of a film
production complex which hr Tarek Den Annmr proposes to build in Monastir (on the
Kairouan road). This project will also be financed by Dr Gaith Paraoun. It will
include a number of studios and all the equipment necessary for film production. The

cost of the project, which should be completed by March 1983, is estimated at 8 million
diners.

Also on 4 August, the chief of state, together with the prime minister and a number of
other cabinet members, met with Saudi businessman Sheikh Saleb Kemel and his assistant,
Sheikh Hessine Bl Harisi, in Monastir. All of these visits bear witness to the vitality
of Tunisian-Saudi relations, and augur the development of cooperation consistent with
the recommendations of the Arab League designed to encourage the use of Arab skills

in Arab countries.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981
533? b519/56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AFGHANISTAN

KABUL TROOPS HELD BY GUERRELAS IN PAKISTAN
”1131501 London THE GUARDIAN in English 13 Oct 81 p 6
[Dispatch by Alexander Thomson: "Kabul Troops Held by Guerrillaa in Pakistad']

[Text] Peshawar--Captured Afghan soldiers are being held in captivity in Pakistan
by at least one of the guerrilla groups whose headquarters are in Peshawar.

There have been reports that these groups hold Afghan Government toope inside
Pakistan. without the approval of the government here but they have not been seen
or interviewed before by western journalists because of the aberraesment their
presence in Pakistan could cause.

I met and spoke to a group during an unannounced visit to the headquarters of
Sayed Gailani's National Islamic Front for the Liberation of Afghanistan. There
were about 60 men queueing up for food being ladled out at dusk from a ragged
tent in the corner of a small compound guarded by guerrillas arned with AK-67
Kalashnikov rifles.

It was difficult to assess their exact status and members of the National Front
were anxious that they should not be called prisoners of war. One official said
they sonetimes brought defectors to Peshawar under guard to check their bona
fides but most deserters encountered in Afghanistan were sisply allowed to go on
their way.

The guerrillas are more impressed by Afghan Government toops, who fight bravely
until they are captured and "re-educated." The official said what con-unism they
had in their heads was knocked out and replaced by Ialan.

If they were reluctant to be converted "we twist their ears a bit." He said that
the National Front did not believe in eliminating then. The official would not

say how long the Afghan troops were detained or how long their interrogation lasted.
A leading Afghan journalist living in exile in Peshawar said that most were held
for comparatively brief periods. Afghan officers were kept in detention longer.

He said most guerrilla groups were holding prisoners in Peshawar. Some were
loosely guarded, others were under what he termed "house arrest."

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the Afghan soldiers in the compound, who gave his name as 'Abdul Halik,
said that he had been captured after recent fighting in the strategic Panjshir
valley. He had originally been captured by another guerrilla group which had
stolen his watch and illtreated him. They then let him go. lie eventually handed
himself in to the National Front "became it is led by a religious man (Sayed
cauani) and I thought I would be better treated." '

Another man. Mohamed Yasin, was a former driver with the Afghan Hinistry of
Education from Laghman Province who had been pressganged into the army in Kabul.
He was drafted into the 52nd regiment from which he managed to escape. he was
captured by Afghan soldiers who held him in a camp where he said he was beaten
up. But, with the collusion of his guard he managed to escape and made his way
to the National Front.

Also queueing up for food was a man who called himself lilnihullah. he too had

been pressganged into the army in the streets of Kabul and had been sent to

Kandahar to fight. While serving as a soldier he had supplied local guerril-ss

with munition but they would only allow him to defect if he brought his Kalashnikov
with him.

His story. and those of others in the compound, support reports from diplomatic
sources that the Afghan Army is facing a serious shortage of manpower and is having
to resort to strong-arm methods to get young men into uniform. The irony of this
is that after giving the conscripts basic training and a gun they sent them to
areas strongly infiltrated by guerrillas where defection is easy.

Also in the conpound was a man collecting food for 30 men held in a camp elsewhere
in the Peshawar area. he came under guard and the impression was that the other
men were allowed less freedom of movement by the guerrillas.

These former Afghan soldiers are a valuable source of infomtion and manpower
for the guerrilla organisations. Host do not need nuch surveillance or guarding.
They are mostly simple men who do not need much persuading, if any, to adopt the
guerrillas' cause. Many, after they are cleared, are only too pleased to go back
and fight as hojahedin.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited [13 Oct 1981]

C50: 6600/53

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHRlJFIWCIAl.lﬂSEI(MVLY

POLITICAL PROSPECTS AFTER BANI-SADR PROCNOSTICATED
Paris PROJECT in French Sap-Oct 81 pp 1011-1014

[Article by Hushang Nahavandi, former chancellor of the University of Tehrannpassages
enclosed in slantlines printed in boldface]

[Text] The political elimination of Mr. Abolhassan Rani-Sadr and the attack of

28 June 1981 against the headquartesscf the PR1 [Islanic Republic Party]. which
along with the "Tudeh" party. is the country's doninant political formation. followed
by the increased repression of leftwing opponents. have brought Iran back to the
center stage of world events.

The situation in Irannstill involvedina murderous and devastating war. in the
grip of an economic crisis. with public and clandestine executions and an absence
of any nornalization--has been extremely serious all along. But with the resolution

of the somber hostage affair. world attention drifted away and people lost some
of their interest.

Both the internal and external position of Iran have been deteriorating ever since
the departure of the Shah and take-over of the government by Ayatollah Khomeyni.

Indeed. the country is in the grip of bloody anarchy, and no one knows how it will
end. -

In the two and one-half years they have been in power. Iran's leaders have been
unable to come up with any social model. economic strategy or political alternative.
References to certain Islamic texts and quotations from the Koran are merely for

the sake of fore. In reality. violence has become the only means of governing.

and repression the only remedy. By the admission of all its leaders the-selves.

the regime's record is grin: Half the people in the Job market unemployed. dizzying
increases in the price of basic conodities and galloping inflation. a budgetary
deficit of 1.0 percent. insolvency of the state. paralysis in the administrative
judicial apparatus. the shutdown of the universities. insecurity. the exodus of more
than one million Iranians. the destruction of the cultural heritage.... The face of
Iran today is that of a coupletely disorganized. ruined country. with no political
instutitions worthy of the name. in reality the victin of all manner of cupidities.
and menaced by all sorts of dangers.

Iran's International Isolation

The nations of the world recognised the Islamic Republic in February 1979. Since
that tine. not even the United States and Egypt-which no longer have diplomatic

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relations with Tram-have withdrawn that [do jure/ recognition of the authorities

in Tehran. Paradoxically. though Iran and Iraq are at war. they have not closed
down their respective embassies in the enemy's capital. a state of affairs apparently
unique in the history of diplomacy. And Israel-whose very name it is officially
forbidden to pronounce in Iran, but which was given Ide facto/ recognition by Iran
under the monarchy--maintains commercial relations. described in fact as flourishing
rather nicely in some accounts. with Khomeyni's regime. Now of course this hardly
prevents the authorities in Tehran eithr from engaging in harsh repression of the
Iranian Jewish con-unity and periodically executing certain individuals charged
with "Zionist tendencies." from supporting numerous Palestinian mercenaries in
Iran, or most mortantly from making substantial contributions to the coffers of
the Palestinian movements.

Despite these often strange facts. "Islamic" Iran seems very isolated internationally.
The complete disregard for the rules in international law. failure to honor signed
contracts. the encouragement of subversion in many countries. and. above all. the
hostage affair have made of the Tehran government an undersirable "partner" for

all intents and purposes. Certainly. the Soviet Union fully supports the Islamic
Republic as it does all the countries in the socialist can and some of the "non-
aligned" states in the Third World. But that support does not make up for Tehran's
isolation. its state of being internationally "quarantined."

The policy of national independence and balance followed byilran under the monarchy
since the midvl960's. the neighborly and cooperative relations it mintained with

the USSR despite its special relations with the Heat, the substantial part it played
in Third World development and above all the effective and beneficient role it played
in the Persian Gulf made its foreign policy a success that even its most instransigent
critics found it difficult to deny. The Islamic Republic's foreign policy has made
it an isolated, discredited and weak state whose voice can scarcely be heard in

the concert of nations.

Internal Dissension

The Islamic revolution is still very violent. According to some estimates. the
number of its victims is already more than 100.000. the sire of an average city.
The numbers are even more tragic if one adds the victims of the Iran-Iraq war. which
we will discuss below. Like all other revolutions. the one in Iran is devouring
its children. The political elimination of Hr. Bani-Sadr and the 28 June explosion
at PR1 headquarters which cost the lives of at least 74 persons-~coming after the
violent attacks which cost the lives of various other leaders and which remain un-
solved. after the successive elimination of the secular and nationalist factions
and after the imprisonment of numerous other individuals who played an active role
in the overthrow of the monarchy--serve as good illustrations of that principle.

Part of the Western press wanted to make Hr. Bani-Sadr the representative of a "liberal
faction." indeed a secular faction. within Iran's current leadership. In fact.
however. the deposed head of state never challenged the basic orientation of the
regime. as embodied in the Islamic constitution. or its totalitarian. racist and
regressive aspects. Both as a nsnber and later as president of the revolutionary
council he participated in organising and carrying out all the human rights violations
comitted by the Tehran regime. The "theoretician" of a fantastic "economics of
divine unity." he tried for several months to isplement it y simultaneously running
all of the government's economic and financial departments. His criticisms of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I1JR OFFICJAl.lMSEI(NWLY

economic management of the Islamic Republic would thus seem to be hypocritical.

Once the war with Iraq broke out. he tried to achieve the image of an intrsnaigent
nationalist. If it were confirmed thatIraq gave his political asylum. there would
be yet one more contradiction in the comportment of this strange and puzzling figure.

In fact, his overthrow was only one episode in the bloody factional in-fighting
within the regime. just like the explosion at P31 headquarters. which cost the lives
of Ayatollah Beheshti. "Islamic" Iran's strong man. as well as the lives of a number
of other leading figures belonging to his faction.

With regard to that explosion. all the evidence actually points to the probability

that internal accounts were being settled: The PRI headquarters was so well protected
that the attack could only have been prepared and executed by persons who enjoyed

free access to the building and were able to position the explosives at the spots
selected. Several important leaders who were not members of the Beheshti faction

were absent from the meeting. even though they were obliged to attend. Others were
called out of the meeting just a few minutes before the explosion. without any explana-

tion. For some time various American commentators had been discussing the possibility
of stabilizing the Iranian regime around Ayatollah Beheshti, who, along with General

Buyser of the United States. was the architect of the February 1979 "neutraliza-
tion" of the Iranian army that made it possible for Khomeyni to come to power.

All these disturbing and revealing facts have obviously been passed over in silence

in Tehran. where the authorities, like Hitler with the burning of the Reichstag.

have made the attack the pretext for even more repression against oppoinents. In
effect. the faction that has emerged unscathed. and therefore stronger. from the
attack, is the faction with ties to Palestinian maximaliats. such as Mr. Georges
Habbache's FPLP [Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine]. and a predisposition
toward greater cooperation with the /"Tudah"/. This latter party. which religiously
follows the Soviet line. hmmadiately threw its support to the candidacy of Mr. Mohammed
Ali Radjai. an insignificant and totally docile individual, for president of the
republic. It looks as if the is certain to win. and if, as some believe, an individual
from the same faction, such as Mr. Behsad Vabavi, reputed to be a Marxist and pro-
Soviet. becomes the head of the government. a new stage in the radicalization of

the regime and its reconciliation with Moscow will have been reached.

The Iran-Iraq War

In September (when these lines will appear) the first anniversary of the [outbreak
of the] Iran-Iraq war will be celebrated. The Iraqi leaders, misinforned. it would

seem, about the intensity of Iranians' patriotic feelings, despite their aversion

to the regime, and counting on feeble resistance from armed forces that have been
decapitated and reduced by Iran's currentrulera.expected a quick victory. indeed
even the collapse of the Islamic Republic. In fact. the war goes on. Iraq, which
only committed part of its forces and gets substantial support. it apparently techni-
cally capable of capturing several more important centers, and would like to unleash
separatist movements in Iran. Neither Iraq's internal situation nor the lives of
citizens have suffered too much; but the country cannot permit the indefinite con-
tinuation of this war of attrition and postion against in Iran whose patriotic reflexes
are deeply rooted even in its weakended and lacerated condition, without either

a brilliant victor or some prospect of winning one.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite the 30,000 acknowledged victims of the war and the more than one million
displaced persons it has produced. despite the massive destruction and 'the .prohibitive
financial cost to the Iranian state offers. the authorities in Tehran do not appear
to be desirous of ending the war. even though militarily it cannot be won. For

on the one hand this strange war makes it possible to maintain a state of permanent
tension within the country and explains away the economic problems. and on the other
it enables the army to be kept far from the capital and thus forestalls--until such
time as they have succeededin "normalizing" the situaionm-sny reaction from that

side.

Prospects For the Future

As things stand now. the most radical faction. the one ready for close collaboration
with the 'l'udeh and the Soviet Union. seems to have prevailed on the domestic front.
All opposition movments have been successively decimated. including the extreme
left. both Marxist-Islamic and Haraist-leninist. Nevertheless. the Tehran regime.
having brought nothing but anarchy. misery and terror. is far from being stabilized.
The majority of Iranians. now that they have lost their revolutionary illusions.
have become deeply hostile to it. Gladestine resistance movements are spreading
rapidly within the country. Ayatollah Khomeyni. whose real power was not insignifi—
cant. no longer seems able to control the situation. Certainly. the regime is still
able to mobilize several tens of thousands of people for street demonstrations which
are rebroadcast abroad and help create the illusion. nut is that enough to govern
a large country?

From this viewpoint. the Islamic Republic has no choice but to become yet more radi-
calized. Cut off from the elite it has decimated. lacking suport in the army that
it tried to annihilate, having lost the confidence of the middle class it has dis-
appointed. challenged by a large portion of the clergy who disavow it. facing revolt
in several provinces. only only other alliance is possible: To rely even more on
the Iranian Communist Party (Tudeh) and to move closer to Moscow. That. ultimately.
would mean Iran's almost total alignment with Soviet policy. It is unnecessary to
point out the regional and international consequences of such a development. The
balance of power would be altered on the global scale. Could the United States.
which under the Carter Administration favored Khomeyni's coming to power in Iran.
permit such a development under the current Administration? If no other solution
is possible. would it favor the dismesberment of Iran at the hands of Iraq and other
intervening powers? That would be a serious political mistake on the part of the
Nest and a tradgedy for the Iranian people.

Inside the country, the armed forces. which have remained nationalistic on the

whole. remain the last reosrt possible; they are capable of putting together a vast
coalition of the vital forces of a nation nnd offering the possibility and the pros-
pact of a different solution. Iran is at the crossroads. Its destiny is at stake.

as is the worldwide balance of power.
COPYRIGHT: CERAS. 15 rue R.-Harcheron. 92170 Vanvea [1981)

9516
650: 6916/9

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MUCH CHIRP SUPPORTS RETURN 0P roman
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 25 Sep 81 p 35

[Interview with Crown Prince Rare by Jean-Jacques Bruges: ”Iran Rants Return of
Monarchy”

[Text] [Question] Your father passed away more than a year ago. Since then
you have because shah of Iran, swearing upon the Koran that sane day you would liberate
your fatherlend. But the situation has deteriorated considerably. How do you think
you night attain your goal?

[Answer] I have around as young advisers, officers, lawyers, constitutional
experts, men of religion, nationalists-ell of when are honest Iranians and who have
the support of the people and who noreover believe in God and their fatherlend and
that is something that appears indispensable to no.

Besides, we are not isolated. I regularly talk to the chief opposition leaders.
I receive personalities and tribal chiefs currently living in Iran who, at the risk
of their life, neat with us. who inforn no, and who assure no of their loyalty. I
recently received a Kurdish chief whose none I cannot tell you and the leader of the
Baluch opposition, Anan Allah than. who is in charge of the armed faction of the
Baluch Unity Front.

1 also have contacts-with diplomats, politicians. numbers of govern-ents, and
even heads of foreign states. The circle of ny friends keeps growing with each

passing day.

As for the rest. the influence which one or the other personality. who nay be
close to no or far away, night have upon me is illusory. The nicest exanple of this
situation is after all ay nother herself, an extraordinary woman and hunan being,
who declared in public that she was the world's youngest queen-nether; she intends
to rennin aloof fron political problas in order to leave as under the protection of
God in facing my destiny and ny people.

Indeed, God is my only guide and only God can influence ny decisions. Like all
Iranians, I an essentially a believer and I feel that any destiny is in the hands of

God and my people because without the help of God no nan in the world can follow his
destiny.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He must however also recall the image of the king in Iran‘s history; he is not
only the symbol of the country's unity, independence, and territorial integrity but
also, in some way, the father of the people in the true sense of the word, the men
to whom one can always go at any time, the man who receives people the way a father
receives his children, a man who can listen, advise, help, and render assistance.
his direct political intervention however only comes in exceptional cases. Is that
not a constitutional monarchy?

[Question] Do you really believe in national reconciliation?

[Answer] Iran has been bled of its vital forces. For us. therefore, there is
no question of depriving Iran of all those who have left but who rediscovered the
right way at the right time, when the day comes, by the grace of God, when our
country, with a monarchy, recovers peace, stability, and security. Believe me,
there are many of those today who are sorry that the monarchy is gone and who
realize that they are guilty of having [M'rtheuebes to be swept along into a -
reaction which, deep down, they themselves did not want.

Of course, those who were killed and those who organized the hateful crimes
which are now being perpetuated in Iran, those who ordered the sentencing of our
fellow citizens without trial and without appeal, they will have to account for
their actions to the justice of God but also to the justice of men. we suffer each
day as we see Iranians die, assassinated, or sacrificing their life to save their
fatherland. He suffer as we see innocent people die in this pro-civil war situation
and we pray to God for them and their families, realising however, unfortunately,
that only the disappearance of this regime could put an end to this drama.

Our country, our people, will know how to liberate themselves amid unity from
the yoke of the current regime and the army certainly will play a primordial role in
this. Although deprived of its long-term leaders, diminished by the incoherence of
the current establishment, the Iranian army is fightiu and remains profoundly loyal
to the monarchy. It would be easy to me, in view of the information I have, to
claia that one or the other action was carried out by one or the other monarchist
group. But it would not be wise to expose those who sacrifice their life to save
their ideal and our fatherland.

I repeat, democracy will not exist in Iran until we have the monarchy which
itself today could only live in this democracy.

[Question] Does this constitutional monarchy correspond to present-day realities?

[Answer] You know that, among all of the experiments that were attempted in
Iran, only the monarchy was able to guarantee stability and domestic peace. This is
why undoubtedly a very large opposition is now rallying, a majority of people who
support the cause of the constitutional monarchy-and they have made themselves
known. Perhaps a year ago they were too worried. They did not have the courage to
declare themselves in the midst of the terror regime which had been established.
Anybody who would have dared to say even a single word along those lines was im-
mediately executed by firing squad or hanged. Or, at best, he was thrown in prison.
But today, the people can no longer put up with that situation. The people feel
that they are marching toward total destruction if the situation is not gotten under
control, if the top leadership is not removed. Either a civil war will break out or

the country will forever be wiped off the face of the earth and the history of
mankind.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are many action groups in Iran and they are very effective. They are
fighting for our cause. They are being killed for it. And many others are ready to
follow their footsteps. All of us have great respect for our ancestors. the fighters
who, at the beginning of the century, got themselves killed in the revolt that led
to the promulgation of the new constitution, establishing the constitutional mon-
archy. Later on, it will be our sons who will have respect for their fathers and
who will have fought for the restoration of this constitutional monarchy, in the
letter and the spirit of the constitution of 1906. It is obvious that the inter-
national situation will have a role to play among all of the political powers. Iran

is in a very important geOpolitical region. Moreover, there is petroleum which
plays a vital role in the world.

I cannot see how anybody in this world could not be interested in what goes on
in Iran, who does not feel concerned with the history of Iran. Iran cannot remain
isolated.

[Question] The ear-Shah, your father, had the sad privilege of being one of the
most-attacked statesmen over these past several years. All countries. except Egypt,

closed their doors to him, after he went into exile. "hat do you think of that
attitude?

[Answer] I am sure that history in the end will give credit to my father for
what he did for his fatherland during the 37 years of his reign and that history's
judgment in the end will be positive. Historians tell us that an event or a per-
sonality in history can be properly appreciated only after a certain period of time
has gone by. If you are at the foot of a mountain, you can see it only partly. You
do not notice details. But if you go further away. several scores of kilometers, it
is possible to get an overall view of this mountain and you can then get an idea of
its height and its majesty.

In a similar manner. I think that it is too early to make any judgment but what
we must say is that, after what we have seen happen over just one year, many his-
torians are surprised and find that the current situation enables them to come up
with a judgment long before the time usually necessary has gone by.

Iran's chaotic situation today suffices to explain many things and men of good

faith, who keep themselves informed, I hope, will in the end judge my father in a
positive fashion.

COPYRIGHT: [1981] par Cogedipresse S.A.

$058
(:50: 4619/6

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHIGDFFIC1A1.LEHE(MVLY

LIIYA

URANIUM PURCHASES FROM NIGER UP SHARPLY
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1870, 11 Sep 81 p 2327

[Text] During the first six months of this year, Libya purchased 1,212 tons of
uranium from Niger, six tines more than in 1980, and for the first tine, Iraq
bought Nigerien uraniul, 100 tone, at the beginning of the year., This information
is contained in the orders published in the JOURNAL OFFICIBL DB LA RBPUBLIQUE DU
NIGER during the first six months of 1981.

Two Arab nations: Libya and Iraq. have therefore bought nearly a fourth of the
6,866 tons of uranium exported by Niger'during the first six months of 1981.

According to the JOURNAL OFFICIFL, Libya bought from Niger 258 tons in 1978, 150
tons in 1979 and 380 tons in 1980. It is possible that the figure of 1,212 tons
represents a bookkeeping adjustment including the deliveries of the three previous
years.

Nevertheless. these Libyan purchases are disproportionate when conpared with the
capabilities of the country, which has but a sasll research reactor supplied by

the Soviets and which uses at most a dozen kilograms of enriched uranium. Accord-

ing to observers, the Libyans do not have a reprocessing facility, which leans that
the uranium can only be stored or sold abroad.

For years, Libya has tried to obtain from the Soviets a license to build'about_a
600-negawatt nuclear powerplant, but have.not yet succeeded. Specialists wonder
about the civilian usefulness of such a facility for such a sparsely populated
country so well provided with energy resources.

Aside free Libya and Iraq, Niger delivered uraniun to four other countries during .
the first six months of 1981: France, the top-ranking customer (nearly 2,300 tons);
Japan (816 tons); Spain (300 tons); and the Federal Republic of Germany (125 tons).
Through subsidiaries, these four countries participate in the capital of the two
Nigerien enterprises that mine the uraniua ore (see Niger coluln).

O

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,666
C30: 6519/2

12
llll(HﬂN(1A1.USBGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SAUDI ARABIA

POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS OF PEACE PLAN DISCUSSED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 236. 21-27 Aug 81 pp 28—30

[Article: “The Saudi Olive Branch between the Holy War and the Political
Effort"]

[Text] Fahd's plan annoyed al-Sadat, embarrassed the
Americans and cornered the Palestinians.

Reactions to the Saudi plan for a comprehensive settlement varied. but

there is a general agreement that it gave form to an Arab position that
manifested itself in the shift from an ambiguous formula for a holy war,
which Saudi Arabia had previously adopted. to that of a political effort
which is defined by articles and conditions. The political department of
AL—HATAN AL-‘ARABI prepared this report in a question and answer format. It
includes an adequate summary of the substance of the Saudi suggestions, the
Arab and foreign reactions to them and their political consequences as well.

[Question] Why did Saudi Arabia choose this time in particular to propose
its settlement plan?

[Answer] There is a feeling that a unified Arab position on the Middle
East that would have the greatest Arab support possible has to be formed.
Such a plan has to stay away from the ambiguity and the obscurity of slo-
gans and ideologies at a time when the grounds for Arab disputes are
growing. Israeli provocation is escalating. the European initiative is
fading and the United States is appearing as though it were getting ready
to resume its diplomatic action in the area.

[Question] Hhat is the Saudi plan's chance for gaining Arab acceptance?
[Answer] The Saudis are now following Arab reactions with interest. If
they find the reaction to the plan to be negative, they will stop acting on

it without losing anything. But if they find encouragement, they will pro-

pose it at an emergency Arab summit or wait till the regular summit meeting
next November.

[Question] There are those who say that the Saudi plan complements the
Camp David accords.

‘13
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FIMICNUHCJA1.USE1MNLY

[Answer] Prince Fahd says in introducing his plan that the Camp David
accords are no longer useful. Other Saudi officials said that the plan was
a substitute for Camp David, that it [implied] a total rejection of Presi-
dent al—Sadat's role and that it [involved] an attempt to break the dead—
lock that is surrounding the crisis in the area.

[Question] But those who opposed the Saudi plan said that it had been
coordinated with the Americans, [did they not]?

[Answer] Some of the articles included in the plan, especially those that
pertain to the PLO. do not have the United States' approval. At any rate
Prince Fahd says that the Arabs have no disagreement with the United
States, except with regard to Palestinian rights. The time has come for the
U.S. government to be less partial to Israel and more fair to the Arabs.

[Question] Can it be said that the new Saudi initiative is an extension
of Saudi Arabia's initiative in Lebanon where it succeeded with 0.5. coor-
dination in stopping the Palestinian-Israeli war that lasted 2 weeks?

[Answer] Haybe. The Saudis are proud of the role they played in stopping
the war in Lebanon. Prince Fahd says that the purpose of that role was to
stop the bloodshed. He is satisfied with the United States' "prompt and
effective" agreement with Saudi Arabia. It may be that the period of rela-
tive calm which Lebanon experienced encouraged the Saudis to propose a plan
for a comprehensive solution in the area with the implicit belief that
their success as intermediaries between the Americans, the Palestinians and
the Syrians in Lebanon may furnish them with greater opportunities for
success as intermediaries and partners in a larger settlement plan.

Correspondences and Differences with the U.S. Position

[Question] Then there is at least an implicit correspondence between 0.5.
and Saudi steps in the area, [is there not]?

[Answer] 0.8. and Saudi cooperation is traditional. but this does not
mean that the steps they take correspond to each other in most cases. Hhen
Prince Fahd was presenting his plan, he said. "we are not satisfied with
U.S. policy in general. especially with regard to Palestinian rights."
Prince Fahd is calling upon the Reagan administration to stop its armed
support of Israel. He does not agree with Hashington about Camp David. The
Saudis also oppose the international polarization that is taking place in
the Gulf, and they do not agree with the Reagan administration that the
Soviet threat takes precedence over the Israeli threat.

[Question] if this is the case. are there any chances for a Saudi-0.5.
conflict? What are the measures that Saudi Arabia may take to put pressure
on the United States?

[Answer] It is a traditional principle in Saudi policy not to become

engaged in sharp confrontations. However, after a Saudi position was formed
and defined by articles and conditions. the Arabs who supported Saudi

'1‘
INJI‘OFFICLAL USIZtNWLY
FOR‘OFFRJIJ.USE(HVLY

Arabia's plan, and chief among them are the Palestinians. will be the first
to call upon Saudi Arabia to turn to use its economic weapons. that is, oil
and financial investments abroad and to turn away from purchasing U.S.
weapons. -

The first step that Saudi Arabia may take if it does not perceive a change
to speak of in the U.S. position during the next few months is to cancel
Prince Fahd's [scheduled] visit to Washington next November.

[Question] Has the Saudi plan gained major Arab approval?

[Answer] The supporters of the plan proclaimed their support publicly, and
the opponents have so far at least been silent. The Palestinians are split
between supporters and opponents. At any rate Soviet propaganda agencies

on the Arab scene are highlighting the plan.

[Question] What specifically is the position of the Palestinians?

[Answer] The PLO supports the plan. 'Arafat and the principal faction

in Fatah support the Saudi plan. Saudi Arabia had contributed 20 million
dollars for the Palestinians after Beirut was bombed. This is in addition
to the 100 million dollars that Saudi Arabia reportedly pays annually to
the PLO. The Saudi crown prince praised 'Arafat especially when he presen-
ted his plan to 'Arafat, emphasizing [the latter's] statement that the
Palestinian factor was the basic factor in the Middle East equation. He
also indicated that the cease fire agreement did not mean that the
Palestinian people would stop their march on the course to gain their
rights. Prince Fahd reminded the United States of the need to recognize the
liberation organization "because any comprehensive peace would be based on
that."

The Palestinian left. however. promptly rejected the Saudi plan wholly
and separately. The Popular Front (George Habash) described it as recog-
nition of Israel and falling short of meeting minimum acceptable Arab
[demands]. The Democratic Front (Nayif Hawatimah) said that it gave Israel
more gains. Meanwhile the mayors of the Rest Bank, those who support the
liberation organization or those who support King Husayn. hailed it.

[Question] What about the Syrians?

[Answer] The Syrians are hard pressed. They are not saying anything now.
satisfied with attacking the Saudi initiative in Lebanon through the
political organizations that are loyal to them there. Their distress is
caused by the fact that Damascus cannot veto the Saudi plan because it

was promised that financing for the Syrian troops in Lebanon would be
resumed. It is estimated that these expenses are 90 million dollars every
year. Saudi Arabia also played a role in dispelling the tension that coin-
cided with what was known as the Syrian missiles crisis.

[Question] What about the Iraqis?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢HHWCIA1.USE(NNLY

[Answer] The Iraqi position on the Middle East question is known. So far
there has been no Iraqi comment on the Saudi plan. However, the Arab Libera—
tion Front, which is the Palestinian Organization that is sympathetic to
Iraq, has announced its rejection of the plan.

At any rate, Iraq's opposition to the Gulf Cooperation Council. which is
sponsored by Saudi Arabia, and the fact that Iraq criticizes Saudi oil
policy do not prevent us from saying that relations between the two fra-
ternal countries are close and the dialogue through diplomatic channels

is continuing. Fahd said that the Saudi national commitment to the preser—
vation of Iraq's power needs no confirmation.

[Question] But the Saudi plan did not speak about Lebanon, [did it]?

[Answer] The eight articles did not actually refer to Lebanon, but the
Saudi crown prince did say in the introduction and in the legal justifica-
tions for the plan that Saudi Arabia was interested in establishing peace
and stability and supporting the lawful government through the Arab Follow—
Up Committee. The Saudis are always urging Syria to calm the situation

in Lebanon. They believe that a relaxation of tension in Lebanon is the
beginning of the relaxation of tension in the Arab world.

[Question] The Lebanese government did not comment on the Saudi plan for a
solution, and President Sarkis seems interested in convening an Arab summit.

[Answer] The Lebanese government is not commenting on the plan because

it is waiting for the Syrian comment. But it is evident that President
Sarkis supports any crystallization of an Arab position if that would help
solve the crisis in the area with which the Lebanese crisis has become
linked. As far as his prime minister, Shafiq al-wazzan is concerned, the
Islamic Grouping to which al-Hazzan belongs and which is sympathetic to
Saudi Arabia has announced its ardent support for Fahd's plan.

It is curious that the National Movement (the Lebanese left) and the
Lebanese Front, which includes the Haronite armed militias, rejected the
Saudi plan.

With regard to convening the emergency summit which Lebanese diplomacy

is seeking, Saudi Arabia has no objections. President Sarkis, however.
does not place much hope on the summit. he only wants to put on record

the fact that the Arabs were not able to save Lebanon as a result of their
differences.

[Question] Can the Arab position in general be summed up in the Saudi
plan?

[Answer] Saudi Arabia wanted to have its plan form a specific Arab
position on the Middle East question. But the current Arab reality does not
furnish the required consensus. Egypt and Sudan are involved with Camp
David; Libya is [preoccupied] in Chad; Morocco is embarking on a confron-
tation with Algeria; and the disputes are known and obvious in the Arab
East.

'16
FOIlOFFﬂJAI.USEINVLY
FORiOFFKJA1.USEGDNLY

[Question] But why did President al-Sadat express his irritation with
the Saudi plan?

[Answer] Al-Sadat is saying that the Saudi plan did not bring anything
new. He is publicly encouraging Saudi Arabia to take political and diplo-
matic action. But he is implicitly very suspicious of Saudi policy. He
believes that Fahd’s plan has targeted his accomplishments in Camp David
and that its timing during his visit to the United States was planned to
capture the limelight.

[Question] But al-Sadat too did not get anything new from his recent
meeting with Reagan. The U.5. president turned down his plea to recognize
the PLO.

[Answer] The failure of al-Sadat's visit is one of the reasons why the
the Saudi plan is causing him to worry. It is making him fear that the
Saudi plan may attually replace Camp David which has remained in the con-
text of an isolated solution. Through the autonomy talks this solution
has not been able to achieve anything for the Palestinians. while Egypt's
will was turned over to the Americans and Egypt itself was isolated from
the Arab world.

The importance of the Saudi alternative lies in the fact that Saudi Arabia
is politically and diplomatically stronger than al-Sadat. It carries weight
with the United States; it plays a role on the Arab scene; and it can speak
on behalf of the Palestinians.

[Question] why did the Israelis reject the Saudi proposals even though
these proposals convey a tacit willingness to recognize them?

[Answer] The Israelis as usual saw only the part that was consistent with
their policy and their interests. Hith their various affiliations they
cheered the Saudi willingness to recognize them. but they rejected the

rest of the plan which stipulates that in return for giving them recog-
nition, they are to withdraw from the land they occupied in 1967, dismantle
the settlements and establish a Palestinian state. In their opinion, all
this seeks "the destruction" of their state.

[Question] If Israel rejects the Saudi plan. what hopes are there for
a peaceful or a political settlement in the area?

[Answer] The Saudi plan is not addressed to Israel. Its purpose is to per-
suade the United States that the Arab position is flexible and to encourage
it to put pressure on Israel. Even THE JERUSALEM POST said. "Khalid and
Fahd are cunning. Why do we let them go as far as they can using Israeli
rejection as an excuse?“

The United States ls Interested in the Saudi Role

[Question] What is the U.S. position on the Saudi role?

'17
FOB OFFICLAI.lEﬂE(MNLY
FI”!(NHHC1A1.USE(MVLY

[Answer] It is not yet known whether the United States' cool attitude
toward the Saudi plan was intended or not. The spokesman for the v.3.
Department of State said that there was nothing new in the plan but that it
was suitable as a basis for the settlement.

At any rate. the United States is interested in the Saudi role in the area
as an intermediary between the Americans on the one hand and the
Palestinians and Syrians on the other. The Americans View with great admira-
tion the success achieved by Saudi Arabia in the efforts that led to the
cease fire in Lebanon.

[Question] To what extent can the Americans go along with the Saudis in
their insistence on the need to achieve a comprehensive and just solution
in the area?

[Answer] It seems the Americans are embarrassed by the Saudi plan. The
Reagan administration, which has so far concerned itself with dealing with
the economic situation, is not prepared to plunge immediately into the
search for an urgent solution ih the Middle East. Reagan's sympathy with
Israel. which has been unprecedented since Truman's administration. is

tying his hands and preventing him from putting pressure on Israel. The evi-
dence for this lies in the fact that Robert Newman, the ".8. ambassador in
Saudi Arabia, lost his position because he said in front of the U.$. Con-
gress that Secretary of State Haig was "a tool in the hands of the Israeli
lobby."

Reagan took action and sent veteran diplomat Philip Habib to prevent, with
the help of the Saudis, an outbreak in Lebanon that could lead to an armed
confrontation between the Arabs and the Israelis which may destroy U.S.
interests in the area.

But Reagan does not appear to be prepared to offer a Middle East initiative
before the beginning of next year.

[Question] What is keeping him from doing that when he recognizes the
danger of the situation in the area?

[Answer] Reagan is waiting to complete his meetings with the leaders of
the area. he met al-8adat this month. He will receive Begin in September,
King Husayn in October and Prince Fahd in November. After that he will
focus on studying the information he compiled to form a U.S. position.

He will either adopt Camp David which the Arabs are rejecting and al-Sadat
and the Israelis are adhering to, or he will come up with a new initiative
whose general lines cannot be predicted now.

[Question] who has more influence on the United States. Israel or Saudi
Arabia?

[Answer] Both have strong ingredients for putting pressure on the United
States. but Israel is capable of influencing the 0.8. political process
through the Congress and through the small circle [of people] around

18

F‘"l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY
FOITOFIHCLAL.USEIDNLY

Reagan. This is due to the strength of the israeli and Zionist lobby there.
Saudi Arabia, however, has many cards that it has not yet used, such as the
oil weapons, the capital invested in the United States and the interests of
0.8. companies doing business in Saudi Arabia. Above all that comes the
importance of Saudi Arabia's strategic location in the area and the role

of the Saudi regime in preserving the "balance of moderation" in the Arab
world.

The Reagan administration is now trying to reconcile its reliance on Saudi
diplomacy in establishing a dialogue with Arab radicals with its reliance
on Israel as a military power [exercising] pressure and coercion in the
area. Saudis and Arabs will not allow this to continue.

[Question] Where does Europe stand amidst this intense involvement in
the area?

[Question] Europe welcomed the Saudi initiative. but the discussion about
the European initiative has faded as a result of 0.8. pressures.

The Soviets Are Coming
[Question] What about the Soviet Union?

[Answer] The presence of the Soviet Union in the area is greater than
it has been at any time since the Soviet Union left Egypt in 1971-1972 and
since it airlifted supplies to Egypt during the October war.

[Question] What are the aspects of this Soviet return?

[Answer] The successive visits of Arab officials to Moscow in the recent
period. Al-Qadhdhafi visited Moscow; then Jalud visited it; al-Shaykh Sabah
al-Ahmad; then King Husayn; Chadli Bendjedid, Paruq al-Qadumi and Taha
Yasin Ramadan.

The Arabs are urging the Soviet Union to play a stronger role in the area
to oppose the fact that the Reagan administration is going along with
Israel in the aftermath of the bombing of the Iraqi reactor and Beirut.

[Question] what is the Soviet position with regard to the recent develop-
ments in the area?

[Answer] The Soviet Union, being one of the two superpowers in the world,
is trying like the United States to gain more than one foothold in the
Middle East. But Moscow has appeared to be more logical and closer to the
Arabs through the promises that Brezhnev made to neutralize the Gulf--and
this is something that pleases the people of the Gulf--and through the
resumption of the appeal to convene an international conference to solve
the Middle East crisis. This too is a matter that the Arabs do not oppose.

[Question] At one time the Soviets appeared to be not strongly opposed to
the Camp David accords.

19

Ff“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Total Arab rejection for Camp David has encouraged the Soviets to
intensify their opposition because the Camp David accords deprived them of
the role that they wish to play in solving the crisis in the area. Such a
role would be an expression of their influence in the area and [would rep-
resent] an adherence to that role and to their presence in the area.

The Soviets now believe that the United States and Israel have used
al-Sadat to the point of humiliation. Washington made him support israel
against the Arabs. and Israel embarrassed him with its provocative surprise
adventure in the Arab world.

The Soviets also believe that the bombing of the Iraqi reactor was carried
out according to a U.S.-Israeli plan and that the AHACS airplanes were
stripped of some of their sensitive equipment to prevent them from moni-
toring Israeli infiltration operations into the air space of the Gulf.

[Question] Hhat is the Saudis' attitude toward the Soviets?

[Answer] Saudi Arabia was almost the first Arab country to establish dip-
lomatic relations with the Soviets. But then these relations have been cut
since 1938. Had not the Soviets overrun Afghanistan, there would have been
considerable rapprochement in bilateral relations in the recent period.

Despite strong Saudi criticism of the invasion of Afghanistan, informed
diplomatic sources are saying that communications between Saudi diplomats
and the Soviets have been taking place in several foreign capitals. The two
sides have discovered many points on which they agree besides the points on
which they disagree.

[Question] Do the Soviets support the Saudi plan?

[Answer] Notwithstanding the fact that in Moscow‘s opinion Saudi Arabia
is an extremely conservative country, the principles comprised in Pahd's
plan do not differ much from Soviet ideas on a solution to the crisis of
the area.

Fahd's Principle

The Saudi plan for a solution as proposed by Prince Fahd comprises the
following items.

--Israel's withdrawal from the land it occupied in 1967, including
Jerusalem.

--The removal of the settlements that were built in the occupied land after
1967.

--Ensuring the freedom of worship in the holy places.

--Affirming the rights of the Palestinian people and compensating those
who do not wish to return.

20

IN)! OIIHCIAI.lEHE(HVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE!NVLY

--Subjecting the west Bank and the Gata Strip to a period of transition
under the supervision of the United Nations and for a period that is not
to exceed a few months.

--The establishment of an independent Palestinian state with its capital.
Jerusalem.

--Affirming the right of the countries of the area to live in peace.

--The United Nations or some of its member nations are to guarantee the
implementation of these principles.

The Saudi plan for a solution stipulates three conditions for the implemen-
tation of the settlement.

—-The unlimited U.S. support for Israel is to be stopped.
--lsraeli arrogance as represented by Begin is to be restrained.

--The Palestinian factor is to be accepted as the basic factor in the Middle
East equation.

Copyright: 1981 AL HATAN AL ARABI

8592
C50: 4304/140

21

FVMICHHWCJAL.USEioNLN
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY

SUDAN

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION STATISTICS GIVEN FOR 1980-1981 -
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBSNS in PrenCh No 1870, 11 Sep 81 p 2327

[Text] According to statistics from the Ministry of Agriculture. the 1980-1981
season has yielded the following results for the main types of agricultural pro-
duction:

Cotton: 730,000 bales, broken down as follows: long fibers, 292,000; nediun

fibers, 406,000; short fibers, 32,000. The 1980-1981 harvest represents nearly
a 25-percent increase over the previous harvest. Nevertheless. it is far lower
than the best crop of the last 5 Iyears, that of 1977-1978, when l. 015. 000 bales

were produced.

Sorghum: 2,124,000 tons, up 27 percent over the previous season (1.669.999 tons).
Millet: 492,000 tone, up 60 percent over the preceding harvest (309,000 tons).
Peanuts: 799,000 tons, down 6.2 percent fron the previous season (852,000 tons).
Sesame: 211,000 tons, or the equivalent of the previous harvest (209,000 tons).

wheat: 220,000 tone, down 6 percent compared with the previous season (233,000
tons).

Gum arabic: 32,000 tone, or an increase of 65 percent conpared with the previous
season (23,000 tons).

Cotton production for the 1980-1981 year is therefore shows a rather strong increase

over the 1979-1980 year. Unfortunately, world prices continue to drop, which points
to a heavy deficit in the trade balance. Cotton exports for the 1979-1980 year
brought in $333. 6 million. or 78 percent of all the Sudan' s export receipts, which
represented a slight increase in foreign exchange inconé over the previous fiscal
year (up $12.7 million), but the increase was essentially due to the liquidation

of stocks from previous years.

The foreseeable deficit in the trade balance will be slightly attenuated by the
sale of other farm production exported: sorghum and gum arabic.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1981.

11,461. 3"”
cso: 4519/2 22

[WHICHHHCLALIKﬂEONLY