FUR (WI’IHAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10578
10 June 1982

USSR Report

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was smsrizcd or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion snark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1057l
10 June 198:

USSR REPORT
Couraucrlou AND EQUIPMENT

(P0110 4/82)

CONTENTS

CONSTRUCTION

Book Excerpts: Construction Finance
(m‘ﬂsy SmITEL'STVA, 1981) O...OOOIJOOOOOIOIOOC.CCOOC

Book Excerpts: Short-Term Credit in Construction

(1'; A. Shesterneva; KRATKCBROCHNOYE WVANIYE V
STROITBL'STVE, 1981) .0...‘.......IIOOOOOOOOOOOCIOIOOOCO

-a- [III-USSR-E
IN)! OIIICIAL.US£4ONLY

CONSTRUCTION

BOOK EXCIRPTS: CONSTRUCTION FINANCE

Mggcow PINANSY STROITEL'STVA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 8 Jul 81) pp 2, 3-6,
2

iTitle page. table of contents. annotation and introduction from the book "Construc-
tion Finance." edited by Professor and Honored Scientist of the RSPSR V. P. Cirov-
ally and Candidate of Economic Sciences 0. A. Khorov. Izdatel'stvo ”Vysshaya Shkola",

20,000 copies. 288 pages]

[Text] Title Page. Second edition. revised and enlarged. Released by the USSR Min—
iatry of Higher and Secondary Special Education as a textbook for VUZ students in the
specialties of "Management Organization in Construction" and ”Construction ASU [autu-

mated control system] Organization and Planning."

Table of Contents.

Introduction

Section I: Finances in the System of Economic Levers of Planned Management
of the USSR National Economy

Chapter I. Finances In Developed Socialist Society

Chapter 2. Organizing the Management of Socialist Finances

Chapter 3. The State Budget in the System of Planned National Economic
Management

Chapter 6. Credit and Banks in the Socialist Society Economic Mechanism
System

Chapter 5. Organizing and Methods of Managing Monetary Circulation
Section II: Finances in the Construction Management System

Chapter 6. Financial Planning and Organizing Pinance work in Contractor
Organizations

chapter 7. Monetary Accumulations and Profitability in the Construction
Organization Management System

Chapter 8. Fixed Assets of Construction Organizations

Chapter 9. Circulating Capital of Construction Organizations

Chapter 10. System of Calculations in Construction

Chapter 11. Short-Tern Credit in the System of Economic Incentives in

Construction

Section III: Financing and Providing Credit for Capital Investments
Chapter [2. System of Financing and Crediting Capital lnvestmentt

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18
29

43
S2

58
72
90
107
126

152

185
FOR ilFFli‘lM. “SI-Z ONLV

Chapter 13. Sources of State Capital Investment Financing 2110
Chapter 14. Long-Tern State Capital Investment Crediting 225
Chapter 15. Financing Construction for Contractor and Directobsbor

Methods of Production 269

Cha r 16. Financing Planning-Surveying and Geological Exploration work 271

Annotation. Reviewed by the chair of the state budget and finances of branches of
the national economy at the VZFEI [All-Union Finance-Economics Correspondence Insti-
tute and the chair of monetary circulation and credit at VZPBI.

This textbook consists of three sections. The first presents basic postulates on the
essence of Soviet finances and their place in the system of economic levers in planned
management of the USSR national economy. The second illuminates questions of finances
in the managenent system of construction as a branch of the national economy. The
third section is devoted to questions of the theory and practice of financing capital
investments. The first edition was published in 1973. The textbook is for VUZ stu-
dents in engineering-economics specialties. It can be used by students in VUZ engin-
eering-construction specialties and by students in the system for improving the skills
of construction personnel.

Introduction. Under developed socialism. our country has achieved great success in
economic and social development, in improving the well—being of the people. A mighty
production and scientific-technical potential has been created by the selfless labor
of the Soviet people under the leadership of the USSR Comunist Party.

The 26th CPSU Congress has set high new frontiers for our continuing advance. The
"Basic Directions of USSR Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and Up To 1990“
were approved by the Congress. This docment creatively generalizes the practical
building of conunism in the USSR; it takes into account the experience of other so-
cialist countries and embodies CPSU strategy and tactics concerning the most import-
ant questions of the country's economic and social development in light of the con-
crete conditions of the 1980's.

A leading role is given to capital construction in increasing the country's produc-

tive forces and improving the well-being of the Soviet people. This has occurred be-
cause capital construction ensures the reproduction of fixed assets. the planned de-
velopment and retooling of all branches of the national economy. and creation of the
necessary base for meeting the social. personal-services and cultural requirements of

the population .

Construction is one of the most important branches. occupying third place (after in-
dustry and agriculture) in the gross social product. About ll million people work in
the branch, nearly one in every seven workers and employees engaged in material produc-
tion.

The rates of development of the entire national economy therefore depend largely on
successful implementation of the ambitious tasks facing capital construction.

An enormous anount of construction work has been done in the USSR. Tens of thousands
of large industrial. power. transport and agricultural complexes and projects provided
with modern equipment have been built and put into operation. Housing, cultural.
personal- and municipal-services construction is proceeding at rapid rates.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Capital investments in the country's national economy are constantly growing. Suf-
fice it to say that they were about 135 billion rubles in the last year of the 10th
Five-Year Plan. nearly two-fold more funds than were used in capital construction
during all the prewar years of the existence of the Soviet state. These are anore-
ous sure. and it is therefore no accident that the party and goverI-emt of our coun-
try pay close attention to their effective use.

The necessity of resolutely improving the state of affairs in capital construction
and improving capital investment effectiveness and construction quality in all
branches of the national economy was ewhasiud particularly sharply at the 26th
CPSU Congress.

Reliance on efficiency and quality is the most important component of the entire eco-
nomic strategy of the party and government. Its actualisation is not only a scienti-
fic and technical and economic task. but also a social and ideological one.

The planned management mechanism must also correspond fully to the economic policy
worked out by the party. This is insistently demanded by the growing scope of pro-
duction. by the economic ties which have evolved and by rapidly developing scientific
and technical progress. Under present conditions. it is important to ensure the ef-
ficient use of everything available to the national economy. relying primarily on in-
tensive growth factors. and to introduce the achievements of scientific-technical pro-
gress and leading experience into production more extensively.

It is precisely this goal which is pursued by the decrees hdopted in July 1379 "On
Further Perfecting the Economic Hechanism and the Tasks of Party and State Agencies"
and "On Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Kechenisn
on Improving Production Efficiency and Work Quality."

The indicated doctments contain a comprehensive program for perfecting planned leader-
ship of branches of the national economy. including capital construction; they out-
line a system of steps called upon to ensure dynamic growth in our economy in accord-
ancc with the demands of developed socialism. a significant increase in production
efficiency. the acceleration of scientific and technical progress. labor productivity
growth. improved product quality and a steady rise in the well-being of the Soviet
people. '

Important significance is attached to economic levers and incentives in the system of
measures outlined to improve capital construction. Among the most effective are fi-
nancial ones.

In order to train broadly knowledgeable engineer-economists in the specialties of
"Management Organization in Construction" and "Construction A80 Organisation and
Planning," the course "Construction Finance" must be studied as part of the complex
of economics disciplines being studied in engineering-economics VUZ's and at analog-
ous departments in engineering-constantion institutes.

The engineer-economist must know the principles of finance work in construction. the
methods and conditions of financing. the existing procedure of financial interrela-
tionships among participants in the process of building enterprises. buildings and
structures. He must be able to perform individual financial operations independently
(calculations of construction-installation work done. determining profitability and

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O‘FICIAL USE ONLY

profit. calculating a circulating capital nornativo. and so forth) and in run a loch-
nical analysis of the financial activity of contractor organisations.

The second edition of this textbook was prepared with consideration of the nornative-
instructional and methods docuents worked out in accordance with the July (1979)
CPSU Central Co-ittee and USSR Council of Ministers decree ”0n Improving Planning
and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Hechanian on Inproving Production
Efficiency and Work Quality." as well as other natarials as of 1 July 1980.

The authors of individual textbook chapters are: Chapter 1 - USSR Acade-y of Sci-
ences Corresponding Heaber and Doctor of Econonic Sciences K. N. Plotnikov; Chapters
2 and k - Doctor of Bcononic Sciences A. ll. Kovaleva; Chapter 3 -- Candidate of Eco-
nonic Sciences z. N. Laktyushina; Chapter 5 - Candidate of Econonic Sciences )1. H.
Krupinova; Chapters 6. ll. 12, 13 and 16 -- Candidate of Economic Sciences R. K.
Belkina; Chapter 7 - Candidata of Economic Sciences 8. L. Pridnan; Chapters 8 and 9
— Candidate of Scononic Sciences 1.. I. Kirichenko; introduction and Chapters 10 and
15 — Candidate of Bcononic Sciences 0. A. Khorov; Chapter 16 (second section. ar-
ticles 2 and lo) - Candidate of Econonic Sciences A. V. Kozlovskiy; Chapter 14 (ex-
cept for the second section. articles 2 and b) -- Candidate of Economic Sciences V.
P. Babak.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Vysshsya shkola". 1981

11052
880: 1821/116

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSTRUCTION

BOOK EXCBRPTS: SRORIHIIHH.CRBDIT IN CONSTRUCTION

Moscow KRATKOSROCHNOYB KREDITOVAMIYB Y STROITEL'STVB in Russian 1981 (signed to press
6 Feb 81) DP 2. 166

[Title page. annotation and table of contents fro. the book ”Short-Tern Credit in Con-
struction." edited by T. A. Shesterneva. Izdstel'stvo "Tinansy i statistiki". 8,770
copies, 164 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This work is a continuation of e book previously published,
"Kreditovsniye i raschety v kapital'non stroitel'stve" [Credit and Calculations in
Capital Construction] (Moscav. Izdatel'stvo "Pinensy". 1979). It exsnines questions
of the organization of credit relations in construction. targets and nethods of cre-
diting, the granting of credit to construction-installation. planning-surveying and
assenbly-conponent organizations, and directions in which credit practice is being
inproved. It is intended for workers in the credit systen and economists in construc-
tion and planning organizations and can be used in the econonic education systen.

The authors of the individual chapters are: Candidate of Icononic Sciences Vasiliy
Alekseyevich Gnatov - chapters 1, II, III (article 1); Candidate of Econonic Scien-
ces - Valentine Ivenovna Zhurevlsve - chapters III (articles 2. 3) and V (article
2): Yuriy Iosifovich Kondratenko - Chapter V (article 1); Celine Psvlovns Podshi-
valenko -- Chapter 4.

Table of Contents.

Chapter I. Principles of Credit Relations Organization 3
l. Necessity for and Essence of Credit Under Socielisn 3
2. Functions of Credit 7
3. Principles of Socialist Credit 12
4. Objects and Types of Bonk Credit 16
5. Methods of Crediting and For-s of Current Accounts 20
6. Credit Linits end Debt Control Figures 25
7. Bank Interest 28
Chapter II. Construction Output and Methods of Actualizing It 35
l. Econonic Features of Construction Output 34
2. Development of Methods of Actualizing Construction Output 39

3. Inproving the Beononic Mechanisn in Construction and Organizing
Calculations 56

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter III. Perfecting Short-Term Credit in Construction
1. Expanding Short-Term Credit
2. Creditins Above-Normative Stocks of Material Goods
3. Crediting Expenditures on: Unfinished Constantia-Installation and
Planning-Surveying Pork '

Chapter IV. Calculated and Payment Credits. Credits for Other Purposes
1. Content of Calculated and Payment Credits
2. Calculated Credits and Procedures for Issuing Then
3. Procedure for Granting Payment Credits
lo. Credits for Other Purposes

Chapter V. Differentiated Creditins Procedures. Economic work in Creditins
1. Bank Ruble Control and the Differentiated Creditins Procedure
2. Economic Work in Creditins

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pinansy i statistika". 1981

11052
080: 1821/1110 END

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY