FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10266
20 January 1982

USSR Report

SPACE

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/102“
20 January 198

USSR REPORT

SPACE
(F000 1/8 2)

Conn-ms
SPACE APPLICATIONS

Integrated Experiment With 'Heteor' Artificial Barth
Satellite: Isportant Step in Development of
Operational Investigations of the Earth From Space. . . . . . . . . . . . . . l

'Heteor'-Series Satellites Intended for Studying the Earth

Pr“ space...OOOOOOOOOO...OOCOOCOOIOOOOOOOOOOC00......DOOIOOOIOO ‘

Technical Bquipnent Couple: for Experiment in Remote Sensing
of Earth Pro- spac.OOOOOOOUOOOOO0.0...‘OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.00... 17

Radio and Television Couple: for 'Heteor' Satellites Used
To Investigate Earth's Natural Resources........................ 26

Experimental On-noard Infornation Couple: for Observation of

the urtheoeeone.seceseesossssseeessseeessaseeoeeseeoosesesssoso 31

Experimental Information and Heasurenent Couple: Based on
'Pragnent' Hultizonal Scanning System........................... 36

,‘Pragnent' Kultizonal Scanning System............................. 61
Problems in mural ‘rt'anauuan and Recording of Hultiz'onal
Video Intonation and Their Solution in the 'Pragnent '

merhenteoes-aooeoesssssesoessn'sssssssseasssssssssssssesssssse 5‘

Hetrological Support for Measure-euro of Brightness of Earth's
Surface by- 'Pragsent' Hultizonsl Scanning Systea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

Preflight Photogra-etric Calibration of, 'Pragnent' multizonal
sumyins systuCCOO‘COOIOQO0.00000I....OOOOOOCOOCOOO0......IOGO 77

Investigation-of Conditions for Surveying Ocean's Surface in
00"111 “- Band of the Sﬁectm.....unn.uuuou..........n 82

- a - [III - USSR -' 21L SST POW

was“ Ama- - - Olav. As" \I
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY

SPACE APPLICATIGIS

UDC 502.3:629.78

INTEGRATED EXPERIMENT WITH 'HETEOR' ARTIFICIAL EARTH SATELLITE:

:2?ng STEP IN DEVELOPMENT OF OPERATIONAL INVESTIGATIQIS 01’ THE EARTH 1R0“

Moscow ISSISDOVANIYE 23111.1 12 KOSHOSA in Russian No 5, Sap-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 1 Jul Bl) pp 5-7

[Article by N.P. Koslov, R.z. Sagdeyev and NJ. Sherenet'yevskiy)

[wext] In our country, the development of facilities for remote sounding of the
Earth frost space is noving in two basic, mutually supplementary directions. The
first of them is based on photographic surveys of the Earth's surface, delivery of
the exposed photographic fil- to Earth, and utilization of the materials obtained
for canprehensivs thematic mapping. the basic space experiments in this field were
performed by 0333 Pilot-Cosmonauts Oo-radss 6.1'. Dobrovol'skiy, V.N. Volkov, VJ.
Patsayev, v.6. Lazarov, 0.6. Hakarov, P.I. Klimk. v.v. Lebedev, v.1. Sevast'yanov,
V.P. Bykovskiy and V.V. Akaenov, in the “Salyut' manned orbital stations and

"Soyuz' spacecraft.

As a result of these experiments and the scientific research and planning and de-
sign work based on them, the nultiscnal space photography Isthod was developed;
within the framework of the "Intercoms" program, specialists from the USSR and
the GDR created the “KP-6 nultizonal space camera. which realises this method and
is intended for extensive productive use. After being developed on the basis of
the results of flight testing carried out with the "Soyuz-22" spacecraft, the
MIG-6H was made available for practical use by interested organisations in 1977.
Since that time these cameras have been used successfully on the 'Salyut-G" manned
orbital station, as well as in laboratory aircraft operating under the
Investigation of the Earth's natural Resources (IP82) 91092"! in many areas of our
country and other socialist countries.

The creation of the MIG-6H camera and the equipment for processing photographs that
accompanies it was an important step in the development of photographic aerospace
investigations of the Earth. The photographs of the Earth's surface obtained with
these cameras are now being used effectively by sany scientists and production or-
ganizations from different ministries and departments in order to solve many diver-
sified problems involving .the Barth sciences and different economic branches.

The second direction for investigation of the Earth from space involves surveying
in the most variegated bands of the visible. infrared and superhigh-frequency zones
of the spectrum of electromagnetic waves passing through the Barth's atmosphere,

“WWWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the transmission (by radio) of the infomtim obtained free satellites to recep-
tion points, and the operatin processing and delivery of this information to
consuners who are engaged in observing. investigating and monitoring transient pro-
cesses taking place on the Earth's surface and in its seas and oceans.

greatest value, since it provides a highly efficient means for solving extremely
important national econonic problems. such as--in particular-neutering the status
of agricultural lands and the work being done on then, searching for regions of in-
creased biological productivity in the sea and many others. The development of
this direction requires the solution of technically sore cosplicated problems. both
on board the spacecraft involved and on Earth itself at the information reception
and processing points. the cosplexity of the solution of the problem increases
acutely when the Earth's surface is to be surveyed with high spatial. spectral and
radiometric resolution and the video intonation obtained is to be transmitted to
Earth over a digital radio line. Operational processing and interpretation of the
obtained video information is possible only on the basis of specialised conputer
technology. The inclusion of specialized computer facilities in the cycle of ob-
taining, transnitting and processing this video information. as well as the devel-
opment of the necessary software for these facilities, is an extremely coupler
problem in and of itself.

A second-generation "Meteor" artificial Barth satellite containing a complex of ex-
perinental equipment that made it possible to begin an extensive experiment that
models the regular. operational utilisation of space facilities for IPRz purposes
was launched on 18 June 1980.

The “Meteor" was injected into a solar-synchronous orbit (with an inclination of
about 97°) that provides the possibility of surveying any area in the Sovut Union
under approxiuately identical solar illumination conditions. The high accuracy of
the satellite's orbital orientation and its altitude of about 630 km above the

Earth's surface made it possible to conduct surveying with a spatial resolution of
tens of meters.

repeatedly for IPRz purposes, three new experi-ental opticoelectronic instruaents
were installed in the satellite. They make it possible to survey the Earth's sur-
face in different bands of the visible and near-infrared sone of the spectrun. with
medium and high spatial resolution.

The video information that is obtained is transmitted to Earth. at the surveying
rate, over specially developed high-infomtion-content con-mication links, in-
cluding digital ones that insure the preservation of the high radiometric accuracy
. of the video information obtained by the surveying instrunents. Along with the in-
dustrial organizations, the USSR Academy of Sciences' Institute of Space Research
(In) and the ONE [Experillental Design office] of the 0881! Ministry of Higher and
Secondary Specialised Education's Rosco. Power mgineering Institute participated

'lhe video intonation arriving from the satellite is processed at nu and the USSR
State Connittee for Hydroseteorology's State Scientific Research Center for the Study

2

FOROFFICMLUSIONLY
POI OFFIOAI. (BE ONLY

of Natural Resources in specialized display-type computer complexes. Specialists
from the USSR Academy of Sciences' 110 have developed a problem-oriented software
system for these complexes. This system makes-it possible to solve. in an inter-
active mode (a specialist-computer dialog). an extensive circle of problems 'con-
cerning the service processing and correction of the video information. its geo-
graphic coordinate correlation and conversion into given cartographic projections
and scales. the obtaining of various statistical characteristics. and the implemen-
tation of thematically oriented brightness and color transformations that insure
the production of high—quality images and a thorough interpretation of them.

As research conducted at Moscow State University and other organisations has shown.
the use of the experimental video infer-atlas obtained with the ”Meteor” satellite
for the purpose of solving various problems in the national economy and the Earth
sciences has confined the effectiveness of this experiment and the prospects of
many of its technical and methodological solutions.

At the same time. during the course of the experiment we discovered quite a few in-
completely solved scientific and technical. methodological and organisational prob-
lems. Here we are speaking of the reliability of individual on-board instrments.
the equipment for the high-speed registration of video intonation that is being
received. the display equipment for the digital processing of images and the equip-
ping of interested scientific and production organizations with it. the provision
of the processing of space video information with a priori data on the spectral and
structural characteristics of objects being investigated. the functioning of the
operational processing service and the dissemination of information obtained from
space and. of course. the readiness of most consumers to change over to digital
video intonation and use it effectively. The detection of these shortcomings.
their analysis and the search for ways to eliminate them is also an important goal
of the experiment that is being conducted.

The “Meteor" is continuing to function successfully in orbit. The experiment is
not yet completed. but we can already say with confidence that it was an important
step in formulating operational investigations of the Earth's natural resources in
our country. The “Meteor“ and its fittings undoubtedly reflect. in the highest de-
gree. our contemporary ideas about the use of spacecraft for operational IPRz. Il'he
information obtained from it and the software that has been developed for proces-
sing and intepreting this intonation answer fully the present requirements of the
most diversified consumers. Host of the theses advanced above are convincingly
confirmed and discussed in detail in the rest of the articles in this issue of
ISSLBDOVANIYA ZEHIJ IZ KOSMOSA.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka'. "Issledovaniye Zemli is kosmosa". 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/18

MWWWLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.507.1362
'HE‘I'EOR'-SBRIBS SAW INTENDED FOR S'RIDYING 1'33 EARTH rnou SPACE

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYE MI 12 30531063 in Russian No 5. Sop-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 29 May 81) pp 8-20

[Article by Yu.v. Trifonov]

[Text] The Soviet experimental progrn for studying the Earth's natural resources
from space with the help of automatic satellites, which later received the name
"Meteor-Nature” in the periodical press, began in 1974 with the launching of an ex-
perinental spacecraft of the “Meteor” type that was equipped with a multispectral
television camera. Between that time and 1979. three similar spacecraft (RA) were
launched into orbit. The first two m's were injected into orbits at an altitude
of 900 km, with an inclination of 82', while the subsequent n's in the ”Heteor-
Nature" program (beginning in 1977) were placed in synchronous solar orbits with an
average altitude of 650 km and an inclination of 98'. All of the ”Meteor" satel-
lites functioned successfully in orbit and transmitted multispectral television in-
formation to Barth en a regular basis (see table.)

'Heteor-Nature' Program RA Launches

    

l (EA/ll. 1016 r. .0!
2 l6.V. I016 r. 807 1024
J 39.". “17 r. “3 31.5
4 ﬁJ. IV" r. W 91.4
Key:
1. Spacecraft number 4. Inclination (degrees)
2. Date of launch 5. Average altitude (kilometers)
3. Characteristics of orbit 6. Period (minutes)

The eain goals of the "Heteor-Nature' program were:

the creation and development of equipment and methods for obtaining, transmitting
and processing multispectral television information of low and average resolution
for the purpose of studying natural resources)

the creation and development of techniques for decoding and interpreting multi-
spectral television intonation on the Earth's underlying surface for the benefit
of different branches of the national economy;

the development of equipment and methods for correcting n trajectories for the
purpose of obtaining special orbits and guiding n courses over test ranges:

MOMMIMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtaining experience in the experimental operation of KA's for IP37. [investigation
of the Earth's natural resources] purposes and the creation of a scientific and
technical reserve for the development and improvement of natural resource Ra's and
the equipment associated with them.

he pivotal element in the realization of this program was the informational radio
and television complex (RTVK) that was installed in all the ”Meteor" Kh's. It con-
sists of two low- (nsu-n) and radius-resolution (MSG-8) multichannel scanning units,
memory units, automatic equipment, synchronisers and two transmitters (one each for
the decimeter and meter bands). All of the m units are duplicated. The speci-
fications for this equipment and a description of it is given in [1). All of the
mltispectral information was received at Goskosgidromet's basic information
reception points in Moscow, Novosibirsk and Klubarovsk, while the low-resolu-

tion information on one of the subbands was also received at independent
(simplified) reception points located in different parts of the USSR. The informa-
tion from the m': multispectral scanners was not of a astrological nature and
was transmitted over an analog radio link, so the decoding and interpretation of
the information was done by visual methods, without the use of digital methods.

The integrated nature of the study of the Earth and its amosphere was character-
istic of all the experiments done with Kh's in the meteor-Nature" program. For
instance, along with the multispectral television instruments. in the Kh's we test-
ed (in various combinations) seven more instrulents operating in the visible,
infrared and microwave bands of the spectrum, as well as eight instruments for
measuring corpuscular radiation and other parameters of space itself. host of them
were built and tested on a spaceflight for the first time. 111s makeup, purpose and
brief descriptions of the instrument packages in the intonation complexas of Ka's
in the ”Honor-Nature" program from 1974 to 1979 are given in [2]. The results of
the work performed by wet of these instruments have been published in journals and
the proceedings of conferences. Not all of the instruments fulfilled the hopes
placed in them and the results of several developments and tests were negative, but
on the whole we laid the foundation for and obtained valuable experience in build-
ing prospective instruments for remote sounding, some of which have been used in
second-generation natural~resource Ra's.

The main result of the development of the basic information system for M's. in the
“Meteor-Nature“ programuthe multispectral radio and television coupler-and the
spacecraft as a whole was a transition from individual experiments to the experi-
mental operation of this space system on the basis of one or two KA's and three
ground information reception and processing points.

During the actual operation of this system since June 1976, the multispectral low-
and media-resolution equipment has been used to photograph the Soviet Union's ter-
ritory more than 400 times: that is, for all practical purposes an overall survey
of that territory was made on the average of every 4-5 days. Despite the fact that
in a significant percentage of the photographs the underlying surface was covered
with clouds, more than 100,000 duplicate negatives and 70,000 photographs and
ortoplany [translation unknown] of multispectral television information have been
sent to hundreds of scientific research organizations belonging to 20 national eco-
nomic ministries and departments during this time. This information was used most
effectively in the interests of hydrology, the maritime fleet, geology and forest
management. Numerous examples of the interpretation of the information for the
benefit of these bl’anchuﬁ are presented in [7—5].

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The information provided by the R1"! is used to evaluate the ice situation in the
seas and oceans, including mapping the distribution and dynamics of the moves-ants
of ice fields. evaluating the age and solidity of ice, detecting free-floating ice-
bergs and so on. On the basis of these evaluations a number of important national
economic measures have been instituted, including the superearly sailing of ships
along the Northern Sea Route in the Arctic and the operation of ships belonging to
seasonal Antarctic expeditions. as well as experimental voyages of atomic-powered
icebreakers in the high northern latitudes. me directions for "Investigation of
the Distribution and Dynamics of Sea Ice on the Basis of Television Pictures From
the 'Heteor' Artificial Earth Satellite.“ which were developed by Goskomgidromet's
Arctic and Antarctic Institute. have been introduced into operational practice. In
addition to this. RM photographs were used to make regular and operational evalu-
ations of the boundaries and dynamics of the snow cover in mountainous and semi-
mountainous regions and the hydrological regiee of rivers and other bodies of water,
particularly during high-water periods. This type of work is being done constantly
along the trace of the Baykal-Amur Main Railway Line.

The USSR Ministry of Geology is one of the main consumers of the broadly dissemin-
ated multispectral infatuation produced by the KA's in the "Meteor-Nature“ program.
Under the leadership of the mo [probably All-Union Scientific Production
Association] 'Aerogeologiya.“ many of its organisations are developing the princi—
ples of the techniques and technological processes for the integrated utilization
of space surveying naterials in regional prospecting work. Important practical re-
sults have already been obtained. R'Nx information is used widely to detect and
define more precisely tectonic structures and the lineaments of the Earth's crust.
According to the estimates of geologists, the annual economic effect fro: the use

presence of useful minerals and determining the overall strategy of prospecting
work. Data have also been obtained for predicting potential «311- and gas-bearing
structures in several regions of the USSR and the confinement sf gold ore manifes-
tations to areas where annular structures and linear faults intersect has been es-
tablished in one of the eastern regions of this country. According to some esti-
mates. the monetary savings when territorial geological structures covering 1 mil-
lion km2 are studied by space methods are about 3 million rubles.

Forest management specialists have achieved significant results through the use of
spectrozonal satellite information to detect forest fire nuclei and monitor their
propagation. Special techniques for using satellite intonation for this purpose,
as well as for the operational evaluation of the weather situation in hazardous
fire periods in areas that are being protected and the organization of the utilisa-
tion of airborne firefighting facilities. have been developed and introduced into
operational practice at forest conservation establishments.

Simultaneously with the obtaining of operational results related to the interpreta-
tion of information for the benefit of the national economy. during the development
and flight testing of the 0's in the ”Meteor-Nature“ program a number of problems
that are important for the development of space technology for relate sounding were
solved for the first time in Soviet practice.

Requirements for KA's for Resists Sounding. In order to solve the complex of prob-
lems involved in investigating the Earth from space by remote sounding methods. in

6

MOWLSBONLY
An analysis of the systems requirements and principles of Construction of remote-
sounding information equipment for KA’s shows that the KA‘s themselves must have a

its orientation in the orbital systea of coordinates (both on the Earth and along

the satellite‘s velocity vector) and stabilization of the craft's intrinsic angular
motion velocities around its center of mass. The higher the spatial resolving pow-
er of the remote sounding equipment and the more accurate the geographical correla-

nasses of data that are accuuulated and transmitted lake it necessary to use highly
lirectional, oriented tan-board antenna that sometimes require special electric
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

guidance drives. Since the remote sounding equipment is used to make measurements,
it is necessary to provide constant temperature conditions and sometimes even
”deep” cooling of the sensors. In addition to this. it is necessary to shield the
sensitive equipment from noise and interference from the comparatively powerful
electrical and radio systems over a broad band of the electromagnetic wave spectrum.

It is only natural that a spacecraft and its systems must have a service life of
several years. 'no this we can add that for remote sounding KA's it is possible to
require a high degree of independence: that is, the capability of functioning for
quite a long time (particularly in the operational mode) without requiring informa-
tion commication sessions with the ground control complexes, which for Soviet
Ka's form a unified cos-sand and measurement complex for the purpose of reducing the
amount of work that must be done. This requirement is also related to both insur-
ing the on-board equipment's high reliability and using effective and automatic on-
board monitoring and satellite control systems.

The spacecraft's design must provide high dynamic accuracy and temperature stabili-
ty for the placement of the measuring instalments relative to the optical axes and
must be a general- urpose one that makes it possible to install various sets of ex-
perimental information equipment quite easily. In addition to everything else, the
design must be suitable for the installation of correcting engines for the initial
setting of the required orbit and subsequent control of it.

The ”Heteor"-series spacecraft possess all of these variegated qualities to a con-
siderable degree, both in the first- and (particularly) second-generation units.
Created originally for meteorological purposes, they satisfy most of the require-
ments for remote sounding of the Earth.

Structure of the ”meteor-Nature" Program M's. From the beginning of its implemen-
tation in 1974, the 'Meteor-Natue' program was developed as an integrated program
providing for the conduct of experimental projects in obtaining, transmitting and
processing information from investigations of the Earth and its atmosphere and
near-Barth space, as well as design experimmts aimed at the further improvement of
Ka's for remote sounding. As has already been mentioned, the prr gram was based on
the use of the design and the electrical and radio complex of the first-generation
”Meteor" meteorological spacecraft.

Let us dwell briefly on several special features of the instrument complexes for
KA's in the ”Meteor-Nature" program, one of which is shown in the generalized block
diagram shown in Figure l. A variety of simultaneously operating instruments that
can be categorized by several specific features is typical of these complexes.
These features are:

the bands of the electromagnetic radiation spectrum used for obtaining information:
the visible. infrared (1-25 um). superhigh-frequency (0.8~8.S cm) and x-ray bands;
the observation principle: electromechanical and electronic scanning for both area
and spectrum, tracking, direct measurement of corpuscular flows, optical observa-
tion of stars and so on:

the orientation and geometric shapes of the fields of view of instruments directed
toward the Earth for vertical, slant and circular sounding, into space and toward
the Sun for calibration purposes. and instruments aimed in different directions for
corpuscular and geophysical measurements;

the intonation transmission methods: digital and analog. with the help of tele-
metric and special information radio links in the meter and decimeter bands.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(Inlﬂlﬂ'ﬂﬂﬂ. (18)

ﬂ" ”KIWI
#

MW "Ml

_ #—

 

mmucp | '
NEH-l:
' 3

Figure 1. Block ding:

.

an of "Meteor-nature“ program spacecraft.
[Key on next page]

9

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

42.
43.

44.
45.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to Figure 1:

Solar batteries

Solar battery orientation system
Automatic power feed unit

Power feed oomutator

Power engineering

Chemical batteries

Temperature regulation system
Direction-to-Earth sensors
Magnetometer sensors

Flywheel engines

Flight direction sensors
Control unit

Orientation

Angular velocity sensors

Moment magnetic engines
Telemetric data

Telemetric parameter connutator
Monitoring. control

Distribution frame

Encoding unit

Radiotelenetric system

Direct transmission

Memory unit

Reproduction

Commuter

Transmitter

Command radio link

Receiver

Decoder

Output coumand unit

Orbit radio monitoring unit
'I‘Emporary program unit

Electric reaction engines

Fuel storage and supply unit

To on-board radio information com-
plex

To ground conmand and measurement
complex

Nozzle

Engine

Fuel feed and control unit
On-board radio information complex
Solar radiation spectrometer-
interferometer

To radiotelemetric system encoding
unit

Telemetric commutator

137-138 lilz transmitter
OR

10

46.

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.

Information system signal-distribution
frame

'no radiotelemetric system
Telemechanics

R'i‘VK

Memory

Amplifier. detector
Radiometer

Superhigh frequency

Detector

Superhigh-frequency polarimeter
Infrared radiometer

Frequency detectors

To ground information complex
460-470 MHz transmitter

Power feed. control

Amplifier

signal discrimination

Analog output

Auxiliary instruments (4 channels)
Observation instruments (. channels)
Calibration

Control, power feed
Programing, synchronization
Reference speakers

Mixer

Heterodyne

Modulator

Recorder

Black body

Comtator

Photographic receiver
Discriminate:

Synchronization, consolidation

79—80 . Not used

81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.

90.

91.

Conversion. alplification

signal comtator

Polarizer

Amplifier. analyzer

. channels

USU-H scanner

MSU-S scanner

Solar radiation opticomechanical unit
Superhigh-frequency radiometer anten-
nas

Superhigh-frequency polarimeter anten-
na

Infrared radiometer scanner

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'me aspirations for the realization of such diversified experiments with a single
spacecraft made it necessary to solve both electrical engineering and design prob—
lems. In addition to the already mentioned problem of providing a power supply
time-programmed control of the instrument complexes' information collection and
transmission processes, the electrical engineering problems involved in creating
and developing the KA's included the important matter of insuring the electro-
magnetic compatibility of all the variegated instruments: that is, eliminating in-
terference with each other both by minimizing low-frequency interference in the
power circuits and relative to radio (high-frequency) interference in the ether.
This was the most acute problem, since the use of highly sensitive instruments to
measure signals counted in microvolts and microamperes over quite broad bands of
the spectrum was essentially on the borderline of achievability for delicate physi-
cal experiments. Bngineering solutions were found that made it possible to mini-
mize the interference so much that it had no serious effect on the final outcome of
the experiments and, in addition. experience for the future solution of more comp-
licated problems was gained.

An important place in the development of instrument cowlexes for the "Meteor—
Nature" program 10's was given to problems of reliability. It is a well-known fact
that the "Meteor“ series Kh's have on-board electrical and radio systems--power
supply, orientation, thermal regulation, monitoring and programmed-command con-
trol--and designs that are highly reliable. The principles of reliability used in
the creation of the information instruments were basically those used in the
"Meteor” program: a unified program for insuring reliability in all stages of the
development, manufacturing and ground and flight tests; special, moderated operat-
ing modes for the electrical and radio elutents; the provision of standby equipment
and functional redundancy; the use of thermally stabilized tests and other methods.
In most cases this produced good results or laid the foundation for the creation of
highly reliable second-generation information instruments.

Design. Significant complexities in the creation of the ”Meteor-Nature“ program
“'3 were caused by the problems involved in placing and insuring the normal capa-
bility to function of the instrument complexes within the framework of the availa-
ble structural means. An idea of the principles behind the layout of the instru-
ments in these Kh's can be gotten from Figure 2, which shows the structural config-
uration of the instruments, as well as from the photograph (Figure 3 [not included!)
of a model of one of them. The following principles were realized in the solution
of the structural layout problems:

for the purpose of insuring the maximum coincidence of the Kh's optical axes as a

whole, as determined by its orientation sensors (the local vertical plotting de-
vice), with the optical axes of the instruments, which require precise orientation

on the Earth, the latter were placed on a single instrument platform, in connection
with which the accura 'y and dynamic rigidity of the platform is insured by struc-
tural and technologica’. decisions; the platform is standardized to a considerable
degree, which makes it possible to place different instruments on it;

most of the instruments' sensitive elements were placed outside the Ra's sealed
body, which made it possible to avoid the use of windows, which lower the overall
useful signal level and distort its spectral composition; the instruments have
their own microatmosphere (microclimate); the electronic and electrical units and
assemblies, which were not designed for use in open space, were put together in the
form of sealed, monolithic units;

instruments that were particularly sensitive to vibrations and linear overloads

11

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arising during the active part of injec-
tion into orbit or to structural noises
(vibroaccelerations) arising during the
rotation of inadequately balanced dynamic
masses inside the n, were mounted on spe’
cial shock absorbers; when it we: neces-
sary to preserve high geometric accuracy.
the entire instrument platform holding the
sensors was mounted on shock absorbers.

Particular difficulties were encountered
when the attempt was made to combine the
rigid dimensional limitations in the
placement of a multi-instrument complex
with the need for providing variegated.
nonintersecting (in three-dimensional
space) fields of view for the information
instruments and the rather broad radiation
patterns of the several antennas of the
radio transmitting systems. At the same
time, for the purpose of increasing relia-
bility. the problem of getting rid of .any
overlapping mechanisms and the use of sta-
tionary antennas was solved.

 

Figure 2. Structural diagram of in- The information instruments' ability to

strument placement: 1. infrared function and the quantitative and qualita-
equipmnt; 2. A-Ol9 unit: 3. local tive characteristics of the remote sound-
vertical plotting device; 4. experi- ing information received from a KA are

mental model of local vertical plot- largely determined by the degree of adher-
ting device: 5. combined conical an- ence to the assigned thermal mode stabili-
tenna; 6. R'I'VK complex; 7. radiation ty for each separate instrument. 0n the
measuring Complex: 8. decineter band basis of constancy of the object's orien-
antenna; 9. radiation measuring com- tation on the Barth and the stable, cyclic
plex unit; 10. solar radiation equip- nature of its orientation on the Sun. as
ment; ll. superhigh-frequency equip- determined by the synchronous solar orbit,
ment. in order to solve the problems of heat ex-
change among geometrically complex systems
of instruments located outside the sealed compartment, with due consideration for
their mutual and variable shading effect on each other, standard calculation leth-
ods were developed that also allowed for the actual planned programs for turning on
one piece of equipment or another during an orbit, as well as that equipment's own
internal heat generation. Calculations made on the basis of averaged heat flows
made it possible to evaluate the average-mass quasistationary temperature, which
was then used to select the thermal stabilization methods. In addition to this,
the deVelopers were given design recomendations that had as their purpose insuring
the stability of the instruments‘ (photoreceiver, bolometer and so on) sensitive
elements within several degrees. In order to allow for degradation of the thermal-
regulation coatings' (TRP) optical qualities. which is an important element in in-
suring the thermal regime's stability, for the first time in the USSR a special
scientific research project to study the effect of space factors on 'l'RP properties
was carried out with several "Meteor" KA‘s- [6]. The quantitative and qualitative

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

properties of almost all the coatings in use were studied during an extended space-
flight (up to 3-4 years). The results of the research were taken into considera-
tion when designing the thermal regulation systess for meteor-Nature“ program Ra's
and were the basis for the 'creation of coatings with better radiation stability.

As a result of the work that was done. it became possible to create thermal regime
support systems for Ice instrument cosplexes that are notable for their structural
simplicity and reliability during extended operating periods. They include: radi-
ators with 'l'RP's of the solar reflector type: electric heaters with automatic or
comand-regulated power levels for equalizing the temperature fields for a piece of
equipment: vacuum-screen thermal insulation that reduces the unevenness of the ef-
fect of heat exchange with the external aedium.

These systems, which have been tested in many flight experiments, provide the in-
struments with the required temperature conditions.

Ballistic Plotting for the “Meteor-Nature" Space System. the essential problem was
insuring the proper ballistic plotting of the space system for studying the Earth’s
natural resources and maintaining the stability of the orbits selected and realised
for remote sounding M's. As is known, the most suitable orbits for such M's are
solar-synchronous or geosynchronous ones, in which a M passes over the same lati-
tudes at the same local solar time, so that there is an almost constant degree of
illumination, which lakes it possible to compare changes in the reflective charac-
teristics of natural formations.

For IPRZ [study of the Barth's natural resources] M's it is advantageous to use
0900-1100 hours local time for observations, since in connection with this--in the
first place--there is good illulination in the images obtained, as well as suffi-
cient contrast because of shadows and--in the second place--as a rule the cloud
cover over the regions being observed is minimal at that time and observation effi-
ciency is increased. In such orbits there is also no loss of television informa-
tion related to low angles of Sun altitude above the horizon, which does occur when
orbits of other. types are used.

The realization of a solar-synchronous orbit for Soviet spacecraft was achieved for
the first time during the launch of a meteor-Nature“ program IQ in July 1977.

In paying tribute to the specialists in rocket technology who successfully solved
this problem, which was a new one for the USSR, it is necessary to mention that the
universal principles used in the 'ueteor" Ra's design and structure made it possi-
ble to inject it into orbit and provide it with a normal, long-term ability to
function with practically no design changes. ally slunents in the orientation sys-
tem and the n's control-program unit had to be reworked, the reason for this being
the change in the altitude of the orbit.

In addition to the solar-syndlronous nature of the orbit, for a remote-sounding KA
it is necessary that the orbit's parameters correspond to several other require-

ments. It is desirable that the orbit be close to circular, so that the images ob-
tained have identical scales and minimal geometric distortions, which makes it eas-
ier to interpret them and compile measurement results. since remote-sounding Ka's
(particularly those used to make operational observations) are also used to track

the dynamics of natural formations, it is necessary that the RA orbits be repeated:

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that is, the satellite's route over the Earth lust be repeated after a whole number
of days. If there are several satellites instead of just one in the space system,
in order to insure effective viewing of the Earth and operational coununications
between the Kh's and the ground information reception points, the parameters of the
spacecraft' orbits must be correlated with each other in a certain Ianner. In or-
der to satisfy this entire complex of requirements, it is necessary to observe
(with quite high accuracy) the calculated values of the orbital inclinations, ec-
centricities and period, not only after injection of the M's into orbit. but
throughout the entire period of their active existence.

Almost all modern launch vehicles used to inject M's into orbit have limited accu-
racy: that is. the paramters of the initial orbits have significant limits of the
possible deviations from the calculated values. For example, the American
"Atlas-E" launch vehicle injects a "Tires-N” n into an orbit with an average alti-
tude dispersion of 37 km (for a naainal altitude of 830 km) . a difference between
perigee and apogee altitudes of 56 km, and period deviations of up to 1 minute.
Because of the effect of various factors, after a n is injected into orbit. the
latter's parameters are subjected to signifith period and constant changes, the

effect of which quickly disrupts the necessary relationships between the orbital
parameters of different KA's.

The stability of remote-sanding space systems is maintained by the use of correct-
ing propulsion systems (1030) that carry out the initial orbital correction (that
is, correct the errors made when the launch vehicle injects a KA into its initial
orbit) and make periodic corrections to conpensate for perturbations that accum-
late during the K3 flight process.

At the present time. so-called electric reaction engines (331)) are the ones most
widely used. BRD's of different types use the principle of acceleration and dis-
charge of a gas that is ionized and heated to a high temperature (is in a plasma
state), through the use of an electromagnetic or electrostatic field. In BRD's the
gas ions pass through accelerators and acquire velocities on the order of tens of
kilometers per second, whereas in the most modern oxygen-hydrogen rocket engines
the maximm discharge velocity is 4-5 kl/s. Because of the high discharge velocity
an ER!) consumes 5-10 times less fuel to generate the same amount of thrust, thanks
to which there is a sharp reduction in the required fuel reserVe for the KB and.
consequently, the overall weight of the entire installation. Thus, for protracted
service periods, the use of an am is more profitable than the use of a micro-2mm
(liquid propellant rocket engine].

One of the important results of the "Meteor-Nature" program was the successful ex—
periments for the flight testing of electric reaction engines and the development
of orbit correction techniques [7.8]. The experiments were initially conducted
with several types of BRD's built in the USSR under the scientific leadership of
Academician I..A. Artsimovich, after which a stationary plasma engine (SPD) was se-
lected for further development because of a nunber of its indicators. The engines
had an average thrust of 2-2.5 g. In the flight testing stage (1973-1975) the fun-
damental questions of the ability of such engines to function in space and their
reliability and stability of thrust were answered, their electromagnetic comati-
bility with a satellite’s electrical and radio systus was investigated. and test
corrections of RA orbits were made. during which the possibilities of a significant
reduction in orbital eccentricity and the maintenance of orbital stability were

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

confirmed. During the next stage. a technique was created and worked out for sak-
ing optimal (with respect to time and energy consumption) corrections for the pur-
pose of establishing repeated orbits (a repeated solar-synchronous orbit with a 5—
day :epetition_period was established in one of the experiments), in connection
with which the developers determined the optimum strategy for alternating active
periods when the 1030's were turned on and passive ones when orbital measurements
were being made.

A matter of considerable interest for the solution of remote sounding problems is
the establishment of not simply a repeated orbit, but one for which the n passes
over a certain region with a given periodicity. An example of this would be a test
(measuring) range where simultaneous subsatellite (airborne and ground) observa-
tions are made for the purpose of developing unified techniques for interpreting
space information. The technique for the solution of this problem was worked out
during an experiment with one of the “Meteor-Nature" M's. with the accuracy of
track guidance over the required region being 5-10 km for a daily repetition period.

Basic Results of the Realization of the meteor-Nature“ Program. The following
scientific and technical problems were solved for the first time in Soviet practice
during the implementation of this program.

1. A first-generation experimental-operational space system for studying the
Earth's natural resources was created on the basis of obtaining, processing and us-
ing medium- and low-resolution multispectral television information for the benefit
of geology, hydrology, the maritime fleet, forest management, hydrometeorology and
other branches of the national economy. line system produces a significant annual
economic effect.

2. The obtaining of a solar-synchronous orbit for remote-sounding spacecraft was
mastered.

3. The design and on-board control complex of a "Heteor"-series RA was used as the
basis for the creation of a specialized first-generation “Meteor-Nature“ spacecraft
for studying the Earth's natural resources; structural-component principles of in-
strument platforms for a couples of remote sounding instruments were developed and
realized in monolithic block and unsealed versions; problems connected with
electromagnetic compatibility and providing the proper thermal modes for lulti-
instrument complexes were solved: experience was accumulated for the further im-
provement of “'3 for studying the Barth's natural resources.

4. Methods for the visual interpretation of medium- and low-resolution, multi-
spectral. wide-angle, television images for the benefit of the branches of.the na-
tional economy mentioned above were developed and introduced into operational prac-
tice and methodical work on expanding the sphere of utilization of the incoming in-
formation is being done.

5. Integrated scientific research and experimental design work has been done on the
creation and development. under spaceflight conditions, of various experimental in-
struments for the remote sounding of the Earth and its atmosphere in the visible,
infrared and superhigh-frequency bands and the experimental interpretation of the
information obtained; scientific. technical and design experience for the creation
of improved remote sounding instrmnts of an operational nature has been gained.

15

son omcm. use ONLY
6.

II'OII OI-‘I-‘ICIAI. [SE ONLY

An optima: technique has been created and developed for correcting a space-

craft's trajectory with the help of low-thrust electric reaction engines for the
purpose of obtaining repeated orbits and guiding Kn tracks over experilental
natural-resource-study ranges during subsatellite experiments.

1.

2.

4.

5.

7.

BIBLIWRAPIIY

Selivanov, Ls. , 'mchin. Yum” et al., “A Radio and Television Coupler tor a:-
perimental Satellites tor Cbservations of the Cloud Cover and the Earth's Sur-
face," in 'Kosnicheskaya geofizika' [Space Geophysics], Ieningrad, Isdatel'stvo
Gidroaeteoizdat, 1918, pp 3-10.

Vetlov, I.P., “The 'Meteor' Space System at the Service of Hydmteorology,'
ISSLEDOVANIYA ZEHLI Iz KOSNOSA, No 2, 1980, pp 11-28.

Gurvich, A.s.. Yegorov, 8.1.. and Kutuza, 8.6., 'Radiophysical Methods of Sound-
ing the Atmosphere and the Ocean‘s Surface From Space," ISSISDOVANIYE m: 12
Kosnosn, No 1. 1981. pp 63-69.

Vlasov, A.A., Yegorov, S.T., and Plyushchev, V.A.. “Comparative Analysis of
Radiothemal and Infrared Images datained with Artificial Barth Satellites,”
ISSIEDOVANIYB 25141.1 Iz KOSHOSA, No 1, 1981, pp 43-47.

Kirillov, n.8., and Borisov, 0.14., "An experiment in Space Geological Hap Com-
parison on the Basis of the Interpretation of Television Photographs Taken by a
'Meteor' Artificial Earth Satellite," ISSISDOVANIYB mm 12 KOSIIOSA, No 4. 1980,
pp 25-30.

"Distantsionnoye sondirovaniya abosfery so sputnika 'ueteor'" [mote Sounding
of the Atmosphere From a ”Meteor“ Satellite, collection of works], Leningrad,
Izdatel'stvo Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

Artsimovich. L.A.. Andronov, 1.04.. Trifonov, m.v., et e1., “Development of the
Stationary Plasma Engine (SPD) and Its Tests in a 'Heteor' Artificial Barth Sat-
ellite,” KCSMICHESKIYE ISSLBDOVANIYA, V01 12, No 3, 1974. PP 451-468.

Andronov, LIL, Trifonov, Yu.v., Taynov, “1.?” et a1., "Electric Reaction Pro-
pulsion Systems in Space,” KOSMIUIBSKIYB ISSIMANIYA, V01 12, No 3, 1974, pp
447-450.

COPYRIGIT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", ”Issledovaniye Zeali i: kosnosa", 1981

11746
C30: 1866/ 18

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[DC 502. 3 8629.78

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYE 2m 12 memos; in Russian No 5. Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 29 May 81) pp 21-27

[Article by Yu.v. Trifonov]

[Text] Intensive work is being done in the Soviet Union on the development and in-
provement of space facilities for obtaining operational intonation for the investi-
gation of the Barth's natural resources. In [1] there is a brief description of the
content and basic results of the work that has been done to create an experilental-
operational space systen for IPRz [inmtigation of the Barth's natural resources}
that has received the title ”Meteor-Nature." With respect to both the intonation
instalments and the basic ”Meteor” spacecraft used to carry the in space. this eye-

ten belongs in the category of first-generation space facilities. The information

tensive utilization in agriculture, the fishing industry and several other branches.
although it does insure the solution of a number of important national econonic

tional subsystem for studying the Earth in order to obtain information on the char-
acteristics of rapidly changing components of the environment. As the basic instru-
ments (the information from which will be transmitted to Earth over radio channels)

Starting in 1980 and continuing this year. an integrated experiment is being con-
ducted for the purposes oi testing and developing. under real conditions. new

17

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

informtion-neasuring equipent for obtaining high- and medias-resolution multisonal
space information and working out the methodological problems involved in decipher-
ing and interpreting measured space intonation for studying the Earth. In this ex-
periment there is a capability for realizing simultaneous surveying of the Earth‘s
surface. with different types of set ming devices. in lo subbands of the spectrum
from 0.4 to 2.4 um. with 30-800 at resolution and fields of view ranging from 30 to
2,000 km. Detailed descriptions of the information equipment and the goals of the
experiment were published in [2] .

The most important goal of the experiment is the further development of the struc-
tural configuration. design and reliability of the improved spacecraft that is the
carrier of a unique complex of rmte sounding instruments.

Composition of the Information Equipment for the Integrated Experiment. The experi-
ment is being conducted with three complexes of on-board and ground information
equipment that is used to observe the Earth's surface in the interests of investi-
gating the Earth's natural resources. 0n the spacecraft that was launched into a
solar-synchronous orbit with an average altitude of 634 km on 18 June 1980, there is
the following equipment:

1. A BIK-B experimental on-board information complex that consists of a

an l'SU-SK medium-resolution multisonal scanning unit with a tapered optiecmechanical
scanner;

an usu-s high-resolution Iultizonal scanning unit with electronic scanning. which
unit was realized on the basis of charge-coupled (st) receivers;

an information conversion and multiplexing unit;

a digital radio transmission unit operating in the 460-470 ml: band.

2. A ”Fragment“ experimental multisonal system, consisting of:

an opticonechanical scanning unit with calibration devices;

a system of photoreceivers with a fiber-optics collector;

an analog-to-digital converter:

synchronization, cosnutation and multiplexing devices;

a digital radio transmission unit operating in the 1.000 MHz band.

The "Fragment” system reasures the spectral energy brightnesses of natural forma-
tions in eight spectral bands with differing degrees of accuracy, using on-board
calibrating and standard light sources during the measurements.

3. An operational radio and television complex (M) with characteristics described
in [3]. '

Figure l is a block diagram of the on-board and ground information cowlexes used in
the experiment.

It should be mentioned here that there are some limitations, related to the utilisa-
tion of a single radio band (460-470 Mar) and a single ”tobos" ground antenna as
well as the amount of intonation produced by the separate scanning devices, on the

simultaneous transmission of information from the RM and ant-s complexes. Since
the maxim amount of information that can be carried by a radio link on this band

is 8 Mbit/s. at any moment it is possible to transmit intonation from only one of
the four (MSU-H, MSU-s. Msu-SK. HSU-E) scanning units, which is reflected in the

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLV

hm: m.

ﬁtpMIuZ nun/rent 00:0":qu £12)

3!! M
rprauu, ”0’27: :gﬂtuam, o, (1)

IIIIII
-- a
Iluuuu, n

m 'ziz'maz'gg'
_-

_——-—_.———__'

          
    

nmhﬁ

mm:
L (231mm mm __5m
----,:- ..... = --.-...__ - ‘

u ”be;

I .II'IIIIIIIIIJIIK

I 11min etch-In , . :

L _________________ J

Figure 1. Block diagran of the experiment.
Key:
1. On-bo'ard power engineering. orien- 14. 1180-8
tation, monitoring and control con- 15. usu-sx
plex 16. HSU-E

2. On board the spacecraft l7. ”Fragment"
3. Power, programs 18. Digital radio link. Gas
4. On-board infatuation complex 19. Analog information reception point
5. commutator 20. Information reception point
6. Not used 21. Reception
7. "OR" 22. Decoding
8. channels 23. Recording
9. Analog radio link. ... GHz 24. Selection
10. observation instruments 25. Processing
11. Auxiliary instruments 26. Central section
12. z! [expansion unknown] 27. Purposeful processing
13. USU-M

diagram in Figure l by the “OR” logic elements. The traneniseion of information
from the ”Fragment" system takes place independently of the SIR-3 and m systems

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and measurements obtained for the same region of the Earth were two of the basic
goals of the experiment.

Information is sent from the SIR-E: complex over a digital radio link to the
Goskomgidromet [USSR State Cousittee for Hydrometeorologicsl Services] reception
point in maninsk. where the want information is also received. It is then sent to
GosNI'rsIPR [State Scientific-Research Center for Study of Natural Resources] for
primary processing. Information from the "l’ranent" system is transmitted over a
digital radio link to an MRI [l-Ioscow Power Engineering Institute] on [Experimental
or Special Design Office] reception point and is processed at the USSR Academy of
Sciences' IKI [Institute of Space Research] and Gosm'l‘stPR.

Figure 2 shows the disposition of the fields of view on the Barth for all the in-
struments used in the on-board information complex during the experiment. together
with the radio visibility zones for the points receiving information from the SIR-E.
“Fragment' and the m.

Features of the Design and Structural Formulation of the Spacecraft. The basic
spacecraft used in the experiment was a second-generation "Meteor-2" rs [space-
craft] , which is distinguished from a I'Meteor" RA by the following basic qualities:
increased accuracy of triaxial orientation and stabilization of the angular veloci-
ties. which makes it possible to use intonation instruments with opticomschanical
scanning and local resolution of up to 80 m. as well as an enlarged energy supply
system capacity:

expanded capabilities for automatic time-prograsued control of the processes of ob-
taining and transmitting information. including control over the light conditions
and sensitivity levels of the measuring equipment:

additional structural configuration and weight-and-sise capabilities. which made it
possible to install a multiband instrument complex and several information radio
links:

a general-purpose automatic-testing system and technique. utilising the control com-
puter's hardware and software. which made it possible to carry out ground checks of
the Ka's additional instrument information complexes with a high degree of reliabil-
ity and to insure (along with other methods) their reliable operation in orbit.

Along with the solution of a considerable number of experimental problems. the use
of the improved spacecraft made it possible to continue Operating the m, which is
the basic source of low- and medial-resolution multizonal information in the
”Meteor-Nature" program [1).

Figure 3 is a structural diagram of the placement of the information complexes on
the spacecraft. The complex of remote-sounding instruments was laid out in accord-
ance with the basic principles formlated in [l] . although there are also a meter
of interesting features.

The specially developed load-bearing housing of the "Fragment" equipment was used as
the structural foundation for the placement of the information measuring instruments
and orientation system sensors. as well as the antenna complex. This made it possi-

ble. on the one hand, ,to achieve the required geasetric accuracy of coincidence of
the instruments' optical axes and. on the other hand. to make do without a special

instrument platform; this. in turn. improved the M's weight and size characterist-
ics. The ratio of the information instrvments' mass to that of the entire satellite

21

MOMMUSBONLY
POI OMIAL USE ONLY

is more than 0.30. which is a very good in-
dicator for such n's. It is necessary to
mention here that all the information com-
plex instruments are not airtight.

Among the nontrivial design solutions that
were found during the creation of this sat-
ellite is the cosbinstion into a single
structural nodule of a large master (up to
six) antenna systems operating on different
wavelengths. This module (see Figure 3) is
mounted along the spacecraft's longitudinal
axis under the infrared local vertical
plotting device (HIV) . since the working
field of view of the PMV is a wide-angled
cone with a narrow field of vision bearing
on the edge of the Earth's visible disk
(the infrared horizon), the inner space of
this cone (its "dead” zone with the axis
pointing at the center of the Earth) was
used for the placement of the unified an-
tenna module and its radiation patterns.
The stiffening ribs that encompass the
PMV's protective germanium fairing were
used to attach the antenna module to the
Figure 3. Structural diagram of satellite's instrment compartment and for
spacecraft's instrument complex: 1. the passage of the feeder devices. Special
experimental medium-resolution scan- smasures were implemented concerning the
ning unit; 2. experimental scanner thermal regulation of the antenna module‘s
based on st structures; 3. monoblock supporting structure in order to prevent
containing automatic equipment for uneven heating of it and the addition of
information complex: 4. low— interference to the Pm's input signals.
resolution RNK scanner; 5. antenna- along with measures to protect the PW from
feed complex: 6. medium-resolution the antenna module's radio emissions. The
W scanner; 7. local vertical plot- Kn's successful operation in orbit with the
ting device; 8. radiant refrigerating antenna module in this location demonstrat-
unit; 9. "Pregnant“ television com- ed this design's viability and the possi-
plex; lo. gas-reaction damping system bility of its further use.

compartment .

 

Projects for the thermal regulation of the
information instruments received further development. As is known, when instruments

are mounted outside the sealed compartment, there arise difficulties in providing
the required thermal conditions for the measuring information instruments. This is
related to the fact that in the absence of a gaseous medium in and between the in-
struments. the possibility of utilizing forced convection and the gas's thermal con-
ductivity to equalize the temperatures of the instruments' elements and the satel-
lite's structural parts is eliminated. The thermal conductivity of the elements of
the instruments' and satellite's parts, as well as radiation, play the main role in
these processes. The integrated utilisation of special thermal regulation coatings
and flat electric heaters and radiators. the creation of special structural bridges
for overflowing heat along the structural elements, and the use of a technique for
making thermal calculations for each instruaent separately and as a part of the

22

FOROWICIALUBIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whole that was worked out and tested experimentally made it possible to solve suc-
cessfully the complicated problem of providing the given. quite variegated and nar-

row ranges of required information instrument telperatures.

In order to create the optimal sensitivity and detection capability regimes for the
straightedgee of the st-structures used in the HBO-E instrument. it was necessary
to cool them to a temerature of 40°C. This was achieved with the help of a cool-
ing screen nounted on the shaded side of the spacecraft's body and a specially de-
signed heat pipe. the other end of which was installed directly in the photoreceiver
asseﬂaly of the MSU-z instrument. The temperature gradient in the heat pipe. which
is about 1.5 a long. did not exceed 4-S°, and the required cooling of the photo-
receiver was insured. The "Fragment” complex's photoreeeivers were also cooled to
the required temperatures with the help of radiators.

Considerable difficulties were overcome in minimizing interference and other kinds
of noise in the KA's on-board network and insuring the equipment's electromagnetic
compatibility, particularly in the area of eliminating pulsations in the satellitefs
on-board network caused by variable-sign dynamic loads occurring during swinging of
the "Fragment" equipment's receiving mirror, which has considerable mass. In addi-
tion to this. the introduction of additional radio links and the use of collocated
antennas also required the introduction of filters. screens and other shielding
measures. As a result. interference of the large couples of variegated radio in-

stmnts with each other was practically eliuinated and did not affect the quality
of the video information that was obtained.

Preliminary Results of the Experiment. The new integrated space experiment in re-
mote sounding has been functioning for more than a year. The spacecraft as a whole
and most of the information complex instruments have retained their ability to funr
tion and are gathering and transmitting to Earth. sultizonal information about our
planet's underlying surface. Elsewhere in this issue there are detailed explana-
tions of the results of the operation of the information complexes and the process-
ing and interpretation of the inforaation both for the benefit of the planning and
design organisations that created the satellite and the scientific equipment and for
the direct benefit of consumers in different branches of the national economy. The
experiment is going well and is making it possible to obtain valuable scientific and
practical data for improving information gathering and processing equipment for the
purpose of the further developnent of renote sounding methods.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. 'rrifonov. Yu.v.. "Heteor'-Series Satellites Used to Study the Barth Free Space,"
this issue, pp 8-20.

2. "A New Experiment in Investigating the Barth From Space." ISSIEDOVANIYA MI Iz
KOSHOSA, No l, 1981: PP 5-6.

3. Selivanev, A.s., Tuchin, Yum” et al., "a Radio and Television Complex for Ex-
perimental Satellites for observations of the Cloud Cover and the Earth's Sur-
face," in "Kosmicheskaya geofizika" [Space Geophysics]. Inningrad, Izdatel'stvo
Gidrometeoizdat, 1978. pp 3-10.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo “Nauka'. “Issledovaniye mli is kosnosa", 1981

11746

cso: 1866/l8 23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551 . 507 . 362

NATURAL RESGJRCES

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYE W 12 KOSHOSA in Russian No 5, Sop-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 22 May 81) pp 28-34

[Article by A.S. Selivanov and mm. 'l‘uchin}

[Text] The diversity of the problems and methods involved in studying the Earth
from space requires the creation and optisum utilisation durings surveys of the
Earth's surface from a satellite of several types of television equipment that are
differentiated by such parameters as the scale of the image that is produced, local
resolution, the number of spectral channels. and the operational nature of the ob-

taining of the information [1].

The basic advantage of space surveying methods consists of their global nature,
which makes it possible to obtain images of large sections of the Earth's surface
at the same time and under the same trananission and recording conditions. There-
fore. along with television systems analogous to those used in the ‘Landsat' arti-
ficial Barth satellite [2], which have resolution of about 80 m and a viewing field
of 185 km and have proven their effectiveness. it is also feasible to use systems
with lower resolution but a considerably larger viewing field.

A prototype of such systems is the complex of equipment for meteomlogical satel-
lites. which--as was already mentioned long ago--can produce information that is
useful for more than meteorological purposes [3]. Nevertheless. however. the quali-
ty of meteorological television systems is still inadequate for their extensive use
in the investigation of natural resources (IPR) . It is necessary to improve their

sensitivity and resolution and enlarge the number of spectral channels available,
thereby expanding the circle of problems that can be solved with their help not only
in meteorological, but also in other scientific and national economic branches.

A complex of instruments that was developed in order to investigate the possibili-
ties of this type of equipment has been installed in experimental satellites created
on the basis of ”Meteor"-type satellites [4] . me first satellite carrying this
equipment was launched on 9 July 1974. and the effectiveness of its utilization was
confirmed. Four more satellites in this series were then built. may have enabled
us to provide the conditions for the experimental operation of an operational system
for IPR and schedule regular dissemination of the obtained information among many
consumers [5]. At the present time two of these satellites, which were injected in-
to orbit on 25 January 1979 and 18 June 1980, are functioning. ll‘he latter one is

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

essentially a satellite of a new generation, because an experimental system with

better characteristics has been installed in it along with the regular equipaent
that is described in this article.

 

Figure 1. Functional block diagram of radio and television complex.
Key: '
l. . channels 3. Coemnnds. power
2. To antenna feed

On-Board Radio Equipment. Part of the satellite's regular equipment consists of a
duplicated complex of instrunents (Figure l) : an USU-ll low-resolution. guadrironal,
opticomechanical scanner (1, 2); an HSU-s medium-resolution, bizonal, optico-
mechanical scanner (3, 4): magnetic recording units (5. 6); timers (7, 8): driving
oscillators (9. 10): decimater band transmitters (ll, 12): meter band transmitters
(13, 14): antenna switches (15. 16): links with the satellite's antenna feed (APO).
The control system is a block of automatic equipment (17) and, in addition. there is
a unit for displaying on-board time (18. 19). '

Synchronous driving of the scanners in both types of instruments is achieved with
signals formulated in a timer (7, 8), where the fundamental frequencies for the oth-
er instruments in the complex are also formed. The master frequency of a highly
stable quarts oscillator (9. 10) operates the timer.

The oomunication channel consolidation operations are carried out in the timer at
the same time. Information is transferred from several spectral channels into a

single commication channel according to the principle of temporal consolidation,
which is realized here by the switching of channels and the formation of a pulse-

amplitude modulated sequence of signals.

All four channels of the NSC-H instrument can be transmitted directly into the basic
decimeter oormunication channel. In connection with this, the switching frequency

is several times greater than the maxim video signal frequency, so signal conver-
sion does not affect the clarity of the image.

25

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
roe omens use ONLY

From the 1480-5 instrument it is possible to transmit only one channel. or two with
interlaced switching. In the latter case the clarity or the image in the direction

of the night is halved, but at the same time is equalised with the clarity along
the line. P'or ground system synchronisation. a pilot signal that is added to the
basic signal is transmitted over the single channel.

'me emery units (5. 6) in the later satellites provide for the recording and repro-
duction of tour spectral channels for each instrument. 'lhe recording and reproduc-
tion times are identical and are 6 minutes in the 5 has band for each channel.

The display device (18, 19) lakes it possible to produce a nulber of operational
telemetric parameters on a photograph tron the HBO-h. as well as on-board time (in
minutes) and a gradation key, which is used to monitor the channel's linearity and
the photograph processing operation.

mus. a pulse-amplitude modulated signal in the direct transmission mode or in the
reading mode with the memory unit (zu) arrives at the input of one of the transmit-
ters (ll, 12) . which is operating in the international 460-470 MHz band in the fre-

quency modulation mode. 'Ihe magnitude of the deviation is 1160 has. The transmit-
ter's power is abouts H.

In addition to the decimeter-band radio link. the system has meter-band radio link
(13, 14) that also operates on an international band (about 137 MHz) and is used to
transmit one of the spectral channels (selectable) with reduced clarity (3 kn) to
simplified, autonomous Goskongidronet [USSR State Omittee for Hydrometeorolo-
gical Services] reception points and my analogous foreign points. Video interna-
tion is transmitted over the meter-band radio link according to the generally ac-
cepted phototelegraphy standard. The rated value of the subcarrier is 2.413: with
a frequency deviation of 9.6 kHz [sic]. The mim- scope of the amplitude-
nodulated (AM) signal corresponds to the level of white in the image. The weight of
the complex is 60 kg.

05

m

”vacuums-

Pigure 2. Spectral characteristics of Figure 3. Spectral characteristics of
HSU-M. ISO-S.

 

Opticomechanical Scanners. According to their operating principle. the scanning
units (scanners) are opticomechanical systems with single-line scanning and single-
elenent receivers for which frame scanningvis accomplished because of the satel-

lite's notion. The HSU-H operates in tour spectral bands and the USU-s in two (Pig-
ures 2. 3)._ The scanners' parameters are given in more detail in Table 1.

In single-line scanners, frame resolution is determined by the ratio of the flight
speed to the scanning rate. One special feature of wide-angle scanners with a fixed

26

MWLISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l. Scanner Parameters

 

 

Parameters HSU-H USU-s

Nominal orbital altitude, km 650 650
Local resolution at the nadir, km:

along the flight direction 1.? 0.142

along a line 1 ' 0.24
Scanning angle. deg 106 90
viewing field, kn 1.930 1.380
umber of elements in active part of line 1,880 5,700
Service part of line 0.25 0.25
Scanning rate, lines/s 4 48
umber of spectral channels 4 2
Weight with drive, kg 4.5 5.5

instantaneous viewing field is inconstancy of the local resolution along a line,
which. is caused by prospective distortions and the curvature of the Earth's surface.
In the HSU-H. for instance, resolution at the end of a line is almost four times
worse than in the center: in the “SO-s, it is 2.5 times worse. In order to equalize
frame and line resolution it is advisable to have some excess resolution along a
line at the nadir, which has been done in the USU-H. In the HSU-S, optimum rela-
tionships are achieved only for the node of sieultaneous transmission of both chan-_
nels with switching every other line.

The substantial difference in scanning rates resulted in the necessity of selecting
different scanning principles. Scanning is carried out in the ISO-H with the help
of a swinging mirror that is driven by a can mechanics. while in the HSU-s it is
done with the help of a rotating mirrored pyramid. In view of the similarity of
nany elements in the instruments' designs. however. only a single description of
them is given below.

The basic element of the image-forming system is an oxs-4-7ssa lens with focal
length P = 75 me and an intake aperture dianeter of 18.75 mu. In the focal plane of
the lens there are diaphragm that form the scanner's instantaneous viewing field in

accordance with the required local resolution. The scanners' optical layout is
shown in Figure 4.

The flow of radiation. after being reflected from mirror 1 (Figure 4a) or one of the
faces of pyramid l' and mirror 1" (Figure 4b). passes through lens 2 and is directed
by mirror 3 into spectrum-splitting mirror 4. The latter reflects the radiation
flow in the visible band into diaphragm 5. while infrared radiation passes into dia-
phragn 6. Having passed through the diaphragm. the flow is collected by lens 7 and,
with the help of nirror 8, is directed into a photoelectronic 'Ilultiplier (F30). Af-
ter passing through diaphragm S and collecting lens 10, the visible radiation is di-
vided into three zones by interference mirrors ll, l2. 14, 15 and ls and is directed
into Pw's l3, l7 and 18. The MSG-s instrument contains only optical elemnts for
two channels (9, l3) and avalanche photodiodes are used instead of Fw's.

Other parameters of the instruments are presented in Table 2. The width of the
spectral channels is given at the 0.5 level with an accuracy of 10.01 us. Measured
values of the signal-to-noise ratio corresponding to an object of maxim brightness
(a reflection factor of unity, with the Sun at the zenith) are given in the table.

27

'ronomauuseomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4. Optical Diagrams of ISO-H (a) and HSU-S (b).

Table 2. Spectral Bands of Scanners
signal-to-Noise

Instrument Sactral Range, um gm of Photoreceiver Ratio (Aver-age»
MSG-M 0.5 -0.6 730114 115
0.6 -0.7 ”0114 77
0.7 -0.8 “011‘ 53
0.8 -l.0 £301.12 35
MSG-S 0.58-0.7 Avalanche diode 24
0.7 -l.0 41

Photometric calibration of the instrusents is accomplished by cutting off the basic
light flow with the help of a "oosb' at obturator 19. in connection with which a
light beam reaches the 1’80 from the calibration channel through port 20, which is
closed with an optical wedge. the obturator revolves cophasally with the line scan-
ning. The calibration channel consists of an sm-io-so incandescent bulb (21), dia-
phragm 22, lens 23, rotating prism 24, collecting lens 25 and lightguides 26. which
direct the calibration flow to the photoreceivers. A sore detailed description of
the scanners has already been published [6].

Reception and Utilization of the Intonation. Above it was mentioned that the
"meteor” satellites' radio and television couples for investigating natural re-
sources, which was initially built as a purely experimental system for working out
methods for studying the Earth from space and gaining experience in working in this
field in different national econosic branches, was put into experimental operation
in 1978. after many positive practical results were obtained. At the present time
the system is supplying information, on a regular basis, to more than 70 large con-
sumers in different national econonic and scientific branches.

The system is operated by Goskosugidro-et's services and works on the basis of re-
quests fro- consuuers. The basic now of information is received by stations locat-
ed in Moscow. Novosibirsk and mabarovsk.. The highest quality information from the

28

MOMMUSIONLY
l-‘OR Ol-‘ﬂCIAL USE ONLY

low- and medium-resolution scanners is obtained via the direct transmission mode in
the decimeter band. The locations of the receiving points makes it possible to cov-
er the greater part of the Soviet Union's territory by direct transmission. since
the assured transmission zone of each point has a radius of about 2,500 km. Cheer-
vation of the remaining part of the Earth is possible when the low-resolution scan-
ner is used and the signal. is recorded in the on-board memory unit. the recording
session (6 min) covers a region of about 1,930 x 2,500 km.

Direct transmission of information to simplified reception points, using the meter
band, proved to be useful, even as a supplement to the operation of the standard
"Meteor“ meteorological system. The capability of transmitting an image in one of
four narrow spectral zones (by choice) over this line makes it possible to improve
the decodability of the photographs in many cases. At the same time, this informa-
tion can be received anywhere, including remote regions, large ships and so forth.
The meter and decimeter radio lines can operate either separately or jointly.

”Meteor“ satellites for investigating natural resources are injected into a solar-
synchronous orbit with a nominal altitude of 650 km and an inclination of about 98'.
In connection with this, constancy of the surface observation conditions is
achieved; that is, the satellite always passes over a point at the same local time.
At Moscow's latitude the periodicity of observation is 4-5 days, with suitable
overlapping of the photographs. At the reception points the information is recorded
on magnetic and photographic film. Hagnetic recording is used for primary conserva-
tion of the images for a short period of time. It is done on "mar-3" series-
produced videotape recorders operating in the predetector mode (the frequency-
modulated signal is entered and read on a subcarrier of 4 MHz) .

Photographic recording is done on the standard phototelegraphic equipment that is
used for postal exchanges and decentralized newspaper printing. Images produced by
the low-resolution scanner are re gistered, separately for each spectral channel. on
photographic film with a 240 x 300 In format. The photograph format for the medium-
resolution scanner is 600 x 480 mm. Arter duplication, the negatives obtained are
sent to the consumers. The originals are placed in archive storage. The system's
average productivity is up to 32 low-resolution scanner and 12 medium-resolution
scanner negatives per day.

As is obvious, the system is oriented mainly on visual or visual-instrt-ental de-
ciphering of the photographs. which corresponded to the actual capabilities of the
information users in previous years and still. in many cases. corresponds to the
present situation, since the methods and technology for utilizing aerial photo-
graphic surveying have been well developed in many branches.

The circle of problem involving investigation of the Earth from space that can be
solved effectively with the help of the “Meteor” system is predetermined by the
characteristics of the instruments used to make the observations. primarily their
broad scope (and the low periodicity of observation that emanates from this) in com-
bination with their multizonality and the degree of local resolution selected (up to
240 m). These problems include the following: in hydrology--evaluating the ice
situation with the publication of data for the transport and fishing fleets and
evaluting the state of the hydrographic network and snow reserves: in oceanography--
observing vortex phenomena, internal waves and river discharges; in geology-«le-
fining regional geological structures: in forest management-detecting and following
the course of forest fires in regions that are hard to reach.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A mnbet of new techniques that will expand the possibilities for the use of this
type of intonation are under development.

1.

2.

3.

4.

6.

BIBLIWRAPHY

vinogradov, B.V., and marat'yev, K.Ya., 'Kosnichsskiye astody zenlevedeniya"
[Space Hetlnds for Studying the Earth]. Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo Gidroueteoizdat,
1971, pp 8-27.

“Data 0991': Handbook." ems, Goddard Space night Centet. Greenbelt, ﬂatyiand,
1972, pp 23-26.

Barret. 3.3.. “Pagoda is kosnosa" [Heather Fran Sp..ce]. Leningrad. Isdatel'stvo
Gidroneteoizdst. 1970. pp 108-121.

Aleksandrov. I..A.. "Planetai-y Heather Patrol.‘ IZVBS'rIYA, 28 Septesber 1977.

Vetlov, 1.9., “The 'Meteor'I Space Systen at Hydrometeorology's Sexvice,”
ISSLEDOVANIYA am: 12 KOSHOSA. No 2, 1980, pp 11-27.

Selivanov, A.s., Chemodanov, V.P., W, 3.3., at a)... "Optioouechanical
Scanners for obsewing the Earth,“ mm KING 1 WA, “0 6, 1978, pp
16-210

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Ranks". "Issledovaniye zelnli is kosnosa", 1981

11746
C80: 1866/18

30

[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. 507 . 362

Moscow ISSIBDOVANIYE 2.13m 12 KOSHOSA in Russian No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript re‘
ceived 22 Hay Bl) pp 35-39

[Article by A.S. Selivanov, Yum. ruchin, 14.x. Narayeva and 8.1. Nosovl

[Text] The iqrovenent of nultisonal equipment for observing the Barth that is used
for the investigation of natural resources (IPR) is following the path of improving
the measuring capabilities and resolving power of the equipment, as well as the in-
troduction of new intonation transmission and processing nethods.

On the basis of the experience gained in the process of operating the "Meteor—
series satellites' radio and television complex (RN!) (1] for investigating the
Earth's natural resources, the next step in the development of remote sounding ta-
cilities was taken, in the form of an experimental on-board information coupler
(SIR-E) that has qualitatively new parameters and correspondingly broader» possibili-
ties for practical use. The purpose of this development project was to test equip-
ment decisions and observation methods for prospective IPR systens.

Practical experience confirmed the advisa-
bility of using wide-angle observation
equipment in an In system. 1he ant-3 al-
so teaturee a wide—angle, media-resolution
scanning unit having a field of view that
is narrower (up to 600 km) than that of
earlier designs and, at the sane time, has
so percent better spatial resolution: the
nusber of spectral channels has been in-
creased to four and high light flow neas-
urenent accuracy has been achieved.

 

Figure 1. Functional bloc): diagram of
on-board information couplex. A three-channel scanning device has been

developed for the solution of problem: re-
quiring resolution in comparatively small observed sections.

The BIK-E equipmnt was installed, in addition to the regular RN! apparatus, in the
"Meteor" satellite that was launched on 18 June 1980 [2].

On-Doard Equipment. The ant-r. (Figure 1) contains two units for the transmission of
spectrosonal inagesz an nSU-SK medium-resolution opticonechanical scanner with a

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Parameters of the scanning Devices
Parameters MSG—5K MSG-B

icanning belt (km) for flight altitude of 650 In 600 28
Dimensions of projection of field diaphragm (element)
of the structure) on the Earth's surface at the na-

dir. In:

per line 175 28
per franc 243 28
Scanning angle. deg 66.5 2.5
Angle of inclination of the sighting line, deg 38.9 0
Scanning rate. lines/s 48 218
Scanning efficiency 0.74 0.91
umber of eletaents in active part of line 3,614 1.000
Number of spectral channels 4 3
Diameter of lens's intake aperture. all 200 87.5
Height. kg 47 17

tapered reaner (l) and an ISO-B high-resolution opticoelectronic scanner with a
plane reaner (2) . the parameters of which are presented in the table above. signals
from these units pass. in successive order, into the block of 8-bit analog-to-

satellite's antenna (5) . The units in the complex are synchronized by a highly sta-
ble reference generator (6). Control of the complex and collection of. telemetric
parameters from the instruments is carried out by an autonatic equipment unit (7).
Units 3, 4 and 6 have a cold reserve. All the inatrunents in the couple): operate
outside the satellite's sealed Wilt.

cy was chasen on the basis of considera-

tions of maxim utilisation of the receiv-

ing equipuent already existing in

Goekongidromet's [0553 State Comittee

for Hydroueteorology] system of ground

points for the meteor“ space meteorology

system. and makes it possible to observe

‘ Figure 2. Diagram ot coverage of the almost all the 0883's territory in a direct
Earth's surface by the seeming de- transmission mode. Il‘he coverage of the
vices: A. M50 5:: instrument; 8. Barth's surface by these scanning da"ices
HSU-E instrument. is illustrated by the diagram in l'igure 2.

  

An increase in the accuracy of light flow neasureuent requires an increase in the
signal-to-noise ratio at a scanner's output. which is achieved by using inroved
photoreceivere and a necessary increase in the effective diameter of the optical.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system's outlet opening, which is 200 s- in the case of the Isa—SK. With such a di-
ameter. wide-angle scanning can no longer be realised by traditional methods (3]. A
cooperative evaluation of the entire set of factors during the creation of the
MSU-SK nedim-resolution scanner resulted in the use in it of the principle of coni-
cal scanning. despite the known difficulties of receiving images transmitted by such
devices. An argument of no little importance in favor of conical scanning is the
constancy of the geometric and photometric observation conditions and the constancy
of line resolution that are intrinsic in it.

According to a simplified diagram of the
USU-SK (Figure 3) , it functions in the fol-
lowing nannerx at an angle of 39° to the
vertical. radiation from the underlying
surface is gathered by spherical mirror 1
and directed to one of the four optical
arms 2 that are located on scanning wheel
3, which rotates around a vertical axis.
In the optical arm the radiation flow is
focused with the help of a number of opti-
cal asselialles and a flow corresponding to
a single television element is separated
from it. directed toward the scanning
wheel‘s axis of rotation, retracted, and
then split in spectrum-separation system 4.
Photcreceivers 5 convert it into a video
signal that, after shaping in asplifiers 6.
is sent to the instrument's output.

 

Four lines of the inage are "drawn' during
one revolution of the scanning wheel. it
being the case that the sighting axis de-
scribes a conical surface in space, while
Figure 3. Structural diagram of the its trace on the Earth's surface (a line)
FISH—SK. is a circular arc with a central angle of

‘ about 66‘.

:

 

Channel calibration is carried out both ac-
cording to an internal standard and with
respect to the Sun. 'l'he HSU-sx's spectral
characteristics are presented in figure 4.

0.:

The high-resolution multichannel scanning

unit (the MSG-B) is constructed on the ba-
‘ ‘ sis of the principle of using linear radia-
0" 0.5 0,! 0.7 M a, u _ M tion receivers based on devices with charge

MAI . coupline (97.8) with 1,026 eleaents per

Figure 4. Spectral characteristics of line, which is the most promising principle
the MSU-SK. for such devices. Figure 5 depicts the ba-

sic principle of the “SO-E‘s design. with
the help of lens 1, the image of the Earth's surface is projected through spectrum

separation system 2 onto three st straightedges 3. each of which operates in its
own spectral band (Figure 6). after leaving the linear photoreceivers, the video

33

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signal enters channel signal uplification
and shaping units 4. All of the straight-
edges are placed perpendicularly to the di-
rection of the flight. Line scanning is
carried out electronically, while frame
scanning is realised because of the notion
of the satellite. A necessary element of
the device is a radiation-type refrigerat-
ing unit, which provides a temperature in
the area of the 928's of from -30 to ~50°c
and makes it possible to reduce the struc-
tural noise of the receivers in the st's
significantly. In this model of the HSU-B,
no provisions were eade for in-flight cali-
bration.

 

Information is received from the BIK-E by
Figure 5. structural diagram of the an experimental information discrimination
Hsu-E. system (SVPI-B) that uses a standard

It , .. _ . ”Meteor“ system antenna fitted with a low-

» noise receiver. 'lhe received signal, which

is in digital form (in the form of a four-
bit. four-level code) is retransmitted over
a radio relay link to the reception point
at the Main Data Reception and Processing
Center (G'rsPOD).

The information that is received is record-
ed on two types of equipment. Information

   

0.0 a, 0.5 a, . 9‘, 4; 10 [,1 from the use-SK is recorded on equipment
5min for receiving newspaper pictures that has
Figure 6. Spectral characteristics of a negative format of 600 x 480 m. Images
the HSu-i. from the HBO-B are reproduced on "Volga'

phototelegrephy units. which have a nega-
tive foremt of 240 x 300 me. Since the ”Volga" recorder operates with a seaming
rate of no more than 8 lines/s. the scanning rates are linked by a magnetic memory
unit that reduces the scanning rate by a factor of eight.

Plight tests of the MSG-E: resulted in stable operation of the radio part of the com-
plex and demnstrated the prospectiveness of the selected transmission channel for
territorial information reception points.

The quality of an "so-5K image was high. and special measurements confirmed that
the theoretical measurement accuracy was realized for all practical purposes.
Slanted sounding of the surface, which is inherent in the conical scanning method,
also contributed to the obtaining of interesting information about water surfaces.
The operation of the st-based HBO-B instrument confirmed the effectiveness of this
means of observation for natural and national economic objects requiring improved
resolution. such as agricultural lands. The limited capabilities of this device.
which are the result of its small local coverage band (about 30 km). can be overcome
in the future by increasing the number of elements in the P28 straightedge, intro-
ducing remote control of the sighting line's position, and deve10ping techniques

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that make it possible to extend the results of the decoding and interpretation of

sections covered by the MSG-E to the large: areas obsemd by the HSU-SK
BIBLIOGRAPSY

l. Selivsnov, 3.8.. and mhin. “.31., ”Radio and Television Cowlex for 'Heteor'

Satellites Used to Investigate the Barth's Natural Resources,‘ this issue, pp
28'3“.

2. ”A New Bxperinent in Investigating the Berth Frost Space,“ 188W 2m: 12
“MA. “0 1‘ 1981) pp 5'6.

3. Selivenov, 3.8., daemodsnov. v.P.,‘Suvorov, 8.3., et sl., “Optioonschenicsl
Scanners for Mowing the Earth," mm KING 1 mourn, No 6, 1918, pp
18-22.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstol'stvo “Ranks”, “Issledoveniye mall is kosnoss", 1981

11746
6802 1866/18

35

“WWI-[BENIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629.78:528.7

EXPERIMENTAL luminance AND mum comm BASED on 'FRAGMENT' MULTIZONAL
SWING SYSTEM

Moscow ISSUDOVANI‘IE MI 12 KOSHOSA in Russian No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 12 Jun 81) pp 40-44

[Article by 6.3. hvanesov, Institute of Space Research, Moscow]

[Text] During the Ninth and Mt): Five-Year Plans, the USSR Academy of Sciences'
Institute of Space Research carried out research and performed experiments for the
purpose of creating and developing sethods and specialized space facilities for IPRZ
[investigation of the Earth's natural resources] in the optical band of electro-
magnetic emissions (BNI) so that they could subsequently be introduced into the
practice of regular observations of the Earth from space.

The most imortant and couplicated problem in this research was the development of
a method and a colplex of equipment that would insure the operational acquisition
and processing of multisonal video infer-nation that is distinguished by high radio-
metric accuracy and depicts. with good spatial resolution. rapidly occurring changes
in objects on the Earth's surface.

The importance of the solution of this problem is a consequence of the fact that on-
ly operationally acquired video intonation insures the realization of those basic
advantages that space facilities provide in the process of searching for, evaluating
the state of. and monitoring the utilisation of the Barth's natural resources. In
connection with this, the greatest economic effectiveness is achieved in the solu-
tion of such problems as evaluating the status and predicting the yields of agricul-
tural crops and the biological productivity of water masses.

The cosplexity of the solution of this problem is the result of a nuber of factors,
primarily of a scientific and technical nature, that emanate from the necessity of
creating and tuning a complicated on-board and ground couples of interrelated equip-
ment.

In addition to the actual on-board equipment for surveying the Earth's surface, this
comlex must also contain equipment for-tho transmission for a large flow of ac-
quired video information to Earth over a radio link. facilities for receiving and

recording this information. and equiplssnt for processing it rapidly. It was neces-
sary to develop all these elenents and contains them into a unified system. the ini-
tial and basic component of this coupler was the "Fragment“ laultisonal seaming sys-
tem developed by the USSR Acadeny of Sciences' In [Institute of Space Research].

36

MWMMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[IN "ﬁrmer," (1) I

turmenq
WON!“
nepela w

dun»:

________—_._‘

(u (mend
npuend u
Meant/mud

peeumpauu

turmeric

«WWW
alpaumnru @

donut

 

Generalized diagram of the informa-

tion and measurement coaplex based on

the "Pragmnt' multizonal scanning

system.

Key:

1. ”Meteor“ artificial Barth satel-
lite

2. "Fragment"

3. System for digital transmission
of data

4. Receiving and magnetic recording

I) .

:zyntmn
Digital data processing system

his experimental information and measure-
ment complex (B!!!) has been functioning
successfully in an experimental operation
node for note than a year. The amount of
information obtained with its help is
measured in thousands of kilometers of mag~
netic tape and millions of square kilome-
ters of the Barth's surface that have been
investigated. A considerable amount of
practical experience in working with this
coupler, which insures the operational col-
lection and processing of information in
the interests of investigating natural re-
sources, has been accuulated.

A generalized diagram of the 2111: is shown
in the figure on this page. It contains
the following systems: 1) the “Pregnant"
lultizonal optical seaming system: 2) a
system forlthe digital transmission of the
multisonal video information: 3) a system
for the reception and magnetic recording of
the multisonal video information: 4) a sys-
ten for the digital processing of the
multiroual video information.

no ”Fragment" and the system for the digi-
tal transmission of intonation were in-

stalled on a I'llsteor" artificial Barth sat-
ellite that was launched into a near, cir-
cular. solar-synchronous orbit at an alti-
tude of 650 In: on 18 June 1980. The orbit

- makes it possible to observe the same sec-

tion of the Barth's surface with a periodi-
city of -15 days [1] .

The system for the reception and magnetic
recording of the multisonal video informa-
tion has been set up at an MEI (Moscow
Power Engineering Institute) 0K8 (Experi-
mental or Special Design Office) reception
point in Moscow (blast. The system for the

digital processing of the nultizonal video information was developed at the USSR
Academy of Sciences' In and GosNI‘I'sIPR [State Scientific-Research Center for Study
of Natural Resources].

The ”Fragrant" system provides for the simultaneous scanning of the Earth's surface
in 8 bands of the visible and near-infrared spectrum, in a belt about 85 km wide.
for a belt that lies across the satellite’s flight path [1.2], in addition to the
conversion of the received radiation into an electrical signal, the comparison of
the electrical signal to a master standard and its conversion to digital fore, the
accompaniment of the basic signal with service infomtion about the state of the
subsystens and their operating modes. and the introduction of synchronization and

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

telemetric frame formation signals. The surveying modes are controlled over a com-
mand radio link.

The system for the digital transmission of the video information form the synchro-
nous messages and transmits the data, by the phase manipulation method, in the deci-
meter band of electromagnetic waves. The radio line's transmission capacity is
about 4 Mbit/s [3].

Synchronous message discrimination, primary decoding of the signals (consisting of
separating them according to channel), and recording of the infomtion on a high-
speed magnetic recorder takes place in the receiving and magnetic recording system.
After each communication session the intonation is rerecorded, in a parallel-serial
code, on digital telemetric magnetic recorders of the 17806-07 type. The magnetic
recordings obtained in this manner are sent to the USSR Academy of Sciences' ml and
GosNITsIPR for processing.

The system for the digital processing of video information that is in operation at
the IKI provides the following: rapid review of the digital video recordings on a
color half-tone display: rerecording of the information on magnetic tape usable in
the Yes EVM [Unified System of Computers]; radiometric correction of the digital
video information; reproduction of the digital video recordings on a black-and-white
photographic median on a scale of l:1,600,000; processing of the data with statisti-
cal analysis and interpretation programs: processing of the data with geometric
transformation programs.

After this, photographic processing is used to produce black-and-vhite negatives on
a scale of l:500,000 and, with the help of an HSP-d multicamera synthesizing projec-
tor, color images on a scale of l:320,000 are produced. The black-anddwhite
l:500,000 negatives and control prints made from them are sent to GosNITsIPR for
publication and dissemination.

In order to create these systems, the oomplex's developers had to solve a hunter of
complicated scientific and technical problems. In the development of the multizonal
optical scanning system, the problems centered around creating a precision scanning
assembly, a high-quality input optical system, devices for the on-board verification
calibration of the opticoelectronic channel, photoreceiving units, high-speed
analog-to-digital converters, an electric power supply, and the design of the system
as a whole, with due consideration for the requirements imposed by the operating
conditions relative to reliable functioning in space [2,4,5].

The problems related to data transmission, reception and recording were concentrated
around the high-volume radio line and the magnetic recording facilities, it being
the case that the latter had to insure the transformation of the information flow
rate to the limits imposed by the rate of information input into the computer [3].

In the area of digital processing of the information, the problems involved the cre-
ation of specialized processing facilities and problem-oriented software [4].

Finally, the problems encountered in providing metrological support for the experi-
ment required the creation of techniques for making energy calculations for the op-
tical scanning systems and the specialized measuring devices, as well as a reliable
technique for the relative and absolute calibration of the on-board system's measur-
ing channels [7,8].

38

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The goals of the experiment with the BIIK based on the ”Fragment“ multizonal optical
scanning system, as formulated and refined during the different stages of the devel-
opaent process, assmd the possibility of overcoming the enumerated difficulties
and can be reduced to the following: 1) the development of new facilities for ac«-
quiring multizonal video intonation in the visible and near-infrared bands of the

of the Earth's surface on the basis of multironal video information: 3) the develop-
ment of systems and methods for the digital transmission of video information: 4)
the investigation and optimization of methods for the computer and visual-
instrumental processing of multizoual video ‘nformation; 5) the experimental produc-

construction of on-board and ground equipment, the organization of surveying work,
and the technology for collecting and processing data in the prospective system for
the operational study of Earth from space.

At this time the processing of the data obtained during the experiment is far from
perfect. Accordingly. the results supplied from the experiment can be only of a
preliminary type. although some of them are already useful.

The protracted and flawless functioning of the on-board systems under the conditions
encountered in space indicates that the design and engineering decisions made during
their development were correct. From the photographs that have been obtained, it is
possible to say that the surveying system's actual resolving power is close to what
had been calculated for it. Confirmation of the power calculations for the system
has been obtained and maintenance of the radiometric calibration's reliability has
been insured, whim facts follow from an analysis of the video information and in-
formation about the built-in reference radiation emitter. In a correspondingly in-
direct manner, the correctness of the methodological and technical decisions made
during the creation of the reliable monitoring and measuring equipment and all the
ground deVelopment and testing procedures has been confirmed. All of this enables
us to say that during the course of the experiment, the first and third problems in-
volved in the development of the on-board equipment have been solved successfully.

During the course of the experiment we were able to refine our techniques for plan-
ning the surveying work and organizing the reception. registration and primary pro-
cessing of the information on the basis of operational forecasting of the cloud cov-
er. using data obtained during meteorological observations made with "Heteor"-series
satellites. Procedures for selecting data for secondary types of processing, which
is of great practical value for the solution of production problems. were also
worked out. The work in this field was done for the purpose of minimizing the tech-
nological information processing cycle. The results obtained in connection with
this correspond to a considerable degree to the problems encountered in working out
the method for the operational study of the Earth's surface on the basis of multi-
zonal video information.

One important goal of the experiment is the development and investigation of methods
for the computer and visual-instrumental processing of multizonal information. here

we can mention that all the service form of processing that had been prepared by

the time the experiment began proved to be quite effective and required minimal re-
working. The visual-instrumental types of processing that were applied to the sur-
vey materials demonstrated their suitability for practical use in many branches of

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the national economy. As far as the computer processing algorithms and programs
(including automatic classification according to given and developed indicators) are
concerned, it would be premature to draw any conclusions about their practical use
at this stage because of the small volume of material that has been processed.

The USSR Academy of Sciences' IKI and GosNI'rsIPR offer rather easy access to the
survey materials acquired by the 311K on the basis of the "Fragment" multimnal
seaming system, which should facilitate the use of this new type of space informa-
tion for the practical solution of problems encountered in the Earth sciences.

The extended functioning of the EIIK and the large volume of material that has been
acquired enables us to hope that this large and complex experiment will have a posi-
tive effect on the development in this country of operational methods for studying
the Earth from space in the interests of the national economy and science.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. "A New Experiment in Space," ISSLBDOVANIYB ZEHLI IZ KOSNSA, N0 1, 1981. pp 5-6.

2. Avanesov, G.A., Glazkov. v.D.. Ignatenko, S.A., et a1., "The 'Pragment' Multi-
zonal Scanning-Surveying System.“ this issue, pp 45-56.

3. Bogcmolov, A.P., Popov, 5.14., molyannikov, Yu.D., and Stepin, a.v., "Problems
in the Digital Transmission and Recording of Multizonal video Information and
Their Solution in the 'Prawent' uperiment," this issue. pp 57-64.

4. Avanesov, G.A., Glazkov, mm, and Tarnopol'skiy. V.I., “Development of a Spe-
cialized Opticoelectronic System for the Operational Collection of Hultispectral
Video Information about the Earth's Surface From an Artificial Barth Satellite,“
in "Hnogozonal'nyye aerokosmicheSkiye s'yenki Zemli" [Hultizonal Aerospace Sur-
veys of the Earth], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Neuka'. 1981, pp 57-76.

5. 'rarnopol'skiy, V.I., "Some Questions on the Planning of Satellite Hultispectral
Optical Scanning Systems." ibidu PP 76-87.

6. Krasikov. V.A., and Shamis, V.A.. ”Processing Multizonal Video Information with
Specialized Computer Complexes." ibid., pp 244-248.

7. Sychev, 1A.G.. and Tarnopol'skiy. V.I. , ”0n the Spectrometric Characteristics of
Spectral Surveying Systems,“ ibid.. pp 87-93.

B. Avanesov, G.A., ziman. Ya.I.., Sychev. A.G., and 'rarnopol'skiy. V.I., "astrologi-
cal Support for Measurements of the Brightness of the Earth's Surface by the
'Pragment' Multizonal Scanning System,” this issue. pp 65-77.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka', "Issledovaniye Zeuli iz kosmosa". 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/18

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc 52857521397.331.2:629.78

'FRAGHENT' MULTIZONAL SCANNING SYSTEM

Moscow Isszaoovmm 2mm 12 rosuosa in Mssim No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manucript re—
ceived 12 Jun 81) pp 45-56

[Article by G.h. Avancsov. V.D. Glazkov, Ya.L. ziman, S.A. Ignatenko, 'r.1.
Kurnanaliyev, v.14. uurav'yev, 3.1. Roshavskiy, v.1. Tarnopol'skiy. v.1. Puke and
v.v. Shcherbakov. Institute of Space Research. Moscow]

[Text] the of the basic oontesporary operational means of obtaining space video in-
tonation on the two-dimensional distribution of the intensities of the reflected
and intrinsic radiation of objects on the Earth's surface and the underlying layer
are nultizonal scanning systems (HSS) that use as their radiation receivers point ,
(nonscanning) detectors in combination with opticonechanical scanning devices [1).
Theoretically, system of this type can be realised for any spectral band of
electromagnetic waves that corresponds to transparency 'windows' in the Barth's at-
mosphere. By using different types of detectors in Hss's. it is possible to cover
a broad spectral range of neasured emissions, which capability distinguishes then
quite radically from other video informatics: systems. The simplicity of_ an
information-measuring channel using a point receiver with a ninimum nutter of
transformation steps for the measured radiation, the possibility of its periodic
calibration with a standard source, and the use of a single optical system and a
single image-scanning system make it possible to achieve high indicators as far as
the accuracy of radiation flow measurements are concerned. Besides this. when pro-
cessing the results of an analysis of. multisonal information from an 855, it is rel-
atively simple to solve the probluls involved in the point-by—point spatial matching
of images obtained on different channels.

Starting with these premises, as well as theoretical and experimental research (the
individual results of which are explained in [1-71) , the ”Fragment" MSS was devel-
oped and a full-scale experiment was carried out with the help of a “Meteor" artifi-
cial Barth satellite.

Below we present a brief substantiation of the technical decisions realized in the
"I-‘ragment'I ass. Figures 1 and 2 are a functional diagram and general view, respect-
ively, of this system.

Surveying Parameters of the "Fragment" System. The basic surveying parameters of
this system include (for a given orbital altitude H - 650 km and a velocity v,‘ k 7

We relative to the underlying point on the Earth's surface): number of spectral
intervals of sensitivity n and their position in the spectrum effective spectral

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Functional diagram of experimental opticoelectronic system for
the operational collection of multispectral video information about the
Earth's surface from an artificial Earth satellite: 1. drive; 2. scanning
mirror; 3. lens of receiving optical system; 4. opticomechanical commuta-
tor; 5. reference radiation emitter with operating and standard groups of
light sources; 6. fiber-optic splitter; 7. spectral band-pass filters; 8.
photoconverter elements; 9. encoding unit; 10. autocorrection circuit: 11.
data transmission system.

  

Figure 2. General view of "Fragment" multispectral scanning system: 1.
scanning mirror; 2. mirror drive; 3. lens; 4. reference light sources; 5.
opticomechanical commutator; 6. fiber-optic splitter; 7. spectral band-
pass filters: 8. photoreceivers; 9. blocks of amplifiers for direct cur-
rent and high-voltage power sources for photoreceivers; lo. analog-to-
diqital conversion unit; 11. control and information collection and pro-
cessing system units; 12. electric power system units; 13. cooling radia-
tors for photoreceivers.

width AAj of the sensitivity intervals; maximum values of the energy brightness's

rate M -

spectral density Bj max measured by the system in each spectral interval of sensi-
tivity; relative mean-square measurement error 03,; viewing band width Ly; surveying
Lyvx; dimensions of instantaneous fieldsjof view 6x-6y - AS in each spec-

tral interval of sensitivity.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
spending
ratory aircrat't [3.7), including measurenents made

with a specially developed model of the ”Pregnant' system that measured the values
of the energy brightness's spectral density in spectral intervals, space angles of

e of viewing angles that all corresponded to

(2)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where the components having normal distributions of the values' probability densi-

ties are caused by fluctuations in the measured flow. channel noises sp and quanti-
. j

ration noises ij. from the condition

0,, = 0%)." < a” I (3)

when the degree of accuracy of the measurements in the intervals j - 1.....503 -
2-3 percent was acceptable for the realisation of the experiment's goals, the vhue
of qj was defined as 7 for all the neasurenent channels.

In accordance with the purpose of the experiment. no requireuents for a global sur-
vey of the Earth were set when detemining the value of L, and. at the sane time,
the limitation on the relationship of the orbital altitude and the width of the
field of view that determines the viewing angle 8 was taken into consideration: this
requirement is related to the fact that the indicatrices of the measured brightness
in the band of reflected radiation can be regarded as orthotropic only within the
limits of extremely small sighting angle intervals, the expansion of which during
surveying threatens to cause a substantial distortion of the brightness distribution
pattern for the section of the Earth's surface being investigated. 0n the other
hand. an extraordinarily slall value of 1., makes the correct geographical correla-
tion of the acquired data more difficult, so the value 1.7 - 85 kl. which satisfies
both conditions. was adopted.

me selection of the linear di-ensions (6x and ) of the instantaneous viewing
fields was one of the nest complex questions dur the determination of the sys-
ten's surveying parameters, since any rigorous physical-geographical substantiation
of the choice was lacking. Taking experimental estinates into consideration and
cosparing then with previously conducted experiments, the following initial condi-
tion was adopted during the development of the "Fragment" ass:

6.,-6.,-6,<10" u (4)
for measurements in the basic spectral intervals (3 I: 1.....5) .

For the limitations on I and by stipulated above. in order to fulfill condition (a)
it proved to be necessary to insure that relationship of the terns of the sun in
expression (1) such that the relationship I - 1/1 and, consequently, the relation-
ship of the viewing time "ck of a band of width by during a single scan and the to-
tal tine of the scan was at least 0.65; that is,

I—TLGu>0.°b. _ (5)

in addition to this. the condition

was adopted, which made it possible to reduce the nuaber of components of flow I for
j - 6, 7, 8 and, at the same time. produce some equalization of the values of the
signals in the system's uneasurenent channels. As a result of the adoption of condi-
tions (5) and (6), it proved.to be possible to provide the base value 6 .1 5 '-
- 8-10‘2 km. 3 '°"'

Scanning Setup and the Scanning Device. In an ass, the choice of the scanning setup
is determined by the accepted scanning trajectory of the brightness field being

’04

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

investigated, which is cosposed of the satellite's notion and the spatial displace-
ment of the sighting angle of the system’s scanning device.

On the basis of the initial condition--tbe line-by-line variant of the analysis of
the brightness field-«of the two possible seaming trajectories (straight line and
conical), which, as analysis showed [2], are approximately equivalent, in the
"Fragment” system the final choice was made in favor of a straight-line trajectory.
The mien of the final decision was effected by several features of the
"Fragment” systen's arrange-ant on the "Meteor” satellite and the type of recorders
used in ground operations with the acquired da .

In the general case, a straight-line scanning trajectory is characterised by the
condition of constancy of theinstmtanem viewing field's linear rate of displace-
ment. as well as a constant scanning plane azimuthal angle. Prospective distortions
of the linear instantaneous viewing field are variable along a line, but the range
of their changes for 8 s 15‘ (e is the current value of the viewing angle) is not.
large: s 3.5 percent for 6y and s 6.5 percent for 6,. The change in the optical
path in the atmosphere during sighting of the center and edges of the surveyed
strip is proportional to cos'1 6 and is less than 3.5 percent for B - 30'.

From the viewpoint of location of the scanning element (83) , two variants were taken
into consideration in the setup: placesent of an a’focal 53 in the converging beans
behind the receiving optical system or the utilisation as an 88 of one of its coupo-
nents, including one having optical power; placement of an afocal SE in the parallel
beans in front of the receiving optical system

At first, the first version appears to be quite compact, but when it is realised the
scattering disk is enlarged substantially. This enlargement is caused primarily by
the effect of field aberrations, because in this case the receiving optical systes's
viewing field lust cospletely overlap the surveyed band of width Ly, although de-
focusing during movement of the 83 also contributes to it.

In the second version of the scanning setup, an increase in the size of the scatter-
ing disk is possible only because of distortions in the 83's shape, and can be mini-
mized if there are sufficiently rigorous requirements for the quality of the 88‘s
reflecting surface. In this variant it is possible, in principle, to use several
basic types of afocal 88's. A cosparison of layouts of this type, using the value
of ﬂex and the 33's dimensions as the basic criterion, was made in [2] and was re-
solved in favor of a one-sided oscillating mirror, the drive of which realizes a
sawtooth (no): > 0.5), periodic law of notion.

For the systes being described, this seaming device was realized in the for- of a
metal and glass mirror and a Iagnetoelectric oscillating system consisting of a

frmework coupled with the seeming mirror that is in the permanent magnetic field
of a stator, as well as a regulator of the nagnitude of the electric current in the

105

me OFFICIAL use my
ace the d1

1 dimensions of the Pos'

 

ffraction coupon

ant: ofthe

The 89qu Video Channel. In the pro-
cess of acquiring space Video
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wave. minimization of the disk's size for a given intake aperture mt be accomp-
lished primarily by eliminating aberrations and having high quality manufacturing
and assembly of the elements. however. eliminating both spherical aberration and
the coma is impossible for a single mirror. Therefore, it is necessary to use two-
mirror systems that are. as a rule, constructed either according to Cassegrain's
classical method, in which a primary parabolic mirror eliminates spherical aberra-
tion and a secondary convex hyperboloid is used to reduce the coma, or by the
(Doll-Kirkkhem) and (Richi-Kret'yen) methods. which are modifications of it.

In accordance with what has been said, the “Fragment“ system's P08 was produced by
the ”Karl Zeiss-Jena" People's mterprise in the can in the form of a Cassegrain
lens with a circular intake aperture having a diameter Du - o. 24 m and a focal
length f' = l m, and that has a scattering disk measuring 4r,” 30-10 6 um <

03.1 23 34 - 130 10‘6 um at A - 0.5 um: that is, one that satisfies condition
(7). Condition (7) is also fulfilled for the other spectral intervals, since the
increase in the disk's size as the wavelength gets longer is outstripped by the en-
largement of the system's instantaneous viewing fields stipulated above. The Pos's
reflecting surfaces are aluminum-plated. In the P06 there is also a thermal omen-
sation unit that eliminates defocusing of the P08 in the temperature interval from
-40 to +20°C.

The Spatidtemporal Optical Converter transforms brightness distribution B(l.x,y) in
the coordinate space of objects (my) into a temporal radiation flow distribution
0' (Mt). The functions of this link in the system are carried out by the scanning
device and the analyzing (field) diaphragms, in connection with which the scanning
device moves the system‘s field of view, which is an image of the analyzing dia-
phragm relative to the space of objects (or, which is the same thing, an image of
the space of objects relative to the analysing diaphragm) , in accordance with the
previously determined scanning trajectory that describes the motion of its center
within the limits of the scan' 8 working section.

In the general case. the 1155's instantaneous field of view can be formed by analys-

ing diaphragms placed in the x direction (the carrier's direction of flight is m).
This measure enables the linear rate of transverse displacement Vy of the field of

view during scanning to be reduced by a factor of m and, consequently, the scanning
frequency Pol: is also lowered. although the nuber of radiation receivers must be
increased by a factor of m.

[Imam
intro!” (1)
1mm”!
mm Inn
”(2)

  

u, a, a, a, 11‘ a, a, a,

Figure 5. Shape of instantaneous field of view of the system.
Key:
1. Direction of flight of the carrier 2. Scanning direction

In the system being described. the instantaneous field of view is represented by a
matrix of square analyzing diaphragms (Figure 5) consisting of n columns (conforming

107

FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the MSS's nulber of spectral intervals of sensitivity). each of which contains
analyzing diaphragls. In connection with this, the matter Ij and size 65' of the an-
alyzing diaphragls in the different spectral channels is not the same, but is gov-
erned by the rule

6"m.-. . .-61’m1-. . .-°e’mm (8)

or, precisely. II I a; - m3 - (114 I as c 6: ‘6 - n1 - 2; I3 - l. The original value
of n = 6 for j a l,...,5, which was chosen to fulfill condition (8). was selected by
a technique described in [6].

For this matrix-type instantaneous field of view, the video signal for each spectral
interval that corresponds to the sane point on the surface being investigated is
shifted temporally relative to the video signal in the first spectral interval by
the amount

M-M/V. (9)

where AGj - distance along the y-axis between the centers of the analyzing dia-
phragms of the first and j-th spectral intervals of sensitivity.

The wtical Selector. The basic function of this unit is to separate the required
spectral intervals from the radiation flow 05 (Mt) formed by the receiving optical
channel and transfer than to the radiation receivers in the appropriate measuring
channels. In the "Fragment" system the optical selector is realised with separate
spectral and spatial selection, for which a fiber-optic splitter is used, the input
faces of the light guides of which form the satrix of analysing diaphragm. along
with spectral band-pass filters of the required quality. The splitter is a rigid,
three-dimensional designed organised in such a lanner that when there is overall
minimization of the lengths of the light guides for the purpose of reducing light
losses, the lengths of the light guides abutting certain spectral band-pass filters
and radiation receivers are distributed in an order corresponding to the order of
distribution of the solar disk's brightness values (”ts Rs 6,000 K) in the system's
spectral intervals of sensitivity.

and the combined temporal transfer function Mo).

was used for j - 5. me photodiodes for j - 6, 7. and an E‘s-2A" photomistor for
:l =' 8. > '

'l’ne Measuring Device. The process of converting the PPU’s electrical signal into
the corresponding provisional nunerical value is performed in the ”Fragment" system

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the Map. The provisional nature of the result is eliminated by calibrating the
instrument.

It is a well-known fact that the relationship between measured brightness B and its
representation at the output of an ideal measuring device can be reflected by the
following relationship:

New. (10)
where N - output code; It - conversion ratio.

In practice, the numerical values obtained as the result of the transformations we
have been discussing differ from the true value by the magnitude of the system's er-
ror. me e:ror inc'vades two cospments: a random one. depending on noise. inter-
ference and so on, a systematic one, which depends on changes in the scale and
nonlinearity of t.‘ ._ video channel's conversion. as well as drifting of its zero lev-
el [4] .

Achievement of the permissible value of the random measurement error, which is one
of the given surveying parameters of the 'Pragment' system. is accoqlished by real-
ization of the astrological characteristics of its elements that provide the neces-
sary relationship of signal and noise in the measuring video channel.

One real method for reducing systematic errors in the measuring video channel is

the use of the information that can be obtained during the conversion of a standard,
previously known input signal. Actually, in the general case. if two reference

emitters with known brightnesses (A) and 35‘ (A) are introduced, and assuming lin-
earity of the conversion character stic, according to the reactions ”17° and “5‘ that
correspond to them it is possible to determine parameters kj and so of the conver-
sion characteristic by solving an extremely simple system of squat one of the type

NIP-Bunk/+Nui Nu"-3uRkJI+N-h (11)

where 3:; - “janum ; "03 - the "code of the actual zero level. In connection
with this, by simple overlapping of the flows entering the m by the comtator,

it is easy to realize 35° - o for the area A < 3.5 till. given this AM.

he a result. there are two possible ways of solving the problem [4]: l) the intro-
duction of correction factors according to the results of the transformation of a
standard signal (realization of the correction of systematic errors); 2) the intro-
duction of a self-tuning (automatic correction) system in the video channel. in
connection with which the systematic errors are minimised because of feedback that
encompasses either separate units or the entire measuring channel.

The process of the correction of systematic errors is usually reduced to three oper-
ations: acquiring information on the video channel's charactei.stics according to
the results of the transformation'of a standard input signal; finding the video
channel's error; introducing correction factors into the results of measurements of
the emissions being investigated.

It is possible to acquire information about the state of the video channel in the
M85 only periodically. during passive scan periods. During this time. the radiation
being investigated is replaced by radiation from a standard source with the help of

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the comutator. The basic shortcoming of this method is the loss of information on
the video channel's characteristics during the active part of the scan, which can
sometimes lead to the appearance of an error during this interval. However, when
the scanning frequencies are relatively high and the measuring video channel's pa-
rameters have a certain amount of tenoral stability, these errors can be ignored.

The general shortcomings of methods for correcting systematic errors are either the
large amounts of time needed or the extreme cosplexity of the equipment used.
ﬂuorefore, these methods are usually realized on Earth and are feasible when there
is a computer in the aerospace video information collection and processing system.

The use of self-tuning methods with the measuring video channel requires the addi-
tion to it of supplementary regulatable elements that produce such an effect on the
transfer functions of the individual asseltlies in the channel that systematic er-
ror is reduced for any kind of disturbing effect and any value of the radiation be-
ing measured. In contrast to methods for correcting systelatic errors that are

based on information redundancy in the aeasuring channel, automatic correction meth-
ods are free from this flaw. While making it possible to increase measurement accu-

racy, at the same time automatic correction methods allow considerably lower re-
quirements for the basic elements that make up the video channel and for the accura-

cy of their regulation and tuning. 111a gain is achieved because of the increase in
the amount of equipment used; that is, equipment redundancy in the video channel.

In the final account, however, the use of automatic correction methods frequently
leads to an improvement in the weight and size indicators and operational reliabili-
ty of the measuring channel in connection with the elimination of nonstandard preci-
sion elements from the system. These methods are of particular value when measuring
systems are being built in a microminiature version with the extensive use of inte-
grated circuits, as well as when constructing converting system based on elements

that donot provide high accuracy but are reliable.

'lhe practical realization of automatic correction is possible with the help of both
analog and digital-to-analog devices. It is also completely obvious that for the

realization of periodic automatic correction it is necessary to have namry units
to store the error signal for the period of time that passes between automatic cor-
rection cycles.

Figure 6 is a structural diagram of a system for digital-to-analog automatic correc-
tion of systematic errors caused by zero level drift and a change in the video chan-

ncl's scale conversion ratios. The basic special feature of this system is that it
encompasses the video channel as a whole, which creates definite advantages. In ad-
dition to this, digital-to-analog autasatic correction devices make it possible to
realize higher accuracy characteristics when standard elements are used.

In accordance with the views that have been expressed here, the following elements
were introduced into the “Fragment" system's measuring video channel (Figure 1):
an opticomechanical cos-mtator; a reference emitter with working and standard groups

of light sources, the relative spectral characteristic of the emissions of which has
a color temrature of approximately '1'" - 6,000 K: a comensation circuit that en-

compasses the encoding unit and the photoconversion elements and that performs, by
compensating for zero level drift and a change in conversion conductance, automatic
correction of the multiplicative and additive errors contributed by the equipment,
it being the case that the correcting control signals are a function of the value of

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Structural diagram of measuring video channel with automatic
digital-to-analog correction of systematic errors: 1. 2. standard radia-
tion sources: 3. optical countator; 4. photoreceiving devices: 5. signal
processing unit: 6. digital equivalent of standard radiation: 7. conver-
sion scale corrector: 8. reference voltage source; 9. analog-to-digital
converter: 10. digital-to-analog sero level corrector; K11. K12 - elec-
tronic keys.

the deviation of the dark signal and the reference emitter's signal from

the zero and reference levels, respectively. since the rate of drift

of parameters hi and so because of the PP!) is considerably higher than be-

cause of the change in optical properties of the scanning element in the POS, it
proved to be possible to place the reference emitter and the comtator behind these
optical elements. '

mus, the "Pregnant” system's measuring video channel operates in the following man--
ner. Radiation rising from the Earth's surface strikes the scanning mirror (Figure
l) , is gathered by the lens and focused on the analyzing (field) diaphragm of the
input faces of the fiber-optic eplitter's light guides. The light guides transmit
the radiation to the spectral band-pass filters. 'ihe filtered radiation is trans-'
formed by the photoconVersion units into electrical signals that are proportional "to
the brightness of the scanned section of the Earth‘s surface in the segregated spec-
tral interval. after which the signals are transformed in the encoding unit and sent
to the data transmission system. By changing the position of the scanning mirror,
which is noved by a drive, the device's instantaneous fields of view, as determined
by the configuration and sites of the analyzing diaphragm (figure 5) are loved
across the direction of the carrier's flight in such a manner that the collection of
data on the brightness of the Earth's surface takes place only during movement in
one (the working) direction during time t; (see figure 4). Reversing of the air-
ror's Inovenent and the return of it to its original position takes place during time
segment t2. which is a minor part of the total scanning time 1‘. During tine segment
t2. opticomechanical co-utator 4 first cuts off the flow of radiation entering the
input faces of the fiber-optic splitter's light guides and replaces it with radia-
tion from the reference radiator. the spectral density of the energy brightness of
which is similar to the spectral density of the Sun's energy brightness. 'l‘he elec-
trical signals produced by the photoconversion elements. which correspond to periods
of shading and measurement of the reference radiation's intensity. are transformed
in the encoding unit and compared. respectively, with the signals' zero and fixed
reference levels. 'Ihe magnitudes of the mismatching of the compared signals with
these levels are used to generate control signals in .he feedback circuit that af-
fect the position of the zero and the conversion conductance of the photooonversion
units in such a manner that the mismatch is eliminated, thereby accomplishing auto-
matic correction of the video channel's nultiplicative and additive equipment errors.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole, the technical decisions that were discussed above that were embodied
in the “Fragment" 1435 made it possible to realize the ooabination of its basic pa-
rameters. which are:

Scanning band width, km 85
Surveying rate, kmz/s 590
'notal information content, bits/s 5.6-106
Total number of channels 35
Intake aperture area. m2 358
Weight, kg 280
Power consumption, w 220
Dimensions, m 1,660 x 1,440 x 730

The surveying characteristics of the ‘Pragment" system for the selected spectral in-
tervals are presented in the table below.

Characteristics of "Fragment” Hultispectral Scanning System

Working Spectral Intervals. u-
Characteristics 0.4-0.7 0.5-0.6 0.6-0.7 0.7-0.8 0.8-1.1 1.2-1.3 1.5-1.8 2.1-2.4

———_—————_—.————————————

Upper limit of meas-

urable brightness, -

w-cm'zsz‘lum'l 320 320 270 210 133 70 33 13.3
Relative mean-square

error of measure-

ments. \ 1.5 1.5 1.8 2.5 3.3 5 7
Instantaneous fields

of view. rad.10~3 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.39 0.39 0.78
Linear dimension of

instantaneous field

of view at the na-

dir. II (H - 630 kl) 80 80 80 80 BO 240 240 480
'Dotal information

content, bits/r105 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.32 0.32 0.16
Video information

content, bits/s-lo6 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.21 0.21 _ 0.10

On the whole, the results of the full-scale experiment using the 'Neteor" satellite
confirmed the rationality of the technical decisions that were made and realized in

the "Fragment" M85. The scientific and technical goal that was formulated--the de-
velopment of a measuring ”58 to be used' for the solution of various long-term and
operational, prospecting and precautionary, economic and scientific problems-was
achieved. At the ground reception points that were not equipped with special com-

puter equipment for the correction of the video information, operational visual and
instrumental analysis of the incoming data was accomplished successfully. 'me accu-

racy that was realized makes it possible to automate space video information pro-
cessing operations. using computer facilities that are produced industrially [S].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Avanesov. 6.1L. "Operational Facilities for Acquiring Space Video Information in
the Optical Band," in "Kosmicheskiye issledovaniya zemykh resursov" (Space

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

4.

50

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigations of Terrestrial Resources], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 1975. pp
24-34.

Avanesov, G.A., Glazkov, V.D., and Tampol'skiy, V.I., "Development of a Spe-
cialized Opticoelectronic Sysm for the metational Collection of Hultispectral
Video Information About the Earth's Surface," in "Waonal'nyye
aerokosnicheskiye 8"yemki Zenli' [Muluzonal Aerospace Surveys of the Earth],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka". 1981, pp 58-76.

Avanesov, G.A., Barinov, I.V., Glazkov, V.D., et al., "Modeling a Space Experi-
ment With the Help of an Airborne Laboratory,” in 'Kosnicheskiye issledovaniya
zemnykh resursov", Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1975, pp 280-290.

Avanesov, G. IL, Glazkov, V.D., and Rhodarev, Yu.K.. "Principles of the Construc-
tion of a Measuring video Channel." ibid., pp 56-80.

Avanesov, G.A.. zinan, Ya.L., and Khodarev, Yu.x.. “Technology tor the meantic
Automated Processing of Video Information," ibid., pp 179-188.

Tarnopol'skiy. V.I., "Some Questions on the Planning of Satellite Hultispectral
Optical Scanning Systems." in ”unogozonal'nyye aerokosmicheskiye s'yer‘ki Zemli".
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka', 1981. pp 76-87.

Avanesov, G.A., Ziman, Ya.L., Sychev, 3.6., and Tarnopol'skiy, V.I., “astrologi-
cal Support for Measurements of the Brightness of the Earth's Surface by the
'E‘ragment' Hultizonal Scanning System“ this issue, pp 65-77.

COPYRIGBT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", 'Issledovaniye Zenli iz kosnosa". 1981

11746 .
cso: 1866/18

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lSE ONLY

UDC 528 . 727

PROBLEMS IN DIGITAL TRANSMISSION AND REWRDING 0P HULTIZONAL VIDEO INFORMATIW
AND THEIR SOLUTIW IN THE 'sm' 3mm

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYE ZEMLI Iz KOSHOSA in Russian No 5. Sop-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 20 May 81) pp 57-64

[Article by LP. Bogomolov, $.31. Popov. Yum. Smolyannikov and a.v. Stepin]

[Text] There is a continual and significant growth in the flows of intonation coin-
ing from aerospace systems for investigating the Earth's natural resources. This is
taking place in connection with an improvement in the resolving power of optical,
radar and radiometric systems, an improvement in picture detail and enlargement of
the area surveyed, and the use of several spectral or polarized channels and equip-
ment integration for the acquisition of the greatest possible amount of infornation
about the Earth.

In the near future we are planning to create research complexes with emery infor-
mation bands (conforming to the video frequency) to 10-40 MHz. The transmission of
remote sounding data from a satellite to ground reception points can be carried out
over a radio channel by either the digital or analog Method. In comparison with
analog systems. digital systems- require expansion of the band of frequencies used
in the ether and an increase in the operating speed of the transmitting, receiving
and recording equipment.

However, digital transmission has a nuaber of important advantages for both the
overall plan (high technological qualities and reliability of the equipment, simpli-
city of coupling with digital computers) and its specific (information) elements.
'Ihey include: low sensitivity to the effect of noise and distortion accumulations
in the signal amplification, transmission, reception, memry and relay channels; in-
formation flexibility, which means simplicity in codeining different and independent
data sources (including nonsynchronous ones). the possibility of sacrificing accura-
cy for transmission speed, and so on.

The basic indicator of a radio link's effectiveness is its degree of economy in both
power and the band of frequencies occupied in the ether and used per unit of infor-
mation for a given degree of transmission reliability. A comparison of analog and
digital methods according to these criteria has been done more than once and can be
represented most graphically by a so-called Sanders diagram (Figure l) [1]. As is
obvious, a digital channel with phase manipulation of the carrier frequency provides
a high degree of on-board transmitter econoay, while with respect to the band of
frequencies used it is only insignificantly behind the optimal (according to this
criterion) analog channel with frequency modulation.

5’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

- ' radio links with the operating speed that
Figure 1. Dependence of specific sig-

nal energy consumption 8 on specific
frequency band a (per binary unit of Model testing of th
information) for a giVen transnission sions envisaged for
quality: An - amplitude modulation; information transni
ChH - frequency modulation; KIWI-m. ried out with the "Pregnant-RI." equipment
KIM-Chi! - digital (pulse-code) nodu- during the ”Fragment" experiment. Taper-a1
lation with phase and frequency aa- packing of the information, which provided
nipulation of the carrier frequency: for the transmission of 4-6 spectral hands

1. mean quadratic error 10‘1: 2. mean into a single digital flow, was used in it.
quadratic error 10‘2: 3. nean quad-

e basic equipment deci-

The data transmission rate was about 4
ratio error 10'3. “bits/s. The use of the lost noise-
Key: 1. (Shannon's) limit resistant

type of modulation (phase Ianipu-

lation of the carrier frequency at 190')
and directional on-board and high-efficiency ground antennas provided the mica-

tion channel with a high energy potential. Figure 2 is a structural diagran of the
equipment at the information reception point. me radio signal is received by an

antenna with an effective area on the order of 50 m2 in the decineter wave band.

if the transmitter's carrier frequency and the receivers'
.owing deterioration of the interference-free reception of
:ignal in the presence of fluctuating interference.

the video signal enters the input of
he signal synchronization and processing unit. where the symbol recurrence

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
 

A
II

(8Menynwm

Figure 2. Structural diagran of "Fragrant-RV equipment.

Key:

1. High-frequency generator 7. Tapes with recording

2. Code simulator 8. Target acquisition

3. Programd guidance unit 9. Converter

4. Antenna amplifier 10. synchronization unit

5. Receiver 11. Flow separation unit

6. Digital integrator 12. Magnetic recording equipment

frequency is separated and optima: postrectification processing of the code's video
pulses is carried out by digital integration of the signal in a period of time equal
to the duration of the symbol. The synchronization unit also distinguishes the
special “Fragment" system marker nessages and uses them to distribute the informa-
tion into four separate flows of 960 kbits/s each for the purpose of organizing
their registration by magnetic recording equipment. The marker message signals also
serve to eliminate the “ambiguity" that is inherent in comunication channels with
phase-manipulated signals.

The reception and conversion complex includes nonitoring and testing equipment that
makes it possible to check the fitness for operation of the entire ground couple):
(including the antenna) before a cos-amication session, while during the session it
evaluates the quality of the signal being received.

The basic specifications of the "Fragment-RI.” radio line are as follows:

Information transmission rate 3,840 kbits/s
Type of modulation in the radio line _ phase nanipulation
(xi-board transmitter power 5 H

Effective area of receiving antenna at least 50 I2
Directivity factor of transmitting antenna about 2

Realized reception range 3,000 km

Power reserve over threshold level at a distance

of 2,000 km . . at least 10 d3

A further improvement in the radio link's traffic capacity can be achieved by chang-
ing over to double phase packing of the channel. a: the basis of the facilities
that have been created, with a partial replacement of the units it is possible to
build a digital comnication channel with an operating speed of up to 80-100
Mbits/s.

56

FOR OFHCIAI. [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the conduct of the "Fragment" experiment, problems related to methods of re-
cording digital multizonal video information were worked out and recauendations

for the construction of ground magnetic recording facilities in the prospective sys-
tem for the operational study of Earth from space were worked up [2]. Some of the
advantages of the digital transmission of video information from objects in space
were mentimed above. As in the case of a radio channel. the use of digital methods
in magnetic recording equipment makes it possible to achieve high quality indicators
and stability of the channel's characteristics and the absence of an increase in
noise after multiple rerecordings and storage, as well as the capability of compen-

sating for temporal distortions arising as the result of unevenness of the tape's
rate of movement.

However, the use of digital methods requires a recording-reproduction channel band
that is 10-30 times wider than when recording in analog form is used. This leads to
a situation where (for example) in order to record a single communication session
with the ”Fragment” system utilizing the digital recording methods used in digital
cowuters, 14 km of tape moving at a rate of 15 m/s would be required. If we take
into consideration the fact that a further increase in digital intonation flows can
be expected in the near future, it becomes clear that the methods for recording di-
gital information that are widely used today cannot solve the problem of recording
at the reception speed.

The creation of magnetic recording devices using digital recording methods with high
tape-use efficiency and having an intonation band of up' to 100 Hbits/s and more is
a complicated scientific and technical problem. In the initial stage of the
"Fragment“ experiment. the entire couple: of instrtnents used was examined systemat-
ically with due consideration for actual achievements and prospects for the develop-
ment of theory. technology, techniques and materials. The requirements for the mag-
netic recording system as a whole and for its component parts were formulated and
crossmatched. '

Another special feature of the development of a magnetic recording system within the
framework of the “Fragment" experiment was the need for information coupling of the
newly developed devices with those possessed by the consumers of the information
that had a different operating speed. input signal structure and placement of the
information on the magnetic tape.

Figure 4 is a functional diagram of the "Fragment-RI." magnetic recording system. It
includes: 1) an azu-v (N283-P) high-speed magnetic memory with an intonation band
of from 16 to 1.6 Mbits/s; 2) an 1120-5 (8281) median-speed magnetic memory with an
information band during recording of from 5.1 lbits/s to 176 kbits/sa 3) an szu-u
low-speed magnetic memory with an information band of from 900 to 56 kbits/s: 4) a
signal formation and commutation unit (UPK) .

After reception and separation of the synchrosignals. the intonation in digital
form enters the UPK. In the reception-from-satellite mode. from the UPK the infor-
mation is relayed simultaneously to two HZU-V magnetic recorders that provide con-
tinuous recording in a sequential engagement mode. After reception and recording of
the data flow, it is rerecorded from the qu-V's on an uzu-s magnetic recorder. The
rerecording is necessary in order to match the "Fragment-RI.” system‘s information
channels and the computer input units, which have a different traffic capacity.
signalgrams from the uzu-s are sent to the consumers' computer centers for process-
ing of the information.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI". ONLY

code-3:853: 05.—

coaunnunousugu as:

338535 3398

2:3:

OD‘NHOﬂp—H

093 03253.

amuz .wIDNz

a...“

nuuooou «0 3323.33 95.3305 new anon—suntan

.od
.5.—
.0.—
.mu
.3"
.2”
.NH

1n."

ache: n0a.m«tn3.om~ .osonanom v.3 3 .
{mg noaém 3.833% v.3 o .
v.35 acuudnwcousoé .

. oz $.82 :78: .
3:3 3:: 533338 o5 .8333... 1.58 .
so.» {3qu 8a .8855 v .
:0: {3.33 com .3053? v .
35 "59339.32 .

O
H

acoﬁaaon 9.3 .. .
uoﬁxnloo .

HNMQM‘DI‘OU‘

>~
Q

€333 930.303 0.3253. sauna—.953.“- uo 3301:. 45.03.02 .9 Panda
mar-3.69.0 :nioaunlo ..I.I
.—

3058. uni-loans fl!
Hun-.313.- IIoao-H I

 

" ()IGK) nor-mo mun-Mn

 

odnmlu. mambo“ —-"-.

.3312. :3
2.32::
Eu... .. ll
3 _
+ a.
I
35.8. . 8:98:

lllll .V 5-365..—

      

 

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1f 1Al. USE ONLY

If a photorecorder with low-speed mechanical seaming is used for operational moni-
toring, there is yet another rerecording of the information in the qu-H, from which
infatuation can be entered in the counter through interface units just as it is
from the qu-S. me basic information profiles are presented in the functional dia-
gram (Figure 4).

In order to guarantee the information characteristics of the type “283-? azu-v and
the type N281 nzu-s, a standardized tape-moving mechanism with automatic control
systems and a bestonvel'nyy [translation unknown] drive in the 0.25-3 m/s speed
range was developed. When used together with an instrument for the digital correc-
tion of temporal distortions, this tape-moving method insures the elimination of the
effect of instability in the magnetic tape's movement on the output signal's parame-
ters. It can operate. without any intermediate buffer units, with photorecorders
having high-speed electronic or mechanical line scanning.

For the medim-speed N281 magnetic memory unit, the widely used method of recording
without returning to zero (WK-H) was utilized, thus making it possible to obtain
good information flexibility.

The basic specifications and a list of the functional systems and service equipment
for the 8251 medium-speed magnetic memory are given below:

Magnetic tape movement speeds, m/s 0.25, 0.38, 0.5, 0.76,
l, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8

umber of recording channels 24

Recording density, bits/Ila 32

width of magnetic tape, In 25.4

Type of magnetic tape used 14406-25

Capacity of magnetic tape reels, m 2,200

Haximm recording speed, lbits/s 5.1

Dimensions, III 1,672 x 565 x 648

There are built-in automatic and oscillograph monitoring system, a Programable
connand unit, a measured information error compensator, a time synchronization error
compensator, and a channel for recording a voice accompaniment. Capabilities for
remote control of the entire rack's working modes and remote acquisition of command
execution signals are also provided.

The following service equipment has been developed: a stationary control panel that
insures the interaction of two or three N281 racks in the continuous, sequential re-
cording and rerecording mode: a portable remote control panel: an instrument for
rack tuning and monitoring: an instrument for the demagnetization of magnetic tape
on reels: an instrument for cleaning magnetic tape and preparing it for operation or
storage: an instrument that compensates for teaporal distortions arising because of
unevenness of the tape's movement during information reproduction.

In order to solve various problems. N281 racks can be used as the basis for the or-
ganization of an independent magnetic recording system that has quite good informa-
tion and operating characteristics.

During the development of the type N283-F qu-V high-speed magnetic memory unit, the
basic scientific and technical problem was the creation of the recording (digital
information reproduction) channel, which had to record 1, 000-2, 000 bits/m2 with a

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reliability level of no worse than 10’7 and an operating speed of up to 5-10
Mbits/s. Different versions of the utilization of analog recording system were
discussed. In [3) there is an analysis of the accu‘acy characteristics of analog
recording methods and it is shown that the frequency modulation recording method
has quite good characteristics. For the realization of this method within the
framework of the “Fragment" experiment, with recording of the information from each
spectral band on a separate track. the tape movement rate would be 1.5 m/s. How-
ever. intrinsic flaws in the frequency modulation method forced it to be rejected.
Basically. they are as follows:

distortions of the image:

the appearance of temporal mismatches between spectral band information recorded on
different tracks because of dynamic misalignments of the tape that occur when it is
moving leads to a lowering of the resolution of the detailed spectral analysis:

the small dynamic range of the reproduced signal.

Another recording method, which makes it possible to reduce the magnetic recording
system's operating speed, is prOposed in (4] and is based on one of the methods for
reducing redundance in the original information. the recording speed is approxi-
mately halved by the use of differential pulse-code modulation (D1104) with predic-
tion on the basis of the preceding element, where only the difference between'the
current and preceding image brightness values is transmitted. However, the use of
DIR! results in a situation where a single error leads to distortion of the follow-
ing group of elements; that is. the errors are reproduced until the end of the line
_is reached. This effect results in undesirable distortions in the video informa-
tion. In order to eliminate the effect of errors when mm is used, it is necessary
to increase the reliability in the data transmission channel by two or three orders
of magnitude, by further increasing the on-board transnitter's power or introducing
redundant encoding.

Taking these things into consideration, at the stage of the actual conduct of the

"Fragment' experiment, a multichannel digital recording method was selected for the
“283-? high-speed magnetic memory and the following technical characteristics ‘were

realized:

umber of recording and reproduction channels 16

Recording density 120-160 bits/m
Recording frequency on a track . up to 1 NH:
Ratio of frequency band transformation during

reproduction l/8-l/lo
Type of tape 14406-25

Continuous recording of the information is insured by the sequential operation of
N253-P racks and commutation of the recording channels. The completion of the fol-
lowing developments for the nzu-v will result in an increase in the number of re-
cording channele: reproduction of up to 40 channels and the development of new mag-
netic heads, as well as the use of new and promising magnetic tapes that will pro-
vide a signal-to-noise ratio of 25-30 dB in the frequency range up to 5-10 Hhr.

For the azu-M, a Soviet-produced digital magnetic recorder was used: it has the fol-
lowing characteristics:

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(1)“. USE ONLY

Tape sovement speed, I/s ‘ 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, l, 2

Rather of recording channels 20
Recording density, bits/Ila 25
Width of magnetic tape, In 25.4
Reel capacity, a 1,000

The experience gained during the conduct of the "Fragment” experiment enables us to
draw the following conclusions about the operation of the radio link and the record-

ing equipment.

0

1. The principles chosen for the construction of the digital transmission and mag-
netic recording system insured the solution of the scientific and technical probles
formulated for the “Fragment“ experiment.

2. m the whole, the rationality of the technical decisions that were made was con—
firmed and actual ways were noted for the further improvement of digital data trans-
sission, reception and recording equipsent for prospective systens for studying the
Earth from space at operating speeds of up to 100 Emits/s.

trauma!

1. Sanders. P.. "Comparison of the Efficiency of Several Cosmnication Systems."
WWYA RADICBLRKTRONIKA, No 12, 1960. pp 52-76.

2. ”A New Experiment in Investigating the Earth From Space.“ ISSEDWMIIYA mu Iz
KOSHOSA. No 1, 1981, pp 5-6.

3. Gitlits, H.V., "Magnitnaya sapis‘ v sistenakh peredachi informatsii" magnetic
Recording in Information Transmission Systems]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Svyaz":

4. Asms, v.V., Hishkina. A.A., Rivkin. I..Yu., Tishchenko, A.P., and shapovalov.
s.v., 'Hultisonal Video Information Input-Output with the Elimination of Informa-
tion Redundancy." ISSLBDOVANIYB 2m 12 rosaosa. No 2, 1981, pp 82-86.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Issledovaniye 201i is homes“, 1981

11746
CSO: 1866/18

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 528.72629.78

313111014061an SUPPOIU‘ FOR mums G? BRIGBTNESS 0F EARTH'S SURFACE BY
'F’RAGMBNT' HILTIZONAL SCANNING SYSTEH

Moscow rssnsnovmrvs mm: 12 xosuosn in Russian No 5, Sop-Oct 8'1 (manuscript re-
ceived 12 Jun 81) pp 65-77

[Article by GA. Avanesov, Yam. zinan, LG. Sychev and v.1. Il‘arnopol'skiy, Insti-
tute of Space Research, Moscow]

['rext] Modern remote methods for investigating the Earth rely to a considerable de-
gree on the use of quantitative methods for processing data acquired with the help
of various surveying systems (58) . Thus, the reliability of the results of such in-
vestigations is directly dependent on the 83's seasuring properties [l], which de-
termine the possibility of making an objective cogerison of the results of neasure-
nents made in different situations by different 88's. It is obvious that a mess--
sary condition for such a comparison is the appropriate astrological support.

In the concept of the astrological support of mamesents we include the choice of
the physical unit for representing the results of the leasurelents, the transfer of
the selected unit from the standard that reproduces it to the 88's measuring scale,
and provision of the necessary nininization of the measurements' total error with
respect to the unit of the selected physical value.

Let us discuss the realization of such astrological support for an optical-band 33,
using as our exasple the planning and radiomtric calibration of the “Pregnant“
nultizonal scanning system 0458) [2].

According to its operating principle, the ”repent" systea is a radial-eter-
brightnessmeter, since its instantaneous fields of view cover the investigated sur-
face conpletoly when masureaents are being made. If we take into consideration the
negligible size of the solid angle at which the intake apertures of radiometer-
brightnessneter 88's used in remote investigations of the Earth are visible fron the
planet's surface, it is obvious that as the radio-attic value that quantitatively
defines the radiation being investigated with the help of such 58’s. we should take
the density of the radiant flow on the surface, as related to the nagnitude of the
spectral interval and the solid angle: that is, the spectral density of the energy
brightness (SPBYa) . And although in practice the resolution values with respect to
the surface, the solid angle and the spectrum are finite, the essence of the problen
of resolution does not change: an ss measures the average SPBYa value, in conneec-
tion with which the higher the resolution, the smaller the error related to the
finiteness of the enmerated value'sl.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering the essential importance of the question of selecting the physical unit
in which the measurement results are presented. let us discuss it in detail.

Actually. the relationship between a measured value and the output signal of any
(j-th) SS measuring channel is defined by the relationship

Panama
3:='3""’I-F—_'

where 55 - a value characterizing the j-th measuring channel's sensitivity; 83(1) .
- absolute spectral sensitivity of the j-th channel: 93 - output reaction of the

j-th channel; BU) - spectral brightness of the surface being investigated: 3 -
- measured value of the brightness.

(1)

In principle. value 8 can be characterized by different methods. When calibrating
radioneter-brightnessneters, the value that is nor-sally used for B is the total in-
tegral brightness of scene standard radiation source, the integral brightness of this
source within the limits of the spectral sensitivity interval (M) of the SS channel
that is being calibrated, or the effective brightness for the given channel [3].
Expression (1) can then be rewritten as

$5,04smn
s._———. (2)

Same»

gamma

3- v 3
“ W H
at

§B.t(1)3(l)d’~

s..—

. ' (4)
gamma
0

where Si, SM, 5n = integral, absolute and effective sensitivity, respectively. of
llw (fmliouu‘tvr'u j-th channel; set”)! buﬂ) . absolute and relative spectral char-
.tctel'iutic, respectively. of the e-itter being used to calibrate the radiometer:

SH) . 30) = absolute and relative spectral sensitivity, respectively, of the radi-
ometer.

Let us evaluate the effectiveness of the utilization of expressions (2)-(4) when
calibrating an SS. we will nention here that during a remote investigation of the
Earth's surface. for the purpose of detecting features of the objects being invest-
iqatcd it is. as a rule, necessary to have the capability of judging the spectral
composition of the radiation rising above these. However, since the output signal of

the radioneter's j-th channel is proportional to the integral of the product of two
functions; that is.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI'W‘IAI. IN: ONLY

n~ Venom.

by its value alone it is impossible to make an unambiguous judgment about the spec-
tral composition of the radiation being registered. Prom this it follows that the
use of integral sensitivity when determining the brightness of an investigated ob-
ject is possible only if the object and the emitter used during the calibration have
the same spectral distribution of energy.

In the case of inVestigations of the Earth's surface, as a rule the spectral compo-
sition of the registered radiation is unknown, so integral sensitivity 51 cannot be
used to calibrate the equipment, since it is deternined to a considerable degree by
the spectra of the emitter used for the calibration.

since 55's for investigating the Barth's surface have comparatively narrow spectral
channels, we should asstne it to be more nearly correct to calibrate the equipment
according to its absolute sensitivity, which makes it possible to standardize the
measure-ant results to some degree. In this case, however. there remains the stan-
dardization error, which is related to the impossibility of the precise determina-
tion of the effective width of the spectral channels, as well as the error caused by
noncoincidence of the spectral characteristics of the emitter used during calibra-
tion and those of the source being measured within the limits of the spectral sensi—
tivity zone of the channel being calibrated.

Equipment calibration according to effective sensitivity would be feasible providing
that the form of the characteristics of the relative spectral sensitivity, which is
identical for all the spectral channels of the SS being calibrated, is maintained.

since this condition is usually not fulfilled, when effective sensitivity is used it

is necessary to introduce some normalizing factor for each spectral channel.

In connection with the special features of the different definitions of sensitivity
that have been mentioned, it has been proposed that, during the calibration of an
5?, it's sensitivity to the spectralldensity of the energy brightness (or SPBYa) be
determined in accordance with the expression

.. yumsma

8 a __ .
5“" ‘—u,.<x.) "T‘Bm )

where 55““,.‘ - the sensitivity being determined; sun“) - spins on the wavelength
“X of the source used for calibration: 7"; - some wavelength within the limits of the
spectral sensitivity of the instrument being calibrated. with such an approach,
standardization of the measurement results takes place automatically during the cal-
ibration process. Calibration of instrments according to their sensitivity to
SPzYa makes it possible, by using the results obtained with their help, to determine
directly the SPBYa of an investigated object with the expression

(5)

”0"-T;_e7a»'
where aux) = SPBYa of the investigated object's radiation on wavelength Xx.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bet us mention here that the magnitude of this error depends substantially on the
choice of the wavelength A, on which the calibration is carried out. It is obvious
that as ’5, we should choose that wavelength on which the ratio of the standard and
measured sources' SPBYa equals the ratio of these sane sources' effective bright-
nesses. In the case where this equality is fulfilled, the standardization error

will be reduced to zero. The wavelength that corresponds to this condition is usu-
ally called the effective wavelength [4] and is given by the relationship
.

8‘, (l): (1)61

BO.)=§
)

-—_ (6)
SEW-(1)0.
. I

Let us Isntion here that in the general case, when there is no prior intonation on

the spectral composition of the radiation being registered. it is not possible to
determine Ax fro- relationship (6). Horeover, 1,, will be different for each specif-

ic spectral characteristic 8 .

Let us assume, however, that spectral characteristics Bun) and 3(1) are approxi-
mated by straight lines within the limits of the spectral sensitivity zone of the
measuring channel being calibrated. This assumption is correct in nest cases. since
radiation from objects on the Earth's surface usually has quite slooth spectral

characteristics, while the spectral channels of the neasuring equipment are’ coopera-
tively narrow. In this case it can be asst-ed that

3,00 -a,.°+8,.'a.

8(1) -B'+B'l,.

where 82t' 8%,, 8°, 31 - soae constant factors.

(7)

In this case, relationship (6) is rewritten in the fore

§(a;.+ mums»

B‘ + 8'1. o
H—-;— ’
” +8“ gmwmnma

 

It i:: vuuy to show that frost this relationship it follows that

i136”);
)4: a v (3)
Ss(l)dl_

vmich coincides with the expression for the effective value of the wavelength that
was introduced in [5,6] for the case of constant brightness. bet it be noted that
factors 82:, Bit, 8° and 31 are not part of expression (8): that is, Ae does not de-
pend on the slope of straight lines (7) and, consequently, does not depend on the
spectral composition of the standard and measured radiation. Thus, when determining

 

65

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

equipment's sensitivity to SPEYa on wavelength. he, the standardization error will
equal zero for measured radiation with any spectral composition. Let us emphasize
again that this is correct only if the spectral characteristics of the standard and
measured radiation can be approximated by straight lines within the limits of the
area of sensitivity of the spectral channel being calibrated.

Thus, we should recognize the fact that it is actually feasible to calibrate the
energy scales of on-board radiometric equipment in SPBYa units, relating the results
of measurements to the wavelength Xe! as determined from relationship (8), that is
the effective wavelength for each spectral channel.

U'IUfU/It-w- ,t M
C

a m 0,5 0,5 0,7 0,: 491,0 1,: 1,: a 1,0 2,0 2,: in

Figure 1. Evaluation of the range of brightnesses measured during an in-
vestigation of the Earth‘s surface from aerospace carriers at altitudes

above 30 km, a solar zenith angle of 20°, and sighting along the nadir:

l. snow-covered surfaces; 2. water surfaces.

The selection for the ”Fragment" system of the SPBYa unit as the physical unit for
presenting measurement results predetermined the calibration method, which consisted
of determining the relative spectral and absolute sensitivities of the channels as a
condition for transmitting the chosen physical unit of the system's energy scale.
The initial requirement for the formulation of this calibration method was the real-
ization of an emitter having a known SPEYa within the limits of the spectral and dy-
namic operating bands of the “Fragment" system (Figure 1) and satisfying the condi-
tion

AH>Din+lApnun

where And - size of the emitter; ”in and as“, = diameter of the intake aperture
and maximum size of the "Fragment” system's field of View, respectively; I. - dis-
tance between the emitter and the SS being calibrated, which makes it possible to
realize SS calibration using an elongated source [7].

In order to determine the-: dynamic range of the bPB‘la values that must be measured
by the "Fragment" “SS and reproduced by the emitter during calibration, an approxi-
mative prediction of the seasonal variations in the upper limit of the measured
brightnesses was made. The prediction (Table l) allowed for the seasonal change in

the Sun's altitude for the area extending from 35° to 70° North latitude at 1000
hours local time (LT).

66

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Seasonal Variations in Upper Linit of Theoretical
Band of Measured Brightnesses (Relative Units)

 

10 o o ' 1.9.104 3.2-m mono-I 0.5.104
86 0 5-10" 1.3-10'I 6.0-10'I 0.0-10'l 7.3-10"
80 1.7-10-° 1.1-10" 2.3-10" 4.8-10'1 0.8-10" 7.840"I
5 0.7-10-1 1.1-10" 2.9-10" 5.640“ 1.5-10" 8.540"
50 1.1-10" 1.9-10" 6.040" (Li-10" 8.1-10'I 9.1-10'I
45 1.9-10'I 2.7-10" L840" 7.0-10" 8.0-10" 9.0-10'l
40 2.7-10" 3.1-10" 5.0-10'l 7.1-10'1 9,1-10" 9.8-10-i
35 3 .8- 10" 6.4- 10" 6.3-10" 8.1- 10" 0.0510" 1.0
u D! A om M
H
w ) ”1%) '6) f5 11 “°”
70 6.840" 5.8-10-I 1.0.104 1.9-10-| 5-104 0
65 7.5-10“ 6.6-10" 1.8-10" 3.1-10" 6.340" 0
60 8.0-10" 1.3-10" 5.0-10" 3.13-10'I 1.5-10" 1.240"
g3 8.6-11rI 8,5-10" 0.4-10'1 6.4- 10" 2.3-10‘1 93-10"
$140” 8.8-10" 7.1-10'| 5.1-10"l 3.010" 1.1-10"
45 9.."1-10-I 8.8-10" 7.8-10" 6.340" (.3404 2.7-10"
‘0 9.8-104 9.3-10" 8.6-10" 7.0-10"I 15.0-10-I 3.0-10"
85 9.0-104 0.540" 8.840" 7.7-10'l 5.5-10" 6.0104
Key:
1. North Latitude, deg 8. July
2. January 9. August
3. February 10. Septenber
4. March 11. October
5. April 12. November
6. May 13. December
7. June

The calculations were nude with the expression

Bile: - H, 00:30 1'; exp [—11, + 7.80020”.

 

where 33- = averaged value of the spectral solar constant in the j-th spectral inter-
val. 11/ng 30 = zenith angle of the Sun. 639: ‘a - optical thickness of the atmos-
phere in the vertical direction: I; a coefficient of spectral brightness of a provi-
sional bright object, as averaged or the j-th interval.

The theoretical values that were obtained for 83 max (Table 2) were compared with
the results of corresponding measurements made on board a laboratory airplane (Table
3). These measurements were made with a special photometric instrument that neas-

ured the value of the energy brightness’s spectral density in the spectral inter—
vals. solid angles of the instantaneous fields of View, and range of sighting angles

corresponding to the parameters of the project ”Fragment" system.

The results of subsequent deteninatione of the value of 'the SPBYa of the Earth's
surface. on the basis of materials gathered with the "Fragment" ass on board a
”Meteor" satellite during an interval that encompassed a sufficiently representative
period of time from June 1980 to Hay 1981. continued (Figure 2) the adequate relia-

bility of the prediction.

67

MOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

Table 2. Maximum calculated Values of Spectral Density of the Energy
Brightness in each "Fragment' HSS Spectral Interval of Sensitivity
(35° N.l.at., June, 1000 Hours LT)

  
 

  

  
 

w. m
'sn' w" h) u—o.1|o.s-o.e|c.o—o.1 0.1-0.||0.H.| u—u u-qu-u

Imlnolzwlmlm 33's.:

    

  

alum | m

Key:

1. Spectral density of energy bright- 2. Spectral interval. um
ness, w-m'zsr'lum'

Table 3. Results of Pull-Scale Measurements of Spectral Density
of the Brightness of the Earth's Surface (December 1976)

      
    
   
 

I you
"do.“ 8’”.

wmm

 

norm “on. (acne-w n «1.4-4:.7 3.3 L1 :
«ensue yuan en un- 0.5—0,“ 8!- 3.0 3.‘ 325
no a cyan; espouse u- 0.6—0.1 1:: ".9 1.1 —
men spots-In 70'. 0.7—0.8 60 3.5 5.9 226
W “an?!” 0.6-1.1 — ._ _ __
noﬁepeeue ‘leploro au- 0.4—0.5 20 2.! 7.9 “0
I Flo-0 0mm 0.6—0.6 —- —- — _
WI" 60W. Ml 0.6-0.7 13 I.“ 7.1 -—
ml see-prawn s 0.1-0.9 m 3.8 1.1 no
semi mam; 0.8—1.1 53 3.5 6.5 13
80:10. ecso) (8)
Key:
1. Subject and surveying conditions 7. Volga River delta (ice and snow sec-
2. Spectral interval, us tions on land and water; channels over-
3. Experimental data grown with reeds; ‘o 8 70°, visibility
4. 83 max! H-m'zsr'lum'l more than 30 km)
5. 63 , w-m‘zsr'lum'l 7 6. Black Sea coast near Sukhumi (edge of
6. Ex rapolation to conditions in shore. sections of water surface and
Table 2 of 33 max' Iuv-n“2sr‘1ma'1 green vegetation: 20 % 70°: clear)

In accordance with the considerations explained above. the emitter that is used di-
rectly for calibration and, in connection with this, reproduces some SPEYa value in-
side the chosen dynamic range. should be netrologically tied in with the standard
that reproduces the selected physical value. Since the final reliability of the
measurement results turned out to be directly dependent on the standards used, the
accuracy of the transmission of the SPEYa value from the standard to the working
emitter. and the structure of the specific 55 calibration method, special attention
was given to the problems involved in selecting the standardization and calibration
facilities.

Until recently, photometric equipment and methods based on light and temperature
standards were primarily used to calibrate opticoelectronic systems. The changeover
to energy values required complicated recalculations. In particular. the known col-
or temperature ot the luminous body of light-measuring bulbs was used to find its
true temperature, after which the bulb's spectral brightness was calculated with the

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘(DR (ll-11(1M. “SI-Z ONLY

  
 
 

-~-- I. 10.7!"
—J¢02 I!”

u,

 
 

 

J0 ‘0 JD 60 70 I0 .90 100 "I 120 1.” 1401.50 1“

U mil-9'"- MI"

Figure 2. Histograms of 5931's values of agricultural lands in the Don-
Khoper interﬂuve, as derived from "Pragaent" 1455 survey materials gath-

ered on 30 July 1980 and 8 October 1980: P - relative frequency of regis-
tration of SPBYa value. .

help of data on the radiating capacity of tungsten. The need for such a recalcula-
tion, as well as the indeterminacy of the data used in it. resulted in substantial
errors during calibration. Some investigators used different nodels of. an absolute-
ly black body during calibration. However. the low quality 0!! these nodels, the in-
adequate analysis of their astrological characteristics. and the lack of standard,
practical measurement techniques also resulted in significant errors.

The situation improved substantially with the creation and approval of a syste- of

State Special Standards (658) for energy photouetry that differ in both operating
principle and the spectral band used [8].

One of these standards-~the State Special Standard for the Spectral Density of
Energy Brightness in the 0.25-2.5 um Band [9]--was also used as the basis for the

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

also” mun/m u)
(II-4.7m.
Ilium [,JM -:
5-47.”? 4-4;.”

lawns/u: (layup/pup

2.5—; 6
4 43’“ (3

Islam: anyways (a)
(II-aim ‘
zit-u

 

Figure 3. Union-wide testing method for equipment for measuring the spec-
tral density of the energy brightness of continuous optical radiation in
a continuous spectrum in the 0.25-2.5 um band: 6 - uneliminated system-
atic error: S - root-mean-square deviation.
Key:

1. Standards 3. Comparison. using a comparator

2. State Special Standard for Unit of 4. Working standards
Spectral Density of Energy Bright- 5. Prototype measurement equipment

ness of Continuous Optical Emir 6. Prototype emitters
sions in a Continuous W in 7. Working measurement equipment
the 0.25-2.5 um band 8. Working emitters

formulation of the calibration methods for the "Fragment" 1158. which operates within
the limits of this spectral band. he use of this standard was based on the ap-
proved testing method for equipment for measuring the spectral density of energy

brightness (Figure 3). In this setup the SPzYa unit is passed from the 652 to the
working standard, which is based on a series-produced 5110-3000 ribbon-filament lamp

or a special law of the "black body" type. From the SPEYa working standard, the
SPBYa unit is passed to prototype measuring equipment based on 8110-3000 or SIB-2000

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

l m

___.__......__1

Figure 4. Setup for neasuraaent of relative spectral characteristic (a)
and absolute sensitivity (b) of surveying systems: .a: l. surveying sys-
ten:.2. deflecting flat mirror; 3. prototype measurement leans (8110-3000
lamp): 4. collimator mirror: 5. optical system of coaparator; 6, 8. twin
monoclmoeators: 7. block of cooperator photoreceivers: 9. halogen lasp;
lo. shutters: b: l. surveying system 2. deflecting flat mirror: 3.
prototype measurement leans (3110-3000 leap): 4. diffuse illminator: 5.
optical system of conparator; 6. twin nonochrouator: 7. block of receiv-
ers; 8. 9. halogen laps of illuinator; 10. shutters.

Key:

1. Comparator 3. Working diffuse emitter

2. Working monochromatic emitter

lamps. At the surveying systes calibration stage, prototype neasureaent equipment
must be used. Figure 4 depicts sinplified setups for the two calibration stages.

Let us concentrate on a discussion of the possible sources and cosparative magni-
tudes of the errors that affect the final result of a measure-ant. Let us mention
here that. first of all, the final result must contain errors related to the trans-
mission of the span unit from the standards to the prototype means that are de-
fined in 6061' [All-Union State Standard] 8.196-76 [9]: depending on the wavelength.
they can be as large as several percent.

Among the calibration error sources we can include instability of the radiation
sources' brightness, nonlinearity and instability of the calibration setup's compar-

ator, nonreproducibility of the mochroantors' wavelengths, noncoordination of the
emitter's and comparator's sonochroeators' wavelengths. However, careful

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(1AI. USE ON”.

construction of the installation used for calibration, preliminary selection of the
photoreceivers used in the comparator and the introduction of different systems for
monitoring the stability of the emitters' operating modes make it possible to reduce
these errors to values on the order of 1 percent.

Thus. in our case the accuracy of the 55': energy calibration was basically deter-
mined by the error in the transmission of the SPEYa unit from the standard to the
prototype and working measurement equipment, and was standardized at a level of sev-

eral percent. This means that. inasmuch as the joint processing of data from a min-
imum of several 55's is necessary for remote investigations of the Barth. when con-
structing the ssh; it is not advisable to require an equipment accuracy level of
better than 1-3 percent for each separate ss operating in the 0.25-2.5 um band,
which figure was realized during the creation of the “Fragment” 1155 (Table 4) .

‘rable 4. Averaged Certified Characteristics of “Fragment" H55
(1 Wm

   
 
 

  

5 ., . ,,
m 0.8 1.3mm .omo- 1.03 ~o.s£s' ‘3
580 1.0 .19-10" .59o10" 2.3 0.83
m 1.5 .01-10" .71010" 2.30 0.638
163 1.8 1.67-10' .5340" 1.03 0.715
.935 2.8 1.36-10‘ .ﬂ-1 1.19 0.890
.305. 2.1 — ,9o.10- -- 1.360
.698 1.9 — 3.1040" —- 1.620
.301 2.1 — 1.21-10" — 2.200
Key:
1. Spectral intervals 5. Coefficient of conversion from output
2. Designation code to measured SPBYa value.
3. Half-width, um u-sr'lom‘z-nn'l
4. Random root-mean-square equipment 6. Amplification modes
error in full dynamic range. \ 7. Effective wavelength Xe. um

Let us emphasize that insuring a root-mean-square random measurement error at a lev-
el of several percent requires special construction of the entire information-
carrying channel. Actually. repeated conversion of the intonation in the channel
will lead to losses of it until the entire measurement process is completed; that
is. until the comparison of some intermediate signal with a standard (the unit of
measurement) and the acquisition of a real number (the encoded signal). The encoded
signal. which is more resistant to noise and interference than the analog represen-
tation of the information. makes it possible to eliminate almost entirely the effect
of subsequent parts of the information and measuring couple): on the measurement re-
sults. Consequently. by carrying out the measurement process as close as possible
to the 55's input element, information losses can be reduced; from this there natur-
ally follows the necessity of including an encoding unit in the $5 (the on-board
part of the information and measurement canplex) and using a digital radio link

[2,10] .

However, the encoding units (analog-to-digital converters (A'l‘sP)) used in on-board
optical-band 55': only convert an electrical signal into a concrete number. As a
result of instability in the preceding opticoelectronic conversion units. measure—
ment errors are generated that. as a 'rule. exceed the allowable level by several

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

percent. Because of this it is necessary to introduce special monitoring of the
stability of the analog opticoelectronic conversion units in the SS and some kind of
procedure for correcting the measurement results according to the data provided by
this monitoring. ' .

Let us discuss the principles of the realisation of this monitoring in the “frag-
ment" ass. In this system, the analog opticoelectronic conversion members include
the receiving optical system. which consists of the scanning mirror and airror lens,
the fiber-optic selector with spectral band-pass filters. and the photoreceiving de-
vices (FPU) [2].

The stability of the receiving optical system's parameters is determined by the de-
terioration caused by the effect of the conditions encountered in space: this pri-
marily means hard radiation and eicrometeorite bodaaralent. The use of mirror op-
tics made it possible to assume negligibly little deterioration because of hard ra-
diation, while the effect of micrometeorite bombardment during the calculated oper—
ating period (1 year) also turned out to be almost unfelt [11]. so this unit's con-
version function was assused to be practically constant.

 

mnnmnxnmunnrunnuxnn
mile:- 4%an

Figure 5. Change in coefficient he of decrease in working reference emit-
ter's intensity relative to the standard reference emitter for the ”Prag-

ment" HSS during prcflight tests and the first months of the flight.
Key: 1. August 2. October

The stability of the conversion performed by all the subsequent analog members is
monitored and corrected automatically by a special reference esitter that was added
to the conversion channel with the help of an opticomechanical commtator with a
periodicity on the order of the scan tracking; that is, about every 70 ms [2]. The
comparatively slow deterioration of the reference emitter, which was about 10 per-
cent during the year-long preflight adjustment period and during the first months of

73

FOR OMGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Llu.‘ flight (Figure 5) , has been evaluated by the episodic introduction into the
channel of a monitoring emitter and can be allowed for quite easily during ground
processing of the measurement results.

Thus, one of the basic goals formulated during the creation of the ”Fragment“ USS--
the acquisition of video information about the spatiotemporal structure of the
brightness field of the Earth's surface that is suitable for automated processing
and has objective measurement properties--has been achieved because of the realiza-
tion of the appropriate astrological support.

The "Fragment" MSS has been certified, in accordance with the proposed principles
and techniques. as an instrument for measuring the spectral density of the energy
brightness of the Earth's surface in the 0.4-2.5 um band, with the basic character-
istics presented in Table 4 and Figure 6.

 

1,0 I a: 1,4 1,6 M 2,0 2,; in,“

Figure 6. Relative spectral sensitivity characteristics of "Fragment" ass,

as averaged for six measuring channels for All-Als and three for A16 and
M7. .

The digital codes that are the result of the measurements made by the "Fragment“ ass
can be used to determine, with up to 5 percent accuracy. the values of the absolute
SPEYa of corresponding sections of the Barth's surface, as observed from a satel-
lite. on effective wavelengths lying within the 88's eight spectral sensitivity in-
tervals [2], it being the case that the effect of the spectral distribution of the
brightness of an investigated section on the measurement result, which has been min-
imized because of the calibration method that was selected, can be eliminated by the
use in the data processing operations of a specially developed computation procedure
[12] that makes it possible to reproduce the true nature of the spectral distribu-
tion of the brightness of an unknown object that is being investigated.

74

FIMRCHHNCJAl.lEﬂE(N§LY
1.

1.

2.

3.

4.

S.

6.

7.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

momma

Such an approach is correct not only for radioneters with a narrow instantaneous
viewing field angle, but also for frame surveying systems (television and photo-
graphic systens. for exauple) , which in this case can be regarded as a set of a
large number of radiometric channels with a small field of View. the size of

which is determined by the elenent of spatial quantification realized during the
processing of the information.

BIBLIWRAPHY

Sychev, 3.6., and Tarnopol'skiy. v.1., ”On the Spectroradio-etric Omaracterist-
ics of hultispectral Surveying Systana," in 'llnogoml'nyye aerokosnicheskiye
s"yenki Zen-11" [Hultisonal Aerospace Surveys of the Barth]. Moscow. Isdatel'stvo
'Nauka", 1981, pp 87-93.

Avanesov, 8.3., Glazkov, V.D., Ignatenko, 3.3., et al., "The 'Praglaent' Multi-
zonal Scanning System" this issue, pp 45-56.

Kholopov, c.x., and Shuba, Yu.A., ”m Standardizing the Sensitivity of nadiolae-
ters," DIP [expansion unknown), No 10, 1977, p 6.

Kholopov, G.l<.. "On Calculating the Effective Wavelength of a masuring System,“
th5 [possible Journal of Applied Science]. Vol 23, No 2, 1975, p 354.

Strdngren. 8.. ”Handbuch der Experimental Physik". Leipzig, Akadeaische Verlags
Gesellschaft aha, Vol 26, 1937, 321 pp.

Kod, A.D., “Energy Distribution in Stellar Spectra.“ in '2verdnyye ataosfery"
[Stellar Atmospheres], noscow. 1963, pp 73-74.

Kelton. G. , et al.. 'lnfrared Target and Background Radio-attic Measure-ants:
Concepts. Units and techniques,“ INFRARED PHYSICS. Vol 1, 1963, pp 139-169.

Katyuk. A.P., Panasyuk, v.s., Sanoylov, L.N.. et al., “Unified System of State
Standards for the Energy Photometry of Coherent and Nonooherent Optical Radia-
tion," Immm‘mYA W, No 3' 1976' m 17-240

“Gosudarstvennyy spetsial'nyy etalon i obshchesoyuznaya poverochnaya skhena dlya
sredstv inereniy spektral'noy plotnosti energeticheskoy yarkosti nepreryvnogo-
opticheskogo izlucheniya sploshnogo spektra v diapazone dlin voln 0.25-2.5 u.”

[State Special Standard and All-Union resting Method for aquipuent for Measuring
the Spectral Density of the Energy Brightness of Continuous Optical Radiation in
3 Continuous Spectrun in the 0.25-2.S um Band]. 6051‘ 8.196-76.

Avanesov, G.A.. 'Sxperimental Information and Measurement Couples Based on the
'Pragment' Multizonal Scanning System" this issue. pp 40-44.

Karachentsev, 1.0., 'Bffect of Microneteorite Particles on the Optical Surfaces
of Telescopes Beyond the Earth's Amephere,‘ ISKDSSTVBNNYYB SPUTNIKI 23141.1, No
15, 1963. pp 57-65.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Bogdanov, LIL, Nulimv. V.N., Sychev, A.G., et a)... 'On the Possible Inton-
mnt of Radiometric Accuracy During Remote Investigations of the Earth With
Hultiaoml Surveying Systems." Issmoovmm m Iz loam, No 3, 1981. pp
77-94.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka', "Issledovaniye um 12 Ramon“, 1981

1 1746
(SO: 1866/ 18

76

FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 528.711.4353.089.6
PRBPLIGIT 98mm CALIBRATIm W 'FRAGHBNT' HULTIZONAL SUM/WING SYSTEH

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYB zmu Iz xosnosa in Russian No 5. Sap-Oct Bl (nanuscript re-
ceived 12 Jun al) pp 78-81

[Article by Ya.L. zinan and v.1. Yurov. Institute of Space Research. Hoscov]

[Text] The aultipurpose utilization of space video intonation about the Barth that
is obtained with seaming opticoelectronic surveying devices--the "Fragment” miti-
zonal scanning system (H58) in particularupredeteriines the necessity of carrying
out photograuaetric processing of this infatuation for the purpose of determining
the geometric characteristics of terrestrial fornations and their geographic coordi-
nate correlation. In recent years there have been quite a few publications devoted
to the discussion of the gee-etry of images obtained with scanning surveying systees
and the photogranetric calibration of these system. However. this probleu cannot
yet be regarded as solved. In view of this. during the preparations for the struc-
tural flight testing (LKI) of the “Fragment“ 3088, a special technique was developed
for its photogra-etric calibration and the instrument package enabling "this tech-
nique to be realised was created.

In connection with the photogranetric cal-
ibration of the "l’ragnent'l ass. the proble-
of determining its following eleaents was
formulated (a large part of these elements
is shown in Figure 1):

focal length of the lens:

geoeetric characteristics of the matrix of
the fiber-optic splitter (VOR) (dilensions
of the natrix's elenents and their relative
positions) [1]:

orientation angles of the vows matrix in
the instrument's systen of coordinates--
o”x"Y'z"--as deternined by its aounting

 

brackets:
Figure l. Parmtere determining the the viewing angle 0 between the scanning
scanning geometry. . rays corresponding to the first and last
Key: 1. Line of flight elements of the lines of'acquired video in-
2. Scanning line for-nation. The projecting rays correspond-

ing to the first and last elements of a
line determine the scanning plane 0"»;
angles w. Y and 0. which determine the orientation of scanning plane 0"” in the

77

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system O'X'Y"2" (angle s characterizes the inclination of scanning plane 0'33 to the
0"2' axis of the systen of coordinates of the instrunent being tested: 7 is the an-
gle between the plane 0"ns. which is perpendicular to 0"“ and passes through 0‘2",
and the 0"?" axis: 0 is the angle in the scanning plane between 0")! and the Muster
of angle 0"“); ' ..
the longitudinal and transverse distortion of the images obtained (transverse dis;
tortion dy is the image element displacement caused by divergence of the scanning
been 0% from scanning plane 0“”: longitudinal distortion is the iaage element dis-
placement along a line caused by divergence of the bean's actual scanning setup fro.
the projected scanning law):

the total scanning period '1' (the title interval between registration of two elements
of the seas order on adjacent lines):

the active scanning period '1‘. (the tine interval between registration of the first

and last element on a single line).

The lens's focal length and the dimensions and relative position of the V03 matrix's
elements were neasured by known methods before their installation in the instrunent.
All the other elements were determined for a functioning instruaent with the help of
a specially developed technique [2] .

This technique is based on the possibility of forming a narrow light been that moves
in space, the registration of this been by the ass, and the determination in an ex-
ternal coordinate system of its position and the position of the investigated in-
strument's coordinate xx, stem o'x'v'z".

Angles O. 9. 1 and 9 are calculated on the basis of data fron neesursnsnts of the
directions of projecting beans 0"A and 0'8 in the o'x'r'z" coordinate systen. In
order to determine longitudinal and transverse distortion, in addition to the' uses-
urenent of the directions of 0's and 0'3 there were neasurelaents of the directions
of beans corresponding to certain points on a line, and these data-with du‘e consid-
eration for the scanning lawn-were used as the basis for calculating the values of
dx end dy corresponding to those points.

An inege line is formed in each zone of the spectra. and these lines are arranged
parallel to each other. In order to establish the relationship of the coordinates
of line points obtained in different spectral zones. it is necessary to know the
matrix of radiation receivers is oriented with respect to the line. If the netrix's
characteristics are known, in order to deter-ine its orientation elasents it is
sufficient to know the coordinates of the elements that are the natrix's "coordinate
marks" and the simultaneous angular position of the zonal scanning beans that cor-
respond to then.

since the van matrix is set iusnovably in the lens's focal plane, its position can be
determined by a single parameter 8. which is the angle between a scanning line and
the symtry of the matrix corresponding to that line.

Period '1' is measured for an unmoving light been that is registered periodically by
the ass. In order to measure active seaming tine 1", the light beam is oriented in
such a manner that it is received by the surveying equipment while surveying the
last element of a line. In this case the tine interval is aeasured between signal
pulses. one of which corresponds to the initial element of a line, while the second
corresponds to the position of the last element of that line.

78

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2 depicts the layout of insta]
lation that ﬂakes it possible to register
the bean's poniti

and the appropriate
goniometric attachments. a detector of the
pulses arriving from

the photoreceivers ot
the insult-eat being ca

be ng calibrat-
ed. the thoodolite and the mirror insure

 

bundle of hem that are
directed into e scanner's optical system
and cove: its entire viewing tield. e
discrete positions of the theodolite and
the airrar that insure the entry of the
, for different fixed positions of the scanning
mirror, by visual observation in the theodolite of the illuminated elonents of the
Van's matrix (in the Isa-called static lode). In the operating inetmnent (in the
dynalic mode). the mute the light bean is registered by the photoreceiVers are
reflected by the arrival of pol e gnals to. than. The acquis ti
corresponding 0 a given line elonent is insured
orientation search lode.

O‘X'Y'z' for
peated Measurements of each of the unknown parameters make it possible to evaluate
e accuracy of the determinations that are made omlas or calculating these
enents and their errors presented in [3].

c characteristics of the “Pregnant"
e conducted on e ban a of the technique explained
ve. The results of these investigations are presented in Table 1. Primary
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Parameters of the "Fragment" Hultispectral Scanning System

I_te1 Value of 'Parameter Accurag
Viewing angle 7'35'34" 100'22"
Orientation angles Y. W and 9 of scanning -0°48'36" 100'11'
plane relative to ass's system of co- 0°l4'54" 100'10"
ordinates -0°22'42" 100'17“
Angle 8 between a line and the line of sym-
metry of the V012 matrix's position -9°12'00" :00'05"
Scanning period 76.71‘ ms 10.055 ms
Active seaming time . 51.43 ms 10.059 ms

Table 2. Scanning .Line Distortion

Line Element Number Transverse Cmnent longitudinal Went
1 o . 0 0. 0
205 3 . 6 9 . 2
409 -0 . 7 10 . 8
614 0 . 5 9 . 5
819 -0 . 4 14 . 1
1 . 024 0 . 0 0 . 0

processing of the video information acquired during the nu of the "Fragment“ ass,
which makes it possible to monitor the measurement of the last two parameters on
board, indicates that the effect of space surveying conditions on the instrument's
characteristics are insignificant. For instance. according to the MCI: data the
scanning p:riod is 76'.78_-to.039 ms and the active scanning time is 51.24i0.064 ms.

Distortion values for six points on a line are presented in Table 2.

The distortion values are given in fractions of an element of resolution. The er-
ror in determining the transverse and longitudinal components of distortion was 10.3
and 10.7 of an element of resolution. Judging from the data in Table 2, the trans-
verse component of distortion can be ignored, since in most cases it does no exceed
a single element of resolution. It is necessary to allow for the longitudinal com—
ponent of distortion when the goal of precise photogrametric processing of the ac-
quired photographs is set.

In conclusion, let us mention that the results of the geometric calibration con-
firmed the good quality of the production and assembly of the parts of the
”Fragment" multizonal scanning system that affect the geometric characteristics of
the image that is formed. The data presented in Tables 1 and 2 can be used to cor-
rect acquired video information at the stage of its geometric transformation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Avanesov, G.A., Glazkov. V.D., and Tarnopol'svkiy, v.I.. "Development of a Spe-
cialized Optic-celectronic System for the Operational Collection of Hultispectral
video Information About the Earth's Surface From an Artificial Earth Satellite,"
in "Mnogozonal'nyye aerokosmicheskiye s"yemki Zemli" [Hultizonal Aerospace Sur-
veys of the Earth]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981. pp 57-76.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Yurov, V.I. , "Method for the Photogrametric Calibration of wtical Scanning Sys-

tens.” Patent No 717534, 25 February 1980, OTKRYTIYA, IZOBRETENIYA,
PRMSHLENNYYE OBRAZTSY, TOVNNYYE ZNAKI, No 7. 1960.

3. Yurov, V.I., ”Geometric Calibration of Surveying-Searching Scanning Systems,"
GBODBZIYA I KAR’I‘OGRAPIYA. No 2. 1979. pp 26-31.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Issledovaniye Zenli iz Roman", 1981

L1746
C50: 1866/18

81

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.¢6.0:629.78

IMSTIGhﬂGI O? CONDITIONS FOR SURVEYING OCEAN'S SURFACE IN 0.4-1.1 m BARB
0? me SPECTRUM

ﬂoscov Issmsovmm zsm Iz rosnosn in Russian :10 5, Sap-Oct 81 (manuscript re-
00in 22 May 81) pp 82-89

[Article by a.s. Selivenov, Yum. Gektin, 3.8. Panfilov and LB. Pokin]

[Text] At the present time a great deal of attention is being devoted to the study
of such objects and phenomena in the ocean as frontal zones, meanders, vorticee-end
internal waves, which exist over almost the entire range of spatial and temporal
scales [1] .

Systematic investigations of frontal zones by remote methods, using equipment in-
stalled in aircraft and satellites, is being done primarily in the far-infrared band
of the spectrum that is, by obtaining images of thermal contrasts on the ocean's
surface [2,3] . Analysis of these images makes it possible to observe the formation

develOpment processes of frontal zones. meanders and vortices in different areas of
the ocean [4,5] .

Analogous information can be obtained in the visibleand near-infrared bands of the
spectrum (from 0.45 to 1.1 um). Such observations can be an essential supplement to
the thermal images as far as eliminating the effect of the atmosphere is concerned

[6] , as well as discovering front genesis processes that do not have surface thermal
contrasts. Besides this, radioeeters functioning in the visible band of the spec-
trum have (as a rule) higher spatial resolution, which makes it possible to study
the fine structure of such phenomena.

Until recently, observations of frontal zones in the visible and near-infrared bands
were of an episodic nature. The basic reason for this is that observations of 'such
phenomena with equipment intended primarily for investigating land areas are possi-
ble only when certain observation conditions that are realized extremely rarely are
fulfilled. For a purposeful study of them, it is necessary to have equipment that

is specially oriented for this purpose. At the present time, however, there are no
clearly formulated requirements for conditions for observing frontal zones and re-

quirements for observation equipment that emanate from these conditions.

Some of the first experimental surveying data in the visible and near-infrared bands
of the spectrum were obtained with a hand-held camera on board the "Selyut-S" orbi-
tal station [7] . Only approximate information relative to the conditions for ob-
taining these photographs was available, since the conditions were not set specially

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and were not studed with the necessary degree of reliability. Therefore. a series
of projects for the making of analogous observations with automatic satellites. air-
planes and ships were carried out. 'Meteor"-series satellites were used for survey-
ing with low- and medium-resolution Isultizonal seaming equipment operating in the
0.5-1.1 m band that had spatial resolution of 1 km and 240 n for viewing belts of
2,000 and lAOO kn, respectively [8,9]. Figures 1—3 [not reproduced] are quite typ-
ical images of the ocean surface. showing meanders. vortices and internal waves.

Analysis of the information that was acquired made it possible to determine the op-
timum conditions for observing frontal zones. as well as to advance a number of hy-

potheses concerning the nature or the observed optical phenomena.

 

Figure 4. Dependence of magnitude or contrast on the angular distance to
the center of a light spot (or z. - 50‘: 1. experimental curve plotted
tron aerial surveying data: 11. theoretical curve: 111. satellite data.

First of all, it was established that the sexism contrasts (K - Luax - Lain/Lear!
where I. is the object's brightness) on a water surface are observed in the area of a
patch of direct sunlight. All the images of contrasting formations on the water's
surface that are seen in the photographs are clearly visible at no lore than 30-40'
along the azimuth from the center of a light spot. Analogous results are obtained
in surveys of eliki [probably oil slicks] in the area of a patch of sunlight made
from airplanes (regardless of the nature of the slicks' foreation). However. it
should be sentioned that for large observation angles trees the center of a light
spot (more than 30°) the contrasts on the surface do not disappear. but remain con-
stant for all azieuthal angles at a It'el of 5-7 percent. Figure 4 shows the exper-
imental dependence of the magnitude or contrast K on the azimuthal deviation do of
the sighting direction ﬁrm a spot of light's geouetric center. as derived treat the
results of surveying done from an airplane and a “Meteor” satellite.

The dependence of the amount of. contrast on the sighting angle 8. as measured from
the vertical, was determined experimentally with the help of photographs made from

an airplane at ditterent Sun heights. Iigure 5 shows the results obtained for ob-
servations of the central part of a patch of light and for an area located in an

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

ottaswuunusr

Figure 5. Dependences of absolute magnitude of contrast In] on sighting
angle 8: I. for observations of the central part of a patch of light: 11:.
for an azimuthal angle of about 120° from the direction to the center of
the patch.

azimuthal direction of 120' relative to the direction to the patch. From Figure 5
it is obvious that the maximum values of K are seen for angles 8 8 40'.

up].
I40

    

’ . a c 1
1 2 J V,I/S

Figure 6. Dependence of magnitude of contrast for the area a: a light spot

on the velocity of the low-level wind.

The velocity of the wind near the surface and the choice of the plane of polariza-
tion of the radiation during observations have a considerable effect on contrast in
an ieage. As the wind speed increase, contrasts decrease gradually and begin to
disappear at speeds of 5-7 m/s (Figure 6). Rotating the polarization plane during
observations through an angle of. 90° relative to the plane with It.” also leads to a
considerable decrease in contrast.

he the result of. an analysis of the images that have been obtained, a weakly ex-
pressed spectral selectivity of the observed phenomena in the investigated band of
wavelengths has been established. Figure 7 depicts the dependences of the must of
contrast of surface formations on the wavelength, as plotted from satellite and air-
craft observation data; although an insignificant drop in the ssgnitude of the con-
trasts in the infrared band is visible in Figure 7, it does not go beyond the limits
of measurement accuracy.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

”u a: M v.7 M a: u u_
Linn
Figure 7. Dependence of magnitude of contrast on the spectral area of ob-
servation: I. aerial surveying from altitude H - 6 km; 11. satellite ob-
servations from B . 650 km; 111. ship surveying from H - 12 n.

Observations made in the area of a patch of light--particularly the nonselectivity
of the contrasts right up to the near-infrared band (for water this is an area of
total absorption) and the polarisation effects-quake it possible to suggest that
frontal zone observations are possible because of the surface manifestation of vari-
ous dynamic processes. The contribution of radiation coming from under the water's

surface is so small that in the area of a patch of light it can be ignored couplets-
ly .

Let us discuss the following nodal of observed phenomena: the contrasts on an image
of a water surface are formed because of differences in the spectrum of the wave ac-
tion, which modulate the observed brightness field: differences in the wave action
spectrum are caused by the interaction of wind-caused surface wave action with sub-
surface dynamic processes.

Such interaction is quite well known for internal waves and nonuniforn currents
[lo-12] , it being the case that waves measuring frou 1-2 to 20-30 cu long play the
basic role in these processes.

As an example, let us compute the magnitudes of the contrasts formed during the
interaction of wind-caused wave action with internal waves. In order to do this
we will use the functions of the distribution of surface slopes because of wind ve-
locity [13.14]. The brightness of the surface in the area of a patch of sunlight
can then be represented as follows [15]:

1. '. coastlexp (%)-L.o_.(§) 4' MM], (1)

where L3. L9. 9,, pp - brightness and reflection factor for direct solar radiation

 

1It is necessary to mention that outside the area of a light spot, where the con-
trasts do not exceed 5-7 percent. observed phenomena do not have to be entirely of a'
surface nature: manifestations of such factors as the color of the water, turbidi-

ty, bottom relief and so on are possible there.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and solar radiation scattered by the sky: 03 - dispersion of the surface slopes:

68 = angulir deviation of the sighting direction from the patch‘s geometric center:
const - a constant allowing for the geometric observation conditions. The relation»
ship of the dis rsion of the marine surface's slopes during interaction with
internal waveed and without them a3 is deter-inst! with the formula [15)

o'—o.'erp[R %]. (2)
where
n — — 5.1:; (3,6) + 6.57;

v - wind velocity; c - phase velocity of the internal ".43; u . orbital velocity
of the particles.

Image contrast K = (L - lo)/Lo, where no and L are the brightness of a surface 'un-
disturbed‘ and "disturbed“ by an internal wave, can then be calculated with the
formula

x= exp(—%)—%exp(-gr)+7%(ou—M
m+up(_§a) (3)

When evaluating the value of Lpp L's, we will take into consideration only the
scattered sky radiation (index p net: the Sun. This is correct for an analysis of
the reflected radiation in the area of a patch of light, since scattered radiation
in this area is considerably brighter than in other parts of the sky and is reflect-
ed from the water's surface in the same directions as the direct radiation (index
I).

The experimental value is 2 310-3 [16]. while according to the results pub-
lished in [171. o 9,, t 6 ( or a sun zenith distance 2. 2: 50°). so that IgoP/L'Dg %
k 1.8 -2. Subst tuting the average internal wave parameters [10.11.15 0 - 7.5°
and R /C) - -0.53 when V - 3 m/s into (3). we can calculate the magnitudes of the
contrasts. Figure 4 shows the theoretical dependence of K on A0, as well as the ex-
perimental data.

The insignificant differences between the experimental data and the theoretical cal-
culations can be explained by the incomplete allowance for sky-scattered radiation,
as well as the averaging of the parameters used for the internal waves. Fran the
experimental data (Figure 4) it follows that the phenomenon of contrast inversion
(the value of the contrast changes its sign) is observed near the center of a light
spot. In the iaages that have been obtained it is seen as a change in the bright-
ness of different areas: dark areas in the center of the spot (”undisturbed“ by
internal waves) become light at the edge and the reverse pattern is seen for "dis-
turbed” areas. This phenomenon is explained by the different distribution of
brightness for "disturbed" and "undisturbed" zone. Figure 8 shows these distribu-
tions, as calculated with formula (1). in relative units.

contrast inversion point ADO can be found by equating the numerator of expression
(3) to zero and ignoring the effect of scattered radiation. He then obtain

86

FIIICNHNCJAI.IEHB(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8. Relative distribution of brightness I. in a patch of light as a
function of the angular distance 60 to its center for two areas of a sur-

face: I. "disturbed" by an internal wave; II. "undisturbed" by an
internal wave.

A&’--o—.:_—oI—UQ . (4)

For the parameters determined previously, A60 - 8.7°, which is extremely close to
the experimental value.

Thus, the good coincidence of the experimental and model relationships confirms the
correctness of the chosen model and the correctness of the state-cut that frontal

zones, meanders. vortices and internal waves are seen in the visible and near-
infrared bands because of their surface effects.

The material presented in this article makes it possible to state that the effective
observation of dynastic processes in the ocean is possible in the visible and near-
infrared bands of the spectrun. in connection with which:

it is necessary to conduct the survey in the area of a patch of sunlight, where the
contrasts reach their maxim values;

maxim contrast values are seen for zenith distances of the Sun and sighting angles
of N 40°;

the-width of the survey's spectral band is of no substantial importance. since the
observed phenwena do not have clearly expressed spectral selectivity;

contrasts on the surface disappear when the surface wind velocity exceeds 5-7 n/s.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fedorov. K.N., and Kuz'nina, N.P., “Oceanic i’ronts,‘I in "Itogi nauki i tekhniki.
Ser. oxeanologiya" [Results of Science and Technology: Oceanography Series] .
Moscow. VINI'I‘I [All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Inforuation] . Vol
5, 1979. pp 4-44.

2. Novogrudskiy, B.V., Sklyarov, V.Ye., Pedorov, KJL. and Shifrin, x.s.,
"Izucheniye okeana is kosmosa" [Studying the Ocean Pro- Spacel , Leningrad,
Izdatel'stvo Gidroneteoisdat, 1978. 56 pp.

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE‘OI’LY
3.

4.

5.

6.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stevenson. 3.2., and Sully-Power, P., "World-Wide Oceanic Pronto tron Satel-
lites,“ nos-ms. ”BR. GBOPRYS. union, Vol 58, No 9, 1977, 6 pp.

Doblar, R.A., and Cheney, 3.3., "Observed Pornation of a Gulf Stream Cold Oore
Ring,” J. PHYS. comm” Vol 7, No 6, 1977, pp 944-946.

Harris, 152., and negeckis, 8., “Satellite Infrared Images in the Agulhas Cur-
rent SYStem,“ DEEP SBA 888., Vol 25, 1978, pp 543-548.

"Atlnospheric Correction of Satellite Observation of Sea water Color,“ Ispa,
Italy, Omission of the European Communities, 1976, 61 pp.

Grechko, GAL, Griahin, G.A., and molkachenko, 6.11., "Cbservations of Visible
Manifestations of Ocean Dynamics Prom the 'Salyut-é' Orbital Station,”
ISSLEDOVANIYB 21mm 12 £08506)», No 4, 1981. pp 5-10.

Selivanov, n.s., Chemdanov, V.P., Suvorov, B.A., and Narayeva, M.l<., "Optica-
mechanical Scanners for aaserving the Earth,” Taxman mo I momma, No
6: 1978' Pp 18-22.

Selivanov, n.s., 'ruchin, Yu.n., Ovodkova, 8.6., and Seregin, V.A., “Television
Complex for Experimental Satellites," mm KING I manna-nun, No 3, 1977,
pp 43-45.

Rushes, 8.A., ”The Effect of Internal Waves on Surface wind Waves,“ J. GEOPHYS.
1138., Vol 83, 30 C1, 1978, pp 455-469.

Hughes, B.A., and Grant, ELI... "The Effect of Internal Waves on Surface Hind
Waves,“ J. ms. 1238., Vol 83, No (:1, 1978, pp 443-454.

Basovich, A.Ya.. and 'l‘alanov, v.I., ”On the Transforaation of Short Surface

Waves in Heterogeneous Wants," IMSTIYA AN 688R. PAD, Vol 13, No 7, 1977,
pp 766-773.

Oox, C., and Hunk, van. , "The Measurement of the Roughness of Sea Surface tron
Photographs of the Sun's Glitter,“ J. OP'I'. SOC. AMERICA, Vol 44, No 11, 1954, pp
838-850. -

Cox, C., and Hunk, HJL, “Statistics of the Sea Surface Derived tron Sun Glit-
tet," J. MARINE “Sal V01 13' “O 2' 1954' Pp 198-227.

Luchinin, A.G., and Titov, V.I., "On the Possibility of the Remote Optical Re-
gistration of the Parmeters of Internal Haves According to Their Manifesta-
tions on the Ocean's Surface,“ Izvzs'nn AN SSSR. PAD, Vol 16, No 12, 1980, pp
1284-1290.

Hakarova, Ye.h., and Kharitonov, A.V., "Raspredeleniye anergii v spektre Solntsa
i solnechnaya postoyannaya" [Distribution of Energy in the Sun's Spectrum and
the Solar Constant] , Moscow, .Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 1972, 350 pp.

Hullamaa, Yu.-A. R. , I'Atlma opticheskikh kharakterietik vzvolnovannoy
poverkhnosti norya" [Atlas of Optical Characteristics of an Agitated Sea Sur-
face], Tartu, Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences, 1964.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18. ”A New Emporium. in Investigating the Earth From ﬁnes” 155mm mm 12
xoswsn. No 1. 1981. pp 5-6.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Ram“, "Iulodovaniyo 20011 12 xenon". 1981

11746
C80: 1866/18 - m -

89

NR Ol-TI'ICIAI. USE ONLY