FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10160
3 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 55/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily froa foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English- language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues
(P000 55/31)

CONTENTS
ASIA
BANGLADESH
Briefa
Chittagong Druga‘Seiaure
HONG KONG

Recent China Arrivals Join Triada in Drug Trafficking
(Tommy Lewis; SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 28 Oct 81) .........

Interpol Arreata Thai Hanted in Holland on Druga Charge
(Tommy Lewia, Janita Wong; SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST,

29 oat 81) oaaaaaeaoaaaeoaoaaoooooaoaeeaoaaaaaaeaoaaaaaaoeaa

Thai Wanted in Netherlands on Druga Charge Refuaad Bail
(son‘m CHINA MORNING Post, 3 Rev 81)

Experimental Treatment of Addicta With New Drdg Urged
(SOUTH CHINA HORNING POST, 6 Nov 81) .......................

China Repreaented at "HO Courae on Drug Addiction
(SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 28 Oct 81) ......................

INDIA

Report on Delhi Conference on Drug Ahuae
(THE “IND“. 21°C: 81) I.DOOIOOOOOOUODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOII'O.

Briefa
Heroin Fran Afghaniatan
Poppy Rusk Opium Subatitute
Charaa Smoking Hideapread

- a - [III - WW - 138 POUC

FAR ﬂmﬁﬁi 8'0“ “‘1’. I!
EUR UIPLUML 035 URL]

NEW ZEALAND

Detaila of Drug-Buying Trips Around Asia Bared at trial
(111393385, 23 act 81) 0.0.0..O0......COCO-IOOOOCOOOIOOOIOO

Briefs
Drug Dealer. Distributor Jailed

PAKISTAN

Custona Still Avaiting Proaised Dogs for Drug Detection
(mkulm ms. 3m' 81) 000.00....OCOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOO

Briefs
Chores, Opium Seisure
Opium Seized Near Afghan Border

THAILAND

Khun Sa's Reward for Information on Narcotics Agents-
(POST. 27 act 81) I0.0...I.'COOOOOOOCOOCOOOOIUO0.00.0.00...

Briefs
Drug Informer Killed in ﬂat Yai
Drug Suppression Efforts
Southern Drug Raul
City Heroin Haul
ﬂunt for Drug Master-ind
Poppy Field Eradication Canpaign
Narcotics Traffic Via Beijing
Nev Drug Lav Supported
Drugs Courier Gets 20 Years
Policeman on Heroin Charge
Two Heroin Smugglers Arrested

CANADA

RCHP Seizes $200-ﬂillion Dru: Cache
(rm: CITIZEN, 16 Oct 81)

Police Break 'Hajor' Cocaine Ring
(1111: "mason sun, 2!. Oct 81)

Police Raid Nets Hashish; Seven Charged
(THE crnznu, 19 Sep 81)

Abundant Supplies of Good-Quality Reroin Appear in Vancouver
(Glenn Bohn; THE VANCOUVER SUN, 16 Oct 81) ................

Use of Importing Charge Criticized ss Uneven
(Zahair Kashmeri; THE GLOBE AND HAIL, HBBKBND EDITION.
2“ Oct 81) IOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOCOOOCD OOCI‘OIOOOOIOOO0.00.00...

- b -
FOR OFFICYAL USE ONLY
LATIN AMERICA
BOLIVIA

Satellite System Suggested Means To Conbat Drug Trafficking
(Rector Valdivia Rodriquez; PRESENCIA, 22 Oct 81} ..........

Draft Bill To Control Coca Production Highlighted
(ELDIARIO. 21 Oct 81) .0...0.00.0000...IIOOOIOOIOOOOOOO0.00

Chapare Region Cited as Major Cocaine Center
(PRESEHCIA. 18 Oct 81) DO...O...0.00IIOOOIOOOOOIOOOCOOOIOI0'

Peasants Demand To Know Destination of Coca Seized
(ms Tlmos. 20 Oct 81) 0..OU.0OO0....OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOGOOO

BRAZIL

Federal Police Said To Be Connected With Cocaine
(Various sources, a, 21 Oct 81) ............................

Former Superintendent Allegedly Dribed
Network of Intrigues

Plastic Surgeon Involved in Cocaine Trafficking
(Various sources, various dates) ...........................

Arrested in Paraguay

Attempt To Extradite Trafficker
Doctor Escapes Prom Prison
Doctor Still at Large

Briefs
Traffickers Arrested in Hines

ECUADOR

Interpol Agents Seize 12 Kilos of Cocaine, Arrest Nine
(El. memo. 19 Oct 81)

28

31

33

36

39

63
NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

IRAN

Guards Round Up 1,000 Addicts in South Tahran
(Km, snov 81) OOOIOﬁOIOOOO0.0.0IOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Figures for Narcotics Seizures
Neyahabur Narcotics Haul
Guards Seize Opium
Torbat Drugs Haul
Drug Den Raided
Opium Seized in Birjand
Heroin Seized
Drugs Seized in Mashhad

"EST EUROPE

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Alarming Increase in Drugs Prom Netherlands Noted
(FRANKFURTER ALLGEHBIM, 28 Oct 81) ..

ITALY

Mafia. DC Deputy Accused of Drug Traffic Involvement
(L'UNITA, 30 Sep 81)

DC Lashes Berlinguer. Attilio Ruffini Interview
Sicily Named as Drug Traffic Center,
by Luigi Cancrini

PCI Leader's Statement on Mafia Drug Connections
(Enrico Berlinguer; L'UNITA. 25 Sep 81) ..................

PSI Hayor Advocates Decriminalization of Heroin
(Piero Valentino; LA REPUBDLICA, 27-28 Sep 81) ...........

TURKEY

Joint Operation With PR6 Breaks Up Heroin Smuggling Ring
(nammm, 22 Sep 81)

New Program To Combat Narcotics Snuggling
(IERCW. 22 at 8‘) 0.0.0...0.0.0..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Asala Heroin Trafficking
Bolvadin Alkaloid Factory

- d -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNITED KINGDOM

Court Told H16 'Uaed Shop-Owner To Bug IRA Drug Ring‘
(THE DAILY TELEGRAPH, 27 Oct 81) ..........................

Eat-Drug Squad Chief Sacked After Inquiry Into Cannabia Plot
(John weeks; nu: DAILY museum, 12 llov 81)

Briefa
Heroin Hail
Drug Squad Raid
Liverpool Cannabia Raid
Reroin Smuggling Sentence

'2'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

CRITI‘AGONG DRUGS SEIZURE-ﬂittagonq, Oct. 3-.th Sea Custals seized 24
kilograms of hashiah and 28 pounds of narijuana valued at Taka over one crorve fru-
Banglar Nita, a ship of the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation yesterday. the captain
of the ship an Indian national it. SJI. Patel and a Pakistani citizen the Chief
Engineer of the ship Mr. LG. Siddigui have been arrested in this connection. The
Sea Customs acting on secret information raided the ship at 5 p.n. yesterday and
found the hashish inside the engine panel. The hashish was loaded for snuggling
abroad. The hashish and narijuana are understood to have snuggled into Bangladesh
frat Pakistan through India by land route. A well organised chain of smugglers
are said to have involved in this snuggling. The ship n.v. Banglar Nita loaded
with jute goods was bound for continental countries in a ﬂew bye. The ship cane
to Chittagong after unloading general cargo at Calcutta port. [Dacca m amou-
DESH OBSERVER in uglier: 4 Oct Bl p 1]

C50: 5 300/7006
RECENT CHINA ARRIVALS JOIN TRIADS IN DRUG TRAFFICKING

Hong Kong som CHINA MORNING POST in English 28 Oct 81 p 12

[Article by Tony Lewis]

[Text]

lleceet arrivals {tout
Chute see not only involw
ed in need robberies hut
hen elmdy eetehliehed
Imlte mth lee-l tried: ea-
and in the distrllmtiott of

‘ W drugs tn veriooe
dam of Kowloon.

This wee dieeleeed yeetee-
dey yhen ofﬁcers from the
Dtetnet prime Unit I. Karo
lode Poluee ﬂadqeevten er-
ected eevett ml. - includ-
ue; two new In two tep-
rete nit — and seized her-
one.

Three of thoee mated
rete foend to he ”M
chop" holders and m believ-
ed to he utemhen of the Bi.
Circle 03:}.

None the “need choc”
helden is an addict end w
lice believe that t heame
involved in dru I 'IIW
an“ my I ‘eh MIG ea-
ehle thee! to wax m M'
hm ”edveecee foe tum
crimes.

Previously police hed
thought the Bi Citele Ge
nu only low In a!
vehhetiet

Bet m e dl’llﬂ luff-ck.
in; link he: been mum
between the u and the
mteriotu MK tel may.

Yesteedey'e raids (alloyed
teverel weeks of unmou-
twee. . _

Ofﬁces (rout lbe Dntna
Crime Unit I. Ko-looo Po
Iiee Hndeuenm. headed by

DeteetlveCNeﬂ le
“Mumps
holeKe-leeeeedemete
theeeveemleeudeelee

Impqdheeeiefmtl
eweweeette:
mNhngekv.

m.

Oeeottheemeted mt
mloudin -
”QM—in Io end Sit

Mongkoh. ud eneet:
eeothee m and I wont:
hellevedtohemhenoft
mung: . .
‘ Metabeﬂoftheatson
Gm ere helleved to he
tehee (theme at deliven
uremia toditttiets Ill Kc
lode {or duttlhetloe to I
pedlen.

Seen-clue tothe eel
eeld lest night It I I
theteeeutheuolthe mC
ﬁle Gm we wait. th
m tato " every p
uherepreﬁteuetohemed

Meanwhile policenidl
eight that the whether
heddmppedeethelocelm
leet ie meet months. eh
ledieeted there is a ma
new 0! into Hugh:
from the en Ttiuq
which had I bumper hen
thieyeer.
INTERPOL ARRESTS THAI NAN'I‘ED IN HOLLAND ON DRUGS CHARGE
Hong Kong SOUTH €11le MORNING POST 1n Engnsh 29 Oct 81 p 1

[Article by Tomy Lewis and Janice Vang}

(Tex: 7

A TM' 1: 'mr Ulmd in CM?! It, ”In My. 1d deﬁnition ii ham of I .On Frau. MI O'Dmneﬂ'
Hound (:1: Jim drug war. Police said In: mm an: alleged offence maimed rum three «was...
ﬁch’nl meaty nixed out I new sex or ppm mly bylaw .5“, did no. hm the om.

of Wamn Can; 1 {mg man lulhmlkﬁd mlljepbuin- HO Mid the a"! all“ M a! of (hi Nﬂbethﬂdl
arm a mnmmc said Eh: ad from Holland m tune for w “at! gun . autumnal» Miniuu of has“ n) mu.

5mm” 9'04"“ '0' hi! the umdmoo beam. —Ahn me mm of authentic» ‘ m, Cm w mgr, m 4..
ulndilion had not been duly mm. lion oldoamenu. ’ fem.

Ivlhenﬂmﬁt When rue-sin Vonchu‘ . The im 0! ch} “timi- Vanda; '- naked in Hol-
But dech-i meﬂkil- yesterday Mr P.H.‘O'Damell : canon arm («can nmm w (or :1!“th

kul's mu: 0! freedom \m " wgmn (can “a a. I'm I um: or sub-um i. .13.. mmch'o‘ of SI

$50!”in - h! V“ "’5'“ documcnu reduced as :and a; com Ira. not. PW was 5:1an .

by ofﬁce” from Ike lamps! mm”. incl in. Ihc («an .' pm In W m 4'39 11'- in mm "no
I

Small!” Mufﬁn“. ram for hu arrest, had lion to relax (unkr dou- I). ha he. the abject of
\v'onchn. um Danny :bandulyummiwu. . mu other mu «MAM: mmMnﬁ.

Conrad (29). nlked out of - ' um \un Maud In! .
Wemrn Cam I: 5.05 pm, Mrppogndluxdrnhad . . Dew: windy-l Cm.

unubmo to commit .. mad rukchkn 'ed
arm hu mm H: mm- Vagina to :6». in: mm W m I” for m «I... o! (be xi.»
24w him_bythe court. umgitioa withoyu nly au~ wwmw~ in. mm In am they

Hu mfe dun on Io hn lama!“ (can Vlmm Tim '8'! about line could ﬂu a. M «-
arm a he valkgd into the ‘ WW5"-

sunimhl and hand a mu.

Vonchm and his win we»:
“man: u. the ofﬁng o! m
Tha: Conmlm on lb: and
ﬂoor of a build"! m Glance»
In Road to Ice uylum u
oﬂh‘m Iron uh! Interpol Bu-
reau headed bi! Daceu‘ve
Chm! humor it: ann
and Scam Imp Arthur 0|-
leremhaw mixed for him in
the lobby. Armed with a m
nmm for Pun anal.

Vanni; law. Mr Ste-

mn Llyewellyn. vent lo the
uConwlue.

M 705 pm. Mr Uycvel-
:ya. Vonchan :nd his ml:
emerged from the lit! 1nd
were me: by the waning po-

rs

Following a brief conver-
sation with the policemen.
Voncnn um mm: to Wm-
em ache: union that be
was deumcd overnight

He wdl Input :1 Western

 

‘30: 5320/9099
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000400080014-4

THAI "ANTED IN NETHERLANDS 0“ 001168 CHARGE REFUSED BAIL

I Kong Kong SOUTH can». HORNING P081: in English 3 Nov 81 p 10
[Excerpt]

An application for bail‘ Imﬁw‘;h.ﬁouumwlw
pyaThueannld uMMMh-wld
“Holland/0331199310.» umuwlhﬂw
“you drugs offence n}, Vuchi. ’
n1mcdbyM:CJ.Pem- m.muu
«atWamanye- mau-«waq._
letday. mum-53.5.03:

Vouchai Tumult ' '

“i" “WM/(19%“ m m w
W“)!"“”‘ mmﬂlhmm
m autumn game-6008-
wumz -lh 510.40“
M that It be. such 9:» 'Wm ,
_chul|thobclw MM“
rub the “by! mm of F“. a. d
5| hhdbmtoﬂolhnd. Voaclu um u:
Vanna? m
an .
................:z. “mam“:
oflbcﬂihnoiauuﬁ'ﬁm '5'.me
MHIW“"°W Thullquioumthl
Huidhehadhmlold u-ummhm
by a: cm a“ m" m moon «I «uncut
- «up into an Nunavut
“m Wvﬂgmv MW.
83y Coon. mun upwind H. an all“ u, tun
fortune/hobo“ “mu,”
Indiana-“MIN I "all“ ad in! than
co‘ﬁemm/onbcrduu '" mﬁda‘vlnw
uunamthcuuﬁudgh W“. ”HM.
we t on mum u a. .
Tum ml
{ammo/Imo- .I m““'%

In the moat/Wm not 0! m «Ina
helm Mr P H. 'Doancll at '1 m4 tot
Weslem Cum. Vagchai m '9 aid Hm «I
“than“. awn not on the m M with
meriuoflbeqmbulutu MIMNMPI.‘
vault of : faulun Io have which m m...“ Io
WUWYHNM atheism“
lbDutchMumuo/Juua. mwmw

CSO: 5320/9100

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-ROP02-00850R000400080014-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R00040008001M

mama mm 0? ADDIC‘I'S WITH NEW DRUG W
Hong Kong scum CHINA MORNING P051: in English 6 Nov 81. p 11

[Excerpt]

A medical specialist on mm m and 7.000 0!
narcotics has ukcd an ammonium
Medical and Hcgllh 0:. u :3 “mm” mm

nmcnt l0 expenmem a a y. I In
3am. Soul addicts wit‘ withdrawal pun. wont [as
am mg m M for buy:- up)»

dnvnl. Who 1 m

0' 3*" N“"'“" '3” draws . W.
B‘m'uu‘”'§?°°9° MMkwm-
uaunent and rchnbcluutm N’Drﬂmuid.
mhcdmnmuum Heuidln ~ hu
"‘9‘“ ‘2‘“ gawk": both a m n
W m . ' um ‘ M u M
W“ t“ "“"M" ““ and: «he! 33 m:
naddmundone. mUMMHIW

m u at bumowhiu apt-uni um
-whic:hub¢utetedfov HOJtOHIW‘o
0m; mama: ms [at pumi- pm on bom-
lmMﬂ-uﬂkdm'ﬂ’ Win {a that m ugh
nod almpcly with manual. to no i! h is can dream
it any. cum"! Wax 0' the m and i! 90-
Newman aid NW“ -. Marduk. '

"ltmybavcw avg "l hwhmitmbo
oﬂu in hen o! mum. wduuwmm
hen?- oa AW «any in

Mom H.000 0! Hon ~ remit", why." and Dr
Roan mauled 40M . . who 5 bad m
:‘i’cu ate reed?“ so: a? No; Vail“. «I

wanna: m t - c m

cl :5. m 323' Mia:
CSO: 5320/9100
5

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000400080014-4
CHINA REPRESENTED AT "H0 COURSE ON DRUG ADDICTION
Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MRNING POST in English 28 Oct 81 p 14

[Text] China is represented for the first tine at a World Health Organisation
training course to help countries with drug addiction problem.

It is one of 10 countries whose doctors are attending the HBO Inter-Regional
Training Course on the treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts.

Local experts are addressing the three-week course which began yesterday.

The Secretary for Security, Hr Inn. Davies, the Director of Medical and Health

Services, Dr ILL. Thong, and the Conissioner for Narcotics, Hr 8.1. Lee attended
the opening ceremony.

The chairman of the Action Comittee Against Narcotics, Sir Albert Rodrigues,
said at "Ho's request the connittes was organising the course for the third
consecutive year because of its past success.

Speaking at the opening ceremony in the Legislative Council Chamber, Sir Albert
said that Nongkong had not found nanawer to narcotics abuse.

"But we have made a great effort to develop a system to neet our own special
needs," he said.

"We have over the past decade sade considerable achievements in attacking the
twin problem of drug abuse and trafficking."

He estimated the addict population at about 100,000.

Drug addiction remained one of our serious social problems which had to be
tackled with continual deternination and persistence.

Local doctors are attending the training course with doctors from other Asian
countries and Egypt.

cso: 5320/9099
REPORT ON DELHI CONFERENCE ON DRUG ABUSE

Madras THE HINDU in English 21 Oct 81 p 8

my“ M.“

as. . mm M
K m mumwwm
Rmmmmm M mmww
WMMWWQ “Wm mmmm
4?de mu hmbwmmw. mMme

WWW mm mm mm

[Text]

W
Wm”. WM

wmwmmm

9%

mm

mm... Em .mmmmm m
mm . Mm? “mam gm»
mm mummimwmmmw
mmmmww mm mm “mm... mm
mmmﬁ Wm mmwwmm n. .nm mww
WWW Wmmmmw mmwmmmm Wm
WM mmm mmmmamm Wm ”WM
gm mmw m mmmmw Wham
mum mam ummémm

m ”mmwmmxmw Tm “mmmmw

5300/7005

C80:
CHARAS SMOKING WIDESPREAD--80 percent of the coeds in India smoke chores. This
information was revealed in a report published by the government. It further adds
that there are regular dens selling chares cigarettes in the hostels of colleges and
universities. The coeds openly buy the chsres cigarettes free there and then smoke
then sitting in groups. On several occasions, the coeds have forced their teachers
also to smoke churns. During the current ygsr._60 teachers have resigned after

being harassed by such wayward students. (Texs/ {Rawalpindi TAHBBR in Urdu
21 Oct 81 p g/ 9779

C50: 5300/4549
DEIAILS 0F DRUG-BUYING TRIPS AROUND ASIA BAKED AT TRIAL

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

Christchurch THE PRESS in English 23 0c: 81 p 5

[Text]

P \ Auckland .

The alleged :ccond Iteu-.
tenant“ In a drug syndrcate'
tom the liteh Court at Ant-it-
Imto vestrroat- that he paid
tutu-- m J Bangkok taxt
driver Mf nor-Ito. but pulled
out ol the neat at)“ he
became uneasy about It

The man who MS btcn
men name suppression and
Imtnuntl} lrnm matter 7
imrtilllwn. told the ('0qu II
was tortunatc that he lett
Thailand mnerwtn- ho: would
have hm: «at-n; tn '- That
prim“ now instead ot one to
Net Zealand.

ilc was ‘n’lnﬁ evidence-
under cmse-esamtttation by
Mr Barry Wilson. delenre
counsel tor one at the
accused Col-n James Prat.
aged ii. rnmpan) dtrector.
oi ﬂtllshorough.

Pratt and ms coaccuaed.
Glenda Faro Mettries. aeed
38. an unemployed batik
t- Ian. at Atundalc. have den-
“N a )0an entry nl mm"-
In: heroin on “act. a at
Chrtslchutth and two counts
oi Importing morpntne on
Dcccmher .1 and ion! ll.

Prast has dented a turther
charge oi importing mor.
home on Scptember at last
ycar

They havt also dented
three rooms oi supNYtng.
two at conspiring to supply.
and two at a-nsptrtn; to
moon her-tin and morphine

The In." hot-m: .\lr Jus-
I-ce Holland surrounded by

ttebt security. is expected to
last three to four weeks
The witness sand went
to Thailand to Februa tnth
ahom ”2.000 after a contact
in Singapore tailed to show

up

He and Prast had die
cusaed the blllty at him
some to and to "look
around to see ti something
could be bought? prior to HIS
lethn' New Zealand.

lie said be arranged to buy
heroin from a Danna taxi
driver whom he met one
night.

Alter the driver brought
him a sample oi the drugs
he id hunt a deposit at

But he tell uneasy and
lelt the country without the
herom.

The witness said he did not
try to see the contact again
and get his money hack
because oi his "measy leel-

III‘.

"I just wanted to act out oi
the place." he said. .

A tearch by customs at
Bangkok when he was louv-
tng had upset and lmbtened
lttm.

Asaresttlthcdtdnotvant
to carry the balance of the
:asb bactt with him and left
thaaknb‘oxwithg‘muh-
i e tn a a
totei (or an Air New gem
:abui crew steward toatne
mopresaedl to cit up.

Oh the way cit' through
iydnes- he said he stayed
nth irieods with whom he
was involved in another host-
iese venture.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4
I: .3: :— I 5:5 5 .80
.53.}. 32.3 2 3 2..
25. Nag-i =5: .33
$94 8 9:28.55

2. 38 v3: :2. 9.5.
E... - 8.83.38... 5. o.
33. 8 .582: . 2 8
:5 3. <3. a... an 18
.32» 8 83 8. «3. 28
3: So 329. 8 9.83..
.23 .333. E u 95.
c8:— Exrn 5.. 3:38.! .

= :8 v3.2. .3
«.5. :3. ya 12: a .33

macaw 3 93mg: 5 u
u an $.39 J: 75.2 3. I.
BRIEFS

DRUG DEALER. DISTRIBUTOR JAILED--Ue111ngton, 13 Nov (AFP)-A New Zealand drug finan-
cier and dealer was today jailed for 17 years for importing and distributing heroin
and morphine. Colin James Prast of Auckland was handed down the heaviest prison
term ever imposed on a New Zealand drug boss. A high court judge called his crime
the gravest of its kind to cone before a New Zealand court. Praat'a chief distribu-
tor. 26-year-old Glenda Fave Menzies. was jailed for 12 years. Praat. a 41-year-old
company director who was the organiser, financier and brains behind the drug ring.
admitted eight charges of ilporting and supplying morphine and heroin. Menzies

was found guilty of supplying both drugs during her three week trial. [Bong Kong
APP in English 0552 GMT 13 Nov 81 BK]

C80: 5300/4558

11
CUSTOMS STILL AHAITING PROHISED DOGS FOR DRUG DETECTION
Karachi MORNING NEWS in English 3 Nov 81 p 5

[Text] The Custom's drug enforcement agency in the city is still trying to sniff
out the whereaboutsof the much promised German "drug detective dogs."

Mr C. A. Jehangir. member can (Customs) had stated in September that the dogs, with
their handlers, would assist the local drug detection cell.

The dogs were expected to assist the customs agencies but the Karachi and
hyderabad collectorates, it is learnt. still do not have the services of these
trained dogs.

A German team visited Pakistan last year and a comprehensive training programme
was planned for the interception of narcotics with the help of dogs especially
trained to sniff out drugs. The dogs were to be used at all the airports in the
country. first at Karachi. to detect narcotics. They were also to be utilised in

special raids by the drug detection squad.

Pakistani custom officers are to leave for Germany. next year to be trained in
handling these drug detective dogs.

However. to date. the dogs have, apparently. still not scented their way to the
Karachi airport drug detection cell.

The custom officers are still awaiting their promised canine support, in their bid
to check the illicit drug trade. through the country.

CSO: 5300/4556

12
BRIEFS

CHARAS. OPIUH SEIZURB-Is1anabad. Oct 31--The Customs authorities yesterday
recovered 32 Kgs of 'charas' and three kilos of opium fron a vehicle found
near village Mehra Aku. Golra. A custols squad, on a vigilance duty, tried

to check a car on 6.1. Road, but the driver ignored then and tried to abscond.
The Customs men recovered the 'opiul' and 'charas' worth about lakhs of rupees
from the car. A case against the said driver has been registered under the
Custons Act and the police were trying to trace his. [Text] [Islamabad THE
MUSLIM in English 1 Nov 81 p 3]

OPIUH $312!) NEAR AFGHAN BORDER--Islansbad. 19 Nov (AFP)-—Police seized 55 kilograms
(121 pounds) of opium in an operation against drug peddlers in the Mslakand District
bordering Afghanistan. official sources said today. The contraband drug, valued at
$50,000, was concealed in four cannisters in a car near Takhtbai last night. The

driver was reportedly arrested. The opium was being snuggled into Pakistan for on-

ward transportation to an unnamed foreign country. the sources said. [Bong Kong
AF? in English 1727 GMT 19 Nov 81 BK]

CSO: 5300/4557

13
KHUN SA'S REUARD FOR INFORMATION ON NARCOTICS AGENTS
BK271456 Bangkok POST in English 27 Oct 81 p 3

[Text] Chiang Rai—-Notorious golden triangle drug kingpin thus 8a has offered re-
wards for information on about 30 narcotics agents based in the north. an author-
itative source said yesterday.

Khun Sa. alias Chang Chi-fu, offered 5,000 to 10,000 baht for details and background
on the top Thai and foreign narcotics agents based in Chiang hai, the source said.

he also ordered his troops to fight back if they encounter government forces in
future, said the source. In the past the troops usually just fled the scene, some»
tines leaving behind mules carrying loads of opium

Khun Sa's order came after a 700~nan drug caravan belonging to him clashed with a
platoon of rangers from Pakthongchai District of Nakhon Ratchasima. A fierce battle
raged fro 2 days, 8-9 October, and four of his caravan guards were killed.

The source also said that Khun 5a was believed to have set up a new stronghold at
Ban Payapai on the Burmese border close to Thailand, under the protection of abOut
2,000 armed Shan United Army irregular troops.

He reportedly moved the troops and a number of people from his Ban Bin Task strong-
hold to Ban Payapai and Ban Nae Hor in Bursa after his drug caravan clashed with the

ranger forces.

His wounded caravan guards were reportedly sent for treat-ant at the hideout of a
close aid in Ban Pa Hued, close to Mae Sai District.

At present. only about 200 people, mainly women and children, were left at Ban Bin
Taek, the source said.

The drug kingpin also ordered his men to collect and destroy the leaflets announcing
half n million baht reward for his capture, airdropped last month in Ban “in Task,
the source added.

Meanwhile, the fate of a menber of s 39-nan ranger platoon who was reported nissing

during the clash with Khun Sa's caravan guards remains unknown, but he is believed
to have been captured by Khun Sa's troops, the source said.

14
Border patrol police unit 508, based near Ban Bin Taek, was assigned to locate him
after government troops moved to clear the battle scene near Ban Bin Taek and Ban
A Hai shortly after the clash.

The unit helped take 8 rangers who were wounded in the clash for treatment. The
rangers reportedly told authority that they went to Rhun Sa's area on a special
mission to arrest him, on the orders of "high superiors." They claimed that their
unit would receive 12 million baht reward if the mission was accomplished.

The mission, which was meant to he secret--no provincial officials or border patrol
police in Chiang Rai were notified-~was a disaster. Ten rangers were killed, eight
injured and one is still missing.

The battle came when Prime Minister Pram Tinsulanon was in the United States. Nar-
cotics problems were among major issues he discussed with American leaders.

Last week border patrol police unit 508 tried to find the missing ranger in the area
of Ban Huang Song, about 10 kilometers northeast of Ban Bin Taek. where it was thought
he was being held.

When the 8?? unit arrived they were told that Khun Sa's troops just left the village.
They reportedly went to join Khun Sa at his new stronghold in Ban Payapai, the source
said.

In September, Khan Sa offered to cooperate with the Thai Government to end opium cul-
tivation and drug trafficking in the region. his lZ-page proposal was sent to nar-
cotics authorities, including the chairman of the office of the narcotics control
board. Gen Prachuap Suntharangkun.

Gen Prachuap immediately turned down the proposal. saying Thailand will not make any
deal with Khun Se, and will work only with the Burmese Government as far as suppres-
sion of opium cultivation and drug trafficking are concerned.

CSO: 5300/4560

15
BRIEFS

DRUG INFORHER KILLED IN HAT YAI--Hat Yai-A hotel worker who acted as an informer for
the U.S. drug enforcement administration was fatally wounded in a shooting in Huang
District yesterday afternoon, police said. Police said Naowarat Natcharabut. 29,

was shot on Niphat-Uthit 3 road at 2 p.3. by two armed men on a motorcycle. Narowarat
was rushed to the District Hospital where he died at 4:65 p.m. from bullet wounds to
the chest and right shoulder. Police said they believed that Naowarat's killers

were hired by drug traffickers who had learned that he was an informer. They said
information provided to the DBA by Naowarat. who worked in the Amarin hotel in ﬂat
Yai, had led to several drug arrests and narcotics seizures in the south this year.
[Bangkok POST in English 20 Nov 81 p 3 BR]

DRUG SUPPRESSION EFFORTS-Interior Minister Sitthi Chirarot told newsmen at the
interior ministry this morning that there is no need to amend the present narcotics
laws because they already carry heavy penalities. The authorities are doing their
utmost to suppress narcotics, but rarely can they arrest the culprits. however, he
said, Prime Minister Gen Prem Tinsulanon pledged during the recent cabinet meeting

to make serious efforts to wipe out opium cultivation and heroin production in Thai-
land. Thailand will cooperate with the international police forces from the United
States and Burma in this matter. Asked about new suppression measures, the interior
minister said that there will probably be no need for new measures as the authorities
are continuing their suppression operations against opium growers and heroin pro-
ducers while the naroctics control board office. with police cooperation, is taking
action against drug trafficking in the country. [Excerpt] [na29ose7 Bangkok Domestic

Service in Thai 1300 GMT 28 Oct 81]

SOUTHERN DRUG HAUL--Songkhla-Police yesterday arrested two men and accused them of
possessing 5.8 kilogrammes of No 4 first grade heroin and 560 grammes of morphine
worth about 3 million baht at a house in Huang District, police reported last night.
Police identified the suspects as Nirot Chonchit. 33, and Chun Thipwalak, 36, and
said they had just arrived in the province from Bangkok by train. The two men denied
possessing 15 bags of double u-globe heroin and two morphine blocks allegedly found
hidden in the house. [Bandkok POST in English 27 Oct 81 p 3 BK]

CITY HEROIN HAUL--Anti-narcotic police yesterday arrested three men and seized 54 kg
of pure heroin on wiphawadi Rangsit Road after a year-long intensive investigation
and surveillance of the network. Deputy Prime Minister Prachuap Suntharangkun said
the heroin was worth at least 10.8 million baht locally and its price could go up

to 2,000 million baht in black market in the United States. Police said the three
suspects, one of them a real estate investor, belonged to an international drug

'16
trafficking ring with connections in Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia and Europe.
Locally, they normally supplied narcotics from the north to the south through the
southern city of ﬂat Yai and they were planning to expand their racket into the
United States, police said. Police said the No 4 heroin was taken to Bangkok from
the Northern Province of Lampang. The heroin was neatly packed in 121 packages.
Police identified the leader of the group as Kitti Rungphara, 60, the manager of Haha
Nakhon housing estate on Hiphawadi Rangsit Road. They said the residence of Kitti
who is ethnic Chinese was in $01 Nuannoi off Ekkamai Road. Two others, Loephong
Tangphaisan alias Ku, 65. and Chalong Thipdacho, ‘0, said they had been hired to
drive vehicles transporting the drugs several times. They said they received 40,000
baht for each assignment. Loephong. also an ethic Chinese, lived on Horachak Road
while Chalong's residence was in Thung Hahamek, Yannawa. Police said they had
followed the drug racket for over a year and learned that the suspects collaborated
with Haw Chinese in the northern provinces of Chiang Kai and Chiang Rai in drug
trafficking in both local and overseas markets. [Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English
28 Oct 81 pp 1. 10 BK]

HUNT FOR DRUG MASTERHIND--Police yesterday ordered a manhunt for the mastermind be-
hind a drug trafficking network that was involved in one of the biggest drug seizures
on Tuesday. Three suspects including a real estate investor were arrested with 54 kg
of pure heroin but police believed there must be a "bigger person" who controls the
racket which has an international connection in Asia and Europe. Zone 3 provincial
police commissioner Pol Lt Gen Det Khattaphan said 690 drug suspects were arrested in
the north between July and September during which the so-called "Intharathep 1" plan
was launched. Police also arrested 1,014 persons for illegal possession of arms and
another 58 for owning war weapons under the plan aimed at extensively suppressing
crime. Pol Lt Gen Det expressed concern on the trend of increasing crime rate in

the north, saying this year's crime rate will be at least 16 percent higher than last
year's. [Bangkok NATION REVIEH in English 29 Oct 81 pp 1, 14 BK]

POPPY FIELD ERADICATION CAMPAIGN-~Chiang Hai--Anti-narcotic and profincial officials
have begun a campaign to eradicate poppy fields here by supplying hilltribe people
with bean and sweet corn seedlings in exchange for their poppy seedlings. Informed
sources in the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) said that hilltribe people
in 51 villages had submitted 61.76 kg of poppy seedlings to authorities and in return
took away 15 tons of been seedlings and 800 kg of sweet corn seedlings. The 51
villages are included in the plan to "eradicate" the poppy fields here. Another 10
villages here are targets of a campaign by ONCB which plans to send policemen to
destroy all the poppy fields there next month. Director of the substitute crops
dividion Aran Suwanbuppha said everything was ready for the campaign to start next
month and all local hilltribe men were getting seedlings to substitute their poppies.
Informed sources said that no defence volunteers or village scouts will be employed
in the campaign to destroy the poppy fields. "He will also avoid using soldiers but
will employ policemen,“ one of them said. However, if necessary a small number of
soldiers will be mobilized to help in the campaign. he said. [BK060343 Bangkok
NATION REVIEW in English 31 Oct 81 p 2]

NARCOTICS TRAFFIC VIA BBIJING--Thailand has detected a shift from Hong Kong to Beijing
as a transit point being used by narcotic traffickers to avoid the regional law en-
forcement dragnet, a regional conference was told recently. The report was made by
the Thai delegation head, police Haj Gen Pow Sarasin, during the wellington meeting
of the Far East region operation heads of narcotics law enforcement agency between

17
19-23 October. Diplomatic sources said that the Chinese Government recently informed
the Thai Embassy in Beijing that a number of drug traffickers from Bangkok had used
Beijing as their new transit point. The Thai Embassy in the Chinese capital has in
turn reported the "new trend" to the Thai Government. The regional conference also
agreed to a long list of recommendations including better coordination and exchange
of intelligence among law enforcement agencies among member countries. [Bangkok
NATION REVIEW in English 10 Nov 81 p l BK]

New DRUG LAN SUPPORTED--Internationa1 narcotics suppression officials have been given
full support to Thailand's plans to empower drug enforcement officials with the right
to confiscate the assets of convicted drug traffickers. This was announced by police
Maj Gen Pow Sarasin who recently returned from an international meeting on narcotics
suppression in Wellington, New Zealand. he revealed that Thailand's tough new law.
which a subcommittee of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) first started
drafting more than a year ago, is nearly complete. According to the proposed law.
once a trafficker is convicted. his assets and bank balances will be frozen until it
can be proven that they were not acquired through drug-dealing. If it is proven that
the assets were obtained from narcotics, they will be confiscated by the state. He
added that the ONCB is also considering plans to amend the 1979 Narcotics Act. The
proposed amendment will focus on altering the penalties for drug addicts who volun-
tarily seek treatment without being arrested. [Bangkok POST in English 12 Nov 81

p 6 BK]

DRUGS COURIER GETS 20 YEARS--A Chiang Mai drug courier, who was arrested in Then
Buri last November with 15 kilogrammes of morphine and 88 kilogram-es of raw opium
smuggled from the north, was sentenced to 20 years jail yesterday by the criminal
court. The court convicted Chaloem Bunyarit, 41. on charges of possessing the drugs
with intent to sell them, but dropped charges against his 19-year-old-son. Ramon. for
lack of evidence. Ramon was travelling in his father's car when it was intercepted
by officials of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) on 2 November last
year. The drugs were found in a specially-made compartment under a ZOO-litre oil
barrel. Chaloem admitted that he was hired to deliver the drugs to a rendezvous in
Phuket for a fee of 250,000 baht. while Ramon denied any knowledge of the drugs.
[BK200251 POST in English 20 Nov 81 p 5]

POLICEMAN 0N HEROIN CHARGE--Uhon Ratchathani--A police corporal attached to Huang
District police station has been arrested on a charge of selling heroin. police re-
ported. He was identified as Ong-at Nachomtian, 26. Police said he was arrested in
Ban Natsuanya in Tmhon Kamnsmssp on Harinchamrap District on Wednesday, with heroin
in his possession. Police said the arrest followed a tip-off that a policeman was
selling heroin the village. Ong-at was taken to Usrinchamrap police station for in-
terrogation. IBKZOOZSl Bangkok POST in English 20 Nov 81 p 5]

Two HEROIN SNUCCLERS ARRESTED--A Bong Kong Chinese and an Akha tribesman were held

at the weekend in separate drug arrests which yielded a total of more than two kilo-
grammes of top grade No 4 heroin. On Saturday [16 November] night, customs investi-
gation officials at Don Huang airport arrested the Hong Kong National, Chol Wing Cho,
21, after allegedly finding 1,350 kilogrmmmes of heroin in his luggage. They said Cho,
who was about to board a Lufthansa flight to Frankfurt when he was detained, had
allegedly hidden the heroin in 4 boxes of Chinese dolls. The heroin, in six packages,
was found in custom-made secret compartments. Cho, who arrived in Bangkok early this
month on a tourist visa was charged with possessing drugs with intent to sell and

'18
attempted snuggling. The Akha tribesnan m arrested at ﬂat Yai railway station
yesterday after southern narcotics suppression unit police allegedly found 700 grannea
of heroin in his possession. The tribesnan, identified as N30 Sisonbat, allegedly
told police the heroin Has a "sample" which he was hired to bring from Chiang Mai to
deliver to a prospective buyer who was interestsd in ordering a larger shipment.
[81(200251 Bangkok POST in English 16 Nov 81 p 2]

CSO: 5300/4560

'19
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

RCMP SEIZES MOO-MILLION DRUG CAO!!!

Ottawa THE CITIZEN in English 16 Oct 81 p 110

[Text]

TORONTO (CF). -
RCMP ofﬁcers aeized‘
illegal drugs with a street
volee eetintated at $200
million Wedneeday follow.
in; a no battle at Col-
linswoed Ai 120. kn»
northwestol - '

:Fonr occupante -of-a.;
small private plane.
etc-pod during the M"
'ogu. which uncovered an ilk;
ternatiooal police operation
hainat a major drop-
nnuulin; ring. police aid.
Nude “ ’

.' . lrtep.‘ Sefrin Gitttlter:s
head of the RCMP‘: Tor-.
onto drog- section. aaid.
three suspecte,eere arr'eet-'
ed separately in Toronto
and charged with conspira-

‘cy to trafﬁc in metbagttn

lone. Police have seized

about 5.800 lineal“ ol'

the drug. preeeed into pill:
known as qmledee. - "

fEThe drop had nobheen
precisely weighed. but
their street valge has been

estimated at about $200
migion. Ginger said. . ' -
die: a airport: on
both sides of the Canada-
U.S. border have been
alerted to watch for the
plane. which escaped alter
a small quantity.“ the
drug was-loaded on to it.

CSO: 5320/009

‘V. .. «om—v“ h-'n
'eerta'llt Er?» 52d” at

th of the plane'e ecce-

'3'» 'and. belleve they
if” the identity o? the
(earth. Allan believed to
bells. rddepn. . - 3

- are Neil'Levvia.‘
'27. of “Rimbaud-1U.»
Laura H ‘ .11. ttl‘ttenr—E
by m’ .and John;

Romeo, Im‘... .
- The one” ' f

' reached m;
e 12:30 on: Wean-a
day at :C°'!'E‘Y°°‘.'

“mu said two RCMP;
olfieere not involved in the
inveetigation had landed.
925L921! New to "'2'!
at the, aim -ie
arteteﬂed and rarely has
' tair

had a ‘eeeuel coo-

” with-M people
who nld were vault-
in. for ‘ t“ to be de’
llvered to their plane.

Ci ‘1‘. ' I

We van arrived and.
two more people itnnte--
diately began loading:
boxes into the plane.
which had its engine! rno

“Within“averyfewtnia-

eta." Giother aid. nine
RCMP omeere who were.

20

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00860R000400080014-4
POLICE BREAK 'HAJOR' COCAINE RING

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

Windsor THE WINDSOR STAR in English 24 Oct 81 p 3

[Text]

\‘arcotics agents say they‘ve broken up a "ma' do-

it?" distributing ring“ after a raid on an Essex nty
me. .

Cpl. Lance Hodgson of the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police said investigators seized what they suspect is
cocaine Withastreet value of about36.000. -

Four persons have been arrested on various drug
charges.

The combined Windsor Police-RCMP drug squad
began its raid at a house on Con. 4. Colchester South
Township. about 9 pm. Thursday. The investigation
continued overnight with four persons arrested and
charged Friday.

Hodsson said a quantity of other drugs was sewed in,
the raid. including what police suspect is LSD with a
street valueof about $600. _ .

COLCHESTER South police assisted the narcotics
agentsinthe raid. Cpl. Hodponsaid._ . ' .

Cpl. Hodpon said the investigation is continuum.
through the weekend. '

Clark Brltlaeic. 27. ol'Con. 4.Colcheeter$outh Town-
ship. was charged Friday with one count of possession
of a narcotic for the purpose of trafﬁcking and one
count of possession of a restricted drug for the purpose
oftralﬁcking. ' . .

Dell Marie Pendleton. 2|. ol' Detrort. Mich. was

CSO: 5320/10

21

chatted withonecounto
couatofpoateaaionofani
lickinandonecountof:
l‘orthepurposeoltrafﬁcl

Karon Susan Gather. 2
charged with one count t

Laminate.

of a mic for the pa:

countdponeaslonofana
The four were emigre:

tooandBrtlacicheldtnc

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02100: ClA-RDP02-00850R000400080014-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

POLICE RAID NETS HASHISB; 52m CHARGED

Ottawa THE CITIZEN in English 19 Sep 81 p 3

[Text]

Ann‘szzooo vorth o! huhlsh
oeized from' e Cumberland home
during 1 raid this week by Ontario
Provincial Police officers front
Rockland and Ottawa has resulted
in trafﬁcking chargqegaimt seven
are: residents,

The seven. who nude 0 prelimi-
nary court appearance Friday. Inve
been remanded in custody-until
Monday when they err to scheduled
to a in pron/incl: court.

Polmmwhohndthemon Re-

' l Reed 34 under surveillance
or some time. obo'seiud a hand-
gun in the Thursday night raid.

“It um pretty obvims what we";

going on there." aid on OPP
spokesman in Roeklud. “People
werealweys oroundthehome.”

Chergetl with mention 0! drop
for the purpose at Making and
occupancy to trafﬁc drugs are Yvon
Below.- Zl. and Peal Aeberg. 20.

C50: 5320/009

22

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000400080014-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

ABUNDANT SUPPLIES 0P GOOD-QUALITY HEROIN APPEAR IN VANCOUVER

Vancouver THE VANCOUVER SUN in English 16 Oct 81 pp Al-AZ

[Article by Glenn Bohn]

[Text]

lore abundant supplies ol 'good-
quality heroin appear to he ﬂowing
intoVaneouveronceagain.

Heroin users and some protes-
sionals said during interviews that
new heroin began appearing in late
summer.

‘11 their observations are accu-
rate. it would he the first major
change in the heroin scene since the
early lS’IOs, when the quality and
availability was reduced dramati~
rally by a serieaoi arrests.

Said one user. contacted through
one at the provincial methadone
treatment clinics: “it's just like the
old days."

Prolesaionals who keep an eye on
the heroin community oilered coo-
nicting opinions on the availability
oi heroin.

Butpolleesaidtbeyhsdheenex-
pectiog that abundant supplies
would enter Vancouver this summer
oriail.andNichPtuns.onaoithe
most experienced drug counsellors
here. said it has already arrived.
Puma is a iomer heroin user now at
Connections. the longest continuing
strcetworker program in Vancou-
yer.

Said Puma: "The good stuii has
hit Vancouver .‘There s an
ample supply oi heroin on the
streets again."

The same trend has been noticed
by probation oiiicer Helen Thorn-
son: "Quite a test at my clients

haven'thaen 'us‘ing ior quitea
while. but now heroin is available
.. .. We haven’t seep many

posseﬁion-oi-heroin charges com-
ing across our desh ior several
years,butnowthenseemstohea
lotoithem."

Sgt. Harris Coll oi the city/m pollen

drugsguad ititlie'al
sa :3.ch
.comparedtolsinAu-

Coil said the additional arrests ne-
ileet a greater supply of heroin on
the streets and a resulting increase
in trenching. And since suppii s
are more abundant, be said. t e
quality has also improved because
dealirs are not diluting supplies as
me

He said the street heroin capsule
has increased in quality since the
summer to three- or iounper-cent
heroin itom l.6-per-cent heroin.

Supt. Lyman Banschel. head oi
the RCIP’s drug section in Greater
Vancouver, said international police
reports show that a bumper crop at
opium poppies was harvested this
springinthe Goiden‘i‘riangie—a
mountainous region straddling
Thailand. Burma and Laos.

The most recent 8. C health

minisu'yreportonthesuhjeetisa

23

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4
level‘ol addiction. an option that
some users emphasised has meant
turnincto crime.

lienschelsaldtbemoatrecent'sei!

zureaarestnlinthetwolnthree-
per-cent range.althou:hone sample
was monthanelaht-per-eentpme.

“it wouldn't surprise me it we're
aeelnganewuend."heaald.“i!it’s
occur-ins. it would he the moat ale
niﬂcent change in years. The last
time we really had an abundance oi
thedrugwa‘sin Mt."

it was the long mm that led
some heroin users to turn to metha-
done. adrugthatheruinuaerssayls
equally as addictive as heroin.
Threeyears aeo.theprovincislpov-

ernmentatoppedaeceptlunbvpe-f

tlents on its methadone mainte
nance pron-am Dr. Ron lltler ot
the Alcohol and Dru; Commission
said about no people are on this pro-
gram now in Greater Vancouver
and 9 more are on a threomonth
methadone withdrawal propram.
He climated that 150 more people
are given methadone by W
in private practices.

Hitler asld doctors on the govern-
mere program have not detected an
increaaehltheoualltyolhernhg

C50: 5 320/10

somehmin’ wisdom“ in "703??" '

some people on methadone are re-

momma-norm.

ﬂrstchoiee.
Oneexheruinuaerdeseﬁbedtwo

triends on a methadone proaram '

whoare“uaina"onceanaln: “Until
lately.ittheyscoreddxcaps.they
wouldn‘teetanymmomdit‘rhat
wasallthemorereasoniorthemto
mahtainthemaelvesonmathadoae.

“Duttlseotherdaytheywentout
andtlnedthrsecaps apleeel‘l'hay
monthenodiaatateolaeml-con-
uhnaneaa brought about by a
strong doaeot heroin). I: iriend

'aaﬂﬂmtkbedthey‘nhndin

year's.”
Aaothersoureeotlntornlatlo'non
herniapuritaiabr. RobertSchnlse.
a medical maverick who belleves
that ruthless policemen and vio-
lencethatruultshnmheruin'sille-
pal statuuloee moredamapa than

Schnlae earned the maverick
label in ms when be publicly an-
nouueed he had prescribed a men
phine mahtcnance prom tor a
patient. contrary to approved prao
tics. lie was subsequently barred
irom preacrihina narcotics tor one

26

—q—~ --

Beasld“certeinpeople
unwithtwotoaixaomplesother-

.oiaeaehweehiortesuna.

Samonthsalonhesampleawere
aelowas.

MMaamuchasﬂ cert”.
Such quality is dangerous unless
the user is aware oi it and uses the-
appropriatedoeaxemesald.
Schulaa. like Hitler and m;
counsellor Puma. see a trend to
‘deuse"—theuseotawide

- variety oi drugs.

dependingon
availability and price. Today. 3h:
said, people who use heroin are
more llhaly to use barbiturates and
alcoholaswail.
Hitler and Puma are concerned
thattheVancouverheroinscenewill

"provide

Warexoday. he'
said. "an awful lot of the stuli is

b

inﬂow a trend in the-U.s.. where-

middle and upper-class cocaine

'uaaraaruenperimentlnawlthhuh-
' quiltyheroin.

Iltler said there have been re-
pnrtsof’O-tnS-per eentpmeher-
oinin8anFrancisco.‘i'henew¢rnup
fmm‘hm tbeoomead
w no
dlctedlitheydon’tinleetthsdna
lntotheirhloodatreems. \ .
USE OF IMPORTING CHARGE CRITICIZED AS UNEVEN

Toronto THE GLOBE AND HAIL, WEEKEND EDITION in English 26 Oct 81 p 12

[Article by Zuhair Kashmeril

[Text]

When a nyear-oid U. s. woman.
the daughter 0! a raiiwa executive.
,was caught hringi $18. worth oi
hashish into . she was sen-
tenced to three years in prison.-

When a poorly educated. 20-year-old
Jamaican woman sin in $6.”
worth at hashlsh. she was sentenced
to seven years. .

A Jamaican man received two
years less a day tor in ”mo
worth lolwmariiuana. whle a woman
from same may seven
years for smuggling if: same
amount.

Another Jamaican woman. smug-
gling 95.000 worth 0! marl . got
seven years. So did a i-year-old
Dutch woman carrying Shim worth
ot hashish.

importing narcotic into Canada is
a crime carrying a mandatory sen-
tBenceoiatieastsevenyuexa‘rsigprison.

ut not everyone ca t ringin
drugs into the country is charged wl
importing. '

Decision Res ts With
Prosecutors

'lhe decision whether to charge
someone with importing or with a'
lesser oilence lies with prosecutors In
the federal Justice Department. who
have been accused by lawyers and
lied overthepastflveyeatsol
a ying their discretion unevenly,
whimsicnllyandca ‘ .

Judge Kenneth oi Bramp
ton Provincial Court. where d
cases irom Toronto true

43:?
5
a
g
t
a
3

35
l.

ﬁié
egg;
E”;
3% =
of
5%

g;
E;
2%
- i
ta

i
2
E
5
E
e

3
§
2

g

prl

5;;
.. E
3!

23%
5 i

Toronto in April. 1978, carryin
mus oi hashish oil worth ism.

week. lilies Bastian. a zom-
oid Bwhicolte woman. started serving
her seven-year sentence. atter losing
anappeal.

5

at criminal prosecutor in Toronto.
saidinanintewiewthisweeltthatit

Miss Baldwin were arrested today.
she probably wwld not be lacing the
seven-year minimum sentence; even
importing O pounds oi marijuana
:vouId not Human“ in an
mporting. , sa .

lie and «:3: nation-wide guide.
lines created in the mid-mus. prose-
cutors loot: at'the amount of drugs
invoived (whether the smugglers are
involved in a "signiﬁcant commercial
vulture”). the method of smuggling
(whether aorneone else is being used
3.3.: incltzt'lin‘rcrlm {mi

( me
and whether the accused cooperates
with police '

But the apnl‘i‘cetion o! the guidelines
has shined. . McCracken says that
in September, last. prosecutors began
to apply the guidelines in a dillerent.
lessstringent fashion. '

Even judges What's? out how the
monitors make e r decisions.
Judge langdon said this week: "The
court never knows what lactors are
used to exercise the discretion. In the

.in eoithecases that came
mew...itdidn«apmrtobe
“Md.whenitdoesnotappeartoi>e

eouitahle. then justice does not ap
peartohedone."

Importing Charge
Eventually Dropped

The "hammer oi proeeantorial dis-
cretion". as one lawyer describes it.
is oiten used to press accused smu -
glers into cooperating. in 1919. '
people were charged with importing
2x. a so: 333 so soc: 3:52...
3 2.5.8: 8.. 33—. I s 325. 2:
an .8239: 323. :8 3.3332.
R :5 898.33..

9: 9.33:» 52:. is 3:5.
39!. 5a 333 o— ..2 33:3 8:.
.88 mu 8.! 8 Ga 18 2488..
case:- 6858 .33. o. 88.8 58
688.55. £33283; 828;
8:5 8 u .88.. 9-8». 9. <3.
3338.. 3 83: $33.

138059“ and :5... 9823.5 3
88 2.3.3:.— 2. 6.9.3.. 2... 3.5.
8. =5 3: 333.5. «can». .3
=8 .3 :83 3.. «99. :8:
9.5.... .5 33. 8a .83.» 838
9599 .33 or» 3:. ”3.83.8
82.3.5“ 5 38 SE 3333 8

.15 033352: nag—3:3 $039.80
BRIEFS

mom CHARGE-d 35-year-old Australian was charged ‘Ihursday with importing 55
grass of heroin into Canada, North Vancouver RCMP said. Police said Alan Keith
Ellison was also chargtd with possession for the purposes of trafficking. RCMP
from Mississauga. Ontario. worked with the North Vancouver drug squad on the

investigation. Wayne Nomn Oliver, 34, of Coonbs, s.c., was also charged with
possession for the purposes of trafficking. The RCMP spokes-an said the heroin

was high grade, with a street value of $500,000. [Text] (Vancouver 1113 VANCOUVER
SUN in English 16 Oct 81 p A17]

CONVICTION ON HEROIN COUNTS--Victoria (CP)-!'our men were convicted in county
court Saturday on drug conspiracy charges in connection with the seizure of more
than a kilogram of heroin worth an estimated $7.5 million on the street. The
jury deliberated for 12 hours before convicting lee Snyder of Central Saanich,
Patrick Snyder of Surrey, Kiri]. Hasursk of Montreal and Steven Bran-well of

Edmonton of conspiracy to traffic in heroin. Brawell and has Snyder also were
found guilty of conspiracy to import heroin into Canada between May and November
of last year. [Text] [Vancouver rm: VANCOUVER SUN in English 26 Oct 81 p A3]

CSO: 5320/009

27
SATELLITE SYSTEM SUGGESTED MEANS TO COMBAT DRUG TRAFEICKING
La Pa: PRESENCIA in Spanish 22 Oct 81 sec 2 p 1

[Article by Hector Valdivia Rodriquez]: "A Multiple-Use 8atellite"]

[Text] In a PRESENCIA article published on 6 June 1971 under the title "Let

Us Use Our Rivers," and written by this reporter, the need was stgested for

the first time of replacing coca plantations with others of greater export

value. such as coffee, cacao and fruits, which we could raise in variety and
abundance in areas of such replacement in the subtropical part of this department.

That article, which is already 10 years old. suggested the installation in
hierbani. near Unduavi, of an industrial plant for fruit processing and canning,
coffee roasting and other activities; the site even offers advantages for a
specific infrastructure: excellent water quality from spring thaws, a pleasant
climate, a highway junction from the two Yungas and Deni and nearby transportation
to El Alto de La Pa: for the convenient distribution of the products manufactured.

A rapid review of that article would lead us to consider other facilities now
available: the proximity of a paved highway under construction to Beni, as an
important factor in the collection and distribution of products by heavy transport,
and of the planned Sakawaya hydroelectric dam, which will generate electricity

for the industrial plant in Hierbani.

At the time the article was published, the degrading effects of cocaine were not
known here, and it only called further attention to protecting our peasants from
tuberculosis. The chewing of coca leaves anesthetisss the digestive system,
reduces the appetite for food and prolongs physical strength for the difficult
work in the fields, and that is why so many people in our high mountain altiplano
and valley regions suffer from the disease.

Nobody, then, bothered to consider, much less study at any great length, the
possibilities offered by the plan for promoting the industrial progress of an
important productive region of the department; in addition, much than was spent
trying to prevent the consumption of coca leaves and gradually to eradicate its
cultivation.

28
It is well known that the cause of the rapid spread of drug use in the world is

due to mafias which for their own profit also encourage the vice in order to create
a greater demand for it; this dappened particularly after the Korean and Vietnam
wars. Now lives ruined by cocaine and other drugs rpovide harsh evidence to
governments of all countries favoring the eradication of this brutal traffic.

Transportation: In our country, the transportation of the drug in small plastic
packets by the peasants a method used by the traffickers in addition to land
vehicles and other ingenious and unsuspected ways, is easier to control than

the use of aircraft to cover long distances between countries; these small air-
craft. then, require a more rigorous control because of their short sojourn in
any one place, the speed with which they can flee and their larger cargo capacity.

If. to understand this better, we look at a statistical graph of the IGAO
[International Civil Aeronautics Organization], according to which Bolivia, with
592 landing strips. places eighth among the first 10 countries of the world, we
can say that this is relative, since there could be more than 1,000 airstrips well
camouflaged by nature itself, given the huge, flat expanse of Bani Department.

ICAO

Gauntries Airports 3nd Landing Strip;
United States 13,728
Brazil 1,645
Mexico 1,262
Canada 853
France 681
Colombia 675
Paraguay 666
Bolivia 592
Guatemala 661
Australia $60

The local press has already reported, on several occasions, the accidental dis-
covery of planes used by the traffickers simply because they had engine trouble

or because of delays in the arrival of gasoline supplies. We will never know how
many of these planes will continue to fly and to land furtively in Bolivia. We
would need many planes and other special equipment, as well as several radar
installations, to facilitate such an investigation, which because of the cost would
be a very ticklish problem for us.

Bolivia's case is not so isolated; thus the other countries of the Andean Group--
Peru. Ecuador, Colombia and even Venezuela, where coca plantations are also
cultivated on a major or minor scale. have similar problems and in addition to co-

caine are struggling tenaciously with other types of drugs just as dangerous or
more so.

Satellite: To present the case we must quote a few paragraphs from the biblio-
graphy on artificial satellites.

"The techniques applicable with artificial satellites are of very particular
interest since they permit us to combine for the first time a number of related
functions. such as telecommunications, emergency operations, air and ground traffic
control, the transmission of meteorological data and maritime, river and air radio-
navigation.

29
"Different surfaces of the same satellite can satisfy a great variety of combi-
nations and needs. Obviously, it remains in the hands of individual governments
to decide whether it is possible for a satellite system to be used for one or
several purposes. a decision which must take into account political, financial

and social considerations."

He already know the variety of services we can utilize from a satellite and its
admirable sensory power.

It has been a concern of uuzsco to interest the countries of the Andean area in
the benefits and low cost of education via satellite, given the more or less
homologous levels of education of those who make up the Andean Group, especially.
Now let us go back to the original premise: that of preventing or intercepting
the aerial transportation of the inhuman drug traffic, and let us say, ratherm
that among the Andean GrOup countries there is the desire to increase the educa-
tional benefits of a satellite; but also, by equipping it with a civil air con-
trol system and another for meteorological information for the agricultural sec-
tor. they can thus satisfy same of their other prime needs.

Several countries have educational satellites. The satellite to which the Andean
Group aspires would have a triple function: educational, civil air control and
agricultural meteorological information, these last two through a steady succession
of infrared photographs covering a total area of b,648,000 square kilometers. It
would be ideal if each country had two educational television channels to transmit
and receive its own respective programs, but this is very expensive for each country.
A minimum system might result in only two educational television channels, with the
receiving channel open to cover the five countries. To serve the three systems,

a central land station would be installed in one of the five countries.

Something tells us that the United States, as an interested party, might cooperate

without cost to the Andrean countries, in the launching and placement of the
"Bolivarian" satellite in a previously chosen place in space.

8735
C80: 5300/2045

30
nwr 311.1. T0 coxmor. coca rsoouc'nou nmmcnm
La Fe: m. sumo in Spanish 21 Oct 81 p 3

[Text] According to the Draft Bill for the Control of and Campaign Against Dan-
gerous Substances, which will take effect soon, plantations of coca in all de-
partments except La Pa: and Cochabamba are declared clandestine and illegal.

"As a result." the law states, "the National Council for the Campaign Against the
Narcotics Traffic is instructed to proceed with the systematic destruction of such
coca plantations without compensation in cases where the owners have failed to do
so within the 90-day period."

To establish the number of hectares used for coca cultivation, that cOuncil is
obliged to sponsor and finance. every 3 years, a Census of Producers of Coca
Leaves, which is considered a basic instrument in the control and implementation
of the respective policies and standards.

Replacement Policy

with regard to the policy of replacing coca plantations. the National Council
for the Campaign Against the Narcotics Traffic must take-into consideration the
following points:

Integrated rural development in such a manner as to be able to achieve the optimum
use of the material and human resourcesin the region; the transfer of new tech-
nologies so that improved or new species can be established according to the soil
quality of each microregion. using the aforementioned transferred technology to
give the peasants a balanced income from the cultivation of perennial as well as
annual crops.

Another point refers to the establishment of a cooperative agroinduetry, so that.
insofar as possible, the peasant family may benefit from the resulting higher total

value, as well as being assured of a market for his primary crop. Also important
is the concession of development credits, including seecalled operating capital
and necessary technical assistance, without interest or at low interest and

long term, so that the former can be paid off under the new production.

In addition, the National Council for the Campaign Against the Narcotics Traffic,
through its National Directorate for the Replacement or Diversification of Crops.
will program annually the reduction of areas under coca cultivation in the
traditional producing departments of La Pat and Cochabamba, with the result that

in the medium term, supply and demand will be balanced for the purpose of traditional

chewing and for medicinal and pharmacological use.

31
Coca Surpluses

The Draft 3111 for the Control of and Campaign Against Dangerous Substances stakes

special mention of the destination of coca-leaf surpluses, concerning which the
docunent indicates:

Should the collection centers and substations have filled the purchase volunes
planned for each leaf harvest and there be an excess supply in the hands of the
producers which cannot be purchases because of lack of resources, written and
numbered notice will be given such producers that the purchase of their product
has been rejected, and such notice will specify the quantity rejected. Such
notice will serve to give the rejected producer free transit within the producing

department and to keep the leaves in storage until such time as the council can
purchase them.

8735
080: 5300/204 S

32
CHAPARE REGION CITED AS MAJOR COCAINB CENTER
La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 18 Oct 81 p ll

[Text] Cochabamba, l7 0ct--The regional director of the Narcotics Office here.
Juan Vscaflor, said in a press conference that the Chapare region has becone an
auspicious area for the manufacture of cocaine due to the ease with which coca
leaves can be obtained and the dense vegetation which prevents discovery of
factories located there.

he added that more than 93 kg of cocaine has been seized by his office since
last April and that the operations carried out by special brigades were not con-
fined only to the Chapare area. but also included airports, bus and railway ter-
minals and some private homes.

Colonel Vacaflor emphasized that the factories are in the Chapare because the
traffickers find it easier to hide there and to obtain the raw material and other
items needed to manufacture the drug.

Agents seized 30,315 grams of cocaine sulfate in 18 operations, and another
36,570 grams were taken in other isolated actions.

According to the chief of narcotics operations, the traffickers have serveral
ways to escape surveillance. They often bring the drugs from the Chapare in beer
bottles, or they leave their vehicles and come in to the settlements on foot.
There was even a case of one truck owner who built a compartment between the cab
and the platform of his vehicle.

It was announced that control has been increasedia the Chapare and that the army
and navy are cooperating, but even so it is difficult to achieve total success,

since the very size of the Chapare region favors the traffickers.

The legal department of the Narcotics Office says that 60 cases have been tried
and that there are 133 persons in the San Sebastian jail charged with the traf-
fic and manufacture of cocaine.

8735
680: 5300/2045

33
FEASAN‘iS DEMAND T0 KM DBSTINATICN (I? COCA SBIZED
Cochabamba L08 TIWOS in Spanish 20 Oct 81 p 7

[Text] No one knows what becomes of the coca seized by agents of the Narcotics
Office and the Office for the Control of Coca Sales in Chapare, peasant leaders
in the area known as Villa Litoral have indicated.

They said that agents from those offices in the settlements of Villa Tunari,
Paracti and Sacaba abused their authority in seizing even an 8-pound shipment
of coca for which there was an authorization for transportation to Cochsbamba
signed by leaders of the Tropical Perm Federation under an existing agreement
between the Office for the Control of Coca and the Chapare producers.

They said that between 10 and 15 loads of coca, with an average value of 80,000
Bolivian pesos, are being seized daily; however, the destination of the confiscated
coca is unknown.

"To date. we do not know where the coca is being taken, and we think the narcotics
authorities should inform us." one of the leaders in Villa Literal told the
editorial staff of 1.06 TIEMP08.

In addition, firms which legally export coca leaves have denounced the frequent
hijacking of their shipments, in spite of security measures.

Recently one of them was the victim of a hijacking of more than a truckload of
coca. It is presumed that actions which involve such large quantities must be
the work of narcotics traffickers, and for this reason greater surveillance by
control office agents and even by the army is needed.

The legally exported coca is destined primarily for pharmaceutical firms and
manufacturers of carbonated beverages.

Meanwhile, narcotics officials and those from control of sales have to date and
since the first of the year nude no official statement abOutthe volumes of coca
seized.

Attempts by 1.08 TIBMPOS to get any information were in vain, since the head of the
coca control office was not in his office yesterday.
In addition. the leaders accused agents of those offices of having become, in the
last few weeks. the chief buyers of coca leaves, coapeting with the businessmen
who have credentials and authorization free the National. Directorate for the
Control of Coca.

They indicated that the agents visit the peasant fiestas and the Isinuts and
Zinahota fairs and force the peasants to sell them the coca for 4 Bolivian pesos
a load, and then it is possible that they resell it to the merchants for double
the price.

They recalled that the activity of the narcotics agents and of the office of coca
sales recently caused an incident at Zinahota, where the peasants refused to sell
their product to the agents; the reaction of the latter caused the peasants to
join forces against them, and the agents fled in search of reinforce-eats.

Finally, they said that the higher goverment authorities will be notified of all

these facts so that such aberrations nay be corrected and official mongdoing
ended.

8735
030: 5300/2045

35
FEDERAL POLICE SAID To 38 CONNECTED WITH CDCAIN!
Former Superintendent Allegedly Dribed
Brasilia CORREIO BRAZILIBNSB in Portuguese 4 Oct 81 p 16

[Text] It is being rumored in Hanaus that Ivo Americano, former regional super-
intendent of the Federal Police Department [DPP]. is involved in cocaine traffick-
ing in the Amazon River region, according to vast documentation presented in
Brasilia at the beginning of this year. This led to the establishment of a com-
mittee of inquiry to make a detailed investigation of the accusation that Ivo had
received 18 million cruzeiros of the 20 million demanded by his own office in
keeping with certain arrangements made between him and Dr Gustavo, an attorney

of Portuguese nationality. Those arrangements occurred in June 1980 after the
crash of a private plane--call letters 0P-L502-in the Xibaru area, in the
municipality of Barcelos, with a large shipment of cocaine coming from Santa

Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia.

Ivo is charged with having softpedaled the involvement of gangsters who had been
arrested and tried at the DPF, according to an accusation made by Colombian traf-
ficker Benito Tavares Villacorta, a fugitive from the Central State Penitentiary,
who made a statement confirming the deal Ivo had made with Dr Gustavo in which it
appeared certain that Dr Gustavo had removed the drug free the plane without in-
terference by federal agents. In the verbal agreement it also becane certain
that those responsible for transporting the cocaine would not be bothered by the
agents.

However, except for the removal of the cocaine from the plane, the sgreenent was
not carried out inasmuch as all the members of the gang, including Benito Villa-
corta, were arrested, beaten and tortured at the DPF.

At the end of his statement, signed and recorded in the files of Brasilia's
second legal office, Benito revealed that he had contributed $12,000 to help
reach the amount of 20 million cruzeiros demanded by Ivo Americans. or the
20 million demanded, the gang members scraped together only 18 million.

This is the most serious accusation made against Ivo Americans who, on Thursday
of last week, was relieved of his responsibilities and confined to his residence,
80 meters from the building housing the DPP'e regional superintendency in Hanaus.

I

36
when the committee arrived and announced his dismissal from office, including in-
structions for him to remove all his belongings from the office in 30 minutes,

the federal agents were overjoyed and even celebrated the good news in bars and
restaurants.

This was a clear indication that Ivo Americans was not well-liked by his subordi-
nates as a result of his constant harassment. The contacts Ive had was only with

deputies, although a few times he chatted with officers not so high up on the
scale.

During Ivo Americano's administration, six federal agents were dismissed from
their duties on the charge that they were involved in crimes of corruption.
Deputies were removed and others transferred to other states, as in the case of
Deputy Elivaldo Parias, now assigned to Porto Velho. It was he who assembled
documentary proof that Ivo was involved with the cocaine mafia.

The quarrel between the two began last year over the case of the cocaine which
fell in the Xibaru area on board a private plane with the call letters, L 1502.

Ivo tried to accuse Elivaldo Parias of demanding money from the traffickers.
However, Farias gave proof that this was not so and prepared the necessary docu-
mentation, particularly in keeping with the statements signed by trafficker
Benito Tavares Villacorta.

Nelson Harabuto is not granting any interview; he is limiting himself to hearing
and verifying the reports coming to his attention. In keeping with the abundance
of facts and accusations, more than 15 persons have already been heard. among
whom are federal agents dismissed by Two Americano who circulated the news that
he, Ive, had received money from the cocaine gang for having softpedaled the in-
volvement of traffickers during investigations. Since there is more than one
accusation considered serious by the committee of inquiry, all cases involving
inquiries will be reviewed and, if it is verified that someone benefited from
Ivo's protection, that person will definitely be dismissed from the DPP and will
become simply an unemployed citizen in addition to being tried in the future for
any implication in a crime of corruption.

Next Wednesday, Deputy Elivaldo Faries, now assigned to Porto Velho, is scheduled
to arrive in Manaus to make a statement at the DPP, since he was the author of
the denunciation made against Ivo in Brasilia.

Network of Intrigues
Sao Paulo VEJA in Portuguese 21 Oct 81 p 36

[Text] Amazonas--For some weeks, cocaine and DP? agents in Hanaus have been en-
gaged in worrisome intimacy. while a Brasilia team has been investigating the
involvement of several agents based in Hanaus in drug trafficking-an undercover
force has already brought about the dismissal of Ivo Americans from the superin-
tendency of that area--three DP? officers were arrested at the Hanaus airport
when embarking for Belem with 1.2 kg of the product. The operation, unleashed

37
on 11 October, was favored by chance: alerted about the possible arrival of

smuggled gold, Deputy Roberto Alves and a few assistants were intrigued by the
passage through the embarkation gate of three men carrying small plastic bags
containing a white powder. It happened to be cocaine. And the three--Ricardo

Yano, Jose Cardoso and Jose Carneiro Araujo—dwsre DP? officers in various areas
of northern Brazil.

In addition to the summary expulsion of the trio within the next few days, it is
not known exactly what will happen in Hanaua. Because of the mystery with which
the DP? surrounds investigations, the principal case-Americano's possible in-
volvement with cocaine smuggling-is foundering in hypotheses and suspicious
versions. One federal deputy maintains that the only definite accuser of
Americana, Colombian Benito Alvarez, allegedly met with Deputy Nelson Harabuto
on Colombian territory to confess that he wrote the denunciation under pressure.
"In that case, nothing is proved against him. thank God," Interim Supt Roberto
Alves presumes. Manaus agents are also whispering that Americano's major enemy,
Deputy Elivaldo Parias, frightened at Benito's alleged confession, asked to be
dismissed from his post in Porto Velho. "That is not true," Parias proclaimed.
"I am continuing to work normally." In Manama, to string the press along,
Deputy Alves promises interviews in Brasilia, but Col Hoacir Coelho, DPP's
director general, denies that this will occur.

In the midst of discordant stories and the tranquil acceptance of the thesis that
a DPF deputy can do business with a fugitiVe from Brazilian justice--Colonbian
Benito escaped from the jail in Hanaus--there is at least one contented man, Ivo
Americano himself. "I had nothing on my conscience. Never did I fear the result
of the investigations," the deputy said frankly. Before retiring next year, he
wants to fulfill one last desire: "I shall not leave here with this image. I
must show that all was planned by people whom I controlled." If the DPP does

not change its methods, the most he will achieve is to circulate rumors that he
was not in error.

8568
CSO: 5300/2039

38
PLASTIC SURGEON INVOLVED IN COCAINE TRAFFICKING
Arrested in Paraguay
Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE SAD PAULO in Portuguese 6 Oct 81 p 17

[Text] Rio de Janeiro-Plsstic surgeon Hosnany Ramos, who was arrested in narica.
city in the state of Rio de Janeiro, on the charge of having stolen a plane and
suspected of murder and the trafficking of cocaine paste, has again been arrested,
this tine in the Paraguayan city of San Bernardino, 35 kn from Asuncion, where he
arrived in another stolen plane piloted by Ricardo Augusto Haacarenhas Varicelli.
There were two young Paraguayan wonen on board the craft, who were also taken by
the local authorities to the Criminal Investigation Depart-ant [DIG].

Hosmany confessed to the police that the Seneca twin engine plahe in which he was
traveling and whose original call letters, RED, had been changed to KECP, was
stolen in Dourados, Mato Grosso, and that he had decided to flee to Paraguay be-
cause he was being threatened with death by a gang of cocaine traffickers from
Rio. With regard to his attempted escape, he said that he had hired pilot
Hascarenhas Varicelli--who had made other flights to Paraguay-—with when he had
left the country by the southern route and arrived last Saturday in Presidente
Stroessner. In that city he and the pilot not two young women and then decided
to go on to San Bernardino; they were arrested yesterday the nonent the plane
landed.

0n the same day the Paraguayan police advised that they would hand Rosnany and
the pilot over to the Brazilian authorities and said that the plastic surgeon
had admitted having stolen a plane belonging to Carlos Alvas Lobo, or Lobinho,
but not confirming whether he had murdered the pilot or not.

Not until 2000 hours yesterday did Attorney Arthur Lavigne know anything of the
plastic surgeon's arrest, or even if he "was still Hos-any's attorney"; he also
said he did not know what charges were being levied against his client. Be ex-
plained that he had made the surgeon only a "promise of possible assistance"
when the surgeon was arrested by the Harica police last month but that he had had
no subsequent contact with Hosnany. who "had disappeared." Lavigne admitted that
the "case is rather nebulous" and said he had met the doctor through a friend.

He then went to Marica in northern Rio de Janeiro State and got his client re-
leased through a writ of habess corpus. Arthur Lavigne said that whatever else
he knew about the case he had learned only "through the newspapers."

39
Today. Deputy Ircalino da Ponseca of the 82d Precinct in Enrica is to send
Judge Jose Eustaquio Cardoso the paper of inquiry in which the doctor is ac-
cused only of “misappropriation," even though, in addition to stealing the
aircraft, a twin engine plane belonging to a ranch owner in Doursdos, he is
also suspected of having killed pilot Carlos Alves Lobo and of having brought
80 kg of cocaine paste to Marica to be distilled.

The deputy said he believes the judge will not handle the case but will hand it
over to a court of justice in Hats Grosso do Sul where it all started. The doc-
tor landed at the time in Harica accompanied by his brother, Jainesio Ramos, and
another pilot who possibly boarded the craft in Sao Paulo. The surgeon had
entered the plane alleging that he was going to purchase it. The pilot, Lobo,

a personal friend of the plane's owner, is still missing.

Attempt To Extradite Trafficker
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 7 Oct 81 p 20

[Text] Yesterday, Dourados Police Deputy Cid Araujo, accompanied by a colleague
from the DEIC [Criminal Investigations Department], went to Asuncion, Paraguay,
to try to extradite plastic surgeon Rosmany Ramos and others involved in drug
trafficking.

Because of mechanical problems in the plane in which he was traveling forcing

the pilot to land, Hosmany Ramos was arrested Monday, #0 km from Asuncion in the
vicinity of Lake San Bernardino. Besides Roamany, the following were also ar-
rested: the pilot, Ricardo Vasconcelos Baricelli; and Englishman, Davi Link;

and two Paraguayan women. All were traveling in the Seneca plane stolen in

Mato Grosso, which had taken off from Porto Stroessner bordering on For do Iguacu.

The Paraguayan police discovered that the doctor's contact was Miguel Verino who
was handling all business matters for the gang accused of drug trafficking, bring-
ing foreign cars into Brazil and stealing planes. With the arrest of Hosmany, we
should have the explanation of the disappearance of pilot Carlos Alves Lobo, whose
plane. a Beechcraft, call letters ZP-POS, was stolen in Abitais and found in
Marisa, Rio de Janeiro State. We still do not know the whereabouts of Commander
Lobo, last seen on 16 September in Abitaia.

Last week, a Seneca plane was stolen from the airport of Santo Antonio do Leverger,
50 km from Buiaba, by pilot Ricardo naricelli, former employee of an sir-taxi firm
in Hato Grosso's capital. An unidentified person was traveling with the pilot,

and it is presumed that this was Rosmany Ramos. According to information supplied
by Cdr Luis Duarte, both boarded the plane and took off.

From Santa Antonio the Seneca was flown to Aragarcas, in Goias, where it was re-
fueled and then disappeared until found in Asuncion.
Harihuane

For having been caught with 35 naribuana plants in their back yard at Arnacao
Beach, in Plorianopolis, an Argentine couple-Claudia Maria Rita Canoirano.
aged 31, and Osaar Eduardo Taverna, aged 34-were each sentenced to 3 years in
prison, the sentence to be served in the local penitentiary.

The police were tipped off by the couple's neighbors. The Argentines and
another couple, friende, were arrested after being caught red-handed. but
only the former couple were unable to convince the Narcotics Bureau police
that they had not planted the narihuana.

Doctor Escapes Prom Prison
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 20 Oct 81 p 1

[Text] Plastic Surgeon ﬂosnany Rance escaped from his cell at Federal Police
headquarters after subduing four police officers who were visiting his, and
"calmly left the prison via Avenida Venezuela." Not until yesterday did the
Superintendency of Federal Police adnit the escape, which occurred. according
to a communique. Sunday evening about 2000 hours.

 

41
In Porto Alegre, businesswoman Iracems Carvalho Leite said Hoamany resembled one
of the attackers who took her money, jewels and documents in Sao Paulo. The
doctor was once a host to Pele and is pointed out as a supplier of cocaine to
the entire Lagos Region. He is implicated in automobile smuggling, drug traf-
ficking and the disappearance of pilot Carlos lobe, or Lobinho.

Doctor Still at Large

Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE 8A0 PABLO in Portuguese 22 Oct 81 p 20

[Excerpts] The Pederal Police Department is still in the dark: it has no clue
to aid in recapturing trafficker Hosmany Ramos who fled from his quarters in
Rio Sunday. Two federal agents, instructed by Deputy Luis Carlos Santana,
direct assistant of Supt Roberto de Araujo Porto and adviser on news media mat-
ters, were stationed at the building entrance to prevent access by the press.

Accused of smuggling the latest model Mercedes-Benz automobiles, theft, homicide
and cocaine trafficking, Hosmany Ramos is allegedly still in Rio, according to
some police officers, waiting for the situation to calm down before making his
escape. Attorney Arthur Lavigne was engaged by journalist Marisa Raja Gabaglie
to defend her friend with whom she allegedly had telephone contacts shortly

after his escape. Marisa denied any further involvement with Hosmany than that
of a superficial courtship. After the incident with the Internal Revenue Service,
which resulted in his arrest, Marisa wrote a series of articles dealing with the
matter and defending Hosmany from the "Lion of the Metro."

Deputy Muniz of the Porto Alegre Narcotics Bureau did not yield to those pres-
sures, according to his own statement, and asserted that he had carried out his
responsibility conducting a flawless investigation. This was true to the extent
that the justice department did not hand the case back to the police. Of the
seven indicted, three--including Sara [the attorney general's daughter]-were
booked for having been caught red-handed, and when Muniz was questioned, three
solicitors appeared at the Narcotics Bureau to assist. Munir did not risk ex-
plaining why Sara was absolved. "Those are things which do not enter into our
hollow philosophy," he said.

Public Ministry sources asserted that Judge Guimaraes Nero justified the acquittal
by contending that the circumstantial evidence against the attorney general's
daughter was a trumped up affair, while in the case of the others it was not.

Sara is even suing Deputy Muniz on the charge that she was beaten at police head-
quarters.

The group was arrested at the beginning of July when the police received informa-
tion that cocaine was being trafficked at a certain building lcoated at Rue

Demetrio Ribeiro. in Porto Alegre. The police were on the lookout for the crimi-
nals and arrested Eduardo Kuhn and three other young men. who were waiting for

him, when Kuhn left the building with a gram of cocaine in his possession. Kuhn
confirmed that he had bought the drug from Olavo Brsnha de Mesquite Barres Junior

in that locality. The police also arrested Olavo and his wife but found only mar-
ihuana in the apartment. However, Olavo said he was expecting a shipment of cocaine
within a few days. When she was on her way to deliver the drug to Olavo at the
apartment, Sara was arrested and confessed that the cocaine was purchased in Rio

by Ana Maria Villaverde, who also was arrested the following day.
8568

C50: 5300/2039
42
BRIEFS

TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED IN HIMSuUherlendie—Dr Luie Carlos Bru- de Paula, from
Aynores, Mines, and his companion, Girley de Sousa. from Manhuecu, were arrested
Tuesday in Aragusri, accused of drug trafficking. At police headquarters the
doctor said that he had planned to distribute 8 kg of cocaine and 20 kg of mari-
huana in that area, principally in Elborcacao where 5,000 prospectors are working.
The sale was to bring in 60 million cruteiros, according to the doctor. A police
officer disclosed that the accused intended to exchange drugs for diamonds at the
Emborcacao mining claim and had informed him that they could buy cocaine and mari-
huana with ease at Porto Seguro. in Bahia. After being booked, the two were re-

leased upon payment of bail. [Text] [Seo Paulo 0 ESTADO DB 8A0 PADLO in Portuguese
4 Oct 81 p 34] 8568

050: 5300/2039

63
INTERPOL acms $8128 12 KILOS 0F OOCAINB. ARREST NINE
Quito EL TIBMPO in Sapnish 19 Oct 81 p 9 3

[Text] Interpol agents of Pichincha Province. continuing their efforts to curb
the illicit traffic in narcotics. have succeeded in capturing nine traffickers who
had in their possession 12.000 gm ofcocsine paste.

Alongwith the arrest of these crisinals two automobiles were seized which had secret
compartments in which they transported the drug.

It was reported at the Pichincha police station that activities have been stepped
up for the purpose of checking as such as possible this illicit business which makes
many unscrupulous families who engage in it rich overnight.

The Arrests

The first arrests took place in the. capital city. when Joaquin Enrique Vincente
Chuquinarca, 51 years old. born in Cariananga. Loja Province. and Francisco Merino
Torres. 31 years old. born in the locality of Quilange. Loja Province. were caught
in flagranti with 910 gm of the paste in their possession which was cleverly con-
cealed in a milk can.

In a statement given to Interpol. Chuquinarca declared that he had acquired the
illicit paste at the Peruvian border fros Pastor Flores and Victoriano Molina. natives
of Peru. The traffickers were attemting to transport the drug to the northeastern
region of the country. to the Colombian border. where they were to have turned it
Over to their accomplice. Francisco Merino Torres. who in turn would sell it directly
to Colombian traffickers.

Jose Calva and Segundo Alvarez were also arrested under the suspicion of cowlicity
according to the Interpol report.

Interpol pointed out that in this case the arrests of the Peruvian traffickers Pastor
Flores and Victoriano Molina and of the Bcuadoreans Antoliano Soto and Genaro Correa
are impending. The two last-named mintained steady contact with Francisco Merino
Torres in connection with their illegal activities.

The persons arrested are at the present time under the control of the appropriate
authorities so that they may be judged according to the law.
Another Case

Also arrested were Jorge Efren Aguirre Castillo. 27 years old. born in Cariananga.
Loja Province. and Pastor Ponce Jaranillo. 29 years old. borninPaltas, also in
Loja Province. whose participation in the illegal drug traffic has. according to
Interpol, been confirmed.

Hell Concealed

The drug. which consisted of 21 packages of cocaine paste. and weighed 11.090 p
was well concealed in secret copartments of a brown 1981 Mazda 1soo pick-up truck.
which was driven by Pastor Harcial Ponce Jaranillo.

During the interrogation which took place at the Interpol office it was learned that
the 12 packages of cocaine weighing 11.09 ga were acquired at the southern border
of the country from the Peruvian Jose Jumbo by Adan Perez of Cariaaanga. Loja Province

Once the drug arrived at Cariaaanga it was transported to this city by Ponce Jaraaillo
who used the brown Mazda pick-up while Efren Aguirre Castillo traveled separately
to Quito to await the drug and to find a buyer. preferably a Colombian trafficker.

In cooperation with the various police services Interpol is requesting the arrest
of the Peruvian Jose Jumbo and the Ecuadorean Adan Perez from Cariamanga. Loja Prov-
ince. and of the Colombian Bdilberto Aguirre.

Other Arrests

Luis ilerrera Paspuel. Antonio Jimenez Marin and Abrahan Vasquez Rojas were arrested
by the Pichincha Interpol in Cariamanga and Toma. Joja Province. for involvement
in the illigal traffic of cocaine in the amount of 28.5 kg. They were traveling
from Cariananga and were intercepted on the highway by persons who used the name
of Interpol to seize the drug from them.

These arrests took place on 5 October 1981 and after the case was investigated the
three sen. along with Jorge Aguirre Castillo. who is also under arrest. were placed
under the control of the assignment section of the judiciary of Loja Province.

Interpol is persistently continuing its investigations in order to identify the
pseudo agents so as to arrest then and recover the drug.

Adan Perez. Mario Mejia. Rodrigo Bermeo Abrahan. of Cariananga. Loja Province. and
Maximo Perez of this city and the Colombian Edilberto Aguirre and the Peruvian Jose
Jumbo. who are wanted by the police. are also involved in this case. The Ford pick-
up 250. double cab. license plate No L-00060 was confiscated.

92010
CSO: 5300/2035

105
DRUG TRAPPICKERS', TERRORISTS' SPEEDY TRIALS ORDERED
Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish 7 Oct 81 p A-l

[Text] By order of the Supreme Court of Justice. from now on all the superior
courts of the republic will report as soon as possible on the progress of trials
for terrorism and drug trafficking.

Moreover. they must state the court of origin and the Correctional Court which
must try them, the proceeding number, the date proceedings were begun and the
stage they have reached, as well as the juridical status of each accused.

These resolutions were made in open court, which also agreed to urge judges to
conduct trials in strict accordance with the law, so that the trial and sentencing
of the defendants is carried out with all due speed.

To that end the Supreme Court of Justice recommended using the facilities granted
by Articles 38 and 208 of the Penal Trial Code wherever possible.

These resolutions have been sent to all the Superior Courts in the republic, in a
circular dated 25 September.

That circular. which was made public yesterday, stressed the extreme danger of
the crimes referred to. and as a result, permanent supervision of activities in-
volving those trials is ordered for all courts, and tribunals under each of the
presidents of each superior court, which are requested, when necessary, to even
make visits for that purpose.

All that will be announced immediately by the Suprene Court of Justice, so that
the personnel of the court systea as well as the general public are perfectly
aware through reports, that judicial activity is being conducted with the re-
quired concern for ensuring social caln. which is gravely effected by these
crimes.

The document was signed by Dr Alvaro Chocano Marina, president of the Supreme
Court of Justice.

8587
680: 5300/2031

66
BRIEFS

LARGE COCAINB SEIZURB--Civil Guard officers on the Peru-Colombia border and at
the Jorge Chavez International Airport seized cocaine base worth over 1.5 bil-
lion sols. The first seizure took place last Saturday on the Purinagus River
in the Bretana jurisdiction. Intelligence Directorate personnel and personnel
from the Drug Control Directorate of the Civil Guard were on river patrol when
they were fired on with long—range weapons by occupants of two powerful speed-
bosts. After a violent gunfight the police. under the command of Capt Jaime La
Torre Arista, overcame the drug traffickers and seized three jute bags contain-
ing 436 kg of cocaine base. worth 1.4 billion sols, long-range Star pistols. and
revolvers. Those arrested were identified as Trigo Rodriguez Coronel, Amanda
Saavedra Narvaez, a Colonbian named Jose Ricardo Alfonso and a Brazilian named
Joel Caldas Castro, and Manuel Rancisco Coronado. At Lina Airport. the Civil
Guard, with the help of two police dogs ("Balin" and "030") intercepted 51.5 kg
of cocaine base worth 100 million soles, which Luis Helpica Helpica was trying
to smuggle to Colonbia in two suitcases. [Text] [Lina EL CGHERCIO in Spanish
7 Oct 81 p A-l] 8587

CSO : 5300/2031

107
GUARDS ROUND UP 1,000 ADDICTS IN SOUTH TEEN
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 3 Nov 81 p 15

[Text] City Service--Pursusnt to implementing the strike plan to round up
addicts from every nook and cranny in Tehran which was carried out by the
Central Antinarcotics Headquarters, last week about 1.000 narcotics and opium
addicts were rounded up in several areas of south Tehran by guards of the

Antinarcot ica Headquarters; and all of these addicts were sent to Shurabad
for treatment.

Regarding this matter, a public relations spokesman of the Antinarcotics
Headquarters told KEYHAN the following: For sometime now, narcotics addicts
have been reappearing at places in south Tehran and have been plying their
work of ruining the minds of young people and residents of south Tehran. This
spokesman added: The Central Antinarcotics Headquarters started its work
several days ago according to the strike plan by raiding simultaneously such
narcotics-infested areas of Tehran as Darvazeh-ye Qazvin. Howlavi, narvazeh-ye
Char. Shush. Gomrok [Customs]. Relal-e Ahmr [Red Crescent Society], and
Nezanabad; and they succeeded in rounding up about 1.000 addicts--and Allah
willing. this plan will be repeated in the future.

Continuing, he said: These 1,000 addicts have been sent to Shurabad and put
under medical treatment.

After his remarks. he added the point that during last week guards of the
Central Antinarcotics Headquarters succeeded in confiscating 1.74 kilograms
of heroin. 4.85 kg of opium, and 2.5 kg of opium sap; and in this connection

they arrested 40 persons who were turned over to the Antinarcotics Prosecutor's
Office.

650: 5300/5321.

68
BRIEFS

FIGURES FOR NARCOTICS SEIZURBS~According to the central news unit the Islamic
Revolution Court for the fight against narcotics. in a statement concerning its
activities over the past year, has announced: up to now, 1053 international smugglers
have been arrested, tried and executed by this office. Also between 10 January and
25 October this year. 24,818 kg of opiua, 725 kg of heroin. 213 kg of hashish, 649 kg
of [word indistinct]. 60 kg of morphine, 67 kg of opium juice. 52 kg of burned opium
and 90 kg of suspicious materials were delivered to this office. During the same
period. 650 kg of heroin. 153 kg of hashish, 34 kg of burned opium, 80 kg of sus-
picious naterials and 61 kg of [word indistinct]. [Text] [1.0011900 Tehran Domestic
Service in Persian 1630 GMT 01 Nov 81)

NEYSHABUR NARCOTICS NAULnHith the persistent sleuthing efforts of the antidrug squad
of Neushabur and the cooperation of the gendarmerie 15 kg of opium have been recovered
from three persons and 14 Opium pipes have been seized from another. The violators
were later handed to the Islamic Revolution Court of Neyshabur. [CF151767 Mashhad
Domestic Service in Persian 14 Nov 81]

GUARDS SEIZE OPIUM--Revolution guards of (Khajeh Rabi) and (Town) have seized 3.6
kg of opium and 820 grams respectively and handed the miscreants to the authorities.
[0P151747 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian l6 Nov 81]

TORBAT DRUGS NADL--Police officials of Torbat-e Beydarieh have recovered 25.9 kg of
opium from one who was later handed over for prosecution. [CF151767 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1!. Nov 81]

DRUG DEN RAIDED—-Mashhad guards have discovered 10.1. kg of opium in a Mashhad suburb
and arrested three persons in this connection. The sntidrug squad has also seized
5.5 kg opium from the possession of another who was a resident of Zabol. [CF151767
Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1‘ Nov 81]

OPIUM SEIZED IN BIRJAND—Birjand gendarurie personnel have seized 57 kg of opium
from one person. [Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 15 Nov 81]

HEROIN SEIZED--Following a confrontation last night between the personnel of Zahedan's
gendarnerie regiment and a number of smugglers near Zahedan about 290 kg of pure
heroin were seized, one of the smugglers vas killed and another was injured. Colonel
Razavi. the commander of Sistsn and Baluchestan gendarneria, reported the above in-
cident in a telephone conversation with PARS and said: about 1800 yesterday a drug
squad of Sistan and Baluchestan Province gendsrmerie regiment closed the road 10 la-

(09
away from Harmak Post near Zahedan to the international smugglers and after a 3-hour
armed confrontation the group succeeded in arresting one of the smugglers alive and
killing another one. Five bags containing pure heroin weighing about 290 kg were
confiscated from them and two of their vehicles were damaged. The Commander of Sistan
and Baluchestan gendarmerie said: the smuggler who has been arrested is being in-
terrogated. He is an international smuggler and his son is imprisoned under a similar
charge. He added: the officers are following the escaped smugglers in the mountains.
[Text] [L0150842 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 0430 GMT 15 Nov 81]

DRUGS SEIZED IN MASMHAD--In the past 24 hours the Mashhad antidrug squad has seized
950 grams of opium juice and 274 grams of heroin from three persons. [GF171742
Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 17 Nov 81]

C30: 5300/5321

50
WING INCREASE IN DRUGS FRO! NETHERLANDS men
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINB in German 28 Oct 81 p 12

[Article: "More and More Narcotic Drugs Coming in From The Netherlands-Border
Inspectors Peel Swamped-—Other Smugglers from Austria and Switzerland"]

[Text] Duesseldorf, 27 0ctober--Hore and more dope smugglers are entering the
PRC from The Netherlands. Border inspectors are by now calling this trend
alarming. In view of the constantly increasing quantities of dope entering the
neighboring country and being peddled almost openly in the streets, the German
customs services appears to be gripped by a sense of resignation. As Chief
Customs Inspector Kurt cbaron of Duesseldorf's inland revenue office puts it:
"My people are just about to keel over; I must state unequivocally that we can
no longer deal with the drug problem.“

In his border sector, which includes two of the biggest autobahn border crossing
points (this side of Venlo), Oberon has found a 30-percsnt increase in the number
of drug smuggling cases during the first nine months of this year. It is a
similar story all over the border area. The most recent investigations have shown
that dealers all over the PRC as well as Swiss, Austrian and Italian smugglers
find ample supplies for their needs in the neighboring country.

Investigators must helplessly watch has hashish, marijuana, cocaine, heroin and LSD
trips are freely peddled in pubs and on the streets across the border. This happens
not only in Amsterdam and Rotterdam. but more recently also in border towns like
Arnhem, Nijmegen, Eindhoven and Venlo. Says Oberon: ”Demand is increasing from
one year to the next. More and more young peeple are using drugs." All a customer
needs to do to purchase the stuff is to attend a youth meeting or visit a disco or
a youth center.

Smugglers are increasingly using the relatively poorly guarded "green“ border and
avoiding the main crossing points. Reports the chief inspector: "we have also
been noticing that these days there are more dealers and couriers who are not
addicts themselves." A recent arrest of three smugglers, aged between 40 and 60
near Vierscn. who were carrying 6 kilos of hashish, also gives credence to the
theory that increasing numbers of older and "respectable" people are trying to
make a quick buck by smuggling dope.

A ”lightning strike" tactic has recently been introduced as sort of an "emergency
weapon!" whenever a smuggler is caught with a significant quantity of dope, a

51
concentrated attack is made the same day or the following night on the presumed
source by the conbined forces of the district attorney's office, the police and
the custons authorities. Telephone and teletype are used in these maneuvers in
an internal manner. By using these procedures, which cone as a surprise to the
smugglers, it has bee: possible during the past few nonths to break up narcotics
rings in such areas as Heinhein, Essen, llilden and Duesseldorf.

9273
CSO: 5300/2052

52
MAFIA, DC DEPUTY ACCUSED 0F DRUG TRAFFIC INVOLVEMENT

Dc Lashes Berlinguer
Rome L'UNITA in Italian 30 Sep 81
[Interview of Attilio Ruffini by Mino Fucillo; date and place not given]

[Text] Rome-~The Christian Democrats' reaction was wrathful. disdainful. A note
from tne political secretary speaks of ”infamous suspicions. hurled indiscriminately
unfounded in any basis of fact. Giovanni Berlinguer's statements touch thepinnacle
of immorality; he hesitated not a moment to hurl his handfuls of mud, not even
pausing to reflect on the elementary duty of loyalty and elementary good manners

in the political battle." To Christian Democratic ears. the charge that it has not
"sternly isolated and controlled the pathological symptoms obvious in its own

ranks" coming from this communist spokesman rang like a slap, like "an insult that
could have stemmed only from 'cheap political speculation.'"

The argument over the guilt of individuals with ties to the upper reaches of
politics in the failure to stamp out the drug traffic has exploded into violent
polemics. and the battle of words in what is unquestionably a heated conflict has
been rough in the process. According to some wire service reports. the head of the
PCI's public health lineup is cited as the source of charges that the DC was "the
source of the drug traffic." Actually, Giovanni Berlinguer explicitly ruled out
any criminal liability and any direct involvement of Christian Democratic Party
members in the narcotics trade. He did. however. clearly point the finger of
accusation at a moral responsibility inherent in the "closeness" between DC party
members and members of the Mafia and/or unnamed deadbeats who are demonstrably
directly involved in the drug traffic. And he naled names and cited examples:
ties between Ruffini and the Spatola brothers; ties between Amintore Panfani and
international swindler Michele Sindona.

Nor was Giovanni Berlinguer's the only communist voice raised in righteous
indignation: a booklet put out by the RINASCITA publishing house on behalf of the
Italian Communist Youth Federation (PGCI) of Palermo (four solid-set pages on "The
Mafia and Drugs") with headlines to match: "Banquet and Contracts (DC)"; "Drugs

and Cement (D0)." To quote it: 'The fortunes of these businesses (Ed. note: those
of the Spatola brothers) through Attorney Francesco Beale, an active member of the
Dc‘s regional Committee, to whom five checks for 10 million lire each were made out
and signed by Rosario Spatola. are clearly connected with the election campaign of
the then minister. Attilio Ruffini."

53
There is more: "Counsellor Reale. just prior to the 1979 political elections. laid
on a banquet at Palermo'a La Carbonells Restaurant tohonorthe leader of the
Sicilian conservatives. the man who headed the ac ticket for the western district

of the island." "The dinner ended." says the pamphlet. "with a toast and an appeal
by Counsellor Reale to employees of the Spatola companies to vote for Ruffini. and
to get their friends and the friends of their friends to vote for Ruffini." A bit
further on there is mention of the "government contracts which the Dc made sure went
to the Spatola clan." The pamphlet cites the contract for 622 units of low-cost
housing in the working-class Sperone district of Palermo: ”The guiding hand in that
deal belonged to a member of the low-cost housing board run by Vito Ciancimino and
chaired by Christian Democrat Cacopardo."

He asked Attilio Ruffini to respond to these charges.
Ruffini: "Never Any Ties with the Mafia"

[Question] Deputy Ruffini. it has been alleged that you associated with and
accepted politicaland campaign fund support from the so-called Spatola clan. That
is a name that keeps cropping up in the court reports in connection with the drug
traffic, among other matters.

[Answer] The truth of the matter is that they are backing an indefensible cause.
I am willing to spell it out for you, point by point. even though this is not the

first time. unforunately, that I have had to waste my time on this mate's-nest.
During and election campaign. you have hundreds of meetings and you see thousands
of people; I personally have never held campaign banquets, if only out of consider-
ations of style and taste. That campaign rally was simply an election rally. no
more, no less.

[Question] Has Hr Spatola there or not?

[Answer] He was there but I didn't know it. and certainly I did not know that
Spatola had ties with anybody at all: at the time. nobody had ever heard of the
Spatolas-I hadn't. and neither had the press. I'd like to tell you that even
several months after the start of this whole argument I was complaining about the
animosity of opponents who were accusing me of meeting with Spatola. I truly
believed he had not been there. I repeat, I didn't know him."

[Question] So you'd call it an on-the-job "accident." an unfortunate coincidence
in your political activities?

[Answer] Not even that. Spatola at the time was not implicated in anything, and
I cannot even blame myself for lacking prudence. “hat I do blame someone for,
though. is dragging Out this story in order to twist it at all costs. to make out
of a plain fact. a mere nothing, some spicy political speculation. and it would be
funny if it were not so monstrous. For one thing, it is certainly not helping the
fight against the drug dealers: if anything. it contributes to throwing those who
are fighting it off the track, to confusing them.

[Question] Mr Deputy. why in the world do the Spatolas turn up so often at DC
rallies?
[Answer] In a society like ours. where the Mafia exists. it may well happen that
one politician or another has some relations with some members of the Mafia. But a
thing like that must be documented. Take the case of Sindona, whom I was lucky
enough not to know: Did everybody who saw him or talked to him before we all knew
everything there was to know about him catch some of the taint. ease of the noral
onus? Hould could that be?

[Question] But aren't politicians citizens. so to speak. who hear special
obligations and who are constrained. by reason of their role. to be particularly

careful? Isn't it part of the duty of their office to check into the nature of
their own contacts?

[Answer] We might as well be perfectly clear here: If the only examples Giovanni
Berlinguer can adduce in support of his argument that the Dc beans a moral responsi-
bility for its dealings with the Mafia and the nonexistent banquet, the presence of
Spatula at a political rally along with thousands of others. and the Fanfani-Sindona

case, we are truly dealing with absurdities. Tell me: Do you really think it is
likely that a cabinet minister--and I was a member of the cabinet at the time-would

go to Mafia meetings with an official police escort? Hafiosi and criminals do not
wear identification badges: It would be nice if we could recognize them by their

smell.
[Question] Would you attend that meeting if it were held today?

[Answer] It would be incumbent upon me or anybody else not to do so, but hindsight
isn't much help...

[Question] Why do you think Giovanni Berlinguer picked on you?

[Answer] It looks to me like childish. foolish speculation: From a recital of
the events. even in good faith. he draws conclusions that simply won't stand up.
Somebody told Berlinguer that a Mafia boss gave a banquet that was attended by a
cabinet member. Put that way, a story like that would have shocked me. too. But,
I repeat. that is not how it was.

[Question] Are you thinking of filing suit?

[Answer] I don't know; I shall consult an attorney; but mainly I am astonished by.
the incredible facility with which they are trying to build a complicated case
against me. They allege that I did a favor, that I extended my protection to
Spatola or some other Mafioso before or after their criminal activities were
discovered.

[Question] In a pamphlet put out by the F601 of Palermo they name a certain
Attorney Reale. who is alleged to have received and cashed checks worth 50 million
lire signed by Spatola, and they talk--and I quote-—of "connections with the
election campaign of Attilio Ruffini." ~

[Answer] I have not read the pamphlet you mentioned. but it doesn't amount to
much: it's the same ridiculous. unbelievable procedure. Counsellor Reels is a
friend of mine and he is Rosario Spatola's attorney: but what in the world is
that supposed to prove? Are we supposed to deny the Hafiosi legal counsel. or do

55
we mean that their attorneys are never to talk with or be seen with anybody
else? How can you possible argue that a man, even a party. can be held liable on
such counts? This is very serious. it is very dangerous. It is worse than a
political speculation: It is a political and human error."

Sicily Named as Drug Traffic Center

Rome L'UNITA in Italian 30 Sep 81 p 3
(Article by Luigi Cancrini: ”The Godfathers of Heroin.”]

[Text] Ten years ago the drug traffic in Europe flowed primarily along two
arteries. Holland (and Amsterdam in particular) was the marshalling yard for
heroin refined in several southeast Asian countries and delivered. onsite. to an
organization with ties to the Asian community (mainly Chinese) in that city. and
sold in Europe by a tight-knit system of "pendulari [pusher/addicts] working on
their own or as part of variously structured groups. On the other side. southern
France, Marseille . its hinterland in particular. served as the clearinghouse for
refining the raw material that came in from southeast Asia. but also from Turkey
and Iran. and supplied heroin to the avid American market. It was controlled. of
course, by a well-organized criminal gang powerful enough at the time to aim at
broad hegemony over all the lucrative illicit activities in the criminal purview
encompassing the shores of the western Mediterranean.

with the lapse of 10 years, the situation has changed dramatically. Swift and
stern action on the part of governments which managed to set the interests of the
collectivity above the temptations of possible money or "protection" has led. in
fact. to a total shutdown of the Dutch artery (where the Asian community linked to
the pool of restaurants and bars openly engaged in the drug trade was expelled by
a single decisive act) and to the gradual dismantling of the French system where
the levels of risk have risen so high as to make refineries altogether too
dangerous and have done generally much the same to all drug-related enterprise.

The international organization or group of organizations that run the drug traffic
and oversee all the various steps in the transfer from producer to user were
forced by these measures to seek new channels for distribution and new interned-
iaries. They tried first of all-—for a short time-to set up a relationship with
the organized crime circles interested in laundering dirty money (customs seizures.
the traffic in arms and diamonds) under the umbrella of the Swiss banks. Then.
aiming increasingly toward expansion of the bases provided in the Latin American
countries (Colombia. Ecuador, Paraguay) whose rightist stance allowed easy contact
with a government attuned to the lure of money and ensured that there would be no
democratic opposition. before finally settling on setting up a complete and
complicated system for distribution and processing in Sicily.

Sicily offers ideal conditions for the development of criminal activities connected
with the heroin traffic. Those conditions are insured essentially by a existence
of a Mafia organization that stands ready to:

a. protect couriers. refineries. and drug transport through a closeknit system
of complicity, blackmail. intimidation. and payoffs;

S6
b. insure. through timely supplies of votes and money, the goodwill of local
administrations and. through members of the local police forces, support from the
political parties with clout on the national scene; as spelled out in clear detail
complete with full names by Comrade Enrico Berlinguer (in NUOVA SOCIETA) and Comrade
Giovanni Berlinguer (in LA REPUBBLICA);

c. to provide cheap and simple channels (because there is no competition) for
communications. through the system set up by the Italo-American Mafia which controls

the organizations that handle distribution in the 0.8. market;

d. to take over directly, coopting or dumping the pushers working in Italy, all
heroin distribution in Italy and in the other European countries;

e. to make use of the tried and true system of recycling monay. with the aid of
the string of banks that handle such operations in this and other seetors.

The one real obstacle to the choice of the Italo-American Mafia as the linchpin
of the organization for the heroin traffic and to the permanent location of
refineries and wholesale operations in Sicily came, for a while, from the Mafia
itself. The Mafia there, was an outfit that had. over these last several years,
undergone what was not merely a change in goals and in the interrelations among
its activities; it had been subjected. in short. to a "reconversion." and to one
that assigned critical importance to the drug trade and thereby undercut its
traditional activities, but which also "inevitably" required a painful change in
the delicate balance of power. in the kind of people it would take and in the
attitudes of the bosses and of their lieutenants, at the same time as it gave rise
to the growth of interests more attuned to the peculiarities of a local situation
than to the logic of an organization active on a global scale.

This is where we find the key to the very long time it took to pick Sicily. because
the old godfathers would not readily yield up their positions of power and because
there was. perforce, a fight precipitated by the power of the criminal element
within the organization (with an unbelievable string of murders. most of them
unpunished) and out side it (ranging all the way from De Mauro to Giuliano and to
the local judges committed to stemming the rising tide of drugs and to the
maneuverings of the people who were putting the system together).

if all this is true. the problem facing Sicily and the Italian southland as the
new and perhaps permanent center for the international heroin traffic is indeed a
truly thorny one. The missiles at Comiso and the inland refineries are wounds
inflicted on the region itself by decisions and interests which have nothing
directly to do with it. But the significance of the operation. "an operation that
would be impossible anywhere else in Italy." is unfortunately the same. This means
that we must react swiftly and ruthlessly to create conditions that will put a
stop to the permanent transformation of Sicily into a foreign colony. ruled by the
arrogance of the Mafia and the cynicism of corrupt local officials.

l devoted close attention to the interveiw with Ruffini in [A REPUBBLICA on

9 September. It truly frightened me: partly because what he had to say was so
like the words American screenwriters put into th nmuths of gangsters and their
protectors when more honest cops or judges "dared" to accuse them (let's see the

57
evidence, if you've got any"); but mainly because of the unbelievable capacity it
displayed for missing the political significance of the report.

Confining himself to justifying his banquets and his meeting with Mafiosi known

to be involved in the drug traffic. Cabinet Minister Ruffini carefully side-
atepped any statement on the crucial issue of his party's ties with Sindona and
the Mafia. whether he does this out of sheer innocence (as I trust he does) or out
of pure gall. it is impossible to refrain from telling him that anybody who read
his interview knew perfectly well that there is no criminal organization of any
standing the leaves "evidence" lying around that could be used against its top
echelons and their most powerful protection.

An interview like the one he gave, based solely on defending his own image, merely
serves to deepen doubt and perplaity if it is allowed to stand as the only
political statement by the men of the Christian Democratic Party at a time when
there is talk of intimate ties (among the “aria, drugs. and politics in Sicily) of
which there is hard evidence gleaned from vast numbers of murder trials and criminal
prosecutions (not to mention the procedings of a parliamentary couission—all
mention of which has been assiduously avoided for years). Can a major party in

the relative consensual majority in Sicily really get away with this sort of
offhand request for "evidence" to be laid against its top man. who have for so long
been accused of hiding such evidence. and doing it with consulate skill? Can the
so—called "lay" parties actually go on talking. while the narcotics scourge spreads,
of "moral issues." without clarifying their position on the point and without
shaping up enough to let them show certifiably clean hands when they join in probing
the issue of relations between the interests of the P2 group, Sindona. and the

Mafia?

6182
650: 5300/2030

58
PCI LEADER'S STA'I'BHRN'I' 0)! MIA DRUG OONUECI'IOJIS
Rome L'UNITA in Italian 25 Sep 81 p 5
[Statement by PCI Party Secretary Enrico Berlinguer to IUOVA SOCIB‘I'A]

[Text] The drug problem in Italy today: how widespread is it? How high is
the level of consumption, and how many pushers are there? Ihat are the issues
we must settle now if we are to face up to so unparalleled a social scourge,
and to fight it properly and sternly enough? On this burning question, the
secretary of the PCI, Comrade mrico Berlinguer, recently gave a statement to
Turin' s NUOVA SOCIBTA magazine.

"NUOVA SOCIE‘I'A has asked me to make a statement on the drug problem. I am
happy to make one because I believe that in our time this is one of the gravest
issues facing Italian society. '

"The battle against this scourge of our society must be fought on both fronts:
against those who deal in drugs, and against those who use them. Italy is on
its way to becoming one of the major marketplaces for sales, for transit, and
even for production of all sorts of narcotics in Isstern Maps and in the

world at large. We must pinpoint the depots and the channels used by those who
traffic in drugs, and sever the links between organized crime -- particularly the
Latin and the Camorra -- and certain sectors of the political and banking world.
There is a submerged economy in our midst, with its roots in the narcotics trade:

it must be eradicated.

"Fighting against the sale of narcotics is not enough, though. There has been
and there still is an active ideology and a subtle propaganda campaign in this
country which encourages the spread of this social cancer, painting narcotics
use as a gesture of freedom, as if heroin could provide a chance for revenge
against Oppression and social injustice. Drug use has frequently been artlessly
contrasted with drug pushing. There are those who mistakenly believe that we

can fight drugs with drugs.

"All this has encouraged misunderstanding and aberrations of all kinds, which
we must somehow find the courage to fight to the death wherever it crops up,
in the area of ideas and social behavior, particularly among the young, and at
the same time to strengthen and eXpand our efforts to rehabilitate addicts.

59
”Little or nothing has been done thus far to counteract the dread disease of drug
addiction, which threatens to destroy or to cancel out a uhole generation. lhat
we need -- and now -- is a courageous turnaround which w111 open the road to ex-
perimentation and to the adoption of new procedures and uethods, and that will
require a thorough knowledge of what people are trying to do elsevhere 1n the
world.

6182
080: 5300/2030
PSI MAYOR ADVOCATES DECRIMINALIZATION 0F HEBDIN
Rome LA REPUBBLICA in Italian 27—28 Sep 81 p 8

[Article by Piero Valentino]

[Text] savouA. 26 Sep—-The idea came to him a few years ago. and he suggested it.
but found no takers. Now he is determined to get it across. He is 72-year-old
Carlo Zanelli, Savona's socialist mayor for 13 years now. he will ask the city
council to set up a center staffed by expertly trained personnel where addicts can
go to get drugs ("any kind of drugs. including heroin") free. Zanelli explains:
"This is not going to solve the problem. but I am convinced that it is the only
workable way to control and contain this phenomenon.”

His city counts fewer than 80.000 souls. but its "known“ addict population is 700.
and there are 2,000 more "scattered" throughout the province. The latest of them
died yesterday in Genoa: he was Giuseppe Camberale. 26 years old. he lived in
Voltri, but he used to come to Savone for his "fix." And this city is setting
unenviable records for bag-snatching and robberies. Every day the reports pour
into the police stations, rising numbers of complaints about muggings for rings.
neck chains. purses. and every now and then an armed robbery. There are no preven-
tion avenues: practically speaking. there is only repression. This is another
reasonwhythe mayor has picked this time to move: "We can no longer go on like
this," he says; "we have to strike at the roots. to get at the causes of this
plague. I don't know if the idea will work. but I do know that there are no
alternatives. The way I see it is this: almost all addicts have to steal and rob
to pay for their drugs. Almost invariably they wind up in the clutches of unscrup-
ulous pushers, they buy "cut" drugs. and more of then die every day. Drug-related
deaths have become so common that we actually don't report them in the papers any
more.

"This center will be an essential alternative for them. They will come here, they
will talk to experts. to sides. to people who know what they are talking about.

It will not be a pushing center. nor a supermarket where they can pick their own
preference in poison off the shelf. of course. He shall certainly not just dish
drugs out to anybody who asks: no service with a smile. There will be methadone;
there will be light drugs; and when it is indispensable, there will even be heroin.
That is not the end of the story. though: the people running the center will be
trying to rescue the kids and get them back onto the track. The and purpose will
be that, but meanwhile we shall get two big plusses: we shall be cutting out the

61
pushers. who have found a booming market here. and we shall stop the kids from
buying drugs illegally. and. in short. we shall lake sharp cutbacks in the spread
of what we call capillary crime, and of casual purse-snatching."

Zanelli is a cardiologist by profession, and in Ssvona he is, more or less. the
establishment. A close friend of Pertini's. he has always run the city coolly.
without and rash ventures. Now he is about to cede his place to a columnist (there
is an agreesent between the two parties covering procedure for taking turns in
office). but before he turns over the reins he is determined to "do something
practical to deal with an energency situation."

The top health minister had an idea somewhat along these sane lines, but nothing
came of it. How will his colleagues receive this proposal? "No question but not
all of them will go along. We are going to talk about it. Re are going to cone to
a confrontation. But I as deterlined to hold out. Somebody has said that we
shall simply be making the kids a gift of death. I say that we are doing precisely
the opposite. If somebody has a better idea, let him cone forward." The first
support for Zanelli's idea cane fro- the police. The city is waiting. stlmned by
the spread of reports of petty crime. Thus far. only one group has cone forward
with an interest in rescuing addicts. and that is the cosnunity run by Silesian
Father Ghilardi.

6182
CSO: 5300/2030

62
JOINT OPERATION WITH FRG BREAKS UP “330m SHUGGLING RING
Istanbul TERCUHAN in Turkish 22 Sep 81 pp 1, 16

[Text] In a joint operation carried out between Narcotics Branch teams and the
German police, a total of 3 kilos of heroin with a market value of 100 million
TL was seized, a part of it concealed in the private parts of two women abroad
and the other portion in Istanbul. in a luxury hotel. M onen were taken in-
to custody in France [sic] in connection with the incident and la persons, one of
whom a businessman were taken into custody in Istanbul.

Taking advantage of a tip which they received, narcotics branch detectives
determined that a gang was making preparations to transport narcotics from the
Middle East into Europe. Istanbul Narcotics Branch special tens. engaging in

a joint operation with the German police. in the first phase seized 170 grams

of heroin packed in the private parts of a prostitute by the name of "Hazel" at
Frankfurt airport. At the same airport, 360 grams [or heroin] were seized, con-
cealed in the private parts of an Australian—born woman by the name of "Jasmine"
who claimed to be a model. While the international operation's wide-ranging
investigation was being carried out, it was determined that a part of the gang
was making preparations for shipment in a luxury hotel in Istanbul. In a raid
on the hotel, teams under the cot-and of Ugur Gur, Narcotics Branch deputy direc-
tor, responsible for the Istanbul part of the operation, seized 2.4 kilos of
heroin packed in a bag. During questioning in connection with the incident, the
Greek-born individual named Atanaisos Kalabalikis, who was discovered to be the
heroin shipping and quality expert, was apprehended. After further questioning,
the individuals named Neset Gezer and an‘rettin Gazer, who were brought to the
hotel by the drug dealers, were taken into custody. In the statements made by
these individuals they stated that the individual named Hicheil Leukouslty, who

is rcspons.ble for the marketing and financing in Europe, is presently in Germany.
Shortly after certain determinations were nade, German police apprehended and took
into custody this individual. Business-an Orhan Gokyayla, found to be one of the
financing partners in Turkey, was apprehended and taken into custody by the Nar-
cotics Branch. Gokyayla, while snilingly posing for newspapermen, said: "I am
also studying other proposals."

One person was taken into custody in Icel's 'l‘arsus district while trying to sell
23.1 kilos of hashish to police for 88,000 lira. According to information obtained
from official sources, Ali Ozdemir, living in Yenice Hayadan village, who was
determined to have sold hashish in Tarsue district. was caught red-handed while
trying to sell 23.1 kilos of hashish for 88,000 lira to police disguised as buyers.

63

NEH PROGRAM TO COMBAT NARCOTICS SHUGGLING
Istanbul TERCUMAN in English 22 Oct 81 p 5

[Text] Turkey has been divided up into seven regions in order to combat narco-
tics smuggling. According to information obtained from the Directorate General
of Security, the United Nations has approved proposals which we submitted in pro-
ject form. Six hundred persons will be employed in narcotics laboratories to be
established in seven central provinces. Meanwhile. $1.5 million in aid has been
received from the United Nations Fund to Combat Drug Abuse.

Chemists To Be Hired

In addition to the security organization specialists appointed to these centers,
chemists will be hired and appointed to the laboratories. The chemists who are
to be appointed will first take a course in Europe, administered by officials of
the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control [UNPDAC], before assuming their
functions.

Seven Laboratories and Seven Regions

--Ankara (Headquarters), Bolu, Kastamonu, Cenkiri, Kirsehir. Eskisehir, Konya,
Nevsehir. Kayseri, Sivas, Yozgat, Zonguldak.

-—Istanbul (Headquarters). Bursa, Izmit, Bilecik Adepazsri, Tekirdag. Kirklareli.
Edirne, Canakkalc.

o-lzmir (Headquarters). Hanisa. Baliksesir, Aydia, Hugla, Denirli, Usak,
Kutahya, Afyon, Isparta. Burdur.

--Adana (Headquarters). Mersin, Antalys. Nigde, Kahramenmaras. Gaziantep, Antakya.

--Samsun (Headquarters), Sinop, Amasya. Corum, Tokat, 0rdu. Giresun, Trabron,
Rize, Gumushane.

--Diyarbakir (Headquarters). Urfa, Adiyaman, Helatya, Hardin, Tunceli. Bingol,
Elazig, Mus, Bitlis, Siirt, Van. Hakkari.

--Erzurum (Headquarters), Kara, Artvin, Agri. Brrincan.

cso: 5300/5322-P

65
BRIEFS

ASALA HEROIN TRAFFICKING—-It was reported that six militants of the Armenian
terrorist organization ASALAIArIenian Secret Arny for the Liberation of Arnenia]
were apprehended together with 9 kilos of heroin. The investigation connected
with the Armenian militants apprehended in Istanbul is being pursued from many
angles. The Armenian terrorists, apprehended as a result of joint work between
Turkish and Swiss police, engaged in such acts as banbing bridges and train sta-
tions in Switzerland. Meanwhile, in order to procure financial means for the
organization, they snuggled heroin which they purchased in Middle Eastern coun-
tries into European countries. It was learned that investigators are seeking a
connection between the six terrorists apprehended in Istanbul and the attacks
carried out against Turkish diplomats. [Text] [Istanbul TERCUHAN in Turkish

3 Nov 81 pp 1, l6]

BOLVADIN ALKALOID FACTORY-~Turkey's No l and the world's third largest alkaloid
factory, construction on which was begun in 1976 in Afyon's Bolvadin district

and which was slated to begin production last year. was opened this year; how-
ever. it was able to operate for only 2 weeks. Officials indicate that in the
event breakdowns in the presses and the machinery are repaired it will once again
start production. They indicate that it will provide medical substances needed
in our country and thus provide a substantial contribution to the national econ-

ony. It will amortize its cost within 1-2 years. [Text] [Istanbul MILLI
GAZETE in Turkish 3 Nov 81 p 1]

C50: 5300/5322-P

66
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

COURT TOLD H16 'USED SBO?-0UNER 1'0 306 IRA DRUG RING'

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 27 Oct 81 p 3

[Text]

—..-. .-.

N 'Oxford'gridihte nursed otbeing involved

in a £20 million drunmuggling plot, claimed

at the Old Bailey yesterday .that'he. had been
recruited by. the.British SecotServioe inmate

the Hi A.

Howutn m. 36. of
Hans Road. Knightsondge,
told the jury that a univer-
sity lnend had asked him to
open turther branches in
Europe of e drmhw in
Oxford called Annabella“ to
peonde cover for M16.

He 'claimed that-the friend.
named MncMillnn. wired [or
the Foreign 05a intelligence
service. " He told nu he worked
tor MIG security brenchand
asked me it I would be inter.
ested in helping them out in

my my through my drea-

business."

Med by Lord Hurt-note.
QL. lm counsel. it there was
any agreement concerning
money. Marks replied: “ e
we: no question at any-money.”

Marks. Hmm um. u:
at Oakland: Avenue, Potters
Bar. and Mount Syn/Aer
Prentiss. 4!. e Celrtornien
yaclt'broker. d Grimmer
Crescent news. Hyde Perk. ell
den smug lung cancel“: and
deeﬁegin.‘ drug

The c arisen (no the
leading 15 tons ol cennnbb
on the lonely Scotnsb isle if
time in December. 1918.

C80: 5320/008

"Wm "g ﬁor'e"..'"'.'

Marla red the! n ma. be
learnedrot e nm arrested-in
Morocco and we: liked.” the
man's wife to meet
in Amsterdam. The'an e,
um nu gas a Jenner
O'Neilltotell dtheerrett.
but discovered later the: the
man's real name we: June:

“in line he tree I
iedding Pm RA «cum
organising banning and crap
snuggling me I lichen
was the In: pennn to
«and front Cnmlin lend

to accen- bob: «raced in
Vancouver but be ensued to
France In: Wu outed bell.

67

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080014-4

Eli-DRUG SQUAD CHIEF SACKED AFTER INQUIRY INTO CANNABIS PLOT

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 12 Nov 81 p 3

[Article by John Weeks]

[Text]

HE former operational head of Scotland
Yard: drug squad has been reduced to

the rank of constable and dismissed from
the Metropolitan Police on four mtemal

disciplinary charges.

Det. Chief lnsp. Anthony
Rich. 3. has been suso
pended lrotn duty since
August, 1977, on full pay.
after an inquiry into how
cannabis seized by police
was recycled through the
drugs market.

In 1968 he was awarded
the British Empire Medal
for disarming a drun-nated
man who was holding a
loaded pistol to the head of
a policeman in West End
Central police station.

Rich appeared at Manlehone
magistrates' court three veers
no unh two other octets.
charted with conspiracy to
obtain. possess. supplv and
otherwise deal in cannabis and
Mlh stealin cannabis resin.
Waeistratet decided that Rich
and one ol the other oﬁcen
had- nn case to newer and
were cleared

CSO: 5320/008

68

" meme

The mid pie
.Vllaael Kevin Cl:
later sentenced to
Jail for his part
spiracy.

The than" an
area! alter Essex
an kilos pt eapnaht
forensic tests. at

W PO

throat the drug
Rich and the at
later copied to a
the Complaints
Bureau at the Y

dimmed with eﬂt
s on [our char. I

Police “£10000. 1

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R00040008001H
BRIEFS

HEROIN HAUL--Customs officers have found two kilograms of heroin worth 500,000

pounds sterling in a suitcase aboard a Pan American jumbo jet at Heathrow. A
woman is to appear in court today. [Text] [London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English

12 Oct 81 p l}

DRUG SQUAD RAID—-Pive men and a woman were helping police with their inquiries
last night after Drug Squad officers seized a package containing heroin with a

street value of 250,000 pounds sterling in Green Street, Forest Gate, London.
[Text] [London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 29 Oct 81 p 2]

LIVERPOOL CANNABIS RAID--Cannabis worth half a million pounds was seized by
Customs officers at Liverpool docks when they swooped on a container unloaded
from the cargo ship Adviser after she arrived from Jamaica. A Customs spokesman
said six men would appear at Bootle Magistrates' Court tomorrow accused of smug-
gling cannabis. [Text] [London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 1 Nov 81 p b0]

HEROIN SHUGGLING SENTERCE--A (7tainee) nursery nurse, suffering from an incurable
hand disease, escaped a prison sentence yesterday for drug smuggling. Miss Garys
Thomson, 27, admitted smuggling 36,000 pounds' worth of heroin into Britain to

earn money for a pain-killing operation. Judge Town, at Birmingham Crown Court,
told her: "whatever you're suffering, I do not think it justifies your part in

this. It is an exceptional case, had you been anyone else you would be facing
a sentence of six years' imprisonment." Miss Thomson, of Hazeldene Road, Sheldon,

Birmingham, was given a two-year prison sentence, suspended for two years, and
ordered to pay 150 pounds' costs. Mr Bruce Pitt, prosecuting, said the heroin
had come from Pakistan. [Text] [London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 6 Nov 81

93]

C80: 5320/007 END

69