FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/ 10697

:9 July 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 16/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED ﬂEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
~

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
J'PRS 1/1069?
29 July 1982

HORLDHIIE REPORT
Tatsconnuulcarxous POLICY, Reseancu AND Deeropneur

(moo 16/82)

Commas

ASIA
JAPAN

N11“ Fanny's Uncertain Future
(Kenichi Konahashi; sum TOYO KBIZAI. 26 Apr 32) . ..... l

m Labor Union's View
(Kazno Oikaua; BKONOHISUTO: 27 Apr 82) .................. 9

Viev of Ministry of Poets and Telecouunicationa
(SMAKU, my 82) ooooooooooooooooooooeooooooooooooooloao l6

lwact of m Refer. Discussed
(RUDE KBIZAI snmun. 11-13 May 82) 22

USSR
'Orbita'. 'Bkran' and 'Hoskva' Satellite Television Broadcast System
(I). L. Zaytaev and 1... Ya. Kantor; mm KING 1 TBLBVIDBNIYA

Apt 82) coo-coo.oooooeooooooooeooooaoeoeoooooooooooooooooeooooo 31

- a - [III '- W ~ 140 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m PAKILY'S “CERTAIN FUTURE
Tokyo 8m TOYO KEIZAI in Japaneu 26 Apr 82 pp 82-85
[Article by reporter Kenichi Konshashi]

[Text] The situation in the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation
(m) has changed greatly drring the past year so, with liberation of later-
ial procureaent as of 1 January and changes nade by the new president, Shinto,
who took over his new post on the sale day. The effect of the rough waves is
surging toward the ao-called "at: family” ofcappmintely 300 fine which
supply equip-ant to m.

The NH flaily is also celled the "Iighty closed society." Con-snication
circles have been upgradiu their technological know-how through joint re-
search with m. Specific manufacturers are given orders through private
contracts. Outsiders are able to achieve official status in 811' through the
race-endation of the business concerned. It an eatrensly difficult feat
for anew participant to break into this bastion.

It is a fact that in achieving a quick recomtruction of the Japanese telephone
network, which was devastated by the war, it was nore efficient to concentrate
orders with specific fir-s. In the actual contracts today, the first order
depends on the degree of contribution in the joint development. The alloca-
tion of next year's orders is decided after the assessaents have been made as.
to thequality ofgoods, condition of conservation systel. delivery tine, price
offer, and nanagenent situation, including the previous year's perforlance.

In Other words, “The principle of coapetition is working, to a certain degree,
and there is absolutely no allouaant of an entire order to one single manufac-
turer. In addition, nenbera of m do not take 'gifts.‘ Inthat sense, things
are working well" (according to a party connected with NIT). Nevertheless, a
"coquettish structure" continues to thrive in the long closed society. Even
the cost of telephones is set by the "accmlative systel" of adding the cost
of parts of rigid quality standards and a fixed profit nrgin. Home appliance
manufacturers say that telephones "can be nade much cheaper."

Moreover, the "rights" of the four tubers—consisting of m, the Hinistry of
Posts and Teleco-micationa, the postal group, and private enterprises—have
been functioning. Thus, the power to crush the fsnily never deveIOped from
within. In the final analysis. the door was finally opened by "external

FOIOI'TICIALUSEONLY
PU“ UPPKJAL U30. UI‘LI

  

(7 masons-sunny.

 

Leading m Del-ands, TelecoI-anicstions unchinery Industrial Association

Key: '

(1) In 100 nillion yen (5) Civilian demands

(2) total order: (6) m

(3) Other governent (7) Note: Broadcasting equip-ant,
(4) External densnda radio equipnent not included

pressure." through the participation of foreign enterprises nsde possible by
the government-level procurement negotiations at the ‘rokyo round of am.

this changed the whole situation.
Tile-Consuning Overseas Procurenent

Through an agree-ant between Japan and the United States. the material procure-
sent method was divided into three stages, of Tracks 1. II and III.

Track 1: includes those [it‘s] which are not directly connected with the tele-
con-mication network. but bids can be placed for readily usable goods on the
nsrkst which can be worked into the network. Bidding and purchase of about
one-half of the annual procurement. or about 1.5 billion dollars including
paper and pencils, can be made according to cm. An anmal purchase of
over 64 nillion yen will he annomced in the official gazette.

Track It refers to those products on the urket that require slight changes.
These will be announced in the official gazette. and purchase can be nsde
through a private contract with a nemfacturer selected fro. applicants for
joint develop-ant (with m).
These new methods are well received by the 0.8. hbassy and "STE, but procure-
ment from foreign enterprises has not progressed substantially.

Specification study of 56 products and 258 companies under Track 1 was com-
pleted at the end of March. Among these were 15 foreign products and 27
foreign companies. Bids for 65 products by 54 companies totaling 19.5 billion
yen were received, but [bide for] only 9.3 billion yen for 9 products by 11
cowanies were from foreign firms. and many were for magnetic tapes and exper-
imental 181 manufacturing equipment.

On the other hand. the only product announced in the official gazette under
Track II was the digital echo suppressor. A Japanese firm was selected. As
for Track 111. 10 products were announced. A bid for automobile telephones by
Ibtorola end a bid for satellite-use echo eliminators by the 11.5. ATT were
received. An examination for selection is being made in each case, but the
fact is that the number is mach smaller then anticipated. (Motorola was
approached for the sale of pocket bells prior to the liberation of procure-
ment. and [Japan] will purchase 2 billion yen worth during this year.)

10 Beat Procurement Firms for m 1980 (in 100 million yen)

Nippon Electric Company Ltd 1,276
Fujitsu Ltd 846
Oki Electric Industry Co Ltd 683
Hitachi Ltd 615
Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd 176
Eurukewa Electric Co Ltd 156
Fujikure Cable Barks Ltd 156
Iwetsu Electric Co Ltd 146
Dainichi-Mippon Cables Ltd 160
Tamra Electric Machinery 113

However. all the products cannot be announced inadiately, and it requires
time to rewrite the specifications. Among the 101 products for Track 11,
slightly over 60 percent of those expected for announcement have been com-
pleted. The plan is to announce all the products by December. The situation
with Tracks 11 and 111 is: "Normally, the time required from research to
testing and test manufacture is l to 2 years for short-term items and about

5 years for long-term items. Procurement takes time." (Shire Matsuo. chief
of Materials Bureau)

An orientation for 0.5. firms. held in Tokyo last June, drew 56 participating
firms. Application forms were simplified. andthrough the instruction of
President Shinto. bidding instructions and specifications were translated in-
to English and distributed free of charge. Those conveniences by MTT were
rather unusual. Since then, over 100 firms have arrived to sake inquiries
or a sales pitch through the Japanese firms or by other means.

however. there is no denial that ”foreign manufacturers do not fully under-
stand the procedures." (Ichio Mada, chief of the international procurement

room. Materials Bureau) There is a plan to send sail directly to col-unice-
tion equipment manufacturers for double PR work.

3

mommruseouu
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On one hand, under the instruction ofPresident Shinto to "take positive steps
to buy good products cheaply," a study group was dispatched to the United
States in the middle of March. The group visited 111', GT8, Bell System (ATT),

and others to find ways to participate more readily in the Track II and Track
III levels.

"Ereaplary manufacturers have made a thorough study of NTT's procedures,
but they do not understand fully the patent rights know-how in Track III"
(Reds); therefore. explanations were made about this. As n result, ATT
placed applications for Track III, showing some progress.

On the other hand, problems also exist within the foreign manufacturers them-
selves. Especially, smaller v.5. co-manication equipment manufacturers tend
to submit applications without changing specifications or configurations, as
they have been doing with local telephone companies which do not possess their

own technology. There is also a difference in the way they make their sales
pitch to NTT.

Talks with various companies are moving along, however, and there is a gradual

understanding. A good example is the approval of private switchboards after
a year of negotiation with the Rohn Company.

In any case, an improvement in getting good results through PR takes time.

"Pull-scale participation of foreign manufacturers will exist from here on."
(Kada)

Stringent Environmental Changes for Smaller Hsmfacturers

whether there are gains in procurement from foreign manufactuers or not,
small and medium-size manufacturers will be affected the most from the
liberation. This was visible even before the liberation.

The bidding for facsimile equipment last fall is a typical case. Up to then,
Nippon Electric Company and Matsushita Dense had made deliveries through pri-
vate contracts, but the bids last fall were based on Track I. Over 10
companies responded, and Toshiba won orders for 570 electrostatic high-speed
equipment and 5,520 theml-aensitive medium-speed equipment items, while NBC
received orders for 1,900 thermal-sensitive high-speed equipment items.

However, the problem was in the prices of the successful bids, which were con-
siderably lower than the market price. A certain source said, "Toshiba set
the price at one-fourth to one-fifth of the market price in order to make in-
roads into the NTT market, and REC emulated them." There is a run that
"NTT's responsible persons have made inquiries regarding the excessively low
price." (art has denied this)

Toshiba disregarded this, saying, ”Delivery to TNT does not require distribu-
tion costs or inventory charges. Since a fixed quantity was assured, mass-
production efficiencies can be utilized to lower the cost."

MOWUSEONLY
Regarding the above, executives of medias-size manufacturers could not conceal
their bewilderment, saying, ”He believe competition is the flow of time, but
large cowanies which can produce in volume have the advantage in making bids.
If they keep this up to become the price setters, smaller cowanies can only
throw up their hands in despair."

In actuality, the trend in achievements of medium-sire communication equipment
manufacturers shows a conspicuous difference between the top-level and lower
level companies. m's investment was reduced to cut down on telephone inven-
tories which in turn out down on orders for telephones.

The top-level cowaniss. which were able to read this situation early, made
gains by exporting pushbutton telephones or by succeeding in diversification
into other fields so as to decrease their dependence on m. In contrast, the
medium-level companies. which were unable or were too late in getting into the
right track away from the rat's projects. show a trend toward stagnant sales
and profits due to depressed an investment.

Moreover, the all-out review of material procurement and construction invest-
ment under the instruction of President Shinto has added to their apprehensions.

In a normal year, a primary contract for 60-70 percent of the next fiscal
year's budget is drawn in January and a contract for the year is concluded in
August after the budget is completed. However, through the recent reconsidera-
tion, contracts were not concluded even in February. when the budgets should
have been fixed by the manufacturers, and it is already April.

The result is the suppression of equipmt, for example, by reducing the
installation of new public phones. according to the slowdown in real income
growth rate, instead of adding new phones.

In contrast. new equipment such as sutophones and pocket bells has increased.
Orders were switched from the old family enterprises to new manufacturers.

Moreover. the main object of the review is on INS (high-level information com-
munication system). What can be accomplished now is to change to a digital
system and promote a more efficient investment. However, many small and
median firms cannot keep up with the new digital technology, and a maldistri-
bution of orders to majors is unavoidable.

In like manner, the structural changes of using [.81 in equipment or moving
into a nontelephone line have pushed the smaller firms into a rather austere
environment. A certain trend in the introduction of new technology corres-
ponding to the technological development of middle and lower-level firms has
been seen. but such a luxury is no longer admissible.

ﬂoreover, as seen in the facsimile case, an mat compete for price in the
event of a sales competition between an and private firms. Procurements are
to he made by the lower market-oriented price, rather than by the purchase

price set by the system of adding-on. as was the case previously. Soon,
"cheaper products can be sold by competitive bidding even though private
contracting continues." (Hatsuo)

MWLUSCONLY
tion Equip-cut Manufacturers which Have Been Affected

Main Procureuent [tens

Depen-
dence
on NTT (financing
(percent)(percent)

Affilia-

tion

Prospects for

___._________._______.____________________________________._______

Bleck phones, pushbutton
phones

Blsck phones. pushhutton
phones

Pocket bells, etc.

Blsck phones. pushbutton
phones

Bleck. pushbutton phones

I Blsck phones, public phones.
privste-use fscsi-iles

Bisck. pushbutton phones

Sleek. pushbutton phones

Public phones. ship-use
phones

Black. puehbutton phones

33

33

20

50

40

60

50

25

REC(37)

“30(63)

IBC(10)

0ki(22)

"30(18)
0ki(18)

Fujitsu

(12)

litechi
(24)

“EC

Fujitsu
(55)

Increase revenues.
exporting pushbutl

Broad increese in
proved export of I

Increase profit tl
seles of inforleti
equip-ant

Revenues end prof:
sale

Revenue snd profu
through export of

Seles stssnsnt. h

Recovery with new
profits rennin th

Recovery with new
lower profits

Revenues. profits
inforlstion. less
Under these various factors. crustal nova-ants are rising within the shell
and nediun unufacturers of commicationa equip-sot

Dissolution of Cooperative Group After 9 Years

At such a tile. the cooperative group of Iiddle-eite enterprises dissolved at
the end of March. This cooperative group had been established in Key 1970 to
support nsdiuI-sise manufacturers through cooperative production of rotary
dial phones, or the so-cslled black phones. by transferring the production
fro. the najors.

The group consisted of six cowpanies: Heisei Denki, Taiko mectric works.
Tamra Electric works. lands Tsushin, hakayo Teleco-nnication Works. and
llasegswa Electric and lugineering Colpsny. At the tine, none of these con-
panies had the capability to produce a comlete set. Under the guidance of
NTT. each coqany supplied different parts (not sales) to be asseﬁled and
delivered to UTT. This nethod ilproved their productivity and technology.

however, moths puehbutton phones becals producable by a single company, the
cooperative group beta-e meaningless. to contrast. closer ties with new
affiliated fir-s would only hinder their progress. It was decided that it
would be better not to rely on the cooperative group, in order to establish
a finer administrative base, and this led to the dissolution.

Up to now. orders have been placed through the group. but starting in 1982,
individual orders will be placed to the nine cowanies. which include lwatsu
Electric Coqeny. Nitsuko and Tokyo Shibaura Electric Company. Transactions
of parts will probably reusin .ong the toner cooperative group tubers but
there will be a gradual and stronger love toward independence. This will
sweep each may into a sore vigorom cowetitive world.

NTT. on theother hand. hes stated soberly. “This will mean that an order can
be placed or received by an ordinary person. and NTT is no longer in a posi-
tion to provide detailed guidance." (Kada)

however, it does not apply to all snall and nediu fins. Under the GATT
provisions, enterprises with capitalisation of less than 100 nillion yen and
with fewer than 300 employees are excluded. and private contracts for small
parts such as connectors and fuses are being carried out. Horsover, over

20 percent of the procurement is allocated to enlist enterprises. under the
”law on assuring orders for govern-ant needs by snaller enterprises."

"Although it is said to be stall in quantity, they cannot take any more or-
ders because of technological lilitetions." (Hatsuo) Thus. the Con-mica-
tions Institute has decided to offer training in digital connnicstions, etc..
with a view toward a cooperative association of null and nediun enterprises.

The problen is with the lower level India-size enterprises. NTT has the
earlier [goal] of "reducing dependence on "IT to 30 percent and striving
toward civilian demands without pissing out on the new technology.” In

actuality, however. things are not going too well, as mentioned earlier.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An attelpt can be Isde to follow up the sudden rise in exports of electronic
pushbutton phones to the United States during the past 2 or 3 years, but there
is a delay in develop-em. and the Isrkst will cool of! by the time it is
coepleted. Ailing for dosestic sales will also result in severe competition
between similar industries. due to delays in operational structure and sales
network resulting from their past dependence on am. They also do not have
design specialists for civilian goods.... Many problass such as these exist.
There is a strong smve toward seeking protection for the affiliated new firm
to replace the m.

However. the environ-ant is turning all the more severe. A wrong nave will
produce dropouts. It is said that "I! a functionel, and cheap product is
available. we will buy it" (Hatsuo). but things are not that sinple. How they
can remove thenselves tron N1"! in the future will be the crucial point in the
next 2 to 3 years. The "N11 Eanily" which has been glorified in the spring of
our society is being compelled into a complete turnaround at "dusk."

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

9218
cso: blO6/lO7

.USIIONLY
m LABOR'UNION'S VIEW
Tokyo muomsm'o in Japanese 27 Apr 82 pp 52-55

[Interview with Kasuo Oikawa. chairman of the All-Japan Telecommunications
workers Union by nomsmo reporter; date and place not given]

[Text] The Nippon Telegraph and telephone Public .
Corporation (811') introduced three proposals regarding
reorganization of m to the hergency Administrative
Group. These show fully the feelings of President
Shinto. who ease up from the civilian ranks. On the
other hand, the All-Japan Telecommunication Barkers
Union. consisting of m exployees. expressed its
basic concept on Ianagerial inrovement to the Central
Con-ittee meeting held during March. It appears that
both labor and manage-ant are cool toward support of
the m systes. but what is their intention? Mr Oikawa
was born in hiyagi Prefecture in 1929. Be is 52 years
of age, and has served his entire life with the union.
starting as chief secretary of the Sendai Telegraph
Office chapter. Re has been in his present position
since 1976.

Return Profits to the People

Interviewer: Both 1m- nanagement and the union hava agreed to disavow the
present an system in the reorganization disputes. Proposals have been made
for a special conpany and a special corporation. respectively. but the couson
point is in the form of management. Is it over how it can operate efficiently
as a business?

Oikawa: Yes, that is true. Ielecoelunications work is part of an industry
with a pronising future. but projects'which should maintain civilian ties

are growing steadily. I believe that if corporate management continues to
place inortance only on the public interest, with no regard for business, an
irrationality will develop. Pro- now on. even public corporations cannot
neglect efficiency. In the final analysis, the question is over harmonious
promotion of teleco-Inication's future, expansion. and business and also how
we can nurture the telecommunication industry in the world market. The
problems lie in the reorganization of the managerial form, based on its role

-9-

POI OFFICIAL LB! ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

as protector of the benefits of all the Japanese people and of corporate man-
agement. There are criticisms against this position taken by the union, but
the points to be rectified cannot be rectified if the goverment undertakings
continue the way they are.

In this sense, I believe the article by Hitsuharu Ito, professor at Chiba
University (in EKOROMISUTO of 2 March. entitled: "Truth or Falsehood in

Talks on )bnopoly-Private Management of NEW-which adx ocates the necessity of
certain "government control" but opposes completely private mansgaent) shows
a constructive view.

Interviewer: The union's proposal is aimed toward a special public corpora-
tion financed by the government and subscri tars. but how are you accepting the
M1": concept?

Oikawa: Frankly, the most important point is the form of ownership, and there
is a conspicuous difference from our view. If a special company in the form
of the Japan Airlines Company is established. many problems regarding stock
ownership will arise.

A limited stock ownership system may be adopted, but be that as it may, stock
for a new business body can be issued to the public. Even if the government
should be asked to own one-third of the stock [for a while], this stock will
be sold within a certain time. we are opposed to it because it is different
from the Japan Airlines system and can be shifted into a private operation.
It means that public control will be removed completely.

In contrast, we are not proposing stock ownership but a special corporation.
Regardless of how we obtain efficient management, we cannot avoid the public
interest in telecomnunications. In the management of a public entity, the
effects of the fluctuations of stock prices and dividends should be avoided.
Stock ownership means strictly private management, and that is why we are
opposed to it.

A change to private management means selling the present enterprise for pri-
vate capital, but there is no need to sell a profitable enterprise. Therefore,
we want it to operate profitably for the people and pass the profits on to the
people. This can be accomplished by a reduction in rates, andthere is also

a merit of converting the present payment system for tax benefit. Perhaps as
a means of financing, a voluntary investment by subscribers is possible. so
that profits can be returned in the form of dividends. In such manner, it is
believed the profits from the an operation should be distributed fairly.
There is no reason why the enterprise should be sold wholly to private capital-
ists and let them benefit alone.

Unclear "Corporate Proposal"

Interviewer: however, as shown in the nine electric power system. an invest—
ment by. for example, the Tokyo Electric Power Company can be huge. A change
to a stock company does not necessarily make management easier.

-10-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Oikawa: There is that view. but the aaksup between electric power and tele-
co-unications is entirely different. All the electric power conpany has to
do. in an extras sense, is to keep the electricity flowing, or in short. keep
the conodity moving.

However. there are senders and receivers in telecommunications. Horeover.
there is an exchange of information through conversation, and the secrets of
individuals and nanagenent must be protected. This is where the significance
of going public or expansion can be lentioned, but to pursue a Ioneynaking
corporation freely brings out the contradictory side.

I feel that if asking noney is the foremost objective, going public or expan-
sion will be negated and greet confusion will arise...including the problem of
privacy.

Interviewer: It seens that career nubers of m are opposed to the m's
proposal for a special conpany.

Oikawa: You aentioned career where, but it is nore soanong the outsiders
who were appointed into the so-called "NIT family." There are some of the
"A"-class college graduate elite who are definitely opposed to it. In other
words, their goal is for reeaploynsnt into the "fa-11y"; therefore, the attrac-
tion for m as a public corporation or as a special corporation or privately
operated many would not be the sale.

Another point is that, no matter what is said, the A-class Isa-hers in our
corporation are, after all. bureaucrats. Sons class-ates are in the Ministry
of Finance and sons are in the Hinistry of Posts and Ielecomunications.
Bureaucrats have the consciousness of belonging to the first-class bureau-
cratic domain. A change to a private magnent would eliminate the future
positions [in m] for those who are now. for esanple, in the Ministry of Posts
and Telecommunication. To state it explicitly, since President Shinto cane
up from the private sector. he tries to push civilian logic. There are sone
who are not happy about this. Prom our viewpoint, President Shinto is going
too far, and there is criticism over how long he is going to relain as a
"civilian" president. He now should act as the president of NIT. we don't
know whether he is forever talking as an "outsider" or as a responsible 1m
nearer.

As a good exanple, President Shinto subaitted three proposals (special company
system, private nanaged system, and reforned public corporation system) to the
bergency Administrative Investigation Group, but none is designated as final.
This is on the prenise that the decision should not cone from m. It was in-
tended that "I only submitted the laterial." but I feel that he is not a person
in charge unless he says to the investigation group: "We want to do this."

we did not submit a proposal. Re are just offering "our views."

In any case. the investigation group will be issuing reports, but if the NTT's
intention isshown too soon in the Shinto's "three proposals." a free discus-
sion by the investigation group can be inpaired. Although the underlying
tone seas to point toward a special conpany, the goal is for private manage-
ment.

-11-

“MUSIONLY
FIHICHHHCJAL USEGNVLY

Interviewer: In the event the union's special corporation plan is to be imple-
mented, will theentire capital of the corporation be returned to the government?

Oikawa: This is a controversial [point]. The government says that it invested
18.8 billion yen when we became a public corporation and explains that this
would be 480 billion yen at the present price rate. It can be said that all

one has to do is to return this amount, but the problem is in future investment--
whether to have the subscribers put up the new money or not. It will have to

be done on a voluntary basis.

There is also the problem of capitalization. As for the type of management.
many problems such as the establishment of an investor-represented committee
to decide on intentions, an inspection committee, etc.. remain to be discussed.
We are thinking of getting knowledgeable persons together to discuss these
issues. In any case, even after the investigation group issues its report,

the reorganization will not progress immediately because of the pending legis-
lative work. It will probably reach a climax by the ordinary session of the
Diet next year.

Interviewer: The corporation's proposals and the union's proposal for having
the government hold the stock "for a while" seem to agree in the joint invest-
ment portion.

Oikawa: Strictly speaking, there is a difference, but the form of management
is quite similar. In essence, it appears that our views have been incorpo-
rated. After all. we have been advocating reorganization for 8 years.

Off-the-Hark Statement by H?T

Interviewer: Returning to the basics, a truly private conpany such as AIT in
the United States is operating quite well. th not the NIT?

Oiksws: The background is completelydifferent. The size of the land is not

at all the same. In the 0.5. case. monopolistic control by a powerful person
is strongly despised. At any rate, if a company is determined to be monopolis-
tic. it is split up by the Antitrust Law. Moreover, in reality it is impossi-
ble for a single enterprise to cover such a wide territory. But the size of
Japanese islands is insignificant.

In the case of Japan, a look at history shows that talks on the private manage-
ment of telecomsunications came up before. It required money and could not
compete as a private entity. Therefore, the decision was that it should be
operated by the government, and it has continued to this day. Because of this
background, it is outrageous to say that the United States can and Japan cannot.

we are against private control. but if it should come about, there is a method
for changing the entire system to private control. In such a case, however,

the Antitrust Law can be applied, and as a result, a split of private control
will be included.

- 12 -

FOR OFFIC1A1.USE(IULN
If it should be split. a new facility will be needed for senders and receivers
of information. This requires huge suns of noney. Moreover. [the need for]
different technology to suit regional situations would make consistently good
service difficult. In fact, second and third telephone companies are being
established in the United States, end this is viewed as an invitation to con- '
fusion. For exanple, telephone rates would rise in the depopulated areas and
be lower in the densely populated areas.

Interviewer: The MPT has been stressing reduction of personnel and rationali-
sation within the framework of the present corporation systen as part of the
m reorganisation. Does President Shinto include such "nuances” in his
statenent?

Oikawa: The m ministry of Posts and Teleco-nnicetions) can be called irre-
sponsible. By and large, inportant personnel of NIT require first of all the
approval of the EFT. without approval from the m. Ministry of Finance
cannot decide on the budget, either.

Such views can «serge if one considers that. the president has had experience
in rationalization of a private shipbuilding firm. This is one way to look at
it in a restricted sense, and it can be viewed affirmatively. But there are
330,000 employees in NIT, and their workload differs according to their place
of employment. In some areas, an absolute value of personnel is lacking.

Frankly. therefore, the rationalisation has been carried out through talks
between labor and management in the redistribution of essential personnel

to busier areas. Thus, there shouldn't be any surplus of essential personnel
to be called lazy. The union cannot accept labor intensification ontha
grounds of working a little harder to becone essential.

Rationalization isnot siwle. but consequentially, they should have cooperated
in the corporation plan. The problen of wages tied to working hours cannot be
worked out readily, because they are regulated by the budget. Despite this,
rationalisation has been carried out. It is believed the corporation has
shown its good faith.

Interviewer: It seems that the m is not aware of such a scenario.

Oikmva: That is correct. Despite many restrictions. negotiations not be
carried out inthe live labor and manath relationship; therefore, I cannot
understand the aeeningly critical statement, though it is a supervisory agency.

There are 330,000 personnel working in N'I'T. and the president and outsiders
may see other weak points, but in actuality. the workers want to work. and new
services are being proposed by labor and management.

however, under the framework of the present system. nothing can be done with-
out the approval of the HPT, even if they are agreed to by labor and nanage-
ment. After going through various deliberation councils and thtees. a
reply will take at least a year. In some cases, it has taken 6 years. The
world situation can change by that tile. That is why I like to say "nonsense"
when a surplus of workers is mentioned.

-13-

mamauaouu
INJR*OFTWCJAI.IJSE CNVLY

Interviewer: Is that the reason the union is proposing that NTT be reorganized?

Oikawa: Yes. At present, weakness depends on the point of view. At any rate,
a reorganization of the system will provide work, which in turn will improve
the enterprise and provide better services to the people. I feel there are
many things which can be put into practice. This is what we think and I feel
that if they can place importance there, the MPT cannot be critical. It is
often said that an enterprise with 330,000 people is too large, but the

issue is tied to inequitable cases. The administrative structure....

Interviewer: Cannot see them....

Oikawa: They occur in a sense from no: being able to see, but this is one
view and I believe that it is an indication. However, if the split theory is
effected, cases such as these can be prevented through a change in authority.
That is why we are proposing decentralization of authority.

Hereafter, leadership from a central office is no longer valid. At the sale
time, a change would provide closer services to the regional subscribers,
since teleommnwucations will penetrate into the people's lives. Unless deci-
sive authority is given to chiefs of telegraph and telephone stations or to
chiefs of co-unications departments that will naintain prefectural control,
the needs of the people in the regions cannot be met. It is a good idea, and
we want to go ahead with it, but it must be heard by the head office. A
systen where a reply takes 2 or 3 months after going through the consunica-
tions department, the communications bureau, and the main office is hopeless.

Authority should be transferred decisively. The “TI leaders are thinking
along this line, and we have submitted our demands for this.

Repeating the Errors of the NRC

Interviewer: The reorganization of NTT, the National Railways Corporation
(NRC), and the Japan Monopoly Corporation is said to be the target of "Doko's
investigation group"; therefore, a substantial reorganization can be expected.
Is there a "preparedness“ for this at this time?

Oikawa: If Mr Doko were questioned politically, he would probably deal with
the issuas on three corporations. Unless a clearbcut reply is made on the
NRC issue, one's ability [to carry it out] will be questioned. Therefore,
the NRC is number one [issue].

With regard to the NTT issue, there are quite a few bureaucratic outsiders in
the Fourth Subcommittee, which is in charge of the inVestigation group. They
will probably take a conservative view, and so I believe that the discussion
will evolve on keeping the present NTT system intact. Those who used people
as a basis will probably counter by taking the stand of split and private
management. The question is for those who are taking the neutral stand....
There arealso mass-couunication people, although their nuber is small.

- 1a -

POI OFFKJAI.UBIGMULY
I doubt that any of the ms-co-mnication people feel that the present situa-
tion is good. when the problel of efficiency is taken up, they will insist on
putting the scalpel to the abuse of ”having the good government foot the bill."
In that sense. Ibelieve the decision will be closer to the people's viewpoint.
That is the situation...I believe.

The nost critical [issue] at this tile is on the present and future of the
teleco-nnication infatuation industry, as was nentioned at the beginning.

The question is whether the report to be issued will be based on the discus-
sions fro. their true neaning.

Interviewer: "hose telegraph and telephone work will it be?

Oikawa: This is not yet a pressing issue. It will be related to the inter-
national econonic activities and industrial activities.

The type of managenent nust be for-ed after taking a herd look at 5 years to
10 years into the future.

Under the existing conditions, speculation presents the concern that the cor-
poration will be chopped up because of superficial conclusions that there are
too my enployees or the scale of the enterprise is too large, or that the

corporation after all relies too such on the good govern-ant to foot the bill.

Interviewer: It seems that the investigation group is saying that they need
further investigation.

Oikawa: That is in the proposals. The president has not mentioned which of
the three proposals he wants. That point will be questioned. When that ques-
tion is posed. the president should respond clearly as president. This is

how I feel, irrespective of whether the proposal will be adopted bv theinves-
tigation group or not.

Interviewer: larlier, you mentioned the three corporations. Do you sense that
the mistake seen in the case of NBC should at least be avoided?

Oikawa: Yes, I do. If NIT perforls the entire work on the national tele-
co-Iunication network and lets the private enterprises do the rest. it can
lead to another NRC aistake. [A listakel also can happen by having the data
conunications sector take over the depopulated areas.

In short, by taking over the red-ink portions.... The second NRC nistake is
definite if they say the good portion will be handled by the private sector
and the poor portion by others because of the public interest.

COPYRIGBT: HaihiChi Shiﬂunaha 1982

9218
C80: 4106/107

summon“
POI OMOAI. USE ONLY

JAPAN

VIE? OP KINISTRY 01’ POSTS AND rammcanons
Tokyo 5mm! in Japanese May 82 pp 72-75

{Text} The Second hergency Ahinistrative Investigation Group (chair-an,
Ioshio Doko) has entered the final stage of work toward issuing its basic
report on 10 July. Various subco-ittee reports will be consolidated in
mid-May to be reported to the Investigation Group. Active "intervening ope-
rations" are being developed for this report by the Liberal Denocratic Party,
concerned governnent agencies. business circles, and organisations with their
underlying interests.

Above all, a violent "counterwind" is raging free the fourth Subconittee
(headed by Keio University Professor Kan [or Hiroshi] Kate), which is working
on "ways of the three corporations and five agencies." The National Railways
Corporation is the symbolic topic of this suboonittee, but the Nippon ‘Iele-
graph and Telephone Public Corporation (NIT) is pushing for a change in
nenegenent structure. iron the deliberations. it appears certain that the
report will favor the private magnet“ line of changing to a special conpany
ained toward greater nobility of the enterprise and competency of the persons
involved.

As this line of thinking became apparent, the LOP, Ministry of Posts and releo
co-inications (M). the m family. and even the corporation started blasting
with their counterheadwind. The postal group in the LDP. which is trying to
bend the report, is working on m to go against the Investigation Group at
this tine. In reality, the postal bureaucrats, who are naneuvering to gain
control over personnel and supervision of m in the event of a change in
nanagenent, the m fanily'e enterprises. which are afraid of losing their
rights and interests. and certain technology first. which have been spending
developnent funds estravagantly as part of the new "technology kingdom," all
have different views. But the "counterwind" has started to gyrate over the
"green" of the Investigation Group. The Investigation Group is in a precarious
situation.

Advancing the "Shinto Concept"
"To correct the inproper abinistration."... Under this project. Bisashi
Shinto, who cane over from private enterprise (Ishikawajine Bari-e Heavy

Industries), seemed the presidency of m about 15 nonths ago. he hes
complained, "I accepted the position because I was told to correct the improper

-15-

summon!
administration. But I have been drawn into a preposterous thing called the
Investigation Group." his reputation up to a year after his appoint-ant had
been good.

Through "reporting to work early," he drew the sass sedia's attention by
straightening out the la: regulations found in the corporation, has drawn the
union to his side through dialog, etc. his greatest achieve-cut has probably
been the opening of m to society by breaking the secretiveness which had been
NTT's the "special quality." lie left voluntarily for the United States and
set with Secretary of Caner-ca Baldridge and brook, a representative of 0811!
(United States Trade Representation). to raise the overall assess-ant of NIT
within the 0.8. Govern-ant. "hen the procuruaent of teleco—mication mater-
ials was about to becone an issue in the 0.5. House of Representatives during
the tine of increasing trade friction in March, USTR representative Brock and
others reproved the Congress that there is "no probles” with m.

m was looked upon as a stronghold of the Tanks faction and the Niki faction.
but the Shinto style of operation captured both factions, and persons such as
former print minister Kakuei Tanaka spurred on "to take the private nanagenent
route by providing capital of 1 trillion yen and support funds of 3 tr.’ llion
yen." At least fro. the present situation. leaders of the Tanaka faction. the
Niki faction, and of course the Suzuki faction are solidly behind Shinto's
concept of private manage-eat.

Up to now, Shinto has refrained fro. issuing his views publicly on the problem
of changing m to a privately nanaged enterprise. In response to the re-
port. issued last July. "to carry out a drastic review of the ferns of name-
went, including private nanageaent," he submitted three proposals for a special
company, private nanagaent, and a reorganized public corporation on 26 Febru-
ary of thisyear. This is merely a way of entrusting the [final] selection to
the Diet, the goverment, or the Investigation Group.

however, there is no doubt that the intention of Shinto is private management,
even if it leans taking the route of a special colpany. The basic concept of
Shinto is that "a public col-unications work which can be of service to the
people and users cannot evolve in the absence of efficient unageIIent." But
in actuality. the prize pupil called NTT has reached its peak in telephone
demands, and the difference between revenues and expenditures has turned to

a 2-3 percent sinus factor and carries a long-tern-debt of 5.3 trillion yen.

0n the other hand, it is being pressed with the problems of rectifying long
and short disparities (presently at l to 60) and Iaeting new needs, such as
an expansion of the data bank and other nontelephone services. The IRS
(high-level inforlation comnication system) concept, to be promoted by NTT
under the 20-year plan with an investlent of 20 trillion yen, is a typical
exasple.

however, a situation of continuing persistently with the current rates or rely-
ing conpletely on rate hikes, as seen in the National Railways Corporation case,

must be avoided. To attain this, efficient management and a stable financial
base are indispensable. Since Shinto assu-ed his position. "industrial efforts

-17-

MOMMUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such as a reduction of expenses by the nonthly settlement of accounts, which
is normal in the private sector, increased revenues through sales pronotion,
and reduction in the interest pay-ant burden have been carried out. however,
m is stynied by budget control, the Public Corporations and Goverment Enter-
prises Labor Relations Act, the public corporation law, public telecomnica-
tion laws, etc., all of which create difficulties in the performance of its
own operations. Unless governannt controls are reloved and it becomes an
active, self-supporting corporation, its downfall into beconing ”second
National Railways Corporation" is inevitable. This is the logic Shinto is
using in his concept of private nanagenent.

m: the Ringleader for Scrapping

President Shinto appears "short-tenpered," and his maneuvering for private
management of NTT is rather inpetuous. For this reason, there are increasing
signs of "stopping private maguent" in opposition to his hastiness, as well
as annoyance at his popularity as the conclusion of the Investigation Group

draws near. For example, EFT-aligned freshmen Diet members are saying, ”Shinto
will bow his head to executives. but he does not even look at us."

However, as you well know. m. along with its falily, has built a solid "struc-
ture of rights and interests" around the rights and interests of NIT in the

30 years since the war. If it changes to a private management system, con-
siderable shaving will take place, and it will be devoid of "sugarly" indul-
gence. The "structure of rights and interests" up to now has been very con-
servative. But there is opposition, as suggested, for sample, by certain
firms to Diet members that "we can no longer continue to associate if NTT

comes under private management."

Even if this were not the case, the result would be preeninent. This line of
argunent has become the center of the "counterwind." A look into the chorus
of "Stop m from caning under private nanagenent" and "Crush Shinto" shows
that the EFT, a supervisory agency. is behind it. iliroshi Asao, adninistra-
tive vice ninister of the HPT. said at one of the meetings: "We can even have
about one-half of the NTT executives occupied by the Ienbers of the EFT."
This is the underlying intention of the m. The HPT feels that NTT is a
subordinate public corporation. but in actuality it does not possess that
such influence. The m and NTT were split free the prewar Ministry of Con-
nunications (NTT was then known as the Ministry of Electric Comnications),
and NTT feels that they are of equal level and has resisted strongly the an
intervention regarding personnel, labor affairs, accounts, etc. When it is
ties to draft a budget, the m sits in as a supervisory agency, but NTT can
only retain silent in the sorrow of being a "third-rate agency." The Inter-
national Telegraph and Telephone Company (KDD) also is enbroiled in this situ-

ation. Although it is a private enterprise, it is subjected to thorough
intervention.

in a sense, it is the desire of the m to have m. in nane and in reality,
under its supervision. Additionally. if NTT becane a truly private enterprise,
the wrwould lose the loo billion yen in contract funds received each year fro-
NTT and nay even have XIII take over the supervision. This already is evident
in the problel involving data commications.

-13-

momaumeomv
Since the Investigation Group wants to replace postal savings, which is one of
the important parts of the m. there is a fear of losing even this if m

turns private. As the mood toward private managasent of N'l'l‘ heightened along
with the popularity of Shinto, a sudden change toward counterattack developed.

Its basic strategy is in countermeasures through the Diet and the mass sedia.
Vigorous countermeasures are being planned by having Norimasa Baaagawa. an
inspector with the Secretariat's Documents Section, in charge of the project,
with Hiroshi Ramada, deputy chief of the Second Section of the Telecommnica-
tions Policy Bureau assisting. They have made candid requests, such as by
saying, "The private management view given by m is peculiar. If you can
print articles to refute this, we can provide you with materials." however,

except for a certain industrial publication, this did not work, probably be-
cause it was too candid.

Vice Hinister Asso's attack against N1": is also appalling. lie takes every
opportunity at the press conference to say, "N‘l'r's view that it is unable to
do anything unless it changes its managerial systus is ridiculous. Those who
say that the present budget system is quite elastic yet lacks elasticity do

not know anything about the budget. Labor conditions are better than in the
other two public corporations and agencies. A revenue gain of 3 percent and
an increase of 6 percent in expenditures are wrong. A drop in labor conditions
can reduce the increase in expenditures to under 6 percent. At present.
330.000 personnel are taking it easy and the m is now carrying out rigorous
personnel management." He becomes indignant about the union's queries. he
also makes statusents which betray his personality, such as: "There are voices
saying that there is opposition within the public corporation. and there are
five or six party meters who are stuck together in the opposition."

The argment of the m, headed by Vice Minister Asao, is that "It can be done
through efforts, even within the current framework," and "your mental attitude
is bad." However, there is an indication of a doubt as to the sincerity of the
m': counteroffensive. Vice Minister Asao and other postal executives say
repeatedly, "If N'l'l' becomes privately managed, menterprise tax and a fixed
property tax will be levied. it would be disadvantageous." In addition,

an Minister Noboru Hinowa has stated. "A reevaluation of assets would have

to be nade if it were to become privately nanaged. This would mean a payment
of 600 billion yen in fixed property taxes each year."

An invesusent in kind without necessarily a reevaluation of assets can be
made under the present system: therefore, the above statement reveals the
government official's sorrowful lack of knowledge about private enterprise.
Furthermore. there is uncertainty in their basis for calculation. They can-
not give nunerical explanations at the press conference and end up apologiz-
ing. to be sneered at by correspondents. Finally, Prime Minister Suzuki
became infuriated by the haphazard figures and prohibited further publication.

Tug-of-Har with Postal Group in LDP
A maneuver toward politicians seems to be progressing steadily. After all,

the HP'l‘ is a gigantic fanily, backed by 16,000 postal offices throughout
Japan. It is not only large in numbers, but there also is mch energetic

-19-

FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

young blood. The feature of the postal f-ily is that each faction has a fresh-
man and second-year Diet member assigned to the comaunications committee.

Since the popular conittees for budget, cuaerce, agriculture, and forestry
are usually occupied by masters who have been elected at least four times,

younger aembers are sent to the less popular comaunications co-aittee, but there
are any who become that much more vocal.

In contrast to the popular co-ittees, chem treats Diet memebers on the
co-aunicstions couittee with care: therefore, those who leave the co-ittee

have an indescribable nostalgia and they become easily rekindled backers of
the m.

The Teleco-unication Basic Problem Study Group (headed by Tsunetaro Kato)
of the Policy Research Co-aittee of the Liberal Democratic Party is the body
which is undermining the private management issue of m. The group has
forcefully "taken over" the discussion on private management of MT which
had been carried out by the Subconittee on Teleco-mications Work (headed
by Ken hareda) of the Policy Research Committee since 2 Hatch.

The "subcommittee" takes the position that the problem of changing the form
of management is "being handled by the Investigation Group, and the party
should not express its views." (Chairman Barada), but the "Basic Problem
Study Group" has taken the opposite view-that "the party's views should be
expressed positively to the Investigation Group." (Chairman Rate)

The argument of the "Basic Problem Study Group" has many faults, and a slightly
lower dimension is seen, but at any rate its distinctive feature is its
thrashing of N11. Executives of the not have stated, "Re are politicians, and
we represent the people; therefore, we should express our in:entions to the
Investigation Group. A takeover of m by financial circles is preposterous,"
(committee member Ko Suite), and s "Regarding the problem of. private manage-
ment, a fixed direction established by having the party call in concerned peo-
ple is one thing, but tohave the president of the public corporation say that
the trend toward private management is uniform is a problem. It lacks suffi-
cient study." (Diet member Eijiro Kata)

Horeover, on 7 April a neutral collective view that even Chairman Kato did not
know of spread within the "Basic Problem Study Group." The neutral collective
view of "what form of ten management should take" is literally an antiprivete—
management proposal. It clearly states, "The majority of calaittee meﬁers
have doubts about private management and also about the transition to a spe-
cial company and [feel] it should sc;k rationalization and efficiency under
the present public corporation system. There is no positive view on the
transition of a special coqany."

The grounds for opposition are identical to the doculent on "blow 811‘ Should
Be Managed," put together by the m in March. which leads to the suspicion
that opposition views were prepared by the MPT. Recently, this postal group
strongly opposed the private management and split of the National Railways
Corporation and started associating with Kato and transportation group in the
Diet who are trying to stop N‘l'l' from becoming private. In addition, Kazuo

-20-

POI OFFICIAL U“ MY
Tanaki and other were of the House of Councilors have started to denun-
strate creepy activities. Thus. the noves "to torment Shinto" have been
growing steadily.

At any rate. the m and the postal group have achieved a certain success in
the tug-of-war latch. Although the Shinto concept may not be squashed con-
pletely. the lIPT's final goal, upon the Investigation Group‘s proposal for a
special coqany. is to obtain indisputable rights and interests (supervision
of personnel), as in the case of the DD, when “'1'! is reorganized legally as
a special cowany. The present administrative reform novenent is nothing
more than the first wave of the reorganisation.

Group for Preservation of Status Quo Regarding m

The term m family is becoming obsolete, but the annual procurenent of over
1.6 trillion yen is still attractive to businessmen. What about the relation-
ship between the corporation and the family enterprises? NTT is not neces-
sarily monolithic. It is said that those who control the Technology Bureau,
the Facilities Bureau. and the Materials Bureau also control 811'. Vice Presi-
dent Yasusada Kitahara and chief engineer Kaisei Yenaguchi are at the top in
building a technology kingdon. Their feelings are to preserve the existing
systen: Yanaguchi, especially, is furiously opposing Shinto's concept. This
corporation support group and the family enterprises will probably nesh
together both openly and secretly in the future.

The NTT engineers form a solid group thmgh personnel, naterials. and

money but this myth has gradually been crunbling ever since the liberation
of naterial procurenent by the so-called three-track system. Moreover, the
introduction of monthly settlements and the squeeze on facility investments
by Shinto are diluting the ”sweet gravy” of the family. If m becomes a
completely independent enterprise, be it in the fore of a special corpora-
tion or a private enterprise. rationalisation will follow. and the invest-
ment which has been the source of "sweet gravy" and the procurenent orders to
specific firms will surely change. Apprehensions will keep rising along the
family. Large diversified nanufacturers of equipment. nachinery. and wires
are better off , since they are not totally dependent on NTT, but the con-
struction business. which has to cling to m. will be seriously affected.

In any case. it is reported that Shinto was infuriated when certain construe
tion businessnen brought hin noney when he seemed the presidency. However,
for the sake of preventing private nanagement. it is not unusual to see noney
thrown in the direction of politicians. NTT officials who have been assigned
to the family enterprises are said to have been neeting once a week at the
Imperial hotel to formulate countermeasures. They denounce Shinto and are
studying a concrete political naneuver.

NTT executives have also participated in these neetings at tines; therefore,
with "unexpected enenies." the change in the form of nanagenent will not be
easy as believed by the pro-Shinto group. Indeed. Shinto has been naneuvering
among the factions and pulling to his side young adninistrators and persons
of practical business knowledge uhohave been cold-shouldered in the kingdom
of technicians. The great current, under the banner of the Investigation
Group. is turning toward private manage-eat. The question of the future
effectiveness of the "counterwind" will beco-e the crucial noment for the
papular Shinto.

9218
080: 6106/107

-21-

MOFFICMLISIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

IMPACT OF NIT REPORH DISCUSSED
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SEIHBUN in Japanese 11-13 May 82
[11 May 82 pp 9-11]

[Text] Impact of NTT Reform (Part 1)

NTT (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation). a mammoth
organization which can be said to be the "central nerve" of the Japanese
Archipelago, is about to be transformed. The report by the nth Sub-Committee
of the 2nd Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council, which report
will be made public soon, is expected to incorporate such reform plans as a
"change to private management" from the present public corporation system,
"separation off of some business operations," and "regional division." As to
whether or not these will go as planned by the Research Council, we must note
their whereabouts in the future. 0n the other hand. however, NT? itself
also is showing various moves toward self-reform, in response to the new age.
They are typified by its positive challenge to the field of advanced
technology. Such moves over NT? will have an impact on the industry circles
in general, at any rate.

Is NT? a Superior Enterprise?

In the middle of April, the figure shown by the Postal Services Ministry
varied greatly from that shown by NTT, over NTT's change to private management.
In a tentative calculation to see how far expenditures will increase due to
taxes. dividends, etc., when the present NTT is assumed to be a joint-stock
corporation with a capital of V1 trillion, the Postal Services Ministry
calculated the increase as V600 billion, and judged that it is impossible for
NTT to be placed under private management. However, NT? asserted that it
can be placed under private managment because the increase can be limited to
V250 billion.

This is because prior conditions are different between the Postal Services
ninist. . which puts in question what should be done to conduct manage-
ment which is desirable for an enterprise. while paying lO-percent dividends
and securing sufficient internal reserves. too, and NT? which expects 8-percent
dividends (no dividends for the shares held by the Government), the receiving
of measures to reduce some taxes, and future efforts for management. As can

-22..
be seen from this example, too, NTT, which is said to be a superior
Government-affiliated enterprise, "is by no means a good company, when it is
assumed to be a private company" (President Hisashi SHINTO). Moreover,
unrest is beginning t. be seen as to the future, too.

Future of Telephones. Which Are Relied upon, Is Dark, Too

NTT's income includes that from telephones,telegrams, data comunications,
etc. Of these, the income from telephones accounts for 88 percent. Moreover,
of the balance between income and outgo (surplus -- equivalent to the
before-tax profit) in the case of NTT, amounting to ¥388,100 million.

VS38,200 million is earned by this sector. In other words, management is
supported by the telephone sector, with the deficits in other sectors offset.

In the telephone sector, where the income showed an increase of more than
10 percent at one time, growth is likely to stop at 2 or 3 percent in the
future, because the spread of telephoneshasrun its course. The future of
telegraph. which causes a deficit of more then V100 billion, is quite dark,
and data communications, too, have not grown so greatly as desired, because
of the severe competition with private enterprises.

Hhile the growth of income is slowing down, there are many factors for an
increase in expenditures. The financial expenses accompanying the long-term
debts (most of them are NT? bonds, amounting to VS,305,900 million as of
the end of March, 1981) account for about 10 percent of the income, and these
expenses will increase further. The increase in the personnel expenses for
330,000 persons, which expenses account for about one-third the total ex-
penditures, are also a heavy burden. when the increase in non~personnel

expenses is estimated, it is found that the situation of the increase in
expenditures exceeding that in income is approaching. President SHINTO also
admits this, saying that "There is the danger that if this situation continues,
NT? will become a second National Railways."

Under such a situation, SHINTO assumed the post of President.from private
circles (former President of Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industry),in January,
1981. He cynically referred to NT? people's way of speaking, "We will install
a telephone for you," which way was brought about amid monopoly, as "NT?
language instead of the Japanese language." he embarked upon drastic measures
including the reduction of expenses and investments, while inspiring the
concept of a private enterprise in the form of pre-empting the
recommendation by the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council.

Reflecting such an intention of the top-ranking leader, the fiscal
1982 budget was epochal. The number of personnel has decreased by 1,000
compared with the preceding fiscal year, and the construction investments have
decreased by ¥$0 billion. Both have fallen below the level of the preceding
fiscal year for the first time since the inauguration of NTT.

- 23 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand, enthusiasm about "trade" has budded, too. Last fall.
Toshiba received an order for about 6,u00 telephone facsimile sets from NTT.
accounting for 80 percent of the total. This caused big repercussions in
the industry circles concerned, because Toshiba, which has not so far been
very friendly with NTT. received such a big order, and moreover, because
its bidding price was exceptionally low, reportedly one-fourth to one-fifth
the market price.

Family Has Collapsed?

Such an occurrence is due to the fact that a formula of competitive
bidding, in which both Japanese and foreign enterprises can participate,
has been adopted on a large scale, from the traditional equipment procurement
system centered on specific manufacturers constituting the "NTT family."
This was occasioned by the opening of the doors for the procurement of
materials. which opening was realized from January, 1981 after the matter
became a political problem between Japan and the US. However, as it occurred
when the NT? market itself had become smaller because of the curbing of
investments, it accelerated the intensification of competition among the
manufacturers.

The unrest of the industry circles concerned is not limited to this
alone. NT? itself, which has so far been their customer. is about to become
a strong rival. NT? is also engaged in the sales of such terminal equipment
as telephones and facsimiles, which are connected with circuit networks
including telephone lines. However. the share of its equipment which comes into
competition with that produced by private manufacturers is falling steadily,
except for the main telephones (first telephones to be installed for telephone
subscribers).

Partly because of the shortage of business efforts, it has become unable
to compete favorably with private manufacturers who move quickly. In the
case of telephone facsimiles, for example. which are being spotlighted as a
new means of communications, NTT‘s share in the number of those installed in
fiscal 1975 was nearly uo percent, but it has dropped to nearly 1 percent
recently. ‘

To vitalize this terminal equipment sector, President SHINTO intends to
open main telephones also to private manufacturers, on the one hand. and on
the other, he is trying to roll back by establishing an "Inhouse Equipment
Business Headquarters" where the related sectors are combined, as early as
next year. NT? has no manufacturing sector, and it purchases all equipment
from private circles. However, in the fields which come into competition
with those of private circles like in the case of terminal units, it is trying
to purchase products at low prices by issuing orders for large amounts
through competitive bids, on the basis of its own technological development.

- 24 -
and stand up against private circles' offensives in real earnest by adopting
the selling-out system and price reductions, too.

At the same time. it is trying to make the data communications sector
more efficient. This sector has continued to have a deficit since it was
started. If NTT's activities are strengthened, its competition with private
circles will come to the fore, inevitably. In the report by the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council's Sub-Committee. separation of the
terminal equipment and data communications sectors is scheduled to be included,
and therefore. it is inevitable that an impetus will be given to such moves.
The stirs of "re-organization" of NTT, which has approached a period of a big
reform, are spreading as big swells. both in and outside NIT.

[12 May 82 pp 10-12]

[rext] Part 2

The "My Frank Account of NT? (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone_Public
Corporation)." which is NT? President Hisashi SNINTO's writing put on sale
in January, became a best seller, and SHINTO, pleased with this, will soon
contribute the royalties to the Japan Scholarship Society, '.c. SHINTO's
views on the management of NTT, which views are included in that book, are so
bold that they could not have been considered by the NT? Presidents in the
vast. However. even President SHINTO was unable to agree to the plan for
"dividing NTTintoregionalgroups." As far as this point is concerned. he
entertained uneasiness as to what conclusion the Nth Sub-Committee of the 2nd
Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council will form.

Taking over Development from Private Circles

In early May. the Sub-Committee's.plan for reforming NTT became clear.
In this plan. the following item was included: "Placing NT? under private
management should be pushed by dividing it into the central company unitarily
holding the nation-wide key circuit networks and the research and development
sector. and 8 - ll regional companies providing telephone communication
services, etc., in various areas." President SHINTO is said to have express-
ed roanNTT leader his dissatisfaction with the plan for division, saying as
follows: "If it is divided into regional companies, NTT may lag behind in
international technological development."

In regard to division of NTT, not only NTT leaders but also electric
machinery manufacturers and university research organs are entertaining
apprehension, saying, "I wonder if NTT's research and development structure
can be maintained."

This is natural. NTT has extremely important roles. being the general
manager of telegraph and telephone services in Japan and at the same time the

general headquarters for Japan's electronic and communications technology.
As to the development of advanced technology, including VLSI's (very large-

- 25 -

FOR 0FT1CLKL USE Ohﬂdf
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scale integrated circuits), computers, optical communication, and picture
communication. NTT is carrying it out jointly with domestic electronics
Imlnufacturers and influential research organs, and entrusting them with manu-
facture. By so doing, it is producing immeasurable benefits for the fostering
of advanced industries in the form of eventually taking over the moving of
advanced technology and expenses for research and development.

Moreover, such technology is on the top level in the world. NTT is
exchanging technology with ATT (American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation).
which is termed the biggest enterprise on earth, and US 18h (International
Business Machines), which is a world giant in the computer industry circles.
This is because NTT has technology ranking with that of these two companies.

Fear of Research Expenses Decreasing

In view of its high technological power and its power of influence on
private circles, NTT is called the "NASA (National Aeronauticsiand Space
Administration) of Japan." Such a position has been built up by the plentiful
research expenses. The expenses for fiscal 1982 are estimated at 888,500

million, and this is because huge business yields. amounting to Vu,166.u00
million, are exrected.

However, if NTT is divided into the central company and a plural number
of regional companies, as planned by the Sub-Committee of the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council. the income of the central company,
which has the research and development sector. will decrease, as a matter of
course. Will it be possible to maintain the same research expenses and
technological level as in the past in such a situation? The uneasiness of

HTT and electronics manufacturers stems from this.

Another focal point for private enterprises is the problem of procurement
of materials. As NTT has no manufacturing sector. it purchases most
communications and information-processing equipment from outside, and purchases
the remainder through joint development. The monetary amount of this procure-
ment was 2776,800 million in fiscal 1980. This amount is so huge as to
exceed by nearly V200 billion the amount of sales by Fujitsu, which is an
influential member of the NTT family. in harch, 1981. This is by far the
largest among the three public corporations. .

The materials procured by NTT are of the following three kinds (fiscal
1980): (1) Materials procured by the hehd Office (automatic switchboards,
transmission wireless devices, cable, data communications equipment, etc.);

(2) things procured locally, on the local communications bureau level (telephone
directories. wood poles, steel strand wires, etc.); and (3) things procured
at actual scenes (consumer goods. fixtures, etc.). The materials procured

by the Head Office account for 81.5 percent of the total.

If "TT is divided into regional companies, the items now procured by

the Head Office, excluding the key circuit networks, will come to be procured
by regional companies. If so. "There is the fear that the advantage of

- 25 -
making unit prices low by package orders of large amounts of materials will
become small." So saying, NT? leaders knit their brows. As NT? gives big
orders under monopoly, it faces the manufacturers side with a firm attitude,
and there are even voices saying that "NTT is high-handed," at times. However,

if the advantage of collectively purchasing large amounts of materials becomes
extinct, and if the purchasing cost rises as a consequence, this may drag down

on the feet of management rationalization, which is the chief aim of placing
NTT under private management.

Intensification of Competition in Bidding, Too

Conversely, it is possible to take the view that if the authority for
procurement is dispersed to local areas, NT? will open its doors further, at

this time when it is carrying out the opening of the doors for the procurement
of materials, and competition, which will become vigorous, will lead to the
lowering of costs on the part of NTT. Moreover, regional companies will
become strict about costs, under a self-support accounting system, and bidding
competition will possibly become severe.

The plan by the nth Sub-Committee of the Provisional Administrative
Affairs Research Council does not as yet refer to what to do about procurement.
The plan calls for effecting the division within five years, and there still

is enough time. At any rate, it is likely to press the NT? family and the
enterprises concerned for a new posture to cope with the problem.

NTT's Research and Development Structure
nusashino Tele-Communications Research Institute --

Iocated in Husashino City, Tokyo; number of personnel: 1,900 3;
contents of research: electronicswitchboards,VLSI, data exchange,
and memory devices .

Yokosuka Tole-Communications Research Institute ~-

Located in Yokosuka City, Kanagawa Prefecture; number of personnel:
1,100; contents of research: data communication, picture communication,
optical communication, and satellite communication;

Ibaraki Tele-Communications Research Institute --

located at Tokai-mura, Ibaraki Prefecture; number of personnel: 300;
contents of research: optical cable, transmission lines, and civil
engineering.

uth Research Institute (tentative name) ** --

located in Atsugi City, Kanegawa Prefecture; contents of research:
VLSI.

Note: * Includes the personnel at the Research and Development
headquarters.

** Expected to be opened in the spring of 1983.
- 27 -

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[13 May 82 pp 3-4]

[Text] Part 3

"A telephone by which what has been spoken in Japanese becomes a foreign
language and what has been spoken by a foreigner becomes the Japanese
language;" "a facsimile which can transmit a message in two or three seconds;"
and "a TV picture which was televisst‘rliOT'appears on the Braun tube in an
instant. with the pushing of a button.ﬁ If the INS (information network
system -- high-level information communications system) project, which is
being drawn up by NTT, is completed, such devices will be used at home, and
we will become able to receive various information services. Even working
at home will become possible.

Industry Circles Also ﬂaking Vigorous Responses

This is by no means a dream. From the fall of 198%, the first test
services are scheduled to be started in the Nitaka area in Husashino. Tokyo.
wit. the surfacing of NTT's future strategy. such influential manufacturers as
NBC, Fujitsu, and Oki Electric Industry have recently established special
organizations for INS measures, one after another. On the other hand. some
enterprises have already applied for participation in the testing of work at
home. Thus, industry circles' moves to cope with iNS have suddenly become
vigorous.

Since its inauguration in 1952, NT? has been pushing its business with
tnese items as its goals: "Telephones which are installed immediately," and
"telephones by which people are put through immediately." Now, however, there
are 56 million telephones, and one out of every two persons, including babies,
has one telephone. It has become possible to make a telephone call anywhere
in Japan, immediately. by dialing a number. As far as telephones are concerned,
the dream at the time of the inauguration has already become real. Succeeding
this. INS is being tackled by staking the existence of NT? in the future.

At the same time, the INS project includes the aim of correcting the
present fare system on which it is constantly pointed out that "It is not
harmonious." As to telephone charges by distance, they are low in the case
of short distances and high in the case of long distances. compared with actual
costs. partly because of the historical circumstances. With the city charge
as l, the fee for a telephone call to an area more than 750 kilometers away
is 60. However, in the case of DDX (new data network), which is a public
network exclusively for data communications, the ratio of charges is l to 12,
and in the case of the network exclusively for facsimiles, the ratio is l to
l.5. Thus, the charge systems among various circuits are disorderly.

Charge System AlsoCan Be Unified

Under INS, however. it is possible to unify the networks of telephones
and data communications. which cannot ride together at present, and to make
all kinds of information pass through the same circuits as numerical digital

- 23 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
signals. Therefore. it is possible to measure the amount of information

in the same unit (bit -- the smallest unit of information). and to unify the
charge systems.

Hith the creation of INS. double investments will disappear through the
unification of the plural number of networks. and the costs per unit Of information

will fall. too, due to technological progress. Therefore. it will be possible
to lower the charge level from the present level. Moreover. the difference
according to distance will also finally become 1 to less than 10. and all this
will greatly contribute to the promotion of information society. This is

NTT’s synopsis. INS is steadily heading toward msterialisation through the
brilliant results of research and development by N?! which leads the world, such
as the optical fiber which makes long-distance transmission possible. and VLSI's
(very large-scale integrated circuits) consisting of about 600,000 transistors
in a basic plate several millimeters square.

According to “17's plan. commercial services, covering 10,000 houses,
will be started in Tsukuba Research and Education City where a Scientific
Exposition will be held in 1905, with experzments in model areas taken into
account. The networks of telephones and data communications will be unified
in the cities where the Prefectural Government Offices are located,in1387,
and throughout the nation by l995. In the year 2000, NTT is planning to
unify the picture networks (moving pictures) which require 1.000 times as
much information as that by telephones. and complete all the networks.

In the middle of February. there.occurred an incident in Hokkaido in
which an NTT employee stole information from data communications circuits,
forged a cash card, and drew out cash. "CV13. in Japan has come to
this point." So saying. an NT? leader recognized “maturation” of
information society. and a: the same time felt as if he were made to look at
the reverse side of the communication and information society which is
progressing limitlessly. -

Effects of Division Unknown

vice-President Yasusada KITAHARA. who is a promoter of the INS project.
emphasizes: "From the standpoint of natural science. including technological
development. we have acquired prospects for the achievement of INS. In the
future. we must tackle the sociological and cultural scientific fields.”
There is an increase in the number of computer crimes, uneasiness over controlled
society. and information public nuisances. As to problems which are closer
to us. there is such a question as whether or not salaried-men's work will go
well even if there is "no drink on one's way back" to work at home. Such
problems which are expected when INS society has become real "cannot be settled
only by technology" (Vice-President KITAHARA).

0n the other hand. what will become of the INS structure when the
"division into the central company and a plural number of local companies."

-29-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfﬂClAl. USE ONLY

which division is scheduled to be included in the report by the Sub-Comittes
of the Provisional Adsinistrative Affairs Research Council, is carried out in
the future? h to this. persons connected with m are avoiding making any
consent, and it seens that they are unable to gather actual effects. too. There
is also arising the vague fear that the charge systems among various local
companies and their efforts will become uneven, and that this will put a brake
on the construction of INS on a national scale. However, if the theory of
competition works and if manquent becones more efficient, as aimed at by the

Provisional ministrative Affairs Research (Jamil, this will becone material
for promotion, too.

Of course. apart fro- such problems as what to do about such "non-
natural scientific” fields and M's structure, "art has sufficient power to
undertake the information and communications revolution which is symbolized
by INS" (President Hisashi sump). whether or not it will be able to display
this capability fully depends upon how m itself will tackle self-reform, in
the stress of the m reform which seeks greater efficiency.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shidmnsba 1982

C50: 6106/115

-30-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“DC 65‘.172:629.78
'ORBITA', 'BKRAN' AND 'HOSKVA' SATELLITE TELEVISION BROADCAST SYSTEMS

Moscow TEKHNIKA KIND I TBLEVIDBNIYA in Russian No 0, Apr 82 pp 37-64

[Article by D.L. Zaytsev and L.Ya. Kantor, State Scientific-Research Institute for
Radio]

[Text] Scientists in many countries have long shown significant interest in the
problem of television broadcasting employing artificial earth satellites. Simple
calculations show that a satellite which is at a high enough altitude - up to
36-60,000 kilometers - can be used to transmit signals, including television, to
huge territories - as much as 1/3 of the earth's surface.

The idea of such transmission was expressed long ago, particularly in P.V. Shnskov's
work.

A real base for this idea was provided after the 1957 launch of the first Soviet
satellite; in the aid-1960s, after resolving a number of technical problems, it
was possible to turn directly to solving the problem of satellite TV broadcasting.

The practical interest in solving this problem is explained by the high economic
efficiency of satellite TV broadcast systems.

Traditional TV broadcasting methods based on the use of terrestrial facilities for
feeding and distributing TV programs - radio relay and cable lines and high-power
transmitting stations - cannot provide TV broadcast services for the entire terri-
oory as the degree of broadcast coverage increases, even in the lost developed
countries.

This is because practically every state has inaccessible regions where it is diffi-
cult to built TV transaitters and radio relay or cable lines leading to them.

In this country. the problem of providing TV broadcasting for the entire country

at times convenient for the population, allowing for the long distance from west

to cast (ll time zones) and the presence of inaccessible regions with low population
density (less than one person per square kilometer), presents significant diffi-
culties; the resolution of the problea is of special interest. Prior to 1967,

this problem was solved strictly through the use of terrestrial facilities - by
building powerful television transmitting stations (5-50 RV) as well as low power
relays (1-10 B).

31

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢MVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dynaaacs of the development of the terrestrial transmitting network in the
USSR [1] shown in figure 1, and the rates at which TV broadcasting is being
provided to the population (figure 2). indicate that the construction of a terr-
estrial transmission network was an efficient approach during the early stages;
stations were built in heavily populated areas of the country, and the introduc-
tion of each of these provided a significant increase in the number of TV viewers.

By 1 January 1961 there were 100 high-power TV stations and about 170 low-power
relays. providing television for approximately 35 percent of the population.
within that five-year plan. i.e.. by 1 January 1966, the amount of terrestrial
facilities sore than doubled (190 high-power transmitters and 680 low-power relays);
however. the increase in viewers was only 20 percent. Then. as TV stations were
put into operation in sparsely populated regions. the efficiency of terrestrial
facilities began to drop sharply. For example, during the next five-year plan

the amount of transmitting equipment increased by 100 stations. but this provided
an increase in viewers of only 15 percent. It became clear that it is not possible
to solve the problem in this manner: at those rates, even to provide coverage for
95 percent of the population it would be necessary to build over 2500 high-power
television stations which. in turn. would require significant capital investment

as well as the construction of a large number of trunk lines. and would require a
long time; even so. it would be impossible to provide coverage for 100 percent of
the population.

The employment of satellite systems is now a fully realistic way to solve this
problem within short periods; the common use of these systems ‘or transmit 1g
television programs in the USSR began in 1967 with the initiation of -‘ .rbita"
network of ground stations. TV programs were fed to "Orbits" stations through the
"Holniya-l" satellite in the 1 Ch: range; the activation of the first 20 "Orbits”
stations provided an increase of more than 40 aillion television viewers [2].

In the subsequent years. the construction of "Orbits" stations continued intensively;
stations were built in practically all of the large cities in Siberia. the Far
North. and the Far East; there are now nearly 90 of them. Beginning in 1976.

most "Orbits" stations were switched to the 6 6H: band to operate with the “Holniya-
2” satellite; these stations are now working.with the "Hblniya-3". "Raduga" and
"Corizont" satellites. The table presents the basic technical parameters of the
"Orbits" system, and the external appearance of the station is shown in figure 3.

The "Orbits" station has been described in the technical literature many times [3.b];
therefore. we can limit ourselves here to the most general characteristics. The
station is based on a fully turnable two-reflector parabolic antenna 12 meters in
diameter installed on a round reinforced-concrete building; the building contains

an input low-noise parametric amplifier cooled with liquid nitrogen. receiving
equipment. a system of equipment for programmed aiming of the antennas toward the
satellites. and a great deal of auxiliary and power supply equipment. The program
received at the TV station is then fed to a local television center or high-power
relay station and sent over the air in the meter or decimeter frequency band.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:w'ﬂ. INC .0”
:m

:x i- ” 90
a»: ,L :n .0

‘0

E
E‘
‘6

.4

2
at—

a
"s‘
”WM “(QM needy-Am m, 7,

‘\

«no W- foam";

(-
Q
§

Q

§
8
8

mum: (my aka, m0 Q,“ next: WW known. 'I.
a ‘ 2'-
S

I!” MI I!“ 197/ I!" ill.

 

time 1. Ietee of develop-eat of tigure 2. Retee of coverege of 058‘
tremittin; televieion network in USS: with terrestrial television broedceetinx
(by five-yeer plane): l-low-power releye; (by five-yen: plene): l—populetion:
2-power trennittere: 3—"!ltren" etetione; z—territory; 3—085! populetion pro-

e—nder of trenenittin; etetione: 3- wided with televieion broedceetins.
yeere percent; b—yeere; S—eree of USSR covered

by televieion broedceetins, percent

the ”Orbite” etetion wee the world'e first eulti-etetion 1'7 distribution eyeten;
however, the epece technology cepehilitiee metin; et thet tine did not ellow the
creetion of powerful eetellitee: ee e reeult. the coet of the "Orbite" ground ete-
tion wee extruely high. the conetruction of theee etetione wee juetified econo-
eicelly only in heewily populeted reeione. "Orbite" etetione were ectuelly eleo

built in. reletively epereely popnleted ereee with populetione of S.000-10,000:
thie wee done in the neee of, end for the good of. the Soviet people.

However. the efficiency of building new "Orbite" etetione ee e um for eupplyinz
TV progre- then dropped eherply; the conetruction of etetione in epereely popu-

leted ereee (with e few thoueend reeidente) led to coete per viewer of thoueende of
rublee; theretore, the development of the network of ”Orbite" etetione ee e neene

33

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. "Orbita" station

for distributing TV programing was curtailed‘.
Technical—economic aspects of creating satellite TV broadcast system

As was mentioned above. the most important factor which determines the parameters

of satellite TV system and which has an effect on the choice of frequency band

and technical characteristics is economy: in the final analysis. economy determines
the advisability and effectiveness of the creation of systems. Economically optimal
system are designed on the basis of considering the cost relationships for the
space complex and the earth stations, as well as the size indicator of the receiving
network on the ground.

Examples of the cost of these complexes as a function of the power of the satellite
transmitter Fe and the Q (sensitivity) of the antennas of the ground receiving in-
stallations (G/T) are “10‘"! in 518“" 5. where G is the antenna gain. '1‘ is the
equivalent noise Emerature of the ground station.

It is apparent from figure 6 that the cost of the satellite and its launching is
a strong function of the power of the on-boerd transmitter: the higher the power.
the larger and heavier the transmitter. the greater the power consumption, dimensions

"'Orbita" stations are now being reequipped with transmitting facilities. and the
network of "Orbits" stations is being used as the basis for creating and developing
the national duplex telephone comications network.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and weight of the power source; in the final analysis, the size and weight of
the satellite as a whole increase, requiring a more powerful carrier rocket.

’ ‘
.n
(II-awn" a tu menu.

  

I
"W mud-m (6) m

__———__—___L___J___________
(7) 10am»: um um: cmmuaﬂ.

Figure 4. Calculation of optimal system parameters (cost): l-entire system; 2--
satellite and launch; 3--N ground stations; b--one ground station; 5-system cost;
6--eatellite transmitter power, P,; 7-diameter of ground station antennas. DA

However, the cost of the receiving station on the ground becomes smaller, since the
same reception quality of TV signals can be provided with a more powerful on-board
transmitter with the use of less sensitive, simpler and less expensive receiving
installations on the ground.

He can reach the following basic conclusions from analyzing these relationships:
-an optimal relationship exists between P. and (GIT)8, for which the total system

cost is minimal;
--the optimal values of P, and (GIT); depend upon the number of ground stations N

in the system: as N increases, the optimum moves toward larger values of Pa.

The basic optimization principle is thus to select that on-board relay power which
makes the system as a whole as inexpensive as possible for satellite TV broadcasting
systems with mass receiving networks [2]. Of course, allowance must be made for

the possibility of the technical implementation of the relay and satellite as a
whole, as well as the fact that interference may be created for other systems operat-
ing in the same or adjacent frequency bands.

From this viewpoint, the highest acceptable relay power or, more precisely, the
highest effective isotropic radiated power (BIRD). is determined on the basis of

the Radio Co-unications Regulations which limit the radiated power flux density of
a satellite on the ground W in each of the frequency bands allocated for satellite
broadcasting or fixed satellite service in order to avoid crosstalk between services.

35

IYNI.(Iﬂﬂ(JAI.IJSI§(HNLV
FOR OFFIFIAI. USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Optimal parameters of satellite systems: 1-44.“; 2--EIRP, db/H;
y-dB-Hlmz; budB'H ; S--”Ekrsn"; 6-41”; 7-"Hoskva" ; ands/k; 9-4, ca;
l'llolOl:

According to the Regulations, satellite TV broadcasting in the USSR can be done in
the 0.7. 2.5 and 12 CH: bands; in addition, TV programs within the framevork of
fixed services can be transmitted in the 6. 11 and 20 CH: bands (higher frequency
bands are not considered here).

Figure 5 shows the limitations on H inoced by the Regulations for these frequency
bands, as well as the aaximua tolerable satellite BIB? and Q-fsctors (GIT); of
ground receiving stations needed to provide a given reception quality and calculated
on the basis of these values of R. Also shown are the values of (Se/'1') . where

Se is the effective surface of the ground receiving antenna. which chargcterizes its
physical dimensions and consequently its costs; these are more convenient for
economic calculations. The first optimisation step thus results in selecting the
basic parameters of the on-board transmitter and the Q-factor of the ground stations

(cm,z or (Se/Ug-

In the second optimization step, values of G, S. and T which provide the minimum
cost of the ground station as a whole are selected so as to preserve the required
ratio (6/108 or (Se/T) . The discussions here are as follows: the greater the
effective service of the antenna Se. the higher its cost; however. it is then
possible to employ a less sensitive receiver (with higher noise tewerature) with
accordingly lower cost. and conversely. Obviously, for certain optimal values of

36
FOR omcu'l. use ONLY
so and T the cost of the entire ground station, which is equal to the sum of the
cost of the antenna and receiver. becomes minimal. It must be noted that this
choice is discrete, since there are only a few types of input devices (parametric
or transistor amplifier. mixer).

17 a“
mums!

70

ﬂ‘l’u
4 7 V II I: 20

Figure 6. Costs for creating optimal TV systems in different frequency bands.

These data provided the basis for determining the comparative cost of creating
economically optimal satellite systems in each of the frequency ranges; the results
of the calculation are shown in figure 6. It follows from the figure that in terms
of economy the most profitable frequency band is 12 63:. where the small limita-
tions on the value of H permit the use of low-Q. low-cost receiving installations.
Comparable economic indicators can also hold for systems in the 0.7 GB: band;

in the other bands, the cost of creating satellite TV systems is significantly
higher.

These considerations have made it possible to develop a strategy in the area of
selecting frequency bands in determining the optimal parameters of satellite TV
systems of the next generation; the "Ekran" and "HOBkVC" systems were created in
accordance with these principles.

"Ekran" system

The first satellite in the "Ekran" system was launched on 26 October 1976 into a
geostationary orbit with coordinates of 0° latitude and 99° west longitude. An
cxperiaental network of 60 receiving installations had already been built by that
tine. The zone served by the system covers 9 aillion square kilometers, which
amounts to about 60 percent of the entire country. Included are regions of Siberia.
the Far North and part of the Far East.

The "Bkran" systea [S] was created in complete agreement with the optimization
principles presented in the preceding section; the 0.7 on: hand was selected

which has the advantages of simplicity and low cost of ground receiving devices.
The osployment of inexpensive transistor input amplifiers. simple multi-element

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"wave channel" antennas and on-hoard tranuitters with m acceptable power
made it possible to obtain the required signal/noise ratio and the required TV
channel perfornance indicators with inexpensive receiving installations (cf. table).

Basic Technical Parameters of Satellite
TV Broadcast Systens

Para-eters Sys ten

 

Frequency band, Gllz I. 6 0.7
Transmitter power fed to 8 1.0 200
antenna, H

Satellite transmitting 22 30 33.5
antenna gain, dB

Satellite EIRP, dB-H 31 1:6 56.5
Modulation lethod PM PM PM
TV signal frequency 9.1 9.1 6.3

deviation (without
sync pulses), m1:

Type and die-eter of arabola 12 Parabola 2.5 32/“ sheet

ground receiving antenna, n

Gain of ground receiving 51.9 37.5 30/23
antenna, dB

Equivalent noise teln- 100 200 800/800
perature

Q-factor G/‘l‘ of ground 31.9 16.5 lI-6

receiving installation. dB/k

Signal/noise ratio at 12.5 12.5 20.8/13.8
receiver input, dB

Signal/weighted noise 53 53 53-55/53
ratio at output of
run-ﬁver in video channel, dB

Signal/noise ratio at out- 57 57 54-56/b9
put of receiver in audio
channel. dB

*Here and below in the table the nulbers in the nu-erator refer to a type-1 ground
station, while those in the denominator refer to type 2.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since terrestrial TV facilities also operate in the 0.7 cu: band, a system service
sons arrangement was selected which provided sufficiently high power flux density
within the sons and ads it possible to satisfy the standards for noise field in-
temity outside the sons in territories belonging to neighboring governments [6].

The basis of the systu is the "Efren" satellite, which has a transsitter with
unprecedented power (200 if) end a huge 3 x S neter folding trensnitting array con-
taining 96 spiral radiators. The widely unfolding wing, which holds solar batter-
ies, provide power of up to 2 W. A special high-precision three-axis satellite
stabilization system holds the vehicle in the required position above the earth
and boresights the beam of the transmitting antenna toward the service zone [7]
(the "Ekrsn" satellite has been exhibited at the VDNKh). The "Ekran" system
employs two types of ground receiving installations. The first type of installation
(figure 7) is used to feed high quality 117 signals to high power TV stations which
service fairly large populated areas. These installations are configured with
"wave channel" antennae consisting of 32 sheets. The receiving equip-ant consists
of a single rack which receives, amplifies. demodulates and separates the video
and audio signals. The cost of the first type of receiving installation is lower

than that of the ”Orbita” station.

The second type of installation (figure 5) is designed to feed TV signals with
slightly lower quality (as compared with the first type of installation) to low-
power television relays, or to a cable distribution network. These installations
use four-sheet antennas and stall receiving devices which translate the spectra: of
the 716 + 12 us: frequency to the spectrum of a channel in the ester band and which
convert in and Ali. A receiving installation of the second type costs almost 300
times less than an "Orbits" station. In order to provide servicing convenience and
simplify the installation, the second type of receiving systems have recently been
updated and cosbined in a single unit with a one- or 10-" transnitting device.

The "than" systes has successfully passed tests, and its technical facilities are
very cot-only used under widely varying conditions: large populated areas, small
villages and even individual geological prospecting and exploration parties. More
than 1000 of these systems (cf. figure 1) have now been installed around the country.
which has made it possible to provide television in regions which are practically
inaccessible for terrestrial TV program delivery facilities. The network of stations

continues to expand, and the equipment is being improved at the same time. For
example, an input anlifier is now being put into me which has a lower noise tem-

perature; it has been proposed that special antennas be produced for regions with
difficult weather conditions, and that the first type of system be provided with an
additional audio channel for supplying radio broadcast program.

All of the above allows us to assert that the "Eltran" system is an extremely effic-
ient nsans for organizing TV broadcasting in areas of Siberia and the Far North of
the USSR.

Unfortunately. this system cannot be aployed in other regions of the country. since
irradiation of the territories to the east and west of the existing service zone
would result in exceeding the standards established by the Regulations. This has
required the creation of technical facilities for providing TV programing for the

Urals, Central Asia and the Far East which are comparable in simplicity and efficiency.

39
FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Moskva" system

In accordance with the tasking, the new "Hoskva" satellite TV broadcast system

was developed and put into operation in 1979 in the widely used 6 GHz band. which
made it possible to develop and Introduce the equipment making up the system within
short periods. The "Moakva" system (technical parameters given in table) is an
addition to the existing "Orbita" and "Ekran" systems, and opens up possibilities for
almost complete coverage of the country with Central television programming [8].

This system was created by employing special trunks carried by the new "Gorizont"
series of geostationary satellites, in which the power fed to the antenna from the
on—board transmitter has been increased to 60 H. In combination with a directional
transmitting antenna. this makes it possible to obtain the maximum EIRP which can
be achieved in this frequency band (cf. figure 3). At the same time, in order to
observe the standards established by the Regulations for acceptable spectral flux
density (-152 dB'H/m2 in the 6 KB: band), dispersion of the energy of the FM signal
transmitted by the satellite by an additional triangular signal at 2.5 Hz has been
introduced which provides additional deviation of t 4 MHz.

 

Figure 9. "Hoskva" station.

 

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dispersion signal is extracted in the receiver with the help of a frequency feed-
back device which controls the frequency of the local oscillator. The use of a
dispersion signal frequency below the video signal spectrum allows it to be filtered
off and to close the frequency feedback device circuit only for the dispersion signal.
The frequency bend of the receiver is designed to pass the to: signal nodulated only
by valid intelligence. This treat-ant sakes it possible to avoid noise tolerance
loeea which would occur if the bandwidth of the receiver were increased. The
probl- of electronegnetic coqatihility with existing terrestrial and satellite
facilities was resolved in this way.

The high power flux density of the signal near the ground has made it possible to
use an antenna with relatively snall reflector die-etc: (2.5 n) at the 'Tioekva"
gromd receiving station. and to use an unoooled paranetric esplifier with noise
temperature of 100 k as the input device; all of the other radio equipmt is con-
tained in a single snall rack sinilar to the receiving rack of the first type of
station in the "Men" systen. These technical trutnents have ends it possible to
create a silple. ensll station which does not require capital construction end can
be housed in any existing buildings or in special containers. The energy indicators
of the co-Inications lines in the Moshe" syste- provide the capability of a
single high perforlsnce television channel and two audio channels. The low frequency
TV video and audio signals fro. the station output are input to a transnitter whose
type and power depends upc the required service tone. The cost indicators of the
"Koskva" station correspond approxisately to the first type of "Ekrsn" receiving
installations. and are such that the use of this station for organising TV broad-
casting is econonically effective for a large nunber of populated areas in the country.

In order to cover the territory of the USSR, there are plans to elploy four space
sag-ants (high-capacity ”Gorisont" satellite trunks). in geostationary orbit at 16’
west longitude. 53'. 90' and lbO' east longitude, in the "scam" system. Tests
which have been cospleted have confirned that the technical treat-ents used are
correct. A network of these stations will soon be under intemive expansion.

Esploynent of "Orbits", "Bren" and 'erlcvs" Satellite Systems

Re have thus mained the principle fomdation of the creation of optimal satellite
TV broadcasting system. and briefly described three doneatic systess. two of which -
the "arm” and 'Tloskva" - correspond to these principles and are econonically
optiael.

There are sons natural questions - why do we need three systess working at the sane
tins. and what is their role and prospects for developeent‘! The answer to these
questions follows fron the formulated task of satellite TV broadcasting - providing
eultiprogras TV broadcast coverage for the entire country allowing for local tine
differences. This problea is resolved by using the First All-Union Central Tele-
vision Program for dietrﬂution to the five broadcast zone“ into which the USSR is

 

.Eech broadcast zone occupies the territory of approximately two tine zones, or 30°
longitude.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
divided, and mass satellite TV broadcast systems with relatively local service zones -
the ”Ekran" and "Hoskva". The second All-Union program, which is also produced
allowing for local time differences. is distributed over the "Orbits" network [9].

The basic task of satellite TV broadcast systems is now to deliver TV programs to

the terrestrial distribution facilities (transmitting TV stations. television centers
and relays). Therefore, heightened requirements for the quality of programs delivered
are imposed on these systems.

In order to satisfy these requirements. and in accordance with the Radio Communica-
tions Regulations. the appropriate type of signal modulation has been selected -
broadband noise-tolerant frequency modulation - which makes it possible to provide

the required perforaance indicators with the difficult energy situation on the
downlink.

The audio signals accompanying the video in the "Ekran" and "Hoskva" systems are
transmitted on a frequency-modulated subcarrier located above the frequency spectrum
of the video signal. The total signal (video signal t PH subcarrier audio signal)
also frequency-modulates the HP carrier.

Conclusion
Our country has the world's largest and most powerful TV satellite broadcast network.

The integrated use of the "Orbita". ”Ekran" and'Tknkva” satellite systems, as well
as ground facilities has made it possible to organize TV broadcasting throughout

the entire country and to provide television coverage to 86.5 percent of the popula-
tion of the USSR. Central television programs are now transmitted in five copies,
so that residents in any area of the country can watch these programs at convenient
times. It should be noted that with approximately 15 hours of TV broadcasting
daily. five simultaneous TV channels are required to relay just one program.

Television in the USSR is now faced with the problem of providing the same conditions
for all Central television programs; in addition. problems of distributing union
republic TV programming have not yet been fully resolved. All of this forces us to
find new technical facilities, one of which should be a 12 GHz satellite TV broadcast
system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Shamshin, V.A. "Status and prospects for development of television broadcast
transmitting network“. ELEKTROSVYAZ', No 5, 1977

2. Talyzin, N.V.. Kantor, L.Ya.. Tseytlin. ".2. "'Orbita‘ ground station for
receiving television programs from artificial earth satellites. ELEKTROSVYAZ'. No
ll. 1967

3. Kantor, L.Ya., Polukhin, V.A.. Talyzin, N.V. "New 'Orbita-Z' couunications
satellite stations." BLEKTROSVYAZ', No S, 1973

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

lo. Talyzin, N.V.. Kantor. L.Ya., Toeytlin, 11.2. "'Orbita' once. of ground
receiving points”. RADIO. No 9, 1967

5. "Basic principles of 'Ekran' system." VJ. Himhin. A.D. Portushenko, SN.
Borodlch et. 81.. BLDKTROSVYAZ' , No 5. 1977

6. Shel-shin, V.A. "From 'zkran' to television screen." RADIO, No S, 1977

7. Pedorov. 1., Harkelov. 6. ”Space television in operation." PRAVDA, 1 December.
1976. No 336 (21305).

8. "'Hoskva' satellite television broadcast oysten." L.Ya. Kantor, V.P. Himshin.
1.8. Poveletokiy et. al., ELKTROSVYAZ'. No 1. 1980

9. Varbanskiy, A.H., "Status and ways for further develop-cut of technical tele-
vision broadcast facilitieo.“, BLEKTROSVYAZ', No 2, 1981

COPYRIGHT: 'Tekhnika kino i relevideniya". 1982

6900
C50: 5500/1020 3“!)

lab

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY