FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10041
8 October 1981

Latin America Report

[FOUO 25/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
BRAZIL

CIBA

LATIN APERICA REPORT

(P000 25/81)

Cou'rems

comm sscmm

Report on (haves as President
(Stan Iehmsn; LATIN MERICA DAILY 9061, 22 Sep 81)............

Report on Background of dams
(Tom mnphy; LATIN ”ERICA DAILY POST, 23 Sep 81).............

Halnierca Addresses IN General mselbly Session
(Pun, 2‘, 25 sep 81).0..OI.UO...0'0.00.00.00.00.00.0.0000...

U.S. Bacteriological Aggression, by Jose Luis Ponce
(h Disarmament, Intente

Intervention in El Salvador

(11 Nonaligned Ibvennt

U.S. Hegemony, by Jose Luis Ponce

Support for Various Causes

Economic, Industrial Development of Camsguey Reported
(BOHBMA, 7 Al’s 81)§OOIOQIOI...I..00....000OOOOOIOOOOIOOOOOOOO

Ssncti Spiritm People's Governmnt Working To End Provinoe's
Problem
(Hipolito Rodriguez Interview; BOHBHIA, 28 Aug 81)............

Nuclear Technology Develop-ants Dismsed
(3mm, 31 Jul 81)....IO...OOI.OIICOIIOOCOCIOIOCOOOC'.00'...

Briefs
Hon tane-Guysnase Vice Presi dent bet

-a- [III-LA-IMPOU

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECT ION BRAZ IL

REPORT ON CHAVBS AS PRESENT
PY222221 Rio de Janeiro LATIN AMERICA DAILY POST in English 22 Sep 81 p 1
["Special to the DAILY POST" by Stan Lehman]

[Text] Sao Paulo-~Por the first time since 1964, when the armed forces overthrew
the civilian government of Joao Goulart, Brazil will have a civilian president
for other than ceremonial duties.

Vice-President Aureliano Chaves, 52, wil].be sworn in as the nation's chief-of-state
on Wednesday temporarily replacing President Joao Figueiredo who suffered a heart
attack last week in Rio de Janeiro.

The decision to have Chaves take over the reins of power was made by Pigueiredo
himself and his top civilian and military advisers after doctors reported that
the president will not be able to resume his presidential duties for at least
eight weeks.

The heart attack almost immediately sparked speculation as to the future of
Figueiredo's abertura [political opening] program.

"Without the president we are lost," and "this could cause serious institutional
problems," were some of the statements made by leading figures of the pro-
government PDS [Social Democratic Party] party expressing a general fear that
abertura was on its deathbed and would be replaced by a return to the kind of
repressive regimes that prevailed in the recent past.

Chaves' appointment as the country's interim president also helped resuscitate
disturbing phantoms of the past as comparisons were made with what happened back
in 1969 when President Costa e Silva was forced out of office as a result of what
was said to have been a brain hemorrhage.

The armed forces at that time, pulling off a virtual coup d'etat, did not allow
Vice—President Pedro Aleixo to step in for the dying Costa e Silva. Instead a
military junta took power and paved the way, through a series of extra-
constitutional measures, for what is considered to have been the harshest

and most repressive post-1964 regime-that of Emilio Garraatazu Medici.

FI”!(MWH(JAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anticipating the national concern that an ugly part of Brazilian history may repeat
itself, civilian and military authorities immediately made statements to the

effect that the Pedro Aleixo case would not be repeated and that the country

was calm and that neither Figueiredo's political, economic or social policies
would suffer any changes.

Aureliano Chaves himself firmly rejected the possibility of a repeat performance
saying that Brazil was in no way facing an imminent coup 'because abnormal
solutions are no longer accepted by the nation nor by the armed forces which

are united around President Figueiredo's political project."

Asked what could be expected during his temporary term in office, Chaves, the
former governor of Hinas Cerais and the president of the National Energy Commission

said "I have always been strongly identified with Pigueiredo and his policies,
not only in thought but in deed."

According to most political observers, nothing will change on the national scenario
during Chaves' brief tenure in office. To begin with Chaves is substituting,
not succeeding Figueiredo, a fact that makes it clear that his main task will

be to maintain things as they are rather than giving the presidency a new
personality.

As a substitute and not a successor Chaves will also be working with the same
Figueiredo-chosen team. in other words the country's economic policies will
continue to be elaborated by Delfim Netto, its foreign policy will still be the
responsibility of Ramiro Saraiva Guerreiro and so on.

Pigueiredo's substitution by Chaves set off a minor political storm in congress.

Several congressmen, especially from the opposition, were annoyed that the legis-
lature had no say as to who would replace the stricken president.

But the real culprit for this controversy is the constitution and its vagueness
in relation to a presidential substitution.

The constitution says that the president will be substituted by the vice-president
in the event of an impediment.

It does not say exactly what constitutes a presidential impediment nor does it
give any further details as to the steps that must be followed when a president
must be substituted.

For Raimundo Faoro, former president of the Brazilian Bar Association (OAB) the
vagueness of the constitution in this respect is sufficient reason to believe
that only congress can formally convoke and swear in the vice-president as
president.

Government authorities, in order to solve the problem created by the vagueness

of the constitution decided that Figueiredo should personally hand over the reins
of power to Chaves in the same fashion ne has done before his trips abroad.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another question that case up surrounding Chaves' indication as interim president
was why he will be sworn in Wednesday. my was he not sworn in imediately‘l

So far, two explanations have been offered. One of these was offered by Chaves
who said he has prior comitnente which he did not want to cancel. The other
explanation is that the nation was taken coupletely by surprise by the recent

turn of events. So surprised that its institutions needed tine to prepare then-
selves to receive a substitute president.

Just how much influence Chaves will have during the eight weeks he will be
president is a question that will rennin unanswered for the time being.

The fact is that Chaves has never been part of the government's inner decision-
naking circle that meets every day at 9:00 a.m.

And it is also known that there are important Barbers of the armed forces who
have always been and continue to be opposed to the idea of a civilian president.

CSO: 3020/.2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION BRAZIL

REPORT ON BACKGROUND OF CHAVES

PY240031 Rio de Janeiro LATIN AMERICA DAILY POST in English 23 Sep 81 pp 1, 3
["Special to the DAILY POST" by Tom Murphy]

[Text] Rio de Janeiro--"0 Mineiro Trabalha Eh Silencio."

“the Mineiro (a citizen of the state of Mines Gerais) works in silence."

This ancient dictum about the residents of Brazil's second largest state rings
true, but with suitable discretion, in the case of Brazilian Vice President
Aureliano Chaves.

Chaves, a product of the rural Minas Gerais town of Tree Pontas and a former
governor of his native state, assumed the presidency of Brazil today for a
period of two months while President Joao Figueiredo recovers from the mild
heart attack he suffered last week in Rio.

As a bona fide Hinciro politician Chaves' work as vice president has been discreet
yet substantive and even, at times, controversial. In fact, he has probably
been the most effective and adroit vice president since the 1950's.

As head of the National Energy Council Chaves has accumulated more power in a
substantive policy area than any other member of the Figueiredo administration
except for Planning Minister Delfin Netto, Interior Minister Mario Andreazza and
the three military ministers. He overshadowa Energy Minister Cesar Gala and
commands the loyalty of commerce minister. and fellow Hineiro, Joao Canilo Penna.

And Chaves is also heard. although not always needed, on matters of political
policy.

It is in this last area that the vice president has demonstrated a streak of typical
Mineiro 5L bbornness, but a stubbornness expressed with typical Mineiro patience.
Earlier this year Chaves made it clear he did not agree with the wishes of
government party leaders to extend the so-called sub-legends [intraparty sub-groups]
voting system to next year's gubernatorial elections. Such sentiments followed

by a matter of weeks a vice presidential trip to Rio Grande do Sul during which
Chaves made subtle but unmistakable criticisms of Planning Minister Delfim Netto's
credit and agricultural policies.

FOR OFFTCIAL.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

His patient work at maintaining personal friendships within the government alliance,
his politeness in expressing his contrary views and his personal prestige seemed

to protect him from creating enemies when he expressed these sentiments. However,
on both occasions, Chaves won-enthusiastic friends from among critics of both

the government's economic and political policies.

Indeed, maintaining the dialogue with Brazil's growing opposition parties was
becoming one of Chaves' principal tasks. And it's a task he undertakes with
authority. Among personal friends are opposition leaders including Seo Paulo
deputy Herbert Levy and Mines Gerais deputy Hagalhees Pinto. Levy, in fact,

was so pleased to be consulted by Chaves on one recent occasion that he told the

press afterwards, "Aureliano Chaves would be an excellent candidate for the
presidency of Brazil."

An apparently warm personal relationship with President Figueiredo and a solid

ﬂmsge among the military ministers buttresses Cheves' position within the current
regime.

Consequently, when President Pigueiredo announced on Saturday that Chaves would
be taking over temporarily, virtually every important political group in the
country expressed both support and relief. Aureliano Chaves, everyone seems to
agree, is ”safe" in just about every way.

Born in the small interior town of Tree Pontas in 1929 Aureliano Chaves declared
his intention to be "an engineer and a politician" at an early age.

He achieved both graduating as an electrical engineer from the nearby Itajuba
Institute and then, in 1958, running for the State Assembly. He lost that
first election, but was chosen by the voters the next time around in 1960.

A member of the conservative UDN (National Democratic Union), Chaves was closely
associated with then Minas Gerais Governor Jose Hagalhaes Pinto. In 1964
Hagalhaes made the 35-year-old state assemblyman his education secretary. And in
1966 Chaves was elected to the Federal Chamber of Deputies.

Because of his relationship with Hagalhaes, the self-styled "civilian head of

the 1964 revolution," Chaves was an early supporter of the post 1964 military
government. However, he was not a consistent supporter. As one of the government
party deputies to vote against the expulsion of radical opposition deputy

Harcio Horeira Alves from the chamber in 1968, Chaves earned the enmity of sane
military leaders and the friendship of many in the opposition.

But Chaves built a solid reputation for competence in the Chamber of Deputies
during the early 1970's. As one of the governmental party's floor leaders he
helped keep the shaky ARENA (National Renovation Alliance) coalition together,
despite the fact that Brazil's artificial two party system of the time put many
political antagonists in the same camp. His work as chairman of the Chamber's
energy commission is something of a legend because of a 1972 speech in which
Chaves stated that "energy development in the world is not keeping pace with
demand." In his report to the chamber as energy commission chairman he predicted
that oil producing countries would form an association to maintain high oil prices
and suggested a number of alternative energy strategies for Brazil.

5

FOR OFFKJA1.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chavcs' reputation as a political moderate drew him toward then Petrobras
President Ernesto Ceisel and, when Geisel became president of Brazil in 1974,
he pushed Chaves for the indirectly elected post of governor of Mines.

Chaves became governor with broad support within the government party.

His administration was marked by peaceful relations among ARENA's najor internal
factions and by a state government plan to push for higher coal output. Chaves
was also one of the first state governors to embrace the alcohol program,
encouraging the planting of various alcohol-producing crops through fiscal
incentives. It was also during his administration that Hinaa greatly increased
its role in Brazilian coffee production.

His reputation for efficient administration and his much tested ability to

bring peace to warring political factions made him a natural candidate for the
vice presidency when out-going President Geisel decided a civilian for that job
would help highlight his political liberalization program. Chaves, all Hineiros,
most government party members and a majority of Brazilians were delighted by

the choice.

Over 200 pounds in weight, Chaves is married and the father of three. He likes
to exercise by lifting weights before breakfast and swimming in the vice
presidential pool after lunch. He watches his cholesterol count. He drinks

only an occasional glass of wine with dinner and has the slightly annoying habit
of smoking only other people's cigarettes, but sparingly. An avid reader, Chaves'
tastes tend toward technical books on subjects related to his long-abandoned
career as an electrical engineer, as well as political science, history and
biography.

There is at least a fair chance that Chaves will nake his temporary job as
president of Brazil permanent after 1984. More Mineiros (five) have become
president than Brazilians from any other state. And six of Brazil's 24 presidents
served previously as vice president (curiously, one, Delfim Horeira, served as vice
president after retiring from the presidency). Chaves professes no such anbition,
saying simply 'hw only wish is to serve as the loyal and discreet comrade of
President Figneiredo." That he has succeeded at this modest ambition was made
amply clear by President Figueiredo's act of Saturday.

CSO: 3020/2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

WISRCA ADDRESSES UN GENERAL ASSDBLY SESSION

".8. Bacteriological Aggression
PA2512101 havens PRELA in Spanish 2349 GMT 2‘ Sep 81

[Article by Jose Luis Ponce]

[Text] United Nations, 26 Sep (PL)--Cuban Foreign Minister Isidoro Malnierca
Peoli said today that his country is convinced that 0.8. Government agencies are
using biological weapons against the Cuban people.

During a speech at the UN General Assembly, Hallierca criticized the United States
for adding biological weapons to its long list of aggression against Cuba.

He referred to the recent epideaic of hemorrhagic dengue, which appeared simul-
taneously in several parts of the country while there were no reports of cases
in other countries in the region. The epidenic killed 156 people.

The minister described the deaths. including those of 99 children, as murder and
stressed that in less than 3 years Cuba has endured five serious plagues and
epidemics affecting cattle and plantations and currently the population.

He listed the plagues as swine fever, the blue mold of tobacco, sugarcane slut,
hemorrhagic dengue and the lost recent one, hemorrhagic conjunctivitis,, while
the fight against dengue is still on.

He indicated that studies made by Cuban technical and scientific personnel have
led to the conclusion that the dengue virus No 2. which produces the heaorrhagic
variety. was deliberately brought in.

He recalled that for many years the United States has been developing a varied
and sophisticated arsenal of bacteriological weapons and has carried out many
tests with a view to using then. a fact that has been reported in official 0.8.
publications.

He stressed that a systeuatic and exhaustive analysis of all data available at
health offices and institutions has proved that when the epidenic of henorrhagic
dengue appeared on the list no epideaic outbreaks of the dengue virus No 2 had
appeared in any of the countries in Africa or Southeast Asia with which Cuba
maintains relations.

IN)! OFI1CJAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Halmierca said that Cuban health authorities have verified that no Cuban or
foreign citizen coming from these or other areas has suffered from the illness
produced by this virus. He added that there are no other outbreaks in any Latin
American or Caribbean areas.

"He know, in turn, that U.S. research centers engaged in the development of
biological weapons have paid special attention to the dengue virus No 2," he noted.

Halmierca recalled that in speeches delivered on 26 July and 15 September, Cuban
President Fidel Castro denounced "this new, indescribable aggression against our
people by the U.S. Government."

He stressed that Cuba asked that the texts of these speeches be distributed among
the delegations to the UN General Assembly. The speeches contain references and
evidence of the admission in official documents of the U.S. Senate and other
bodies that on several occasions, and as part of actions aimed at overthrowing
the Cuban revolutionary government, preparations to use bacteriological weapons
were suggested.

He stressed that these facts have not been denied by responsible U.S. Government
authorities even though President Fidel Castro has challenged them to state before
the world public whether or not they have authorized the Central Intelligence
Agency to carry out these actions.

"We have endured all sorts of attacks by the North American imperialists for over
20 years and have accumulated a long and painful experience," Halmierca said.

He then quoted the Cuban president, who said that "we are not afraid of imperialist
threats. It may be possible to know when a conflict against us will begin but
what nobody can know is when or how it will end."

On Disarmament, Detente
PA250449 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0035 GMT 25 Sep 81

[Text] United Nations, 20 Sep (PL)-Cuba today promised to work for the success
of the forthcoming General Assembly session devoted to disarmament, so that it
can be converted into a battle for universal peace and for the resumption of
detente.

Isidoro Halmierca, the Cuban minister of foreign relations, said before the
General Assembly that Cuba is sure the United States will do everything possible
to prevent the convocation of this extraordinary assembly, dedicated to disarma-
ment and Scheduled for next year.

He recalled that in 1978, when the General Assembly's first session on disarma-
ment was held, the United States, at the same time. summoned the chiefs of state
of the NATO member-nations. who proclaimed, under U.S. Government pressure, their
intention to increase their arsenals.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since then. Halmierca noted. the United States has continued to take steps to
achieve military superiority, although it becomes more evident day by day that
its NATO associates are resisting this pressure for political or economic reasons.

The minister accused the United States of unleashing an arms race whose end it
is impossible to predict, citing the increase of war expenditures to unheard of

levels and the reduction of the budget for social expenditures, "applying the sad
practice of less butter and more cannons," as examples.

He also mentioned the creation of rapid deployment intervention forces, the
decision to install 572 medium-range rockets in Europe, the production of neutron

bombs, the MK rocket systems, the increase in the number of nuclear carriers,-
Trident submarines and the recommissioning of large warships.

"we are sure that the United States will do everything possible to prevent the
convocation of the forthcoming extraordinary assembly dedicated to disarmament
and we can expect very little 0.8. cooperation and efforts toward its success,
if it is held," he said.

Halmierca recalled that his country's National Assembly of People's power expressed
firm and determined support for the appeal issued by the USSR Supreme Soviet to
all parliaments and peoples of the world in connection with the critical inter—
national situation, augmented by the dangerous heightening of the arms race.

He pointed out that the nonaligned countries that took the initiative of calling
for the first series of sessions on disarmament will make every effort and will
work for its success.

The minister also supported the proposal made by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey
Gromyko last Tuesday regarding the prevention of a nuclear catastrophe.

The Soviet proposal suggests a solemn declaration by the General Assembly that
any state or statesman deciding to be the first to use nuclear arms will be
committing the gravest crime against mankind.

Intervention in El Salvador

PA251619 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0065 GMT 25 Sep 81

[Text] United Nations, 26 Sep (PL)-Cuba today denounced the intensification of
0.8. interventionist and genocidal actions in El Salvador, arming and counselling
a terrorist government that has murdered over 20,000 Salvadorans.

At the General Assembly, Cuban Foreign Minister Isidoro Halmierca Peoli rejected
the propaganda spread by the United States accusing Cuba of causing instability
in Central America.

"It is not Cuba but Tankee imperialism which imposed and protected the sntipopular

and atrocious governments whose only virtue was their protection of the economic
exploitation of the peoples of the region," he said.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He asserted that it is imperialism which. with its direct or indirect military
intervention, through reactionary regimes, must assume responsibility for the
lack of peace in Central America.

He recalled that the Government of Cuba had emphatically denied that some of the
arms delivered by the USSR are being redistributed in Central America, and noted
that it is a lie that Cuba is now supplying any other arms or ammunition to the

Salvadorans or that Cuban advisers are or have been in El Salvador.

He explained that these irrefutable facts do not imply a commitment or a moral
judgment on the right to send military aid to the forces which are fighting the
junta in El Salvador and whose political representation has been recognized by
France and Mexico and has just been unanimously proclaimed by the countries
participating in the 68th IPU Conference.

He said: "Something which is not a lie and which the 0.8. rulers cannot deny

is that U.S. and Venezuelan military and police advisers are training the genocidal
forces of the Christian Democratic junta of El Salvador."

Halmierca said that it cannot be denied either that the Salvadoran soldiers are
learning the art of repressing people from Augusto Pinochet's fascists in Chile.
He noted that the Sslvadorsn people are being murdered with Yankee helicopters,
planes, weapons and bullets.

He praised the recognition that Mexico and France gave to the alliance between
the FMLN [Parabundo Marti National Liberation Front] and the Democratic Revolutionary

Front [FDR] describing it as "a clamor of justice in line with the principles of
international law."

He noted that the United States, demonstrating its true intentions and interven-
tionist purposes, reacted violently in the face of the French-Mexican initiative
and, in using its allies in the Christian Democratic government of Venezuela,
"forced these fake democrats to join the worst tyrannies of the continent in
issuing a declaration condemning this initiative."

"Pinochet, Stroessner, Herrera Campins, together, led by the nose by Reagan, are
trying to obstruct the search for a negotiated and political solution to the
civil war in El Salvador."

0n Nonaligned Movement
PA251855 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0236 GMT 25 Sep 81
[Text] United Nations, 24 Sep (PL)--Cuban Foreign Minister Isidoro Halmierca
Peoli today asserted at the UN General Assembly that those who aspire to divide
and destroy the Honaligned Movement, that his country currently heads, will fail.
"He once again congratulate the movement for its 20th anniversary and warn those
who want to divide or destroy it that they will not be successful and will find

in it a powerful instrument of solidarity of the countries of the so-called Third
Horld," Halmierca said.

10

FORtOFTﬂC1Al.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He pointed out that with the celebration of its 20th anniversary on 1 September,
the movement maintains its vitality, continuity and fidelity to the struggle for

national liberation, peace and disarmament and against imperialism, colonialism
and neocolonialisn.

He added that the struggle against racism, Zionism, and apartheid and for a
fair and equitable international economic order, have strengthened the bases of

the movement's unity and will help it impress its seal on the majority of the
most important decisions of the United Nations.

Within the framework of the activities of the nonaligned countries, Malmierca
recalled with sorrow that up to now it has not been possible to end the painful
conflict between Iran and Iraq.

He recalled that since the first days of the war and even before this war began

Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro, tried to contribute to a peaceful, political,
just and honorable solution.

He added that lately these efforts were made in conjunction with other ministers
of the Nonaligned Movement and that "it is our firm purpose to continue trying
to find the desire solution to this conflict."

U.S. Hegemony
PA251967 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0202 GMT 25 Sep 81
[Article by Jose Luis Ponce]

[Excerpt] United Nations, 26 Sep (PL)--Cuba today accused the U.S. Government

of trying to impose its hegemony on the world and to demand a military supremacy
which endangers the carefully established framework of peace and international
justice.

Cuban Foreign Minister Isidoro Hslmierca said at the UN General Assembly that
the U.S. Government has ignored the norms of peaceful coexistence and the

sovereign will of the majority of the states to claim an unacceptable supremacy
at every level of international life.

Malmierca cited a speech by President Fidel Castro delivered at the inauguration
of the [1P0] conference in Havana, in which he expressed his firm conviction that
the group which constitutes the principal nucleus of Ronald Reagan's administration
is fascist and warned of the danger that it had taken on the structure of an
imperialist bourgeoisie democracy.

He said that Reagan's administration is trying to impose its hegemony on the world
and demands for the United States, in an arrogant attitude, a special position
which will permit it to decide all international affairs in favor of U.S. imperi—
alist interests and its transnational firms.

The minister said that not even Washington's closest allies have escaped the
mistreatment of the new administration and its policy, which affects them and

11

FOR OFFKJAI.USEINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

endangers their territories and peoples, without worrying over either the reti-
cence of the allied governments or the opinion of those peoples.

After underscoring that the self-proclaimed chaspion of democracy is irritated

by the opinion of the majority, he said that the United States demands the right

to label as terrorists the leaders of other countries and prestigious national
liberation movements and yet enforces terrorism with its military forces throughout
the world, thereby violating international law.

He recalled that the United States rejected the proposed convention worked out
after 8 years of negotiations in the Third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea,
adding that the recent provocations against Libya and the overbearing 0.8. aggres-
siveness demonstrates the unquestionable need for a convention.

Helmierca said that the results of the U.S. actions have most seriously affected
Southern Africa, the Middle East, the Caribbean, among other regions, and wondered
whether it is possible that South Africa dared attack Angola because it felt
assured of 0.8. support.

In this framework he recalled that the visit of Assistant Secretary of State
Chester Crocker to South Africa and the meeting between Ronald Reagan and South
African Foreign Minister Roelof Botha. given wide publicity in the United States.
and the special interest in making the South African racists feel that they are
part of a strategic alliance with the United States.

Who can deny, he asked, that the veto cast by the United States on the condemna-
tion and sanction of Angola's aggressors constitutes proof of the encouragement
and support for the illegal and hated apartheid regime.

He said that the attack on Angola is an attack against all black Africa, especially
the southern part of the continent, and demanded that South Africa withdraw from
Angola and stop its hostile actions against the rest of the Front Line states.’

He cited Israel as one of the basic links of Washington's strategic alliance and
said that Prime Minister Henahem Begin is today imposing on the Palestinian
people the Nazi methods imposed against the Jews in the past.

He affirmed that nevertheless, the Palestinian people under the leadership of
the Palestine Liberation Organization will attain victory in their struggle and
will establish their own and independent state.

He added that the strategic understanding reached between Reagan and Begin is
being confirmed with the bombing of Lebanon, the attack against the research
center of Iraq and the threats against Syria and Jordan.

Support for Various Causes

PAZSZOOA Havana PRELA in Spanish 1040 GMT 25 Sep 81

[Text] United Nations, 25 Sep (PL)--Isidoro Malmierca, the Cuban foreign minister,
renewed the solidarity of his country with the causes of Puerto Rico, East Timor,
Panama and the people of the Western Sahara.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In speaking at the UN General Assembly, Halmierca greeted the independence of

Belize after its long struggle to prevent the annexationist aims of the oppressors
of the Guatemalan people.

He noted that the clamor to put an end to the colonial situation in Puerto Rico
is increasing in that island and that most political organizations are demanding
that the UN General Assembly review the Puerto Rican case in the next period of
sessions.

"Cuba supports the right of this fraternal country to its independence and is
sure that, in fulfilling its obligations, this assembly will not deny the Puerto
Rican people the right to have this tragic situation examined." he said.

The Cuban minister reiterated the support of his country to the legitimate aspira-
tion of the Argentine people to see the Falkland Islands incorporated into their
national sovereignty as well as the just claim of the Bolivian people for an
outlet to the sea.

After supporting the right of the East Timor people for their free determination,
he said that the people of Western Sahara have earned with their heroism the
respect and admiration of the entire world and supported their inalienable rights
to self-determination and independence.

Malmierca said that he trusts in the prompt solutions to the old problems of
Hayotte Island, which was not included in the sovereignty of the Comoro Islands
and the Malagasy Islands which Madagascar has not yet recovered.

He stated that the ".8. presence and virtual occupation of South Korea prevents

a peaceful reunification and the end of foreign intervention in Korea. He expressed
support for the government and people of Panama in their struggle to have the canal
agreements complied with.

He expressed the sympathy of his country with the Guatemalan people ”who are
raising their weapons against the cruel tyranny imposed since the 0.3. intervention
of 1954."

He also expressed support for the efforts of the Cypriot people to maintain their
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in a united and nonaligned
republic.

In referring to Southeast Asia, Helmierca said that there is only one negotiated
solution to put an end to existing tensions.

He reiterated the support of his country for the proposals of Vietnam, Laos and

Kampuchea to hold a regional conference with that goal in mind, and with the
participation of the other states of the region.

We also stress our unavoidable recognition of the sole and legitimate representa-
tive of the Kampuchean people, the People's Government of Kampuchea, he noted.

13
FOR 0F11CLAL USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regarding the Afghan situation, Halnierca said that in its capacity as president
of the nonaligned movement, Cuba has offered its good offices to find a political
negotiated solution to the situation in West Asia.

After reiterating the willingness to continue the Cuban efforts. the minister
stressed that the solution must include the end to the intervention and inter-
ference in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

He added that this must have the necessary international guarantees and the

establishment of conditions that will permit the normalization of relations among
all the states in the regions based on the principles and goals of nonalignnent.

CSO: 3010/8

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC, INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OF CAHAGUBY REPORTED
Havana BOHEHIA in Spanish 7 Aug 81 pp 10-13

[Text] Once a tourist asked a native of Camaguey why the streets in downtown Cama—
guey were so tangled up. The host jocularly replied that it was a strategy of the
old residents so that when pirates came in they would get lost and it would be
easier to combat them.

From Anecdote to Reality. Much to Say

The Agramontian capital is a typical example of irregular colonial urbanism, stem-
ming from the constant relocation of the town from one place to another over a
period of nearly 100 years, until it reached its final resting place.

Santa Maria del Puerto del Principe was originally founded in 1514 on a tongue of
land near the bay of Nuevitas. The shortage of water and the aridity of the land
forced the inhabitants to move the town to the southwest, toward the Indian
chieftainship of Caonao. Years later it was moved to its current site.

These factors explain the lack of a central nucleus in the town's structure. That
is why there are several plazas scattered around the city, such as Las Mercedes,
La Soledad, El Carmen and San Juan de bios, to name a few. The main public
buildings were erected around these plazas.

In addition, there is the whimsical layout of streets, which resemble rivers.
Their design is of medieval influence.

400 Years Later

After touring the limits of the old city and turning your sites to the north,
toward the industrial city of Nuevitas, you will find a spacious avenue which
Agramontes residents call Circumvallation. That is where the Camaguey of the year.
2000 lies.

Nearly 20 kilometers long, the avenue forms the northeastern part of a peripheral
highway which will encircle the city. In that zone, the provincial capital's
General Plan for the year 2000 will be implemented. Already more than 20
facilities have been installed or are under construction-on both sides of this
broad street.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY

Five years ago an army of construction workers blazed the trail of the new avenue
through dense brush and weeds, while along the sides the new buildings began to
rise.

About 5 kilometers from the city, the first higher learning center built by the
Revolution can be found: the University of Camaguey. More than 8,000 students are
registered in its normal and directed courses.

The General Maximo Gomez Vocational School is an extravagant combination of func-
tional and aesthetic shapes which symbolize the focus on the new man in this privi—
leged area. More than 2,000 students at the secondary and pro-university levels
study in its classrooms.

The Higher Pedagogical Institute, the Camilo Cienfuegos Hilitary Vocational School,
the Provincial School of the Communist Party of Cuba (PCC), the sports centers,
Schools for Sports Beginners (SIDE), Elementary Physical Education School (EPEF)
and the Vocational Arts School, all built here, offer a wide range of courses to
nearly 5,000 students in different fields.

Near the University is the delegation of the State Statistics Committee, which has
a computation center that boasts modern computer equipment. It has the third
highest data processing capacity in the country.

Travelers on the way to other provinces will be interested in the El Tinajon
multi-purpose center, which has a restaurant, cafeteria, souvenir shop and service
station. The latter's wide lanes and 12 fuel pumps make it the largest in the
country.

In this area there is also a Clinical-Surgical Hospital which has a rehabilitation
ward for patients from other provinces, and a Home for the Physically and Mentally
Handicapped, which will open soon.

Industrial Growth

There is a pasteurizing plant, a poultry slaughterhouse, and a bakery. The
agricultural meat packing plant that is being completed, with its tile floors and
ll of the 21 refrigerators in operation, is another industrial facility that is
being utilized in the northern part of the city of Camaguey.

A new railroad junction is now being built. It will have a passenger station, a
yard and a loading and unloading area. This will solve the problem of traffic jams
resulting when trains come through the present terminal downtown.

There is also a Meal Complex under construction, which will have the capacity to
process scne 1,000 beef carcasses per day. A unchanical plant will provide about
4,000 jobs, and a water treatment plant will help improve the city's water supplies.

Among the agricultural facilities is a soil and fertilizer laboratory, whose archi-
tecture and capacity make it unique in the country and enable it to serve areas
outside this territory. Camaguey also has the largest hydroponic garden in Cuba,
where high crop yields are obtained from at least six vegetable products, planted
in stone containers.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the coming years construztion will begin on residential areas and a textile
plant. as well as scientific and cultural centers. This year a brewery will begin

construction.

COPYRIGHT: BOHEHIA 1981

8926
C50: 3010/1806

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

SANCTI SPIRITIB PEOPLE'S oovsmmm' WORKING TO END PROVINCB'S PMLBIS
Havana BOHEHIA in Spanish 28 Aug 81 pp 107-49

[Interview with liipolito Rodriguez. president of the Sancti Spiritus People's
Government by Dhnuel. Gonzalez 8111:), date,- time and place not given]

[Text] Hipolito Rodriguez, president of the People's Govemmnt of the province
Sancti Spiritus, says with absolute confidence that sooner or later all problems
will be solved. He assures us that when the new Provincial Assembly is constituted.
after the October elections, the province will have solved 50 percent of the
electors' complaints, a figure higher than the current 43.7 percent.

[Question] As I understand it, you have a method for systematizing the electors'
complaints.

[Answer] We created a card system to deal with all complaints by district. The
card manager, who remains in the municipality, classifies the problems according
to the stage they are at. If you come now to a municipality and want to know what
problems exist, you just have to ask for the card.

The card means that the delegate has to deal with all the problems in the municipal-
ity once a month. Now the delegate is more comitted, more controlled; he cannot
procrastinate the solution to a problem.

The card also allows the executive committee to check up on the response of the
enterprise. Every lo months the provincial cmmnittee visits the municipalities and
goes over the cards and responses. There is strict control.

This method has yielded very good results. We can tell what was complained of in
every district in 1980. what was solved and what is pending.

This method helps us give a positive response, not necessarily because the problem
is solved. |wt because the response has more clout, more reasoning, and this lends
prestige and authority to the delegate in his constituents' eyes.

[Question] How have the work commissions functioned?

[Answer] Some well, others have problems. The social assistance comission has
done a good job because it has responsible members. They have done everything they

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were asked to do; they have made profound analyses and useful recommendations to
the Provincial Assembly.

In general, the comissions have been helpful; they provide the means to make deci-
sions.

[Question] What are the province's basic problems?

[Answer] We have three serious problems: roads, septic tanks and electricity,
aside from others such as housing and services.

[Question] Hhat is happening with roads?

[Answer] When the People' 8 Government was formed, three nunici palities in the province
were isolated: La Sierpe, Fomento and Yaguajay. This caused problems, even for

transporting goods. We have had problems with the bridges on the highway to
Yaguajay. But by next year the problem should be solved.

Fomento, another municipality with problems, already has a highway. We are
finishing the asphalt pavement on the La Sierpe highway, which is important
because the rice enterprise and a livestock enterprise are there.

The road situation in Trinidad has had an impact on international tourism. There
two bridges collapsed; one of them, on the Canas River, has already been rebuilt.

We were assigned a brigade with road equipment for the Escambray highways, which
have been neglected for years.

The Ministry of Construction gave us the road unintenance enterprise with some
resources, including an asphalt plant. We have assigned more resources to this

enterprise, and we are setting up a system for equipment maintenance. He still
need a hot asphalt plant and a cold asphalt plant.

Next year we plan to pave the highway between Trinidad and Sancti Spiritus, and
the Cabaiguan highway too.

Roads have been given top priority in the province, and by next year I assure you
there will be notable progress.

[Question] And the septic tanks, what is the problem?

[Answer] We have had some difficulties. Right now we have gotten nine pump wagons,
which are a great help. This semester we will receive more.

There are municipalities where you can call in because of a septic tank problem
and they send out a truck right away. I should mention that in some municipalities
there were as many as 500 septic tanks that overflowed.

There is one concern: The equipment they have sent us runs on gasoline, and for
this kind of work it is recommended that diesel-powered equipment be used, because

the engine is always running due to the nature of the work the equipment performs.
He think that in the future we may have some problems for this reason.

19

FORtOFFNJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] And you say that the third serious problem is electricity.

[Answer] Very serious. The electrical system is in very bad condition. here in the
capital city we do not have a double circuit, which the other provinces do have.

Trinidad had its own electrical plant, but when it joined the national system it
was given some insulators that work on an alternating basis. To give you an idea,
Trinidad has gone 'up to a days without lights, and this is a municipality with
museums and hotels, where tourists go.

For this year we requested 172 kilometers of lines, but they gave us 75, and now
that has been reduced to 1.8. The proportion of the-reduction is great, especially
considering that this province does not have a double circuit.

At all the assemblies the electors have brought up the electricity problem. Not
only has the population been directly affected, but the agricultural workplaces
and sugarcane enterprises have also been hurt. The 25-room hotel in l-‘omento cannot
open until the electricity problem is solved.

The solution to this problem is not in the hands of the People's Government, but those
of the nation.

[Question] You were saying that another problem, minor in comparison with the
others, is that of services.

[Answer] Yes, the greatest deficiencies are in light sales services: beverages,
croquettes. In the restaurants the problem is almost completely gone. We have stud-
ied the service problem.

One of the weak points is poor management. For example, on Saturdays and Sundays
some employees do not show up, although they do come to work the rest of the week.
There is a lack of discipline on the part of the manager. There is also a lack of
hygiene in the units; that is the responsibility of the manager.

In the dry cleaning and watch repair sectors the service is bad; by the end of
next year there should be an improvement, because we are expanding capacities.

[Question] I have learned that there are serious problems at day care centers,
such as leaks and a shortage of cots.

[Answer] I knew you were going to ask me about that. The problems exist only in
the municipality of Sancti Spiritus. what happened is due to negligence and care-
lessness. There is no reason to lack cots at a day care center if we have canvas.
wood and carpenters.

This semester all the problems will be eliminated.

[Question] Hell, let us go now to the issue I mentioned to you, recreation. I want
you to tell me about the solutions.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!)FFNJA1.USEIDNLY

[Answer] He have inmedlate and long-term solutions for recreation in the province.

1 will talk first about a plan that is already in operation at Playa Ancon, in
Trinidad, which serves the whole province. There we built a campground that opened
on 19 Hay. There are more than 200 cabins, which can be rented through the Central
Organization of Cuban Trade Unions (CTC). Food prices are reasonable, affordable
for any worker. He transport people from the municipalities in small buses for the
regular price of bus transportation. The people are happy with this plan; we have
received positive comments.

in Yaguajay they built a beach, in an effort by the municipality's People's Power
to deal with recreational needs.

He are building ZS-room hotels in Pomento, Jatibonico and Taguasco. These hotels.
while solving lodging problems, will also have restaurants to serve the local popu-
lation and can function as nighttime entertainment centers. The three hotels will
be finished next year.

Here in Sancti Spiritus we built the Los Laureles Hotel, which meets a great need.
it will be expanded during this 5-year period. Also here in the city we renovated
a building and converted it into a youth center. He will also put in a dancing
area where a "Spiritus" punch will be sold, for example, at low prices. There will
also be soft drinks and juices for the youths to purchase.

The Central Planning Board (JUCEPLAN) gave us some dollars to make purchases
abroad. We decided to buy things that would directly benefit the population; we
thought of buying soda fountains, soft drink machines and coffee pots. But the
first thing we decided to buy are ten completely equipped jukeboxes with spare
parts. We will place one in each municipality, except for La Sierpe, because there
it would not be used enough due to the number of inhabitants. Here in Sancti
Spiritus we will put one in the youth center and another at the dancing area.

He thought that these jukeboxes would contribute a great deal to meeting the
youths' recreational needs. The idea is for all of them to be installed by the
time the Provincial Assembly is constituted.

we will also build a multi-purpose theater, where any kind of show can be put on.
We are hoping that by next year all municipalities will have the ten cultural mod—
ules.

we are paying special attention to museums in the province. ln Trinidad there are
nine, and now we are going to put the national museum of the Struggle Against
Bandits there. it will be housed in the old jail.

For the long term, we are working on a project for the Yayabo River, here in the
city of Sancti Spiritus. There used to be a recreational center there, but when we
won the Revolution and industry and housing were built up, the river became
polluted.

He will clean up the river and make it a major recreational area over the next 5
years or more. He will put in a bathing area, a boating center, a swimming pool,
dancing areas and many other facilities, including restaurants and cafeterias.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are other ideas that will be implemented in the short or long term.

We think that little by little we will be able to meet the recreational needs of

the population, and of youth in particular. This year and next the changes will
become evident.

COPYRIGHT: BOHBHIA 1981

8926
CSO: 3010/1806

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENTS DISCUSSED
Havana BOREHIA in Spanish 31 Jul 81 pp 8-13

[Text] At the Novovoronezh nuclear powerplant built 17 years ago in the central
Soviet Union, a poster mounted over the entrance to the turbine room announces,

in bold letters: "Let_the atom he a worker and not a soldier!"

The phrase engraved there bears witness to the fact that just as at other power-
plants in the great country of Lenin, the Soviets work here with feverish enthusiasm
on the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

The scientists in the USSR are convinced“ and the highest leaders of the party

and the government so proclaim - that if not all, at least a large share of mankind
will disappear from the face of the earth if the blind, brutal forces of the capi-

talist reactionaries and imperialism dare, with irresponsible determination, to set
off atomic bombs.

The peaceful policy aimed at eliminating or substantially limiting atomic weapons,
if we want life to continue on our planet, has been ignored by the capitalist
powers, mainly the United States, contrary to the appeals for peace made by the
Soviet Union and repeated warnings from the chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Leonid
Brezhnev, that the atom should be used for the good of, not to the detriment of,
mankind.

Cuba Before and After 1959

In "La Historia He Absolvera" [History will -Absolve He],Pide1 reminded us that

"everyone agrees. that the need for industrialization of the country is urgent, that
we need metallurgical industries, chemical industries, paper" industries, "but the
government stands idly by and industrialisation never comes."

After the Revolution overthrew the old political-economic-social structure, cube
began a new life and embarked upon the path of progressive alternatives, which
could not fail to include agrarian reform, nationalization of the monopolies that
exploited workers and farmers, and industrializationt

Before 1959, did we even have enough thermoelectric potential to embark upon that
urgent and far-reaching undertaking?

Absolutely, positively not!

23

‘ roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As part of its broad range of constructive plans, the Revolution undertook national
electrification and took electric power to the most remote rural regions of the
country, where previously, the people had only known the traditional kerosene lamp
or the typical native chismosita.

At the same time this extremely important source of energy was being developed,
large industrial complexes were cropping up in all regions of'Cuba, complexes that
necessarily operate with electricity, and the raw material that moves this powerful

machinery day and night is expensive and has to be imported;

Cuba does not have its own fossil fuels such as oil or coal, nor does it have large,
powerful rivers that would provide it with water power to meet its future energy
needs. Our country has no other alternative than to develop nuclear energy, which
will meet the growing demand and which today, with the price of oil, is more econo-
nical than traditional sources.

In his address summarising the events commemorating the seventh anniversary of
the defeat of Yankee imperialism at the Bay-of Pigs, Fidel said, in April 1968:

“When man discovered the energy contained in the atom, he discovered a source of
energy capable of supplying the unlimited future needs of mankind. Atomic power,
which mankind first came to know as an instrument of war and destruction,-is at
the same time the only solution of mankind in the future.

"Consequently, any country that has any foresight and that looks to the future
has to think about the generation of electric power using nuclear energy. Our
country cannot continue to build more and more electric powerplants based on oil.
Once we have completed the current program to set up thermoelectric powerplants,
we shall have to think about facilities that use atomic energy.

“That is why," Fidel said, "our Revolution is already recrUiting outstanding stu-

dents to study nuclear physics and become the engineers who will operate this
type of plant. This is one of the issues of most interest to the world today."

Nuclear Science and Technology

Not only at the nuclear powerplants are the nuclear science and technology for
peaceful purposes applied. They are also utilized for the production of radio

isotopes and in many branches of the economy. In medicine, agriculture and
industry, as well as in physics, chemistry and biomedical research, we find
various uses.

Specific examples of its applications include the following: determination of
soil moisture, the volume of rivers, the calcium and potassium content of grass
and silt, densities and levels of industrial processes, mineral composition, the.
conservation of food by irradiation, and geological prospecting (exploration).

In medicine, nuclear techniques are used for the treatment and diagnosis of dif-
ferent diseases, the sterilization of surgical equipment, and the creation of

ideal conditions in which microorganisms that produce antibiotics must live, so
as to improve productivity,. and so on.

26
Institute of Nuclear Physics (ININ)

This Institute, since 1974 known as the Nuclear Research Institute, was established
with the fraternal, valuable help.of the Soviet Union and as th culmination of

the work done by the Nuclear Energy Group of the Cuban Academy of Science. It
opened in January 1969.

Beginning on that date, with the advice of Soviet specialists, Cuba embarked upon
the task of putting nuclear sciences on a scientific footing in our country. We
would also have university graduates in radiochemistry, dosimetry, nuclear reactors
and radiological protection, trained at the Hoscow State University.

At the same time and without interruption, the training of Cuban technical and
scientific cadres continued at various centers and institutions in the Soviet
Union.

Along with the incorporation of the first graduates in the USSR, Cuba intensified
activities to give advanced training to the personnel that would fundamentally be
responsible for work and research. In 1971, the number of workers at the Institute

increased significantly with the entry of a group of physics and chemistry graduates
who had completed their education at the University of Havana.

At the same time we planned for new work, we strengthened cooperation between the
National Nuclear Research Institute and the State Committee for the Use of Atomic
Energy from the USSR, including the signing of new agreements an advice and the
visits of Chbans to Soviet nuclear centers. Regarding international relations,
they were established - and have been maintained - since the founding of the
Institute, especially with the International Atomic Energy Organization under the
United Nations, with headquarters in Vienna,_the Cuba-USSR Unified Nuclear Research
Institute, the Sossendorf Central Institute in the German Democratic Republic,

and the CBHA Permanent Committee for the Peaceful Use of Atomic Energy.

Cienfuegos Powerplant

Fulfilling the energetic plans of the Cuban Government and as a result of the enthu-

siastic cooperation of our Soviet brothers, the agreements for the construction in
Cuba of the first nuclear powerplant were signed.

Talks began in Moscow in 197‘. At that time, the agency involved was the Ministry
of the Electrical Industry and later, the Academy of Sciences, the ministries of
Public health, Mining and Interior and other government organizations came to parti-

cipate. Two years later, research began for the location of the site in the central
area of the island.

"Why in the central region?" we asked engineer Alfonso Afont Pifat, deputy director
of the First Nuclear Powerplsnt Budgeted Investment Unit of the Ministry of Basic
Industry.

"The reason is the requirements of our national electric power system," Afont

explained. "There is obvious industrial development in the central region of Cuba.
The area chosen meets the hydrological, geological and other needs." '

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"What is the main difference between a thermonuclear powerplant and the plants
in use today?" we asked.

"A thermonuclear powerplant is a plant that generates electric power, like those
at Mariel, Rente and Cienfuegos. The difference lies in the fact that its main

source of energy is the process of nuclear fission, which replaces the burning of
oil."

”What is fission?"

”It is a type of reaction in which the neutron free a source emitting neutrons or
from a previous fission strikes a uranium nucleus, which divides (splits) into two
light nuclei. In this reaction, a large quantity of energy is given off.

”Uranium (nuclear fuel) is a cheaper and safer source. Our solution lies in build-
ing plants that generate electric power by using this radioactive element, but for
this, we need a substantial number of highly skilled specialists. A plant of this

type requires the services of many high- and interlediate-level technicians. At
both levels, most personnel will need complete nuclear training."

High-level personnel now receive training at the School of Nuclear Science and
Technology of the University of Havana and at specialized institutes in the USSR.

The rest of the personnel for the powerplant includes graduates of the country's
university centers, where additional training is received.

Intermediate-level personnel will be trained at the Cienfuegos Nuclear Polytechnical
School, which will be set up in September of this year, with the beginning of the
1981-1982 school year, where skilled workers will also be trained.

The polytechnical school is being built near the site where the thermonuclear
powerplant will be and at the present time, final touches are being put on the large,

modern building by workers from the Industrial Projects Construction Enterprise
No 6, which will also build the powerplant.

with the beginning of this school year in the new facilities of the polytechnical
school, the students will study intermediate-level nuclear technology and interme-
diate-level automatic control. Graduates of this center will first go to the Jura-
gua powerplant. This includes technicians as well as skilled workers. All working
personnel will receive the indispensable training in thermonuclear technology. In

addition, every-worker must study and pass the standards of radiological protection
and work safety for‘this type of plant.

The polytechnical school has seven laboratories: physics, nuclear physics, auto-
satic control, metals, chemistry and biology, chemical analysis, electronics and
electrical engineering. It has six shops: assembly, operation and steam generator
and reactor repair, dosimetry, electronuclear powerplants, central assistance and
reagent protection, languages. There will be five senior teaching posts.

Like all centers of study that the Revolution has built and continues to build for

intermediate-level education, this school has its administration, .teaching admin-
istration, meeting room, files, administration of nuclear activities, foreign'

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical assistance office, theater, student dormitories, faculty dormitories,

recreation and living rooms, clinic, barbershop and beauty salon, kitchen, dining
room, green space and playing fields.

Anatoli Cherbakov, Soviet electromechanical engineer who has been responsible for
the setting up of the laboratories, offices and workshops of this plant as well

as of the Armando Garcia Aspuru Energy Polytechnical School in Santiago de Cuba,
told us:

“I have been in Cuba for 3 years. I like this country very much; the Cubans are
very friendly and brotherly. It is a pleasure 'to work with them, whether they

be construction workers or professors. They are all happy, enthusiastic, hard-
working and content. The students are magnificent. They are already reaping the
fruits from the Santiago polytechnicel school. These young people are very good
technicians and they will be very useful in the field of electric power."

Comrade Cherbakov talked to us in Spanish about our customs, the fun-loving nature
of the Cubans, and he expressed his regret over leaving Cuba so soon even though
his work contract has been completed.

"I have been very happy'in Cuba. I am grateful for all the attention I have re-
ceived, but I want to say that with the same willingness that l have come to this
beautiful country, the first free territory in America, I would go to Ethiopia.
Angola, Nicaragua or wherever my cooperation is needed. He communists practice
proletarian internationaliam with true pleasure because this is part of our
Harxist-Leninist education."

5 de Septiembre Polytechnical School

we visited the 5 de Septiembre Polytechnical School in Cienfuegos, where we were
welcomed by Director Francisco Mendez and other members of the board of directors.

We were informed about the progress of students beginning their studies in nuclear
technology. They and a group enrolled at another polytechnical school will make up
the class of the new polytechnical school that will open in September.

"There is no lack of difficulties," the director told us, "but they are being
resolved. These young people are very promising."

We were able to talk at length with several students, all of when expressed the .
importance of the career they have chosen. Orestes Morales, one of the most enthu-
siastic, said he was convinced that "energy is a fundamental branch for our coun-
try' 3 economy. Cuba needs to develop its industries,“ he said, "and to create
nany more. For this purpose. we need large amounts of electric power, which can

only be obtained from nuclear powerplants."

"what does this career mean to you?" we asked him.

"For me, it means a great deal. I like the field of energy. I visited the Carlos
Manuel de CespedesThermoelectricPowerplant to see its operation because nearly

all of its machinery is like that of a thermonuclear plant. The difference is the
reactors."

27

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

University of Havana

It is not widely known that at the University of Havana, the School of Nuclear
Science and Technology trains high-level specialists in nuclear energy.

Dean Jose Roig told us that the graduates will work at the Juragua Powerplant
and will teach at the school or do research for the ININ.

He continued:

"Although our school will begin its operations this year, nuclear energy was al-
ready being taught at the Jose Antonio Bcheverria Advanced Polytechnical School.

That is why we have students at all levels in the field. In July, we shall have a
new class of engineers graduating in nuclear energy. The school has connections

with the Research Institute and with the Ministry of Basic Industry in the area of
teaching and in research. Students practice or do research for the national enter-
prises, as do the professors."

Personnel

To use a phrase in vogue, cubs already has a number of duly qualified technicians,
some working for the thermonuclear powerplant. The first group of Cuban engineers
went to the Soviet Union in 1971 to receive postgraduate training in Moscow. They
worked at the Novovoronezh Powerplant. In 1973, another group of university grad-
uates studied at the sane centers. They all had some background in nuclear energy
that they obtained in Cuba. In 1975, acre graduates went.

Those specialising in the USSR are working for the Projects Enterprise of the Minis-
try of Basic Industry, in the central offices of that linistry, in the Juragua
Budgeted Investment Unit and at the University of havana.

"There is a fourth group," Daniel Calcagno, a thersonuclsar technician, told us,
"made up of comrades who in February cospleted their special training at the Moscow
Energy Institute. They conpleted'thernophysics for 5 years. Previously, they had
had preparatory studies and Russian in Cuba for 1 year., ln.May, several Ienbers

of the group joined the Juragua Budgeted Unit." '

There we had the opportunity to use: with engineers Miguel A. Tare: Jardines and
Luis Angel Medina Ramos. Both decided to give us a single response to our questions.
They told us: -

”Our group was made up of conradea who had belonged to the Nuclear Physics Interest
Club of the Lenin Vocational School. He net because of our interest in the field
and were lucky enough to have the help of a highly trained professor who had'studied
in the USSR. His classes prepared us for the activity to which we would finally ‘
devote ourselves. There were plans coordinated between lconsonol and the UJC

[Union of Young Communists]. -Upon our return, we went into production. He are
anxious to serve science, technology and the Revolution wherever we would be nost
useful, but we believe that it is here, in Juragua, where we must begin our work."

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Training

The training of cuban specialists in this field of unlimited possibilities moves
steadily forward. Through the signing of an agree-eat with a Study and Training
Center at the Novovoronezh Powerplant, personnel will be trained for operations,
laboratory work and maintenance. The first group will begin its training at the
end of this year. Others will leave for Novovoronezh in 1982.

Electrical engineers from the Carlos Manuel de Ceapedes Thermoelectric Rowerplant

with some background in nuclear energy have been chosen to take a course in theory
and practice in the Soviet Union lasting 1 year. We talked with a number of then

and they all agreed that the trip will complete their professional training. The
knowledge they acquire will be very beneficial when, on their return, they go to
work for the first nuclear powerplant in Cuba.

COPYRIGHT: BOHEHIA 1981

ll,h6h
050: 5100/2322

29

FIN!(NN§C1AI.USE1MNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

BRIEFS

mm—curmsz VICE PRESIDENT KEEP-Havana, 22 Sep (PL)-Biehwaishvar ‘Ransaroop,
vice president of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana, held a friendly neeting
here with Jesus Hontane, alternate menber of the Political Bureau of the Conunist
Party of Cuba. Ransaroop, president of the Ruling National Congress Party (NCP),
heads the Guyanese delegation to the 68th Conference of the Interparlianentary
Union that should close tomorrow in this capital. Bilateral relations and the
progress of the interparlianentary conference were examined during the meeting.
The meeting vas attended by the Guyanese anbasaador to Cuba. Cecil Pilgrin.

[Text] [PA222001 Havana PRELA in English 1925 GMT 22 Sep 81]

cs0: 3010/8 3“”

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY