FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10003
22 September 1981

South and East Asia Report

(FOUO 4/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060063-4

FOR OFFICIAL U! LY

SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT

(FOUO 4/81)

CONTENTS
Kiu‘iPUCHEA
Japanese Correspondent Visits [JR-Controlled Arena
(Yoji Tani; HOSEKI. Jul 81) ....... ........
- a - [I

COD 0mm“ "CF “Ni V

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060053-4
FOR OFFIFIAL USE ONLY

KAHPUCHEA

JAPANESE CORRESPONDENT VISITS DK-CONTROLLII AREAS

Tokyo HOSEKI in Japanese Jul 81 pp 102-113

[Article by Yoji Tani "Account of a Penetration IntOIIKBDPUChea Guerrilla Region"!
[Text] Commentary

The Siruation in Kampuchea

"Kampuchean General Elections," (Heng Samrin government), "Democratic Kampuchean
Forces“ (The former Pol Pot government, the present Kiu Sam Phan regime) "Prince
Sihanouk" (Former head of state), "Former Prime Minister Son Sann" (The Third
Force-Kampuchea People's Liberation Front)--Recently, words communicating the
situation in Kampuchea have again become noticeable in the newspapers. At the

end of 1978 200,000 Vietnamese troops invaded the country, but in the more than
[HO years since then what has the situation been like in Kampuchea?

(1) The Heng Samrin Regime: Pro-Vietnamese, Pro-Soviet. Supported by the 200,000
Vietnamese, it recently held a "general election." However, the area under Heng's
domination is about one-fifth of the country(?). Recently the Soviet Union,

aiming at propping up this regime has announced economic aid. Heng Samrin's forces
number 30 to 50 thousand.

(2) Democratic Cambodian Regime: Anti-Vietnamese forces originally under Pol
Pot. new led by Prime Minister Viu Sam Phan. They have recently attacked areas
under Vietnamese control and have established many "Liberated Zones."

  
   

\ D'IRZ-I‘TKJI‘
norm-12m!!!
agape-2 '0‘)
P 1;-
. D run g

a "can": I C
3‘5“.qu d

[Key on following page] 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Map of the distribution of forces 4. Gulf of Siam
as of Feb. 1981 as reported to S. Koh Kong
the United Nations by Democratic 6. Pursat
Kampuchea 7. Battambang
a. Liberated areas 8. (Stung Chun Long Pat?)
b. Guerrilla bases 9. Kratie
c. Areas under Democratic 10. Komgpong Thom
Kampuchean control 11. Zone under Vietnamese occupation
J. Areas under Vietnamese 12. Republic of Vietnam
carapation l3. Phnom Penh
2. Sisophon 14. Angkor Hat
3. Laos 15. Thailand

(3) Prince Sihanouk and Former Prime Minister Son Sann. Sihanouk's former head
of Cambodia with Son Sana as his Prime Minister. In March Sihanouk announced

the formation of the first "Unified Anti-Vietnam Line" with Prime Minister Khieu
Jamphan at a meeting in North Korea. China's Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping announced
military aid to the Prince and the activities of Son Sann are under attention as
Knmpuchea's "Third Force" (Buddhists) by the ASEAN countries.

The world press at present is focusing its attention on Kampuchea. The reasons

for this are that the Democratic Kampuchea Army which had been preserved in the
mountain zones has begun to shake the areas occupied by the Vietnamese forces and
because a movement towards forming a "Unified Anti-Vietnam Front" has started among
the Democratic Kampuchean forces, Prince Sihanouk and former Prime Minister Son
Sann. However, one also cannot overlook the fact that, as with the Afghanistan
issue. the shadow of the Soviet Union has begun to flicker, and if the Third Horld
countries fight in quest of "independence," and are victorious. right afterwards
the Soviet Union will enter the picture...hence Kampuchea is becoming a "focal
point of modern history."

This report by the journalist Yoji Tani is a testimony to current conditions.
coming from Kampuchea....

[Author's report begins] The small truck that picked me up traveled south at high
speed down the national highway abng the Thai-Kampuchea border from the bordertown
Arsnyeprathet. I was not informed where we would cross the border, nor was I told
where I was being taken. I was living in uncertainty not knowing what the extent
of the war actually was in the forest zone. how safe it was. where we could stay.
At the same time, I was naturally exhilarated by the thought that at long last I
would be able to come in contact with soldiers of the Democratic Kalpuchea govern-
ment and the people of the liberated areas who shared their fate.

The invasion and occupation by Vietnam that has continued for more than two years.
and the Kampuchean forces that are resisting these,-these touch my own feelings,

since in the past I myself supported self-determination for the Vietnamese and had
spent my youth in anti-war demonstrations. To me, the concerns of Kampuchea were

my concerns.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The truck has apparently veered from the min national highway to a side road.

It runs along the bumpy road furiously kicking up clouds of sand and rocks. Even
though it is high noon there isn't a shadow of a person anywhere around. It was a
wierd feeling. Something looking like a person's shadow appeared in my field of
visim in the thicket up ahead. The truck slowed down. The shadow came gradually
closer. A man waved his hand, making some kind of signal. I guess it was a
soldier of the Kampuchaan Arny,...a black uniform caked with dirt, which is unique
to the Khmer people wound around his neck.

The truck stopped there. I was let off and according to his instructions, I was
ordered to step through a thicket about a man's height. I don't know how many
minutes passed. I came to a river about ten asters wide. It was the Thai-Kanpu-
chea border. I had finally made it to Kampuchea.

I hadn‘t noticed, but when we began to cross the river, about ten Democratic
Kampuchean Army troops appeared on the side, carrying AK rifles on their backs.

I was relieved to see among them the ailing face of Lon-No Lin (age 38), a
Foreign Affairs official of the Duaocratic Kampuchea Government. Last autumn he
had visited Japan and I knew his face. He is fluent in English and was to serve as
my host.

Again we entered the thickets, shrubbery areas and thick forest and walked for
about three hours. We finally arrived at a cleared space in the forest. There were
four relatively sturdy buildings thatched with grass, and in the opening in the
center were long hand-made tables.

"This is a government facility. We will ask them to let us stay here two or three
days," No Lin interpreted. This place, that he called "headquarters" is one of
the base areas of the Democratic Kampuchea govern-eat and is reportedly used on
occasion for cabinet meetings by government leaders.

The jungle was cleared for 50 meters in all four directions, with trenches dug in
places. Anti-aircraft machine guns were also installed here, as if looking up at
the tall trees growing next to each other. "hot I discovered the next morning on
a walk, was that many barracks were placed around this government base area, and I
was told that they normally accomodate around 300 men who stay here on an alter-
nating basis.

The only seasons in Kanpuchea are the rainy season (May through Sept-bet) and the
dry season (October to April), and there is no "winter." There are about two weeks
when it is chilly in morning and evening, but it is hot the rest of the year, which
Folk-ably makes this kind of jungle life possible.

H'om my second day, I walked to the neighboring "Liberated Zone" villages nearby,
starting out from the "headquarters" and while moving through the jungle came upon
se\ 21'81 "liberated zones." Each village consisted of a row of houses on a river-
bank selected because there has water there. In particular there were villages
concentrated along the border, where. there is rater even in the dry season. These
places were probably naturally selected for the water and because it is possible
to escape by crossing the border in the event of a Vietnamese attack.

3
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first "liberated zone" that I observed was a spot 60 kilometers southeast of
Arunyapruthet in the jungle a few kilometers from the border. The settlement was
reportedly begun there when they escaped into the jungle during the first Vietnam-
ese invasion in 1979. At that time they felled trees, prepared the land and

built a village, but many people died without food or medicine.

Even so, there are three liberated zones (homestead villages) enclosing the
river, and the house in each are high-floored grass thatched homes beautifully
lined up. I heard that about 10,000 people live there, two thousand of whom
apparently had returned from a Thai refugee camp in June of last year, and some
complained "we want to go to our home village but cannot, since we fear the Viet-
namese."

In this vicinity there apparently are a considerable number of "liberated zones."
However, for these liberated zones, a difference remains in the food supply situa-
tion, between the villages near the Thai border that receive international aid and
the villages from which it is necessary to make a 2-1/2 day round trip walk to

get such aid. Apparently representative members elected by their respective vil-
lage rungic have been working very hard to eradicate the differences. The differ—
ence is particularly evident in medical facilities. It is common for there to be a
lack of medicine everywhere, but there are some hospitals equipped with medical
equipment through the International Red Cross, and some which must rely on primi-
tive treatment.

In every village hospital there are always exhausted—looking patients stretched
acrOss bamboo beds. A young doctor who says that he received medical schooling in
Phnom Penh pointed out "lack of nutrition brings on disease and delays recovery":
while a doctor in another village related "In the places here that people have
escaged to, there are no wards, so they have to sleep on the ground and every day
tens of people die off." These words match the conditions that I heard about in
the Thai refugee camps, and I have no reason to doubt then.

I remember that Prime Minister Samphan once told the world that this was a "battle
for continuation of the race" against the starvation strategy of the Vietnamese
forces, but the jungle was really a hell for them. The number of 111 persons
reportedly increases threefold in the rainy season. Even so, it appeared that
efforts were being made to build new wards and train nurses in each village.

There are schools in every village in the "liberated zone" and it was apparent
that efforts were being expanded on education of the children. Since there were
no textbooks or stationery, they followed the method of learning by raising their
voices according to the teacher's instruction, facing a hand-made blackboard; but
the faces of teachers and students alike were serious. The subjects taught are
Kampuchean, arithmetic and music, but high school students are also taught politi—
cal educat.ou that teaches the significance of the united front in order to over-
come the present adversities, and methods of preventing and treating malaria.

In spite of such terrible conditions the expressions on the innocent looking chil-
dren running around barefoot are always cheerful, and one can constantly hear the
cries of newborn babies, all of which testifies to the robust quality of the

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

strength for human survival. The villages in the liberated zones appear to have
returned to a peaceful state--at times they erect stages in each village, put on
dramas and folk dances using hand-made musical instruments.

A few days later I observed a village meeting at which I was able to see clearly

the bond between the Democratic Kampuchea Government and its people. Scanning the
village square I could see 2000 people, who enthusiastically applauded the speeches
of the government and village representatives that were delivered over loud—
speakers. Their spirits were raised by shouting in chorus "The Democratic Kanpu-
chean Army and the People Forever" and "Down with the Vietnamese Invaders."

The meeting on that day was to celebrate victory in battle in the Phnum Halai
Mountains (an area in northwest Kampuchea). It cusumnicated to the villagers the
state cf development and the significance of the unified front being promoted by

the government. The meeting stimulated people to cooperate in a spirit of democracy
and harmony. to improve and elevate life in the liberated villages.

Such meetings apparently are held from time to time in the "liberated areas." As
far as I could see in Battamban Province, which I had penetrated. there was a con-
siderable number of people who shared their fate with the Pol Pot army and were
waiting out the withdrawal of the Vietnamese forces. I don't have accurate figures,
but according to estimates of the Thai military, the number of Kampucheans living
in the border areas is 430,000. The population in regions dominated by Democratic
Kanpuchea, according to its own figures, is 150,000.

The people in the "liberated" areas have planted vegetables and corn in the
fields, and bananas and papayas around the fields. The latter are apparently
consumed not as fruits but as vegetables, and while they rely on rice supplied
through international aid, I was impressed with the vitality of their efforts to
be self-sufficient.

A feature which distinguishes these people from those in the Thai refugee camps

is their self-revitalization and their planned village construction. However,

to the people driven out of the rice paddies into the "liberated" areas, the lat-
ter are nothing other than refugee villages. Recently, apparently many people
have escaped to the "liberated areas" from the flatlands, to avoid the terrorism
of the Vietnarose soldiers and government oppression. However, the Democratic
Kampuchean Cove:nment reportedly is advising people to move their dwelling places
rather than increasing the population in the Jungle, where food is in short supply,
and to remain in the flatlsnds and await the right moment.

Thcrr Has no Difference Between Men and "omen among the Soldiers Fighting at the
I (On:

There was considerable traffic along the roads connecting the villages in the
"liberated" areas, no matter where one went and sometimes one would even encounter
bicyclists ringing their bells as they went along. In places there were small
huts. apparently relay posts with soldiers guarding them with rifles, but there
was not much psychological tension.

5 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A few days later I resolved to ascertain what Prime Minister Samphan calls the
dry season offensive and to live with the Democratic Kampuchea forces in the
field, so I requested by all means to be allowed to travel to the front. The
Foreign Office official. No Lin told me "It takes five days round trip to the
heavy fighting, and there is no water along the way," but he apparentl} contacted
the front regimental commander Nikhom and brought me an "OK" to go to the front.
I was prepared for a rigorous march and was firmly resolved to face danger, since
if I hadn't done so, my trip all the way from Japan would have been a waste.

0n the first morning, an elephant was prepared from the base area. I was mounted
on one and I headed east into the jungle accompanied by about fifty soldiers.

The speed of the elephant making wide strides is equivalent to that of a person
walking fast. Even so, no matter how much we traveled, there was no end to it

With a noon break sandwiched in between, the journey extended to nine hours and by
night fell we arrived at a supply base to the front lines.

Great masses of soldiers were camped as if drawn into the jungle on both sides
of the road, with a considerable number of women among the supply unit. It was a
noisy spectacle, like a colony of sparrows.

We were to camp together with them. In the surrounding jungle, it is reported

that there are places where large quantities of weapons and ammunition were buried
at the beginning of 1978 in anticipation of a Vietnamese offensive. It is said
that these are dug up and used in attacks, but apparently there exist a lot of
weapons lost when those responsible for burying them died in battle. Mines have
been placed around them, so as long as there are no surviving members to serve as
guides to their location, they cannot easily be found.

The meal that had been prepared for us consisted of stir fried vegetables with
chicken, and soup. The rice was reportedly bought from Thailand with currency
provided by aid from a friendly country. The rice grains were dry and meal was
not delicious to me so I ate it by pouring the soup over it and drinking it. I
suddenly noticed a group of four or five people necking at the rice in their pot,
and was embarrassed to discover that the only things that they ate with it were
powdered fish and salt.

The night soldiers were sleeping like insects, hanging in their hatuncks. Also,
some soldiers were sitting around the campfire listening to folk music and news on
portable (Japanese made) radios reporting the results of battles from each area,
since even in the jungle broadcasts of Democratic Kampuchea could be heard very
well.

It is rumored that the broadcasts originate from a transmitter placed in Yunnan
Province in China, but this is not confirmed. In any case, as long as one has a
radio. Dem-ﬁratic Kampuchean broadcasts can be heard anywhere in the country.

The next morning at 7:30 it was decided that I was to go on foot to the next relay
post, and I joined about 300 soldiers heading towards the front. After going
beyond the supply base, I saw that large trees had been felled everywhere, laying
across the road. This was done reportedly to prevent the invasion by Vietnamese
tanks. I began to get somewhat tense. A large group of soldiers who were on

6
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their way to the front as replacements joined in, so suddenly the size of the
Kampuchean troops swelled considerably. For myself, who was born right after world
Har II, there was no way of knowing the feelings of these young soldiers who might
die on the battlefields, but the appearance of these young troops silently march-
ing on, with AK rifles and anti-tank guns on their shoulders was truly majestic.

After coming this far, I realised that it was not only men who were fighting
against the Vietnamese troops. This is because I encountered even young women
carrying ammunition or rice on their heads while gritting their teeth, walking

in file on the long journey to the front. The women in the supply unit accompan-
ied the soldiers, just as the combat nurses did, and supported the Democratic

Kampuchean forces in the rear.

We suddenly stopped while I was marching along lost in thought, and the command
came "We will camp here for the night." I was told that this place was about 15
kilometers before reaching the village called Taken where 1200 Vietnamese were
reportedly building a camp. When I settled into the spot indicated to me, at the
camping point, two or three soldiers who were on the side began suddenly to dig
holes. when I stood up I was told something that meant "if a fire fight breaks
out please get in this hole." I spent a sleepless night laying next to that hole.

I reached the attack zone on the front the next day, which was the third day of the
march. It was five kilometers this side of Tnkon. On this day, on the way, I
heard that we passed through a camp abandone' by-the Vietnamese in retreat and that
the Kampuchean forces had been making sporadic attacks twice a day for the past

two weeks in order to keep up the pressure.

The attack on this day was one of these. When radio contact was made with units

on three sides who had sneaked up as close as possible to Takon an all-out

attack began, coordinated with the signal from big guns. 107mm mortars spewed forth
fire and the enemy was attacked by these, and by 75mm mortars that boomed out. The

quick maneuvering of the Kampuchean soldiers, the impact of the rockets...I dis-
covered that I was tense with fascination. Shortly, I was warned of the danger of
a counterattack by the Vietnamese and was ordered to retreat, but the mortar attack
continued for about one hour.

later I noticed that the radio broadcast that the "Vietnamese camp on National
Route 5 had been brought under control through a fierce attack by Kampuchean for-
ces." and also learned that the Kampucheans had retaken Taken.

Japanese tanned Goods were Scattered About the Fallen Vietnamese Camp

I again returned to "Headquarters," where I met Regimental Commander Nikhom who

I thought was at the front. when I asked him when he had returned from the front,
he said he walked back, marching through the night. That evening I had dinner with
Nikhom and told him that I would like to meet Pol Pot, and if this was difficult,
at least to know where he was operating. In reply the regimental commander ex-
plained with great self-confidence “I can't tell you, since his location is a mili-
tary secret. However. he sends us information and instructions by radio every

day. We know everything about the location of the Vietnamese forces, without

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which our attacks would bring no results. Of course, we also know in detail what
is going on in Phnom Penh." He also informed me that the Vietnamese camp at 0

la hon fell three days ago. He said that the freshness of battle still remained
at 0 1a hon. The next day I set out for the field, dragging my corn-blistered
feet.

The route to 0 la hon was narrow and there were more mountain passes than 1
expected, added to which there was the danger of mines. I therefore skirted the
trail and walked where there was no road, and finally arrived at the area totally
exhausted.

The Vietnamese base at 0 la hon was on a high point with a commanding view. The
jungle was cut away on all four sides for about 300 meters but the camp structures
themselves were scattered about, probably as preparation against attack. Deep
ditches were dug around each building, and there were many trenches deliberately
constructed by ditches with logs and dirt piled on top. and I could see why the
Vietnamese forces had been several times stronger than the Kampuchean side.
Scattered about were ammunition, Vietnamese army caps, and cooking utensils testi—
fying to the horror of war, but what really surprised me was the large number of
empty cans of Japanese goods scattered about, designed with the "Rising Sun" and
"Noun t Fuji. "

To the best of my knowledge, the Japanese government sent to Phnom Penh as aid
canned goods worth 800 million yen through UN organizations. However, it is re-
ported that some of these ended up on the black market in Vietnam, and here we have
confirmation that they were brought by the Vietnamese up to the front lines.

In a granary built by the Vietnamese about three bags of rice still remained.
Thinking it was precious booty, when I pointed it out to a soldier with whom I

had become friendly, he frowned and shook his head "No." It turned out that the
Vietnamese may lmv: poisoned it, so on no occasion should it be eaten. Up to this
time, there had been cases of people dying from drinking water that they did not
know the retreating Vietnamese had poisoned, and cases of mass dysentery, so the
troops were very serious about such "booty."

(Eopu) (age 27) the commander of the 0 la hon district, described the battle to
drive out the Vietnamese. "In the first week, we wore down the enemy by surprise
attacks, finally went around behind them, cut off their supply route and made a
concentrated attack from three sides in the jungle." He said they also concealed
themselves along the retreat route and fired at the retreating Vietnamese. He
added "It is an iron rule of diversionary warfare for a company to wipe out a
regiment and route the enemy without making any sacrifices."

Walking along in pitch darkness, I was slated to return to "headquarters,” but by
accident I came across soldiers heading towards the front along with women carrying
supplies. They were to chase after the Vietnamese towards Pailin in the south."
Prime Minister Khieu Samphan Described Conditions at the Front This Way

I was to move from “headquarters" to the "liberated area" in the vicinity of Phnum
Malai. I took leave of the soldiers, mounted an elephant, and headed north. Phnum

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Malai is a major point in northwest Kampuchea and since last year the Vietnamese
have repeatedly attacked it, but were repulsed each time. They say that this was
because the Vietnamese were unable to use tanks in the fighting, since the bridge
near the supply base at O-Chareu on the Vietnamese forces‘ side for the attack on
Phnu: Halai was detonated four times by Kampuchean guerrillas. At any rate the
fighting spirits of the Kampucheans is high. It is reported that the fierce
attack on the Vietnamese last December was especially terrible.

I heard the following evidence about the situation at that time. "The Vietnamese
forces poured soldiers drafted in the south into the fighting like human bullets.
The Kampuchean forces made repeated surprise attacks on them from the jungle and
wiped them out. The road going from 0-Chareu to Phnum Malai was covered with the
corpses of Vietnamese soldiers." The number of Vietnamese soldiers that died in
battle on that road, which is now nicknamed "Cemetery Road" reached 1,600 according
to Kampuchean reports.

I had an unexpected meeting in the liberated zone near thum Malai. It was the son
of Prince Sihanouk who has been in the public eye regarding the issue of an Anti-
Vietnamese Unified Front. His son, Norodom Narindarapon (age 26), returned from
France last December. I had dinner with him. and he related to me the following.

“I am a Buddhist, but feeling that I wanted to fulfill a political role to do some-
thing to solidify the people against Vietnam, I returned home to answer to the call
for a unified front. I have seen the brave posture of the soldiers on the battle-
field, and would like to undergo military training myself, if possible. I cannot
believe that my father could retire from politics. Now, when it is necessary to
save our country from invasion, I hope that he will join us in the Ethnic Patriotic
Front that the government is calling for.

This "liberated area" appears to be a window for diplomacy opened by the Democratic
Kanpuchean Government towards Thailand, and visitors from foreign countries are
apparently generally received here. Near here there is an advanced form of
liberated area village called a "new village," in which efforts have been expended
to improve the environment, and is being used as a model for other "homestead
villages." It is about three kilometers from this liberated area to Phnum Halai.

I could thus well understand why Kampuchea defended it "to the death."

1 must report :hat here I also met with Prime Minister Khieu Samphan. The cabinet
that accompanied the Prime Minister included Secretary General Khet Chhon and
Social Welfare Minister Isng Thirith. These important people appeared out of the
blue. and when the interview.was over they again disappeared into the jungle. I
hnac no idea where the facilities for the high ranking cadre are located. They
are probably moved about constantly in the jungle.

However. in December 1979, I heard that when a delegation of Japanese newsmen met
with Pol Pot at a base area in Northern Kampuchea, they crossed the border under
cover of night and were led to the meeting place in blindfolds. but I could now
understand the expression of their confidence in the "liberated areas" and the
change in the war situation from my interview with these officials.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLV

My interview with Khieu Samphan lasted from 4 pm to 9 pm with dinner in between.
The Prime Minister, who served as Minister of Trade during Sihanouk's regime is
known as the only person in the cabinet at that time who rode to work on his
bicycle. Perhaps because of his present ordral, he had much more white hair
than he did in his (earlier) photographs.

The dauntless face of the Prime Minister who, in his younger days studied Marxism
in France. as had former Prime Minister Pol Pot, who now occupies the position of
highest military commander, appeared even to eeflect the mentality of this country,
although I heard that he has a light case of malaria. He answered each of my
questions crisply, to the point and with clarity. Here I will present only the
characteristics of the war situation as the Prime Minister related them to me.

Prime Minister Samphan and his party, filled with confidence explained: "In 1979
when the Vietnamese invaded, we were forced into a bitter struggle, with a dead-
lock state continuing into 1980. The two years up to now we were in a defensive
posture, but the war situation now has taken a dramatic and favorable turn and our
forces are now on the offensive in each area." Their analysis as to the cause
behind the change in conditions was (1) lowering of fighting spirit of Vietnamese
troops, (2) the military strength of the Vietnamese forces had reached its ceiling,
and (3) supply has become difficult owing to the economic collapse inside of Vietnam.

Next, in regard to how the people are accepting the war as a resistance to invasion,
they told me, showing considerable power, that "At the time, in '79, there were
people with various ideas, but those who were fighting against the invasion were
Kampuchean government forces, and support for them has spread widely through their
results in combat and through political knowledge.” They also said that even
though the Prime Minister is in the jungle, he knows the situation throughout the
country in considerable detail.

"Those who support the Vietnamese troops amount to only one percent of the popula-
tion (60,000, assuming a population of 6,000,000?). Even among the vigilante
groups that they established, there are some who will harbor political officials
and poor farmers will offer supplies to the guerrillas, so that in some form they
can maintain relations with the people."

Later, when I asked a Western correspondent in Bangkok how he perceived these facts,
I was able to hear an interesting explanation that was quite similar. "Heng
Samrin's regime is just a billboard for the Vietnamese. and his so-oalled army has
practically no fighting men. It is not appropriate to think that they are fighting
together, rather they serve as guides for the Vietnamese troops."

"Vietnamese officials have been assigned even to the rural Villages, but the
vigilante groups have been organized actually in order to expose people opposed to
the Vietna‘ese, and sympathizers with the Democratic Kampuchean forces."

There are people who walk for several days from inside the country to the Thai—
Kampuchea border to receive supplies from international aid. It is through the
mouths of such people that one gets a vague profile of what is going on inside of
Kampuchea, one that is different from that shown to foreigners.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

>rime Minister Samphan continued "Vietnam has sent 250,000 troops and 50.000
government officials into Kampuchea, but they have complete control of only one

area. and guerrilla warfare is continuing sporadically throughout the country."

\lso. regarding the strength of the present Democratic Kampuchean Army. he ex-
Army estimate is 40,000). In

plained "There are 60,000 regular troops (the Thai
addition, there are 70,000 guerrillas“ and he reported "The scale is expanding even

more, since we have volunteers.

Recently, it became evident that increasing numbers of Vietnamese who were sent

into the invasion of Kampuchea fear dying in the jungles of a strange land and have
been deserting into Thai territory. It seemed perfectly natural to me that the
Vietnamese soldiers. constantly harrasaed by surprise attacks, would lose their
will to fight in a senseless war that is being protracted. Even in Battamban

Province that I had infiltrated into the jungles cover a vast area and ones range
of vision at best is ten meters. No matter how strong the Vietnamese may be, it is

next :0 impossible to stamp out the guerrillas who know how to survive the jungle
labyrinth, just as the 0.5. forces were unable to deal with the Viet Cong. As for
the recent strategy of the Vietnamese, it appears that they have already given up
on advancing into mountain regions, perhaps because they have realized they have
had more victims than successes, or because they lure the enemy into the flatlands
and wipe them out there. At the same time, it is safe to say that one feature of

the Kampuchean situation these days is that the Kampuchean forces are waging fierce
attacks on the Vietnamese bases that have been stretched out across the flatlands.

The Young Female Democratic Kampuchean Soldier Smiled and Looked Down When She

Faced the Camera

f the soldiers of the Democratic Kampuchean

ho former soldiers of Pol Pot. This may be a subjective opinion. but the

Army, t .
impression I got from direct contact with them was not the "cruel, unjust gang"

reported in the media in Japan. Rather they are n group of simple young people with
surprisingly high moral standards.

Hal‘ of the soldiers are 18 to 25 years old. and many come from poor farmer house—
holds. Khat is striking about such young soldiers is that they become separated
frat :he real fighting men when they get married, and that in Kampuchea, where the
average life span has been about 65 years, at the same time, in Third Horld coun—
tries that are on the road of progress the sire of the population under age fif-
teen is 45 percent (UN data), which testifies to the reality of the situation.

The young soldiers who were raised in a place having no connection with materialis-
tic civilization are filled with the earthy innocence that still remains in the
TohoPu region of Japan. I was impressed by the beauty of their clear eyes shining
in the darkness of their sunburnt faces. This is not only true of the men. Even
the women in the supply units were innocent young girls who would reply confidently
they are serving "for our country's independence" and w0uld smile and look down

when in front of the camera.
An independence was evident among them. That did not match their youthfulness.

During marches. if someone stood up, everyone would follow suit, people would
prepare their two meals a day as they liked in groups of four or five, and when the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Givovac site was selected people would sleep where and when they liked, and all
life was carried On at the squad level. There were no orders or commands, and
perhaps because they had been tempered in the many diversionary actions where they
had to act according to their own judgment, it was unusual to see how disciplined
they actually were.

There were fixed military rules among the soldiers. For example, "one must not
deprive the people of even one grain of rice," in order to prevent soldiers armed
with rifles from shooting, "There must be no arguments among the troops," and
to guard against moral degeneration there was a rule between men and women "women
must not be teased."

Such discipline in the Kampuchean forces was a legacy from the time of the fi_ht
against the Americans and apparently it now permeates them in the war against the
Vietnamese. As far as I could see in their living and in their marches, conversation
between the sexes was modest, and at night no one ever approached the women's

camp. I was repeatedly struck by the kindness among people: lending one of one's
sandals to a barefoot person, showing care to those with malaria, and the like.

As I discovered when I learned that an older man dressed in simple farmers' clothes
and straw sandals was Regimental Commander Nikhom later assigned to defend
Battambang Province, my honest impression was that the Democratic Kampuchean Army
in a country where 90 percent of the population are farmers was none other than an
"army of farmers," and the commanding officers in each area were "good natured
peasants."

The Cambodian Conflict Must Be Reported from the Standpoint of the Side Being
Invaded

To the Japanese, the term "Cambodian Army" raises a dark image. This is because

it inevitably reminds them of the "atrocity problem." Therefore in Japanese public
opinion, there are many who say "Of course, the Vietnamese were wrong to invade
(Cambodia), but the Cambodians themselves (Pol Pot's army) were also cruel." But
if we take the position "The invaders are wrong and so are the invaded," what can
the people of the small country of Kampuchea hold on to in order to survive?

Isn't the current Kampuchean problem one of resistance to the independence of a
small country being swallowed up by the military might of a large one (Vietnam)?
After the Americans left Indochina, the Soviet Union is supporting Vietnam in order
to encroach upon Southeast Asia, and didn't this same Vietnam invade the small
country of Kampuchea in order to swallow it up?

If we follow the thesis of the Shoichi Honda school of journalism that taught us
that "the issues must be examined from the side of those being invaded" during the
Vietnam cauflict, two prerequisite conditions are missing in reports on Kampuchee
up to the present time. One is that the Democratic Government of Kampuchea, which
was founded in 1975 by evading the struggle for ethnic liberation, was under con-
ditions of economic hardship that were more severe than those of Vietnam. The
scale of the bombing raids by American forces was not the same ratio as in Vietnam
for example the all-out bombing of the entire country for 200 days in succession
brought destruction unprecedented in the history of this small nation.

12
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One other factor was that the Kampucheans were also fated to deal with ethnic
liberation, i.e, at the same time as they were liberated, they had to deal with
Vietnam's policy of incorporation (the plan for an "Indochina Federation").
Japanese think that the invasion of Kampuchea was a sudden blitzkrieg, but this
is not so. Until the large-scale invasion by the Vietnamese at the end of 1978,
various schemes were carried out to overthrow the regime of Pol Pot, who would
not agree to the "Indochina Federation" being advocated by Vietnam. The idea was
similar to the Soviet principle of limitation and was intended to bring the mili-
tary forces of Laos and Cambodia under the direction of the Vietnamese.

The Kampuchesns chose to advocate non-alliance and neutrality, and follow a course
of independence separate from Laos not because of an ethnic confrontation, but be-
cause there was an undercurrent of self-reliance, a desire not to entrust again

the liberation gained by the flow of blood. to the domination of a neighboring
country. The border conflict that broke out soon after liberation was not an issue
as to who was the aggressor. It was nothing than a political confrontation and
political discord over whether to be subordinated to Vietnamese control or follow
the path of independence. taking the form of a border conflict.

Inside Kampuchea, as the Vietnam factions were purged and operations designed to
overthrow the government ended in failure, it was decided to throw the Vietnamese
Tank Corps into an all-out offensive as a means of last resort. The Heng Samrin
regime was set up one month prior to the offensive. It was a mere “decoration"
designed to hide the Vietnamese aggression from the eyes of the world.

At the center of the Cambodian "atrocity issue" are punishment of the Vietnam
faction during the turmoil and unrest right after independence, and instances of
bloodshed that took place as retributions against members of the old regime and the
Vietnam faction at the local level. Of course, there were many deaths from
starvation and disease. but they do not exceed the number of deaths in societies
after revolutions that have occurred up to the present-a fact which is gradually
becoming apparent.

I think it is necessary to focus attention on the fact that the source of the "mass
atrocity issue" is Vietnam, the country that was the aggressor at the time. Just
because piles of bones were shown in the environs of Phnom Penh that was under
Vietnamese control at the time does not allow us to judge whether these resulted
from atrocitirs. illness, or starvation. Burial of the dead after liberation
rhanged from individual to mass graves, and if they were disinterred, any number

of human bones could be dug up.

's ‘t t»o far-fetched to think that it was only natural for them to set these up
as "places of atrocity" and show them to foreign newsmen? (Even if these were
"great atrocities." this is for the Kampucheans, not the Vietnamese. to judge.)
These words keenly represent the anger of the Kampucheans on this issue.

Another Kampuchean has said that Vietnam, which has tens of thousands of boat
people abandoning their homeland. is not qualified to judge Kampuchea. It is more
appropriate for them to be concerned with finding means to supply food to the
starvinn people in their own country, than to send their armies into foreign lands.
I don‘t think that any solution can be found by complaining about an unconfirmable

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"111.155 atrocity" unless attention is paid at the same time to the problem as to why
hardships and tragedies continue to plague the many refugees and people in the
"liberated areas."

Regarding the "mass atrocity issue," Prime Minister Samphan openly acknowledged
that there were cases of persons who were put to death without warrant due to
misunderstandings in the process of uncovering Vietnamese spies and disruptive
elements bought by them. and to excess alarm, but at the same time he stated "if
the atrocity reports were true, we and the people probably could not continue this
bitter struggle," and expressed self-reproach and regrets, saying "our being too
late in opening a diplomatic window was a decisive failure for Kampuchea and made
the Vietnamese slander possible."

I cannot forget the words of Ms Ieng Thirith "It is the Vietnamese who are cal-lit-
ting the atrocities. I cannot understand why we, who are the victims of aggression,
are being criticized."

The UN resolution demanding that all foreign troops be withdrawn from Kampuchea is
still being ignored by the Vietnamese aggressors. Reverting to the principle of
self-determination of peoples. isn't observance of this resolution itself the first
step towards solving the Kampuchean issue?

COPYRIGHT: Kobunsha 1981

6093
C50: MOS/208 END

11:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY