FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10076
27 October 1981

Translation

ECONOMIC FORECASTING FOR THE DEVELOPMENT

OF LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTEMS

By

S.A. Sarklsyan. at al.

' FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infOrmation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlin 5, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are 'applied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HNTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10076
27 October 1981

ECONOMIC FORECASTING FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTEMS

Moscow EKONOMICHESKOYE PROGNOZIROVANIYE RAZVITIYA BOL'SHIKH TBRHNICHES-
KIKH SYSTEM in Russian 1977 (signed to press 10 Jun 77) pp 1-318

[Book by S.A. Sarkisyan, D.E. Starik, P.L. Akopov, 2.8. Minayev and
v.1. Kaspin, written under the editorial review of Doctor of Economic
Sciences V.A. Lisichkin, Izdatel'stvo Mashinostroyeniye, 3,800 copies,
318 pages]

CONTENTS

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

CHAPTER 1: SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF LARGE
TECHNICAL SYSTEMS

1.1. The Scientific and Technical Revolution and Large Technical
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

1.2. General Principles of Research and Analysis of the BTS . . . 8
1.3. Particular Features in the Development of Large Technical

Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
1.4. The Life Cycle and Scheme of the Analysis Process of a BTS . 22

CHAPTER 2: FORECASTING THE DEVELOPMENT 0? LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTEMS

2.1. Functions and Tasks of Forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.2. A Classification of Forecasting Methods . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.3. Expert Forecasting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
2.6. Forecasting on the Basis of the Extrapolation and *

Interpolation of Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
2.5. Probability and Statistical Methods in Forecast Research . . 95
2.6. Composite Forecasting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126

CHAPTER 3: CRITERIA FOR ESTIMATING EFFECTIVENESS OF LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTEMS

3.1. Principles for Formulating the Effectiveness Crfteria of BTS 134
3.2. Economic Effectiveness Criteria and Types of Economic
Effects of HTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145

- a - [II - USSR - P000]
[III - USSR - 3 F000]

FOR‘OFFMJAI.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

CHAPTER 4: FORECASTING THE COST ESTIMATES 0? LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTDiS

10.1. Forming the BTS Cost Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
6.2. Basic Principles and Methods for Forecasting Cost Estimates 175
5.3. Basic Patterns in the For-ation and the Forecasting Methods
for the Costs of NIB. and on of Large Technical. Systems . . 216
4.4. Basic Formative Patterns and Methods for Forecasting the
Costs of Serial Production of the BTS and Their Functional
Elements..........................225
6.5. Basic Formative Patterns and Forecasting Methods for us
OperatingExpenditures...................246

CHAPTER 5: METMODS 0F DETERMINING THE ECOWIC EFFECTIVENESS 0? LARGE
TECIINICAL SYSTDIS

5.1. General Characteristics of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
5.2. The Dynamic Method for Determining National Economic
EffectivenessoftheB’i‘s..................254

5.3. Approximate Method for Dcteraining National Economic Effect
(FrontheExanpleof theA'l’S) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272

5.4. Dynamic Method for Determining Cost Accounting Effect of ms 277
5.5. Approximate Method for Determining Cost Accounting Effect
(FrontheExampleofanATS)................280
5.6. Determining the Limit Price of an Aircraft in the Stage of
ItsDevelopment......................281
5.7. Estinating Economic Effectiveness of us Functional Elements 282

Bibliography................................. 289

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Annotation] The book examines the basic principles and methods of economic fore-
casting. as well as the specific featurec of their application to the class of large
technical systens (8T8). The development patterns of technology are shown under the
conditions of the present-day scientific and technical revolution, the reasons for
the occurrence of large technical systems and their distinguishing features and
classification. Also taken up are the basic concepts dealing with systems, their
life cycle and the principles of technical and economic analysis. The methods are
given for forecasting the development of the BTS, the criteria and methods for

assessing the economic effectiveness of the systems, the models and methods of fore-
casting their values.

The book is designed for scientific workers and engineers whose sphere of profes-

sional interests includes the questions of forecasting and an economic assessment
of scientific and technical progress. It can also be useful for instructors and
students in machine building VUZes.

17 tables, 50 illustrations, and a bibliography of 50 titles.

LIST 0? STANDARD TRANSLATIONS

1. taktiko-tekhnicheskiye trebovaniya-tactical-technical requirements
2. opytno-konstruktorskaya razrabotka-prototype design work
3. opytnays sistema-prototype system
b. ekspluatatsiya--operation
5. aeriynoye proizvodstvo—-seria1 production
6. sebestoimost'--production cost
7. tekuehchiye zatraty--current expenses
8. kapital'nyye vlozheniya-capital investments
9. stroitel'no-montazhnyye raboty-construction-installation work
10. nauchno—issledovatel'skiye raboty--scientific research
11. avanproyekt-~preliminary project, design
12. tekhnicheskoye zadaniye-technical requirement, specification
13. tekhnicheskiye predlozheniya--technica1 proposals
14. eskiznyy pruyekt--draft design
15. prorabotka--study
l6. mauetirovaniye--mock-up construction
17. tekhnologiya--technology, production method
18. opytnyy obrazuts--prototype
l9. rabochiye chertezhi--working drawings

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIJOFFKJALIEHEONLY

FOREWORD

A most important condition for increasing the efficiency of social production and
improving product quality. as was pointed out by the 25th CPSU Congress, is an ac-
celerated pace of scientific and technical progress based upon comprehensive pro-
grams [1]. The comprehensive programs and the long-range development plans compiled
on their basis for the interrelated national economic sectors linked together by

the canon end result of research, design and production activities, are an effec-
tive means for ensuring the planned and time—coordinated development of science,
technology and production. The developing of the comprehensive scientific and tech-
nical development programs and long-term plans involves the necessity of surmounting
a whole series of ambiguities.

Among them one would mention the ambiguities relative to: the development goals;
the means and methods of achieving the goals; the resources ensuring development;

the total development effectiveness; the comparative effectiveness of possible de-
velopment areas under the conditions of future resource constraints. The first two
types of ambituities can be overcome by special methods based, as a rule. on non-
formal (heuristic) and formal (extrapolation) forecast assessments.

The theoretical and practical aspects of forecasting can be found in a large number
of articles and monographs published in the USSR and abroad. These studies take up

a large range of questions related to the gnoseology and methodology of forecasting,
the results of the practical implementation of individual methods are given, and the

questions of organizing forecast activities are examined. However, it must be
pointed out that many questions in the theory and practice of forecasting still re-
main debated.

At the same time the existing publications virtually do not deal with the method-
ological aspects of forecasting the resources which ensure scientific and technical
development as well as the questions related to assessing the economic consequences
of scientific and technical progress. Active control of scientific and technical
progress becomes effective only under conditions where, along with assessing its
results. consideration is given to the entire spectrum of resources essential for
carrying out one or another direction in scientific and technical development.

The problems of forecasting and assessing economic effectiveness from scientific

and technical progress assume particular acuteness in line with the necessity of
managing the development processes of large technical systems (BTS).

FOR OFIWCLAL.USE(NVLY
INNIOFFKJAL.USE(MVUY

The DIS are a direct consequence of the present-day scientific and technical revolu-
tion which made a start to the age of the conquering of space, the use of atomic
and nuclear energy, computers, the automation of production processes and so forth.
In being marked by great complexity, the BTS require significant rescurce outlays
on their creation and series production. At the same time the use of the BTS for
their specific purpose creates an opportunity of obtaining an economic effect in
various spheres of human activity. From this arises the problem of correlating the
resources consumed in the various stages of the life cycle of the systems with the
effect obtained during the period of their operation. The solving of this problem
should correlate two aspects of scientific and technical development for the BTS,
namely the technical and economic, and this is essential for drawing up the long-
range plans.

The book presented for the reader's consideration attempts to systematize an examin-
ation of the methods of choosing alternatives for the development of the BTS from
the viewpoint of their integrated technical and economic evaluation. In consider-
ing that the BTS properties which determine the specific methods of their economic
forecasting are most inherent to aircraft systems, a majority of the applied ques-
tions is examined in terms of aircraft systems of various classes and purposes.

The book has been written using materials from the theoretical research by the
authors and from an analysis and generalization of Soviet and foreign literature on
the questions raised. The leader of the author collective is Doctor of Economic
Sciences. Prof S. A. Sarkisyan. Chapter 1 was written by S. A. Sarkisyan; Points
2.1, 2.3 and 2.6 of Chapter 2 were written by Candidate of Economic Sciences, Docent
E. S. Hinayev; Points 2.2 and 2.6 by Candidate of Technical Sciences, Docent V. I.
Kaspin; Points 2.4.5 and 2.5 jointly by V. I. Kaspin and Candidate of Economic Sci-
ences, Docent P. L. Akopov; Chapter 3 by S. A. Sarkisyan and Doctor of Economic Sci-
ences, Prof D. B. Starik; Chapter 4 by S. A. Sarkisyan and P. L. Akopov; Chapter 5
by D. E. Starik.

The authors would like to thank Senior Science Associate Ye. V. Tabachneya, Engrs
Yu. A. Teplov and A. S. Chernaya for the help given in preparing the manuscript for
publication.

The book does not claim to be an exhaustive exposition of all the aspects of the
posed problem, and for this reason the authors would be grateful for critical com-
ments and proposals which should be sent to the following address: Izdatel'stvo
Mashinostroyeniye, No 3 First Basmannyy Lane, 3-78, Moscow, 107885.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FI1C1A1.USE1ONLY

CHAPTER 1: SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF LARGE TECHNICAL
. SYSTEMS

l.l. Tie Scientific and Technical Revolution and Large Technical Systems

The devnlopment of technology in recent decades has shown a transition from techni-
cal devices to technical systems and this to a significant degree determines the
essence of the present-day scientific and technical revolution.

The advances made in individual scientific and technical sectors, in nuclear physics
and power, electronics and computers, aircraft and missile construction could be at—
tained only by the creation of systems.

If fne bears in mind modern science as a whole, in it one could scarcely find a con-
cept capable of rivaling the word "systam' in terms of breadth of use. Biologists
and physicists, cyberneticians and psychologists, cosmologists and economists ana-
lyze and model a system.

The same thing can be said about modern technology. Not so long ago specialists of
a corresponding specialty designed means of communications or transport and then.
depending upon the specific technical parameters of this equipment, developed
auxiliary facilities which would ensure their successful use. The present develop-
ment stage of technology is characterized by the designing not of individual pieces
of equipment but rather technical systems which incorporate all the elements essen-
tial for carrying out a certain complex function.

A modern aviation or missile complex, a production control system, a telephone net-
work serving millions of subscribers or a large power system cauld be treated only
by considering the complex interaction of the entire system of operations and dif-
ferent types of equipment. All this equipment must be designed simultaneously, in
a strict relationship subordinate to carrying out the basic function, and an omis-
sion in any of the elements can tell decisively on the entire system.

Large technical systems are the result of the action of fully automating the system
functioning processes and the development of computers. The increased scale of ac-
tivities performed by equipment, the complexity of the problems solved and at the
same time the necessity of a more rapid pace of decision taking have led to a situ-
ation where the historically formed systems of control and data processing have been
unable to promptly produce optimum solutions. In particular this is characteristic
for systems with great operating speeds where a delay in taking an essential deci-
sion can lead to catastrophic consequences. Aircraft are a vivid example of such
systems.

FOR Oi!ﬂ(1Al.USElMVLY
FINICHﬂWCJAL USHE<NVLY

The complexity and diversity of the problems solved and the specific conditions of
realizing them have led to a sharp rise in the number of specifications of the
flight and surrounding medium which influenced the course of carrying out the set
task. As a result over the last quarter of a century the number of aircraft instru-
ments has risen by more than 10—fold while the time needed to perform aircraft con-
trol operations, due to the sharply increased flight speed, has been reduced by 6-7-
fold. At the same time human response speed to equipment signals even with intense
training has remained on the previous level (0.1-0.3 seconds).

As a consequence of the simultaneous execution of a range of involved functions,
the necessity has arisen of automating the aircraft control process. Onboard com-
puter equipment has appeared on the aircraft.

The process of automating the various functions performed by aircraft has developed
particularly intensely in aviation where the speed factor has always played a cru—
cial role. Here is a characteristic example from the development history of combat
aircraft demonstrating the need to develop complex technical systems. The combat
aircraft employed in World War II had machine gun and canon weapons and aiming was
done visually. Due to the speed differences of a bomber and a fighter. the latter
had an opportunity to execute several combat turns for attacking the target. How-
ever with an increase in speed the number of possible attacks declined sharply.

Analogous trends can also be traced in civil aviation. Thus, in an air traffic con-
trol system, with an increase in the amount of traffic and the number of aircraft

in the air, the ensuring of flight safety by traditional methods became impossible.
For example, for solving the problems involved in figuring the optimum aircraft
routes for all the centrally scheduled trips observing a number of constraints such

as the capacity of the routes, altitudes and so forth, it would be necessary to ex-
amine more than 101°° variations and choose the optimum one.

The latter can be carried out only on a basis of modern computers by creating auto-
mated flight control systems. It must be emphasized that the most important control
functions in such systems and namely assessing the developing situation and decision
taking, as before are carried out directly by people but the accelerated process of
transforming and processing the increasing information flows as well as calculating
optimum solutions using computers have become a qualitatively new phenomenon. what
are the particular features which put large technical systems in a special class of

systems? They are:

l) The complexity of the structure and behavior of the system, that is, the pres—

ence of such complex intertwined and overlapping relationships between the changing
parameters of the system whereby a change in one variable leads to a change in many
others; the presence of complex and overlapping ties between the elements in the

system;

2) The irregularity of effects from the external environment and the irregularity
of the very system's conduct which leads to the necessity of decision taking under
conditions of ambiguity and sometimes active counteraction;

3) The presence of subsystems of an hierarchical and functional nature having their
own particular goals from which the overall goal of the BTS is formed;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE10NLY

a) A high degree of automation making it possible by utilizing the computers to
create flexible control, encompass complex dynamic processes with an enormous num-
ber of parameters and optimize the decisions being taken.

With all the diversity and complexity of the problems solved by the 318, it is also
possible to isolate features for their systematizstion and classification.

1. The specific features or the degree of purposefulness and specificness of the
system; the degree of clarity and certainty in the formulation of the goal; the
degree of its formalization, the range of goals (that is, the number and diversity
of goals) and the hierarchy of goals. It is possible to isolate single-goal sys-
tems. that is, systems designed to solve one single task, multigoal systems for
solving multiple tasks and functional systems which solve an individual aspect or
facet of a general task.

2. The degree of integrity. that is, the degree of the permanent dependence of the
component parts. elements and processes of the examined systems or stages and the
directions of the tasks being carried out. Integrity is characterised by the number
and diversity of harmonious links, component parts and elements of the system. by
the degree of determinism in their reciprocal conduct and functioning and by other
features.

3. Complexity or the degree of objective complexity; this is determined by the
total number of elements and links between them, from the diversity of elements and
links, from the number of hierarchical levels, from the number of functional sub-
systems and from other features. Depending upon the number of elements, the charac-
ter of the links and the conduct it is possible to isolate the following systems:

a) Simple or small--systems with a limited number of elements (10-10“), the links
and conduct of which are a determined nature;

b) Complex or large--systems with a large number of elements (10”-107) with a mass
variable number of links; the behavior of such systems represents a random process
which moves toward a certain limit, and for this reason such systems are of a prob-
ability sort; characteristic for then is a high degree of automation for the control
processes; in particular, modern aerorocket. space-missile and other aircraft sys-
tems belong in such systems;

c) The ultracomplex or self-developing--systems with a number of elements up to
1030 in which successful adaptation to randomness will be carried out by the random-
ness of the internal structure.

a. Controllability--the degree of automation of control over the functions carried
out. According to this feature it is possible to establish three basic classes of
the BTS: I. Information retrieval systems (IPS). II. Automated control systems.
III. Automated national-scale control systems.

Automatic telephone systems would be put in the systems of class I. Close to them
in terms of the problems solved are the information retrieval systems which use an
electronic computer to retrieve scientific and technical information. here the com-
puter is the central element of such systems and provides the link between the con-
sumers (subscribers) and the information sources. Approximately the same principle

FOIIOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has been used to develop and operate at present systems which locate free hotel
rooms, sell air tickets (the Sirens automated ticket sales and reservation system
serves 250 cities) and so forth. The data of Table 1.1 give some idea of this class
of large systems in which the complexity of data transmission and processing de-
pends essentially upon the number of subscribers (users).

Name of System

Retrieval of scientific
and technical information

Table 1.1

   
     
   
 
      
     
     
   
      
     
 

 
 
 
  

Repository of Information

Subscribers Sources

Scientific workers Libraries, repositories

of scientific and tech-
nical papers, microfilm
holdings and so forth

Hotels

Enterprises under the
ministry

Visitor

Leadership, administration
of sector or ministry

Hotel reservation

Obtaining information on
course of carrying out
production plans.
material-technical supply

and so forth

Air reservation Aeroflot ticket service

which has tickets and

I monthly flight schedules

A common feature of the class II systems is traffic control where a person acts as
an operator controlling a process. as an inspector or a diagnostician in a closed
control loop both for the entire system and its individual subsystems. Among such
systems one could put:

Aeroflot reservation clerk

a) An automated air traffic, take-off and landing control system which ensures
safety in carrying out scheduled, training and other flights within the limits of a
given airport and simultaneously maximum utilization of the runway capacity;

b) The control system for a large aircraft or space device;

c) An automated control system for production processes (production processes in
petrochemistry. the cement industry. the extraction of metals from ores, the rolling
of metals and so forth;

d) The control system for energy or transport systems and so forth.

A basic feature of the class III systems is the use of class-II systems which have
varying functional purpose within a single system unified by a common goal. Depend-
ing upn the degree of detailing for the component elements and functions of the
class II systems. by a class 111 system one can understand, for example, both the
entire automated air traffic control system encompassing the territory of an entire
country as well as an individual subsystem concerned solely with the questions of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dependable communications between the airfields comprising the air traffic service.
The following basic features of the class III systems can be established:

a) Control of the processes is significantly more complicated than in the class II
systems; entire complexes and associations of the class I and II systems which
carry out different functional tasks can serve as objects of control;

b) The hierarchy of the system's structure and the higher the level of hierarchy
the less contact with the specific functions performed by the lower rank systems;

c) The presence of class I information retrieval systems as data sources;

d) Control of the major operations using various automatic data processing and dis-
play devices.

Thus, the basic feature of complex systems is information processes linking the in-
dividual elements into a single whole for ensuring optimum control. For precisely
this reason a system is not a simple combination of its own subsystems but rather
possesses particular properties which none of its individual parts has.

Cybernetics, information theory and algorithm theory are concerned with the ques-
tions of controlling the BTS. However. in the process of developing the BTS, a
multiplicity of important problems arises going beyond cybernetics and the other
above-mentioned sciences. One of them consists in creating an economically optimum
system in terms of its set functions. The development of science and technology
provides an opportunity to create a great diversity of technical devices or elements
of the BTS capable of carrying out qualitatively uniform functions. Due to the dif-
ferences in the physical processes which ensure the realization of a certain func-
tion, these devices possess different functional characteristics and a design or
technological appearance, they consume different types of energy and so forth. The
listed features determine, on the one hand, the operational efficiency of the tech-
nical devices and. on the other, the cost of their creation. production and opera-
tion.

The diversity of functionally equivalent elements for the BTS gives rise to an even
greater diversity in the variations of constructing it as each of these is capable
of realizing the set behavior. The variations of the BTS synthesized in a certain
initial range of devices or elements which are indistinguishable in terms of func-
tional features will possess their own characteristics of cost and effectiveness.
The latter gives rise to the problem of selecting a preferential alternative out of
the multiplicity of systems which realize the set behavior. The choice of alter-
natives can be made objectively only under the condition that this is done on the
basis of analyzing the economic consequences of developing the BTS and the entire
spectrum of expenditures on their creation, production and operation.

The problem of selecting an economically optimum system is solved by the methods of
general systems theory and systems analysis, the theory of the economic effective-
ness of capital investments and new technology and scientific and technical fore-

casting.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.2. General Principles of Research and Analysis of the BTS

The principles for the research and analysis of large technical systems are based
upon the methodology of studying complex objects and this comprises the foundation
of so-called systems theory. General systems theory as a concept was proposed in
the 1930's by the Austrian biologist 1.. von Bertslanffy at a philosophical seminar
at the University of Chicago. He developed an "organismic" viewpoint in proposing
to view living organisms not as aggregates of cells which, in turn. consisted of
colloids and organic molecules but as an organized unified system.

An exasination of objects representing a certain aggregate of interrelated and inter,-
dependent elements as a unified (unifiable) single whole for carrying out a complex
function has been termed a systems approach. The systems approach gained universal
recognition and was fruitfully employed in a study and analysis of various material
objects and processes of their development due to its dialectical essence. This
approach represents the extension of well-known methods of Marxist dialectics which
view nature as a single related whole in which phenomena are interdetermined and
interdependent to economic, biological, cybernetic, technical and other systems
which are component parts of the material world.

The methodology of the systens approach is the unifying principle which makes it
possible to extend its principles to diverse scientific areas. The methodology is
based upon the principles of the integrity of the studied object and the principle
of isomorphism. The principles of integrity are related to the hierarchy of the
system's structure and make it possible to represent the complexity of the studied
system in a broken down form. The principle of isomorphism1 is used for an analy-
sis of the laws which explain the inner similarity of objects and structures of dif-
ferent nature and purpose.

In the sphere of technology, a system approach has been effective due to the fact
that modern technology, as has already been pointed out, in ‘its essence is systems
technology as:

a) Its basic object is various types of systems (aviation, missile, space, produc-
tion control systems, comunications systems and so forth);

b) The process of creating technical systems is itself a system in which is car-
ried out the coordinated work of numerous prototype design. scientific research,
production and operating organizations which, in turn, represent independent sys-
tems;

c) The process of producing the technical systems or their construction is carried
out in a certain system and, as a rule, this process involves numerous enterprises
which are elements of a complex production system:

 

lBy isomorphism one understands a uniform similarity between objects from the view-
point of their structure, the relationships between the structural elements as
well as between the objects and the external environment.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d) The process of the functioning of technical systems is a system in which there
is an interaction not only between the elements of the technical system but also be-
tween the different specialized systems.

Since the main distinguishing feature of a large system is the close link of all its
elements and parts, a systems approach to the analysis of a BIS means a considera-
tion of these relationships, a study of the individual objects as structural parts

of more complex systems and the ascertaining of the role of each of them in the
overall process of the functioning of the BTS.

Let us examine certain concepts of systems theory which are most often used in the
text below. For this let us formulate again the concept of a “system" and isolate

its basic properties which distinguish a system from any other aggregate of ele-
ments.

In general systems theory, by a system one understands an aggregate of objects or
elements which possess certain properties and are interconnected and by these inter-
connections the system is unified into a single whole. The system possesses a cer-
tain structure which allows a breaking down of the hierarchy of elements. It inter-
acts with an external environment and can be viewed as an element of a broader sys-
tem that is superior to it. The structure of a system is such that its elements
possess the properties of a subsystem in relation to it. The system is designed to
perform a certain activity which can be broken up into a number of interrelated op-
erations. From the definition of a system it follows that the most important con-
cepts in general systems theory are the element, operation. external environment,
structure and hierarchy.

An element of a system is what lies at the basis of the hierarchy in breaking down
the system and cannot be broken down further.

In accord with the role that the system's elements play in the process of achieving
the set result, the so—called system central element2 is isolated among them (the
elements) and by this one understands the entity (the aggregate of interrelated
elements) capable of performing an elementary operation.

An operation is an aggregate of actions aimed at achieving a certain goal. In the
process of performing an operation. the central elerent will be linked to other
parts of the system and the interaction with them carries out the operation. How-
ever, the characteristics of the central element have a determining impact on the
functional properties of the entire system.

Any system operates in a certain environment. The environment is the aggregate of
all elements where a change in the properties of these influences the system as well
as those objects the properties of which are altered as a result of the system's

2In certain instances, the term "central subsystem" is used. For example, the air-
craft is the central element (subsystem) of a system of aircraft which wOuld in-
clude the aircraft and the ground facilities such as the airfield, controls, com-
munications and so forth.

FOR 0F1HCIALI£§E¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

behavior. For this reason, both the system as a whole as well as each element in
the system have inputs which characterize the actions of the environment on the sys-

tem and its elements and outputs which characterize their effects on the environ-
.ent I

The interaction of the system with the environment as well as that of the system's

elements with one another can be represented by structural models or functional
models.

A structural model. depending upon the aim of analyzing the system, can be of three
types: an external model in which the system is represented in a canonical form and
all its links with the environment are expressed by inputs and outputs; a hierarchi-
cal model in which the system is broken down by levels according to the principle of
the subordination of inferior levels to superior ones; an internal model in which
the composition and relationship between the system's elements are shown.

The functioning of the system can be represented by the following: by a model of
the system's life cycle characterizing the processes involved in the system's exist-
ence from the genesis of the idea of its creation to its "death" (the ceasing of
functioning); by a model of the system's operation representing the aggregate of
processes involved in the system‘s functioning for its basic purpose.

All these models characterize the system's method of action (the method of existence
and functioning) in space and time.

Let us examine the particular features of
canonical models of systems. As is shown
in Fig. 1.1, the basic input vector compo-
nents are: z1-—the information input which
controls the activity of the subsystem or
is subject to processing by the system;
x2-the energy input which ensures the de-
velopment of the system or maintains it at
the set level of productivity; x;-the
material or object input which represents
the flow of materiel to be processed by the
system (the material means for the opera-
tions performed by the system); xu-the
FIB- 1.1. Canonical model of a personnel input which provides the system

technical system with inputs (outputs): with personnel prepared f°r participating
x1(y1)--information; x2(y2)--energy; in the functioning processes.
:3E;§;__::g:::ga::::?)EE§E:::::::: The designated inputs represent organized

’ inputs and their presence is ensured by the
purposeful activities of people. In addi-
tion to the organized inputs there are also unorganized ones which, as a rule. im-
pede the system's activities or these might be called the disturbance inputs x3 com-
ing from the environment (interference, noise, constraints and so forth). Thus,
the input of a BTS is a vector

.,environment

3333‘

 

F - (x1. :2. X3. xu. 1:3).

10

IN)! OFTWCJAL USEZCMULY
FOR OFTICTAL USEZCNNLY

Each input will have several components so
x1 - (x11), 1 - l, 2, ..., n; j - 1, 2, ..., m;

x13 - (2118), g - 1, 2, ..., p,
where i--the type of input; j--nomenclature of input; g--source of input.

The result of the system's activities, the output vector y; can be characterized by
analogous components:

y - (Y1. Y2. Ya. ya. ya).

where y1-the information output characterizing the result of the system's informa-
tion activity;

y2-the energy output characterizing the transfer of energy from the system to
the environment and the loss of the system's elements (the exhaustion of
their life, the nonconformity to demands or flaws) as well as production
was tea;

y3--the object output characterizing the result of the purposeful action of
the system (what the system produced);

yu-the personnel output characterizing the movement of personnel;

y3--the output disturbance characterizing the system's ancillary actions on
the environ-ent.

Obviously, as is the case for the inputs, the output vector components can be rep-
resented in the form

Y1 - (3'11). 1 ' 1) 2o ”-9 k; .1. 19 2’ "as L;

Yij - (yijg). s - l. 2. .... s.
where i--type of output; j--nomenclature of output; g-purpose of output.

The characteristic inputs and outputs of a passenger airplane as a system are shown
in Table 1.2. An analogous approach to systems analysis using canonical models can
also be applied to production systems. The characteristic inputs and outputs of a
system in terms of the production of large technical systems are shown in Table 1.3.
From Tables 1.2 and 1.3 it follows that, regardless of the difference in the struc-
ture and the functions of the designated systems, their inputs and outputs keep
fully within the given input and output classification. The latter, in particular,

means that the compared systems. regardless of their differing nature, are isomor-
phic from the viewpoint of the external structure.

A study of a canonical model in terms of a specific system makes it possible to
disclose the relationships of the systems. The inputs and outputs here can be ex-

pressed by parameters which comprise the system's functional aodel (the model of the
operation).

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060053-3

2007/02109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

   

audaquIO
a“ scam wanna.
nuance “Aaoauua
nsnoa no uncuuov
case» no voono
«an maﬁna0no
:« o>a3 soonm

                 

INJR‘OFT1CJAL USIICN‘LX

vascuco
auouuQBHOM aneun
"lanoan a“ cow;
nonsuana we can.
Iguanas “muouosau
a: mauvao: anew»

nuance Hangman nun

 
       

nouunnuauwan

 

~.A oanoﬂ

                     

wands
luoaoooE
kayo no

Au

 

         

a¢uo>u noun Joya

u:u«Au no ouau
nuance humuOQEUH Ion co doauqauouau

ﬂoadonuoa

oua>uoa ecaouu
.zbuo asnuam .uauaauaoou usuaam

3> .3:
Hoaaoauom

zquH on 160
o wuuuuu uuuoavou cu ooaan

              

anon-ca 1a» "cow-nus on»
ouauuaaon no use wuahuuao
can hang ”su “unnuam osu no

unauaan uo ouuun
.8 33a mo 31:.

nquu on ‘66
anus—you uni—aloe
wcanaaa «oauuaaa
coauuwa>un use
nonueou vasoum
scum coauqlu0uuu
235.5 “35...
naou uuonoxau

_> .5"
couuqluoucu

nuaauso van musacu uuuuouu< nomcommmm no oanz

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

      

     

 

acauuusu
laws on use no
a: can: on mucus
luau m.§uuu>u no
waou “unusaa0iuw
:« donned hwuoau

      

    

Anna
Ina vascuwv muao
cue: unwouanou
new manna «nan.
“gamed uswuaunauv
ucuvuxo vac Anna
uca vcaouwv aoam

      

     

                
 

         

coauacuuwov cu
nouo>unov ownuo

u:¢ apouaoannm usnuao

 

                
 

                   
       

vouuuoo
on cu owuuu
ecu unawauwwum

        

   

wsacn

muscuso

MO

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ClA-RDP02-00060R000400060053-3

2007102109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
loans. auo>qu
non «nauoouuaoo
Inna mo noauwaou>
unuusvoun O>Hu
-oouov no vaguso

      

moaned Hocuoouoa
muuucdiuu vocuddn
nova: Hoaaouuom

 

        

:uu0w on can
“wauuwou weave:
Ila uncauuncou
HQUddOﬂOuOOuoﬂ
uuoaoauuw as»
acuuauoouauwa new

                  

                  

onuuauouco
an mcuuuouu vca
uuunuuuuou new
Inwavon Huccounua
occuuwuuuauonn moouuauwuco
HuoachOu :« ua sue: new
oowcanu :uooou0mzs vocuauu Hocaonuom

      

oocunusuuaa

man weaosvoum

coauwu
laconuo unaunhuno
Iona coaualhounu

"auuoaaoov uuoa
Ion mouooauuuuou

wound: nouuuav
noun «33:33»
L: B. 533.25
uuaeoua “acouu no anou ”aucuuuau
scanned“ .mﬂoau vac uuoanwsvo
nauuuoov uuoucnuoa coauuavoum no one;

uuouuuua vooavOun
onu wcauauomo

mo nunsauu as» no
:OHuQBMOmaa "can;
law no newquHOM
wnu :o cauuaau0u
new uuaowuuouuwo
Iago uuuuoocunco
van Hwo«=&00u
magnum usuuuquu
lacuna: uuuauu

                              

«anyway uzMuHu
uOu woman was
ovwauu macauw>

. Hoau “maouuauoao
:ouuunvoua new
huunuoood uwuz
van nouns cauuuon
00:0

uao sun: ouuaaou
than unqusuumu cu occuuaaauumau
Isaac now anon» .aucuvuusn .uaﬂa
Inuuwuuomn swam Imasvo coauosv0um

now musauao new nuamum no new:

            

                

                 

manna
mcuuuuuucouaao
ha vousuuouvuua
ooauuuuu “wanna
«you» “uuuuu

luwu tonoucah

    

nuamuao

                 

                
    

wcauuauucou
loan as wanna
luuuacua auqcs
can woumaaonmu
.ouuaa nauoavOHQ
vuzaacuuuaaom
van «HuanOuwi
.ouusvoun aux «Hausa
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the process of systems analysis and forecasting it is important to know now only
their link with the environment but also their structure. In considering that the
different natured systems are isomorphic in terms of their inner structure, let us
examine the principle of constructing hierarchical models for the inner structure of
systems using the example of aircraft systems.

In the general instance an aircraft system is divided into subsystems of a certain
rank (Fig. 1.2, a). In the diagram so is a certain supersystem (for example, the
transport system) in which the aircraft system is included as a subsystem (a system
of the first rank).

The system of aircraft 82 consists of several aircraft subsystems 821, ..., 52m and
several support subsystems for their functioning s2(.+1), _... 52(n+n), which, in
turn, will be the subsystems of the second rank. For example, in an air transport
system the aircraft systems of the second rank can be the air transport systems in
the economic regions of the nation while the support systems for their functioning
are the air traffic control system, the system for the development and overhaul of
aircraft, the material and technical supply system and so forth.

The second-rank aircraft systems, in turn, can be broken down into the third-rank
systems which also will make up several aircraft subsystems and several intermedi-
ate support subsystems for their functioning. Here the latter will not be identical
with the support systems of a higher rank.

Finally, each third-rank aircraft system can be broken down into several aircraft
systems and support systems of the fourth rank. Such a breaking down can lead to
ensuring the identicalness of the inferior rank systems.

If the systems 82,11. ..., s2mi are identical in terms of the composition of the
aircraft and their functions. t n the inner structure of each of these identical
systems can be represented by a single scheme (Fig. 1.2, b). An identical aircraft
system includes the aircraft (aircrafts), the take-off system (airfield). the con-
trol system and the repair and support system. The aircraft can be divided into
expendable and reusable subsystems and so forth.

An analysis and assessment '5 the systems for the purposes of forecasting their de-
velopment are the basis for the scientific choice and disclosure of the relation-
ship between the goals of the system. the means of achieving them and the resources.
The basic goal of systems analysis is the taking of a decision on the ways to im-
prove the system or process. A decision describes the difference between two states
and determines the method for moving the system to a new state. The implementation
of the decision is the process of moving the system to a new state.

In terms of the contents of the analysis problem, systems can be divided into four
types: the problems of optimizing the designed parameters of the system; the prob-
lems of selecting a preferential alternative (the selection of a preferential sys-
tem); the problems of allocating the assigned resources in the stage of making up
the complex systems (in forming a "mix“) under the conditions of an ambiguous situ-
ation; the problems of allocating the resources available to the systems (for
achieving the goals of the operation in a specific situation). The first three
problems are the problems of developing the systems and the last is the problem of

using them.

14

IN3R‘OFFTCJAI.USEE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

b)

subsystem )1 subsystem q
8

Fig. 1.2. Tree of system's hierarchical structure for aircraft

Key: 1--Aircraft systems of rank n; 2-System rank; 3--Support
system of rank n; b-—Aircraft; S--Reusable subsystem;
6—-Disposable subsystem; 7-Take-off systen (airfield);
8--COntrol system; 9-Repair and support system

The process of analyzing large technical systems includes the following areas of
research.

1. Determining the ultimate goals of the system.

2. The working Out of alternative methods and means for achieving the set goals
and variations of systems from which the most preferential must be selected.

3. Ascertaining the required resources to implement the designated alternatives
and the constraints on them.

b. An analysis of the interaction of the goals, alternatives and resources, in-
cluding interrelated events such as: the selection and formation of the evaluation
criterion and the constraints which define the area of possible decisions; a compar-
ison of alternatives by a criterion, including an optimization of the decision with
an analytical form of a criterion; defining the ambiguities and an analysis of their
influence on the calculation results; judgments complimenting the analytical analy-
sis; taking a decision on the choice of the preferential variation of the system
considering additional information on possible situations, interacting systems,
available resources and so forth. If the results are unsatisfactory, then a deci-

sion is made to carry out a new cycle of analysis with a revision of the set goals
and the elaboration of new alternatives and resource constraints.

The obtained decisions are the basis for elaborating the specific, operational pro-
gram and economic forecasts. The integrity of the compiled forecasts will be

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

largely determined by the objectivity of the criteria used as the basis for select-
ing the systems and the considered constraints, by the correctness of the formal
methods, by the depth of analysis and so forth. However, along with this of impor-
tant significance will be how complete and thorough analysis is given to the pat-
terns inherent to the development processes of the BTS and the relationship of these
processes to the overall development trends of science and technology in related
spheres of activity employing different systems as well as in the sectors of materi-
al production.

1.3. Particular Features in the Development of Large Technical Systems

Large technical systems are developing systems. In studying the BTS it is essential
to bear in mind two aspects of systems development: genetic, that is, the study of

a system in its development, and functional or the study of the actual actions of s

system and its functioning. From the viewpoint of the methodology in economic fore-
casting of interest is the genetic analysis. that is, the examination of the origin

and particular features of a system's development.

There are two approaches to explaining the nature of the processes in scientific and
technical development: ontological and teleological. The sense of the former ap-
proach is that the development processes are viewed as a manifestation of a self-
developing synamic process or the result of activities by a self-developing system.
In other words, scientific and technical progress is viewed as a response to the
opportunities and problems confronting science and technology. Here is assumed the
presence of factors which are internally inherent to science and technology and
cause the process of scientific and technical development.

The supporters of this view refer to the fact that the inventions which have caused
major consequences are accidental and not determined by external causes, or, in any
event, are determined by certain concealed factors which are outside the sphere of
action of the main driving forces of history (the discovery of the antibiotic prop-
erties of penicillin, the discovery of radioactive decay, the invention of the laser
and so forth).

The teleological viewpoint holds that scientific and technical progress is con-
sidered as the result of an objective process determined by social need or a great
economic demand. The primacy of the external (social) effects on scientific and
technical progress assumes that the rate and direction of the latter can be pre-
dicted only to the degree that scientific and technical progress itself is the con-
sequence (that is. the reaction) of changing needs or demands externally superim-

posed on the system of research and development. In other words, if a social need
is recognized, then the technical means for satisfying it can be provided.

These two approaches are diametrically opposite viewpoints and while the former
fully excludes the possibility of controlling the development processes the latter
assmaes that these processes are fully controllable.

How do large technical systems develop? From the viewpoint of establishing the pat-
terns in the scientific and technical development of the systems of greatest inter-

est is an examination of the class of competing BTS, the examples of which would be
aircraft systems.

16

FOR OFFKJAI.U8310NLY
FOR OFF“JAL.USE(NVLY

The schemes for the functioning of a system is represented by its canonical model
which depicts the aggregate of factors characterizing the process of its function-
ing through an external structure, the system's inputs and outputs. The latter are
determined by the relationships between the designated system and the environment.

Characteristic of technical systems are three groups of inputs and outputs, the in—
formation. energy and material. Their content depends upon the presence of a com-
peting system and the relations between competing systems.

Characteristic of the relationship between competing aircraft systems are two peri-
ods of life: the period of their nonconflicting competition and the conflict period.
The systems will have different inputs and outputs in accord with these periods.

The canonical model of a competing system can be most fully represented for the con-
flict period. In this instance all the inputs can be divided into three groups
(Table 1.4): those depending upon the researcher x1. X2, X3, X», those depending
upon the competing system x5, x5 and those depending upon nature (if nature does not
operate as a competing system) X7. The results of the transformation of the inputs
by the system will describe the system's outputs.

Let us describe in somewhat greater detail the significance of the inputs and out-
puts for a certain aircraft system S.

For each such system the basic object of effect is a certain aggregate of goals (the
system goal) which will be the basic content of input 15. The results of the
system's effect on the system goal will be described by the output Y5. In turn, the
effect of the system goal on the designated system will be described by the input

X6 and the change in the state of the latter as a result of this effect by the out-
put Y5.

Thus. the efficiency level of a competing system depends, on the one hand. on the
conformity of the controllable inputs X1 and X; to the needs of the system, and on
the other, upon the state of the inputs regulated by the competing system, XS and
X5. For this reason the development of aircraft systems has a competitive nature.
Each of the competing sides endeavors to increase the efficiency level of its system
and thereby reduce the efficiency of the competing side's system. Under these con-
ditions, even during the nonconflicting period. relative efficiency of the competing
system shows a wave-like nature. After one of the sides has improved its system for
the purpose of raising its efficiency, the opposite side endeavors either to mini-
mize the gain in efficiency achieved by the competitor by countermeasures or to make
its system as advanced as the competitor.

Consequently, it can be stated that the development of competing systems has a dual
nature. 0n the one hand, this development is a response to a change in the state of
the system goal, that is, the competing system in order to prevent a decline in the
efficiency level of one's system by employing countermeasures. At the same time,

a change in the efficiency level of the competing system can occur and often does
occur as a result of spontaneous discoveries and inventions (for example, the de-
velopment of more advanced equipment, semiconductor electronics and so forth).

Thus, the motivating force in the development of a BTS is simultaneously the social
needs and the inner possibilities of scientific and technical progress which open

up new, previously unknown prospects for their improvement and application.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1.4

  
 
 
    
    
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    

Y1-information.
describing results of system's in-
formation activities

Y2-energy not depending upon competing
system
(loss of system's elements. con—
sumption of resources as a result
of system's functioning)

Y3-conditions and constraints,
imposed by the results of system's
functioning on interacting systems

Yn--effect of system on national

x1-information,
determining program of system's work

X2-energy.
(—esources ensuring development,
safekeeping, functioning and repair
of system)

X3--conditions and constraints,
imposed by interacting systems

Xu-conditions and constraints,

imposed by national economic economy
interests
X5--object, Ys--goal or specific

or the system goal (the objects of
the system's effect)

(the results of the system's func-
tioning for its basic purpose and
the change in the state of the
system goal)

Y5--energy dependent upon competing
system
(change in system's state, loss of
system's elements as a result of
counteraction and resources on re-
pair of system)

Y7--effect of system on nature

Xs--competing,

X7-conditions and constraints,
imposed on system by nature

What has been said predetermines the strategy of analysis and building of systems
whereby the choice of the optimum directions of systems development is carried out
proceeding from the set goals of their functioning but considering the means (pos-
sibilities) which are provided by scientific and technical progress.

The development of new technology can have an abrupt or evolutionary nature. From
this viewpoint scientific and technical progress consists of definite stages Quark-
ers) which differ qualitatively from one another. These stages are not absolute
and their relativity consists primarily in the fact that each new stage is a dialec-
tical negation which includes an aspect of succession, maturation and development
and the synthesizing of certain elements from pervious stages [28]. The transition
to a new stage is not a single act or a boundary point of development as the techni-
cal and scientific revolutions or their stages can be superimposed one on the other.

The relativity of the stages and the revolutionary periods of science and technology,
the links between them and their possible superimposition-all of this does not show
that technical and scientific progress is a continuous chain of revolutionary
changes. The pace of scientific and technical progress periodically alters. Scien-
tific and technical development always includes not only the abrupt shifts and

18

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE¢DNLY

revolutions but also periods of evolutionary movement. Abrupt development occurs
in the transition to qualitatively new physical phenomena and materials and is ex-

pressed in the appearance of new classes of systems.

The change from cycles of evolutionary technical development to abrupt shifts in its
functional properties can be easily traced from the example of the change in the
speed of means of transport. The iunctional parameters evolve within the limits of
a certain class of systems which are unified by common principles in the function-
ing of the major subsystems [airplanes with piston engines (PD), aircraft with gas
turbine engines (601) and missiles].

In the general case. the evolutionary process of functional characteristics in sys-
tems undergoes a number of sequential phases: the phase of embodiment, the initial
phase, the phase of intensive development Osaturity) and the phase of obsolescence
(Fig. 1.3. curve 1).

limit of functional n,/ ,
properties

 

 

system's performance

    
   

gszsl 3:221” gases a...

Fig. 1.3. Dynamics of most important 3T8 performance:

l--Functional properties; 2--Cost; L-Efficiency of
system

The embodiment phase which precedes the appearance of the prototype includes re-
search on the physicochemical principles of the system's functioning, the methods
of creating a useful effect based on the results of the theoretical and experimental
research and the possible spheres of the new system's application.

The initial phase, or as it can be called the incubation period, coincides in time

with the beginning of materializing the scientific and technical ideas. During this
stage the first models appear of the functional subsystems which employ new physical
and physicochemical processes which fundamentally distinguish these subsystems from

their predecessors.

During the incubation period the basic efforts of the research and development
organizations are aimed at ensuring the stability of the occurring processes as well

19

FOI:0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FtNICMWﬂCJAl.USEiMVLY

as studying new phenomena which appear in testing the BTS which employ such sub-
systems. As a rule, the prototypes of the new BTS do not go into industrial pro-
duction or operation. More advanced articles which employ the same functioning
principles are developed on their basis and undergo experimental testing. The
growth rate of the functional parameters during this period is still slight but con-
tinuously increases.

The intensive development phase can be termed the period of the system's maturity.
The maturity period encompasses the time from the appearance of the first industrial
models to the moment when the potential provided by the nature of the occurring
processes is virtually exhausted. Characteristic of this period is the highest
growth rate of the functional parameters. It is essential to note in particular
that a series of modifications and modernizations occur in this period. The func-
tional parameters increase during this period by a slight amount in comparison with
the base article but here the spheres of use of the BTS are substantially widened.

Over time the increase rate of the parameters gradually declines and the moment
comes beyond which the increase rate in the parameters begins to drop continuously.
This is caused by the influence of impeding factors for the given type of equipment
(for example, the piston engine restricted the possibility of developing supersonic
aircraft).

The last phase in the development of the BTS is the equipment obsolescence phase
when the possibilities of further improving the equipment are exhausted in terms of
the old fundamental bases and the growth rate of the functional possibilities de-
cline sharply. During this period. as a rule, there begins the materialization of
new scientific and technical ideas aimed at broadening the theoretical limits of
functional characteristics which restrict a further rise in operating efficiency and
a broadening of the sphere of use of the 8T5. The latter is accompanied by a quali-
tative shift in the functional performance of the BTS subsystems and properties
(Pig. 1.3, curve 1').

A combined examination of the change patterns in the functional parameters of tech-
nical systems and their cost estimates3 makes it possible to spot the most important
feature in the system's changed efficiency which can have a decisive impact on its
development.

Numerous research has shown that the cost estimates of systems respond regularly to
a change in their functional properties and parameters (this question will be ex-
amined in detail in Chapter 4). The evolution of functional properties. in being
accompanied, as we have seen. by a greater complexity of the systems. leads to an
intensive rise in their cost estimates (Fig. 1.3, curve 2). Here. while the growth
of the functional properties is restricted by the system's nature and as a conse-
quence of which its development rate moves to zero, the system's cost rises expo-
nentially.

 

3By cost estimates here and below we understand expenditures on development (re-
search and development), industrial production and operation of the systems.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘IUAI. USE ONLY

The efficiency of a system, as a result of the interaction of the functional prop-
erties and cost of the system, with the growth of the functional parameters ini~
tially increases and then, upon reaching a certain maximum value, begins to dimin-
ish sharply (Fig. 1.3, curve 3). Consequently, it is possible to speak about a
certain area of an economically optimum existence of the system beyond which it is
necessary to use fundamentally new systems for the same purposes. The locating of
these areas is one of the most important tasks in economic forecasting as it opens
up an opportunity to effectively control the scientific and technical development
processes of the BTS.

The development processes of a certain type of modern technical systems cannot be
viewed in isolation from other systems as well as outside of the scientific and
technical development processes in the sectors involved in their creation and pro-
duction.

Thus, in selecting the development strategies for a certain class of systems it is
essential to consider not only the direct result of this development in the form of
the greater efficiency of the system. It is also important to take into account the
side effect which can appear as a consequence of implementing the results of the
given system's development in systems of a different class or purpose.

Scientific a:d technical progress is expressed not only in a change in the proper-
ties of the 5:5 and in the use of the results from this development in other areas
of human activity. The ensuring of the set functional properties of the systems
often requires the employment of fundamentally new means and methods of their crea-
tion and production. This leads to a situation where in the process of scientific
and technical development the material and technical base of the sectors producing
the new systems undergoes profound changes. Fundamentally new equipment and produc-
tion processes are introduced and these provide high precision in the working of the
parts and joints as well as high purity and uniformity of structures both in working
traditional and fundamentally new materials.

In parallel with this an improvement occurs in the processes of creating systems for
the purpose of raising labor productivity, reducing labor intensiveness, shortening
the cycles and increasing the efficiency of control. The enterprises which produce
the BTS elements automate the processes involved in controlling conditions in the
heat-treating and plating shops. the processes of milling part contours using
hydraulic and electric tracking systems and machine tools with program control are
evermore widely used. Machining is replaced by cold upsetting, cold extrusion,
electroupsetting and rotary working. Ultrasound and photoelectronic, magnetic pow-
der and capillary methods are employed for quality control of the initial materials,
castings, forged pieces, finished articles, joints and assemblies with a high degree
of precision and reliability. The organizational management structures are being
improved and automated production control systems (A80?) and automated development
control systems (ASUR) are being introduced.

Thus, the process of developing the BTS is a multi-aspect one involving a rise in
the technical level in the sectors involved in their creation and production as well
as in the related sectors. All of this shows the necessity of viewing the develop-
ment processes as a whole and considering the relationship and intercausality of the
development rates in the individual areas. In other words, a systems approach
should be applied to analyzing the BTS development processes.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.4. The Life Cycle and Scheme of the Analysis Process of a BTS

The large technical systems exist in space and in time. The time period from the
plan to create a system until it is taken out of operation is termed the life cycle
of a system. It includes several stages, each of which consists of a amber of
events and levels. The duration of a system's life cycle depends upon its purpose
and technical potential. The basic stages of a 31:8 life cycle (Fig. 1.4) are: sci-
entific research; prototype design work; series production; operation. The begin-
ning of a system’s life cycle is preceded by the phase of social, economic and

scientific-technical forecasting. This includes the range of work on shaping the
tasks of the systems and assessing the possibilities of science and technology over

the long run.

 

Fig. 1.4. A System's Life Cycle

Key: l--Scientific research; 2-—Prototype design work; 3--Series production;
low-Operation; 5-Systems research; 6—Designing; 7—Crestion of proto-
type (head) systems; 8--Elaboration of subsystems; 9--Testing of sub-
systems; lO--Assembly of system; ll--Testing of system; lZnModification
of system; l3--Series production of systems and subsystem; lion-Series
production of modified system; lS--0peration of system; l6--0peration of
modified systems; l7--Taking out of operation.

Scientific research starts with the plan of the BTS (the phase of shaping the con-
cept). The genesis of the plan starts with an awareness on the part of the organi-
zation in charge of utilizing the system for its basic purpose of a need to develop
or replace the existing systems because of a widening or change in the nature of the
tasks or the development of a fundamentally new system caused by the appearance of
new tasks. Thus, an awareness of the new tasks and new conditions is the starting

point of the plan.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTHCJAI.IEHE(NVLY

The initial prerequisites for the genesis of the plan are fundamental changes in

the nature of operations which shape the basic principles (the doctrine) in the
sphere of the systems' functioning. Here the doctrine operates as the organizing
principal. In turn, the successes in developing the new systems and the appearance
of fundamentally new types of systems definitely influence the content .' the doc-
trine. Thus, in the process of creating the systems there is a constant interaction
between theory and practice. as follows: new tssks-doctrine-the plan for the
system-new system--doctrine.

The forming of the plan includes a series of events the basic ones being: research
carried out by the client for the purposes of analyzing the new tasks and elucidat-
ing the demands to be made on the systems designed to solve them; the shaping of

the initial tactical-technical requirements (TTT) for the new systems in considering
the nature of the new tasks and the scientific and technical possibilities fore-
casted for the immediate period (it is important that the demands reflect as fully
as possible the goals which the new system seeks to attain and provide the designers
and researchers with room for searching for rational ways to solve the new prob-
lems); research conducted by scientific and industrial organizations in the sin of
seeking out new scientific and technical principles and ways for solving new prob-
lems; the elaboration of several variations for the initial design of the system,
that is the preliminary project (predesign project) for the purpose of formulating
the system's appearance. the basic relationships, the ways for solving the basic
technical problems and the required resources for the creation and functioning of
such a system; research on the efficiency and optimization of its parameters for the
purposes of choosing the preferred variation.

The end result of the plan stage is proposals or recommendations on solving the
problem and these would include the content of the plan in the form of the descrip-
tion of the system. the volume and sources of resources required for its creation
and functioning and an estimate of the development and production times.

For choosing an optimum system it is essential to work out not only several alter-
native systems within one plan (several alternative subsystems within one system)
but also several alternative plans. The alternative plans would include fundamen-
tally different systems the commonness of which consists only in the commonness of
the pursued goals.

The second stage in the life cycle of a 875 is the prototype design work (OKR) which
includes the designing, manufacturing of prototypes (prototype production) and the
testing of systems. As a rule, by the start of designing the less preferential ver-
sions of the systems have been weeded out and designing is carried out with a
smaller number of variations.

The system's designing starts with an adjustment of the tactical and technical re-
quirements made on the system. In working out the projects for several variations
of systems there is an alternating of the process which follows the scheme of
synthesis--analysis—-systhesis--analysis and the discovery of new possibilities is
not to be excluded. For this reason the client's requirements here must be con-
sidered as a guide for the areas of the search although they basically should al-
ready govern the developers. It must be pointed out that designing also presupposes
the continuation of research on new problems discovered in the process of drawing

up the plan and in designing.

23

FOR OFFICIAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Designing ends with the elaboration of the working drawings. The system's analysis
carried out at this stage has specific features. In the first place, the analysis
of the system in the designing is carried out on a theoretical basis without test-
ing it out in a full-scale experiment. The testing provides an opportunity to
check out the conformity of a whole series of calculated initial data and conclu-
sions to the experiment. Substantiation of the conformity of the individual calcu-
lated parameters to the experiment provides great certainty of the analysis' cor-
rec tness .

Secondly, in selecting the preferred system in the research and design stage it is
very difficult to assess the expenditure of resources on the prototype and series
production and operation of the systems with sufficient precision and reliability.
This can lead to the taking of incorrect decisions. This can be done with much
greater accuracy and reliability from the results of the actual expenditure of re-
sources on the development of the prototype system. For this reason at the given
stage a specific analysis of the system should be run in taking the decision about
the series production program.

In the stages of the series production and operation of the systems there will be:
the production of the subsystems. the assembly and installation of the systems as a
whole, the functioning of the systems and the maintaining of them in a state of
technical working order and functional readiness as well as the repair of the sys-
tems. The operation of the systems makes it possible to finally assess the theo-
retical research carried out in the process of creating the system as well as to
improve the algorithm and methods of system analysis. The life cycle of a system
ends with its taking out of operation as a consequence of obsolescence. A system,
as a rule, is modernized by replacing some of its elements and by developing others.

As can be seen from the description of the basic stages in a system's life cycle,
the analysis and assessment of systems are carried out in all stages starting with
the formation of the plan and ending with the decision to take it out of operation.

The analysis and assessment of aircraft systems in the interests of forecasting
their development in the early research and design stages are carried out under the
conditions of an ambiguity of the situation and initial data and the presence of re-
source constraints. These conditions in the selection of the technology have led to
the rise of a new scientific discipline. systems analysis. as a methodology for
selecting systems under conditions of ambiguity and resource constraints. Systems
analysis, in

Systems analysis, in being based on systems theory and using the mathematics of op-
erations research. compliments them in its logical methods of decision preparation
under the conditions of the ambiguities developed by decision theory. Systems
analysis is the basis for a scientific choice and the elucidation of relationships
between goals, the means for achieving them and the resources.

In comparison with operations research which provides a quantitative assessment of
the results of systems use in a specific operation by using strict mathematical
methods, systems analysis recognizes such an assessment as insufficient for select-
ing the preferred variation as a result of the presence of a number of ambiguities.
For this reason the solution to the selction problem is supplemented by other meth-
ods, namely: by judgment methods based on logic and on formal experience and by

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJA1.UBEIMVLV

engineering methods. In the latter the prime role is assigned to the art of recog-
nizing conmmn interrelated development patterns of systems and situations.

2) The elaboration of alternative methods and means for achieving the set goals

and the variations of systems from among which the most preferential must be
selected;

3) The elucidation of the required resources for implementing the designated alter-
natives and constraints in them;

4) An analysis of the interaction of the goals. alternatives and resources includ-
ing interrelated events, such as: the choice and shaping of the evaluation criter-
ion and the constraints which define the area of acceptable decisions; a comparison
of alternatives using the criterion. including the optimization of the decision with
an analytical form of the criterion; elucidation of the ambituities and an analysis
of their influence on the calculation results; judgments or logical analysis compli-
menting the analytical analysis; the taking of a decision on selecting the prefer-

red variation of the system considering the additional information on possible situ-
ations, interacting systems, available resources and so forth; if the results of the
analysis are unsatisfactory, then the decision is taken to carry out a new cycle of

analysis with a revision of the set goals and the elaboration of new alternatives
and resource constraints.

The multiplicity of states in which a system is found during its life cycle also
determines the necessity of a continuous systems analysis process. As a result of
the increase in the amount of information and the degree of its reliability, one
can speak of a multistep (iterative) process of systems assessment. As a first
step one might point to preliminary analysis based on judgments and simple analyti-
cal models in the course of which the required information on the possible goals

and areas for searching for alternatives. on operations models and so forth will be
more fully disclosed.

The basic components in the systems analysis process are: the goal, operational
and design research, an analysis and selection of the criterion and the constraints,
modeling of resources. the criterion function and constraints and the selection of
alternatives or the optimization of the system.

The goal-oriented research consists in elaborating the alternative goals and choos-
ing the preferential alternative. The selection of the tasks (goals) the fulfill-
ment of which should be ensured by the system is either the result of a systematic
analysis of the dynamics of the tasks which arise as the situations change or the
result of the generalizing of the experience and views existing on a superior
management level.

The process of defining the goals is subordinate to certain rules of which we would
point to the two most important. In the first place, the tasks of the interior-
level systems should be compatible with the tasks of the superior level systems and,

25

FOR OFFKJAI.IEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possibilities of the systems. Here there should be a hierarchy of tasks correspond-
ing to the hierarchy of systems. that is, the superior level system should have a
structure of means (their tasks) so that the aggregate of the inferior-level systeas

goals as a whole. Secondly, the attainability of the goal depends upon the expendi-
ture of resources on fulfilling it. A goal can be chosen where the available re-
sources do not make it possible to create the system ensuring its attainment. For
this reason, the final determination of the goals can be given only in the process

possibility of creating a multigoal system capable of carrying out a broader range
of tasks instead of a specialized system).

Depending upon the specific purpose. the operations performed by aircraft systems
can be divided into information (inspection, communications and so forth) and trans-
port operations.

Depending upon the workfront, the scope of activity and the degree of involving tech-
nology and human resources, operations can be divided into volume (supervolume) and
local (sublocal).

Thus, in the process of operations research there is a choice of goals and the

methods of attaining them. This makes it possible to formulate the operational
links and constraints which are part of the model of the criterion to assess

(select) the alternative systems.

discrete positing of a problem, a comparison of a finite number of variations) or
the acceptable ranges for the change in the system's parameters (in the instance of
the continuous positing of the problem, the systematized sorting out of an infinite-
number of variations in the designated range of parameter changes).

Project or design research, like the entire process of systems analysis, is an
iterative process. In designing on the basis of the tactical and technical re-

quirements worked out by the client from the results of operations research, the
system's structure is formed, the base subsystems are selected and modified, new
ones are designed and the system is synthesized and analyzed.

In the event of an unsatisfactory solution, the design process is repeated. The
iterations are carried out until a satisfactory solution has been obtained.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of base (standardized) subsystems in the system being designed is of a
contradictory nature. 0n the one hand there is a reduction in expenditures on the
designing and series production of the system, and in addition, the development time
of the system is shortened, while on the other, the use of such subsystems can lower
the level of the technical advancement and operational efficiency of the system.

In the conflict period, the superiority of one of the competing systems over another
to a significant degree is determined by the degree of the system's degredation and
reconstruction rate. This, in turn, is largely dependent upon the mass production
of reserve means used for the reconstruction as well as upon the labor intensiveness
of the reconstruction processes. It is not to be excluded that these considerations
may be crucial in examining the designated contradiction.

The genesis of the idea of creating new means is related, as was already pointed out,
to two sources: the rise of new tasks and the achievements in technical progress.

In this regard the genesis of new plans and alternative design variations for the
systems must be expected in organizations entrusted with the solving of new prob-
lems (the client) and the organizations directly developing the technology (the
developer). Obviously only the combined activities of these organizations ensure
the elaboration of alternatives which conform to the demands of the problems being
solved and of scientific and technical progress.

As was already pointed out. in the BTS, as a rule, the central element of the sys-
tem is the most revolutionary link. Within the system, as a rule. there are two

or three generations of central elements (for example, of aircraft) having identical
purpose but different efficiency levels. The system's average efficiency level as

a whole will depend upon the degree of heterogeneity of the systems of the competing
sides, that is. upon the proportional amount of different-generation central ele-
ments within the systems of both sides. In this regard a study of the replacement
rate in the generations of central elements within the systems of a competing side
should be one of the objects of systems analysis.

The choice of an alternative for the next generation of central elements should be
made proceeding from the view that the incorporation of new types of central ele-
ments in the system makes the system an optimum one. A system which has been opti-
mized under the supposition that it will include only new elements can be nonoptimal

under the conditions where the system possesses central elements of several genera-
tions.

This conclusion follows directly from the so-called Bellman optimality principle.
According to this principle, an optimum sequence of decisions possesses the property
where, regardless of the initial state and the decision taken at the first moment,
the following decisions should be optimal relative to the state arising out of the
initial decision [35).

The heterogeneity of the BTS places a number of demands on the other subsystems.
The basic demand is compatibility or the reserving of possibilities for compatibil-
ity with the central elements of several generations.

Thus, in the process of project or design research, alternatives are worked out for
the design variations or the acceptable ranges for the changes in the system's

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parameters as well as the demands incorporated in the group of design links and con-
straints in a system of disciplining conditions in solving the problems of an eco-
nomic assessment of systems.

In the process of carrying out the goal-oriented, operational and project research
extensive use is made of forecasting methods and these make it possible to reduce
the degree of ambituity in the notion of the future goals, tasks and possible paths
in the scientific and technical development of 318 functional elements.

In the process of criterion research, on the basis of analyzing the goal orienta-
tion of the standard operations, the possible criteria are determined for evaluating
the system and the mathematical model of the criterion function (the goal) and the
overall appearance of the disciplining conditions (the matrix of conditions and vec-
tor of constraints) are formulated.

The carrying out of resource research entails the necessity of setting numerical
perameters for the criterion function, the matrix of conditions and constraint vec-
tors determining the group of economic ties. In the process of this research the
following are determined: the resources required to implement the alternative pro-
grams of the "resources--system parameters" link as needed for an analytical descrip-
tion of the criterion function and disciplining conditions as well as the con-
straints imposed on the amount of the resources.

Resource analysis is carried out according to the types (material, labor, financial
and so forth) as well as in terms of the stages of the system's life cycle and ele—
ments. In the process of this research, the necessary and sufficient degree of ag-
gregating the forecast estimates is determined. In accord with the scope of the
initial information. a choice is made of the forecasting method and the composition
of the essential factors and variables determining the effectiveness of the system
and characterizing the state of the stages of their life cycle is defined. The
mass of statistical information is formed, it is analyzed and processed, forecast
resource models are constructed and the accuracy and reliability of the forecast

calculations are assessed.
The choice of alternatives for the optimization of the system is made using the

selected criteria considering the formulated constraints which are determined by the
operational, design and economic links.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 2: FORECASTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTEMS
2.1. Functions and Tasks of Forecasting

The enormous impact of scientific and technical progress on the development level of
productive forces necessitates the presence of constant controlling actions on the
nature of scientific and technical development and the introduction of their results
into the industrial production sphere. The management of scientific and technical
development is an important element in production management.

Production management has gained the widest development in a socialist society.
Under the conditions of a socialist economy, national economic management is an ob-
jective necessity. Public ownership of the means of production makes it possible to
have control on a scale of the entire national economy. Production management is a
most important function of the socialist state.

Management includes three basic elements: planning. the organization and management
itself (or control) of production. These management elements are interrelated and
interdetermined and represent a single process, a single management system. The
primary element is planning which determines the production development goals. The
organizational structures and procedures are formulated for the established goals.
Within the set structures and procedures production is controlled under the inter-
ests of attaining the goal.

In keeping with the development of the productive forces and the accelerated base of
scientific and technical progress, the role of management has grown and the manage-

ment system has become more complex and advanced. Production planning and primarily
long-range planning and forecasting have assumed particular significance.

Planning as an element of management is an information process. A particular fea-
ture of this process is the presence of a time shift of the information output in

relation to the information input. In planning the information flows on the past
(retrospective information) are the input while the flows of information on the

future (prospective information) are the output (Fig. 2.1).

Along with retrospective information, in adopting plan decisions, information is
also used on the state of the planning object and the environment (background) at
the moment the plan is worked out; this is information on the present. In relation

to the planned period, this information is also information on the past and for
this reason it can be conditionally classified with the retrospective information

(conditionally retrospective information).

29

FOR OFTWC1AI.USE|DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

%§?§3§p8£:1.

    

past present future tine

Fig. 2.1. Characteristics of information inputs and
outputs of planning process

Key: l--0bject; 2-Background

The amount of the time lag of the information output and input of the process de-
pends upon the lengd1(the lead tine) of planning, that is, upon the tine interval
in the future for which the plan is worked out. The greater the amount of the lead
the more needed the lemuﬂmof retrospectionl and, consequently, the greater the tine
lag between the information input and output of the planning process. Depending
upon the lead time, four stages are distinguished in national econoeic planning.

1. Operation calendar planning (with a lead tine from an hour to a month).
2. Current technical and econonic planning (up to 1 year).

3. Perspective and long-range planning (up to 15 years).

a. Forecasting.

The planning stages are oriented not only in time but also in the planes of the
functional and territorial articulation of the planning object. The scope of the
functional and territorial levels of the hierarchy by the planning stages (the space
of their functioning) varies.

Forecasting and long-range and perspective planning encoepaas the superior levels of
the functional and territorial hierarchy: from the national economy down to the
enterprise. Operational-calendar planning encompasses the inferior levels of the
hierarchy on the planes of the functional and territorial articulation of the

 

lThe lengthof retrospection is the time interval of the object's functioning in the
past (fron the retrospection horizon to the present) for which the necessary and
sufficient retrospective information is available. The retrospection horizon is
the name given to the most distant point in the past on a tine scale at which
there is the necessary and sufficient information.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

planning object. from the work area to the enterprise. Current technical and eco-
nomic planning holds an intermediate position between them.

The designated scheme for the scope of the hierarchy levels in terms of planning
stages is continuously being transformed. Under the impact of the extensive use of
computers in planning, the planning stages with a short lead time (operational-
cslendar and current technical-economic planning) are encompassing ever-higher
levels of the hierarchy. At the same time, under the impact of the accelerated
pace of scientific and technical development, the stages with a longer lead time
(perspective and long-range planning and forecasting) are encompassing the ever-
lower levels of the hierarchy and the planning horizon2 is being widened.

Planning can be divided into two stages: forecasting and planning per se including
the first three stages and termed the plan elaboration stage. Direct links between
these stages occur at the boundary of long-term planning and forecasting. They have
a common sphere of application in the functional and territorial planes and an iden-
tical scheme of information flows.

The fundamental distinction between planning per se and forecasting is the nature of
the output information. that is, the directive nature of planning information (plan-
directive) and the orientation or guideline nature of forecast information (forecast
--orientation). These differences are caused by the significant reduction in the
accuracy and reliability of the information produced on the future with an increase
in the depth or length of planning.

 

D-rml

rims '
b)

 

Fig. 2.2. Dynamics of the confidence interval for
assessing parameters of a planning object

2The planning or forecasting horizon is the most distant point in the future on the
time scale at which the state of the planning object is assessed.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 2.2 gives a diagram for the change over time in the confidence interval for
assessing the state of a planning object for one parameter x. If the state of the
object is described by the set of parameters {:1}, then the curves for x(r) given
in the graphs are transformed into planes of the (n-kl) order, where n-—the number
of parameters describing the state of the object.

In constructing the graphs (Fig. 2.2, a) it is conditionally assumed that the retro-
spective information on the object is fully reliable. Mistakes of measurement and
mistakes arising out of interference in the data transmission channels in this in-
stance are not considered.

However, here it must be pointed out that the value of older retrospective informa-
tion is reduced. its predictive force is lowered. that is, there is a discounting
of retrospective information. The older the retrospective information is, the fewer
the germs of the future and the greater the vestiges of the past.

The perspective information worked out in planning is of a probability nature and
has a certain reliability within the limits of the confidence interval. An increase
in the length of planning leads, with a constant confidence probability (Fig. 2.2,
b) P - conat., to a widening of the confidence interval of the estimate (in Fig. '
2.2 a, it has the form bounded by the diverging curves). With a constant value of
the confidence interval (the confidence interval is bounded by the equidistant
curves, see Fig. 2.2, c), the confidence probability P - f(1) is reduced (see Fig.
2.2, d). Thus, the reliability and accuracy of perspective information produced in
planning is substantially reduced with an increase in the length of planning. that
is, there is a discounting of the perspective information.

A directive nature cannot be ascribed to perspective unreliable information. but
this information indicates a probable state of the future and is a guideline for
future planning decisions with a shorter length of planning. Forecasts even with

a relatively small degree of reliability make it possible to reduce the uncertainty
of our knowledge about the future and, consequently, lower the risk of the present
planning decisions and the here from their nonoptimality which can arise beyond the

planned period.

As we see, the time factor is primary in delimiting the concepts of forecasting and
planning per se (the elaboration of a plan). It determines the limits of the proc-
esses of planning per se and forecasting. The length of forecasting theoretically
is not limited. In practical terms it is obviously advisable to set such limits

proceeding from the necessary and sufficient reliability of the estimates for the

state of the planning object in the future. Thus, in terms of the lead time, fore-
casting holds the superior level in the hierarchy and then comes the elaboration of

plans.

Let us give the basic concepts of forecasting theory: the forecast, forecasting and
prognostics [18]. A forecast is a probability judgment concerning the state of a
certain object (process or phenomenon) at a certain moment of time in the future
and (or) the alternative ways of achieving them. Forecasting is the process of
formulating the development forecasts of an object on the basis of analyzing its
development trends. Prognostics is the science studying the patterns of the fore-

casting process.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In certain sources concepts are encountered which replace the concept of forecast:
ing: prediction and foresight. Prediction is a reliable judgment based on a logi-
cal sequence concerning the state of a certain object (process or phenomenon) in
the future. Prediction is the advance reflection of reality based on a knowledge of
the development laws of an object (process or phenomenon).

Prediction and forecasting differ in terms of the reliability of the future assess-
ments and foresight is a broader generic concept which includes both of the previ-
ous ones. Thus, the logical formulas for the different types of processes of pro-
ducing information on the future (foresight) can be written thus: forecasting-
"it probably will be," prediction-o"it will be" and planning--"it should be."

The concept of futurology as a..science dealing with the future has become wide-
spread in foreign terminology. Being in a certain sense the equivalent of the term
"prognostics," the concept "futurology" significantly and unjustifiably broadens
the subject of the science, making it all-encompassing and including all aspects of
the problem of the future.

There are also other viewpoints on the question of the relationship between the
concepts of forecasting and planning. At times an opposition is ascribed between
forecasting as the foreseeing of spontaneous uncontrollable socioeconomic processes
characteristic of capitalism and planning as the defining of development trends in
the future for controllable processes in society and the national economy under
socialism. Such an approach to the forecasting of national economic development is
invalid, as forecasting and planning (the stage of plan elaboration) have the same
informational and socioeconomic nature.

In other instances the nature of the output information is considered to be the pri-
mary factor in delimiting the concepts of planning and forecasting, that is, the
directive nature of the plan and the nonconpulsoriness of a forecast. This dis-
tinction between plans and forecasts is secondary and is caused, as was already
pointed out, by the time factor and the related greater level of forecast ambiguity.
The supporters of this View feel that the plan and the forecast of national economic
development can be compiled for the same period. Obviously the presence of two sets
for the same future period--a directive uniform indication and a noncompulsory multi-
variant guideline-are merely capable of misleading production and depriving a pro-
duction collective of a unity of goal.

There is the viewpoint that forecasting is the preplanning studies, that is, the
process preceding planning. The unity of the tasks of planning and forecasting and
the conauonness of their principles and methods make it ill-advised to have a funda-
mental division and opposition between these concepts. There is a single produc-
tion planning system as a system of producing information on the future and this
includes the forecasting stage and the plan elaboration stage.

Thus, production planning is a unified system for generating information on the
future and this system does not have a formal limitation in time and consists of
two stages--forecasting and plan elaboration. With the specific features of these
planning stages, they are united primarily by the connonness of the goals (produc-

ing information on the future) and the tasks.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For gaining information on the future it is essential to study the national eco-
nomic laws and to determine the causes and driving forces of this development.

This is the basic task of planning and forecasting. Social requirements, techni-
cal possibilities and economic advisability are the basic driving forces in the
development of production. In accord with this it is possible to point to three
basic tasks for planning and forecasting: the setting of the national economic de-
velopment goals, the seeking out of the optimum ways and means for achieving them
and determining the required resources for attaining the set goals.

The choice of goals is the result of analyzing the sociopolitical tasks which must
be carried out in a society and which reflect the objective action of the economic
laws of socialism.

The selection of goals is preceded by the elaboration of alternative goals, by the
constructing of an hierarchical system or "tree of goals," by the ranking of the
goals and the choice of the leading links. The initial prerequisites for goal se-
lection are, on the one hand, the real possibility of solving the given alterna-
tive and, on the other, its optimality in terms of the efficiency criterion.

The next task of planning is to study the possible ways and means of attaining the
set goals. The ways and means of attaining the goals are determining on the basis
of analyzing the development of the national economy and scientific-technical prog-
ress. Here in the forecasting process there is a restricting of the area of alter-
native ways and means for achieving the set goals. that is, the area of optimum de-
cisions is defined. The sole alternative criterion which is optimal in terms of
the accepted vector is determined in the process of working out the plan.

It-must be pointed out that, depending upon what task is carried out first, two
types of forecasting are recognized: research (or exploratory) and normative.

The research or exploratory forecasting is the name given to the drawing up of
forecasts for objectively existing development trends on the basis of an analysis

of historical trends. This type of forecasting is based on the use of the princi- '
ple of development inertia where the forecast is oriented in time "from the present
to the future." A research forecast is the picture of the forecast object's state
at a certain moment in the future as obtained as a result of examining the develop-
ment process as movement by inertia from the present to the forecast horizon.

The forecasting of the development trends of the forecast object where these trends
should attain certain sociopolitical and economic goals at a set moment in the fu-
ture is termed normative. In this instance the time orientation of the forecast is
"from the future to the present."

The discrepancy of the normative and research estimates of a forecast object at a
given moment of future time is the consequence of the "need-—possibility" contra-
diction. A composite forecast is based on the research and normative forecasts.

The choice of the goals and means for attaining them without fail should be com-
bined with setting the resource requirements. In setting the resources it is essen-
tial to view the planning and forecast resource matrices (financial, labor. material
and energy) as well as the production capacity and time resource matrices. Also
assessed are the required resources and the probable constraints on their amount

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFTWCJAI.USE(NVLY

within the range of the lead time of the plan or forecast. The forecast's resource
matrices are the most important initial data in drawing up the national economic

balances in long-range planning.

The driving forces of development do not operate in isolation, they are interrelated
and interdetermined and can be shown in the form of a connected triangular graph
(Fig. 2.3). The vertexes of this "causal triangle" identify the driving forces of
production development and its edges are the two-way ties between them. For this
reason the tasks of planning and forecasting cannot be viewed separately. In the
process of forecasting and plan elaboration without fail there is an analysis of

the interaction of the goals, the methods and technical means of attaining them and

the required resources for realizing them and using the accepted efficiency criteria
the optimum national economic development paths are determined.

 
  

Social needs

Economic - Technical

advisability possibilities

  
   

Fig. 2.3. Triangular graph of driving forces
of development

Regardless of the commonness of the tasks, their positing in forecasting and plan-
ning differ. In planning there is the following scheme: goal-directive. the ways
and means of achieving them are determined while resources are limited. In fore-
casting the scheme is different: the goals are theoretically attainable, the ways
and means of attaining them are possible while the resources are probable.

As is seen, the plan will contain only one (optimum) solution while the forecast
will have a range of alternatives. This particular feature is also a consequence
of the time factor as the large time lead causes a high degree of ambiguity in the
information on the future and. consequently, a widening of the confidence interval
of the forecast estimates (the probability nature of the estimates). The tasks of
planning and forecasting also differ in terms of the breadth of coverage. while

the tasks of forecasting are global ones. the tasks of the other stages of planning
are tasks of a lower rank. Thus, the global goal of forecasting national economic
development in the USSR--thc creation of the material and technical base of commu-
nisnr-is transformed in the Tenth Five-Year Plan as a more concrete goal of a lower
rank. "The main task of the Tenth Five-Year Plan," as is pointed out in the Basic
Directions for USSR National Economic Development in 1976-1980, "is to consistently
carry out the communist party's course of raising the material and cultural standard
of living of the people on the basis of the dynamic and proportional development of
social production. a rise in its efficiency. the acceleration of scientific and
technical progress. the growth of labor productivity and the greatest possible im-
provement in the quality of work in all the national economic units" [1]. The goals
of the current plans are defined in accord with the main task of the five-year plan.
The aim of each inferior planning level is to ensure the achieving of the goal by
the superior level. that is, a compatibility of goals among the different planning
levels should be achieved in planning.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

National economic planning is carried out on a basis of the conscious use of the
law of planned, proportional national economic development and is correlated with
the basic economic law of socialism. liarxist-Leninist economic science is the
scientific basis of planning theory.

In our nation national economic planning has been carried out from the first years
of the founding of the Soviet state. In 1920, under the direct leadership of V. I.
Lenin the GOELRO [State Commission for the Electrification of Russia] Plan was
worked out. This first forecast plan for the socialist reorganization of the Soviet
republic's national economy through large-scale machine industry and electrification
was designed for 15 years.

In the following years a number of other forecasts vas worked out. In 1920, under
the leadership of the Soviet scientist G. S. Strumilin, a demographic forecast was
worked out and this was a forecast for the size of our nation's population for
1920-1941. Prior to the Great Patriotic War, under the leadership of '1‘. S. Khacha-
turov, a forecast was drawn up for the development of transportation for 10-15
years. In 1945:1946, the USSR Gosplan drew up a national economic development
forecast, in 191.8, a plan for the transformation of nature, in 1959-1960 a general
perspective of national economic development for a 15-year period (up to 1975) and
then for 20 years, up to 1980. In 1967-1969, a plan was elaborated for the develop-
ment and location of the productive forces up to 1980.

The long-range five-year plans compiled considering these forecasts played an im-

portant role in the development of the socialist national economy. At present the
initial projections of national economic development are being worked out for a 15-

year period (1976-1990) and the forecasts up to the year 2000.

Starting in the 1950's. in a number of the capitalist nations, and primarily the
United States, a great deal of attention has been devoted to forecasting and its
science and attempts have been made to compile development plans (programs).

However, the political and economic structure of a capitalist society which is de-
terained by the private ownership of the means of production and by capitalist pro-
duction relationships creates an objective impossibility of effective management,
planning and forecasting of production development. Characteristic of a capitalist
economy are long-term studies only for individual, relatively stable sectors (chief-
ly for the military sectors) while unsuccessful attempts have been made to unify
their results in the so-called macroeconomic structure.

The deviating of the forecasts and plans from actual reality in the capitalist
world is caused by the discrepancies between the particular patterns characteris-
tic of the individual industrial complexes and the social conditions of their mani-
festation.

The financial crisis which has engulfed many capitalist nations in recent years has
again convincingly demonstrated the impossibility of efficient economic management

in the capitalist nations. including its highest form, state monopolistic capital-
ism.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AL USIICMVLY

2.2. A Classification of Forecasting Methods

In the modern literature on forecasting a good deal of attention is devoted to the
questions of classifying the forecasting methods. At present one could count more
than a score classification systems of various authors. However, up to the present
there has been no unified classification of forecasting methods which is useful,
sufficiently complete and open (in the sense of a possibility of broadening).

Probably, prognostics as a science has not yet reached a development level where it
would be possible to create a unified classification, and for this reason it is not
the aim of the given section to conpensate for this shortcoming as a whole. Here an
attempt has been made to formulate the goals of a classification, to examine the
possible ways of attaining them and to review certain examples from the past.

what are the aims in classifying forecasting methods? Two basic aims could be men-
tioned. In the first place, there is classification for the purpose of studying

and analyzing the methods and, secondly, classification for the purpose of selecting
a method in working out the forecasts of the object.

As is known, there are two basic types of classification: successive and parallel.
A successive classification presupposes the separating out of particular groups
from more general ones. This is a process which is identical to the dividing of a
generic concept into specific concepts. Here the following basic rules should be
observed; the basis of the division (the feature) should remain the same in the
formation of any specific concept; the groups of the specific concepts should ex-
clude one another (the demand of the absence of overlapping classes); the groups

of specific concepts should exhaust the group of the generic concept (the demand of
the full coverage of all objects of classification).

The parallel type of classification presupposes a complex basis of classification
consisting not of one but rather of a whole series of features. The basic principle
of such a classification is the independence of the selected features each of which
is essential, all of them together are simultaneously inherent to the subject and
only their aggregate provides an exhaustive idea of each class.

A successive classification can be given a visual interpretation in the form of a
certain geneological tree and for this reason makes it possible to encompass the
entire area of classification as a whole and determine the place and relationships
of each class in the general system. It is more accessible for the purposes of
study and makes it possible procedurally to represent the classified area of know-
ledge in a more orderly manner.

In the parallel system of classification, each class can be interpreted as a certain
area in the n-dinensional space of classification features. This interpretation.
naturally, is less visual and procedurally is not as convenient for presenting and
studying the classes. However, the classification possibilities of such a system
are greater than the successive approach, since the complex specific features make
it possible to provide a more detailed classification with no overlapping of the
classes. For this reason. in practice, for example, in the process of selecting a
class of methods for an object characterized by the given set of parameters, this
classification is more effective than the successive one.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF1C1A1.USE:(MNLY

Examples of both types of classifications are known among the classifications of
forecasting methods. Certain authors prefer to give a classification of forecasts
and others a classification of the forecast objects. Let us give certain examples
of classifications and briefly describe them.

The classification of G. H. Dobrov [13] gives extrapolation, expert estimates and
modeling as the basic classes for forecasting methods. Then follows a level of 8
types and below that 19 generalized names of methods. _

In examining this classification one can note a violation of the principles of an
ideal classification in it. On each level there is not a unified classification
feature ”and the demand of an absence of overlapping types is not observed (the types
of the modeling class can be partially put among the expert methods while types of
the extrapolation class are partially among the mathematical models). 0n the in-
ferior level such narrow specific methods as an interview are given simultaneously
along with the almost all-encompassing groups (incidentally also overlapping) such
as mathematical economics models and probability statistics models.

The classification of E. lanch [50] on the upper level cannot be reduced to a single
feature: 1) intuitive methods, 2) methods of exploratory forecasting, 3) methods of
normative forecasting, 4) methods with feedback. As we can see, the second and third
classes are determined by the aim of forecasting while the first and fourth are de-
termined by its sppars'us. The overlapping of the types is also apparent. Thus,
the Delphi method from the first class uses the feedback principle with an expert,
that is, it could be put in the fourth class, the writing of a senario (the second
class) usually preceeds the constructing of the tree of goals, that is, it is in-
cluded in a normative forecast (third class) and so forth.

V. A. Lisichkin [49] gives a system of features for forecast classification. This
system is a parallel one for 18 features, one of which is a method used for the
forecasting.

'0;
Thus, this is not a pure classification of methods but rather a mixed classification
in terms of the types of objects, goals, the tasks of the forecast and the methods
of carrying it out.

Here are the classification features: the nature of the forecast object; the scale
of the forecast object; the number of forecasted objects; the nature of the link of
the forecasted object with other objects; the nature of the change process in the
object; the lead time of the forecasted event; the degree of localizing the forecast
on the scale of probable situations; the method used for forecasting; the number of
methods used for forecasting; the nature of the process of compiling the forecast;
the relationship of the predictor to the forecast object; the system of knowledge
underlying the forecast; the form of expressing the forecast's results; the goal of
the forecast; the purpose of the forecast; the degree of understanding and soundness
of the forecast; the method of testing the reliability of the forecast; the area of
science the object of which is being forecast.

The given mixed system of classification features provides an opportunity to put
each of the forecasts in a relatively narrow class and describe it from various as-

pects, however the utility of such a classification is not very clear from the view-
point of the two possible aims formulated above.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the work [23], this system of features has been developed and presented in the

form of an hierarchical structure. In this form it is more complete and finished.
Here four basic aspects of classification are examined: the process of making the
forecasts, the object of forecasts, the predictor and the forecasting method.

In the classification by the aspect of the forecasting method, the forecasts are
divided into two groups: those based on unsystematized knowledge (everyday) and
those employing a system of scientific knowledge (scientific). The latter are
divided into hypothetical, theoretical and empirical. Each ofthese classes is
divided in terms of the employed type of methods into general scientific, inter-
scientific (the method uses the apparatus of a specific science) and special scien-

tific (methods used only in a narrow area of science). The classification is then
made in terms of the number of methods employed in making the forecast. If there
is one then it is a simplex forecast, if there are two methods it is a duplex, and
if three or more then it is a compound forecast. Then follows the feature of the
time lead by which forecasts are classified into long-term, medium-term and short-
term. Finally, there is the feature of forecast accuracy by various scales: by
the scale of probabilities, by the scale of parameters and by the semantic scale.

Without going into a detailed analysis of this classification, we would point out
that the presenting of it in the form of a polyhierarchical tree has advantages
from the viewpoint of the procedure for expounding the entire range of forecasting
problems. At the same time, in essence, it remains a parallel-type classification,
however it does not solve and does not ease the problems of the choice of forecast-

ing methods.

An attempt to approach the problem of selecting the forecasting method on the basis
of a classification of information data on the forecast object has been undertaken
in [68]. In accord with the data defined by the classifier, the initial information
is assigned a certain eight-digit code which is then compared with a table of the
known forecasting methods. Appropriate methods are selected in the process of this
comparison. The data classification features by categories are given below.

Quantitative Data Qualitative Data
Random--Nonrandon Single-factor--uu1tifactor
Singular--Hass Homogeneous--heteroganeous
Discrete--Continuous Scalable-Unscalable
Periodic-Nonperiodic Cyclical--Trajectory
Stationary-Nonstationary Stationary--Nonstationary
Reliable--Unreliable Reliable--Unreliable
Representstive--Nonrepresentative Representstive--Nonrepresentative

Each place in the code can contain a O. 1 or 2 and the 2 is used in the instance
that the given place is indifferent to the forecasting object or method. The table
of methods gives 38 names and their corresponding information codes.

It should be pointed out that the very idea of selecting a method according to the
information possessed about the object is extremely enticing, however the realiza-

tion of this idea cannot be considered satisfactory. In the first place, the given
classifier has not been sufficiently worked out as the concepts of reliability,

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

representativeness, cyclicalness, trajectoriness and stationariness for the quanti-
tative data are unclear. Secondly, in order to identify the method it is not

enough to consider just the initial information but rather it is also essential to
paizess information on the nature of the object, the goal and the tasks of the fore-
cast, as well as the demands which are made upon the forecast's quality.

Even in the instance that all the listed data are present, the process of selecting
the method remains a creative, unformalized process which should not and cannot be
replaced by the mechanical substituting of numbers at least at the present develop-
ment level of prognostics.

From the examination of the above-given classifications of forecasting methods it is
apparent that at present this problem cannot be considered satisfactorily resolved.

In our view, at present it is impossible to present a unified classification which
would satisfy both aims formulated at the start of the given section. For this
reason we propose two classifications: the first of the successive type for the pur-
poses of visual presentation and an analysis of the methods and a second of the
parallel type for the purposes of facilitating the choice of the method for the spe-
cific forecasting object.

Fig. 2.6 shows the first of the designated classifications [35]. On the first level,
the classification feature (according to the information basis) divides the methods
into two classes: factographic and expert. The factographic methods are forecasting
methods which use as the information base real facts that occurred in the past.

These facts can be recorded on any information carrier and have both a quantitative
and qualitative nature. In opposition to the factographic methods, the expert meth-
ods are based upon the processing of opinions and judgments by specialists or ex-
perts in one or another area of knowledge and these are obtained in the process of
various specialized procedures for their collection.

The classification feature of the second level has been formulated as the method of
employing the information about the object. In the class of factographic methods,
three types have been established for this feature.

The first type is the aggregate of extrapolation and interpolation methods. Charac-
teristic for this type of methods is the use of initial information for constructing
fitting functions. Then the value of the segment of lead time is substituted in the
found dependence and the obtained value of the function for the sought forecast is

set.

The second type of factographic methods is based upon a study of the relationships
between two or more variables in the forecast object with the subsequent determining
of the future values of some variables using the values of others which are known or
have been determined by other methods. The apparatus of multidimensional mathemati-
cal statistics underlies such methods. In this type of methods a specific place is
held by the so-called lead methods which are based on a study of relationships be-
tween the scientific-technical information and the scientific-technical progress.

As a rule, for all the methods of this type, after elucidating the relationships be-
tween the variables and the constructing of one or another statistical model, the

40

FOR‘OFHKHA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Forecasting methods
Factographic Expert

Extrapolation &
interpolation Statistical Analogies With feedback

      

               

 

H
o
o I: m
o o H
1-: v4 0
z: a v
o H S m
o v: ‘
° 3 5 ° 0 H
E c a «mu-c «rt 0
o u u a! 0
a V4 I: GE:
u .4 H m H
v m on n
H a use! 50
u o t: to. u m 15
° 3 “ L o o 5 u —a u u; u
a u no my: a m o I:
o u 011 as» o o a w
H a *0 an! n 0 v! H
u o u: :=> H .o H > ~ U 0
a no on. m o 3 v! o m o “u
H 0 Ha u a o u v-i U 8
o o. as on v. I: 'o u o s g
5* ° .3 : °:; '5 a 1: :a 3 a a
H
u u «.4 H m a
5 2 :3“ '80 m 3 'u o 2 ‘ H '3
an: on H :3 a u n
E 8 u 3 .a m s H . . . '
o o e o s a v e o O H ~ If)
.4 N n - h - - - -

Fig. 2.‘. Classification of forecasting methods

actual forecast is obtained by the extrapolation or interpolation of the dependent
variables in relation to the independent variables.

The following type of methods is based upon a study of the future development of
certain objects following the development patterns of their analogous objects. Here
it is possible to use both quantitative and qualitative information. Moreover.
within this type one can isolate the research on analogies between objects of the
same nature but having a certain historical break in the development level and anal-
ogies between objects which differ in their nature. In the first instance, for ex-
ample, this could be two countries standing at different levels of social and tech-
nical development, and in the second, analogies known from foreign sources of lit-
erature between the development of a biological system and the spread of a new pro-
duction method and so forth. It is essential to point out that in the practice of
scientific-technical and economic forecasting. particularly in our nation, this

type of method is applied in practice comparatively rarely.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In terms of the method of using the information obtained from expert specialists,
there are two types of methods: direct estimates and those with feedback. Here

the difference is that in the first instance the expert information obtained is
processed and given directly as a result. In the second type of methods, the result
is obtained in a process. as a rule, of several approximations and at each step the
results of processing the previous one influenced the experts. that is. there is
feedback with the experts.

The inferior level of our classification is comprised of comparatively narrow groups
of methods which are close in their essence.

It is essential to point out that the presented classification encompasses only sim-

ple (singular) methods3 and does not include the composite ones. As a rule.
composite methods of varying complexity are employed in practice. For example,

the PATTERN method [25] includes as component elements the following: the writing
of a scenario, morphological analysis. the constructing of a tree of goals and col-
lective expert estimates. The matrix forecasting method includes the construction
of a model graph of the object and collective expert estimates. The patent methods
ordinarily employ the construction of a certain classification tree for assessing

the importance of patents, the methods of statistical analysis for examining the sta-
tistics of patenting and its internal and external relationships, the methods of ex—

trapolation and analogies of patenting dynamics and introduction dynamics.

Obviously with the development of the apparatus of prognostics, the number of singu-
lar methods will grow and at the same time the complexity of the comprehensive
methods will rise with an increase in the demands made upon the quality of the fore-
casts. In this regard. as was pointed out above, at the present level in the de-
velopment of prognostics it is hard to propose a classification of the parallel-type
forecasting methods which would make it possible to select uniformly a method for
forecasting a certain range of parameters in an object. It is only possible to list
gzoups of preferential methods which are employed under various conditions and for
different objects.

In selecting a forecasting method, it is essential to consider the following basic
factors: the type of forecast to be worked out; the volume and type of initial in-
formation about the object; the ratio of the base time To and the lead time t, of the
forecast.

In terms of the first factor. it is possible to isolate exploratory and normative
forecasts. Let us designate the first by the digit 0 and the latter by the digit 1.

For the second factor, the information one, it is possible to isolate four forecast
subgroups: 0-there is a very limited amount of information about the object; 1--
there is qualitative information; 2--there is statistical information about the ob-
ject or estimates of the basic probability characteristic; 3-—there is determined
quantitative information.

3By singular methods one understands methods which are not broken down in a certain
sense into other, simpler ones based, as a rule, on a certain type of information
and employing a specific area of mathematical procedures.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 2.5. Space of forecast classification
features

Key: a--Information about object; b-Type
of forecast; c--Exploratory; d-—Norn-
ative; e--Determined quantitative
information; f-Statistical informa-
tion; g-Qualitative information;
h--Limited amount of information

 

For the third factor which cannot be examined for all the number combinations of

the first two, it is possibl- to isolate the following forecast subgroups: 0--with
a ratio of ro/ry 3; l-with a ratio of rolt 3. The figure 3 has been taken as a
result of generalizing the opinions of a n er of authors on the minimum acceptable
ratio of the base time to the lead time for a forecast. In their majority these re-
late to the extrapolation methods of exploratory forecasting.

For normative forecasting, it would be correct to formulate the gradations for the
third factor depending simply upon the lead time: short-term, medium-term and long-
term forecasts. For maintaining the commonness of the classification, we will keep
the two gradations for the normative forecasts as well using the digit 0 for the
short- and medium-term forecasts and the digit 1 for long-term ones.

Thus, we have a three-dimensional space of features in which there are 16 areas cor-
responding to the various values of their codes (Fig. 2.5). For each of these areas
it would be possible to name several methods from those listed above (see Fig. 2.5)
which would preferentially be used under conditions corresponding to the value of
its coordinates. The simple methods ordinarily are incorporated in the comprehen-
sive forecasting methods for this area. It is possible to give the following tenta-
tive division of methods, using the numeration of the methods shown in Fig. 2.6 for
the following areas:

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Area Area

Code Number of Preferential Methods Code Number of Preferential Methods
000 8, 9, 10, 13 100 9, 10. 14

001 9, 10, 13 101 9, 10, 13, 14

010 7, 8, 9, 10, 13 110 9, 10, 14, 15

011 9, 10, 13 111 9, 10, 12, 13, 16

020 3, 4, S, 6 120 4, 5, 6

021 k, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13 121 6, 5, 6, 10, 13

030 1, 2 130 10, 11, 12, 14, 15

031 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13 131 ll, 12. 13, lb, 15

The given parallel classification can be used as a guideline in the problems of
selecting suitable methods. The solution to this problem as a whole remains a com-
plex unformalized process as was already pointed out in the given paragraph.

2.3. Expert Forecasting Methods

The area of employing expert forecasting methods is the scientific-technical objects
and problems an analysis of which either completely or partially cannot be submitted
to a mathematical formalization. These methods provide an opportunity to construct
an adequate model of future scientific-technical development on the basis of opin-
ions of persons working in science and technology (experts).

The use of expert opinions as sources of information about the forecasted object is
based upon the hypothesis that they possess ideas about the ways to solve particular
or global problems, apriori judgments about the importance of different decisions
and intuitive guesses about alternative and possible variations for the development
of the studied object.

Let us examine the most widely found methods of expert evaluation which are employed
in scientific and technical forecasting.

2.3.1. Individual Expert Estimates

Individual expert methods are based on the use of the opinions of experts who are
specialists in the appropriate specialty, independently of one another. The most
frequently employed are two methods of making a forecast: on the basis of a conver-
sation between the forecaster and the expert following a previously elaborated pro-
gram (the interview methods); on the basis of the extended and careful independent
work by the expert on posed questions (the analytical estimate method).

The interview method is the simplest method of expert evaluation and here the spe-
cialist's opinion is elucidated by an expert. The analytical estimate method, on
the contrary. provides an opportunity for the expert to use all the information
needed by him about the forecast object. The expert draws up his ideas in the form

of a report.

The basic advantage of the designated forecast methods is the possibility of making
maximum use of the individual abilities of the expert. However, these methods are

04

FOR 0FTHC]A[.US£IDNLY
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEGDNLY

little suitable for forecasting the most general strategies due to the limited know-
ledge of one expert specialist about the development of related areas of science.

2.3.2. Collective Expert Estimates

The method of collective expert estimates is based on the principles of elucidating
the collective opinion of experts on the development prospects of the forecasting
object.

The use of these methods is based on the hypothesis of the expert's ability with a
sufficient degree of reliability to assess the importance and significance of a sci-
entific and technical problem, the prospectiveness of developing a certain area of
research, the time for completing one or another event, the advisability of select-
ing one of the alternative development paths for the forecast object and so forth.

The advantage of these methods is the possibility of exchanging opinions between the
expert specialists. the orientation of the ideas toward the strategic goals and the
use of internal and external feedback in the heuristic process. The basic shortcom-
ings of these methods are the possibility of an influence of the authorities and the
opinion of the majority, the difficulty of a public abandoning of one's viewpoint
and so forth.

At present, expert methods based on the use of special commissions have become wide-
spread and here the groups of experts at a "roundtable" discuss one or another prob-
lem in the aim of coordinating their opinions and working out a uniform opinion.
This method has a drawback in the fact that the expert group in its judgments is
basically guided by the logic of compromise.

In contrast to the commission method, in the Delphi method, instead of a collective
discussion of one or another problem, there is an individual questioning of the ex-
perts ordinarily in the form of a questionnaire for elucidating the relative impor-
tance and dates for the occurrence of hypothetical events [50]. Then the question-
naires are statistically processed, the collective opinion of the group is formed,
the arguments in favor of various judgments are generalized and all the information
is provided to the experts. The participants of the expert evaluation are requested
to review the estimates and explain the reasons for their disagreement with the col-
lective judgment. This procedure is repeated several times (three or four times).
As a result, the range of estimates is narrowed. The drawback of this method is

the impossibility of eliminating the influence which the organizers of the question-
naires have on the experts in drawing up the questionnaires.

As a rule. the basic questions in drawing up the forecast using an expert collective
include: the formation of a representative expert group; the preparations for and
carrying out of the expert evaluation; statistical processing of the obtained re-
sults. The basic rules for solving these questions will be examined below.

Fbrming the representative group of experts. In forming the expert group, the basic
questions are to determine the quantitative and qualitative membership of the group.

The selection of experts starts by determining the areas of scientific, technical,
economic and administrative questions which are involved in solving the given prob-
lem; then lists of persons competent in these areas are drawn up.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0RIOFF"JAI.USE(NULY

For obtaining a qualitative forecast, a number of demands are made on the partici-
pants in the expert evaluation, the main ones being: a high level of general erudi-
tion; profound special knowledge in the area to be evaluated; the ability to ade-
quately depict the development trends of the studied object; the presence of s psy-
chological set forthe future; the presence of an academic scientific interest in the
question being studied with the lack of any practical self-interest as a specialist
in this area; the presence of production and (or) research experience in the desig-
nated area.

A questionnaire is used to determine to what degree the potential expert meets the

listed requirements. The method of the expert's self-evaluation of his competence

is frequently employed in addition to this. In a self-assessment the expert deter-
mines the degree of his knowledge on the question being studied also using a ques-

tionnaire. The processing of the questionnaire data provides an opportunity to ob-
tain a quantitative assessment of the potential expert' s competence using the fol-

lowing formula:

Zn:
K—05 L+_ ' (2.1)

[2‘11—

where Yj--the weight of the gradation given by the expert for j (3 -1q .... m) char-
acteristics in the questionnaire, number of points;
yj-max--the maximum weight (the scale limit) for 1 characteristics. number of
points;
m--the total number of competence characteristics in the questionnaire;
l--the weight of the group marked by the expert in the self-evaluation scale.

number of points;
p--the limit of the expert self-evaluation scale, number of points.

It is rather difficult to set an optimum size for an expert group. However, at
present a number of formalized approaches to this question has been worked out. One
of them is based upon setting the maximum and minimum size limits of the group.

Here they proceed from two conditions: 1) the high average competence of the expert
groups; 2) the stabilization of the average assessment of the fcrecssted character-

istics.

The first condition is used to determine the maximum size of the expert group “max:

2 K:
cK...'= "' . (2.2)

"am

 

where c--constant;
Kuax—-the maximum possible competence for the employed competence scale;

K1-the competence of expert i.

66

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY
FOR‘OFF"JAL.USE¢DNLY

This conditions assumes that if there is a group of experts whose competence is max-
imal, then the average value of their estimates can be considered "true." Voting is
used to determine the constant. that is, the group is considered elected if two-
thirds of those present have voted for it. Proceeding from this it is accepted that
cI-2/3. Thus, the maximum size of the expert group is set on the basis of the in-
equality

 

. (2.3)

Then the minimum size of the expert group n.1n is determined. This is done by using
the condition of stabilization for the average estimate of the forecasted character-

istic. This condition is formulated in the following manner: the inclusion or ex-
clusion of the expert in the group has an insignificant influence on the average es-
timate of the forecasted amount

343‘
3max

 

< c, (2.6)

where B--the average estimate of the forecasted amount in points as given by the ex-
pert group;
B'—-the average estimate given by the expert group from which one expert has
been excluded (or included therein):
Emax-the maximum possible estimate of the forecasted value in the adopted esti-
mate scale;

c--the set value for the change in the average estimate in including or ex-
cluding the expert.

The amount of the average estimate is most sensitive to the estimate of an expert
who possesses the greatest competence and who has set the greatest number of points
with B‘ ﬂux/2 and minimal for B >Bmax/2 and for this reason for testing the reali-
zation of the condition in (2.6) it is proposed that the given expert be excluded
from the group.

In the literature the rule is given of calculating the minimum number of experts in

a group depending upon the set (acceptable) amount of the change in the average
estimate of :

3
am“ - 0.5 [E + s]. (2.5)

Thus, the rules of (2.3), (2.6) and (2.5) provide an opportunity to obtain estimate
values for the maximum and minimum number of experts in a group.

The final size of the expert group is formed on the basis of the sequential exclu-
sion of the little-competent experts and here one uses the condition (Kmax"xi) < n.

where n-the set amount of the limit for the acceptable deviation of competence for
expert i from the maximal. Simultaneously new experts can be included in the group.

67

FORIOFFﬂJAl.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The group size is set within the limits “max < n 4 "min-

In addition to the above-described procedures, in the methods of collective expert
estimates they also employ a detailed statistical analysis of the expert conclusions
and as a result of this qualitative characteristics of the expert group are deter-
mined. In accord with these characteristics in the process of carrying out the ex-
pert evaluation the quantitative and qualitative composition of the expert group

can be adjusted. The methods of determining these characteristics are examined be-
low.

Preparation and carrying out of expert evaluation. The preparations for questioning
the experts includes the elaboration of questionnaires which would contain the range
of questions on the forecast object. The structural and organizational set of ques-
tions in the questionnaire should be logically linked to the central task of the ex-
pert evaluation.

Although the form and content of the questions are set by the specific nature of the
forecasting object. it is possible to set general demands for them: the questions
should be formulated in generally accepted terms, their formulating should exclude
any semantic ambiguities and all the questions should logically correspond to the
structure of the forecast object and ensure a uniform interpretation.

By form the questions can be open and closed, direct and indirect. A question is
called open if the answer to it is not regulated. Questions are considered closed
if their formulation contains alternative answers and the expert should choose one
(or several) of them. Indirect questions are used in those instances when the aim
of the expert evaluation must be concealed. Such questions are resorted to when
there can be no confidence that the expert. in giving information, will be totally
sincere or free of outside influences which would distort the objectiveness of the
answer. Let us examine the basic groups of questions used in carrying out a collec-
t we expert estimate.

1. Questions presupposing answers in the form of a quantitative estimate, that is:
on the time of the occurrence of events, on the probability of the occurrence of
events or for an estimate of the relative influence of factors. It is advisable to
use an uneven scale in determining the scale of values for quantitative characteris-
tics. The choice of the specific uneven scale depends upon the nature of the de-
pendence of the forecast error upon the lead time.

2. Questions requiring an informative reply in a concise form: disjunctive. con—
junctive or implicative.

3. Questions requiring an informative answer in a complete form: with an answer
in the form of a list of information about the object; with the answer in the for:
of a list of arguments affirming or rejecting the thesis contained in the question.

These questions are formed in two stages. In the first stage the experts are asked
to formulate the most promising and least elaborated problems. In the second stage

from the designated problems they choose those that are fundamentally solvable and
have direct bearing on the forecast object.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFiﬁCIAl.lEﬂE(NNLY

The procedure of carrying out an expert estimate can vary, hovever here also it is
possible to establish three basic stages: 1) in the first stage the experts are
used to clarify the formalized model of the forecast object, to formulate the ques-
tions for the questionnaires and adjust the membership of the group; 2) in the
second stage the experts work directly on the questions in the questionnaires:

3) after the preliminary processing of the forecast results the experts are used

for consultation on the lacking information needed for the final formulating of the
forecast.

Statistical processing of expert estimate results. In processing quantitative data
contained in the questionnaires, statistical estimates are determined for the fore-
casted characteristics and their confidence limits as well as statistical estimates
for the agreement or the expert opinions.

The average value of the forecasted amount is determined using the formula

II
B U z Biln,
i-l

where Bi--the value of the forecasted amount given by expert i;
n--the number of experts in the group.

R
Moreover. the variance is determined 0- [§(B‘—B)’J/n—l and the approximate
a
'17-
value of the confidence interval Jail/:1,

where t--the parameter determined from the Student tables for the set level of con-
fidence probability [the number of degrees of freedom k - (n-2)].

The confidence limits for the values of the forecasted amount are figured according
to the formulas: for the upper limit AB - B+J; for the lower limit A“ - B-J.

The coefficient of variation for the estimates given by the experts is determined
from the following dependence V - 018, where o--the standard deviation.

In processing the results of the expert estimates for the relative importance of the
scientific areas, the mean value. the variance and the coefficient of variation are
figured for each assessed area. Moreover, a concordance coefficient is figured and
this shows the degree of agreement among the expert opinions on the importance of

each of the assessed areas and paired rank correlation coefficients which determine

the degree to which the experts agree with one another.

For this the importance estimates given by the experts are ranked. Each estimate
given by expert i is expressed by the number of the natural rank in such a manner
that the number 1 is given to the maximum estimate and the number n to the minimum.

If all the n of the estimates differ then the corresponding numbers of the natural
series are the estimate ranks of expert i. If there are the same estimates among

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWCIAI. USE ONLY

those given by expert 1, these estimates are given the same rank equal to the arith-
metic average of the corresponding numbers of the natural series.

The total of the ranks sj assigned by the experts to area 3 (j - l, ..., m; r-the
number of studied areas) is determined by the formula

3
S I ,
J i- 1“!"1

where Rijnthe rank of the estimate given by expert i to era 3.

I!
The mean value of the total of estimate ranks for all the areas equals '5' - 2 53/3.
1'1
The deviation of the total ranks obtained by area 1 from the mean value of the total
ranks is defined as d3 - 33-3. Then the concordance coefficient calculated for the
aggregate of all the areas approximated for the estisate is

a

The amount T1 - Z tg-te is calculated with the presence of equal ranks (a-the
e-l

number of equal rank groups, tenths number of equal ranks in the group).

The concordance coefficient assumes values within the limits from 0 to l: H - 1
means the full agreement of the expert opinions and H - 0--full disagreement.

The concordance coefficient indicates the degree of agreement in the entire expert

group. A low value for this coefficient can be obtained if a comonness of opinions
is lacking among all experts as well as due to the presence of opposing opinions
among expert subgroups although agreement can be high within a subgroup.

For ascertaining the degree to which the expert opinions agree with one another, a
paired rank correlation coefficient is used

53"
Pam" T‘—l—T'.—— o
'3"

Ila—n!) — 1? (Tc-— The)

where U! --the difference (for the modulus) in the anounts of the expert ranks for
area J gel: by experts i and (1+1); .3 - lRij'Ri-O-l; 1|.

The paired rank correlation coefficient can assume the values -1 c p < l. The value

p - 1 corresponds to a full agreement in the opinions of two experts. The value
0 - -1 shows that the opinion of one expert is the opposite of the other's opinion.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For determining the significance level of the values of the coefficients H and
01. 1+1 it is possible to use the x—square criterion. For this one calculates the

ﬂ
:2 2 4
value 1'~——%— (the number of degrees of freedom I: - m—l) and from
m(m+l)—;I—_—TX'T.
‘-

the appropriate tables the significance level of the obtained values is determined.

2.3.3. Brainstorm Methods

Among the intuitive forecasting methods. a significant place is held by brainstorm
methods. The given methods are based upon involving all the experts in an active
creative process. For using these methods in forecast studies there is an opportun-
ity to obtain productive results over a short interval of time in a situation of the
creative generating of ideas with the direct contact of experts. The following
brainstorm methods can be named:

a) The direct brainstorm method the aim of which is to generate as many possible
new ideas for solving a problem situation;

b) The method of a destructured relative estimate;

c) The confidence group method the aim of which is to establish the agreement among
a small group of participants in the method;

d) The method of inducing mental and intellectual activity the aim of which is to
find the rational choice of one or anorher solution to a problem situation without
the establishing of quantitative estimates;

e) The method of the controlled generation of ideas the aim of which is to disclose
promising and original ideas to resolve a problem situation;

f) The method of stimulated observation the aim of which is to find logical solu-
tions to the discussed problem situation with the formulated constraints;

3) The operational creativity method the aim of which is to find the sole solution
for the discussed problem situation.

The basic rules of brainstorming consist in the following: 1) The statements by the
participants should be terse and clear and detailed reasoning is not required; full
statements can reduce the pace and impede the development of the essential and fruit-
ful state of emotional stress; 2) skeptical comments and criticism of previous state-
ments are categorically prohibited; 3) each of the participants has the right to
speak as many times as he wishes but not sequentially; lo) the floor is given first

to those who wish to content on the previous statement; 5) it is not permitted to
read without interruption a list of proposals which could be prepared by a partici-
pant ahead of time.

Additional proposals to resolve a problem situation can occur among the participants
later and for this reason all proposals which occur after the brainstorming can be'

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!!0FFHJAL.USE‘0NLY

written down and turned over to the organizers of the session. For brainstorming it
is most productive to have a group consisting of 10-15 specialists in a session of
from 20 minutes to 1 hour.

The explanation for this established fact is probably that in the process of brain-
storming a majority of ideas are voiced by association with the previous idea.

Along with encouraging such associative thinking it is essential to provide rapid
questioning of all those who desire to be heard on the previous idea. For the oc-
entrance of associative thinking it is essential to have a certain minimum "thresh-
old" group size which generates an aggregate of different quality viewpoints on the
discussed problem situation. The answer to the question of the make-up of the group
presupposes a proper selection of participants:

1) From persons of approximately the same position (degree or title) if the partic-
ipants know each other (the presence of superiors intimidates subordinates);

2) From persons of different positions (degrees or titles) if the participants are
not acquainted; in this instance it is essential to make each of the participants
equal by giving him a number in calling on the participant in turn by number, since
the group could include candidates of sciences, for example, along with academicians.

The essential condition of the participants specialization in the area of a problem
situation is not required for all group members. Moreover, it is very desirable
that the group include specialists from other areas of knowledge who possess a high
level of general erudition and understand the sense of the problem situation. A can-
structive approach to fulfilling the formulated condition consists in the coordinat-
ing of the goals of the brainstorming, the forms of informing the participant of the
initial information and the competence or informativeness of the participants in the
area discussed (by informativeness one understands the level of special knowledge
for the participant in the discussed area).

A description of the problem situation includes: the reasons for the occurrence of
the problem situation; an analysis of the causes and possible consequences of the
arising problem situation (it is advisable to overstate the consequences in order to
more acutely feel the need for resolving the contradictions); an analysis of world
experience in solving a similar problem situation (if this exists); a classification
(systematization) of the existing ways of resolving the problem situation; the for-
mulating of the problem situation in the form of a central question with an hier—
archy of subquestions (a question should be sufficiently simple in its internal
structure since the narrowing of the problem encourages the efficiency of brain-
storming).

The leadership of the brainstorming should be assigned to forecasters who are ex-
perienced in leading scientific discussions and problem posing and who know the pro-
cedural questions and methods. If the discussed problem situation is complicated
and has a narrow specialized nature, then a specialist on the discussed question
should be called in as a co-chairman for directing the brainstorming. Moreover, the
group should include: methodologists who are specialists in the area of prognostics
and who have experience in holding sessions and processing the results; initiators
who are specialists in the area of the studied problem; analysts who are highly
skilled specialists in the area of the studied problem and who are capable of sum-
marizing the past, assessing the present state of the object and the research trends

52

IN)! OFIWCJAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the problem; anplifiers who are specialists in the designated problem with de-
veloped deductive thinking.

All the participants in the brainstorming should possess developed associative think-
ing. The brainstorming process should be carried out under conditions which help as
much as possible in establishing a creative mood with a maximum concentrating of at-
tention among the participants on the discussed problem. Since an idea advanced at
a given moment could previously "mentally belong” to another participant waiting for
the floor. the result of the brainstorming is considered to be the fruit of the col-
lective labor of the entire group. The most valuable are the ideas directly tied to
previously voiced ideas or arising as a result of the uniting of two or several ideas
ideas into one.

It is desirable that a problem situation be presented in writing beforehand and here
specific questions should be raised, such as: the goal of the brainstorming; useful
ideas for solving the problem; a list of factors relating to the discussed problem
situation which anticipate new approaches to solving it; a list of different view-
points on the discussed problem; a list of questions which must be answered in order

to resolve the problem more rapidly and effectively; a plan for resolving the dis-
cussed situation.

The leader of a brainstorming session should organize his opening speech in such a
manner as to arouse the mental susceptibility of the participants and force the par-
ticipants to feel the need of doing what the leader is asking. The process of ad-
vancing new ideas occurs in the following manner. An idea voiced by one partici-
pant in the discussion gives rise to a reaction which, because of the ban on criti-
cism, is formulated as an accompanying idea.

As a rule, at the outset of the session it is essential to have required questioning
as often the leader must stir up the participants for 5-10 minutes and create an at-
mosphere of a free exchange of opinions. In conducting the brainstorming the leader
follows the above-listed rules and in addition he should:

1) Focus the participants' attention on the problem situation, setting its limits
by the specific requirements of the problem situation and the terminological strict-

ness of the ideas voiced;

2) He should not declare any idea faults, he should not discuss and not interrupt
the examination of any idea; he should examine any idea regardless of its seeming
inapplicability or unfeasibility;

3) Helcome the improving or combining of ideas. He should give the floor first to
those who wish to make a statement relating to the previous statement;

4) He should support and encourage participants as this is so essential to elimin-
ate their reticence;

5) He should create an unrestrained atmosphere thereby helping to increase the ac-
tivity of the participants.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIWWCJAl.lEﬂi(MVLY

The active work of the leader is presupposed only at the outset of the brainstorm-
ing. After the participants have been sufficiently aroused the process of the pro-
moting of new ideas occurs spontaneously. In this process the leader plays a pas-
sive role in controlling the participants according to the rules for conducting a
brainstorming session. It must be remembered that the more diverse and the greater
the number of statements. the broader and deeper the coverage of the examined ques-
tion and the greater the probability that new ideas will occur.

The stated ideas should be taped in order not to miss a single idea and to be able
to systematize them for the following stage.

After the holding of the brainstorming the ideas raised in the generating stage are
systematized. The systematisation is carried out by the problem situation analysis
group in the following stages: 1) A nomenclature list is compiled of all the stated
ideas; 2) each of the ideas is formulated in generally accepted terms; 3) duplicat-
ing and complementary ideas are determined and these are then formulated in the form
of comprehensive ideas; A) the features are established by which the ideas can be
unified; S) a list of ideas is drawn up by groups; in each group the ideas are given
in the order or their commonness: from the more general to the particular which com-
plement or develop the more general ideas.

In forecasting use is also made of the method of a destructured relative estimate
(the 000 method) which is an integration of two processes of an ordinary brainstorm
and the destructuring of advanced systematized ideas. The destructuring of ideas is
a specialized procedure for evaluating ideas for practical feasibility in the pro-
cess of brainstorming, when each of the ideas is subjected to thorough criticism by
the participants in the session. The basic rule in the destructuring stage is to
examine each of the systematized ideas solely from the viewpoint of obstacles on the
path to achieving it, that is, the participants in the brainstorming give arguments
which reject the discussed idea. In the destructuring process a counter idea can be
proposed which would contain an assertion about the impossibility of realizing the
idea, it would formulate the existing constraints and advance a proposal on the pos-
sibility of eliminating these constraints. The structure of the counter idea, as a
rule, is as follows: "This cannot be because.... In carrying out this it is essen-
tial to use...." Thus, the result of carrying out the second stage of the D00 meth-
od is the drawing up of a list of critical counts on a group of ideas or each of
the ideas as well as a list of counterideas.

The leadership of a brainstorming session in the destructuring of ideas is provided
by a leader who: discloses the content of the problem situation and briefly de-
scribes the groups of systematized ideas; recalls the rules for brainstorming and
concentrates the attention of the participants on the need for a thorough criticism
of the ideas proposed for discussion and the advancing of counteridess; he formu-
lates the most general idea of the first group and invites the members to have their

say.

The brainstorming process in the destructuring of ideas is governed by the same rules
as in the idea generation stage. However. the leader gives basic attention to pre-
venting the voicing of arguments which substantiate the discussed idea as well as
encouraging proposed counterideas.

Sb

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FCNR()FF1C1AL.USE2(XNLN

After all those who so desired have voiced their critical comments on the discussed
idea, the leader proposes the next idea for examination. The leader determines
whether the next idea will be a particular idea of the discussed group of ideas or
will belong to a new group of ideas. In taking this decision he is guided by the
considerations of maximum criticism for all ideas belonging to the discussed group.

The leader can propose that the participants criticize a group of ideas all at once
but this is allowable only in the instance when the number of ideas in the group

does not exceed five-seven and they are simple in terms of their inner structure.

The destructuring process is repeated until each of the systematized ideas from the

list has been criticized. The advanced criticisms and counterideas are tape re-
corded.

The third stage of the 000 method is to assess the critical comments obtained in

the destructuring process in order to draw up a final list of practically applicable
ideas aimed at resolving the problem situation. The evaluation of the criticisms is
as important as the destructuring of the ideas since in the destructuring stage all
possible constraints impeding the practical implementation of the idea are formu-
lated while in the generation stage the knowledge of concrete conditions under which
the ideas should be realized is voiced.

The processing and analysis of the destructuring results are carried out by the
problem situation analysis group. The group can be supplemented by those special-

ists who are empowered to take decisions on carrying out the ideas (this is partic-
ularly important in those instances when decisions must be taken quickly on a multi—

plicity of problems all at once).

The D00 method makes it possible to find a group solution for an arising problem
situation, excluding the path of compromises. A solution in the form of a single
opinion is the result of the dispassionate and successive analysis of the problem.
However the method does not offer the ranking of ideas in significance or the find-
ing of an optimum way to achieve the set goal and for this reason should be comple-
mented by a collective expert evaluation with the subsequent statistical processing
of the evaluation results.

2.4. Forecasting on the Basis of the Extrapolation and Interpolation of Trends

In examining the singular forecasting methods we have not set the task of fully rep-
resenting the entire list of them either in terms of composition or in terms of the
depth of examining individual methods. The following considerations have underlain
the choice of the composition of examined methods and the degree of detailed examin-
ation of each of them. In the first place, the practical feasibility and utility of
the methods in the tasks of forecasting BTS development. secondly, how well the
given method has already been described in the literature, and thirdly, the newness
and promise of the method in developing the theory and practice of prognostics.

Thus, let us turn to the problem of using the mathematical methods of extrapolation
and interpolation in forecast research as this is the most fully elaborated and
widely used type of factographlc forecasting methods.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtMﬂﬂClALIHﬂEONLY

2.4.1. The Formal and Forecast Extrapolation

For persons who are little acquainted with forecast problems, as a rule, the ques-
tion arises of why extrapolation is examined in prognostics at all as it has been
presented exhaustively and in the greatest detail in mathematical literature. It is
merely a question of taking the formulas, substituting the initial information and
obtaining the results. What results can be obtained with such an approach is clear-
ly demonstrated by R. Ayres [46]. For example, in formally extrapolating the growth
trends for the speeds of the various types of transport over the last two centuries,
by the year 1990 we will obtain speeds which significantly surpass the speed of
light. In an analogous manner the curve for human life expectancy after the year
2000 rushes toward infinity. The extrapolated growth trend for the explosive power
of means of destrucrion created by man rises virtually without restriction even
after 1981. One could give a number of other results of formal extrapolation which
run counter to common sense.

R. Ayres defines such forecasts as excessively exalted. 0n the other hand. he gives
examples of blinded forecasts which do not permit the researcher to predict the pos-
sible consequences of future events, the prospects of a trend, the influence of the
environment and so forth. "A simple extrapolation of trends does not presuppose the
understanding of factors underlying any phenomenon and it is usually enough that
these (concealed) factors remain unchanged over time" [46].

The problem of formal and forecast extrapolation has been examined more closely by
G. Haustein [63). He says that it is possible to have extrapolation on the basis of
the patterns inherent to a system proceeding from the existing development trends.
Mathematically the optimum fitting of results to the initial data using a polynomial
to a certain degree corresponds to this.

With a different variety of extrapolation, the amounts characterizing actual data
are correlated to hypotheses about the dynamics of the process over the long run.
The elaboration of the hypotheses is not carried out just on the basis of past de-
velopment. The closeness of the theoretical and actual data is not turned into the
sole criterion for the choice of the function.

Below we will distinguish between a mathematical or formal extrapolation and fore-
cast extrapolation. By the former we understand those methods of extrapolation (and
interpolation) of dynamic series whereby no use at all is made of information about
the physical or logical essence of the examined process, nonformal procedures for
selecting the functions are not employed while the results are not varified by any
hypotheses concerning future development of the object.

The most suitable example of mathematical extrapolation is the calculating of coef-
ficients for the polynomial breakdown of a function for a set range of values.
According to the Weierstrass theorem, a function which is stable within the inter-
val of values (a, b) can be represented in it with any degree of accuracy in the
form of a polynomial. For any value of x on (a, b). there is the valid inequality
Iy-f(x)| < E, where €—-any small positive number.

In increasing the number of terms of the polynomial in the breakdown, it is possible
to increase accuracy theoretically up to the absolute coinciding of the curve with
all points. In practice this seeming advantage ends up with a loss of accuracy.

56

IN)! 0F10C1AI.IASE§CNULV
FOR OﬁIWCJAl.USEGDNLY

As a rule, the economic processes and the processes of scientific and technical de-
velopment arise out of a certain constant, steady tendency which in prognostics is
usually termed a trend, and a certain random component expressed in the fluctuation
of indicators around the trend. These random components can appear as the results
of random fluctuations in the external or internal variables of the object as well
as random measurement results. In borrowing terms from information theory, the
above-described increased accuracy of approximation leads to the emphasizing of

noise (the random components) and does not filter the signal (the trend) out of
the noise.

In contrast to a formal extrapolation, a forecast extrapolation is aimed at using
various methods to seek out the simplest type of function which provides a maximum
approximation to the trend of the process, considering its particular features and
constraints and conforming to the hypotheses about its future development.

The procedure of selecting the type of approximating function in this instance, as

a rule, includes a series of nonformal aspects such as assessing the conformity of
the function to the points of a dynamic series. The very forecast research here
consists of several stages usually of the following composition: the primary proc-
essing and reprocessing of the initial series; the choice of the type of extrapola-
tion function; determining the parameters of the extrapolation function; the extrap~
olation itself and assessing the accuracy of the obtained results.

Let us point out that a formal extrapolation can be incorporated as a stage of re-
search in a forecast extrapolation. 0n the other hand forecasts are frequently
worked out on the basis of just formal extrapolation. In this regard let us examine
it in more detail.

The mathematical basis for extrapolation and interpolation methods can be found in a
section of function approximation in the theory of numerical analytical methods.
The approximation problem is posed in the general case in the following manner [12]:
a given function-f(x) must be approximately replaced by a generalized polynomial

Q(x)-C.-r. (x)+Cm (10+ +0.04». (2.6)

so that the deviation. in a certain sense, of the function f(x) from Q(x) in the
given set X = {x} is the least. If the set X consists of a finite number of points
x0, x], ..., xn, then the approximation is termed point, and if X is an interval

a < x < b, then the approximation is termed integral. Let us examine the first in-
stance.

The most important for practice are the degree polynomials of the type

Q(x)=a.+a.x+a.x’+---+n..x"- (2.7)

In terms of them it is possible to formulate the approximation problem in the follow-
ing manner: for the given function f(x) to find the polynomial Q(x) of the lowest
possible degree m assuming at the set points x1(i - l. 2, ..., n, x1 # x with i f j)
of the same value as the function f(x), that is, one where Q(x1) - f(x1) i - l, 2,
..., n). The given system of points x1. x2, ..., xn is termed the basic point of
interpolation while the polynomial Q(x) is the interpolation polynomial.

57

FOR OPFTCLALIJSE(MNLY
FINICNWWCJAI.USE(MVLY

Let us point out that for extrapolation purposes it is possible to use the same in-
terpolation polynomials in which are substituted the x values lying beyond the in-
terval (a, b) or the given set of points x - {x}. However, mathematics recommends
that extrapolation be very cautiously used. Por example, in assigning the initial
points in the form of a sequence of equidistant values with an interval h, it is
recommended that orthogonal polynomes be used for an extrapolation only for a value
Ax - h/Z or if the designated function has rather smooth ends.

On this level the forecaster must make much bolder conclusions, for example. in
setting the initial series of values for a variable over a year to extrapolate this
for 5 or even 10 years to come. Because of this there is the obvious necessity of
involving certain additional information not found in the dynamic series.

However, let us return to the formal interpolation. If n 6 a, then it is possible
to assume m - n and determine the factorization coefficients for a1 from the system
of equations:

«+aun+--- +0.6-“
ag-l-am-l- ... +0x-m;

sees-assesses

m+aw.+-~-+a.£uy..

(2.8)

The determinant of this system is a Vandermond determinant Ao‘p‘q‘n- P(xg-xp) f 0
and, consequently, the system (2.8) has a uniform solution. This solution will be

called a Lagrangian interpolation polynomial and which can be written for the func-
tion f(x) in the explicit form

(1—1.)...(3—31.) l-llo,-~(X"”a) .
I" (‘0' . m—x.) (aw—x...) (RI—'Mu)“ .(xa—x.) "
(II

For the case of equidistant basic points of xi, the polynomial Ln(x) can be written
in the form of a Newtonian interpolation polynomial.

If n > m, then a precise approximation is impossible. as the number of basic points
exceeds the degree of the polynomial and the system (2.8) becomes incorrect. In
this instance one moves over to an approximate interpolation, as a rule, to a point
quadratic approximation. This comes down to seeking out the coefficients which min-
imize the quadratic deviation of the polynomial from the set points

8 - 3}. l0. 0:.) —I(x,n'. 0-9)

Such a method of approximation is called the least square method. If the degree of
the approximating polynomial is greater than 3, then calculations using the least
square method become extremely cumbersome and in addition the solution to systems of
equations with high m values leads to significant losses in accuracy. Because of
this a method is employed based on the use of orthogonal functions. that is, those

58

FOI!OFFKJA1.U§IGNVLY
FKHICMNHCJAI.USE¢DNLY

n
where 2 9(x1)p(x1) - 0 in the entire set of points x - {xo, :1, ..., an}.
1-0

The approximating polynomials are constructed in a system of functions in which all
functions of the system are paired orthogonal in the set X - {x0, x1, ..., xn}.

Let po(x), p1(x), ..., pm(x)--the set system of orthogonal polynomials in the set

n
{x0, x1. ..., xn}, that is, X pJ(x1)pk(x1) - 0, with 3 f k, and the polynomial in-
1-0 n
dexes correspond to their degrees. In addition, let SJ - X pj(x1) > 0. Since the
1-0
polynomials pi(x1)(j . 0. 1. ..., m) are linearly independent, the arbitrary poly—

nomial Qm(x) or the degree m can be represented in the form of their linear combin-
ation:

Qm(x) I bopo(x)-+blpl(x) + ... + bnp.(x).
In line with the orthogonality of the polynomials p;(x) it is possible to give in

an explicit form a formula for calculating the coef icients for the factorization of
b3:

0
gmwnm

gt. '7 (‘4)

51" (II-0. l. .. .. at). (2-10)

For using orthogonal polynomials in solving approximation problems the least square
method is used (2.9). Let us examine a possible version for realizing a function
approximation using the Chebyshev orthogonal polynomials.

Let us assume a general case when the function has been set by its values yk in the
set of points xk. In this set. the Chebyshev orthogonal polynomials p°(x), p1(x),

N
p2(x), ..., pn(x) has been set so that 2 p1(xk)pj(xk) - 0 for all i f j.
k-l '

Let us seek a representation of the given function in the form

Y ' bopo(x)+blp](x) + H. 4" bnpn(x),

where the factorization coefficients are determined according to (2.10)

N
“am; it.)
bl- —w— (l- I. 2. ..., n). (2.11)

de

59

FOR OFFICLAI.UBE1ONLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.US£(MULY

The Chcbyshev polynomials themselves have the following form with the leading term
equal to l:

tun-1:.
Mann-E:
u
2‘. («Jr
h(t)-(3-£)'--'i'—-—-(*-*)-
p'h—i)‘
in a
h" . -. . .
I- ”-8. 3. -(3)'
——'—N—-x’—$:ﬁ; 3+;ﬁtetCo . (2.12)

In organizing the calculation process for figuring the Chebyahev polynomials, a re-
current procedure is employed and this is described by the following formulas:

m (x)-(x+a,..)p,(x)—-,}:{; p... (x) u- I. 2. or.

N N
m-g‘pﬁtam ﬂm-—-1';‘-'E_.xupi(x.)o.
(1-0,]. 2. n).

Fig. 2.6 shows the block diagram of an algorithm for the calculation process in
figuring the coefficients of Chebyshev polynomials following the above-described
procedure. It uses the following designations: x-the vector for the values of
the independent variable representing the set (so. :1, ..., xx]; Y-the vector for
the values for the function representing the set {yo, yl, ..., y };N--the total
number of set points; n-the maximum degree of the polynomial; the vector for
the values of the factorization coefficients {b1}; polkl-corresponds to pj-1(xk);
p1[k] corresponds to pj(xk); pa, pb. pc--working values corresponding to pj-1(x),
pj(x), pj+1(x) in the calculation process; ha, hb correspond to R3,1 and H1; BETA--
corresponds to SJ+1.

In the block diagram there is the subprogram PP-"B" for calculating the values bj,
Hj_1. Hj, Bj+1 using the formulas (2.11), (2.13) and (2.14).

After calculating the coefficients we obtain an analytical representation of the
point aggregate. however, as an examination of the algorithm indicates, it is not
simple to represent its notation in the form of a degree sequence with coefficients
because of the recurrent calculations of the polynomials themselves. For utilising
the obtained approximation in practice it is essential to employ an electronic com-
puter as a means of storing the information and figuring the values of the y func-
tion for any values of the independent variable x. In the computer storage it is
enough to have the values for the coefficients 3 - {b1}; BETA - (8j}; H - {“1}; i3
Then using formula (2.13) it is possible to calculate in sequence any polynomial
starting from p2(x) and po(x) - 1; 91(x) . x-i2 Then. having multiplied the

60

FOI.0IF1CIAI.UEII¢N!LY
lune”: lt- 11:1-1. A"!!! II!
ﬂue-é! Ill! 0! ("I

am- WW
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us substitute the variables u - (x-‘a'0/h, where i’ - (straw/2. The sought poly-
nonial is written in the form

V ' c090“) ”11’1“” + "Imam; (2.15)

°J' u—jkilsmjm (1-0 1, ...,n,n<m,

where HJ- k2 1P1 2(uk); uk- (xrxﬂh; po(u) - l; p1(u) - u, and the recurrent formula

H
has the form pj+1(u) - upj(u)—H—1'L1pj_1(u)(j . l, 2, ..., n).

The values Hj and the ratios [1/de in these formulas are calculated through the
total number of points N:

u 112-1 N5 2- 2g 2-4 to)
Ho - N; at - J—lz—l ; 15- N :80" and so forth,

and there are tables for “J for the various N and this facilitates the calculation
procedure.

There is a significant number of different polynomials making it possible to carry
out interpolation and extrapolation using various approxilation formulas. These are
the formulas of Lagrange, Newton, Stirling, Legendre, Lsgger and others. Very wide-

spread are the methods of a harmonious analysis of periodic processes using trigo-
nometric polynomials of the type

g-%+g(a,coslor+b,slnlu); 0—3:}. (2.16)

where a and b—polynomial parameters;
T--the period for the change of function.

with equal accuracy of the measurements and equidistant values for the independent

variable cm} s (x a o. l. II - I):

II
“1:“; 22mm». 0-0. I. m): (2.17)
”n!

Tagging“ (1-0. 1.....m).

where x - 2N1 u.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is convenient to construct the calculation procedure for an uneven number of
points N - 2L+ 1 using the reccursive procedure. The sequence is calculated re-
currently:

new-m: M..;-m.+2muxm (2.18)

and hence “i-I'Uu+'2m“ﬂul.I—“uu
(‘-2L—2. 210-3. one. 2. 1).

then 2
ag-Tm+u..,cocu,—u.,): (2.19)

b! - 12' “LI“II '1’.

Thus, it is possible to avoid repeated calculations of the sin and cos for the
square values of the independent variable. This substantially reduces the calcula-
tion. The procedure's program is rather simple.

Very essential in problems of this sort is the question of selecting the amount of
the degree of the polynomial in the factorization. The optimum degree of the poly-
nomial is determined by the following considerations. A low degree polynomial gives
a rough approximate description of the process and with a high degree of the poly-
nomial the effect of smoothing and the filtering of random deviations (noise) is
lost and this obscures the essence of the studied phenomenon. 0n the other hand
with a rise in the degree of the approximating polynomial there is a sharp rise in
the machine time expenditures for the calculations as well as the memory for storing

the information.
Let a polynomial of the degree no represent absolutely accurately the functional de-

pendence set by the points y - for), and the measured values yk contain the random

errors "It distributed according to a normal law. They are independent and have
equal variance 02 [31]. Let the factorization be carried out according to Cheby-

shev orthogonal polynomials (Lin-(2.14).

The random errors nk cause mistakes in the factorization coefficients bj (let us
designate them 83) and give rise to deviations in the changed values of the function
from the calculated. If we designate the coefficients obtained on the basis of an
experiment by bjev then the deviations at this point are determined as follows:

R... y‘_§ 51.010.)- (2.20)

[n the notation through the measurement errors

R. - m-g m (1.). (2.21)

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The deviations will follow a normal law with the variance

du-a(.:7_g1;'—p}w). (2.22)
The aininum total of the deviation squares
II a
8.. - 2 wk: - 35"». [v.- I: M 0.)] (2.23)
has an average value
M8,.—o'(N—n.—l). (2.25)

Here tor-the weight multipliers with different measurements of Yk("k)'
The ratio
sno/(n-no-l) (2.25)

serves as an unbiased consistent estimate for the variance oz. Hith a sufficiently
large N-no - 1, it is possible to consider a2 I 3110/ (N-no-l).

This ratio can serve as an unbiased consistent estimate of the variance with any
n > n .
’ 0

The procedure for selecting the optimal degree of a polynomial can be represented in
the following form:

1) Let us calculate the factorization coefficients b0, bl. b2 according to the
algorithm given in Fig. 2.6;

2) For each next value of b, let us figure the total of the squares of deviations
Sn (2.23) which can be more conveniently figured using the formula

II . .
3. - ‘2' 0:9:- (“Ho-l-“HH- - ~- +5317.»

The addition of each new term in the factorization of y for the orthogonal polynomi-

als reduces Sn by the amount b§+1Hn+13

3) Each calculated next sn is divided by the number N-no-l and the obtained de-
viation of the type (2.25) is compared with its previous (n-l) value;

lo) The process terminates when the ratio (2.25) ceases to decline noticeably; this
last value of n is also taken as the optimum degree of the polynomial no; the thresh-
old of the diminishing rate can be set differently. for example, by the condition

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lsn_1 — Sal 6 c or by the relative value Sn.1/Sn-< l-rd, where t and 6 -the set
small positive amounts.

The algorithm is sufficiently simple and can be directly incorporated in the block
diagram for the algorithm of figuring the factorization coefficients for the
Chebyshev polynomials (see Fig. 2.6). Analogous estimates and rules can be provided
for selecting the optimum procedure for a trigonometric polynomial.

Thus, we have examined the basic questions related to seeking out an approximate
description of a function in an interval using polynomials. This method is the
most typical in solving interpolation and extrapolation problems by formal mathe-
matics. Here we have not discussed the questions of selecting the most suitable
type of orthogonal polynomials for one or another numerical sequence. Sufficiently
universal procedures for solving this problem as yet have not been worked out al-
though the first steps have been taken in the direction of formalizing the procedure
of choosing the type of functions which ensure an optimum approximation [19. 20].

2.4.2. The Use of the Method of Finite Differences in Solving Series Extrapolation
and Interpolation Problems

In setting a numerical series with a constant interval in the increment of the inde-
pendent variable in solving interpolation and extrapolation problems, often instead
of the very values of the function it is advisable to employ series of its sequen-
tial increments. Such a procedure in a number of instances is very effective in

solving forecasting problems and is presently rather widely used in the practice of
various modifications of extrapolation forecasts.

Let us examine the essence of this method. The formation of finite differences with
a reduction in the increase interval of the independent variable leads to an opera-
tion which is close to a repeated differentiation of a continuous function, as to a
reduction in the order of the curve and to a simplification of its analysis and ex-
trapolation.

Let the function be set by a numerical sequence of values with equidistant spacing
of h: x0. yo; xo+h, yl; ...; xo+ih. Vi; ...; xo+nh, yn. The amount y1+1-y1 is
termed the first descending difference and is designated Ayi, the amount Ay1+1- A 1
is termed the second descending difference Azyi and so forth, Anyi . An'lyiﬂ-Aﬂ'. yi.
It is convenient to reduce the values of the descending differences to a table of
the sort given below.

In the simplest case we proceed in the following
manner. In sequence the finite differences are
calculated for the first, second and so forth
orders for the initial numerical series with a
set interval for the increment of the independent
variable. The order of the differences increases
until the difference of order m becomes virtually
constant within the limits of a certain research
accuracy. If the number of points of the initial
series n is slight. then it may seem that

 

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hut Ul‘l'lt IAL “3?. URL!

stabilization does not occur up to the last Any difference. In this case, ordi-
narily the n order is considered the one at which there has been a stabilization of
the differences in value. Thus we have:

initial series yo - fora). y; - f(xo+h). yz - f(xo+2h), ..., yn - f(xo+nh);

first order differences Ayo - y1-yo, Ayl I yz-yl, ..., Ayn.1 - Yn‘Yn-l;

second order differences Azyo - Ayl-Ayo, Azyl - Ayz-Ayl, ..., Azyn.2 -
AYn-l‘AYn—Z;

m order differences Anya I Arlyl-Arlyo, Amyl I Am'LyZ- Arlyl, ..., Auyn... '

ArlYn-m-l ' AID-17mm-

Let us assume that Amyo = A'yl = = A‘yn...‘ = Amy = constant. Then let us accept

that own...” - Amy. that is, that the finite m-order differences maintain their
constancy for the following point of the series. Let us carry out the reverse cal-
culation:

An-lyu-al-i " 6‘ "Us-WM + A'Ws—u-Ho A""’9s—n+3 '-
- A.-’y""" H + Andys-nﬂ ' ' ' " Ms - Ayn—1+ A'ys—I'
11-1.: “ ya + A”.

Thus, we have obtained the point yn+1 - f{xo+ (n+1)h}, that is, the value of the
function for the next increase step of the independent variable beyond the limits of

the initial series of numerical values.

Having assumed furthermore the constancy of difference In for the following point
Amymwz - Amy and carrying out an analogous calculation. we obtain the value of the
funcl Inn on [hr following increment interval for the independent variable and so

forth.

This method is very approximate and leads to satisfactory results with low degrees
in the factorization of a function, with a smooth type of initial series (this is
the main thing) and for a small number of extrapolation intervals.

Special Newtonian formulas are used for the extrapolation and interpolation of func-
tions using the method of finite differences. These have been also used for stand-
ard programs to organize the corresponding computer calculations. The Newtonian
formula for an interpolation forward has the form

pn(g)_y.+my.+ﬂ_‘ﬁ.'_’0“+m+WA.“ (2.26)

'66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0¥FKJAL.USE(MYLY

where t--the number of intervals between x and x0, t - (x-xo)/h;
Akyo--the finite difference of order k.

If we assume n - 1, then we obtain a formula for a linear interpolation

Pnbi) - yo+ tAyo-
Hith n - 2, we obtain a quadratic interpolation

P200 3 yo+tAyO+£L;-Tll Azy°.

If the values of the functions are rather numerous, then the number n is chosen in
such a manner that the difference Anyi be constant with the set degree of accuracy
with the limited number of points n - m—l, where m-the total number of set points.

The error of interpolation for (2.26) is determined in the following manner:

R=%¥I(l—l)u.(l—II)M‘+”. (2.27)

where xo 6 E < x. The error 5 will be minimal with small values of t. that is, in
the vicinity of the initial value of x0.

There is an analogous Newtonian fornula for an interpolation backwards:
I - l ... -
P.(x)-v.+IAy...+t-‘-}‘,—A'u...+---+“'*’ , ’+" "My. (2.28)

It is advisable to employ formula (2.28) for x > ‘n° Formulas (2.26) and (2.28) can
be used for extrapolation of the y values. For x ‘ x0 it is advisable to use (2.26),
and t - (x-xo)/h < 0. With x > xk and x close to xk, it is convenient to use (2.28)
and t I (x-xo)/h > 0.

For calculating one value of the function f(x) using any of these formulas, there

I 2
must he n divisions. n +3" - 11 multiplications and (n2+l) additions and altogether
(1.65n2-+6.85n-0.3) conaitiona arithmetic operations. In knowing the speed of a
computer it is possible to assess the machine time expenditures for calculating one
point on the standard interpolation (extrapolation) program.

 

2.é.3. The Methods of Preliminary Processing and Presenting Initial Data in a
Forecast Extrapolation

In contrast to a formal extrapolation, a forecast extrapolation does not come down
merely to calculating dependence factorization coefficients for apriori selected
polynomials or to calculating the parameters of a predetermined function. In a
forecast extrapolation. in the process of analyzing the set series of values as well
as the essence of the described process, hypotheses are advanced on the nature of

67

FOR 0FFﬂJA[.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its further development and on the basis of them the type of extrapolating function
is chosen. '

As experience of working out such forecast models shows, very essential here is the
method of presenting the initial data and the procedure of their preliminary proc-
essing. Let us examine certain possibilities for realizing these procedures.

With a large number of empirical points, the choice of the extrapolation function
can be facilitated by smoothing the initial series. As was said above. for a fore-
cast extrapolation the essential thing was to eliminate the random deviations
(noise) from the experimental sequences.

Smoothing is carried out by polynomials which approximate the groups of experimental
points using the least square method. The best smoothing is obtained for the mid-
points of the group and for this reason it is desirable to choose an uneven number
of points in the group to be smoothed. The very groups of points are taken by com-
position as moving through the entire table. For example, for the first five points
y1, y2, ya, ya, ys the average y3 is smoothed and then for the following five ya, ya,
ya. Y5. ye the yu is smoothed and so forth.

The remaining end points are smoothed using special formulas. The most widespread

form of smoothing is linear, that is, using a first-degree polynomial. For smooth-
ing for three points, the formulas are as follows:

E--} (n+v.+v.):
i. - '5' (5w. +2» — m); (2.29)
5.. - 7',- (- u.. +2u.+6u.).

where ya, yo--values of the initial and smoothed function at the midpoint;
y-1, y-l--values of initial and smoothed function to the left of the midpoint;

y+1, §+1--va1ues of the initial and smoothed function to the right of the mid-
point.

The formulas for §_1 and 9+1 are used, asa rule. only for the ends of the interval.

Analogous formulas exist for smoothing series for five points:
5. '3 '%" UJ’HI-I + Uo'HM'HM):

5-1 " 1% “y.- + 39—1 + 290+“);
3.1- 1'; (0-: + 2y. + 3m + 4y.»
iie"'%‘hﬁLs4‘90.|4'Ub"903

i..--§-(—u..+y.+2u.+ay.).

(2.30)

68

POR<0FFKJAL.USEIONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A block diagram for an algorithm to smooth a sequence of points according to the
formulas of (2.30) for a group of five points can be represented in the form given
in Fig. 2.7.

   

Fig. 2.7. Block diagram of algorithm for
smoothing a sequence of n points

  
    

Key: [only Russian terms translated in
appropriate boxes]
l—-Start: 2--Input; 4-Calculation...
of end points from formulas (2.30);
5--Start of cycle from i- 3 to n-2;
6--Calculation; 7-End of cycle for i;
lOb-Start of cycle from 1-1 to n;
ll--Calculation; 12--Bnd of cycle
for i; l3--Print; 14--End

In Immuzﬂllnm'lI-IIO
syn-110 no (out Ila"

am

Smoothing. even in a simple linear version, is in many instances a very effective
method for disclosing a trend in superimposing random interference and measurement
errors on an empirical numerical series. In the block diagram shown in Fig. 2.7 a
possibility has been provided for carrying out repeated smoothing of the initial
numerical series. The number of sequential smoothing cycles is set by the value K.

The choice of the amount of K should be made depending upon the type of initial
series, upon the degree of its assumed distortion by noise and upon the goal pur-
sued by the smoothing. Here it is essential to bear in mind that the effectiveness
of this procedure declines rapidly (in a majority of instances) so, as experience
shows, it is advisable to repeat it from one to three times.

As a certain objective criterion from which it is possible to judge the inadvisa-
bility of a repeated smoothing. one can use the expression: max{|y1-y1}l e c.

where t--a positive number chosen from considerations of the accuracy of data pre-
sentation and the accuracy of the subsequent processing algorithms.

An example of the processing of a numerical series using the smoothing method is il-
lustrated in Fig. 2.8. The broken line shows the initial dynamics for passenger

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1000 Persons departures over the years for one of the

nation's airfields. Curves l and 2 cor-
respond to the smoothed series for three
and five points.

       
     

E

V
.4

In addition to the linear smoothing, a
significant number of formulas are known
for nonlinear smoothing by higher-degree
polynomials. However. in practice they
are employed comparatively rarely (at
least above the third degree) for the
reason that for a satisfactory realiza—
tion they require only large-sized table,
in addition, the edges of the table are
not sufficiently well smoothed and the
formulas themselves become cumbersome.
Nevertheless, in the case of large ini-

tial files, complex types of curves and
the use of computers, their application
is fully justified.

H

g 3
IIIIIIIIIIII
IIIIII
IEIIII
IIIIII
IIIIII

   

IIIEII
III!

Hhile smoothing is a procedure aimed at
the primary processing of a numerical
series for the purpose of excluding ran-
dom fluctuations and elucidating a trend,
fitting is used for the more convenient
presentation of the initial series, in
leaving the numerical values as before.
Fitting is the naae given to the reduction
of the empirical formula y - f(x, a, b) to

No.

  

the type
. + I I
1957 an nu ma Y 31“ b1 (2 31)
years
The formula (2.31) examines 1 two-
parameter initial function. inis is due
Fig. 2'8' Processing numerical series to the fact that this function is the
“31“3 5‘°°‘h1“8 ”eth°d most widely found in the practice of ex-

trapolation and interpolation calcula-
tions, and on the other hand, in a majority of instances is comparatively easy to
fit. Functions with a greater number of parameters are far more difficult to fit
and in fact cannot always be done so.

The most common fitting procedures are taking logarithms and the change of vari-
ables. Let us examine these procedures from a series of the following specific ex-
amples.

1. For finding the parameters of the exponential function y - axb, a logarithmic

transformation is employed of the type: lg y - lg a+b lg x and the change of vari-
ables X - lg x, Y - 1g y. As a result we have (2.31), where a1 - b, b; - lg a.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, having rearranged the experimental points of the proposed exponential depend-
ence in the logarithmic ruling, we obtain a linear dependence which can easily be
described and extrapolated and then recalculate the results using the formulas in-
verse to the initial transformation of the variables.

2. For the exponential function y - aeb" it is also possible to apply logarithmic
fitting: 1g y - 1g a+b lg e x and the change x - x, Y - lg y. We obtain (2.31),
where a; - b lg e. b1 - lg a. In this instance it is essential to provide for the

rearrangement of the exponential points in a semilogorithmic scale with the subse-
quent analysis of the obtained graph.

3. For dependences of the type: a) y - 1/(ax+b) and b) y - x/(ax+b), the follow-'
ing transformations are used: a) Y - l/y - ax+b, b) X I l/x and Y - lly. This

gives Y - (i + b]/% - a+bx. In this instance along the axes of the grid one must

lay off the amounts inverse to the values of the initial variables.

lo. If the proposed empirical dependence has the form y - l/(a+be"). then the
transformation of fitting is Y - l/y, X - e'x. Then the coefficients of (2.31) will
heal-b,bl=a.

It is essential to bear in mind that the values of the function parameters deter-
mined after the fitting minimize the total squares of deviations for the transformed
values from the linear dependence of (2.31) and do not always correspond to the min-
imum deviation of the measured values from the calculated. For this reason such a

calculation must be considered only a certain approximation to the truly optimum co-
efficient values.

In the case that the empirical formula is assumed to contain three parameters or it
is known that the function is a three-parameter one, then by certain transformations
it is sometimes possible to exclude one of the parameters and the remaining two can
be reduced to one of the fitting formulas.

For example, the initial formula y - axb+c can be fitted after an approximate calcu-
culation of the c parameter. For this we select x1, x2 which are moved farther
apart in the empirical series and x; which is linked to them by the ratio x3:x. -
x3:x2. or such a choice of independent variables one approximately determines c -
(y1y3—y2)/(yl+y3' 2y2). Then by the changing of variables X - lg x; Y - lg (y-c),
the initial formula is reduced to a linear one: Y - bx+lg a. In comparing it with
(2.31) we have a1- b and b1- lg a.

After defining the parameters it is recomended that for all the points the correct-
ness of the approximate calculation of c be tested and in the instance of signifi-
cant discrepancies recalculate the parameters.

It is possible to view fitting not as a method of presenting initial data but rather
as a method for a direct approximate determination of parameters for a function
which approximates the initial numerical series. This method is often employed pre-
cisely in this manner in certain extrapolation forecasts. He would point out that
the possibility of its direct use for defining the parameters of an approximating

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

function is determined chiefly by the type of the initial numerical series and by
the degree of our knowledge and by our confidence about the type of function de-
scribing the studied process.

In the event that the type of function is unknown, fitting must be viewed as a pre-
liminary procedure in the process of which. by employing various formulas and pro-
cedures, the most suitable type of function describing the empirical series is as-
certained.

Graphic and numerical analysis of the dependence of two variables could be the sole
method for selecting the form of connection if a set of equally correct analytical
expressions did not conform to the same function graph or ratio. Fig. 2.9 gives
several examples of analytical expressions where it would be impossible to choose

one in using the above-given methods of preliminary analysis.

 

Fig. 2.9. Graphic depiction of various analytical expressions

The examination of an empirical series for the purpose of elucidating the optimum
type of function describing it is a broadening of the fitting method or its general-

ization. Here it is not essential that the transformations lead to linear forms.
However their results prepare and facilitate the process of choosing the approximat-
ing function in the problems of forecasting extrapolation.

Source [63] gives a procedure for such research using differential growth functions.
In the simplest case it is proposed that the following three types of differential
growth functions be employed.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1HCJAL.U§E(NVLV

l. The first derivative or absolute differential growth function

I '-22
O‘t) y dt . (2.32)

On the graph 9 - f(t) this is represented by an angular coefficient at each point
of the graph. The 0(t) = const for the linear law of change of y(t). For second
order curves (parabolic laws) 0(t) has a linear type of change and for the exponen-
tial curves of ¢(t) also an exponent. The value of 9(t) depends upon the selected
scale for the measuring of the exponent and tine.

2. The relative differential coefficient or the logorithmic derivative

~(!)--‘.,'-/v-d(louvdl- (2.33)

This function can be shown on a graph by constructing it on a senilogorithnic scale.
Then u(t) will be an angular coefficient at each point. For the exponential de-

pendents u(t) = const and for the exponential function u(t) there is a hyperbolic
nature.

3. Elasticity of the function ¢(:)_:_“L_%E%, (2.34)

Fig. 2.10. Block diagram for calculating
differential growth functions

Key: [translation of only Russian in
appropriate block]

l-Start; 2--Input; 3--Carry out PP
[subprogranl-"D"; 6--Derivation of
graph; S-Calculate; 6--Carry out
PP-"D"; 7--Derivstion of graph;
8-.Calculate; 9-Carry out PP-"D";
10-Derivation of graph; ll--End

 

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOR¢MHWCJAL.USE(MVLY

In a graph of a dynamic series constructed on a logorithmic scale, elasticity is de-
fined as an angular coefficient at each point. The e(t) - coast for an exponential

function; for the exponential function c(t) has a linear type of change and it is
also linear for the combined exponential function.

It must be pointed out that the elasticity of t(t) is a dimensionless amount and

this makes it possible to employ it in comparing the nature of changes in different
processes occurring in the most different possible time scales.

Source [43] gives graphs for differential growth functions for all the approximating
functions most used in forecasting extrapolation, including: linear, parabolic,
exponential, logistical, hyperbolic and so forth. An examination of growth func-
tions indicates that by their combining it is possible rather uniformly to define
the type of function producing them and determined by a numerical empirical series.

Thus. for preparing to take a decision on the type of approximating function, it is
possible to propose a machine procedure for calculating the differential growth
functions following the scheme shown in Fig. 2.10. It is best to carry this out on
computers having a graphic data output (graph plotter, teletype, electric typewriter
or display). The set of graphs obtained on the output for 0(t), u(t). t(t) is com-
pared with a standard reference table of the type given in [53]. In the block dia-
gram of Fig. 2.10, the PP-"D" designates a subprogram for differentiating the func-
tion of y(t) set by the series (vi. :1}.

2.4.4. The Problem of Choosing the Type of Function and the Rays of Sovling It for
a Forecast Extrapolation

In the process of smoothing a dynamic series, in fitting it and determining the
functions of differential growth, the type of function describing the initial proc-
ess is already approximately determined and sometimes the estimates of this func-
tion's parameters are even obtained. For the final choice of the type of function
a retrospective series study carried out in the stage of preliminary processing must
be supplemented by research on the logic of the occurrence of the process as a
whole, including hypotheses on its occurrence in the future and by research on the
physical essence of the process, possible shifts, jumps and constraints stemming
from this essence.

The basic questions which the researcher should set for himself at this stage are:
l) is the studied indicator as a whole an amount which grows uniformly, diminishes
uniformly, is stable or has an extrenum (or several of them) or is periodic; 2) is
the studied indicator limited above (or below) by any limit; 3) does the function
defining the process have a bending point; a) does the function representing the
process possess the property of symmetricalness; 5) does the process have a clear
limitation of development in time.

Depending upon the answers to each of the listed basic questions, secondary ques-
tions arise which are of a more quantitative nature or the nature of elucidating
the reasons for the appearance of one or another quality in the process.

For the answer to the first question it is essential to bring together information
obtained in the process of the primary processing of the series and namely the

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first derivative 9(t) and the general considerations on the nature of the process's
development. Obviously for a steadily rising function the graph 9(t) should lie
completely in the positive area and its extrapolation would not show a tendency to
cross the abscissa axis in the future.

Now about the essence of the process itself. For example, a majority of parameters
determined by the development of scientific and technical progress can be steadily
growing functions which in a number of instances have asymptotic constraints. Thus
it is possible to speak about the continuous increase in the speed of transport. the
rate of data processing. the power of energy units, the distance nan penetrates into
space, the increase in the length of human life, the greater labor productivity and
so forth.

Analogous arguments can be given for steadily diminishing processes. For example,
the shortening of production cycles, the reduction of relative dimensions and
weight of units and so forth.

For stable parameters it is possible to estimate the amount of their degree of in-
stability in the retrospective interval bymax or Gmax - Aymax’y- It is essential to
bring out the factors which influence the instability and analyze their possible
changes in the future.

The most complicated problem in forecasting is the predicting of the appearance of
abrupt jumps in the studied process in the future. The basic ways for solving this
in the area of scientific-technical and economic forecasting are research using
lead methods on patent and scientific-technical information as well as carefully
planned expert surveys.

The extremums on the retrospective interval are easily detected in examining the
graph of 6(t) at the points it crosses the abscissa axis. The presence of extremums
in the previous development of the process leads to questions about their causes and
their possible occurrence in the future. Here it is essential to examine the sta-
bility of their appearance in the development process and draw a conclusion on the
possible periodic nature of the process.

In the event of a supposition of the monoextremalness of the process, the basic
question is to elucidate the point of the extremum and the extremal value of the
forecasted parameter (if the extremum has not yet been passed). This problem can
be solved by the extrapolation of ¢(t) and by determining the point of its crossing
the time axis. This research must be supplemented by the results of qualitative
and quantitative analysis for the development of factors influencing the achieving
of an extremum by the examined process.

Many economic development processes are characterized by a periodic nature of de-
velopment. In truth, these processes basically have a cyclical and not purely a
periodic nature. Thus, the cyclical nature of economic development under capital-
ism is generally known. The process of its development contains a number of repeat-
ing stages: economic increase, crisis, depression, a new increase and so forth.
Econometric research has shown that over long intervals of time the period of the
cycle can remain relatively stable, although the height of the rise and the depth

of the fall can change from cycle to cycle within certain limits.

75

FOR OFF1C1AI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If in the research process it is discovered that a certain indicator depends sub-
stantially upon the cyclical development of the overall economic process, then this
fact provides essential information for selecting the type of function representing
it in the extrapolation research. In particular. the methods of harmonic analysis
and factorization for trigonometric polynomials (2.16)-(2.l9) are used very effec-
tively for such processes. -

The reply to the second basic question about the nature of the process is very es-
sential for selecting the correct type of function which extrapolates the trend.

We have already mentioned at the beginning of (2.&) the mistakes to which extrapola-
tion can lead in forecasting with a failure to consider the possible constraints of
the process. For example, a dynamic series describing an increase in the speed of
transport over the last 100 years is described rather well by the exponential de-
pendence [66]. However. consideration of the natural limit of the speed of light
inclines one to choose an S-shsped curve (logistical) for describing the process.
The forc:ast results using these two curves differ substantially.

In any area of knowledge great attention is given to the problem of studying de-
velopment limits. In the area of scientific and technical forecasting it is pos-
sible to point out several types of limits examined below.

Absolute limits are unconditional limits where the area of action is not restricted.'
Among absolute limits are [50], for example: the speed of light, absolute tempera-

ture zero, zero pressure, an efficiency of l, the temperature for the breaking of
molecular bonds and so forth.

Relative limits occur in a certain area or in terms of a certain object. These in-
clude the terrestrial limits such as: maximum speed in the atmosphere, maximum
’epth of the ocean, minimum speed for the orbiting of a sattelite and so forth. It
is also possible to give examples of the relative limits of human capabilities:
maximum g-loads, maximum noise level and so forth.

Calculated limits are more particular limits set on the basis of the first two types
of limits and various sorts of transformations and laws linking them to the derived
amounts. For example, the maximum value of efficiency with a set temperature drop
in the Carnot cycle, the limit for loading storage with information of 101“ bits

per cm3 calculated on the basis of the absolute limit determined by the heisenberg
formula; the maximum amount of microminiaturization of electronic elements related
to the Dirac constant and defined as 1016 elements in a cm3 and so forth.

An elucidation of the question concerning the limitation of a function to a large
degree is based upon an analysis of the physical and logical essence of the studied
process, its links and the dependences upon the absolute and relative limits in the
investigated area of knowledge. A formal analysis of the differential growth func-
tion ¢(t) can serve as an indication of the limit's existence. In the case of an
asymptotic approximation to the limit, the function ¢(t) will obviously move toward
zero.

The secondary questions with an affirmative answer on the existence of a development
limit include: what is the amount of this limit and what is the nature of the ap-
proach to the limit value of the studied function.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ff”!()FF1CIAl.USII€NVLY

The solution of the first question often develops into independent forecast research.
For example. a forecast of the limit computer speed with the set circuitry, the
forecast for maximum power with the given fuel and overall dimensions of an engine,
and so forth. The question is more simply solved in the case that the limit is ab-
solute, relative or calculated.

The nature of the approach to the limit is also basically determined by logical anal-
ysis of the occurring process. A predominant number of technical and physical in-
dicators for the processes move asymptotically toward their limits. At the same

time certain volume indicators in economic forecasting can change over to limit
values at a point. For example, the growth of the production volume for a certain

product with limited capacity of raw material supplies or a sharp decline in the
increase of sales with the complete saturating of the market. Such processes are

significantly more difficult to extrapolate than are the asymptotic ones since the
nature of their development, as a rule, is determined by external factors and is not
brought out in analyzing the retrospective data about the process.

The soundness of the research and the degree of considering not only the short-term

but also the long-term trends in the research are of great significance in correct-
ly determining the constraints of the indicator and the nature of the move toward
it.

R. Ayres [46] has pointed out that by using disaggregative analysis it is usually
impossible to predict the appearance of even comparatively simple innovations (if
they alter the configuration of the system), since the limit values for the effi-
ciency of any class of systems (instruments) can be determined by extrapolation only
on the level of individual components. Major inventions usually change the config-
uration of the components to such a degree that this in no way can be predicted
ahead of time.

An aggregative approach is also aimed at an analysis and forecasting of a wide class
of systems. In an extrapolation the aggregative approach has been embodied in the
envelope method which will be taken up below. In applying this method the limits
assume a more generalized sense and can be set more correctly and thereby more accu-
rately reflect the future development of the process.

Hence, in setting development limits for any forecasted process it is always essen-
tial to correctly choose the level of analysis aggregating.

The third question of the listed basic questions about the nature of the process
relates to the existence of bending points. This is also very essential in elabor-
ating the various forecasts. In a number of studies the bending point and its posi-
tion on the time scale has been chosen as the criterion for the perspective develop-
ment of one or another scientific or technical area. Thus, in [bl] for each area
from the possible solutions of a technical (technological) problem a curve is con-
structed for patenting dynamics. Then. the presence of a bending point is shown on
the curve corresponding to each area. In the event that patenting dynamics by the
present has already passed its bending point. the given area for the development of
technology (production methods) is considered relatively unpromising.

77

FOR‘OF1NCJAI.USE(DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In formal terms the bending point can be established from the zero value of the
second derivative of an approximating function with the subsequent change in the
sign of this derivative. 0n the graph of ¢(t), the bending point is shown in the
form of an extremum so that the determining of it on the retrospective segment
formally does not provide any problem. In the case of significant random fluctu-
ations superimposed on the process, it is advisable to carry out its preliminary
smoothing by one of the methods described in 2.6.3.

It is significantly harder to predict the appearance and location of a bending
point in the future. Analysis of the essence of a developing process in this in-
stance should be carried out in the direction of elucidating the factors which sub-
stantially influence the growth rate of the process and then an analysis of the
trends of their change in the future.

An analysis of the bending points is substantially facilitated with the availability
of data on limits in the development of the process and the nature of the move to-
ward zero. In this instance the presence of a bending point can be considered set
and its location is determined after choosing the parameters in the functional de-
script! on.

As for the fourth question it must be pointed out that among the functions used for
extrapolation in forecasting, only very few possess the property of syuetry.
Basically these are logistical curves with a central synetry relative to the bend-
ing point. Linear develcpment laws possess a symetry relative to any point but
for them this property is not of particular significance.

The formal setting of symetry can be carried out by an iterative comparison of the
final differences of the function to the left and right of certain points which
gradually approach a possible point corresponding most closely to the symmetry
center. As the symetry criterion relative to a certain point I: (the symmetry
center). it is possible to propose the following expression for the amount of the
standard deviation of the final differences of an empirical series with a constant
spacing to the right and left of the point:

I:
s. e 3."); (Amuzémr. (2.35)
where n-—the total number of points in the segment of the curve studied for sym-

metry.

A plus sign is taken for axial symetry and a minus sign for central symetry. Then
the presence of symetry can be determined by the expression

min {5k} ‘ a, (2.36)
k

where c--the given positive number determining the limit for asymmetry.

The last question on the nature of the process concerns the elucidation of develop-
ment constraints for the process but not in terms of amount but for time. This

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

involves the elucidation and consideration in extrapolation of moments for the oc-
currence of certain events which bring about an end to the process or its transition
to a different quality. As' an example one might give the necessity of ending the
production process for a certain product by a certain date as set by a higher-level
plan or forecast.

In and of itself the setting of a time restriction on the process and a limitation
point on a time scale can be the result of a forecast or a plan. Nevertheless the
consideration of this factor is essential in extrapolating the development trends of
parameters which describe this process or are linked to it.

Theoretically it is impossible to speak about a process (with the exception of the
scale of the universe) as unlimited in time, and for this reason here it is a ques-
tion of a relative limitation on the forecast's lead time. If the time of develop-
ment (existence) for a process greatly exceeds the forecast lead time, then it is
possible to speak about a process which does not have constraints in terms of de-
velopment time. Otherwise it is essential to determine this constraint and con-
sider it in choosing the extrapolating function.

Having analyzed the basic questions arising in the stage of choosing the type of
function for an extrapolation of the studied process and the possible approaches to
resolving them, let us move on to an examination of those functions which prefer-
ably should be used in a forecast extrapolation and certain demands which must be
made on them. In [46] the demands are given which are made on the approximating
curve: morphological simplicity, smoothness, symetry and mathematical simplicity.
As a whole it is possible to agree with such demands having put symetry in last
place and mathematical simplicity, having examined this in greater detail. in first
place.

What do we understand by mathematical simplicity? This is the minimum possible num-
ber of terms in a formula; the minimum possible degree of an independent variable;

a linear ascent of the coefficients; continuity; a minimal number of extremums and
bending points. Such requirements are met by the standard functions which are most

widespread in extrapolation:
a) Linear y I a+bt (with b I 0, y . a--stable state);

b) Parabola y I a+bt+ct2 (with c > 0—-a growth function, with c < 0--an extremal
function);

c) Step function y I atb;
d) Exponential function y Iaeb‘;

e) Modified exponent y I k-ae’bt;

f) Logistical (S-shaped) curve y I —I-‘— ;

l + be":t

b

CI:

p.) Hyperbolic function y I a +

 

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The various sources give different lists of reconnended curves. The lists given
here, in our view, represents that essential minimum which covers a predominant
portion of the needs arising in extrapolating trends in economic and scientific-
technical forecasting.

This list does not include functions making it possible to approximate periodic
processes. The problem is that harmonic analysis of periodic processes represents
a rather independent problem. Moreover, in forecasting problems in the area of the
31‘s, the necessity of extrapolating periodic processes virtually does not arise

(w! th rare exceptions).

In a general form, the sequence of steps in selecting the type of extrapolating
function for the set empirical series can be as follows: Smoothing the empirical
series, attempts at linear fitting; in the case of failure the constructing of dif-
ferential growth functions; in the case of success imediately a logical analysis of
the essence of the process using the scheme given in the given section and the
choice of the type of function for the extrapolation.

2.6.5. Calculation of Parameters for the Extrapolating Function

Thus, as a result of solving the previous stages in the forecast research a definite
type of function has been found for extrapolating an empirical series and its ana-
lytical presentation has been given containing a series (or one) of unknown parame-
ters. In the following stage it is essential, in using the empirical series, to
choose (calculate) the values of these parameters which ensure optimum approxima-
tion in a certain sense.

As the optimality criterion ordinarily one uses one or another measure of the devi-
ations of the points in the empirical series from the approximating function. Each
of the possible criteria for approximation optimality has its corresponding method
for determining the curve parameters. Let us examine the basic methods having paid
most attention to the least square method as the most widely found.

The averages method is based upon the miniaiaation of the algebraic total of point
deviations from an approximating curve. In this case the optimality criterion is
written in the following form:

II
S w 2 w—prauao. «admin. 2.37)

- l—l

where 3'1. x1--the ordinate and abscissa of point i of the series; a1, a2, ..., an"
the parameters of the approximating curve.

In practice this method is realized in the following manner. All ti- n points of the
empirical series (n > m) are divided evenly into In groups and for each of them the
total of the deviations of the type (2.37) is reduced to zero. As a result one ob-
tains a system of n equations with m unknown parameters a1, a2, ..., an which are
determined by solving this system. With a linear incorporation of the parameters
into the curve's formula, the system is linear and is solved by one of the known
methods.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.LENE(NVLY

It is essential to point out that the results of the method of averages depend sub-
stantially upon the method for grouping the points. Practice shows that the most
rational is a grouping method whereby the groups are made up of points which in-
crease successively with the independent variable.

With a linear function of f(x) - ax-th, we obtain a following type of system (for
even a):

~42 .. ~13
“zﬂ‘xl'*"’ TEA“- (2 38)

\ u ‘
“(u-21‘2“.“ +9 .9".an m-

In adding together both equations of the system and having divided them by n, we
obtain

ai+ b - v. (2.39)

From (2.38) and (2.39) we determine the parameters a and b.

2 "'3
j; z.W-' _ ._
n a+ and b - Y - ax. (mo)

2 n‘
_ ,_.§
":21‘

Analogously it is possible to determine the coefficients for the function of three
parameters and generally for m parameters.

The method of averages and the corresponding criterion provide satisfactory results
for forecasting for sufficiently smooth (or smoothed) numerical series and signifi-
cantly poorer ones with substantial random components.

The source [43] gives another series of methods based on criteria which differ from
(2.37):

n
‘

2. lift-I (It. 0.. . . .. 0.)]
8"LT—“ ""n;
’ (2.“)

 

D
‘2‘..qu -I (n. .,. .. .. .. a."-
3" T-‘N'M (“2)

1“' (2.43)
FOR.OFTWCJAL.USE1MNLY

we will not stop to analyze in detail the advantages and drawbacks of each of these
criteria but we would merely point out that the results obtained from each of them
vary and in certain instances are even contradictory.

Let us examine one other extrapolation method which contains elements of graphic
constructs and for this reason is simplest and most approximate. 1n the given in-
stance the formal optimality criterion is absent and is replaced by a certain qual-
itative concept of visual proximity.

The points of the empirical series are plotted on the coordinate plane xou, after
which a smooth curve is drawn on it in passing most closely to all the points. From
the type of curve its order m is estimated and according to this the point chi-1) is
chosen on it. These points are distributed approximately evenly along the entire
interval of the set of the series. The abscissas and ordinates of these points make

it possible to compile a system from the Obi-1) equation for determining the values
of the ans-l) curve parameter analogously as is done for the method of averages.

It must he pointed out that this informal method is good for preliminary estimate
calculations and simple forms of curves. The use of human intuition and the ability
to draw smooth averages often gives it very satisfactory results.

The least square method is the most widespread method in forecast extrapolation.

Its merits are the relative simplicity of realization (for a number of functions it
has been brought to an analytical presentation of coefficients). The method smooths
out well the random noise in describing a trend and it makes it possible to obtain
unbiased and consistent estimates for all the parameters so, a1, ..., an. in the
most widespread case of the linear incorporation of the parameters into the trend
formula. the parameter estimates using the least square method are also effective.

The formulating of the least square method comes down to the following. If all the
measurements for the values of the function y1. y2. ..., yn are made with equal pre-
cision, then the estimates of the function parameters are determined by the condi—
tion

8 '- ﬁ 'yl —,(xm: at. al- - o to adv-claim (2“‘)

If the measurements have been made with different accuracy (with different variance).
then weights are introduced which are inversely proportional to the assumed vari-
ance ratios:

s“§,,"~"“-‘ 0.. 0.. .... a.)|’ m.-.Inln; (2.65)
I I I I
"'w':"':":”'m‘-_af:—«Z" :zzu . :7:—

if for each value of the independent variable xk there are several measurements mk
to: the function of values and the average arithmetic value of the results is taken

as yk. then the numbers of the measurements in the series wk - mk can serve as the
measurement weights.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the general case the least square :ethod can be extended to the case of the
function of H variables:

8 ' X. "In ”,(xlm xlqo . --o x... ago a“ .s o. “P .‘—' IIIIII.

The most widespread form of using the method in economic research is (2.“). In
forecast research it is possible to use the forn (2.45) when one considers the so-
called discounting of data (a reduction in value and accuracy) as one moves into the
past using the corresponding discounting coefficients wg. In a general form the

65

realization of the formulas of the type (2.“) or (2. leads to the solving of a
system of equations of the sort:

18 , as . as
{Err-o. 137”“ ""11"“ (2.46)

In the case that the parameters of ak are introduced linearly into the accepted for-

nula E(x, so, a], .... an), then the system of equations of (2.46) will also be
linear. Let us examine several specific types of functions.

The linear function: y - ax+b. In this instance the system of equations (2.66)
assumes the form:

.‘ ' a i n I
a ; xn'I‘bn- ¥ Us:
aidkb$n=$nu us»

However, since with this nethod a straight line always passes through the average

values of the Ti and 7 coordinates. it is advisable to construct it as a single-
paraneter one of the type

y—i-au-h:

;- a. “'13 E— a. 'I'I:
2's - -’ 2':

a— x':G)‘:

1 I, __
E‘s 2‘ "' and xy- :4" .
E: I. 's
The programing of these formulas and conputer calculation does not represent any
difficulty.

The quadratic function y - ax2+bx+c leads to a system of equations of the type

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a8.+w.+cs.-§3,Mm
03s+ws+59i-.2_‘Ue‘s's: (2.53)
as.+k9.+c8.-§'v.-.z

8,-é.dm (pa-0. 's 2v 3! ‘)‘

The solving of the given system of equations also is rather easy to carry out on a
computer, however it can be further simplified by shifting the start of the calcula—
tion to the point'? (for the case wk - l) and measuring the function of y at points
which are synmetrical to X on the left and right. Then,

v-a(x-§?-flv(r-£§4.&
""5’ [Ah (Ia-W-SQE]:

n
b "ﬁgmm—F): (2.1.9)
.

ca;— 3+"; ons.__f‘l.; 3,.- 2 (x.—Ir(p-o.2.4).

Parabolas are frequently employed in forecast extrapolation and the calculating of
them using the formulas of (2.69) has been substantially simplified.

At the conclusion of this section we will become familiar with still another method
for determining the parameters of an extrapolation function and this is based on the
uneven consideration of the importance of retrospective information. In a majority
of practical cases, of great significance for the forecasting of a process is the
information which directly describes the process at moments of time standing closer
to the future (that is, present moments) and the further we move into th' past his-
tory of the process the less valuable the information will be for the future. In
the least square method. this devaluing of information can be considered by dis-

counting coefficients wk (2.45).

Let us examine the method which has been named exponential smoothing because of the
exponential nature of discounting the retrospective values of variables. Its es-
sence is that the time series is smoothed using a weighted moving average and here
the weights are subordinate to an exponential law. The weighted moving average with
the exponentially distributed weights characterizes the significance of the process
at the end of the smoothing interval, that is. is the mean characteristics for the
last terms of the series. Such a weighted moving average can be a forecasting tool.

The exponential smoothing method is employed for forecasting series which are de-
scribed by polynomials:
84

FOR,OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
sip-b. IN I- 514‘ I- m4 %l’+g=§% t!+a,. (2.50)

A forecast for moments of time t - (I‘d-l), where l - l, ..., L, is compiled by
weighing the observations of the series 7t in such a manner that greater weights are
assigned to the later observations in comparison with the earlier ones. The fore-

cast of the dynamic series y: for the time period T+£ can be constructed using an
expansion into a Taylor series:

° I l' 1 l“ p
”7-H "(lg-{'01: -'--§Ty‘+ on +wy:+ sea +FM'
where y't‘nderivstive 1: taken at the moment of time t.

According to the theorem proved by Brown and Mayer, any It derivative (I: - 0. l, ...,
p) of an equation can be expressed by linear combinations of exponential means up to
the (p+l) order. The calculating of the recurrent corrections for the estimates of
coefficients for the equation (2.50) here is the basic aim of exponential smoothing.

An exponential first order mean for the series Vt is the name given to:

85%) = a go —¢)‘ g,_,, (2.51)

where o-—the smoothing parameter (0 < a < l).

I

The expression S)"(y)-¢'X°(l—a)'$17"(y) is called an exponential mean of the In
order (k - the number of terms in the polynomial).
Brown derived the following recurrent formula for determining the exponential mean

a" w) ~=c51“" (n+0 — «0551'. (y). (2- 52>
The new exponential mean equals the previous one plus the portion of u from the dif-
ference between the new observations and the previous smoothed values of the series.
The function (2.52) is a linear combination of all past observations. The weights
assigned to the previous terms of the series diminish in a geometric progression.
From formula (2.52) it can be seen that for smoothing the series it is essential to
set an initial amount of the exponential mean. For this it is possible to use the

special formulas worked out by Brown. In particular, for a linear model the initial
conditions are determined in the following manner:

Woo-r -#o.;

st" (y)—b,_3_§";" by (2.53)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coefficients bo and b; in (2.53) are the coefficients for a linear equation of
a time trend obtained by the least square method.

For a quadratic model the initial conditions are set from the expressions:

SWM-bz- '3'0.+1—-g—"'”'"’b.:
st” (9)..a.—3£:—'lb,+.1'—=21;LL‘-’—'J- 0.: (2.54)
8?? M-h-u—T" b:+’°-‘—;;i———'-" 4—3.) 0--

The coefficients b0, b1 and b in (2.54) are the coefficients of a quadratic equa-
tion for a time trend obtained by the least square method.

 

In order to express the coefficients of a linear equation which includes only the
first two terms of the model of (2.50), on the basis of the Brown-Mayer theors- it
is possible to obtain a systel of equations connecting the estimates for the coeffi-
cients bo and b1 with the exponential means 8‘" (y) n 8PM”:

 

81"m-5u + "' 3.:

 

55"“)-754.’ "'“’ 3.. (2.55)

in solving the system for bu and 31. we obtain
13—251" (go—s!” m:
3u~1—1-.l85"m-$"MI- (2.55)

For a quadratic model we obtain the following system of three equations with three
unknowns:

SS"m=3.— '-'s,+9_-_«3;«3_-_a_);ﬁ

53"(3I)=3o—3.ﬂa—_°‘1 51+ ('—¢la( ‘3“! 3';

 

(2.57)
3"" (ll) 35.— 306—6! ;'+3 “-aLV—h) 3..
“me 3-=- 3 (51" (54— swm +85"(y):
5. amt—ﬂ; l(6~sa)si"(y)—2(s-4a)s$" (10+
(2.53)

-|- (4 — 31|) 35" (U):

5. .. 3%,- IsS"(y)—2s$" (”+er (m.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FCNI(”NHCJAL.USEGDNLY

The forecast for a linear model is made using the formula

73+: ' 50+51t- (2.59)

The forecast error is calculated from the expression

.o..

 

3';+‘-$'.'.m Vﬁéu‘“ 4““ —¢H-5(l —¢)’+
“4‘ “‘ ’4' - (2.60)

A forecast for a quadratic model is calculated from the formula

0 A A ' A (2.61)
uni-50+” "T b."

with an error

5 - 1/23" FW (2.62)

"44“, SIT H)

In an analogous manner it is possible to obtain estimates for the remaining coef-
ficients of the polynomial (2.50).

In constructing forecasts using the exponential smoothing method, one of the basic
problems is the choice of the value of the smoothing parameter a. Naturally, with
the different values of o the forecast results will vary. The weight of the obser-
vation left for k periods from the observed moment equals e(l- -o)K If it is cer-
tain that the initial conditions are reliable, than one must use a small amount of
the smoothing parameter (o=:0). If there is not sufficient certainty of the relia-
bility of the initial conditions, then one must use a large amount and this leads
to considering basically the influence of late observations in the forecast.

2.4.6. Functions With a Flexible Structure in Trend Extrapolation

An examination of the various methods for choosing the type of approximating func-
tion and the procedures accompanying them indicates that this orocesa is essentially
based on the intuition and experience of the forecaster and ctv.eins a mass of in-
formal qualitative estimates and criteria. Naturally because of this there has been

a desire on the part of the researchers to formalize this process, to describe it
with clear quantitative criteria and to elaborate the mathematical procedures for

its optimization.

As an example of such studies one might give the ideas developed in a number of
workd [19, 20] devoted to the theory and practice of using so-called flexible struc-

ture functions (PCS).

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In contrast to ordinary functions described analytically. it is proposed that use

be made of functions the appearance of which can be altered depending upon the
values incorporated in describing the parameter function. In using functions with
a flexible structure in forecasting in the process of minimizing the errors between
the PCS values and the points of the empirical series. not only should the optimum
values of the coefficients for the approximating function be chosen but also its
optimal type (in accord with the accepted criterion). This is the basic idea of the
method. Below is given its formal description.

The initial process (a single variable function) is presented in the form
z(x) - P(x) + 3(1), (2.63)

where F(x)--the approximate model of the process (a description using the PCS);
R(x)--the remainder (a certain function of the approximation accuracy).

In the most general form the PBS for a single independent variable can be written:

I
rmﬁn. ..EAIJLL'F-L, (2.66)

where n--the fixed natural number;
xo--the initial value of the independent variable in the designated interval;

A0. A;, .... An—-the constant active parameters;
D—-the special determinant of order n;

0.. a .2 r: r: . 0-65)
I? ' r?" r}" ... I:"

in which r1. r2. ..., rn are real or complex paired numbers;
Ci(x-xo)--functions obtained from the determinant D by substitu ing,the

elements of line 1 for exponents of the type l/rvle'“ "*°)-l].
\l-l, 2, .... n.

Thus, the F68 depends upon the independent variable x and the values of (Zn-+2)
parameters (x0; n; A0. ..., an; r1. .... rn) and in such a manner that the change
in them can cause a change in the very structure of F(x). The structure P(x) is

basically influenced by the values rj(j - l, 2, ..., n). In the event that all the
parameters of r1, r2, .... rn are real. different and not equal to zero then the

function F(x) is determined, real and continuous on any segment of the independent
variable. Actually in the given instance it will be a linear combination of expo-
nents which grow without limitation with r > 0 and diminish without limitation for

r < 0.

88

INJR‘OFTWCJAI.lﬂSEZ(ﬂ‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If n--an even number (n - 2p) and the parameters r1, r2, ..., rn are com llex,

paired numbers of the type ru - a” +8141 and [n+1 - 04,- an i, where i - -l W8 i 0,
u - 1,2, ..., p and a" are real and different, then the" function 50:) according to

the formula (2.63) is determined, real and continuous on any segment of the inde-
pendent variable and can be represented in the following form:

a
F (x) a O (x) — B. + 39!... ("‘0’ [B'cosﬂ’ (x—x.) +c'g‘n" (1—13)].

where 80, 3m (Jr-constant real parameters depending upon A0, A1, ..., An; n1, (:2,
coo, up; 81, 82. One. 8p.

As is seen, in this case F(x) will contain terms of a harmonic nature which are am-
plitude modulated by the exponential functions.

In the event that all the terms r1, r2, ..., rn move toward zero with a transition
to the limit, the function F(x) can be reduced to the type

rm"r.(x)-A.+A.(x—x.)+~-+A.1'—',;"’—'.
that is, we obtain a step polynomial.

From an examination of the different variations for setting the parameters r1, r2,

. .., 'n it becomes apparent that by changing thu it is possible to alter the struc-
ture of F(x) in rather broad limits, representing it in the form of a step poly-
nomia1,a trigonometric polynomial, or an aggregate of exponents, or, finally, any
combination of the listed structures. This is a very enticing property of the PCS
from the viewpoint of using them for trend extrapolation.

It remains to solve the question about the method to seek out the optimum values of
r1, r2, ..., rn. Let us examine a case when the function z(x) is differentiatable
(n+1) times in a segment containing the initial point x - x0. Then formula (2.64)

can be reduced to the type
F (0-20.) + I'M—ﬁrm (2.66)

where z-I (xo)--the derivative of order 1 for the initial function at the starting

point;
D--the determinant described by (2.65) where r1, r2, ..., 1“,, are viewed

as roots of a certain base equation:

,1. +dﬁ‘f'" +a“-r—2 + .., + d(~I-0.=OI
a.-(—l)*r,r. r.:
0. -(-lr‘-' ('1': r... -I- m n):

ssoosoooososu-e-

a...-(-|)'"“-"(rn+ r.+--- H.) (2.67)

The functions 63 (x-xo) are determined analogously to (2.66).

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?!(]Al.lE§ECNHLY

An analytical expression of the remainder in formula (2.63) has the following form:

I l
Rm..- I I n(r)‘—2L‘D'-‘l’dw. (2.68)

his

The term of this formula An(t-r) can be obtained from (2.65) in substituting the
last n line of the determinant D for the line of the exponents of the type

amt"), (v - 1. 2. ..., n).

The other term of (2.68) can be defined from the equation

(2.69)

The idea of an optimal approximation in using the PCS comes down to minimizing the

remainder R(x) and to establishing such values of the parameters ao, a1, .... ‘n-l
that the value of the remainder in each point of the segment does not exceed a cer-
tain set amount (the approximation error) and this also determines the type of F(x)

which is the solution to the problem.

In [20] as an example they examine a case of even approximation

zm—A— Afﬂr_‘h mm)

 

 

where yo - const. > o, o< x0 a x< xks b.

If the parameters of A1 are taken according to (2.66), then we obtain an expression
of the approximation error in the form

6
r m .. 2m -— [2 (.v.) I- 2; v» w—Qr- . (2.71)
l s

The unknowns in (2.71) are the parameters r1. r2. .... rn which can be determined in
the process of minimizing t(x). with an even approximation the errors values of

c(x) at the extremal points H1. Kg, .... Mn, at the initial point no and the end
point “n+1 - Mk are the same for the modulus and alternating in sign:

duanﬁudan-nfudnm n<x<&:
“(In ""N’pu’v P = lo 29 ---n "3 I.(xl)l"

=.N, ”0.1.2. ....n+|: l:(x)l<Na (2.72)

Depending upon the selected system of base functions and the different values of

the parameters so, a1, ..., an-1 in the base equation (2.67) in the process of mini-
mization of (2.71) various structures of F(x) can be obtained, for example, a Taylor
step polynomial, a Chebyshev polynomial or a trigonometric series.

90

FOR4OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR‘OFF1CJAL.USEZCNNLY

The other nethod of even approximation can be terned integral. It is based upon the
use of the fornuls for the remainder in (2.68):

l I
¢(x)=z(x)—F(x)—R(x)-IIn(s)A—‘i‘D——9dtdl. (2.73)
I.»

Then the first part of the conditions in (2.72) can be expanded on this basis. In
particular, the conditions of the extrenuls c(x) at points H1, H2, .... ”n are
written: €'(x1) - €'(xz) - - €'(xn) - 0, or considering (2.73)

" M: - ) "‘

In") ' 4t:- .. Inn)" "" «.0, (2.74)
The second part of the conditions in (2.72) vill assue the form

'p 7 'Ju l

I]a.(t)9-“—“l;'—'-’dtdln— I In(t)"—“D'—"dtdl. (2.75)

I... I. I"

If for a certain function of z(x) it is possible to choose a value of n and the
parameters of a0, .... an-l in order to fulfill the condition

n(x) - z‘m’le) + an.lz“(x)+... +a12(2)(s) + aoz(l)(x) E 0.

then P(x) will provide an even approximation with a zero error factor. Unfortunate-
ly, the nonlineality of incorporating the coefficients so, ..., 11“.! in the system
of (2.74), (2.75) substantially inpedes its practical utilization.

In the instance of a small segment [x0, x3], if n is sufficiently large. it is pos-
sible to assune

- r‘U—I) ”Au-"'7
' u ‘) V sea ' o
.. - +r,(lI-t)+—§1—-+ +7—m'._ ' (2.76)

then the equality is valid
6.0—1) l—t)
"'b_' " (s— In

and the system of equations in (2.76) and (2.75) is linear relative to so, a1. ...,
an.“

1‘“th — 1r—| dt - . . - ‘1'"("0- _ ‘r-; d" _ o; (2.77)
I . 'rol
' "(ﬂu—‘r'l d'd‘u— .. —l
I}. . 1 1w)“ s)- am. (2.13)
91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In practice it is not known ahead of time whether or not (2.76) is fulfillable, and
for this reason in the instance that it is possible to formally solve the system
(2.77) and (2.78) relative to n of the parameters so, s1, ... , a“.1 and n of the
coordinates x1. x , ..., X“, then the roots of r1, r2, ..., r'n are calculated and
the correctness o (2.76) is checked.

In the general case the seeking out of the F68 parameters leads to a system of
transcendental equations which. as a rule, do not have analytical solutions. Never-
theless a number of particular cases of the functions can be successfully approxi-
mated on the basis of the PCS.

In forecasting with the aid of the PCS, it must not be forgotten that this method
is only one of the methods of formal extrapolation, that is, the optimum fittirg of
a series which does not contain elements of forecast extrapolation in the under-
standing that is presented in 2.6.1. The very idea of a method for automatically
obtaining the type and parameters of an approximating function is extremely inter-
esting and enticing. however from the viewpoint of practical implementation there
still are numerous difficulties.

2 .lo. 7 . Envelope Extrapolation

Envelopes in forecasting reflect an aggregative approach in the analysis and fore-
casts of complex processes. As an examination of the developmental history of
scientific and technical progress shows, this process can be broken down into two
conditional components: evolutionary and revolutionary. The former is character-
ized by a relatively gentle change determined by the quantitative accumulation of
knowledge in the process of researching, improving technology. production methods.
materials quality and so forth. The second is determined by qualitative shifts or
bursts, as certain foreign authors term them.

In elaborating the long-range forecasts of a scientific-technical or economic
nature, the degree of aggregation should rise along with the increased lead time.
It is possible to give a number of examples confirming this rule. R. Ayres [66]
gives graphs for the increase in the effective energy of particle accelerators and
the trends for the increased power of aircraft engines. From examining them it
becomes apparent that a specific type of technical device operating on a certain
principle causes the growth of the forecasted variable in a certain finite time in-
terval and a certain finite interval on the scale of values. The dimensions of the
time interval depend upon a large number of factors in the development of scien-
tific and technical progress and these determine the time interval for the existence
of the given type from the moment prior to which its appearance had not been pre-
pared for by the entire history of development and up to the moment of the aging of
the given type and the exhaustion of its possibilities. The interval on the scale
of values is determined by certain relative limits caused by the essence and prin-

ciples of the examined type.

An envelope provides an opportunity to disclose a general development trend in the
forecasted variable and to assess the possible limits of its development and the
nature of the approach to these limits. Here definite opportunities are opened up
to predict not only the nature of evolutionary growth but also the probable tech-
nological or scientific burs-.2, shifts in development and the appearance of funda-
mental inventions which is the most important and most difficult task in forecasting
scientific and technical progress.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As in the case in the problems of extrapolating numerical series. in envelope ex-
trapolation it is possible to isolate the purely formal part and a number of as-
pects which make this extrapolation a forecast one. Let us examine the formal math-
ematical set up of the problem and the possible ways of solving it.

Let us accept as given the set P of experimental points and this set can be broken
down into a certain number of subsets P1, P2, P3, ..., Pn according to a certain
parameter C. As C we will accept a certain generalized concept of the parameter
which does not come down just to a numerical amount but can also be a certain non-
quantitative characteristic such as a "type of device,“ "operating principle,"
"physical nature," "elemental base," and so forth. In the general instance the C
parameter can be complex and represent the vector C - l6}. c2, ..., ckl. As an ex-
ample we might turn to [56], where an entire range of accelerator characteristics
such as the type of particle trajectory, the method of been focusing and so forth
is used as the parameter in extrapolating accelerator capacity.

Let the designated subsets of points form on plane 10! a certain family of curves
which we will call the C parameter family (Fig. 2.11). In the event that the C
parameter has the nature of a continuous quantity, the envelope could be defined as
a curve which at each point has a common tangent to one of the family of curves.

In the case of a discrete nature for the
change in C it is not possible to give a
strict definition of the envelope as it is
impossible to draw it uniformly. By an
envelope we will understand the smoothest
of all the possible curves touching all
(or a majority) of the curves in the
family.

Let us examine a possible method of de-
termining it. Let each subset of points
Pl, P2, ..., P"I be approximated by the
above-given procedures using dependences
of the type:

 

!I: ,I (“no “no - - a “In; g);
.‘Ia " I: (an: “an ' - u an. I); (2.79)

Fig. 2.11. Illustration of the

concept of an envelope of a family
of curves 0m “’n‘amh 0—» ---~0am XL

where all the parameters of at are determined in the approximation process and are
considered known (for the sake of simplicity let us consider their number n as the

same for all the functions and this does not in principle play an essential role).

Let us assume that we are looking for the envelope equation in the form of k para-

metric curve of the type Y - F(b‘, b2, ..., bk, x). For each point of its tsngency
with one of the curves of the family we will have two equations of the type

(ax-(49).. me»

where e - l, 2, ..., m--the number of the tangency point.
93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In substituting the expressions for Y and y in these equations, we will obtain a
system of 2m equations with the unknowns x1, x2, .... *m and b1, b2, .... bk of the

type
[Mam d”. -- -- am 10".“1. by» .., am 3|)?

(”I 1'": 0.0.; n Ugo. 8)) _( ”I... .1. .. .. .a- l) ) :

Me... a... a... 1.4-“... 0.. l,” x.): (2.81)

(”bi-W)“. =(§.‘£I_"1;_5_”)_,‘-

In the event that k - m. that is, the number of parameters in the envelope equation
equals the number of curves in the family, we obtain a system of 2m equations with
2m unknowns. that is. in principle a solution is possible. If k > m. then there is

no solution. but if k < m. then an approximate solution is possible.

However. it must be pointed out that since the variable x is included nonlineerly in
the equations of the family, the system (2.81) is nonlinear in all practical in-
stances. In this regard the solution to it is impossible in an analytical form in
real situations and, in addition, the numerical solution methods also may not lead
to positive results. On the other hand. such a formal solution is very critical
toward mistakes in setting the points of the initial series or to the random compo-
nents present in an empirical description of the process.

At present, there is no known positing of the problem of constructing an envelope
for a family of curves in an approximate variation as has been done for the extrapo-

lation of dynamic series, for example, by the least square method. Because of this
the approximate graphic-analytical method can be given as the basic method for con-
structing envelopes. It can be realized in the following manner.

The approximating curves determined in one way or another for the subsets of po—nts
from the family Pl. P2, ..., Pm are dipicted on the on the coordinate plane XOY.

After this a smooth curve is drawn close to the above-given concept of an envelope.
In the given instance this concept can be very approximate, since the drawn curve
can touch only a portion of the curves in the family from which it runs a short
distance away and some it intersects.

The nature of the dependence and the number of parameters m in describing it are
determined from the type of obtained approximate envelope. Then using the method
already described in 2.0.5 m points are chosen on this curve and their coordinates
x1. y1 are measured. 0n the basis of these pairs of coordinates. a system of m
equations is drawn up with m unknowns from which are determined the values for the
parameters of the approximate envelope.

In determining the type of curve, one should use all the moments of logical analysis
into the essence of the process as described in 2.6.b. It must be pointed out that
for an envelope such an analysis to a significant degree is difficult due to the
fact that its nature is determined by both evolutionary change and revolutionary
shifts in the development of the process. However. the demands made upon the ex-
trapolation accuracy in the given instance are significantly less because of the

9b

FT”ICNWWCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more generalized estimates and the greater, as a rule, lead time in comparison with
the simple extrapolation of dynamic series.

In solving the BTS development forecasting problems, the envelope method can be used
for forecasting aggregated characteristics of scientific-technical progress in any
area of technology. In this instance a certain integral development trend is de-
rived which is invariant to the past and future leaps of a qualitative nature. Ex-
amples of such envelopes have been given above.

As one other example one might give the envelope for the speed of generations of com-
puters. Here the C parameter is a vector characterized by the computer circuitry,

by the structure and composition of the computer, by the principles of organizing

the computer process and by other characteristics which distinguish the different
generation machines.

Having constructed a family of curves for the dependences of computer speed for the
first, second, third and fourth generations upon output time and having obtained the
envelope equation, we will disclose the general trend for the change in speed which
does not depend upon the type of circuitry and other indicators determining the com-
puter's generation. In extrapolating this envelope, we obtain forecasts of computer
speed for unknown future generations with still unknown operating principles and
circuitry.

2.5. Probability and Statistical Methods in Forecast Research

The methods of probability theory and mathematical statistics are used very widely
in the various methods and procedures of forecasting. Here it must be pointed out
that these areas of mathematics are used both in the methods of processing facto-
graphic information and in the processing of data obtained by the expert method.
Let us examine certain. in our view, promising applications of probability and sta-
tistical methods to forecast research. while the previous section 2.4 examined

questions of analyzing development trends for a certain variable in time, in the
given section attention has been focused on elucidating the links between two or a

range of random variables and the use of the elucidated links for forecasting their
values. In terms of the degree of research comprehensiveness, the methods employed
in this area can be divided into bivariate and multivariate.

The former involve an examination of paired relationships between variables (paired
correlations and regressions) and are aimed in forecast research at solving such
problems as establishing the quantitative measure of the closeness of the tie be-

tween two random variables, the establishing of the closeness of this tie to a
linear one and assessing the reliability and accuracy of forecasts obtained by the

extrapolation of a regression dependence.

The multivariate methods of statistical analysis are basically aimed at solving the
problem of systems analysis for multivariate stochastic forecasting objects. The
aim of such research, as a rule, is to disclose the interrelationships between the
variables of the complex. to construct multidimentional functions for the relation
of the variables and the isolating of a minimum number of characteristics describ-
ing the object with a sufficient degree of accuracy. Here one of the basic tasks
is to reduce the size of description for the forecasting object. Thus, statistical
methods are basically used to prepare data and to reduce them to a sort suitable

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for making the forecast. As a rule. after their use one of the extrapolation or
interpolation methods is employed for directly obtaining the forecast result.

The mathematics of probability theory and mathematical statistics have been de-
scribed sufficiently uidely in the mathematical literature [8, 21]. The questions
of applying these methods to the solving of forecasting problems have also been
taken up in the literature [24. 37, 38, 43]. Let us examine the methods of a paired
correlation and regression in forecasting. the methods of multivariate statistical
analysis and the questions of their application to solving forecasting problems.

2.5.1. Correlations and Regressions in Forecasting Interrelated Random Variables
Let there be a set of values for two random variables X1{x11} and xp{ 1} for which

there is s supposition of the presence of a linear-type relationship v th random
deviations. Let Y; and Rb-the mean arithmetic values of these variables:

El - 7"- 2"“: i}. i ‘ I”. I (2.82)

The relation between the variables is determined using a paired correlation coef-
ficent

)3 (swam-3»

l-I

"' a 33- ' (2.83)

--the standard deviations of x1 and 1p;

- - . 1-—
- 2,. (In — 'I)‘ . A (an —3,.)'
8| =' ‘I n and S, I- - a .

The paired correlation coefficient is employed for assessing the closeness of the
relationship if the relationship is a linear one. With a nonlinear form of a rela-
tionship a correlation ratio or index is used

where 81, Sp

 

 

 

l ”V' :57; (2.81.)

u “" '

where Sip--the residual dispersion of XI relative to the regression line x1 - f(xp);
s%--the full dispersion of x; relative to Y1.

As is seen from (2.84), for determining the correlation index for the actual data it
is essential to preselect a regression line and this complicates the procedure of
selecting the influencing factors (the method of selecting the form of relationshin
is given above). In order to avoid intermediate operations related to choosing the
regression line, instead of the natural amounts of variables it,is possible to use
their functions in assuming that the relation between the functions of the studied
amounts, for example, ln x1 and In xp is a linear one.

96

FOR¢DFFNJAI.USEloNLY
FIJI‘OFFICJAI.IE§EZ(NQLY

Subsequently. when the regression equation has been chosen, the regression is

tested for linearity. The regression test for linearity is based on the fact that
there is a definite relationship between the correlation ratio 1 and the correlation
coefficient r. In the event of a linear correlation association 12 -r2, in all
other instances 12 i :2, and l in terns of its absolute value cannot be less than r.
The difference (12 - r2) cannoc be negative and if it equals zero, then the regres-
sion is a linear one. The regression linearity is assessed from the Fisher 2 cri-
terion

I (" Ml.) 6-4,)“ . ‘
a l
. 5 "[ ("Mun—7:1;- ”t “-8”
with- the degrees of freedom V1 - p - 2 and V2 - n - p, where f—fiducial probability.

The significance of the calculated correlation coefficients is assessed fron two
criteria:

1-._,sr=vn —" 2'29; (2.86)
V I—d,
z ..+In%5>z,. (2.87)

A linear regression equation can be written in the form
(x.—§.)-r. 5' (x —E). ‘ ' (2.88)
s'3; p r

If r - 0, then a correlation relationship is absent between x1 and , if r - 1, then
then X! grows linearly with the growth of xp, if r - -1, then :1 din ishes linearly
with the growth of x,. The values x < |r| < l characterize certain intermediate

3
types of relationship between :1 and ‘P‘ The coefficient r19 E1 is termed a linear

regression coefficient; it defines the slope of the regression line to the xp axis.

In forecasting such an extrapolation method is used in the instance that a suffi-
cient amount of statistical data is available for two interrelated variables. One of
these variables is chosen as the independent and the second is the dependent (the
function). As the independent variable one selects the one from the pair of vari-
ables thc significance of which can by one means or another be judged for the fore-

cast lead time.
The step paired regression is a particular instance of using a paired regression in
forecast research. In this instance by studying a chain of paired variable rela-

tionships one arrives at a definition of the forecasted variable. The scheme for
applying a step regression thus cones down to the following:

x1 ' f1(12). x2 ' f2(83). x3 - f3(xu) and so forth. (2.89)

97

IWDRIOFTNCJAL USEZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using such a scheme, for example, it is possible to investigate the relationship of

economic indicators for product costs x1, labor productivity x2. the capital-to-
labor ratio X3 and capital investments x“.

It is essential to bear in mind that the mistakes in determining the final indi-
cator increase rapidly with a rise in the length of the "ladder" of intermediate
indicators. In the event of the independent distribution of the random errors

ul. uz. u3, ... among themselves with certain constant confidence intervals 0;, 0:,
D3 ... for each step, the probabilities of falling in them will be multiplied in

rapidly reducing the significance level of determining the final variable of the
"ladder."

In addition to studying the relationships of two random variables in forecasting
use is also made of correlation and regression analysis between the values of the
same variable. The use of sutoregression models for forecasting is based on the as-
sumption that the value of a time series at a moment of time t (with the accuracy

up to a random amount) is a linear function of its values at the preceding moments.
The modeling process using the autoregression equations consists in isolating from

the time series a stationary random component and constructing an autoregressioa
model for it:

2: - bl: H’zzt- +...+bnzt_n+ct. (2.90)

t-l 2
The isolating of a stationary random component comes down to excluding the trend
from the time series. The simplest and most widespread method of excluding the
systematic part of a time series is the method of forming differences of the corres-
ponding order (see Table 2.6).

After the formation of the first order differences the centering or the obtained
series A t is carried out:

at - ai-Z" (2.91)
and the constructing of the autoregression model of the type

6t = “15t-|+326t-2+--°*3m6t-m+nt' (2.92)

Before beginning to calculate the coefficients for the equation (2.92) it is essen-
tial to test the premises of its application in forecasting. The test consists of
the two stages examined below.

1. The test of whether the random component is a random amount not dependent on
time. This is carried out using the criterion of a series based upon the sampling
median. Let the deviations from the trend be calculated: n1. n2. ..., “n' From
these an ordered series is formed n1, n2, ..., n", where n --the least of all devia-
tions. Furthermore, let nmed--the median of this ordered series. Then it is pos-
sible to form a sequence of the pluses and minuses using the following rule: in
place i (i = l, 2. ..., n) a plus sign is put if observation 1 in the initial series
exceeds the median and a minus sign if it is less than the median; if observation 1
equals the median, it is dropped. Thus, we obtain a sequence consisting of pluses
and minuses the number of which does not exceed n. If the deviations are random

98

IWJR 0FT1CLAL USE2CNNLY
FOR'OFFNJA1.USEZONLY

onus then their alternation should also be random. The sequence of running pluses
or minuses is termed a series.

Let us calculate the extent Kmax(n) of the longest series and the total number of
series V(n). In order that the initial series represents a random sample, the ex-

tent of the longest series should not be too great while the total number of series

should not be too small. The sample is recognized as a random one if the following
inequality is met (for a 5 percent confidence level):

Kan“) < “5.302“ 'l" ”1'
V(n)>[%(u+l)-l.96Vn_—i]. 2.93)

If even one of the inequalities is disrupted, then the hypothesis of the random
nature of the deviations in the time series levels from the trend is rejected.

2. The test for the hypothesis of stationarity for the random component. The basic
condition for the stationarity of a random process is the condition of the depend-
ence of the autocorrelation function solely upon the difference of the independent
variables t; I t: - T.

Let us test the hypothesis that the value of the autocorrelation function does not
depend upon the choice of the beginning of the observation count but depends just on
the amount of the shift of T. For this for the random component nt(t - 1, 2, ..., n)
we will find the value of the autocorrelation function r9, r3, ..., r? (the upper
index is the number of observations for which the autocorrelation function is cal-
culated). A formula for calculating an autocorrelation function has the following
form:

Then one of the observation curves is excluded and a new autocorrelation function is
calculated rQ'l, ra’l, ..., rQ‘l. In a similar manner one excludes P(P - 0, l, 2,

..., p) observations and the value of the (pi-l) autocorrelation function is calcu-
lated. Thus we obtain t groups of autocorrelation coefficients and each of then

will include (p-ki) coefficients. For a stationary process, the autocorrelation co-
efficients included in the same group should be uniform.

The test for uniformity can be carried out in the following manner. For each rgP'P)
included in group 1, we calculate the amount of the z criterion using the formula

I I+I£"'”
z.,—Tmﬁ4n_, . (2.94)

Then for this group we calculate

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

'
; .. '23.“. (2.95)
I ';F| '

Mote has proved that the amount
p

2M ' (2.96)

-—-— -.1
1-9 p ‘

is distributed as x2 with p degrees of freedom. In the event that the amount x2
calculated using formula (2.96) is less than the tabular value of x2 with a set con-
fidence level. then the hypothesis of the uniformity for group 1 of autocorrelation
coefficients can be accepted. If the uniformity hypothesis is confirmed for all the
groups, then it can be accepted that the random component is a random process that
is stationary in the broad sense.

If in the test it is established that a time series does not meet even one of these
conditions, it is wrong to apply an equation of the type (2.90) for describing it.
In this case one must move on to higher order differences.

After the necessary tests have been made,
it is essential to determine the order of
the autoregression model. The first step
in selecting the order of the autoaggression
model is an analysis of the correlogram.
The autoregreasion process is characterized
by the fact that an autocorrelation func—
tion is diminishing. A diminishing of the
correlogram indicates that the relation
with the past is weakening. The autore-
greasion order is determined depending upon
in what shifts the autocorrelation function
reaches the greatest amount. Let us ex-
plain this from a specific example.

 

Fig. 2.12. Correlogram for determining
the order of an autoregression model

From Fig. 2.12 it can be seen that for r > 5 (r--the amount of the shift) there is
a damping of the correlogram, that is. the relation with the past is weakening. On
this basis it can be concluded that for the given example it is not advisable to
construct a model above the fourth order. Since an autocorrelation function reaches
the greatest amount in the third and fourth shifts. autoregression models of the
third and fourth order are constructed.

After first determining the order the parameters of the autoregressinn model are
found. The autoregression parameters can be determined by a double method. The
first is the direct application of the least square method. The condition for the
minimum dispersion of the deviations in the fixed sample from n observations is
written in the form

I '- 3
D ‘ s.— ‘ ). .
lml (-éo-J l [y'afolq min. (2 97)
100

I1)R‘0FIWC]AI.IJSEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This condition leads to a system of normal equations

0-. +4 --+l lua+l

a. 2': aqua)"; a...o...+---+a.- 2‘. am...-

- 2 514513

lust-H
a. (33+: 6'40"”- a. v.23» 61.3 + . . . + a. 0-2-5" 6.40,... -
" ..?:..°~‘" - (we)

swooaoeecs ooaooseeso‘osos.

l«._ats.....+-~-1-a.. 2‘. .61...»

Ina-4»

an 2‘. '64..n6:-. Fa:

:‘\
[IN E L

l—n-l»

- )3 6.4.0..

l~u+|
The estimates of the auturegression coefficients can be obtained by another method
from a system of Yule-Walker equations .
r. +0. 44.0. + +r.-.¢.-0.

r.-I-m.-I-a.+~--+r...¢.-m
oaooeogooassoeo (2099)

r.+r...a.+r...a.+~~+a.—o.

where r1--the coefficient for the i-order autocorrelation.

For all cases, with the exception of p values, the system of (2.99) is easier to
solve than the system (2.98), since there is a more symmetrical form in the construc-
tion. As is known the solution to the system (2.99) comes down to recurrent rela-
tions

(2. 100)

 

0n=a.-...+a..¢....... (h-I. 2. ....s—l). (2.101)

Here as the initial value one uses ‘11 - -r1. As a result of applying (2.100) and
(2.101), we obtain estimates for the coefficients of an autoregression model of the
s order, since as; - al, a3: - a2. ..., a,. - am. Having determined the parameters
of the autoregression equation, it is now possible to more precisely set the order
of the autoregression model. For determining the order of this model the Mann and
Held criteria is employed. It is convenient in the fact that it employs directly
calculable and not estimated amounts.

In order to establish whether a sufficiently high degree of approximation has been
obtained as a result of the approximation by the model (2.92) of the order m, it is
essential to determine the deviations which arise in increasing the autoregression

101

PORiOFFNJAl.USE(NVLY
FIHIOFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

I

I

' order. For this autoregression models of the q order are constructed, where
m < q < [-1 and the total of the squares of the deviations is determined for those
observations for which the value at could be calculated both using the m~order
models and the q-order models.

Let 2;--the total of the squares for the remainders for the m-order model (the
prine means that not all the remainders are examined but only those for which a q-
order model has also been determined); x2-the total of the squares of the remaind-
ers for the q-order model. In this instance the amount of the Mann and Wald cri-

teria

- (n- q) 1n zz/z‘f (2.102)

has a distribution x2 with (q1-m) degrees of freedom. Consequently, having set a
given confidence level, it is possible to test the hypothesis that the studied
process actually represents an autoregression of the set order. The model can be
used for further analysis if satisfactory results have been obtained for the Mann
and Wald criterion. Forecasting the value of

Forecasting the value of 6: for the period (t-Fl) using an autoregression model as
carried out in the following manner. Initially the value 6t+l is calculated using
the formula

6:." “Flal +a‘6‘_'+ as . 'PM~Q+W0 _ (2.103)
then in the expression -

a:+:-a.o:+u+¢:6.+-~+a.6i—.+m (2.101.)

we substitute the calculated value 5t+1 and determine the value of 5:+2 and so
forth.

In earring out the corresponding transformations, it is essential to move on to a
forecast for (ti-l) period of the initial time series.

The transformation must be made using the formulas

= 8' + 6.: (2.105)
V... =- Y,'+A;. (2.106)

0f substantial significance is an estimate of the error factor of the forecast ob-
tained using the sutoregression model. Let us assume that the order of the auto-
regression model has been set and the model coefficients are known. In this in-
stance the remainders n: in the autoregreosion equation are distributed normally
with a zero mathematical expectation and a variance an . From this it is possible
to obtain the probability limits for the predicted value of 5t:

2.107
9|I6.-6a°l<lo.l-¢ ( )

102

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or

9' w —Io. < a; < 6:4 ml - a. (2.103)

where 6t-the true value of the examined parameter;
6§--the predicted value of the examined parameter.

Let us now examine the possible methods of assessing the accuracy and reliability
of the regression and correlation models. The following statistical characteris-
tics can be employed as indicators of the approximation accuracy.

1. An estimate of the standard error of the regression equation

2 lu-le'
SI.".)= '/_“' ._' ' (2.109)

where n--the umber of observations;
p--the number of constants in the regression equation.

 

 

2. The mean relative error of the estimate

I " --I(xcl
0..-? 2&7:— 10095. (2.110)

3. The mean linear error

. .
Sum—Hun

_- ‘ .
3" Wat-U (2.111)

The characteristics of (2.109)-(2.1ll) show the degree of approximation of the re-
gression equation to the series of observations of the dependent variable but do not
provide any idea about the existence of a relation between the variables from the
viewpoint of the sensitivity of the dependent variable to changes in the variable of
the independent variable. For this reason the correlation index is a stronger cri-
terion for judging the accuracy of approximation and this is sometimes termed the

correlation ratio:
_ 3L7“!
J a: l T. (2.112)

where S§--the full variance of the dependent variable;

8!— .§.“‘_"" (2.113)

 

here y—-the arithmetic average of the dependent variable calculated from the empiri-
cal data of the series.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since 0 < J < l. the closeness of the correlation index to 1 makes it possible to
judge simultaneously the quality of approximation and the significance of the re-
lation between the variables. The significance estimate provides an opportunity to
make a judgment about the reliability of the selected model. The model's reliabili-

ty can be set by a significance estimate of the correlation index using the Fisher
2 criterion:

1 J’ n—-)
z m TIn[-T.—:T,--2;:€T a 2... (2.115)

where zp-the tabular value of z with the set fiducial probability [6].

For obtaining sufficiently dependable estimates the level of fiduciary probability
must be set not lower than 95 percent, that is p z 0.95. The purpose of estimating
the significance of the correlation index is to test the hypothesis of the absence
of a relation between the variables. From (2.112) it can be seen that this corres-
ponds to the case where the variance of the data in the series relative to the re-
gression line s§,§(x) is close in amount to the variance of the relative mean of
the series 8%. The question is how significant is the difference of these two indi-
cators, that is, to what degree the substituting of Y'and Sf for f(x) and Sf.f(x)
improves our ideas about changes in the dependent variable. Along with estimating
the correlation ratio. the model's reliability can also be judged directly from the
variance ratio. For this purpose the Fisher F criterion is used

F .. 35—; P... (2.115)

where F1-a-the tabular value of the Fisher P criterion with the given probability
a of rejecting the hypothesis on the equality of the variance ratio [31].

An analysis of the model for sensitivity to changes in the independent variable
plays an important role in assessing model reliability. Attempts to judge model
sensitivity visually from the position of the data on a graph can lead to serious
errors, as the nature of the graph is influenced by the set scale of construction.
This is seen from Fig. 2.13, where the same data have been depicted with differing
scales for the dependent variable. In Fig. 2.13s the data on the dependent variable
are extended along the y axis while in Fig. 2.13b, on the contrary, they are com-
pressed. It is not difficult to realize that it is very hard to judge the exist-
ence of trends proceeding solely from graphic presentations.

Thus, the use of the Fisher 2 and F criteria makes it possible to avoid mistakes in
judgments about the real relatiC'ship between variables. If several mathematical
functions satisfy all the listed requirements equally. preference should be given
to the simpler analytical expressions. Here it is essential to consider the pos-
sibility of a semantic interpretation of the constants. The latter plays an im-
portant role if the obtained model is to be used as the basis for further research
on factors which are not considered by the set dependence.

Forecasting from a model selected as a result of the above-described procedure con-
sists in calculating the values of the dependeu' variable from the values of the
independent variable which go beyond the limit of the available aggregate of initial

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                          

 

   

III III III
IIIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIIIIII
!ll!lll!:i¥n
Iiieiﬁiiii i
=illlﬂllllll
me I!" ”In“ "a "a
b)

Fig. 2.13. Influence of scale on visual
assessment of regression model reliability

data and the establishing of confidence intervals within which one must expect the
appearance of the real value of the dependent variable with the determined set prob-
ability. Here it is assumed that the prediction error has been distributed normal-
ly relative to the regression line and that the mistakes are mutually independent.
The latter supposition requires a special check in analyzing dynamic series since
the internal series (serial) correlation leads to a significant displacement of the
variances in the model parameters and these are incorporated in the general error
of the regression equation of [44]. For this reason. before going on to calculate
the confidence intervals for the forecasted variable it is essential to test the

model for error autocorrelation.

In order to establish the presence of a correlation in a sequential series of values
at for a time series, it is essential to use the Darbin-Hatson serial correlation
criterion [66] which is written in the following manner

I
-‘ (n - Im)’
23 . (2.116)

I
21!?

I».

Dr.

 

where ct--the remainder of (Yt‘ f(t)) at the moment of time t;
cc -et_l--the righthanded sequential difference of remainders.

The significance of a serial correlation can be assessed from the table which gives
the upper and lower limits of the criterion (such a table is found in [64]). If it
is established that a correlation of errors occurs. then it is better to use auto-

regrcssion forecasting methods the contents of which are given below. In the ab-
sence of a serial correlation it is possible to move on to calculating the model's

general error which is formed from the error of the regression equation and the
errors of its coefficients (16, 46]. A diagram for the formation of the general
error can be easily traced from the example of a linear model (Fig. 2.14). if the
independent variable is expressed through deviations from its mean.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As is seen from Fig. 2.11:, the general
error of the actual amount of ’1 is fomed
from the error of the predicted value of y
on the regression line with the estimate
parameters bo and b1 and from the devia-
tion of the predicted value 91 from the
value Y1 on the regression line with true
coefficients as caused by the error in the
angular coefficient b1 and by the error of
the aritllnetic mean 7 caused by the devia-
tion of bo from 89. In knowing the amount
of each of the particular errors, it is
possible to determine the general error
using the formula

1 3 5|. h

    

x. —--__-—- ‘

. _- . LI“! _ ) __"s
1,1 8"" 1". ‘ V 511(1) I —. " 8] ll (X; X)
Pi 2 1!. Dis f h f ti or S S 1/. + l + l tel—i)!
8-.. 'grsnorteormaon .onum ._ .
of the general error of a linear model I'F'aI ' 7;- 3‘
(here Y - 80+81(x-Y)-the regression (2 117)

equation with true coefficients)

The confidence interval for the individual prediction of the value of y! can be pre-
sented in the for: of an inequality

In - "SW-3d < y; <5. +I..s',;_;d. (2.118)

where ivy-the point estimate of the dependence of the variable on the estimate re-
gression line;
tp--the value of the Student-Cosseth t-criterion for the set level of fiduci-
ary probability with n degrees of freedom (n—the number of terms from
the dynamic series [16, 64]).

An analysis of the expression (2.117) indi-
cates that the confidence interval changes
along the regression line from the minimum
value with x1 - 3?, when the third term of
the expression under the radical turns to
zero, in maximally widening toward the end
values of the independent variable, as is
shown in Fig. 2.15. The point y: on the
graph is the extrapolation value of the
dependent variable for 2"“ value of the
dependent variable which for a dynamic

' series is equivalent to (r+1) year.

Fig. 2.15. Confidence interval for The ossibilit of e 1 1 confidenc
individual value of dependent variable integvals calcxlatedngrz :ge data of :b-
“ﬂuted by linear model servetiona to estimate extrapolation

 

106

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reliability has been examined in detail in [8]. However it is not difficult to see
that this reliability rapidly diminishes with an increase in the forecast lead
period and with sufficiently high for trend extrapolation loses its practical sig-
nificance. For this reason, the above-described forecasting method should be em-
ployed for short-term forecasting. However it must be kept in mind that even a
carefully selected model can be inadequate to a complete dynamic series although it
is the best for a part of this series. This is the basic difficulty in forecasting
using regression equations. They hear too strong an impression from the previous
history of the process, in describing its patterns as an average, that is, equally
good or bad for all development phases of the object.

2.5.2. Multivariate Statistical Analysis

In a majority of real studies of the 81‘s, the forecasting object is a multidimen-
sional complex described by an aggregate of interrelated variables. The difficulty
01. systems analysis and forecasting for such a complex increases sharply with a
rise in the number of variables comprising it. On the other hand, a study of the
development of an individually taken variable from the complex or of the interac-
tion of the pair of variables is always fraught with the danger of obtaining erron-
eous forecasts due to the overlooking of the effect of other variables. For this
reason the forecaster is confronted with the question of choosing the research
method which will provide a compromise between the complexity of realizing it and
the reliability of the obtained results.

The multidimensionality of the relationships and the random nature of a mnber of
variables in the forecasting object necessitate an examination of it as a stochastic
object and, consequently, the use of the statistical and probability methods of
multivariate analysis. Here the following approaches can be used:

1) Multivariate regression and correlation analysis aimed at constructing the sur-
faces (planes) of multiple regression for the studied characteristic with the subse-

quent interpolation or extrapolation of its value;

2) Statistical analysis of the internal structure of the complex aimed at disclos-
ing the main (determining, leading) variables which define the development of the
related secondary variables; this, in essence, is the path of minimizing the dimen-
sionality in describing the complex;

3) Factor analysis aimed at disclosing new random variables, each of which is a
generalization of a whole series of initial variables in the complex; this approach,
like the preceding one, is aimed at minimizing the dimensionality of the object's
description but not by discarding unimportant ones and examining the basic ones but
rather by increasing the degree of research aggregation.

Multiple regression and correlation analysis is applicable in analyzing the follow-
ing propositions [11, 22, 1.3]: the random value distribution laws are close to the
normal; the variants of the dependent variable are equal with different values of
the independent variables; the independent variables are measured without errors;
individual measurements for all amounts are considered stochastically independent,
that is, the absence of an autocorrelation is assumed in their change.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are the following differences in the premises for employing these two methods:
regression analysis presupposes the absence of a correlation between the independent
variables, while correlation analysis assumes the presence of such a reciprocal cor-
relation; regression analysis is suitable for describing objects of both a linear
and nonlinear character while correlation analysis is suitable only for linear ob-
jects, since for nonlinear ones there is no sense in the concept of a multivariate

normal distribution of the variables and this is an essential condition for its re-
alization.

In solving practical problems, the strict observance of all the listed conditions,
as a rule, is impossible. however both methods are applicable considering that the
deviations from the above-listed conditions reduce the reliability of results. This
must always be kept in mind in assessing the accuracy and reliability of the fore-
casts obtained by regression and correlation methods.

In the general instance a multiple regression equation represents a dependence be-
tween one and several variables. For modeling, for example, the cost estimates of

the BTS, linear and nonlinear equations are used for the independent variables and
linear ones for parameters. For example, the equation

xlabl 'l ba‘s'l' bats 'i‘ +5}, (2.119)

is a linear one for the independent variables and parameters. The equation
3‘. -=I:.x3'x3' x? (2.120)

is nonlinear for the independent variables but linear for the parameters, as it

can be reduced to a linear type by replacing the variables with their standard
functions, for example,

log 2?. .-= log I), 1. b,|ogx, -I- 1:, log x, + ... +- 0,10“,

As is seen, the equation (1.20), in contrast to a linear equation, expresses a
linear relationship between the logarithms of the variables, that is, it is loga-
rithmically linear. Sometimes for forecast modeling semilogarithmic linear equa-
tions are used. For example, the equation

k, -_. e": ”o'-“a'a"'”‘+'p'p (2.121)
is semilogarithmically linear, as it can be reduced to the linear form:
'n XI ""1 ‘I' box! + box: ‘I‘ ‘ ' ' + bpxr
One other variety of parametric-linear models is the equations which are linear

relative to the double logarithm of the independent variable and the logarithms of
the dependent variables:

5’s '3 ‘l
k.-e"' ". (2.122)
108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR()FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

which has the following linear form:
mmdo=mm+nmn+mmn|.u+mmn

As in the case of constructing regression equations with two variables, modeling
with multiple regression equations necessitates the choice of a form of the rela-
tionship between the variables. The choice of the form of relationship between the
variables of a multiple regression equation is complicated by the fact that prelim-
inary analysis using graphic constructs, as is employed in selecting two-variable
functions. is not suitable for an analysis of multiple relations. Any of the equa-
tions (2.119)-(2.122) expresses the relation between two variables (dependent and
independent) under the condition that all the remaining variables in the equation
assume certain fixed values. For this reason graphic analysis of the type of de-
pendence cannot be carried out before the parameters of the regression equation b1.
b2, ..., bp are found.

Thus, graphic analysis of the form of relation requires the preliminary positing of
a hypothesis on the form of the multiple regression equation and the calculating of
its parameters. Regardless of this. in certain situations graphic analysis can be
a useful auxiliary tool in constructing such models.

Graphic analysis of the type of dependence between the dependent and each of the
independent variables in the model is carried out by the sequential elimination of
the influence from other variables and this is achieved by substituting into the
equation the values of these variables which are numerically equal to their arith-
metic means. For example. in a case with three independent variables, a model

suitable for analyzing the type of dependence between the variables :1 and x; as-
Sumes the following form:

x. = b.4555“ (2.123)

where g; and xZL-arithmetic means of eliminated variables.

After transformation we arrive at a simple regression equation with two variables:

3“ ,b'x‘n o; =- mac. (2.121.)

In an analysis of dependence graphs it must be remembered that each of the amounts
of the last product contains a certain error since the calculated values b1, x3 and
xu are only estimates of their true values in the general aggregate. For this rea-
son the regression line described by the equation (2.124) can be shifted along the
vertical axis and the actual points can be above or below the regression line. How-
ever such a circumstance does not influence the nature of the trend.

The effectiveness of aposteriori graphic analysis depends largely upon the number of
independent variables, their variance and reciprocal influence. With a large number
of independent variables with significant variances and complex internal relation-
ships, most often the placement of factual data in a rectangular system of coordi-
nates does not make it possible to provide any reliable judgment on the type of

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dependence using geometric constructs. This is quite natural since the multiple
relations are described not by lines but by complex spatial figures. In this re—
gard, if there is no definite informal feature for which preference should be given

to one of the models beforehand, the choice of the form of relation can be made
only on the basis of the regular estimate criteria.

The parameters of s parameter-linear multiple regression equation are set by the
least square method. here there is a minimization of the total of the squares of

the actual data deviations from the regression surface described by the given equa-
tion:

go. "it — 17nd. 5)], "' mm. (2.125)

where X-the vector of independent variables (X2, X3, ..., x p);
B—-the vector of the regression equation parameters (b1, b2, ..., bp).

In differentiating (2.125) for each parameter and setting the particular deriva-
tives at zero, we obtain a system of linear equations:

XXI "'"bl‘l"’rzx1'.‘bsz’s'|‘ '” +bp8xs:
XXm-nbuxl'a F-bzzli-l- 03812134- +b,2‘,xgx,:‘

Xnnwm2h+hzhh+h83+"'+hzﬂﬂ OJ“)

................. see-

27m. -*0I21*p+0221m.+-~- +b,..zx,_.x,+b,zx'

 

where the totaling is carried out for the entire aggregate of initial data (1-1" n).

The solving of the system of (2.126) makes it possible to find the parameters of
the regression equation b1. b2, .... bp which are optimum for the criterion of
(2.125). For calculating the parameters of nonlinear models the latter are linear-
ized (see above). In this case the variables are replaced by their logarithmic
functions.

The variables of multiple regression equations can be set in a natural scale, in the
form of simple and standardized deviations from their means. For an analysis of the
relations between the variables of the greatest interest are the models constructed
from the standardized deviations of the variables (standardized variables). The
unit of measurement for the degree of reciprocal influence of the variables is their
mean square deviation and the formula for converting to a standardized scale is:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

]/ Aim-3:? (2.128)
“I " —_:T:T_’

The multiple regression equation expressed in a standardized scale has the form:
Z.-M+M+---+l|ptn (2.129)

where 82, 83, ..., BP-standardized multiple regression coefficients which are de-
termined from the system of linear equations

91"Ie-WI'I Wu+”'-I‘II/uro
“sa'u—(Wsrl'm’u +"‘+I‘/ap)3

.................

“a "- ’Ip “'“ (up! “I“ ”no “I“ ' ‘ ' “I“ ”piste-IDI-

(2.130)

where r13--coefficicnts for the paired correlation between variables.

The system of (2.130) is obtained as a result of applying the least square method
to the standardized variables. The standardized multiple regression coefficients
indicate to what part of a; there will be a change in the average value of the de-
pendent variable if the corresponding independent variable changes by one mean
square error (OJ. 3- 2, p). while the other variables remain constant. Since all
the variables are expressed in comparable units of measurement, the regression co-
efficients indicate the comparative strength of the influence of each variable on
a change in the dependent variable. If the equation has been selected sufficiently

correctly, the general influence should be close to one, that is, E IBJ! '1.
1'2
Thus, the expressing of multiple regression equations by standardized variables

provides a valuable tool for analyzing the sensitivity of the estimates to a change
in the independent variables.

The conversion of the equation (2.129) to a natural scale is carried cut using the
formulas

bl‘pla'! l-ﬁi (2.131)
0. -7r. 40.3. Hi.+-~-+b,i,). (2.132)

where ;l--the arithmetic mean of the dependent variable.

The constructing of equations in a standardized scale involves carrying out addi-
tional calculations and the complicating of the calculation procedure for the model
parameters. For this reason, with the lack of a well organized program making it
possible to carry out the entire calculation procedure on a computer, it is simpler
to use the method of calculating the variables on a conventional scale. In this

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instance, an analysis of the models for sensitivity can be carried out using a sim-
plified schae with a multiple determination coefficient

Rim. . ..-" ""+°' 2”""+"'+"2""'. (2.133)

where x1, x2, ..., xP--deviations of the variables from their averages.

Having divided term by term the righthand portion by 1%, it is possible to measure
the degree of influence of each indicator for indepe ent variable of the model on
the estimate of the function as expressed in fractions of the overall variation.

An estimate of the approximation accuracy and model reliability is carried out using
two basic criteria:

The multiple correlation coefficient

 

(2.136)

where r134, ..., '1p.23...( _l)-partial correlation coefficients between the de-
" pendent and independent variables;

The multiple correlation index
1|.ﬂ...p"" "/I _ 4m...» . (2.135)

where Sf.f(23“.p)-estimate for the variance of the actual data on the relative re-
gression surface;
Sﬁ—estimate for the full variance of the actual values for the de-
pendent variable relative to its mean.

An estimate of the variances is made using the formulas:

(1;: --ml' (2. 136)

$1.1m ,,.. ' l-P :
-|('ll-;l). (2.137)
I -—n_:—_'

The multiple correlation coefficients and index are always positive and assuse any
values between 0 and 1. If the corresponding index is equal to or close to zero
this shows the absence of a relation between the independent and dependent variables
while the closeness of the indicator to one shows a strong relation. From (2.135)
one can see that the correlation index J1.23.up=0, if sl.f(23...p) 881.11.23

"he“ $1.:(23.. .p) =0-

l.

3
see?

112

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The latter means that virtually all the actual values of the dependent variable lie
on the regression surface or in any event are located in the immediate proximity of
it.

The sense of the ratio of the two variances in (2.135) comes down to the fact that
by using it it is possible to elucidate how much better our estimates are described
by a regression equation in comparison with the average value of the dependent var-
iable. In considering that the observed difference in the variances can be the re-
sult of a random variation of the data, it is essential to estimate the signifi-
cance of the established relations. This estimate can be carried out using the
Fisher z-criterion

"'1'

I l‘
zuTlnmm>zf (2.138)

with the degrees of freedom v1 - (p-1) and v2 - (n-p).

The same criterion is employed for assessing the significance of the multiple cor-
relation coefficient. The estimate of the significance of the multiple correlation
coefficients and index makes it possible to judge the reliability of the model. The
The same indicators are employed for estimating the approximation as the multiple
correlation coefficient makes it possible to choose the better linear model while
the multiple correlation index does the same for the best nonlinear one. A compari-
son of them can finally establish the form of the relation. For this it is essen-
tial to assess the linearity of the relation using the Fisher z-criterion:

’Immp- Lumps—p

I
=. 2.139
2 ‘74"'—17:7{;:ff:_-P-3‘=z' ( )

 

Hith degrees of freedom v1 - (p-2) and v2 - (n-p). If the condition of (2.139) is
satisfied, the linearity of the relation is considered established and preference
must be given to a linear model.

The accuracy of the forecast estimates is characterized by the square of the error
for the individual prediction which is calculated using the formula

Si.-.~..,m...,. =.- sf..........(l +++onx§+w§-I-
(2.140)

-I- m--I wz-I- 2“”, + 2mm 4- - ~+ 2a,”).

l,)--estimate of the standard error relative to the regression sur-
face;
x2, X3, ...,xP--independent variables expressed in the form of deviations from
the corresponding averages;
n--the volume of the initial statistical aggregate;
czz. C33, ..., cpp, C23, c2“, ..., cjp--constants determined from the system of
equations in [16]:

where Sl.f(23

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l1)R‘0FF1(1AI.IJSEi(ﬂULY

(nor.+(zwm+---+(nx.x,)c.;u
(EWa)€a+(2‘§)0n+°“+(2’a‘p)0u-0:

........... eaoenaeoo

00.0.0 Issue-es

(2}12*.)0n+(2v.)an+m+(23'.)cx.-m

(2 ’Dcari-(E “)5: +'"+(2:‘a‘p)€a- l:
(2 %)€a+(2’9‘u +'“+ (2 “368-0:

............. nos-assoc

(2.161)

....................

......................

()3 19¢..- +(2Wc»+-~-+(2x.x.)c,-m
()2. 1%)‘n4-(L’9‘n +--~+(2x.~.)c.-m

...................

(2| x"!)‘ﬁ+(2 ’33,)Cp 4""+(2 12"};- I.

The deviations of the independent variables from the averages for the nonlinear re-
gression equations are calculated fro- the formula

"I ' ’7’ "2." (2.142)

where i}--arithnetic average of independent variable in initial statistical aggre-
gate.

Since it is assumed that the error of an individual prediction is subordinate to a
normal distribution law, the confidence interval within which one can expect the
forecasted amount of the dependent variable with the given probability can be de-
termined by the expression

7r. — (’5‘: .

"I.I(1I...p‘x". x‘ “’51 ,.' (2.11.3)

I’IIIMH

where air-the predicted value of the dependent variable for the multiple regression
equation.

Forecasting from models which represent a linear or nonlinear conbinstion of tine
or statistical dependences involves the necessity of calculating the total (inte-
gral) forecast error. The total forecast error is defined for a linear combination

of dependences as
1—!
5"V):'s" (2.144)

112.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJRiDFF1CIAl.thEi(M§LY

and for a nonlinear combination using the formula
-"'3V'—_'
s’“l/§(37.')s: ’ (2.165)

where Sk--the individual prediction error for dependence k;
3F

3?E--the partial derivative of a composite model for dependence k.

Let us examine the question of using mathematical statistics to reduce the dimen-
sionality for describing a stochastic object.

The correlation pleiad method is designed to disclose variable groups in a complex
the relation between which is the closest to linear. After discovering such groups,
all the variables of the group (pleiad) in the research are replaced by one deter-
mining variable. As a result the initial dimensionality of description is substan-
tially reduced with small losses in accuracy which are determined by the accepted
level of the correlation coefficients.

In the process of such research a correlation matrix is constructed for all the
variables of the studied object o - Irijln.

After this a number of threshold levels are set for constructing the correlation
pleiads. For example.

I) l<r.,<0.9:
2) 0.9 < r" < 0.8:

a) 0.3 (n, .10]. (2.11.5)

Then. from the correlation matrix one selects the relations corresponding to each
interval. For analysis these can be conveniently presented in the form of a graphic
interpretation, an example of which is
shown in Fig. 2.16. In this drawing around
the circumference lie sequential points
corresponding to the variables x1, xz, ...,
x“. In examining the D matrix. one con-
nects with straight lines those variables
on the circumference the correlation co-
efficient between which fell within the set
interval 1, 2, or 3 as determined by
(2.146).

. As a rule, the picture obtained as a result
will contain a number of clusters analogous
to the clusters in xu and x1 in Fig. 2.16.
In examining such a picture, it is easy to
isolate the vertices of the clusters which

 

Fig. 2.16. Illustration of the collect a large number of relations. For
correlation pleind method level i of (2.146) it can be said from
115

FORi0FFKJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 2.16 that the variables X}, xs, :1, xk and xn.1 are related virtually func-
tionally (with r >0.9) with the variable at; for this reason the analysis and fore-
cast can be made only for x“ and the obtained results extended to all the variables
of the cluster through the formulas of functional ratios. An analogous conclusion
can be drawn for the other peak of the cluster xi in Fig. 2.16.

The construction of several such circles of correlation pleiads for the various
levels of correlation coefficients makes it possible to analyze the internal rela-
tionships of all the variables in the complex and select for examination a minimum
number of them as determined by the given accuracy of the research and the nature
of the D matrix.

Another approach to solving the problem of minimizing the system's dimensionality
for an object's variables is given in [5, 39] from the standpoint of information
theory and pattern recognition theory. From these positions the problem of fore—
casting BTS development can be represented as the task of recognizing the future
state of an object from the results of forecasting the values of a set of individu-
al variables which comprise its description.

The problem of minimizing the demensionality of a description is carried out in the
following manner. 0n the basis of the retrospective values of the variables. from
them a minimum number is chosen making it possible with the set reliability to dis-
tinguish the states of the forecasting object which are of interest to us. The
basic propositions and assumptions in the given examination come down to the follow-
ing. For the studied object we know a finite. denumerable set A - [A1, A2. ..., Ag}
of possible states called classes. The object is described by the set of X -

{x1, x2, ..., KN} variables, each of which can assume a finite number of values.

It is assumed that all the variables of xn are statistically independent of one an-
other, as otherwise the problem becomes particularly cumbersome for practical use.

According to Shannon the information content of a certain variable relative to a
set of classes A can be defined as the difference of the initial entropy in the sys-
tem and the entropy of a solution for the variable x“

J“ - 1m) qua/x“). (2.11.1)

Let the variable x“ assume T discrete values xn (j -l, 2, ..., T). Then the en-
tropy of the solution with value 1 of variable in can be written:

" 2.148
H, Mix.) .3 _ ”2' p (A.Ix,,) logp (um). ( )
According to the Bayes formula
P (A )PUII‘IAI, ' P (‘l) P hall‘s!)
INA-I511) "" ——_____np (1“,) .-.-u .
)_‘. m.) mum.) (2.149)

In substituting this expression in (2.148). we obtain

116

FORIOFINCIAL USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HI(”1a)'—'7,I;’T X

A
X ZP‘A'WWIM-Hon 4M,
2: Hanna’s...)

"l,” 2} I’M-WV-i/M'0¢n(/|.)I»(X./A.)- (2.150)

 

m—

— A Amway/A.) Ion Amanncrnntd -

In these formulas: P(an )--the probability of the appearance of gradation j of

vatiable n for all classes of An; porn-1 /A.)-the probability of the appearance of
value 1 of variable n for class II.

For obtaining the full entropy of the solution for the variable ‘n it is essential
to total Hi (A/xn) for all gradations of j with weights proportional to the proba-

bilities o the appearance of each gradation. that is, p(xnj). As a result, we ob-
tain

‘l’
I! Mix.) "E p(x.,) "AA/x.) ..

“i {I 9 (Alt I") 'O‘IMAQO xal’ 4‘

[I'll Col

‘ “.
+ ’23. §'P(‘lo til) M&'P(A-v xai)‘

In substituting the obtained expression and the initial entropy MA) -

- X p(Au)log p(A,) in (2.147). we obtain the final expression for the information
n-l
content of variable n:

M ‘l’
l. -‘ — .3.”"1') loam/1..) + 2.3; pm... x.;Hoap(/I.. 1")—

t. ‘1 “.
-_ P". 3‘. "M” "'ﬂ h“ 3:. "M" """' (2.151)

where p(Am, xnj)--the joint distribution of probabilities for the values of x for

the class A“. “J

The expression (2.151) is the basic working formula for calculating the information
content of variables. Having determined quantitatively the values for the inforna-
tion rontent of the variables, it is possible to rank then according to the decline
in the values of Jn and determine that mininun number of variables which is essen-
tial for recognizing the state of the object with the set degree of reliability.

117

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let the solution be made by calculating the aposteriori probabilities of the possi-
ble states for the values of the variables xn determined relative to a certain
moment of time in the future. here it is advisable to consider the variables with
the highest information content out of the entire set. Thus. the route of examin-
ing the variables is set by their ranking number from the decline of J". The length
of the route, that is. the necessary number of variables in the examination. is de-

termined by the given threshold value for the aposteriori probability of the class
of states Pp.

With the least favorable distribution of the aposteriori probabilities of the hy-
potheses we have

.. '~"n. l—P. . |—".
I”. -ﬂ-:i . Ti. . . s. ﬁl (2.152)

with the most favorable

I _
1,. I P, o. n. o. (2.153)

The last coordinate of the minimal route is determined by the Fano inequality:

HIM) '"(Aixd "(A/«gm-.—Ii(A/x.)2H(/l)—H,. (2-154)

where Lr-the number of steps in the minimum route;
Hp--the entropy of the solution determined from the distribution of (2.152).

The above-examined method of minimizing dimensionality in a description of a sto-
chastic forecasting object can be realized in those instances when the problem is
posed from the above-described positions of pattern recognition theory and the
retrospective analysis provides sufficient statistics of the variables and the
states for calculating conditional probabilities.

In the event that in examining the minimal route none of the hypotheses has reached
the given threshold Pp. it is possible to use the following variables of the full
route. Then two variations are possible: either at a certain step the probability
of one of the hypotheses m exceeds P and then one can speak about the forecast of
the object's state close to m. or, if none of the hypotheses reaches the set prob-
ability threshold, then one can speak about the appearance of a fundamentally new
state of the object in the future. In lowering the threshold Pp. it is possible to

determine to which of the known this new state is closest.

The designated procedures for determining the information content of variables, for
seeking out the minimal route and for classifying states in examining it can be suc-
cessfully carried out on a computer. Experiments in identifying classes of techni-

cal systems have provided positive results.
Furthermore. a method has been provided of multivariate statistical analysis making

it possible to minimize the description of a stochastic object not by discarding
inessential variables but by disclosing certain general characteristics of their

aggregate.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJALIﬂNECNVLY

2.5.3. Certain Information on Factor Analysis

Factor analysis in its present form represents a certain area of mathematical sta-
tistics [26, 62). However, its appearance at the beginning of the present century
is usually linked with the names of the psychologists C. Spearman, S. Barthow,

L. Thurstone and other. Its initial aim was to construct mathematical models for
human capabilities and conduct. Here the results were based on various psychologi-
cal and physical tests and at the output certain general indicators or factors were
formed. In this area factor analysis is successfully employed at present, however
in recent decades it has spread actively into many other areas such as sociology,
economics, geology, meteorology, engineering and so forth. The work of H. Harman
[42] gives over 200 publications on factor analysis and its use in over a score
scientific areas. He also points to the great diversity of factor analysis methods
and their modifications which are presently known. Let us examine the essence of
one of them.

Let X--an n-dimensional random vector representing a random sample of measurements
for an aggregate of interrelated parameters x1; F-a k-dimensional vectgr the com-
ponents of which are directly unobservable variables (the factors F ); X—-the
mathematical expectation of the fector x; U--the vector of the tots of the unob-
servable errors and specific factors. According to the basic assumption of multi-
factor analysis, each specific measurement of the X-x1 vector can be viewed as the
total of the effects of a certain small number of group factors f (taken with
certain weights ‘ij)' the specific factor a1 effecting only the given variable and
the measurement errors e1. Since 81 and e1 are indistinguishable in factor analy-
sis. they are ordinarily viewed as the total “1 - si‘tei.

Further, let A--the matrix of the order n4-k(n>'k), the elements of which are factor
weights aij determining the load of variable i on factor 1; m—-the number of obser—
vations on vector X for which the estimate is made. Let us write the basic idea of
factor analysis in a matrix form:

x-Ani-w. (2.155)

For the sake of simplicity let us set all the averages at zero: i - O, that is.
we will further view the unbiased distributions x1. Let us designate the product

AF by Q, then
x - Q+U, (2.156)

where Q--is usually called the general part, and
U--the specific part of X.

It is assumed that 0 does not depend on Q and all the u1(i - 1, 2, ..., n) are not

intercorrelated. Here the matrix H(QU') - 0, the matrix H(UU') is diagonal (H--the
operator of the mathematical expectation; U'--the transposed matrix U). Then

HOD") - H[(Q+U)(Q'+U')l - M(QQ')+H(UU')+H(QU')+H(UQ') - M(QQ')+H(UU'). (2.157)

If we normalize the X vector for the values of the standard deviations 01(21
*ip/°i) where 11P--a component of the X vector; p--the ordinal number of a agngle

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

observation of vector x), then H(ZZ') - R is a correlation matrix. In accord with
(2.157), this can be shown in the form

R - ao+u2 - Ro+1+u2, (2.158)

where R--the initial matrix with units on the main diagonal; Routhe (Io-called re-
duced matrix; UL-a diagonal matrix from the squares of the total specific factor

weights and errors; H2--a diagonal matrix of the sovcalled comunalities; I--a unit
matrix.

In factor analysis usually the R matrix determined from (2.158) is subject to factor-
torization. Here the reduced matrix is approximated by the product

30 - AoAb. (2.159)

where Ao--is taken as the matrix of the factor weights of the order (n" It); A8 --
the matrix transposed in relation to A0.

The factors f,, f2. ..., fk are assumed to be uncorrected. In this instance, the
factor weights can be viewed as coefficients in a linear regression equation for
estimating the variables by the factors.

If we disregard U in (2.156), then A6 coincides with A and Ro coincides with R; con-
sequently, the factorization will be closer to the original the closer the matrix
of communalities H2 is to one.

In estimating A0, usually the main component method is employed, the idea of which
is the following. Since R0 is a real symmetrical matrix, then by the orthogonal
similarity transformation, it can be reduced to a diagonal type

r1301 - 1., (2.160)
hence R0 - BLB', or due to the orthogonality of B
Ro - 81.8“; (2.161)

here L--the diagonal matrix comprised of the characteristic roots of Ito considering
their multiplicity; B--the orthogonal transforming matrix the columns of which are

the eigenvectors Ro which transform the orthonormed system; B'luthe matrix inverse
to B; B'--the transposed matrix.

From (2.160) we have
no - 1111/21.”er1 - 1M5 . (2.162)

hence A0 - 31.1”, where L‘lznthe diagonal matrix from the square roots of the eigen
numbers.

The solving of the equation (2.162) of the 20 matrix also comprises the lost essen-
tial part of the calculation procedures in factor analysis. The geometrically de-
scribed transformations are the equivalent of rotating the initial system of coor-
dinates in such a manner that the new base axes coincide with the sway axes (the
main axes) for the distribution of vector X.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending upon the method of determining the comunality estimates, a distinction
is drawn between two variations [16]: l) the comunaltiy estimates are considered
equal to one, and this is the sovcalled closed factor analysis model; 2) the comu-
nality estimates are taken below one, calculating them from empirical data (an open
model). Let us examine a closed model as a simpler method which has proven itself
in a number of practical problems [17].

After determining the factor loads which correspond to the aggregate of unobserv-
able variables (factors), usually an attempt must be made to interpret them, that is,
a certain useful and generally accessible interpretation of the essence of various
aspects of a complex phenomenon as reflected by the isolated factors.

Due to the fact that the procedure of obtaining the loads in factor analysis does
not lead to a uniform result (with a number of factors greater than one), it is pos-
sible to obtain equivalent sets of loads by their orthogonal transformation. Geo-
metrically this will correspond to an additional rotation of the factors in the
measurement space.

As the criteria for locating the optimum (in the sense of interpretation) position
of the factor axes in space, rather many proposals are known. The varimax criterion
has proven effective in a number of actual studies [24, 26] and the sense of this
comes down to reducing the factor loads to the simplest type. The simplicity V3 of
any factor is determined in the given instance as the variance of the squares for
the corresponding factor weights:

V _ n a a 2__ \ a a
, I w (M) 1w.
The varimax criterion consists of demanding the maximization of the sums

V-a 2‘, V,-omax.
I

For obtaining unbiased estimates, the values a1 are normed by dividing them into
the corresponding comunalities hi' The final varimax criterion is determined by
the ratio

V:- );.{[n )9 (ab/hf)2 — (g: tin/’3)j ]/II’ I —- max. (2.163)

while the solution is written in the form A - Ao'r, where Ao--the matrix of factor
weights obtained by the main component method; T—-the orthogonal transforming matrix
selected in such a manner that the simplicity V of matrix A is maximal.

1n the described method the most labor intensive part is the calculating of the
eigenvectors of matrix Re using the main component method. At present a number of
machine programs are known realizing the presented method and its modifications.

One such program (compiled by Ye. Yenchenko) is described in [210]. It has been
used in analyzing statistical complexes which describe, for example, such an object
at the network of USSR trunk air routes. In working out the development forecast

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the demand for air passenger traffic in [33], a set of methods was used includ-
ing trend extrapolation for short lead times, expert questioning to discover pos-
sible shifts in demand, and in addition, factor analysis was used for the network
of Soviet trunk air routes.

A fragment of the network was studied consisting of 12 air routes holding the first
places among the nation's routes in terms of the passenger traffic volume. As the
characteristics they took the following statistical data on: 1) the amount of an-
nual passenger air traffic; 2) the amount of passenger traffic by rail between the
end points of the connections; 3) the population dynamics of the cities which were
the end points of the connections; 4) the ratio of the amount of per capita nation-
al income to the air fare for the route by years. Thus, the examined stochastic
complex was represented by an aggregate of values for 48 variables.

The computer calculation following the described method (carried out by V. L.
Gorelova) showed that the correlation matrix has a very high "rigidity" estimate
(0.797) and the number of essential connections is 63.5 percent with a significance
level of P - 0.01. The calculating of the factor load matrix with the subsequent
rotating of the main factors in accord with the varimax criterion (2.163) made it
possible to isolate three main factors with a total contribution of 90.3 percent to
the generalized sample variance. The interpretation of the isolated factors led to
their following explanation in accord with the distribution of the factor loads.

The first factor (77.2 percent of the generalized sample variants), as in a majority
of factor research. has high loads for virtually all indicators, and somewhat
greater for the indicators of the first and fourth groups and somewhat less for the
indicators of the second and third groups. It can be interpreted as the generalized
main factor for air passenger traffic. The second factor (7.8 percent) can be in-
terpreted as the rail factor, since the greatest factor loads in it occurred as an
average in the area of the second group of indicators. The third factor (5.3 per-
cent) can be termed the population factor, since the greatest factor loads occurred
for it in the area of the third group of indicators.

The results of the experiment showed how effective factor analysis is as a tool in
studying multivariate stochastic objects. It not only makes it possible to signifi-
cantly reduce the dimensionality of the description (from £8 to 3 in the designated
example) without essential losses of accuracy but also isolates the main factors
which disclose the basic driving forces of the process and these can rather easily
be interpreted from the positions of human, logical understanding of its essence.

Having examined the use of factor analysis in the retroapection and diagnosis stages
in forecast research, let us take up the possible method of applying it in the stage
of the immediate elaboration of the forecast (the prospection stage).

The essence of the method of research forecasting based on factor analysis can be
presented in the following manner.

According to (2.155) and (2.156)

X I AP-PU,

122

FOR OFFKJALIﬂﬂEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where U - l-H2--the matrix of specific factors and errors which is closer to zero
the closer the communality matrix “2 is to one.

In the closed model which we have used. it is assumed that 82 is a singular matrix
and, consequently, it can be considered that

X - AP. (2.164)

By retrospective analysis of the n-dimensional random vector X the matrix was de-
termined for the factor loads A with a dimension of nitn. In examining this natrix
it was discovered that only a small number of factors k <n determines the deVelop-
ment essence of a multiparametric stochastic system described by the vector X.

Having isolated the corresponding R from the columns of the A matrix, we obtain a
matrix A1 with a dimension of n Xk. The equality will correspond to it

x . A117. (2.165)

Let us determine the matrix A'lturned in relation to A in such a manner that A:1A-l.
Let us multiply the lefthand side of (2.164) by A'l:

Arlx - r.

We obtain a matrix of P values with a dimension of n xm, where m--the number of meas-
urements of the vector X in the retrospective period. From this matrix we isolate

the lines corresponding to the previously depicted main factors, and we obtain the
submatrix F1. Each line of this submatrix will determine the development process
in time for a certain generalized unobservable characteristic f1 of a complex sto-
chastic process under the condition that all m of the measurements are a time se-
quence. Proceeding from the basic provision of factor analysis, precisely these k
of the characteristics (k <n) determine the process as a whole with sufficient con-
pleteness considering all the internal statistical relations.

According to the basic principle of research forecasting we can assume that the
statistical structure of the forecasted system is preserved in the segment of the
lead time T(AI-const.) and the basic development trends for the factors as well.

One of the above-listed methods is used to forecast the development of each of the

k factors for the set lead time T. As a result we obtain the values additionally of
q measurements of F], where q - T/At , and Atﬁ--the pace of measurements in the
retrospective period. Then the F1 mgtrix wit the new q columns assumes the form
F2 with a dimension of k x(a-tq). Having substituted F2 in (2.165). we obtain the
values of X in the retrospective and future period T:

Xv”- - Ale. (2.166)

The first m of the matrix columns of (2.166) provide the values for all the x1 in-
dicators for the past m measurements and can be used to test the approximation ac-
curacy. The last q of the columns of (2.166) provide the forecasted values for the
parameters of x1 at the various moments of the lead period.

123

FOR OFIWCIAL USIZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If there is no need to calculate the retrospective values of x, the future values
can be calculated using the formula

XI - Alrzq, (2.167)
where qu-a matrix consisting of the last q of the columns in the P2 matrix.

In conclusion we must reemphasize that the basic advantage -in forecasting the de-
velopment of factors and not individual variables is not even that this substantial-
ly reduces the size of the problem (k.<<n), but that in the process of forecasting
the factors the problem is automatically solved of synthesizing and correlating the
singular forecasts of the individual indicators. This is the basic advantage and
perspectiveness of using factor analysis methods in research on complex multipara-
metric stochastic processes.

2.6. Composite Forecasting Methods“

The complexity of large technical systems causes difficulties in forecasting their
development using any singular method. For this reason in working out scientific
and technical forecasts recently ever-greater use has begun to be made of composite
forecasting methods (or systems) which synthesize the algorithms of the singular
methods in a certain sequence.

In Soviet and foreign forecasting practices, such systems have been worked as the
forecast graph method, PATTERN, PROFILE, the selective method, the double tree
method, the CPPO, the weighted estimates method, FORCAST, QUEST, the matrix method,
RDE, the functional analysis method and a number of others.

In an analysis of composite forecasting methods the basic thing is to define the com-
position of the procedures and singular methods comprising the system, their stand-
ard sequence and the logical rules for making up the systems. Let us examine the
best known composite forecasting methods considering this as well as from the view-
pointof the nature of the input and output information.

The forecast graph method has been worked out by a group of specialists from the
Cybernetics Institute of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences under the leadership of
V. M. Glushkov. The given system includes the following procedures and methods:

the choice of the forecast object, a study of the background, a classification of
events, the formulating of the forecast problem, the working out of the general goal
of the forecast, an analysis of the hierarchy, the formulating of events. the adop-
tion of the internal structure, the adoption of an external structure, questioning,
mathematical processing, a quantitative evaluation of the structure and varification
of the results.

The internal structure of the object is a forecast graph and the external are its

elements. The technique for constructing the graph is Delphic, that is, by repeated
questioning of the experts the close plans of the graph are made to coincide. The

 

“written together with R. I. Peseleva.

124

FOI.0FFKHA1.USEGNULY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY

given method makes it possible to obtain a forecast of the ultimate goals, the time
and probability of their accomplishment.

The input information obtained from expert 1 includes: the list of premises for the
formulated goal $3, a time estimate of the goal SJ—-t13, the probability estimate of

the goal Sj-p13, a self-assessment of competence 813, and the degree of certainty
in the forecast Yij'

The information in the output of the method is as follows: the list of the ultimate

goals with their premises, the time for achieving the ultimate goals of the graph

t3, the probability of achieving the ultimate goals of the graph p3. The calculation
is made using the formulas:

2': "Mum

_L______~

‘l . i o
2‘, ﬁlm]
i

I
2‘. mum...“ «m

mu) - ‘ .
21"ﬂ"m

where j--the ordinal number of the ultimate goal;
i--the number of the expert;
k--the number of experts;
n--the number of premise events.

The method makes it possible to carry out a preforecast orientation, to obtain the
internal and external structure of the object and to assess quantitatively the
given structure. The criterion for selecting the end goals of the graph is the
probability of their accomplishment at the set time.

The PATTERN system was worked out in 1965 by the u.s. Honeywell Company as a means
for aiding the company's leadership in decision taking on the most important ques-
tions of setting the future of 0.8. military production. But the principles used
in this system make it possible to forecast and analyze an enormous number of data
in any area of activity. PATTERN stands for Planning Assistance Through Technical
Evaluation of Relevance Numbers. The Structure of PATTERN consists of the follow-
ing elements: the choice of the forecast object, the disclosure of the internal
patterns, the writing of a scenario, the elaboration of the forecast problem, the
elucidation of the general forecast goal, an analysis of the hierarchy, the formu-
lation of goals, the adoption of the internal structure, the adoption of the ex-
ternal structure, questioning, mathematical data processing. a quantitative evalua-
tion of the structure, verification, the elaboration of the resource allocation
algorithm, resource allocation and allocation estimate.

PATTERN makes it possible to disclose the forecast orientation, to work out the in-
ternal and external structures of the object, to carry out a quantitative assess-

ment of the object's structure and to work out variations for the resource support

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the object's elements. The internal structure is the tree of goals. A system of
local criteria operates as the external structure.

The levels of the tree contain the following information: the national goals, the
measures, tasks. quotas and principles of the systems, the functional subsystems,
the designs of the functional subsystems and scientific-technical problems.

The information obtained on the system's output is the following: the list of ulti-
mate goals. the total weights of the goals which are the indicator of their scien-

tific and technical value. The formula for calculating the total weights K1 is of
the following form:

0. K "
KI=‘~ [2“ Km] [1%]; Kan-IKw]. (E's KWKWK'" '

where i--the number of the level;
j--the ordinal number of the goal;
Kv--coefficient of relative importance;
Ks--"state--time" coefficient;
Kn--coefficient of reciprocal utility.

The indicators of scientific and technical value of the goals in the given system
have acquired the name of relative importance coefficients. The concluding stage
of the given system-recommendations on resource allocation-assumes rational re-
source aloocation in accord with the level of the relative importance coefficient.

The PROFILE (programmed functional indicators for laboratory evaluation) method was
worked out by H. Citron in 1965. It is analogous to PATTERN. The internal struc-
ture is a tree of relative importance consisting of four levels: a goal of the con-
flict type, the form of activity. the problems and the program.

The external structure is formed by a system of criteria: sensitivity, promptness,
assistance, internal value. the probability of achieving the goal of the program,

scientific-technical progress and resources.

A quantitative assessment of the structure is significantly simplified in comparison.
with PATTERN:

n
“1’ 2‘1"
1-111
where r1--criterion assessment;
q1J--assessment of element 1 in terms of criterion 1.

The method provides the following: elucidation of the preforecast orientation, the
forecasting of the object's internal and external structure, it makes it possible to
provide a quantitative assessment of the structure and to give recommendations on
rational resource allocation for the purposes of ensuring the forecasted appearance
of the object.

126

FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

Selective method is designed for the forecasting of R50 [Rus.: NIOKR] programs on
the sectorial level. A fundamental distinction of the given system's structure
from the ones examined above is that the internal structure consists of two graphs
--a tree of goals and a stochastic grid which operate sequentially. The external
structure is made up out of elements of the tree of goals consisting of four levels:
I--the problems (requirements), II--scientific-technical areas, III-scientific-
technical problems. IV-R&D programs.

Coefficients for the relative importance of the nan programs are the result of proc-
essing the tree of goals:

where i—-the number of the level;
j--the number of the goal;
n--the number of levels;
a, ..., x, ..., v--the numbers of the criteria;
qx--the weight of the criterion;
ij--Lhe weight of goal j in relation to criterion x.

The method makes it possible to disclose the preforecast orientation, to obtain a
forecast of the internal and external structure and its quantitative estimate and

provides an opportunity to choose alternative programs by solving the stochastic
grid and work out recommendations on resource allocation:

.1
_ sgenRi-n

J
E Ri-n

51

The 'ﬁbuble tree" method was worked out by T. Gordon and H. Raffensberger and is de-
signed for forecasting and setting the priorities of both fundamental research and
R80 programs. The internal structure of the object is a theoretical tree consisting
of question events; the external structure is an experimental tree. The experiment-
al tree confirms or rejects the theoretical one. The value of a RED program is de-
termined by the degree of its criticalness combined with the possibility of imple-
mentation. Using the theoretical tree, the estimates are determined for the rela-
tive importance of its elements and using the experimental tree. the possibility of
realizing the same elements.

Preference is given to that research which is not only important for solving a tech-
nical problem but is also feasible. The method provides an opportunity to make a
preforecast orientation and construct the internal and external structures of the
object and also indicates the possible direction of estimating it.

The CPPO system. The Center for Long-Range Research and Economic Estimates of the

French Ministry of National Defense has worked out a system for the forecasting of
applied research and this has been named after the place of its creation.

127

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The goal of the CPPO system is to provide a forecast for future weapons systems and
select the proposed research aimed at providing the required performance of the
systems.

As the internal structure of the object in the given system there is a "double tree"
(a "utility tree" and an "economic tree") with a canon lower level. The utility
tree is constructed on the basis of the client's demands. The economic tree can-
siders the interests of the executor. The utility tree consists of the following
levels: strategic tasks, tactical tasks (functions), potential requirements, aub-
systems, and elements of research operations (ERO).

The economic graph has four levels: ultimate goals, tasks, means, BRO. that is, the
BRO level is common for both graphs.

By the external structure in the given system one understands the degree to which
the elements of the trees match certain criterial features. In a quantitative as-
sessment of the structure. indexes are assigned to the elements. with the presence
of several criteria features. combinatorial matrices are used for obtaining the
element indices. The element indices are an indicator of their relative importance
and to this degree correspond to ranks. The algorithm for the quantitative assess-

ment of the structure using the given system is extremely simplified: the indices
of the elements lying on the branches which converge on the lower level are added.

The CPPO system makes it possible to obtain a preforecast orientation, to work out
a structure of the forecasted method and evaluate it quantitatively.

The weighted estimates method (HEM [Rus.: HVOD was worked out for forecasting R80
programs on the sectorial level. According to the given system. the object's in-
ternal structure is constructed similar to a tree of goals consisting of five levels:
common development goals for scientific and technical progress in the sector, the
basic development tasks of science and technology in the sector, the basic areas of
scientific and technical research, the basic R50 subject, scientific and technical
problems. The external structure is formed by elements of the tree of goals. that
is, the elements of the preceding level are the estimate criteria for the elements.
Such estimates are called weighted:

I
14"-. A}. 1:14;“; 2,314— 1.0; lid-:31. o.

where a1:1--particular specific weight of element with ordinal number 7 on level
3 1+1 estimated for element 1 of level i.

The method provides an opportunity to make a preforecast orientation, to construct
a forecast of the object's internal structure, to use it as an internal structure
and make a quantitative estimate of the object's structure.

The FORCAST System provides forecasting of scientific and technical development for

a period of over lo years and is widespread in the United States for forecasting
the development areas of scientific and technical research in terms of weapons sys-
tems. The internal structure is worked out in two directions: the tasks of scien-
tific and technical development and the areas of scientific and technical

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development. The estimates using the "expenditure--effectivenesa" criterion com-
prise the external structure.

PORCAST provides an opportunity to make a preforecast orientation, to work out the
object's structure, to provide a quantitative estimate for the structure, and to
prepare recommendations on resource allocation for the purposes of ensuring the
forecasted appearance of the object.

The QUEST System (quantitative utility estimate for science and technology) was de-
veloped by H. Citron in 1966. The forecasting of the object's structure is carried
out on the basis of research on the areas of science and the types of technology and
constructing matrices of their reciprocal influence. The structure's quantitative
estimate is made by a logical correlating of the influence matrices which describe
the area of science by assistance coefficients and the type of technology by con—
tribution coefficients. The QUEST System solves all the most important problems in
forecasting scientific and technical programs, from providing a preforecast orienta-
tion to elaborating recommendations on resource allocation. The given system in—
cludes the following procedures and methods: the choice of the forecasting object,
background research, a classification of events, the positing of the forecast prob-
lem, the elucidation of factors, factor classification, the constructing of influ-
ence matrices, the adoption of the internal structure, the adoption of the external
structure, questioning, the mathematical processing of the questionnaires, a quanti-
tative estimate of the structure, verification, formulating of the goal function,
the formulating of constraints, the solving of a system of linear equations and es-
timating resource allocation.

The publications on the QUEST System do not give the algorithms for a quantitative

estimate of the structure and there is no description of the criterial function in

the problem of resource support for the forecasted appearance of the object, but a

class of methods for solving the optimization problem is given and these are linear
progrmmning methods.

The matrix method has very many common aspects with the QUEST System. Their func-

tional structures are identical. The elaboration of the object's structure in the

given system is based upon a classification of factors which influence the ultimate
goal and the grouping of independent homogeneous factors into individual complexes.
In the matrix method a quantitative estimate of the structure is made by estimating
the influence of the complexes on each other and ultimately on the end goal.

In possessing a vector which describes the degree of importance of the ultimate goals

and the matrices for the influence of the various factor complexes on the ultimate
goals, we obtain coefficients for the relative importance of the factors in the form

of vectors. The components of these vectors are the basis by which the resources
are allocated:

A:§c’-2})§AW.

where A--general resources;
c3--resources for complex 3;

A --resources for factor 1 of complex 1;
3 --vector component of factor 1 in complex 3.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The work under the matrix method ends by the solving of a heuristic problem for re-
source support of the object's appearance.

The BBB Method (forecasting exploratory research and development) was developed by
A. E. Nath of the United States. The contents of the given method are somewhat
broader than its name (research and development effectiveness). since as a result of
employing the given method one establishes the coefficients of the relative impor-
tance of systems and their elements (goals) and the resources which are optimally
allocated in terms of the effectiveness criterion. The object's structure is worked
out in the form of influence matrices according to the system: research program—-

research tasks n, research tssks-systems k, systems-goals N, goals-research sub-
jects i.

In using this method in sequence one determines the relative importance coefficients
for the systems Rk, for the goals Ru and for the subjects 81:

R.—‘XID|n|xDlxl;
.. ‘lIn )(D N:
R» A 'I l I

le’(Rmv RNI '0 a. Kb ”0'

where D[n]--the matrix of problems (an element of the matrix is the relative impor-
tance of each variation of the problem);
D[k]--the matrix of the system (the element of the matrix is the contribution
of the given system to solving the given variation of the problem);
D[n]--the matrix of goals (the matrix element is the contribution of the given
goal to solving the given variation of the problem):
t--the envisaged time;
o--the degree of completeness;
K1--the quantity of systems which are assisted by subject 1;
n1--the number of goals which are assisted by subject 1.

The resource allocation problem using the given method is a linear programming prob-
lem of the type

V1- - E V1x1+lnax

with constraints of the type 2 a1x1,sb1, where VT--effectiveness of forecasted re-

1
search program; x1--resource for subject 1; V1--effectiveness of subject is

3P1
V1 " f[?, Riv P19 t: kit “1],

8P
where 3% --the rate of change in the probability of success over the designated in-

terval of time. The method provides an opportunity to construct a forecast of the
object in the following sequence: to provide a preforecast orientation, to work out

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11CJAI.USE‘0NLN

the object's structure, to make a quantitative estimate of it, and provide recom-
mendations on resource allocation for the purposes of ensuring the forecasted ap-
pearance of the object.

The functional analysis method is used for forecasting new technology according to
the production parameters and the allocating of funds for the disclosed series of
scientific research and development. The forecasting of the object's structure is
carried out using functional subsystems.

In assessing the structure, as factors influencing the financing level of the sci-
entific research and development, the following have been used: an index of prog-
ress JA (the ratio between the progress of the technological parameter with the
given financing level and the progress of the same parameter which could be achieved
with unlimited financing over the same period of time); the value index J“ (the re-
sult of generalizing the two matrices--consumer and technological value).

For modeling the progress index, an exponential function has been used JA1(x1) -
(l-e'X1/Di) with the constraint txi - c. where x1-the financing level of develop-
ment 1; D1--the financing level which ensures technological progress at a higher
rate.

Here the income function has the form of an additive function

P ' EJwiJu-

This dependence assumes that the additional income from the new investment of funds
increases at a retarded rate. The given model of the allocation problem can be ac-
cepted as the basis but its realization in the described form makes a great diffi-
culty due to the disparate understanding of the D1 value. The value of the given
method consists in basing the adoption of the income functional dependence upon the
volume of allocated funds.

We must also examine the Dean and Howser method which is not a system in the full

sense of this word. With such a method, in using information on the object's struc-
ture and its quantitative estimate as the initial data. it is possible to solve the
problem of resource support for the forecasted appearance of the object.

For the forecasting of technical systems the expected expenditures and the expected
probability of realizing the systems have been used as the initial data. This meth-
od envisages a sequential solution to three problems: 1) with a fixed budget and a

given set of systems to allocate the budget among the systems in the best manner;
2) with a fixed budget for a subsystem and the given number of subsystems to allo-

cate the budget between the subsystems; 3) for each subsystem to make an optimum
choice of the technical approaches to realizing the subsystem.

The following criteria are employed for solving the set problems: the expected cost
of implementing the technical approach; the probability of implementing the system
with its fixed cost; the expected value of the set of systems with the fixed cost
and one of the conditions: a) the systems do not have any priority; b) certain
systems have priority; c) all the systems should obtain financing; the probability
of implementing the set of systems with the setting of the overall cost.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dynamic programming method is employed for solving the problems using the Dean
and Howser method. The setting of the problems in the publication dealing with
the method is given in a general form without bringing out the criterial functions.

and assumptions.

An examination of the composite forecasting methods indicates that their specific
purpose consists in the following: to provide a preforecast orientation, to work'
out the object‘s internal and external structure, to make a quantitative estimate
of the object's structure, and to work out recammendations on resource support for
the forecasted appearance of the object.

In the stage of making the preforecast orientation in the designated methods, for
the purpose of elucidating the internal patterns, use is made of both the writing of
a scenario as well as report (analytical) notations, and for the background study.
both an analysis of the statistical reporting (factographic analysis) and document
analysis as well as the classification of events.

object, most often root trees are constructed and namely trees of goals and stochas-
tic grids or nets. In accord with the object's adopted structure, the elements of
this structure are goals, events and subsystems. The formulating of the object's
structural elements is preceded by the concretizing of the forecasting problem, that
is, by the elaboration of a general goal, and an analysis of the hierarchy which
discloses the necessary and sufficient number of corresponding structural levels.

By the external structure one understands a system of criteria from which the in-
ternal structure is evaluated. In certain methods, for example, FORCAST, the cri-
teria are the elements of the internal structure which are initial for the evaluated
elements. A different variation for the elaborating of the object's structure is
the construction of influence matrices and this is preceded by a disclosure of the
factors which influence the object and their classification.

In the stage of the struCture's quantitative estimate, the examined methods assume
either the questioning of experts or the work of the experts using the comiasion
method, the mathematical processing of the questionnaires and the opinions of the
commission members for the purposes of obtaining a reliable general opinion of the
representative expert group and the further use of the obtained resources in the
calculations using the algorithm for the quantitative estimate of the forecasted ob-
ject's structure. The quantitative estimate algorithms are determined both by the
internal and by the external structure of the object.

At the end of the stage. the methods make it possible to obtain the following spec-
trum of quantitative estimates: the expected time of carrying out the program,

the probability of carrying it out at the designated time, a coefficient for the
relative importance of the program, the ranking of programs and program effective-
ness.

The stage of resource support for the forecasted appearance of the object in the com-

posite forecasting systems has a varying depth of elaboration. A number of methods
are restricted to a quantitative estimate of the structure (the forecast graph

method and the double tree method). In certain systems the research allocation prob-
lems are solved by heuristic methods (PATTERN, PROFILE and the selective method).

132

IWJR 0F?1C1Al.lﬁSEiCNNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a majority of system, optimization problem for resource allocation are solved
(FORCAST, QUEST, RDE, the functional analysis method and the Dean and House:

method).

In conclusion, the following conclusions can be drawn: for composite forecasting
for us development. with a certain adaptation to the forecasting object, it is pos-
sible to employ the forecast graph method, PA‘n‘ERN, PROFILE. the selective method
and the matrix method; a number of methods can be race-ended for use under the con-
dition of further working out the methods and their components since in the existing
publications they have been presented descriptively without an elucidation of the
mathematics (the double tree method. CPPO. PORCAST and the functional analysis

we thod) .

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3: CRITERIA FOR ESTIMATIK; EFFECTIVENESS 0? LARGE TECHNICAL svsrms
3.1. Principles for Formlating the Effectiveness Criteria of 8T8

Chapter 1 gave the essence of technical and economic analysis for the development
of large technical systems and this is the basis for their scientific selection and
the disclosure of the relationships between the goals, the means for achieving them
and the available resources. Technical and economic analysis of the systeas repre-
sents an aggregate of various types of research: goal, operational, resource, de-
sign, criterial and optimization. The present chapter is devoted to criterial re-
search.

The initial premises for carrying out criterial research are: the data of goal and
operational research which determines the choice of the goals and the methods of
achieving them, the results of design research which determine the constraint vec-
tor for the parameter values of the system and the matrix of design relationships;
the data of resource research which defines the vector of resource constraints and
the matrix of economic relationships. The composition and structure of the criter-
ial function and the systems of disciplining conditions formed in the process of
criterial research are influenced by the hierarchical level and stages of the sys-
tem's life cycle at which the estimate is made.

For example, the effectiveness of transport aircraft system can be estimated in the
air transport systan of an economic region. in the system of all air transport, in
the unified national transport system and so forth. In addition the composition of
the estimate criteria of the aircraft systems at the stage of aircraft designing can
have definite differences from the systa estimate criteria in the stage of taking

it out of operation. The initial premises the result of criterial research are
shown in Fig. 3.1. The criterial research is related to the concepts of effect and
effectiveness. Let us examine these concepts.

The effect (from the Lat. effectusnexecution, action) is the result or consequence
of certain causes and actions. Effective means producing an effect, leading to the
needed results or actual. Hence effectiveness is the results.

In a mathematical interpretation, effectiveness is a relative or specific amount.
Effectiveness is the ratio of the effect (result) to the expenditures on attaining
it. This definition also includes the effectiveness indicator for various types of
systems

Eyd - v/z, (3.1)
13!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Goal. Goal of
telic operation

  
  

 

 
        
      
   
  

  

Period of «'1: J:
0
Area of probable system ' .5 " a
.s 1 f life cycle u '2
Operation va use 0 opera- u . 3 u
0 tion parameters .2: S 83°
5 r. s
u vi 0 «
Criterial “a “E "‘ “
° research H o
o .3 an
Area of acceptable 8 g
m Design values of system E
0 parameters a .3. o
u a o
m Hierarchies " 3 5
level of a 3 3
cyst“! 5 v 3
Area of acceptable i 5 a
Resource values of resource

       

amounts

  

Fig. 3.1. Initial premises and result of criterial
research

where Y--the effect (result):
Z--expenditures which provide for the effect Y.

Efficiencies are typical indicators for the effectiveness of equipment.

By effectiveness of large technical systems one must understand the ratio of their
effect with the total expenditures in all stages of the system's life cycle (research
and development, series production and operation). Thus, the task of studying n'rs
effectiveness comes down to establishing the amount of the effect, the expenditures
and a comparison of them.

The effect of technical systems is sometimes called the technical or target effect.
What is the essence of this concept? Any technical system is designed to satisfy a
certain social need. A specific, quantitatively determined social need also deter-
mines the target effect of the system. For example, any transport system is de-
signed to move freight or passengers. The effect of transport systems can be meas-
ured by the quantity of moved freight, by the distance, speed, by traffic safety and
so forth.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order that a system can achieve a certain effect and could satisfy a certain
social need, it is essential that it possesses certain properties. For example,
aircraft satisfy the needs of the national economy and individuals of our popula-
tion’for air shipments. In order that an aircraft can satisfy such needs, it must
reach certain speeds, be light, dependable and so forth. The aggregate of these
qualities of an aircraft characterizes its quality.

State Standard 15467-70 defines product quality categories: product quality is the
aggregate of product properties determining its ability to satisfy certain needs in
accord with its purpose. By analogy with the given definition, it is possible to
define the quality of a system as the aggregate of its properties determining its
ability to satisfy certain needs in accord with its purpose.

The quantitative characteristics of a system's properties are the indicators of its
quality (the parameters). A system's parameters can be divided into three groups:
functional, technical and economic. The functional indicators describe the ability
of a system to carry out the set functions. The technical and economic parameters
describe the structure of the system as well as the consumption of resources in-
volved in its creation, production, storage, transporting and operation.

Functional parameters can be divided into specific-goal and limiting. The specific
properties perform a function which determines the possibility of the system to
satisfy strictly determined requirements. An example of a specific property of an
aircraft is its ability to carry passengers or cargo, that is, its purpose. The
most important specific parameter of a system is its productivenesa or the property
describing the system's ability to carry out a certain amount of useful work over a
certain time. Productiveness is a high-rank composite property and it is caused by
the comprehensive properties of a lower rank, that is: productivity, reliability,
ergonomicness and aestheticness.

Productivity is the ability of a system to carry out a certain amount of work in a
unit of time. For example, aircraft productivity describes the maximum transport
volume in ton-kilometers carried out in a unit of time (hour, day or year). A sys-
tem's productivity characterizes its ability to satisfy a certain social need, for
example, for passenger or cargo shipments. However, a system can satisfy this need
over a brief or extended interval of time and to a varying degree maintain these
properties in operation.

Reliability indicators characterize the system's properties to maintain its operating
ing efficiency under certain conditions and operating modes. According to the State
Standard 13377-75. by the reliability of any object one must understand its property
of carrying out set functions in maintaining over time the values of the set operat-
ing indicators within the given limits corresponding to the given modes and condi-
tions of use, maintenance, repair, storage and transporting. Reliability is a com-
posite property which, depending upon the purpose of the object and the conditions

of its operation, can include the absence of failures, durability, ease of repair

and keeping qualities.

By the absence of failures one understands the property of an object to continuously
maintain workability over a certain time or certain operating life.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By durability one understands the property of an object to maintain its workability
up to a limit state with the established maintenance and repair system.

For example, for an aircraft durability is numerically assessed by the general
service life Tcz. The general service life of an aircraft is formed from the time

intervals of its reliable operation or life between repairs 1“:

Tc: ' Z 1.;1- (3.2)
1-1

where ncp--the number of aircraft major overhauls.
If it is accepted that Tci - const. - 1c, then
‘ct - tc(ncp+l). (3.3)

The repairability of an object is a property consisting in an adaptation for the
prevention and detection for the causes of failures1 and damage and for eliminating
their consequences by carrying out repairs and maintenance.

By keeping qualities one usually understands the object's property of continuously
maintaining a workable state during and after storage and (or) transporting.

Ergonomicness is a composite property which characterizes the strain and intensity
of labor for maintenance personnel. Ergonomicnesa is determined by a whole series
of the system's simple properties, for example, the degree of automation and mech-
anization of control, the degree of convenient work, the comfortableness of work for
maintenance personnel and so forth. Aestheticnesa is a composite property which in-
fluences a person's sensory perception of the entire system as a whole from the
viewpoint of its external appearance. A less aesthetic system fatigues a person,

it distracts him from the labor process and depresses him. As a result the use of
the article deteriorates over time and productiveness drops. Aestheticness is de-
termined by a series of simple properties, for example. shape, design, style and

so forth.

A system can maintain its ability to satisfy the set requiranents under limited oper-
ating conditions. The reflecting of these operating conditions is a function of the
article's parameters which reflect the limiting parameters. The limiting properties
can be divided into properties which characterize the external conditions of the
system's workability and keeping qualities (for example, heat resistance, frost re-
sistance, corrosion resistance and so forth), the properties which characterize pro-
duction and technical conditions for the system's workability and keeping qualities
(for example, maximum speed, maximum altitude and so forth) and the properties char-
acterizing the safety conditions (for example, fire proofness, explosion proofness
and so Forth).

1A failure is an event consisting in the violation of a system's workability.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to functional parameters, a system is characterized by technical and
economic parameters. In criterial research of the greatest interest are those
parameters which in their aggregate determine the consumption of resources related
to the development, production, storage, transporting and operation of the system.
These indicators can be technical and economic (natural and cost). The technical
and economic parameters are manifested in the production sphere, in the distribution
sphere and in the consumption sphere.

In production, a system is characterized by one most important property, the de-
sign's technological effectiveness. A system can be termed technological in possess-
ing the functional properties which with the set production parameters make it pos-
sible to manufacture the system with the minimal expenditures of labor and material
resources in the shortest time. In the distribution sphere a system is character-
ized by those properties such as transportability and storability. The consumabil-
ity of resources in the process of operating the system is characterized by the re-
source consumption rate which, in turn, is determined by such simple properties as
the labor intensiveness of the performed job, material intensiveness, energy inten-
siveness and fuel intensiveness. It is also essential to isolate such system prop-
erties as operational and repair efficiency.

The above—examined three groups of system quality parameters (functional, technical
and economic) in quantitative terms express the corresponding system properties.

The functional indicators of the system's quality determine the sphere and condi-
tions of its use and also determine the degree of interchangeability with other sys-
tems. As for the economic parameters, they determine the system's quality level and
the level of its effectiveness. However, as was pointed out above. the system's
quality level is characterized by a large number of parameters and for this reason
the system's effectiveness estimate on a basis of them is an extremely complicated
problem.

ﬁne of the basic purposes of criterial research is to disclose the basic system
quality indicators and establish the most important of them. These main indicators
are transferred to the category of criteria which must serve as the measure for
comparison, estimate and final choice of the system in the stage of optimization
research. The remaining indicators can act in the role of disciplining conditions.
Obviously the choice of the system's estimate criteria and the setting of disciplin-
ing conditions are not a formal but rather a creative procedure which should be
carried out using logical analysis, intuition and experience of the leader.

At present, great attention. both in Soviet and foreign literature. is given to the
questions of selecting the estimate criteria for technical systems. One of the most
debated questions here is the number of criteria required to solve the problem of
optimizing the appearance of the BTS.

Until recently, the concept of the effectiveness of technology and technical systems
was essentially identified with the concept of economic effectiveness. This is con-
firmed by the names of the official documents published on the given question, for
example, the 1963 "Procedure for Determining Economic Effectiveness from the Intro-
duction of New Technology, Hechanization and Automation of Production Processes in
Industry," the 1961. "Basic Procedural Provisions on Determining the Economic Effec-
tiveness of Scientific Research," the 1969 "Standard Procedure for Determining the

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Economic Effectiveness of Capital Investments" and others. There is extensive lit-
erature on the question of the economic effectiveness of capital investments, new
technology, scientific research and so forth. However in recent years in a number
of works, along with the economic effect, other effects (results) have been examined
for scientific research, development and new technology, including: scientific-

technical, social and so forth. Such a positing of the question is correct qad up-
to-date.

While previously, in developing machines and the implements of labor, in taking de-
cisions about their development and introduction it was possible to limit oneself to
the indicator of their economic effectiveness, but this is not sufficient under
present-day conditions. Modern, large technical systems are characterized by ex-
treme complexity of design, of the processes of development, manufacturing and oper-
ation. as well as by the importance and complexity of the tasks performed by them.

For this reason, in taking decisions about the development and introduction of such
systems, along with the economic effectiveness indicator, it is essential to con-
sider the social consequences (the providing of sanitary-technical and aesthetic pro-
duction and operating conditions, safety measures and environmental conservation),
its scientific-technical level and its influence on the scientific-technical poten-
tial of a nation as well as the time needed to carry out the scientific research and
prototype design work.the putting of the system into production and operation, the
availability of production and human resources, the raw material supply and so forth.

Consideration of the diverse factors indicates that the quantitative basis for deci-
sion taking is a complicated problem and the problem of choosing the criterion on
the basis of which the nrs effectiveness is determined is also complicated. Depend-
ing upon the number of criteria it is possible to speak about two ways of posing

the problem of choosing the system's parameters or evaluating it: mono- and poly-
criterial.

With the monocriterial approach, the evaluation and choice of the technology are
made for just one criterion. However, in a majority of decision selection prob-
lems there are several criteria which must be considered for correctly selecting
the optimum BTS. This is particularly characteristic for the problems of optimiz-
ing large technical systems. where a triad of criteria is widely used: effective-
ness--cost--time (H--C--T). In a majority of instances, the concent of “effective-
ness" is identified with the system's specific effectiveness.

In the case of a monocriterial approach, one of the triad's criteria operates as
the main one and the other two as constraints. The question of selecting the main

criterion is settled individually in each case depending upon the positing of the
optimization problem. For example, if the system's effectiveness has been selected
as the main criterion, the problem of optimizing the BTS arrangement is a problem of
resource optimum allocation and has the form

l“? ounnx:
C<E§

l 1' < 7‘ (3.4)

139

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1ﬁ€1Al.USE(MVLY

In the case of selecting the system's cost as the main criterion, the system optimi-
zation problem comes down to the problem of resource minimization and this is writ-
ten in the form

C «Inhu

I w?“ (3.5)
! T<T.

In the expressions (3.5) and (3.5) i, E, TL-the set limit values of H, C and T.

The mathematical model of the optimization problem, when time is taken as the main
criterion, has the form:

' 7'--Inhu

V> W:.
l est. (3.6)

In the given general arguments a number of additional disciplining conditions have
not been pointed out and these are determined by the essence of the problem being
solved and are brought out in the stages of the goal, operational, design and re-
source research.

Hany researchers, in being aware of the need to consider several criteria in optimiz-
ing the configuration of technical systems, have followed the path of designing com-
ponent criteria in the form of various functions from the initial criteria. The use
of component criteria within a monocriterial approach to the optimization problem
has made it possible (or more often, the illusion of such a possibility) for in-
directly considering several optimality criteria.

The component "fractional" criterion has become rather widespread in economic prac-
tive and in the problems of optimizing the parameters of new equipment. This cri-

terion is the ratio of the obtained effect to expenditures (3.1) related to the ob-
taining of the given effect or the inverse ratio.

A fractional criterion is employed in a monocriterial positing of the optimization
problem for the purpose of optimizing the system immediately for two criteria:
specific [telic] and economic effectiveness.

The use of a fractional criterion has two most essential shortcomings which are re-
lated to the form of its presentation. In the first place, in maximizing the pro-
portional effect or minimizing proportional expenditures, no consideration is given
to the amount (physical or economic) of the numerator and demoninator. The second
drawback of a fractional criterion is that the size of the ratio moves rapidly
toward its limit values.

In summarizing what has been said above, it can be concluded that the basic short-
coming of the monocriterial approach to solving optimization problems in constructing

technical systems consists in the complexity and subjectivism of choosing the main
optimality criterion. Among the merits of the monocriterial approach is the

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AL US£1DNLY

possibility of extensively utilizing the rich arsenal of mathematical methods from
decition taking theory. namely: mathematical prograsmdng, game theory, the theory
of statistical decisions and various numerical optimization methods. The polycri-
terial approach is essential in the following types of decision choosing problems:
1) when the choice of the optimum variation of a system involves considering the
effectiveness of the component subsystems, each of which is estimated by an indivi-
dual criterion; 2) when the quality of the decision must be assessed for a number of
variations of conditions for the use of the technical system and an individual esti-
mate is introduced for each variation; 3) when the decision is evaluated over time
or by stages in the BTS life cycle and an independent criterion is introduced at
each stage: 4) when there are several goals in the functioning of the BTS.

An example of considering several effectiveness criteria is the forms of additive

(3.7) and multiplicative (3.8) criteria which have been widely used in optimization
practices:

E. AM: (3. 7)
: . n h
l.-_- -‘ll€(. (3.8)

where El and E2-- component criteria;
e1--local i criterion;
A1. 31--significance and elasticity coefficients for local 1 criterion in
the composite criterion;
i--ordina1 number of criterion 1 F [1; m].

These types of criteria, particularly the additive one, have been recommended in the
literature and are used in practice, however the subjectivity of assigning the A1
and Bi coefficients (particularly in the case of the local criteria for differing
physical dimensionality) reduces the value of the recommendations obtained in accord
with the criteria (3.7) and (3.8) for choosing optimum decisions.

Recently the problem of polycriterial (another widespread name is vector) optimiza-
tion has assumed timely and exceptionally important significance. The problem of

vector optimization in a determined case (that is, in the absence of random and un-
defined factors) in a general form can be formulated in the following manner.

Lct there be a certain operation, the outcome of which is estimated by the aggregate
of local criteria e1, e2. ..., forming the vector of the effectiveness criteria

2 - f(e1). i E [1; ml. The loczl criteria of e1 can be both scalers and vectors.

The relative importance of the local criteria is set in the form of the vector A -
(Al. A2, ..., Am) the specific sense and importance of which are not important in the
general positing of the problem.

The outcome of the operation depends upon the values of the strategy (decision) for
the operating side. Strategy x can be a scalar, vector or a matrix. The operating

side controls the operation, choosing stragegy x from the 9x of its tolerable values.
The area of ﬁx is set by a certain aggregate of disciplining conditions.

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FT1C1AI.USEIDNLY

The vector of the E criteria is related to solving the X of the mapping F: X->E -
F(X). where P - (f1, f2, ..., fa). The mapping can be set analytically or in a more
complicated instance algorithmically.

In the problem it is essential to find the optimum value of X° which is determinable
by two conditions: 1) the solution should be feasible, that is, it should belong to
the set ax of its tolerable values; 2) the solution should be the best, that is, to

optimize the vector of the effectiveness criteria E considering the relative impor-
tance vector A.

In other words, an optimum solution should satisfy the ratio
x... v:
’ [,‘EPJ‘WX” A’]. (3.9)

where F'l--the inverse mapping 8-.x - F‘1(B);

opt--a certain optimization operator adopted in the problem.
Let us give an example of a task of decision taking with a vector effectiveness cri-
terion. It is essential to choose a model of a multipurpose aircraft. This is to
perform simultaneously the functions of a transport (misfunction is estimated by the
c1 criterion), passenger (the e2 criterion) and ambulance aircraft (e3) and so forth.
The quality of the multipurpose aircraft can be estimated only by the vector criter-
ion E - (e1, e2, ..., e.).

In solving vector problems of decision taking a number of specific problems arise
having not a formal or computational nature but rather a conceptual one. The main
one is selecting the optimality principle which determines the optimum decision prop-
erties and provides an answer to the main question of why the optimum decision is ﬁn
best of all the other decisions (surpasses the other decisions). In the model of the
problem (3.9) this corresponds to disclosing the sense of the operator opt E.

In the problems of monocriterial scalar optimization, the optimality principle is
uniform for all the problems. As the optimum solution x0 a value of X is taken for
which the condition is valid (in the case of the maximization of the criterion)

e(X°) s em for all xenx, (3.10)
where e--scalar effectiveness criterion.

The major distinction of vector optimization problems is that for them there is a
multiplicity of different optimality principles leading to the choice of different
optimum solutions. This places serious demands on selecting the optimality princi-
ple. Let us list the basic problems related to solving a vector optimization prob-
lem.

Problem 1. A determining of the area of compromises or decisions optimal according

to Pareto. In vector optimization problems there is a contradiction between certain
of the criteria. This contradiction obviously is not strict as otherwise the prob-

lem would not have a solution. Because of this the area on of acceptable solutions

is broken into two nonintersecting parts: the area of agreement 9% and the area of

compromises 9%. In the area of agreement Qﬁ there are no contradictions between the
criteria and the quality of the solution can be improved simultaneously for all

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

criteria. In the compromise area a: there is a contradiction between certain cri-
teria: an improvement in the quality of the solution for some criteria worsens the
quality of the solution for others.

Obviously, the optimum solution can lie only in the compromise area, that is, X° {-51},
as in the agreement area the solution can be improved for all indicators. Conse-
quently, the search for the optimum solution must be restricted solely to the compro-
mise area 9%. Hence Problem 1 is the isolating of the compromise area from the
area of acceptable solutions of 9‘. In individual instances the search or the opti-
mum solutions with a practically acceptable accuracy can be restricted to isolating
the compromise area without a further solution, that is, without the solution to
problems 2 and 3.

Problem 2. The choice of the optimality principle and the corresponding compromise
scheme. The further search for optimum solutions in the compromise area can be car-
ried out only on the basis of a certain compromise scheme. The number of possible
compromise schemes is very great. The choice of the compromise scheme is a compli-
cated conceptual problem.

The choice of the compromise scheme corresponds to disclosing the sense of the opti-
mization operator opt in (3.9) usually in the form

up! ,1. (X ) = opt E (X)- "Ill-q! (E (X)).

(a: ten: (3.11)

where ¢(E)--a certain scalar function of the criteria.

Problem 3. Normalization of the criteria. In practical terms this problem comes
down to adjusting the chosen compromise scheme.

The listed problems are the main ones but they do not exhaust the entire range of
problems. These problems (with the exception of the first) are of a conceptual
nature. The solution to similar problems should be carried out using strictly elab-
orated formalized procedures on the basis of scientific arguments, with the limited
and formalized use of heuristic procedures.

Let us take up in somewhat greater detail the central problem of vector optimiza-
tion, that is, the choice of the compromise scheme. At present there are no suffi-
ciently strict theoretical concepts on the choice of optimum compromise solutions.
that is. for determining the scheme to locate the optimum variation of the system
in the compromise area. Certain authors have proposed restricting oneself to just
isolating the compromise area while the decision is made proceeding from the subjec-
tive views of individual responsible persons. With such an approach the subjective
factor has the dominating influence in decision taking and this leads to its insuf-
ficient soundness. Moreover a whole series of schemes have been proposed for com-
promise solutions where the crucial role has been assigned to experts in carrying
them out. Such a positing of the question is more valid. Scientifically sound
expert evaluation possesses sufficient objectivity in decision taking.

Let us take up certain schemes for locating compromise solutions. The evenness
principle consists in an even rise simultaneously in the level of all the local

163

FOB.OFIIC1AI.US£1WNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

criteria. The conditions for its use are: the local criteria are normed (that is,
they have a uniform scale of measurement) and equal in terms of importance. There
are several varieties of this principle, for example, the equality and maximin prin-
ciples. In accord with the equality principle, maximization is achieved under the
condition of the equality in the level of all criteria. The solution with such an
approach can be beyond the compromise area. The other variety of the evenness prin-
ciple. the maximin principle. in individual instances is employed in determining
perspective systems. Here the goal is a desire to obtain a satisfactory result for
all criteria by bringing up the poorer of the criteria.

To a greater degree the principle of a "just“ concession fits a solution to the
problems involved in determining perspective BIS and it is based upon an assessment
and comparison of the increase and loss of local criteria inevitable in the compro-
mise area. This principle has two varieties: the principle of an absolute conces-
sion and the principle of a relative concession.

The absolute concession principle states: a compromise is valid when the total ab-
solute level of the decline in one or several criteria does not exceed the total
absolute level in the rise of the other criteria. This principle is met by a model
for the maximization of the total criteria (integral effectiveness)

-
op! 15 =4 max 2, ci. (3.12)
I I

The shortcoming of the absolute concession principle is that it can permit a sharp
differentiation in the levels of the individual criteria since a great value of the
integral criterion can be achieved by a high level of some criteria with a low level
of the remainder.

The relative concession principle states: a valid compromise is the one where the
total relative level in the decline of one or several criteria does not exceed the
total relative level for the increase in quality for the other criteria. The rela-

tive concession principle is met by the optimization model with a criterion in the
form of the product of the local criteria

0pi L" - mu Rep (3.13)

The relative concession principle is very sensitive to the amount of the criteria
as due to the relativity of the concession there is an automatic decline in the
price of the concession for the high-value criteria and vice versa. As a result
there is a significant smoothing of the local criteria levels.

There also is a whole series of other optimality principles. We feel that at pres-
ent, for solving problems related to choosing the optimum BTS, the principle of iso-
lating the main criterion is the soundest scientifically and the most elaborated.
Here definite constraints should be imposed on the established range of local cri-

teria. Such an optimality principle can be termed a polycriterial positing of the
problem with constraints. In individual instances, in realizing the given principle,

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is advisable to utilize the equivalent reciprocal models in which the main and
most important local criteria which are in the constraint system can change places.

Optimization is carried out on a basis of the maximization (or minimization) of the
local criterion chosen as the main one and a certain aggregate of local criteria
which reflect the most important functional, economic and time characteristics in-
volved in the creation, production and operation of the BTS.

In estimating the alternate BTS, one of the triad of criteria of (3.6)-(3.6) can be
adopted as the global criterion. The most typical is the forming of a resource min-
inization criterion. In this case as the criterial function one adopts the economic
effectiveness criterion with a constraint on the telic effectiveness and time. If
it is considered that there presently are economic models which take the time factor
into account as well as methods for a value assessment of time, considering this the
above-given idea can be formulated in the following manner. In resource minimiza-
tion, as the criterial function. one adopts the economic effectiveness criteria
with a constraint on the telic effectiveness and considering the time factor. Let
us examine in greater detail the essence of the economic effectiveness criterion

for large technical systems.

3.2. Economic Effectiveness Criteria and Types of Economic Effects of ETS

For creating BTS, great capital investments are required in all stages of its life
cycle. The program for the development of BTS to a certain degree is a long-term
capital investment program or a long-term investment program and for this reason
the economic effectiveness of the BTS can be viewed as the effectiveness of capital
investments into these systems. Here it is possible to utilize the entire method-

ological apparatus for assessing the economic effectiveness of catpial investments.

The methods for calculating capital investment economic effectiveness are given in
the "Standard Procedure for Determining the Economic Effectiveness of Capital In-
vestments" as approved by the Decree of the USSR Gosplan, the USSR Gosstroy and the
Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences of 8 September 1969. Capital investment
effectiveness is determined by a comparison of the effect and the expenditures. In
planning and designing. the overall (absolute) economic effectiveness is determined
as the ratio of the effect to the total capital investments and in selecting the
models for solving economic or technical problems this is the comparative economic
effectiveness showing to what degree one model is more effective than another.

In the Standard Procedure the effectiveness criteria (indicators) are examined for
the system levels:

a) For the national economy as a whole, for the Union republic economy and the
national economic sectors (industry, agriculture, transportation and construction)
as the ratio of the increment in the volume of national income (net product) with
its set physical structure in comparable prices AD to the capital investments K in-
to the material production sphere which have caused this increase:

Yci - AD:K;
b) For the individual sectors and subsectors of industry, agriculture, transporta-

tion and for the ministries, by the ratio of the increase in profit to the capital
investments causing this increase:

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USEIDNLY

Yci ' AR: K,

where AR--the increase in the annual profit over the planned period (year, 5-year
period);
Kr-capital investments into the construction of production-end projects;

c) For individual enterprises, construction projects and sites, for individual
measures and technical-economic problems, by the ratio of profit to the capital in-
vestments:

Ye - (P-C):K, (3.11.)

where P--the value of the annual product output (according to the plans) in enter-
prise wholesale prices (without the turnover tax);
c-the costs of annual product output;
K--the estimated cost of the project under construction (capital expenditures
on carrying out the measures and technical-economic problems).

In calculating overall economic effectiveness the repayment time is determined for
the total volumes of capital investments on the basis of the inverse ratio of capi-
tal investments or profit or the savings from the reduction in production costs:

rd - chk; we - K:(P-C); ch - K:(C1-C2).

I
Calculations for comparative economic effectiveness of capital investments are em—
ployed in comparing the variations of economic or technical decisions, in locating
enterprises and their complexes, in solving problems related to choosing inter-
changeable products, for the introduction of new types of technology, for the con-
struction of new enterprises or the reconstruction of existing ones and so forth.

The indicator for the comparative economic effectiveness of capital investments is
a minimum of reduced expenditures. The reduced expenditures for each variation are
the total current expenditures (production costs) and capital investments reduced
to a uniform dimensionality in accord with the normed effectiveness coefficient:

c1 + tax, - min, (3.15)

where C1-current expenditures (production costs) for each variation;
En--the normed capital investment effectiveness coefficient;
K1--capital investments for the same variation.

According to the Standard Procedure for the national economy a normed capital in-
vestment effectiveness coefficient has been set equal to 0.12 and this corresponds
to a normed repayment time Tn - 8.3 years, where Tn - 1/8“.

In February 1977, the State Committee of the USSR Council of Ministers for Science
and Technology, the USSR Gosplan, the USSR Academy of Sciences and the State Com-

mittee of the USSR Council of Ministers on Inventions and Discoveries approved the
"Procedure (Basic Provisions) for Determining the Economic Effectiveness of Using

new Technology, Inventions and Rationalization Proposals in the National Economy."
According to this procedure a uniform normed coefficient for the economic

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK]A1.USE(MNLY

effectiveness of capital investments was set at 0.15, and this corresponds to a
normed repayment time Tn - 6.7 years.

The normed capital investment effectiveness coefficient is the lower limit of capi-
tal investment effectiveness. The amount ﬁnk is the normed savings. This is the
amount of the national economic losses which arise not at the enterprises which
carry out the capital investments but at other enterprises which have not received
the necessary capital investments since they were used in the given element of the
national economy. If one examines a certain technical system, the lost net income
in the other sectors for the designated system is additional expenditures caused by
the investments into it.

The indicator of reduced expenditures is identical to the indicator for the repay-
ment time of additional capital investments:

 

where T2/1--the repayment time of the additional capital investments into the
second variation in comparison with the first due to the savings in
operating expenses, years;
Kl, K2--capital investments in the first and second variations of the design,

rubles;
C1, C2--production costs (operating expenditures) in the first and second

variations of the design, rubles/year.

The second variation will betanre economic than the first under the condition
TZ/lé1h, where Tn--the normed repayment time of the additional capital investments,

years.

Let us illustrate the principle of selecting the most effective variations in the
given example. Let us assume that there are two variations for the construction of
a plant and the indicators for these are shown in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1

   
 
  

Indicators, million rubles. by variations

     
     
       
       
       
     

Volume of annual product P1 - 25 P2 - 26
Capital expenditures K1 - 15 K2 - 30
Product costs 61 - 19 02 . 15
Profit P1-81 - 5 P2-62 - 9
Reduced expenditures c1+EnK1 - 21.3 Cz+EnK2 - 19.5
P-C -
‘::;:::::::e:::::,::“mm °‘ - 1:1 - -— -

     
 

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us select the most effective variation. with the same volume of sold product,
the second variation requires 15 million rubles more of capital investments (Kl-K2).
However the second variation of the plant provides a reduction in production costs
in comparison with the first variation by 6 million rubles (Cl-02). Let us calcu-
late the repayment time for the additional capital investments:

132/] - (K2'K])/(C1'C2) - 15:4 - 3.75 years. Thus, Tz/z < Tn(3.75 < 6.7), so
we can conclude that the second variation of the plant is better than the first.

The given method for selecting the variations according to the formula for the re-
payment time for the additional capital investments can be employed with a small
number of variations. The basic difficulty of this method is that the variations
must be compared in pairs: the first with the second, the third with the second
and so forth. Because of this the method of reduced expenditures is widely used

[formula (3.15)]. In the given example the second variation is also chosen for the
minimum of reduced expenditures (19.5 million rubles).

Above we have examined the indicators of general and comparative capital inVestment
effectiveness as given in the Standard Procedure. The Standard Procedure points
out that the designated uses of capital investments can be considered economically
effective under the condition that the obtained general effectiveness coefficients
are not below the planned norms and the analogous indicators for the preceding plan
period. In the given example (see Table 3.1), both variations are effective, since
the general effectiveness coefficient (0.33 and 0.30) exceed the norm for capital
investment effectiveness in industry which we will consider as equal to 0.15. The
question arises why are the comparative effectivaness indicators required? Is it
not possible to select the most effective variation using the maximum general ef-
fectiveness indicator? If the variation is chosen using this criterion, then pref-
erence must be given to the first variation (0.33 0.30). A contradiction develops
as according to the general effectiveness criterion the most effective is the first

variation while according to the reduced expenditure indicator it is the second.
Uhich solution is correct?

Let us attempt to select the most effective variation using the maximum general ef-
fectiveness indicator. The maxilmm value of this indicator (0.33) corresponds to
the first variation. Let us compare both variations. The second variation makes
it possible to obtain lo million rubles of additional profit per year in comparison
with the first variation and here the general effectiveness indicator is 0.30, that
is, only 0.03 less than the analogous indicator for the first variation. Previous-
ly it was stipulated that the actual effectiveness of analogous plants for all in-
dustry is 0.15. The question arises of why, if there are no capital investment
constraints, is it necessary to give up I: million rubles of profit a year with a

general effectiveness of 0.30 which is significantly more than the normed amount
(0.15).

The second variation makes it possible to obtain an addition lo million rubles of
profit per year in comparison with the first but requires 15 million rubles more of
capital investments. The effectiveness of the additional investments is 6:15 -

0.26, and this is significantly above the adopted normed coefficient for capital
investment effectiveness (En-0.15). Hence, one must give up the lo million rubles
of additional profit, as the effectiveness of the additional capital investments is

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IINICHHHCJAI.USEGDNLY

below the capital investment effectiveness for the first variation for the basic
capital investments.

The general effectiveness indicator for the second variation can be represented in
the following form:

(P-Cﬁxl (C1-C2) (Kg-K1)
P-Cz P-Cz‘l‘C 1-Cl [(1 + Kz-Kl

I(2 K2 K2

 

or

P432 Yc1K1+32/1(K2-K1)

K2 K2 ’

where 52/1-comparative effectiveness coefficient for second variation in relation
to the first.

In the designated example

p-c2 0.33-15 + ”’15 ”’15

______ ____ 30-15 .
Kg 30 0.30.

Thus, in comparing the two capital investment variations, the general effectiveness
indicator for one of them is the average weighted (for the capital investments)
amount of the general effectiveness indicator of the other variation and of the com-
parative effectiveness of the first variation in relation to the second. Since
82/1 > En, the additional capital investments under the second variation are effec-
tive and, consequently, so is the second variation as a whole. The choice of the
second variation is confirmed by the minimalnesa of the reduced expenditures (19.5
million rubles). In adopting the second variation we maintain the effectiveness

of the first and. in addition. we utilize the additional capital investments with
an above-norm effectiveness. Consequently, in choosing the capital investment var-
iation it is essential to use the comparative effectiveness method.

There is also another viewpoint on the given question. Thus, individual economists
recommend choosing the optimum variation from the maximum indicator of general ef-
fectiveness. From the variations given in Table 3.1. the representative of this
approach would choose the first variation, arguing as follows. For the 30 million
rubles (capital investments in the second variation) when necessary one could build
not one but two plants under the first variation, double the product volume and ob-
tain an additional 1 million rubles of profit with the same capital investments.
Table 3.2 gives these variations.

169

FINICNWWCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.2

      
    

Indicators, million rubles, by variations

     
     
     
       
     
       

  

Volume of annual product P1 . 68 P2 - 24

Capital expenditures K} I 30 K2 I 30
Product costs 01 I 38 C2 I 15
Profit P1-C1 I 10 Pz-Cz I 9

Reduced expenditures

Indicator of general capital
investment effectiveness

P -C
Yc1- % - 0.33

C2+EDK2 I 19.5
Pz-Cz
K2

 

Ycz - I 0930

  

At first glance the above-given arguments are convincing. The first variation makes
it possible with the same capital investment volume to double the product volune and
obtain 1 million rubles of additional profit and a higher general effectiveness.
However, such a comparison is not objective as it puts the second variation under
intentionally poorer conditions in terms of the production volume. Let us elimin-
ate this shortcoming. In actuality. if the demand for the product is 68 million
rubles, then for producing it it would be possible to build not only two plants for
the first variation but also two plants for the second (Table 3.3).

Table 3.3

Indicators, million rubles, by variations

   
       
      

     

          
     
     
       

Volume of annual product 48 P2 I 48
Capital expenditures 30 K2 I 60
Product costs 01 I 38 C2 I 30
Profit Pl-Cl I 10 Pz-Cz I 18
Reduced expenditures C1+EnK1 - 52.5 C2+EnK2 I 39.0
. P-C -
“2:22;: 2:223:22? -T,‘ - -—-

          

In the designated instance, preference must be given to the second variation which
is characterized by minimum reduced expenditures (37.2 million rubles). This vari-
ation makes it possible to obtain 8 million rubles of profit in comparison with the
first variation with a coefficient of Yc - 0.3 which is only 0.03 less than the
corresponding indicator for the first variation. From the additional profit, the

150

FOR‘OFTHCLAL USE1NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(6.7 years).

Thus, the most effective variation is selected from the comparative effectiveness
indicator. Here it is assumed that the capital investment volume can be increased
to 60 million rubles. However, if the capital investment volume is restricted to
30 million rubles. the persons making the decision should choose the first, less

effective variation. Thus, the values of allocated capital investments operates
as a constraint in choosing the variations of the system.

Table 3.14
Indicators, million rubles, by variations

 
 
 

 

   

    
        
      
       
        
  
 

Volume of annual product P1 - 27 P2 - 27
Capital expenditures It: I 80 K2 . 110
Product costs Cl - l9 (:2 - 15
Profit Pl—Cl I 8 Pz-Cz I 12
Reduced expenditures Cl+EnK1 - 31.0 Cz+£nl<2 - 31.5
Indicator of general capital P-C; 1"“

  
 
 

investment effectiveness Yc‘ - l - 0.10

In the example the first variation is the most effective as this provides a minimum
of reduced expenditures (31.0 million rubles). The additional capital investments
(Kz-Kl) - 30 million rubles are repaid from the reduction in production costs
(c.-c2) - lo million rubles in 7.5 years and this is above the normed time (6.7
years). However neither the first not the second variation is absolutely ineffec-
tive and this is confirmed by the values of the Ycl and Ycz coefficients, each of
which is less than the adopted normed coefficient for capital investment effective-
ness (0.15). If we view comparative effectiveness as the repayment rate of addi-
tional capital investments and general effectiveness as the repayment of full capi-
tal investments, then in the designated examle neither in the first nor in the
second variation are the full capital investments repaid at the normed time and
consequently both variations are economically ineffective. If the construction of
such a project is essential to the national economy and the economy decides to
build a knowingly unprofitable project, then the most effective variation of the
two ineffective ones is chosen using the comparative effectiveness indicator which

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the given instance demands a greater effectiveness level from the additional
capital investments than the full capital investments.

From the above-given arguments it can be concluded that the standard procedure cor-
rectly recommends the use of both the general effectiveness indicator and the com-

parative effectiveness indicator in the design stage. The determining of these in-
dicators can be combined in the following sequence. From all the capital investment

variations one choses those for which the general effectiveness indicators are
above the normed amount. Out of all the absolutely effective variations, the most
effective is the one for which the amount of reduced expenditures is minimal.

The proposed indicators are employed in observing definite conditions. The compared
variations should be compatible in terms of product quality and quantity. in terms
of the prices employed for expressing the expenditures and the effect and in terms

of the time of making the expenditures and obtaining the effect. Of course, the re-
ducing of the variations to a comparable type for the listed features is sometimes

a complicated task. However this reduction must be carried out in order to obtain
an objective estimate of each variation. Let us take up in more detail the compara-
bility of variations for expenditures made at different times.

Expenditures which are the same in terms of amount but made at different times are
economically not equivalent. Let us assume that there are two variations for in-
vesting the same amount of expenditures. According to the first variation the
project is to be built in 5 years and according to the second in 3 years. Accord-
ing to the first variation the capital investments do not produce any return for 5
years and for the second for 3 years. If the second variation is adopted, then for
2 years a certain amount of capital investment is freed which could be channeled
into other projects and from this the national economic outlays could be addition-
ally reduced. In turn. the obtained savings in being productively employed also
will make it possible to reduce national economic expenditures and so forth.

If at the initial moment of time the amount of capital investments to be addition-
ally put into economic circulation is K0, then the effectiveness of its use will be:

at the end of the first year of the planned period
K1 ' KoH<oﬁn = RAMP-n):
at the end of the second year of the planned period
K2 - Kl+KlEn - K (1+an)(1+£n) - Ko(l+Bn)2;
at the end of year t of the planned period
Kt - x°(1+sn)t.

The multiplier (1+En)t has been called the reduction factor. Using this factor
the expenditures made in different years can be reduced to the last year of the
planning period. In the designated example it is essential not only to reduce the
expenditures for the first 2 years under the first variation to the end of the
second year but also for both variations to the end of the fifth year. In this

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instance all expenditures will be reduced to the same moment in time and. consequent-
ly, comparable from the viewpoint of the time of making the expenditures.

The Standard Procedure recommends that in the reduction formula use be made of a re-
duced effectiveness rate in comparison with the one employed in the formula for an-

nual reduced expenditures. This is justified by the fact that not all the deferred
amount of investments will be reput into economic circulation but only a certain
portion corresponding to accumulation in national income. According to the 1977
Procedure for Determining the Economic Effectiveness of Using New Technology, the
reduction rate for E has been set at 0.1.

Above we have examined the basic criteria for assessing the economic effectiveness

of capital investments. Let us apply these to determining the economic effective-
ness of HTS. A large technical system contains an enormous number of structural
elements and possesses a complex hierarchical structure. Each element in the sys-
tem is characterized by certain technical and economic parameters which, in turn,
characterize its effectiveness. However the system's effectiveness is not the mere
total of the effectivenesses of its elements. This stems from the important quality
of large systems. that is, the presence of innate properties which do not derive

from the known (observable) properties of the system's elements and the methods of
connecting them. There is a new terminology and the essence of this characteristic
property of systems was disclosed even by K. Harm who felt that "the force of attack
by a cavalry squadron and the force of resistance of an infantry regiment are funds—
mentally different from the total of those forces of attack and resistance which the
individual cavalry and infantrymen could develop.... Here it is a question not only
of a rise by the cooperation of individual productive force but also one of creating
a new productive force which in its very essence is a mass force."2

The parameters of the system elements and the system as a whole are interrelated and
for this reason, along with the effectiveness criteria of the system's individual
elements (the particular criteria) one must examine the criterion for the effective-
ness of the system as a whole. or the general criterion.

Technical systems exist in time and space. The method of a system's existence in
space can be described by models which are structural schemes of a system. In an
analysis of large systems, ordinarily two types of models are used: canonical and
hierarchical. A canonical model shows the functioning scheme of a system while a
hierarchical model gives its structure and for this reason a system's canonical
model can be used for establishing its general criterion while the hierarchical one
is used for working out the hierarchy of particular criteria. Let us examine the
questions of formulating the general criterion for estimating BTS economic effecv
tiveness.

A system's canonical model reflects an aggregate of factors which characterize the
process of its functioning through the external structure. the system's inputs and

outputs. The inputs and outputs determine the relationships between the designated
system and the environment. As is known, the inputs into a large system can be
divided into: informational which define the system's operating program; resource

____-_————--—

7K. Marx, "Capital,“ Vol 1, Politizdat. 1969. p 337.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which ensure the development, recovery and functioning of the system; the conditions
and constraints imposed by interacting systems; the conditions and constraints in-
posed by national economic interests; the conditions and constraints imposed by
nature. In an analogous manner the outputs out of the system are divided into in-
formational which characterize the results of the system's informational activities;
the consumption of resources as a result of the system's functioning; the conditions
and constraints imposed by the results of the system's functioning on the interact-

ing systems; the system's impact on the national economy; the system's impact on
nature.

The listed inputs and outputs expressed by the corresponding parameters are an ob-
ject of relic, operations and other types of research which in one form or another
are generalized in the criteria. The individual inputs and outputs have a direct
link with the nature of the criterion itself and with its structure. This applies
first of all to the links which characterize the system's interaction with the
national economy.

They mark first of all those constraints which are related to the influence of
national economic interests on the system's functioning (for example. the con-
straints for the required resources and the functioning modes for which the systems
are designed or can be designed) and the system's influence on national economic in-
terests. Constraints can also be imposed on the system's functioning by nature (at-
mospheric conditions, terrain and so forth). In turn, the system itself influences
the state of nature and the environment. Hence it can be concluded that the system
estimate criterion should include a system of constraints from the national economy
and the environment on the studied system. These constraints influence the system's
technical and economic parameters.

The constraints imposed by the national economy on the resources required for the
creation and functioning of the system or the constraints imposed by nature on the
system's technical parameters (the noise level, the impurity content in exhaust
gases and so forth) do not exhaust the influence of a system approach on shaping
the BTS economic effectiveness criterion. No matter how complicated a technical
system is, it, in turn, is an element of a higher level system.

The structure of these large systems is also hierarchical with a rather high level
of hierarchy (system ranks). Previously, in Chapter 1, as an example we gave our
nation's air transport system (a first-rank system) which consists of aircraft sys-
tems (second-rank systems) which in turn represent the air transport systems of the
nation's economic regions. The second-rank aircraft systems can be divided into
third- and fourth-rank systems and so forth.

Air transport, along with the other types of transport systems, comprises a higher
rank system, the nation's unified transport system. Transport, along with indus-
try, construction and agriculture, comprise the higher-rank system, the national
economic system. Naturally in working out the effectiveness criterion for the air-
craft system. it is essential to consider the influence of the given system's ef-
fectiveness on the functional effectiveness of the other systems which interact
with this system on the scale of the national economic system. Such a requirement
of systems analysis has been named the national economic approach to estimating

the economic effectiveness of systems. This means that its adopted variation

should be not only effective within that higher rank system in which the given

156

FOR‘OFFICLAI.USE|)NLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEZONIN

system functions but also should contribute to increasing the effectiveness of the
entire national economy.

The national economic approach to assessing the BIS is related primarily to its life
cycle (NlR [scientific research work], OKR [prototype design work], series production
and operation). A national economic systems approach to estimating the economic ef-
fectiveness of BTS is also based on considering the time and resource expenditures

in the stages of the system's life cycle in the various spheres of material produc-
tion: at the N11 [scientific research institute], experimental enterprises, at
serial-production plants and in operation.

In examining the stages of a system's life cycle, it must be stressed that opera-
tions are the determining stage as far as estimating a system's effectiveness. It
is precisely this stage which discloses a system's specific consumer properties
which determine its effect. Precisely at this stage it is essential to compare the
effect from the system with the expenditures which include the expenditures on the
stages of NIR, OKR and serial production. For confirming the given viewpoint, one
can refer to the thesis of K. Marx on the economic limits of new technology under
socialism as elaborated in "Capital." This thesis states: "If one views machines
exclusively as a means for reducing the cost of a product, then the limit of their
use is determined by the fact that the labor which their production costs should be
less than the labor which is replaced by their use."3 From this it can be concluded
that the effect of the new technology is realized in the spheres where it is em-
ployed. The economic effectiveness of new technology must be calculated in these
spheres.

Above we have examined the basic provisions in the theory of systems effectiveness
and analysis and the theory of capital investment effectiveness which can be used
in directly formulating the economic effectiveness criterion for the BTS. Proceed-
ing from the adopted multicriterial approach to the estimate, we select minimum
expenditures as the main criterion while thé remaining criteria of the time and
effect operate as the disciplining conditions (3.5).

The national economic approach makes it possible to determine the national economic
effect of the BTS. This effect shows what benefit the national economy will obtain
in using the new BTS. The national economic effect represents the total savings of
expenditures for the entire aggregate of produced resources (labor, materials and
fixed productive capital) as achieved by using the new system. Current expendi-
tures are added to the one-shot capital ones by using the reduced expenditures for—
mula. In comparing several variations of a system, the most effective one is chosen
for the minimum reduced expenditures on operations:

Ct+3n1<r - min, (3.16)

where c;--annual current expenditures for operating the system;
Kr--capital investments for operating the system.

The expenditures on operating the system are dynamic. At the beginning of opera-
tions and then as the system is put into operation they decline. Moreover, the

 

3K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [Works], Vol 23, p 406.

155

FOR OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

volume of the system's annual work also changes over time, and for this reason it
is proposed that the average annual expenditures be considered for the entire oper-
ating period of the systen 6,. If we consider the average amount of expenditures
for operations, then (3.16) assumes the form

Er-o-snx, - min. (3.17)

Then it is essential to disclose the content of the concepts "average annual cur-
rent expenditures for operations" and "capital investments into operations." More-
over, it is essential to bear in mind that according to the above-adopted national
economic approach, in calculating BIS effectiveness ode must not restrict oneself
to current and capital expenditures just into operation. It is also essential to
consider the current and capital expenditures into the N11, the prototype design
organizations (0K0) and into experimental and serial-production plants.

The national economic expenditures for the system's entire life cycle includes the
expenditures on scientific research znir' design and prototype production work car-
ried out at experisental enterprises 20kg, expenditures on the serial manufacturing
of the system 2. and expenditures on operating the system 2,. The dynamics of ex-
penditures for the entire life cycle of a system can be shown schematically in the
form of Fig. 3.2. The expenditures znir» zokro 2. and Zr include both the capital
investments Knirv Kokrv Km and K: as well as current expenditures cnir' cokr, C. and
6,. All these expenditures are made at different times. Consequently, in order
that the compared variations are coapstible, all these expenditures must be reduced
to the same moment in time. Hithin (3.17) let us try to consider the national eco-
nomic expenditures and the time factor.

expenditures

 

Fig. 3.2. Expenditure dynamics during
life cycle of a system

As the reduction base for all expenditures, let us use the first year of operation.
For the convenience of the calculations, we will assume that the end of the year is
the point of reference. Thus. the reduction point will be the point Tar-fl, where

Tar--the point of starting operations in the interval Tt' Let us designate the re-
duction point by TS' Let us introduce the other notations used below:

Tsnir: Tsokro Tan and Tar--the starting points for the stages of NIR, OKR, manufac-
turing and operating the system in the interval T: (years); Tscnir- Tseokr’ T‘cnl
Tscr-the starting points for carrying out capital investments for the'corresponding
stages; Cenir» Teokr- Ten. Ter--correspondingly the ends of the same stages in the
interval T; (years); Tecnir- Tecokrv Teen. Tecg--the ending points for carrying out

156

FOR OF?1C1A1.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capital investments for the corresponding stages; Tnir: Tokr' Tn, Tr-the duration
of the stages for the NIR. OKR. manufacturing and operation of the system (years);
Cnirt- cokrt- cut. Crt--the costs of N13, ORR. manufacturing and operating the sys-

tem in year t; Knirtv Kokrt- Rut, Krt--capita1 investments in the corresponding
spheres in year t.

The dynamics of the capital and current expenditures for the system's life cycle is
shown in Fig. 3.3.

If one considers just the expenditures into operations, then considering the time
factor, the comparative effectiveness indicator (3.17) assumes the form

Tet Tecr
Z - Ti I haunts“ + in Z Kﬂuﬂzﬂrt - min. (3.13)
r t'TBr+1 t'Tscrﬂ

In actuality (3.18) expresses the average annual reduced expenditures for operating
the system. The variations are compared for the same amount of work and for the
same operating period, and for this reason the total expenditures on operations re-
duced to the same moment of time, that is. to the start of operations, will be
divided by the amount of the period Tr.

expenditures

 
 

Fig. 3.3. Dynamics of capital and current expenditures
over system life cycle

The capital investments into operation made during the various years using the re-
duction factor (1+E)Ts-t also lead to the start of operations. Expression (3.18)
also considers the expenditures on series production. The current operating ex-
penditures Cr: consider the deductions for the renovation of the system while the
amount of capital investments Kr: includes the cost of manufacturing the system.
However, here no consideration is given to the current expenditures on NIR, OKR

as well as the capital investments into NIR, OKR and serial production. The formu-
la (3.18) also does not consider the capital investments into related production
which must be carried out in line with the creation and operation of the system
being evaluated ch. It can now be considered being generally recognized that all
the listed expenditures must be considered in calculating the economic effective-

ness of technical systems and they must be taken into account in the amount of
capital investments.

157

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, before putting all the listed expenditures into (3.18), let us clarify

Ter
this equation. Its first term i%- Z Crt(l+E)T8‘t expresses the average annual
r t-Tgr... 1

outlays for operations during the operating period. These are average weighted ex-
penditures for Cri and these expenditures are weighted using the amount (1+3) rt8' --
the reduction factor for expenditures made at different times. The expenditure re-
duction factor is also the weight which is considered in determining the average
weighted expenditures. In determining the average weighted expenditure it is essen-
tial to multiply the elements of the aggregate by their weights and then divide this
byTthe total of the weights. In this instance the total of the weights is

er

E (l+E)TS“. Consequently, in (3.18) it is essential to divide the total of
t'1'er

th; products of the current expenditures and reduction factors by the amount
er
2 (l+E)T8-t, and not by the operating period T,. If this adjustment is incor-

t'Tsr-H
porated in (3.18). then it will assume the form

1 Tet _ Tecr T -t
2 ' Ter—'—__ 2 CAME)“ t + Eu 2 KARE) 3 - min. (3.19)
2 (1+E)Tg-t t'TBH'I F'Tscr‘H

t-Tsr...‘

After the adjustments made, let us draw attention to the second term of (3.19), to

the capital investments made into the systen' s operations. Considering the national
economic approach. it is essential to somewhat broaden the concept “capital invest-
ments into operation" and incorporate in it the cost of the “IR and OKR (NIOKR), the

cost of the system and the cost of the capital investments into the production of
the system and related production.

The cost of the system is divided into two components: the cost of the central ele-
ments in the system Kc and the cost of the other elements of the system Ky which en-
sure the functioning of the system's central elements. The central element has a
determining impact on the parameters and functioning conditions of the other system
elements. for example, the aircraft is the central element for an aircraft system.

Considering what has been examined above, it is possible to obtain the following
formula for the reduced expenditures on operating the system:

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

1 Te! Tecniokr Teniokr
Z - Ier X Crtatrsn Z xniokr + Z cniokrt“: +
z “t t'Tsﬂ- c"Tscnioltr-l'l C'Tniokr+1
C'Tsﬂl
Tecr Tetcp Tecc Teco
+ 2 Km“: 4» f cht°t + 2 Rant + Z Kit°t . min.
t'Tscr+! t'Tsccp-H "Tscc+! t'Tsco+1

(3.20)

where Crt-annual current expenditures on operating the system; T -t
at--reduction factor for expenditures at different times, a;- (l+E) 8 ;
Kniokrt--capital investments into NIOKR in year t;
Cnlukrz-nthe costs of NIOKR in year t;
KnC--capita1 investments into producing the system in veer t:
chc--capita1 investments into related production in year t;
Tsccp' Tecc --beginning and end of making capital invrstments intc related pro-
duct on;
K¢;--capita1 investments into operations needed for scluiring system central
elements in year t;
Tscc, Tecc--beginning and end of carrying out capital investments for acquiring
system central elements;
Kot--other capital investments into operation of system (excluding cost nf
system central elements) in year t;
Taco» Tec0--beginning and end {or carrying out other capital investments into
operations.

Let us examine in more detail the content of the individual components of (3.20).

The annual current expenditures on operating the system 6;: consider all the expend-
itures for operating the system carried out in year t: expenditures on upkeep and
maintenance, fuel and amortization deductions. Amortization deductions include de-
ductions on major overhauls and deductions on the complete replacement of the system
(renovation). As for the second term of (3.20), it includes the amount of the cor-
responding capital investments. In the early designing stages or even in the pre—
design stages, when the system's effectiveness is being calculated and when the
system's effectiveness is being forecast, the question arises of the methods to
determine this amount. Many works determine capital investments from a scheme of
reduced expenditures. Let us given certain examples.

The 1964 "Basic Methodological Provisions on Determining the Economic Effectiveness

of Scientific Research" recommend that economic potential be determined by the
formula

Ys - (cl-c2) + a..(x1-x2)+'r;.<c;-c5) + (xx-x5).

where Cl and C2—-the production costs of the annual product volume of the sector
producing the means of labor. respectively, for the new and base
variation;

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(N§LY

K1 and K2-capita1 expenditures needed for the above-indicated product output
in the sector producing the means of labor, respectively. for the

new and base variations;
Cl and C§-the cost of the annual volume of the product produced with the
designated neans of labor in the sector using them as fixed capital;
K1 and K§-additiona1 capital expenditures (in addition to the expenditures on
the designated means of labor) in the sector using these means of

labor as fixed capital;
Sir-the normed effectiveness coefficient in the sector producing the

means of labor;
Tﬁ—-the normed repayment time in the sector using the designated means -

of labor as fixed capital.

In this expression the reduced expenditures are used for deter-ining the value of
the means of labor.

The 1972 "Instructions on Determining the Economic Effectiveness of Capital Invest-
ments in Construction" employ an indicator for the full reduced expenditures and

these consider the expenditures in creating the project and the expenditures for op-
erating it. The full reduced expenditures are calculated by the formula:

P1 ' 01 + ani + ani + "11'.

where Ci--the cost of construction-installstion work in building a project using

variation 1;
K1--capital investments into the fixed productive capital and investments into

' working capital in the construction sphere;
K1--related capital investments into producing building materials and struc-

tural elements;

H1--operating expenditures (average annual);
T--the calculation period during which the operating expenditures are con-
sidered (this can be set equal to the normed capital investment repay-

ment tine).

In this formula as well the expression Cid-EnKi is used to determine the cost of the
project. It would be possible to give a whole series of other works in which re-
duced expenditures are interpreted as the price or value. This position has been
expressed most clearly in the work [34, p 53]: "Economic effectiveness in the
national economy is ultimately neasured by the growth of social labor productivity
which is determined either by the quantity of manufactured product per unit of time
or by the expenditures of live and embodied labor per article or per unit of work
(the cost of the article or a unit of work). The lower the cost of the article

(unit of work) the higher the labor productivity.

"In the sphere of aircraft system operations a standard operation can be accepted as
a unit of work and. consequently. the cost of the operation is an indicator of
social labor productivity. The reduced expenditures also form the criterion for the

operations' cost."

According to [34] in a general forn the criterion for the cost of an operation can
be expressed in the following manner:

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- ‘K n m
cop ' I 2 2 5113(‘)n13(?)dt. (3.21)
101-1 j-l

where C‘1J(1)-expenditures per unit of means per unit of time 1;
n1j(1)--the quantity of means required per unit of time t;
i--t2e[:ndex of the type of aircraft participating in the operation,
1 ; n ;
j--the index of local operations from which the global operation is
formed. 3911. m1;
To and 1K--the tune for the beginning and end of the operation.

In the simplest case the formula (3.21) assumes the form
cop . éln.

Expenditures per unit of means 51 are determined from the formula

CL ' c1+EnKydn (3.22)

where Cl--the cost of a unit of means;
Kydr--the proportional, that is. per unit of means, capital expenditures.

Let us adopt the reduced expenditures for determining the amount of capital invest-
ments in (3.20). The capital investments into prototype or serial production can
be represented as the total of the annual reduced expenditures on building one or
another project. Analogously it is possible to represent capital investments into
related production and operation (minus the cost of the system central elements).
The cost of construction can be expressed by the corresponding reduced expenditures
of the construction organization. However in system feasibility studies, as a rule,
there is no need to determine the cost by such a differentiated manner, as there
are determined proportional capital investments which are used in the calculations.
The organtzations which work out the norms for proportional capital investments in
determining capital investment costs use the reduced expenditure scheme. Let us
examine in more detail the procedure for determining the cost of the central ele-
ments in a system. This can be represented as the reduced expenditures in year t

zmc ' cmt+EnKmt' (3-23)

The operating capital investments needed for acquiring the system central elements
Kct can be represented in the following form:

Tecc Tem
Z Kct ' 2 Zac-
r-"'rscc+1 t'Tsm-H

If the cost of the system central elements is to be determined using the reduced
expenditures, then the amount of corresponding capital investments can be expressed

by the formula

161

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(M§LY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Tem Ten
2 zm- Z (covenan-
til-”H t-Tm1

Formula (3.23) needs a certain adjustment. First of all this applies to the con-
cept of Kmt‘ It designates the new production capital which embodies the necessary
capital investments. However, in determining the value of the system's elements,
one must not restrict oneself to just the new capital and existing capital must be
considered as well. For confirmation of this let us examine the following example.

Let us assume that according to one variation of a system capital investments are
required into serial production. while under different variations they are not
needed, that is, the elements of the system are manufactured at an operating enter-
prise without any reconstruction. If in determining the cost of the system we con-
sider only the capital investments and do not consider the value of the existing
capital (let us remember that here we do not have in mind the asortization deduc-
tions), then according to the second variation the system’s cost (if it is figured
from the above-given scheme of reduced expenditures) will equal the systen's cost
as capital investments equal zero. However from the operational viewpoint the capi-
tal investments for both variations should be considered not in terms of production
costs but rather in terms of value. For this it is obviously essential to consider
not only the capital investments but also the existing capital. If the amount of
the existing and new capital is considered, then the cost of the system's elements
is determined by the formula:

Tem Tem 11
(F 4' Km ).
+ 3n z mt t

where Fug-the amount of existing capital used for producing the system‘s elements
in in year t;
Kat—the amount of new capital in year t (capital investments into production
in a running total up to year t inclusively which are used in year t in
manufacturing the system's elesents).

Let us make one other clarification. The operating capital investments needed for
acquiring the system central elements do not equal the cost of manufacturing these
elements over the entire period of their production. In the noun: of the capital
investments Kc it is essential to consider only that value of the system elements
which ensures expanded reproduction in operation. The capital investments going to
replace the wear on the system's elements, that is. used in simple reproduction,
must not be considered in the amount Kc. This means that expenditures in production
must be totaled for the production period of the system's elements going to expand
the capital in operation from the start of manufacturing t - Tm+l to t - Tm, that
is, to the moment when the elements are used to replace the worn out.

Hence the amount Kc is determined from the following formula:

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m Ties:
l(c ' 2 zjntv
. 3'1 t'TjslH'l

where j--syatem element;
m--number of system elements.

If the remaining expenditures for the system are represented as the total expendi-
tures for its elements. then formula (3.20) assumes the form:

1 TE: m Tjecniokr Tjeniokr
z ' T crt"'t. + F11 2 2 aniokrc“t + 2 c1 niokrta‘t +
2 t t-Tsr+1 1-1 tqjscn1°h+1 t-Tjniokr+1
t-T8,+l
r
Tjecm Tjeccp Tjem Tjeco
+ 2 ijt°t + z KJCPCQI + 2 zjut“: + I Kjotut ‘ min.
tgtj SCI+1 t-Tj sccp+1 t-Tj .n+1 t-rjsco+1

(3.210)

The designated criterion for the national economic effectiveness of the BTS (3.24)
makes it possible to select the most effective variation of the system. Its eco-
nomic essence is that it expresses the value of the result from the systmn's func-
tioning (the value of its work or the value of its carrying out of the set opera-

tion) .

The national economic approach to determining BTS effectiveness does not exclude
the elucidation of cost accounting results or a cost accounting effect but, on the
contrary, in taking a decision on the development or introduction of a new BTS, one
must not restrict oneself to disclosing the cost accounting effect and it is essen—
tial to also consider the national economic effect. Let us illustrate this idea by
the following hypothetical example. Let us assume that an aircraft designer has
taken a decision to increase its service life by (hours). The expenditures of
the experimental enterprise to increase the aircraft's service life are 1 million
rubles. These expenditures are financed from the budget and are not incorporated
in the aircraft price. As a result of increaaeing the aircraft service life, civil
aviation gains a savings totaling 50,000 rubles a year in amortizing the aircraft.
This comprises the annual cost accounting effect of civil aviation. From the view-
point of the civil aviation's cost accounting interests, an increase in aircraft
operating life is advisable. However, from the viewpoint of the national economy
where it is also essential to consider the expenditures on phototype design work to
increase the aircraft service life, this measure is not advantageous. The addi-
tional 1 million rubles of expenditures on the 0101 will be paid back in 20 years in
civil aviation (1 million rubles : 50 rubles). Consequently, proceeding from
national economic interests. the 0K0 must seek out more economic means for increas-

ing aircraft life.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The essence and relationship of the national economic and cost accounting effects of
new technology has been disclosed most completely in the work of L. H. Gatovskiy [9].
The national economic effect makes it possible to answer the question of the eco-
nomic advisability of new technology for the national economy as a whole. The cate-
gory of the cost accounting effect provides an answer to the question of the cost
accounting advisability for the manufacturers to produce and for the consumers to
employ a given new technology which is effective for the national economy. Thus,
the national economic effect is primary and the cost accounting effect is secondary.
The task is not to set one effect in opposition to the other but rather achieve
their unity with the determining role for the national economic effect in relation
to the cost accounting one. For this the socialist state uses the economic mechan-
isms and levers achieving an optimum reconciliation of the interests of society and
the individual enterprises.

The interaction between the national economic and cost accounting effects occurs in
the following sequence: the national economic effect--selection of new technology-
price of new technology--cost accounting effect.

A clear differentiation of the two effects--national economic and cost accounting--

has a positive impact on the further development of the theory of new technology
effectiveness. If this idea becomes generally accepted, then the supporters of
either types of effect or either type of accounting will debate not the replacing

of one accounting by another or one effect by another but will jointly seek out ways
for the reconciling and interaction of these two types of effect. As is known, for
a long time there have been disputes between the supporters of a uniform capital
investment effectiveness norm for the national economy as a whole and the supporters
of differentiated rates for the sectors. We feel that it would be possible to pro-
vide the following reconciliation of these norms: in calculating the national eco-
nomic effect to employ a unified national economic norm for capital investment ef-
fectiveness and in calculating the cost accounting effects the sectorial norms for
capital investment effectiveness. If a uniform normed effectiveness coefficient
would be approved in setting the sectorial procedural instructions on determining
economic effectiveness for the use of new technology for all the sectors then the
national economic and cost accounting effectivenesses would be figured using a uni-
form norm.

The cost accounting effectiveness is based upon the mechanisms of planning. expendi-
ture accounting, price formation and encouraging new technology. With the existing
planning and economic incentive system, as is known, profit and profitability are
the important cost accounting indicators for the effectiveness of the sectors and
enterprises. For this reason, for the large technical systems in national economic
use and which are financed from centralized capital investments, the criterion of
cost accounting effectiveness is formed using the profit and profitability indica-
tors.

According to the 1977 Procedure for Determining Economic Effectiveness of New Tech-
nology, the cost accounting effect from the production and use of new technology is
determined by the formula:

V, - {AP-EnzAK, (3.25)

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Yx--the aggregate cost accounting effect for production from the output and
use of new technology in the year being planned t, rubles;
{AP--increase in profit (decline in cost) from all measures under the new tech-
nology plan in the year being planned t, rubles;
{AK--capita1 investments for all measures under the new technology plan of
year t, rubles.

This indicator is used in determining the cost accounting effect of the new BIS, and.
for this it is essential to compare the increased profit in the set period LP with
the normed amount of effectiveness from the additional capital investments BnAK us-
ing the formula

Yx - AP - an“. (3.26)

The indicator of (3.26) makes it possible to determine the overall cost accounting
effect of the new system. The new system's effectiveness level is determined by
the effectiveness indicator for additional capital investments:

3', - AP/AK.

Along with the comparative effectiveness indicator it is also recommended that the
general effectiveness indicator be used, that is. the indicator for the effective-
ness of full capital investments

ch I P/K.
where P--annua1 profit.

The economic effectiveness criteria for the BTS make it possible to determine the
economic effect from its creation and introduction. First of all it is essential

to distinguish three types of economic effect: preliminary, expected or planned
and actual.

In the stage of carrying out scientific research for establishing the necessity of
the 0K3, that is, before taking the decision to carry out the OKR to develop a new
BTS, the preliminary economic effect should be determined.

After completing the development of the new system, the expected economic effect is
determined considering the development results and the assumed areas and conditions
for its introduction.

At the stage of drawing up the new BIS introduction plan, the expected economic ef-
fect is the planned effect.

After the new system has been put into operation the actual economic effect is de-
termined.

Each of the above-designated types of effect (national economic and cost accounting)
can be determined as preliminary, expected or planned and actual. If one generaliz-
es the characteristics of the national economic and cost accounting effects. it is
possible to emphasize that both types of effect are figured proceeding from common
methodological principles. The differences are in the nature of the initial data,

165

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR 0F?1C1Al.USE!DNLV

methodological principles. The differences are in the nature of the initial data,
the normative materials and the comparison base for elucidating the effect.

The nature of the initial data, their completeness and degree of certainty depend.
in the first place, upon the life cycle stage of the BTS for which its economic ef-
fectiveness was figured and. secondly, upon the level on which the problem is
solved (the national economy or sector). In determining the annual economic effect
of a BTS, the following are used as the base of comparison:

1) During the stage of formulating the NIOKR plans (in the process of selecting

the variation for creating a new BTS), and in taking a decision to put a new BIS in-
to production--the indicators of the best BIS designed in the USSR (or a foreign BIS
which can be purchased or developed in the USSR on the basis of licensing); in the

instance of the absence of design studies in the USSR and the impossibility of using
foreign experience as a basis of comparison, the indicators of the best BTS in the
USSR are used;

2) In the stage of formulating the plans for the development of the new BTS as well
as in the stage of their introduction and operation--the indicators of the BTS to be
replaced.

In addition to the above—mentioned types of effect from the BTS, depending upon the
adopted calculation period, a distinction must be made between the annual economic
effect of a new BTS Y8 and the complete economic effect of a new BTS over the period
of its operation Y . The annual national economic effect from operating a BTS is
calculated on the basis of the criterion of (3.24) using the formula

Y8 I 25-21:, (3.27)

where 25 and Zn--the average annual reduced expenditures for the development and
operation of the new and base systems.

The full economic effect over the operating period is calculated by the formula
er
I: - (zb-zn) E at. (3.28)
t-Tgr+l

Along with the absolute amount of the new effect for a new technical system (the
annual or full effect), the level of its effectiveness is also determined

arb"€rn
- —— 3.29
E? Ktn‘KZb ' ( )

where pr, Ern--the average annual cost of operating the base and new variations of
the BTS;
Ktbr Kxn--the total capital investments for the development, production and
operation of the system reduced to the start of the system's opera-
tion.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 4: FORECASTING THE COST ESTIMATES 0? LARGE TECHNICAL SYSTEMS

Economic forecasting of BTS development assumes the choice of the most effective
areas of scientific and technical development using economic effectiveness criteria.
Such a choice becomes objective only under the condition that the possible develop—
ment alternatives are coordinated uith the estimates for resources needed to imple-
ment these alternatives.

The resources which ensure the scientific and technical development of the BTS are
diverse, but, as a rule. can be put in four basic groups: labor, material, energy
and information. The direct totaling of the needs for each of the resource varie-
ties included in these groups is excluded as the resources are incommensurable in
terns of their natural and physical form. This circumstance forces one to resort
to cost estimates of resources which to a significant degree reflect the expendi-
tures of social labor included in all resources without exception, independently of
their nature and physical embodiment. In addition to ensuring the internal compara-
bility of the resources, the cost estimates are a means for comeasuring the amount
of resources with the end effect (the result) or BTS development to the degree that
the effect of any 6 ”elopment can be measured by cost estimates.

The cost estimates for resources vhich ensure the development of the BTS are con-
cretely expressed in the value of the scientific research and prototype design work,
serial production and operation. In the book these are linked together by the com-
mon concept of the BTS cost estimate.

4.1. Forming the BTS Cost Estimates

The complexity and great scale of the BTS lead to the spreading out of the process
of their creation (NIOKR) and serial production in many industrial sectors. Each
sector, and within the sector the individual “II, OKB and serial-production plants
are specialized in the creation and industrial output of certain groups of the BTs
functional elements. These elements are united by the common purpose and character
of the physicochemical functioning processes, by designing and production processes.
The particular features of the individual functional elements of the BTS are re-
flected in the organization and content of the processes of their creation and
serial production, in the composition of the consumed resources and in the struc-
ture of the cost estimates. All of this ultimately leaves an impression on the for-

mative patterns in the cost of creating and serially producing related groups of
BTS functional elements. An analogous situation is also observed in operations.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCJAI.USEGDNLY

Thus, for each group of related elenents there is a corresponding special inner
logic and structure for the processes of NIOKR, series production and operation.
Because of this the entire process of forming the BTS cost estimates can be broken
down into a multiplicity of particular processes which to a significant degree occur
independently.

In taking into account what has been said, the model of the BTS cost estimates which
most reflects the process of their formation can be represented by the expression

c..->,;c.,..,+;.c.. (.1,

where cij--production costs of system's element 1 at stage i of the life cycle;
nj--number of 1 elements in system;
csoi--the cost of the work related to organizing the system at stage i of the
life cycle.

Such an interpretation of the process of forming the cost estimates of the BTS
possesses two basic merits. In the first place, it considers the particular fea-
tures of the functional elements and the conditions of their creation, serial pro-
duction and operation. This provides a high sensitivity of the BTS cost estimates
to a change in the characteristics of the individual elements and the stages of
their life cycle. Secondly, the model (b.1) possesses great flexibility as an eco-
nomic forecasting tool as it meets certain specific demands imposed by the logic

of the BIS development process.

In actuality, in accord with the BTS development goals, the properties of the indi-
vidual functional elements do not change uniformly. The increase in the system's
functional possibilities in the individual stages is brought about by the develop-
ment of those elements which at the given moment most impede overall development
and thereby are the main obstacle on the path to achieving the general goal. Here
the contribution of a specific element to overall development can vary in rather
significant limits. But the demand for resources ensuring the development of the
given element does not always correspond to this contribution.

Thus, if the element's functional parameters are close to their theoretical limits,
an insignificant increase in them, nevertheless, can require significant expendi-
tures. Consequently, even a small increase in an individual element’s functional
parameters can cause an increase in expenditures which is very tangible on a scale
of the entire system. On the other hand, there are contradictory links between the
parameters of the system's individual elements and for this reason in the process
of developing the BIS, as a rule, compromises are made with a certain parameter
being improved at the expense of a certain deterioration in the other parameters.
Here as a whole the system's effectiveness rises. Thus, a change in the BTS cost
estimates will depend upon the particular features of the development process of
the individual elements which are characteristic for the given period of the sys-

tem's development.

168

FOR 0F?1C1A1.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From what has been said it follows that a study of the formative process of the
BTS cost estimates should start by an analysis of the system's internal structure
and the isolating of individual elements or kindred groups into an independent re-
search object.

The cost estimates for the functional elements are by nature dynamic.

In the process of developing the BTS functional elements, the expenditures at each
stage of their life cycle are influenced by a complicated combination of factors of
the most diverse nature. The influence of some is limited to an individual stage
of the life cycle while others encompass all stages; the action of one is discrete
while that of others is continuous. A majority of factors is in a complex interac-
tion.

Fig. 6.1 gives a classification based upon the principle of dividing the total
number of factors into related groups in accord with the place, time and nature of
their influence on the cost estimates. As is seen from the diagram, all factors
are divided into three large groups: factors characterizing the conditions of the
creation, production and operation of the elements or the organizational-economic
ones; the factors characterizing the functional element as a means of attaining
certain goals or the operational effectiveness factors; the factors characterizing
the BTS element as an object of creation, production and operation, or the design-
production ones. Such a classification makes it possible:

1) To unify in each group the similar factors reflecting the influence of definite
processes related to the development of the SIS on the cost estimate;

2) To utilize the link between the factors existing in each group and between the
groups for the purpose of choosing the indicators which accumulate the influence of
the factors related by cause-and-effect ties;

3) To disclose the mechanism of influence of the factors in each group on the cost
estimates.

The operational effectiveness factors hold a central place in research on the for-
mative patterns of the cost estimates, since precisely this group of factors accumu-
lates the influence from the properties and functional capabilities of the BTS ele-

ments on the expenditures. In this group of factors it is possible to isolate two
independent subgroups of which the first describes the element's ability to perform
the set functions, or the functional subgroup, and the second is the maintaining of
this capacity in the process of operation. or the technical and operational sub-

group.

In the first subgroup are such factors as the element's purpose, the number of per-
formed functions, the number of functional cycles within one operation, the maximum
possible values of the functional parameters, the range of their change and so
forth. The maintaining of the capacity to perform the set functions is character-
ized by reliability, service life and the repeated use of the functional element.

The influence of operational effectiveness factors on the cost estimates is mani-
fested through the design and production features of the elements, including:

169

INJR‘OFIWCJAL USIZCNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cost estimate formative factors for
BTS functional elements

operational design,
effectiveness production

    

organizational,
economic

   

     

*5 *3

H
o o as H >.
I: c H o
0 O 8 8
u u ~4
0 s «u v. H
o o E- u o
u m m o v: «v!
u u g g 8 a:
a a U N v v.

 

Fig. 4.1. Classification of formative factors for the
cost estimates of BTS functional elements

weight. geometric shape, layout, the total number of design elements and their den-
sity in a unit of volume, the mechanical, physical and chemical properties of the
employed materials; the manufacturing precision for the design elements and their
connections; the roughness of the worked surfaces and so forth. The more complex
the design of the BTS functional element and the higher the properties of the em-
ployed materials and the demands made on the quality of the production processes
the more expensive it costs to create, produce and operate the element.

However. the mechanism of the influence of the operational effectiveness factors on
the cost estimates is much more complicated as in each specific instance there is

a multiplicity of possible combinations for the forms and methods of materialiring
the functional and technical-operational characteristics.

At the sane time, the amount of the cost estimates for the elements, with other
conditions being equal, can change depending upon the overall ratio of the number
of original, standardized and unitised parts used in its design. A high degree of
standardization and unitization, in deepening specialization and creating favorable
conditions for the organizing of mass production for the individual design elements,
leads to a marked reduction in the cost estimates.

The cost estimates of a new functional element will differ from the cost estimates
of its predecessors the less the higher the degree of its design succession, that is,

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the overall correlation between the borrowed and newly developed design elements.
The cost estimates will be influenced by the methods of assembling the designs into
individual units, panels and assemblies, their interchangeability and the possibili-
ty of disassembly and assembly without disrupting the overall arrangement of the
elements in the system. In other words, the cost estimates will depend upon the
design efficiency of the functional element. Considering what has been said, it is
necessary to isolate an independent group of factors, the design-technological ones.
with the splitting of these into two subgroups: design and design efficiency.

The degree to which the designated factors influence the cost estimates of the BTS
function elements depends largely upon the characteristics of the state of the
processes occurring in the individual stages of the element's life cycle. These
characteristics in the adopted classification are part of the microeconcmic factors,
that is, the factors operating on the enterprise and organization level. These in-
clude the organizational-technical level. the scale and degree of development of the
processes involved in the creation, production and operation of the systems. These
factors will be examined in detail in the subsequent sections of the chapter as for
each stage in the life cycle their influence has its specific features.

Let us stop in somewhat greater detail on the influence of the organizational-
technical level of creating and producing the systems on their cost estimates to the
degree that this is related to the overall process of scientific and technical de-
velopment of the BTS. The organisational-technical level of creating and producing
the elements of the systems is characterized by the following basic indicators:

the level and progressiveness of the production-technical facilities; the technical-
and energy-to—labor ratio; the level of automating the mechanizing the labor proc-
eases; the progressiveness of the employed production processes. the level of tech-
nological outfitting; the system of preparing. servicing, controlling and planning
production; the forms of the organization of labor and production; the level of con-
centration, specialization and cooperation [subcontracting].

The process of improving the technology and the technological and organizational
forms for creating the producing the systems is an objective expression of scien-
tific and technical progress. In essence. this process, in being a response to the
development of the systems, makes possible the materialization of the new function-
al properties of their elements. For this reason the processes involved in the
development of the technical and organizational-economic systems occur in parallel.
Here there can also be certain temporary breaks in the pace of this development.
The cost estimates simultaneously accumulate the influence of these two trends and
respond to changes in the ratio of the development rates. There is no doubt that
this important aspect in the process of forming the cost estimates should be taken
into account in working out the cost forecasts.

Nevertheless, the present methods of forecasting the cost estimates proceed from the
assumption that the one-time set development rates of the technical systems and the
means ensuring this development remain constant. This is tantamount to the assump-
tion that the technical and organizational-economic systems are in a state of rela-
tive equilibrium. Let us endeavor to analyze this question and for this we will
turn back to the already-discussed particular features of BIS development.

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of structural elements in systems occurs unevenly. One part of the
elements undergoes substantial changes, a second changes insignificantly or not at
all while the characteristics of a third can even deteriorate somewhat. For this
reason at each moment of time the means and methods for ensuring the new properties
of elements will comprise a certain portion in the aggregate of all the means and
methods employed on a system—wide scale. It is also essential to consider that a
portion of the parts and assemblies of the functional elements, in undergoing
change, has been borrowed from previous designs.

Thus, at each stage in the development of a system a certain set of tested means
and methods will be employed to ensure the functional possibilities of the system.
And these means and methods will be constantly improved due to the continuous
nature of the development processes and the action of the law of increased social
labor productivity. The latter is an objective prerequisite for reducing the cost
estimates. Consequently, the more intense growth of the cost estimates caused by
certain breaks in the development pace of the individual BTS elements and the
organizational-economic systems will to a significant degree be compensated for by
a drop in the cost estimates of the individual BTS elements as well as the borrowed
design elements.

The formation of the cost estimates is also influenced by factors operating on the
national economic and sectorial levels, or macroeconomic factors. These factors
comprise a group of conditions inherent to a certain economic development stage on
the national scale. This includes the level of social labor productivity, the
adopted forms of wages and incentives for the participants of material production,
the system of relationships between the individual enterprises and the state budget,
price policy and so forth.

Social labor productivity is the most important factor determining the overall level
of the cost estimates.

To the degree that the rise in social labor productivity is expressed in a savings
of both live and embodied labor, it works to reduce product costs. The continuous
rise of social labor productivity and the decline in product costs are an objective
reality determined by scientific-technical progress, by the rise in personnel skills
and by the improvement in technology and the forms of industrial production.

The effect from the increase in social labor productivity is apparent in all stages
of the BTS life cycle through the expenditures of past labor consumed in the process
of creating, producing and operating the systems and embodied in the raw products,
materials. fuel and means of production. Social labor productivity has a particular
effect on the cost estimates of functional elements the designs of which employ new
still not sufficiently developed materials, for example, titanium alloys (Fig. 4.2)
or filamentary crystals (Fig. 4.3).

   
   

   

  

a, .
g 1’ Fig. 0.2. Forecast of comparative cost of

. , . , titanium sheet 1, titanium new plates, strips
3 ‘ “may“, and rod 2, steel and aluminum 3

m n V‘“ — "’

 

 

1N7 I!" "I

172

FOR 0F?1C1Al.USE¢DNLY
At the same time. in analyzing, for example,
the drOp in the cost of materials made from
titanium over time, it is not hard to see
that as the new materials are developed and
they become ordinary ones, this channel for
the influence of social labor productivity
on the cost estimates weakens. Thus, the
intensive drop in the cost of titanium ob-
servable in the period from 1967 through
1972 was gradually replaced by a gentler
dynamic so that the rate of decline in out-
Pig.6.3. Change in the cost of certain
fibrous crystal materials in the process lays on titanium materials became compar-

 

of developing their production' able with the trend for the change in the

l--Filamentary sapphire crystals; cost Of steel and aluminum.

Z--Fibroue silicon carbide; 3.-F118- The macro- and microeconomic processes are

mentary boron crystals; 4-Graphite

fiber- S--Pilamentary silicon carbide processes "1th both ‘ direct link and feed-
’ fibers back. Thus, the satisfying of the new de-

mands made on the organizational and tech-
nical level of the BTS production sectors determines the areas for the scientific

and technical development of the organizational-economic systems and this ultimately
leads to macroeconomic shifts and, in particular, to a rise in social labor produc-
tivity. This is tantamount to the saving of social labor. The latter, in turn,
determines the amount of resources which are to be allocated to satisfy the social
needs in the BTS and are to be channeled into their scientific and technical de-
velopment. The interaction of the different-natured factors and their relation to
the cost estimates are shown schematically in Fig. 6.6.

The dynamics of the factors in each group forms its own individual time trend for
the BTS cost estimates in the process of their technical and scientific development
while the entire aggregate of factors forms the resulting trend. Fig. 4.5 hypothet-
ically shows the formation of the resulting trend of the cost estimates for the BTS
elements against the background of the growth of their functional parameters. Each
of the presented Curves depicts an individual trend of the cost estimates formed by
the dynamics of an individual group of factors when the remainder are conditionally
assuaed to be constant. The straight line parallel to the time axis depicts the

hypothetical trend of the cost estimates Jc for the case where the factors involved
in forming the cost estimates remain constant.1

As is seen from Fig. 6.5, the curve for the resulting trend changes direction: the
decline observable at the start of the system‘s development is replaced by a rise
in the cost estimates as the intensive development phase approaches. This occurs
because in the first stages of the system's development the factors relating to the
starting up of the processes of prototype and serial production of the functional
elenents are very strong and for this reason the prototypes for the functional

 

1
Fig. 4.5 considers the influence of factors which have a steady time trend. How-

ever the cost estimates are also influenced by factors the changes in which can be

step-like, cyclical, pulse or simply of a random nature. Thus, the real trends in
the cost estimates are much more complex.

173

FOI:0FFNJA[.USE(MVLY
FINICMNHCJAI.USE1ONLY

   

 
   

resources on ITS
development

savings of social labor

  
 
  

   

progress in operational
effectiveness characteris-
tics

 

macroeconomic factors

   
  
   
  
 

       
 

cost estimates for 818
fuctional elements

  

microeconomic factors

design. produc-
tion factors

 

elements of the new class of systems. with
other conditions being equal. have a

factors and design efficiency performance
become the determining ones.

 

Fig. 6.5. Hypothetical scheme for in the
forming the resulting trend J3 for the istics
cost estimates of the BTS elements:

JC(P;), JC(PE;), J (9:9, Jc(§h)“1nd¢*°5 organizational-economic factors and design
of cost estimates determined. respec- efficiency performance helps to reduce the
cively, by dynam1cs of funcc1on51 par— cost estimates, however the resulting trend
ameters, by the characteristics of the 18 I rising 00°-

design efficiency. by micro- and macro-
economic factors; JPf--lndex of func- A review of the general patterns in the

tiona‘ parameters; a--character13t1cs formation of 8T8 cost estimates makes it
of development processes for BIS possible to represent a model of the cost
elements; b--development phases of estimates in the following manner:

functional parameters for 818 elements

176

FORIDFFKJAL.USE¢MNLY
FOI.0FiﬁC1Al.lEHE(ﬂVLY

C" 2 2 "Icll(Fv Fun Fun F1", 0"" 20304- (4.2)

In! [-I

Fk1—-vector for design efficiency performance;
t-time elapsed since start of system's development.

From all that has been said it follows that in the most general instance a cost
forecast should be based on scientific-technical. socioeconomic and organizational-
economic forecasts. Considering that none of these forecasts can be compiled in
isolation from the others, as the effective factors are closely interlinked, the
cost forecast cannot be absolute. In other words it is possible to draw up a cost
forecast which considers changes in the operational effectiveness parameters only
for a completely definite combination of vectors which accumulate the influence of
the other factors, since each new combination of factors will determine its own
amount of the cost estimate.

Thus the cost estimate represents information of the following sort: event A can
occur with a certain probability. if event 3 will occur under the condition that
the occurrence of event 8 is accompanied by the simultaneous appearance of events
C, D, E and so forth. Since the number of combinations for the simultaneous satis-
faction of a multiplicity of conditions is incalculable, it is not hard to imagine
that very high degree of ambiguity which is encountered in forecasting value esti-
mates even for a short period of time. This ambiguity can be reduced only by
methods based upon a knowledge of the patterns in the formation of the cost esti-
mates during the developmental prehistory of the cost estimate object. In turn,
the establishing of firm patterns becomes possible with complete systematized in-
formation on the processes of the object’s scientific and technical development

.and actual resource consumption related to this development. However, the economic
forecasting tasks arise in the most different stages of ITS development, and for
this reason in forecasting one must frequently be content with information acquired
up to the time of the rise of the problem. The volume and nature of the initial
information also determine ultimately the existing differentiation of forecasting
methods for the cost estimates.

h.2. Basic Principles and Hethods for Forecasting Cost Estimates
4.2.1. The Choice of a Forecasting Hethod for Cost Estimates

The methods of forecasting cost estimates from the viewpoint of the principles of
forecast information generation can be divided into two large groups. In the first
group are the methods which are based upon the use of expert judgments for fore-
cating purposes, that is, the expert estimate method, while the second group in-.
eludes forecasting methods where the basic source of forecast information is a model
for the formation of cost estimates or interpolation and extrapolation methods

(Fig. a.6). It must be pointed out that the involvement of experts in the compiling
of cost forecasts is very useful when the second group of methods is to be used.

175

FOR OFTNCJAL USEICN'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

methods for forecasting 31's cost

estimates
expert estimate methods interpolation and
extra -lation nethods
apriori comparative time trend interpolation 8
(intuitive) analogy extrapolations extrapolation
methods methods statistical
aethods

   

point estimates

3
3 s
" to
O

u s
u H
> o
a ‘5'
3 s

ﬂ
0
H
3
3 o
u N
0 W
q 0
u H

regression

3.: 33'
n a
H ‘U
i 3

factor

     

Fig. 4.6. Classification of aethods for forecasting the
cost estimates depending upon sources of forecast
information

However, this does not disrupt the strictness of classification, since the role of
the expert is restricted to incorporating his corrections in that information which
"1.“ model produces. Thus, here it is appropriate to speak not about forecasting as

such but rather about increasing the reliability at the interpolation and extrapola-
tion forecast estimates.

In the general instance the choice of the forecasting method for the value estimates
is dict .ted by the considerations of forecast reliability and dependability. From
this viewpoint, the priority of the methods employed as a forecasting tool for the
model of the cost estimates is beyond any doubt. Bovever, their use is not always
possible, since in order to obtain the model there must be sufficiently representa-
tive information characterizing the develop-ant processes of the cost sstimate's
object. As was shown in Chapter 1 (see Fig. 1.6), any functional element in its
development passes through a series of sequential phases: the phase of embodiment
which precedes the appearance of the prototype; the initial phase of development
encompassing the period from the appearance of the prototype to the first example
used in a functioning system; the phase of intensive development characterized by
rapid growth of the element's functional parameters and its penetration into ever-
never system; the obsolescence phase characterized by a sharp drop in the growth

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rate of the functional parameters and this ultimately leads to the halting of scien-
tific research and development in the given area. Simultaneously with the object‘s
development there is the accumulation of information on the articles made or the
prototypes of the forecast object. This information includes data on the functional
characteristics of the prototypes, the design solutions corresponding to these char-
acteristics, the production processes, forms and methods of organizing development
and production, external factors and so forth.

The consolidated characteristics of the initial data about the cost estimate's ob-
ject and the contents of the typical value forecasts in comparison with the fore-
cast methods which are most characteristic for the listed development phases of sys-
tem functional elements are shown in Table 6.1. As is seen from the table, it is
necessary to resort to expert judgments based largely on expert intuition during the
phase preceding the appearance of the prototype, that is, when the general operating
principles of the system's element are known. Such a situation could arise, for
example, prior to the appearance of the first liquid-fuel rocket engine or the first
computer.

At this stage, only the principle for creating the thrust (for the liquid rocket
engine) or transforming information (for the computer) is known but in essence there
is not a single extant full-scale model of the new functional element. For this
reason the information on the new object is very meager as largely it involved re-
sults of theoretical and experimental research. In such an instance it is extremely
difficult to forecast the technical possibilities of the new device let alone a
cost forecast.

Either type of forecast can be nade only by experts and the soundness of such ex-
.perts will be very low. However, regardless of the probable occurrence of major
errors in the forecast estimates, under such circumstances no other alternative
simply exists. It is better to have a bad forecast than none at all.

The appearance of the prntotypes of new functional elements provides the researcher
with en0ugh information to markedly increase the forecast accuracy. At this stage
the basic functional parameters of the article are already known as well as the
particular features of design and the basic types of materials and production proc-
esses. The actual expenditures are very important information from the standpoint
of the cost forecast and would include the cost of the scientific research and de-
velopment carried out before the construction of the prototype, the cost of the
prototype, the cost structure and so forth.

Under these conditions, the forecast of the cost estimates for a system element
possessing new, higher functimal characteristics becomes more dependable. However,
it must be remembered that the first examples of new functional elements are only
the prototype of future articles, that is, the articles which will go into serial
production and operation and for this reason the ambituity of the forecast estimates

is still great.

Nevertheless. formalized methods can be employed for forecasting the cost estimates.
These are methods based on analogies or, as they are sometimes called, comparative
forecasting methods. The essence of these methods is that the production cost of
the nearest predecessor (prototype) of the cost forecast object is employed as the
initial base for forecasting. However the quantitative estimate of the indicators
which make up the forecasting tool is carried out by experts.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(M‘LY

uuuoaxu

_n_ accuse»
couuuauoucu
undocu0u

avauoaudo no mucus
uouulauoo uuonuﬂ

oduaﬁwuou
uuoaxo .o>«u«=ucu

7: 89:8.
wcuunnuou0u

n.c «ﬁnch

 

ucoaoao soaouu

locum no: «can: undue»-
uo «new: no uooo .N
.uuoaoHo

no oceanonoun chowuounm
wﬁauanwpouo you use
vduuuuu «Man: uo uuoo .H

ucoaomo Huaouuocsu a»:
mo acuuuuoao and nouuoav
noun asap-o mo uuoo .n
ucoaoao Haaouu

locum no: mo acquauano
van nouuoaeoum Huuuoo
u:«noao>ov uo uooo .N

unuaouo
aquoquocau so: hauquunun
now xson mo uooo .H

      
   

.m. nouuaquoo
uaoo no nouuuah0ucu
unsavuOu NO 0:00:00

ousuonhuo on“ can
Aconhuouounv onhuououn
wadusuoausnua no ounce .n
ouauosnuo nun
a omhuououn no noduoouo
ououon use vouuuao ucaano
|A0>¢u was zouaonou ouuau uneven ndwwuoavnu
Iguana no uaoo anuo< .N and on oahuou
auaauouul .ooo .IOun unuaouuonau
Inooohm nouuosvoun ouocn and mo oonduuonan
.aouauCOu nuanov .ououoa louulloacﬁa acne
Isaac Hucouuuuau ounce .H Iaouo>¢v Hauuucn
«Bough»
Awswuuunov unauuuoao
cu uauaouo Ha:o«uu==u
:0: maﬁa: noun uoouuu
co mauve Huuwcou .n
.uams on ado unusuao
H¢:0auu:=u 36: scans
:u nebuo>a no onhulnona
uo nonocno annuaaom .N
.uuo
.nonaoumu “wuzoauuonxo
a Hau«90uoosu uo newsman—
:o vuoop uoouuo Hanan:
wcuuuuuu mo ovosuua :«uu
uuoo .oounwosdun wuuuouu
locum Huuaaozoouwm>nm .H

nouns; uuoanvon
Iawv unauOuoua

uo oucwuooana
waavuuoun mousm

       

mommooou. _ uaoEOHo
unusa0u0>ov vaunno Hoaouuoaau
co uuwv Hauquouuaua man no nowusn
Houuwca mo uaouaoo ucoamoao>ov

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
oouaiquno
uuuaxo an“: vouua
naou nouuwnonouuud

dIOﬂUOﬂUQUI val Old?

      

ouuunuo
.ouooo:

    

   

savanna aouuauuoo uuonuu

              

       

avo;uoﬂ cannonsouao
noouuv .vosuul Ouui
tau-o uﬂuoa .UOSuoa
nauuau ﬂoanuo>ﬂou

Ivy-0:6».
.ouuoaxo

.uaovoz

  

  

ovosuaa o>«u
Iauomaoo .co«uuuoa
uuuuxo Haouuoauaum

     

  

coauoaonauuxu
ago

A.u.aoov H.c OHQIH

Hauuuuuuauo a cage Hanna» .zxcuz mo uuoo .

manna anaconda

mo n .N .u eunuch .n

oouuuquouocuun
nqcowuuuau no wound aouuoauOuuauos
udﬂﬂu cu accede ucdao dqaowuonsu cu anal:
non «How: we ucoo .N 0u uuuaua Haoauouooga .

usoaon

Hacoauousu no ouaau
Haowuuuoqsu cannon canon unsung co usa ouau

ou axon: no 0000 .H acuvououa ed a: «Bow .
nunoaou

ouuoaooo van aaouu ouauu
Iuoauo an ousuuauuo nausu
.nouauavuaaxu aaauu< .

      

Iona cupid cu
slam: mo and:
«man cu coauou
wanna mo uuauu
Baum away.
condo-oaonno

            
       

      

Hang-OH. d'gﬁuog

non occuusuoo and.»
osowun> uo a:0«u¢u0&

a hm .ﬂKOHz no 0000 .

         
 

nonuuuu

ova! no caduceuOuOIMIA
honououuuo :uaoon .
uauan

nau>ov a.uuonpc no auwo
now oowuuo omuuo «was a
uowuauuouuuuaso auaum .
couuwuoa

. vac Ammv aouuoavou

         

uuaoo coauqu«u«va= .
weaken coupon

unuuo mo uuuuo

         

              

         

unused unease .maOnz "woman 0» «Hove:

H~¢0ﬁuousu uo ao>u cacao ouua duo one Hauuuosvau
luauouua maﬁa: swan». w Iuovu: o>¢s sous: nuoonp and scum manna
cauuauono van coauoavou mo ouuwouwua cuauuu uuuaao~o>ov
uo nonunuuouoauwno .s o>uucouau
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As information is acquired on the object's development processes and the formation
of the cost estimates. an opportunity arises for establishing the regular changes
in the cost estimates under the influence of scientific and technical progress.

A mathematical model is constructed from these data and its describes the process
of forming the cost estimates and the interpolation and extrapolation calculations
are made depending upon the forecasting goals.

Interpolation and extrapolation forecasting methods can be employed in using two
types of models: models for the time dynamics of the resulting trend of the cost
estimates (see Fig. 4.5) and regression models which reflect the basic relations
between the cost estimates and the factors of their formation.

In the first instance it is assumed that the dynamics of the cost estimates are a
consequence of a self-developing process engendered by factors which are internal-
ly inheren: to the processes of scientific and technical development. The interac-
tion of the factors forming the resulting trend is considered to be a reaction to
the necessity of ensuring the required functional parameters with the least expend-
itures of social labor. For this reason the existing time trend for the cost esti-
mates can be a forecast tool. In the second instance an attempt is made to de-
scribe the process of forming the cost estimates using a model which would reflect
as fully as possible the relations of the cost estimates with the factors of each
group. Here it is assumed that quantitative relationships exist between the cost
estimates and the corresponding factors. In either instance the concept of the
inertia in the processes of forming the cost estimates is used. This means that the
relations observed in the past, that is. over the object's developmental prehistory,
will remain in the future.

Cost estimates can be forecast with a varying degree of detailing for calculations.
Depending upon the degree of detailing, forecasting methods are divided into aggre-
gated and differentiated (Fig. 4.7). The detailing of the calculations can aim at
two goals: increasing the accuracy of the forecast estimates or determining ex-
penditures according to the type of consumed resources.

In the first instance .he detailing is carried out in two areas: 1) the articula-
tion of the object into individual design elements (units, aszemblies or parts) and
2) the structurizing of the individual life cycle stages. It is assumed that de-
tailing in terms of design elements provides an opportunity to consider the influ-

ence of parameters which determine consumer value of the assemblies, units and
parts on their cost estimates (for example, the increased pressure in a compressor
or gas temperature ahead of a jet engine turbine). Structurization of the life
cycle stages makes it possible to reflect the influence of specific features of in-
dividual events in the life cycle on the cost estimates (for example, the breaking
down of the serial production process into three stages: preparation. starting up
and full serial production).

The forecasting of expenditures by resource types is carried out broken down for the
economic elements comprising the cost structure of the article. Here the cost of
the material, labor and other types of expenditures is determined. Each of the
designated varieties of the differentiated methods, in turn, is divided into two

types: methods for direct integration of the estimates and methods for a base
position or proportional ratios.

180

FOR OFFﬂﬂAl.USE1DNLY
FINICHHﬂCJAI.lEﬂ§(HVLY

methods for forecasting cost
estimates of BTS functional elements

l_____.

l aggregated I differentiated
by design elements by life cycle by economic
elements (events) elements

methods of direct methods of base position
estimate integration or proportional ratios

Fig. 5.7. Classification of forecasting methods for cost
estimates depending upon degree of calculation detail

 

The method of direct integration of the estimates envisages the direct totaling of
the cost estimates of each element in accord with the adopted structure of the func-
tional element, the life cycle stage or cost. The use of the base position

methods makes it possible to restrict oneself to forecasting the cost estimates

for the basic structural elements (for example, the basic assembly, the cost of

basic materials, the production costs of a prototype) and so forth. The cost
estimates of all remaining elements are determined from the ratio to the cost esti-

mate of the base position using the standard expenditure-structures. The base
position method is less accurate in comparison with the direct integrating methods
as the cost estimate structures are subject to significant changes. However, in
the absence of proper accounting of expenditures for all the elements, this method
can be useful, although for very approximate estimates.

Generally speaking the possibility of employing differentiated methods depends
largely upon the system for calculating the actual expenditures on the creation,
production and operation of the systems. Thus, if expenditures on manufacturing a
functional element are calculated as a whole for the article, then forecasting the
cost estimates in terms of design elements is excluded. Moreover, the use of difs
ferentiated methods entails the carrying out of cumbersome calculations and this is

not always justified by higher estimate accuracy. For this reason the aggregated
cost estimate forecasting methods have become most iidely used while the differen-

tiated calculations are widely used in planning.

From what has been said it follows that the choice of the forecasting method for
the cost estimates depends chiefly upon the scope and composition of initial infor-

mation about the object of the cost estimate. The reliability of the forecast
estimates depends largely on this.

181

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, it is essential to point out that the selection of the forecasting method
for the cost estimates can also be determined by the goals of the forecast research.
Thus, in solving the problems of choosing optimum system parameters and other char-
acteristics of development processes, the forecast model should reflect the link of
the cost estimates with each of the optimized characteristics. The constructing of
such a model requires the use of multiple regression and factor modeling methods
and this in and of itself, as we will see subsequently, involves the need to solve
a whole series of complex conceptual problems and carry out labor intensive and
cumbersome calculations. For this reason, in those instances when the influence of
an individual characteristic on the cost estimates is not major, for example. in
setting prices, determining the overall need for R&D financing and so forth, pref-

erence can be given to simpler methods which, in particular. would include the time
trend extrapolation methods.

Let us move on to a more detailed examination of the methods for forecasting the
cost estimates of BTS functional elements, paying basic attention to the analogy
and factor modeling methods. All the remaining methods of the designated classifi-
cation (see Fig. 4.6), from the viewpoint of the formal forecasting apparatus, in
no way differ from the methods which were described in Chapter 2.

6.2.2. Comparative Forecasting Methods of Cost Estimates

The comparative methods or the analogy methods are based upon a comparison of the
parameters for the object of the cost estimate with the parameters of its prototype
(hence the name of the methods). 0f greatest interest are two varieties of the com-
parative methods: the point estimate metho’ and the conversion factor method.

The essence of the point estimate method is that a unit of increase for a certain
functional parameter Pfi is given a cost number Cbi- here the forecasting of the
cost estimate for the object is carried out using the formula

n

c - cp+ 2c},1 Pfi, (4.3)

1-1
where CP--prototype production costs.
The cost number indicates by how much the production cost of a prototype can in-
crease if the functional parameter increases by one. The model of the point esti-
mate is formed using experts who assign a number to each parameter (for example,
according to a lOproint scale):

51*Pf1. bz'tpfz. ..., bn-Oan. (4.4)

The transition from the numbers to the cost number in the model (4.3) is carried
out by norming the point estimates

0
Chi ‘ b1 { b1. (4.5)
1-1

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWDR 0F1ﬂCJAI.lﬂﬂE(MVLY

The basic drawback of the method is that absolute parameter increases are used in
the model (6.3). As a consequence of this their dimensionality influences the
amount of the production costs. Here greater preference will be given to the param-
eters measured in absolute units in comparison with parameters measured in relative
units and this leads to significant distortions of the forecast estimates.

The most objective of the comparative methods is the conversion factor method. The
production cost of an object here is determined as the product of the prototype pro-
duction costs by the average conversion factor:

c - cpxpf. (4.6)

The mean conversion factor Kpf is determined by the particular conversion factors
from the prototype parameters to the parameters of the forecast object as weighted
in accord with the degree to which the parameter influences the amount of the cost
estimate.

The mean conversion factors can be expressed by linear and nonlinear models. Here
the model variables are represented in the form of either indexes or specific in-
crements. A linear model for the mean conversion factors with variables having the
form of indexes is determined by the expression

where B1--the weight factor considering the proportional (specific) influence of the
parameter in forming the cost estimate;
Kpf1--the particular conversion factor representing the ratio of the estimated
object's parameter to the prototype parameter:

x,“ - 9;; : ('5‘. (4.8)

A model employing proportional parameter increments is written thus:

.
1 GP“
10.,— | + 21"? . (6.9)

The weight factors which consider the influence of the parameters of the forecast
object on the cost estimates are determined by expert estimates. The total of the
weight factors in (10.7) and (4.9) should satisfy the condition 281 - l, as the

1
overall influence of the paraneters on expenditures is considered as one while the

contribution of each parameter to forming the cost estimates is measured in frac-
tions of a unit. In this regard in forming the model (b.7). there should be the
certainty that without exception all the parameters have been considered which in-
fluence the cost estimates. At the same time. in analyzing the model (4.9). it can
easily be noted that for the parameters close in size the product 81(APf1/Pf1) 8 0.

183

FOR OFIJCIAL USIZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This frees one from the need to examine the entire aggregate of parameters, since
the results of the forecast will be influenced only by the parameters which have
undergone a marked change. As a consequence, the number of parameters which must be

studied is sharply reduced and this can substantially simplify the expert estimate
procedure.

Thus, it can be stated that the proportional increment model is a particular case of
the model (4.7). However. its use in the form it is shown in (4.8) does not fully‘
eliminate the problem of narrowing the number of considered variables. For this
reason an important step which should precede the expert estimates is the isolating
of the base parameter which determines the overall level of expenditures on the
given type and purpose of functional element. Among such base parameters are. for
example, the weight of the element or other characteristics more closely linked to
its specific purpose (the weight of an aircraft, engine thrust, pulse power of a
radar and so forth).

The isolating of the base parameter makes it possible to move on to forecasting pro-
portional production costs, that is. the production costs of a unit of the base
parameter CPO. This transition in and of itself provides an important advantage,

as for a narrow class of articles the base parameter may not change substantially
and technical progress will be determined by the dynamics of qualitative character-
istics (for example, aircraft speed, specific engine fuel consumption, the sensi-
tivity of radio equipment and so forth).

The advantages of models using base parameters become particularly apparent if the
following model is used for analysis:

on me..(| + 2 a, 13L). (no)
I .

where P8--the amount of the base parameter for the cost estimate's object;
Cﬁo--the proportional cost of a unit of prototype base parameter.

In making the transformation. we obtain

. . . AP
cent», .1. pa, 2 9,77%. (4.11)
la! ll

From expression (4.11) it is seen that the object's production costs are made up of
two components. The first part is the production costs which depend upon the amount
of the base parameter Po and considers the amount of all the remaining parameters
which have played their role in forming the prototype production costs (the latter
is expressed in the amount Cio). The second part considers the change in prototype
production costs as a consequence of the dynamism of quality performance. From
this it follows that mistakes in setting the weights are reflected only in a part
of the cost estimate and namely the one which in the righthand part of (6.11) is
expressed by the second number of the total. It is natural to assume that with
other conditions being equal the accuracy of the models with the isolated base

parameter will be higher.

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1)R OF1HCJAI.USII(NULY

The designated models of conversion factors are based on the assumption that the re-
lation between the cost estimates and the characteristics determining them is close
to linear. At the same time, research has shown that the influence of a majority of
factors considered by conversion factors on the cost estimates is nonlinear and for
this reason linear models are better used with relatively small changes in the vari-
ables. Otherwise nonlinear ones must be used, for example. the multiplicative models
of the conversion factors:

K - K".
" Es "‘ (4.12)

The model (4.12) is linear but relative to the logs of the variables. Having logged
both parts of the equation, we obtain

log No, - 2‘9: '08 Kr” (4.13)

I.

As is seen from (4.13), the particular conversion factors are represented by the
logs of the parameter ratios and their significance has the sense of the weight
factors of the ratio logs. In this instance, it is essential to maintain the rule

It

2 1 - 1. As a whole it must be pointed out that the conversion factor method is
1-1
enticing in its simplicity and convincingness. However its successful application
depends largely upon the skill in setting the weights which reflect the contribution
of one or another characteristic in the process of forming the cost estiaates. The
total of the weights reflecting the influence of the designated factors on the cost
estimates should be equal to one. Under these conditions the problem comes down to
distributing the general influence of the factors taken as one among the individual
factors. Formally it must be established how much more strongly one factor influ—
ences the cost estimate in comparison with the others, that is, bring out the pri-
ority relationships between the factors.

of the presently known methods for establishing priorities, it is essential to men-
tion the methods of successive preferences [6] and paired comparisons [65] which

can be successfully applied for establishing weights in the conversion factor models.
The choice of one of them, as practice shows, can be made depending upon the number
of factors to be compared. With a rise in the number of factors to be co*.sred p,
the mentioned methods can be broken down into the following sequence: successive
preferences (Pé'6); paired comparisons (p>>6). Let us take up the essence of these

methods.

The successive preferences method provides a successive comparison of the expert
estimates considering the following assumptions: for each factor there is a cor-
responding real nonnegative number Y3 viewed as the estimate for the true signifi-
cance of the factor 01 (subsequently for simplicity of exposition by the term the
Oj factor we will understand its true significance); if the OJ factor is more im-
portant than 0k, then Y3 >yk, and if 03 equals 0k, then Y3 - Yk- The procedure of
successive comparisons consists of three stages.

185

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. The analyzed factors are ranked, that is, placed in the order of diminishing
preferences, and here rank 1 receives the most preferred factor and rank p the
least preferred. The most important factor is assigned a weight n - 1, while the
remaining factors receive estimates 71 between 0 and l in the order of their rela-
tive importance.

2. In the second stage the following is established: a) Is factor 01 more im-
portant than all the remaining factors, that is, a comparison is made of 01 with
02+03+...+op:

If 01 is preferable to 02+03 + +0p, it is essential to alter the significance
of 71 so that an inequality is met: n>n+13+...+yp;

If 01 and 02+03+ +0p are equal, then the significance of ‘11 must be altered so
as to meet the equality n- Y2+Ya+...+Yp;

If 01 is less preferable than 02+03+ +09, then a value of 71 is adopted so as
to meet the inequality 11 < Y2+Y3+...+YP;

b) Is the second in importance factor 02 with an estimate 72 more preferable than
all the remaining factors which have received lower estimates. that is. 02 is com-
pared with 03 + 0..+ +0P. Depending upon the results of the comparison, the
significance of 72 is corrected using the same rules as for Y]. The procedure of
successive comparisons is continued up to the (p-l) factor.

After this the entire procedure is repeated as the quantitative estimates obtained
in the first cycle for the significance of the factors cannot satisfy the initially

p-I -2
set priorities 0.: X o" 0.23:“ and so forth. Thus it may seem that with
541 (I)

p—‘I p -| p-‘I p-I
0.> ll; 0: 1'. < 31?. or with 0.< 2. 0m. s 2‘, 7, and so forth. In this regard.
he I'! “-3
there must be several iterations for matching the quantitative estimates for factor
significance and the established priorities and this extends the calculation pro-
cedure of the weight factors.

For simplifying the successive preference procedure, the comparison procedure can
be altered so that the comparison and reestimating of the factors are made in the
reverse order: initially t'.ere is a comparison of the factor 0p.2 with op.1+op,
then the factor 09.3 with 0944-09., +0P and so forth. The process is continued
until a comparison has been made of the factor 01 with 0 +03+ +0p. The use of
such a method makes it possible not to check the obtained results and this signifi-
cantly simplifies :he successive comparisons procedure.

3. The obtained preference estimates are normed. The normed preference estimates
can be used as weights in the conversion factor models.

The paired comparisons method consists in a paired comparison between two studied
factors so as to establish the more important factor in each pair. For facilitat—
ing this procedure, a paired comparisons matrix is drawn up and here all the factors

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1, 2, .... p) are written twice in the same order: in the top line and in the
extreme lefthand column as is shown in Table 6.2.

Table 4.2

 

Each expert who fills out such a matrix should put an estimate x1 at the intersec-
tion of the line and column for the two compared factors. Depending upon whether
factor 1 is more preferential than factor 3. this estimate equals 1 or 0, respec-
tively.

After each expert has filled out such a matrix, a second matrix is constructed show—
ing a percentage relationship of the instances when factor 1 was more important
than factor 3 in the total number of obtained estimates (Table 4.3).

The elements of the matrix given in Table 6.3 possess the property that A15 - m1j:m,
where mij--the number of experts who preferred factor 1 in comparison with factor 3;
m--the number of experts participating in the expert questioning. Thus. if the num-
ber of experts m . 10, and four experts preferred factor 1, then for A13 - 6:10, and,
respec;ively, six experts preferred factor 3, then 111 - 6:10, hence A131+A11 - 1.

After obtaining the generalized preference matrix the elements of which A1 repre-
sent the relative number of preferences for each pair of factors obtained from all
the experts. the estimates are then sealed. The procedure for constructing the
scale estimates consists in turning the observed ratios 111 into the most probable
ones :13. This transformation is made according to the formula

"J ‘0
I "1'
GUM-"MI" 3 y—ﬁ" 4" (4.11.)

where 211--the normed deviation of the observed share of instances of preferring
factor 1 to factor 1 from the true share [8].

187

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.3

 

factors fh°t°r'

series
total

'
' ﬂIll——=—- M
* ‘u "Mill—- ~
(I luliu ... ‘TIN
» - - ﬂ-l

Here A j is viewed as the area of the normed normal distribution from -- to 213.
The values of :1 comprise the basic transformation matrix with rows of numbers
for each factor i and columns of numbers for each factor 1 as is shown in Table 5.4.
In the given matrix, each estimate of 211 is the difference between the factor 1

and the factor 1 in the standard deviations and the total of these estimates
9

I: -" [2'qu while the mean value is

_ v‘ -
z. - gum. (4.15)

where p-the number of analyzed factor.

For each factor. from the mean value of 11, using the table for the normed normal

distribution in [8], C(21) is determined and on this_ basis the normed relative im-
portance coefficients as 1well. Here the estimate C(21) are totaled for all factors
and each estimate is divided by the obtained total:

- a - a
than.) Lama): 3.1M... (4.16)

The amounts necessary for calculating the relative importance coefficients can be
reduced to Table 4.5.

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R10F11C1ALIESEGMULY

Table 6.6

tive import-
factors smce coeffs. 2

 

The paired comparisons method, when the priorities are set using the estimates 1

and 0 assigned to the analyzed factors, requires the deviation significant estimates
in the opinions of the experts relative to the preferences set by them. Consider-
ing that the significance estimate presupposes a nornal deviation distribution,

such a procedure requires that an expert group which is sufficiently representation-
al in size be involved in the expert evaluation.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to certain data [6, 36], the number of experts should be at least 25.
This condition imposes a constraint on the possibility of using the paired compari-
sons method with the assigning of the extreme preference estimates (1, 0). For
this reason with an insufficient size of the expert groups it is possible to pro-
pose that the estimating of the weights in the conversion factor models be made
using preferences set according to a 10-point scale.

In this instance each expert fills out a matrix analogous to the one shown in

Table 4.6. only instead of the estimates 1 and 0, point estimates are set in the
table squares. Here, if a factor standing in line i. in comparison with the factor
standing in column j is considered more significant, then it is given an estimate
yij > S. Then the factor standing in column 3 is given the estimate yji - 10-3713.
Here the number of points are set in whole numbers. After carrying out the expert
evaluation. the table's data are generalized. For this the total number of points

I
is determined as set by expert k for each line i ‘AyII-J the total number of points

a r
set by expert k for each column j 2pm; the resulting total of points 2 J 9!]:-
l-l 0-] [-l

The weight coefficients set by expert It for each factor 1 are determined from the
following formula

“1-1 ’ (-11-: ' (4.17)

The mean statistical value of the weight coefficient, in being the indicator of the
generalized opinion of the experts, is determined from the formula

5. -3; tin/m. (a . 18)

As we see. the procedure for calculating the weight factors using a 10-point scale
is greatly simplified. At the same tine, the use of this method requires additional
procedures for establishing the reliability of the expert estimates as was pointed
out in Chapter 2.

The elucidating of the factor priorities from the standpoint of their impact on the
cost estimtes using the just described methods, in addition to the procedural
difficulties, entails also a number of logical and psychological difficulties. The
latter are determined primarily by the absence of cause-and-effect relations between
the factors and the cost estimates.

As was shown in Section 4.1, the operational effectiveness factors influence the
cost estimates of the system functional elements not directly but rather indirectly
through a multiplicity of intermediate characteristics. Thus, the operational ef-
fectiveness factors influence the design characteristics of functional elements and
the physical properties of the employed materials. The latter determine the state
of the production processes. the means and implements of labor and this, in turn,

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
influences the labor intensiveneas of the work, the skill level of the workers em-
ployed in these jobs, the cost of the employed means and implements of labor, mater-
ial intensiveness and so forth. Only the last group of characteristics has a direct
influence on the amount of the cost estimates. Under these conditions the attempt
with expert help to set the influence of one or another functional characteristic of
a system’s element on its cost estimates is directly tied to the necessity of over-
coming the ambiguities concerning the multiplicity of intermediate links, their in-
teraction and reciprocal influence. The following circumstance must also be pointed
out. Due to the hierarchical nature of the functional structure of technical sys-
tems. the design characteristics and the properties of the employed materials in the
functional elements are determined not only by the parameters of the elements them-

selves but also by the parameters of the higher level element in which the given
system is a subsystem.

In addition, a number of design and materials characteristics can be determined by
the influence of functional parameters in the elements of the same hierarchical
level as the cost estimate's object. This necessitates the creating of an informa-
tion basis and the elaborating of special procedures for an expert estimate of the
weights in the conversion factor models. Obviously the information basis which
precedes the expert evaluation should be an hierarchical system of interrelated
characteristics which reflects the mechanism of influence of the employed factors

191

Ftﬂl(”ﬁﬁ(]Al.lﬂﬂE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the cost estimates through all the intermediate characteristics. In having such
a system it is possible to organize a step-by-step expert evaluation, in estimating
in sequence the priorities between the factors which are on the given level in re-

Here for the estimates on each level or several adjacent levels for which the esti-
mates involve the solving of kindred problems. independent expert groups can be set
up. Each such group will consist of experts from one or two related specialties and

the method of disclosing the priorities since the number of estimated factors, like
the number of experts in each individual instance, will not be constant.

As is seen from the diagram, on the first and second levels of the hierarchy there
are characteristics of the technical system in which the assessed functional element
is a subsystem. Here it is shown that the design characteristics of a functional
element and the properties of the employed materials are determined not only by the
technical, operational and functional characteristics of the element but also by the
system's analogous characteristics. Then the diagram shows the successive influ-

(for example, the method of obtaining stock, the machining method, the method of
connecting the elements and so forth). The designated characteristics of the produc-
tion processes, in turn. are related to the basic expenditures which determine the
production cost of a unit of the base parameter for the functional element.

disclosing the specific influence of the upper level characteristics on the infer-
ior level characteristics for all interrelated groups. Here the general influence
of one or several upper level characteristic groups on each group of the related
lower level characteristics should equal one. It is not hard to see that all the

characteristics are interrelated by cause-and~effect ties and this sharply reduces
the degree of ambiguity on the intercausality of the factors.

In addition, the link between any two groups of factors can be established by an

isolated independent expert group. The latter provides an opportunity to set up the
necessary number of uniform expert groups, each of which will consist of the repre—
sentatives of related specialties. Thus, the relationship between the functional
characteristics of the system and the element can be set by specialists in systems
theory; the relations between the functional and design characteristics and the
physical properties of the employed materials will be set by designers; the rela-
tion between the physical and production properties of the materials by production
engineers and so forth.

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 
  

 

    
    
    

    

qumam Mum
. uuwmmnnxauv tapvunuwwcmvaa xenmusauanmms
’Ilntnmﬂ I. swam 6 mm

L- me "sum-mu HI
III-ml 7 :annnma
I Ouuucnw u "may:
8 charm saucepan»!

remand - JI- Mayan: -

   
    

 
 
    

16 (smegma. mama» W Mug

Fig. 4.8. Influence graph of operational effectiveness factors
on cost estimates

Key: l--0perational effectiveness factor; 2-System's technical
and operating characteristics; 3--System's functional
characteristics; 4-Technical and operational character-
istics of element; 5-Functional characteristics of element;
6--Strength characteristics of element; 7—Design charac-
teristics of element; 8~-Physi:al and chemical properties
of materials; 9--Characteristics of production processes;
lO--Technological properties of materials; ll-Labor in-
tensiveness; 12-worker skill level: l3-Cost of materials;
14--Consumption of materials; lS--Labor and material ex-
penditures; 16-Production cost of a functional element
for system

The organizational difficulties of conducting such an expert evaluation are appar-
ent. however there obviously is no other reasonable alternative for constructing tt
conversion factor models. At the sane time the conversion factor models are a very

valuable and at times irreplacable economic forecasting tool since, as a rule, the
number of the characteristics of the technic~l systems influencing their cost esti-
mates is great while the number of prototypes comprising the initial statistical

193

FOR 0FTWC]AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aggregate in the majority of instances is insignificant. This circumstance imposes
constraints on the possibility of constructing the statistical dependences which
will be taken up in the following section.

4.2.3. Interpolation and Extrapolation Methods for Statistical Dependences

environment. The task usually is to disclose these ties, to select the main factors
out of the multiplicity of them. to localize the ties which cannot be estimated
quantitatively and to coordinate the entire aggregate of determining factors by a
mathematical model which would reflect the basic patterns of the studied phenomenon.
The models which satisfy these requirements have been named the mathematical eco-

nomics cost models and at present are the basic forecasting tool for the cost esti-
mates .

The essence of forecasting using the mathematical economics cost models is that by
the statistical dependences which reflect the influence of the indicators of inter-

termined when the indicators assume new values different from those which were ob-
served in the initial statistical aggregate. Here, if the new value of the indi-
cator does not go beyond the limits of the observed range of changes, the forecast
is of an interpolation nature. Otherwise the set statistical dependence between

the cost estimate and the changeable indicator is extrapolated for its new values.

evolve. However in the problems of optimizing the BTS parameters, the need arises
also for interpolation calculations. if the optimization process is carried out
under a certain compromise scheme. In this instance, the optimal variation of a
system can include functional elements the individual parameters of which will be
somewhat below the parameters of the nearest prototypes. In order to assess the

expenditures on such functional elements, an interpolation of the statistical de-
pendences is employed.

The mathematical economics cost models can be of two types. The model can be repre-
sented by one general multiple regression equation reflecting the influence of the
entire aggregate of factors simultaneously. This is the simplest method of model-
ing the cost estimates and it provides very rough forecasts. More dependable fore-
casts are achieved by employing composite, mixed models based upon factor modeling
of the cost estimates. The factor modeling method consists in modeling the influ-
ence of the individual groups of related factors on the cost estimates separately

in accord with the place, time and nature of this influence. The thereby obtained
local models or submodels are brought together according to definite rules into the
overall mathematical economics model.

The use of factor modeling methods becomes possible with a sufficiently full and
representative amount of statistical information encompassing the various aspects
in the developmental process of the cost estimate's object over large intervals of

194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time. Since these conditions are not always feasible, at times one must resort to
multiple regression equations.

At the same time it is essential to point out that regardless of what the final form
is for showing the mathematical economics model of the cost estimates or the form of
the multiple regression equation or composite model, the modeling of the cost esti-
mates must start by dividing the general process of forming the cost estimates into
individual fragments, the elucidation of the composition of influencing factors and
the establishing of quantitative indicators reflecting the influence of the factors
on the cost estimates.

For this reason the constructing of one or another mathematical economics model for
cost estimates must be carried out according to a general scheme (Fig. 4.9). The
entire sequence of events represented in the basic block diagram for modeling the
cost estimates can be divided into a series of independent stages: logical modeling
(blocks 1-2). the forming of the initial information file (block 3), logical-
statiatical analysis or selection of influencing factors (blocks 6-5), mathematical
modeling (block 6), forecasting (block 7) and forecast verification (block 8).

The logical modeling stage envisages the carrying out of preliminary research aimed
at showing the possible states of the cost estimate's object, the stages of its
life cycle and of the environment. In this stage a logical scheme is constructed
making it possible to compile a general notion about the formative mechanism of the
cost estimates under the influence of the developmental processes.

The logical modeling of the states of the cost estimate's object (block 1.1) is car-
ried out in the following sequence: the class of systems is established which are
to include the cost estimate's object; the system prototypes are selected which are
identical in terms of their basic purpose and performed functions; the system is de-
composed with a model being constructed for the internal structure and the place and
role of the object in the process of the system's functioning are determined; the
parametric series of the object's prototypes is set; the basic functional character-
istics of the object, their internal and external relations are set; the object is
decomposed with its schematic diagram, composition and purpose of the basic struc-
tural elements and other design characteristics being determined; the relations are
established between the basic functional and design characteristics; the object's
model is constructed showing its structure. internal and external relations.

In analyzing the functional characteristics, particular attention must be paid to
their ties with the elements of the same and adjacent hierarchical levels of the
system. This is essential for fully encompassing the factors which influence the
development of the cost estimate's object, as the latter is often determined pre-
cisely by the external relations. It is very important to trace how these relations
influence the design characteristics as the design features of the object ultimately
have a direct impact on the cost estimates (see Fig. 0.8). The logical modeling of
the studied life cycle stage of the cost estimate's object (block 1.2) includes a
solution to the following basic problems: constructing a model for the internal
structure of the process and reflecting the basic developmental stages of the object
in the given life cycle stage; the establishing of the basic characteristics in the
state of the processes inherent to the given stage and their quantitative estimate;
constructing a logical model reflecting the reciprocal influence of the state char-
acteristics of the life cycle stage.

195

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I II [mung-me Whaupokml cat-nun 0M“! pull-ml I I
U. Maul-Mm- m mm «cm- I. 1 Wm
um tumor-nu ‘IH ri I. ,
m

2. Mutual” no “a” one 4'90““.
CWUIOGIIIIAM Dunno

II. Mann-u 2). m_ 1.0“
”I'm an,—
‘ ' ' min

0 i
5 "Wm" "3.. .zzz‘r'::.::..:m~' ”waxwmw m

um :2 NW . -
own '1th cm:

Q. lumw- cncmucmuucu’ on u alnnn'pucnln
0 nor“ pl: '0'”.

 
 

    

  

’ODIIIDO llllll

 

 
 

61. Ann: («m-n - 02 MAI: ﬁrm I 4.). Can: we a
M taut-Mila- “II-W It
uni-um We“ can lav—rum

hav-o- -cnumutmuvnuuu vulva nqun‘tl coruupo- ml Ilium-nu
"no. pl. ham-n W

' “M H mm-
_m L‘"'::’:L. I...“ am
.M mu"
0. lap-lulu :uuun- nan-annealed mien
{lo-Magnum Douala

“a“ ", _,_~_N_ «Inn-bu. nah-v. “~W :00»

 

M”. p, .‘n. .m (‘m‘muar‘ (m 0.0-—
(Na-.4 yaw. ‘ 'rmww‘w c count-Ic-
: Wan-lac " "':"""‘ , unlu-

dunm we nun: -

H (MI: W Inc-- M
l I ’ " ' ‘ I (“Wan-ﬁn]

 

   

l I Juno-Mn u "NM"

ﬂcpupvacuul

    

    

 

opoouoaol

   

Fig. 4.9. Basic elements in a block diagram for
modeling and forecasting cost estimates for the BTS functional elements

[See the key on following page.]

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJA1.USEIDNLY

[Key to Fig. 4.9 on preceding page]

l--Logical modeling of state of development processes; l.l-Hodaling state
of cost estimate object; l.2-Hodeling state of stage of object's life
cycle; l.3-Hodeling state of environment; 2--Logical modeling of forma-
tive process of cost estimates; 2.1-Hodeling influence of object's
characteristics; 2.2--Hodeling influence of characteristics of stage;
2.3--Modeling influence of environmental characteristics; 2.h--Hodeling
combined influence for characteristics of developmental processes;
3--Porming the fiLe of statistical information on the developmental
prehistory of the cost estimate's object; 3.l-Determining information
sources; 3.2--Elaborating forms of information carriers; 3.3-Collection
and systematization of information; 3.4-Assessing reliability and uni-
formity of information; 3.5-Correcting and adjusting information;
lo—Logical-statistlcal analysis of characteristics in developmental
process; 6.l--Ana1ysis of state and development of object's character-
istics; 4.2--Analysis of state and development of characteristics for

life cycle stage; 6.3-Analysis of state and development of environmental
characteristics; 5--Logical-statistical analysis of formative process of
cost estimates (selection of influencing factors); 5.l--Research on in-
fluence of state characteristics of life cycle stage; 5.2-Research on
influence of environmental characteristics; 5.3-Research on influence

of object's characteristics; 5.4-Research on combined influence of
characteristics of developmental processes; 6--Elaboration of mathemati-
cal economics model of cost estimate; 6.l--Elaboration of model reflecting
relation of cost estimates with object's characteristics (first submodel);
6.2--Elaboration of model reflecting relation of cost estimates to char-
acteristics of object and life cycle stage (second submodel); 6.3-Blabor-
ation of model reflecting relation of cost estimates to characteristics

of object, life cycle stage and environment (integral model); 6.k-Analy-
sis of models and setting of constraints on change in variables; 7-Fore-
casting of cost estimates; 7.l-Extrapolation and interpolation of depend-
ences; 7.2-Setting of confidence intervals for forecast estimates;
8-Verification of forecasts

The internal structure model of the process characterizing the designated life cycle
stage should have sufficient detailing in order to isolate the permanent elements

in the process which do not depend upon the properties and particular features of
the cost estimate's object or upon the elements the composition of which varies
from object to object. This will make it possible subsequently to isolate from the
total expenditures that portion which is most related to the change in the charac-
teristics of the cost estimate's object.

The logical modeling of the state of the environment (block 1.3) envisages the fol-
lowing: establishing the sources and nature of the external effects; establishing
the characteristics of the state of the sources and a quantitative estimate of
these characteristics; constructing a model which shows the links of the environ-
ment with the characteristics of the developmental processes. These problems are
solved separately for the cost estimate's object and the stages of its life cycle.
Such a dividing makes it possible to form a clearer notion of the mechanism of the
environment's influence on the cost estimates. This ultimately facilitates the
choice of the indicators which reflect this influence in constructing the cost
model.

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The concluding phase of the logical modeling stage is the constructing of a hypo-
thetical model for the forming of the cost estiutes in each life cycle stage of
the system's functional element (block 2). For this purpose one first constructs
isolated models (blocks 2.1, 2.2, 2.3) each of which reflects the influence dis-
closed in the previous stages on the cost estimates for the characteristics of the
object, the life cycle stage and the environment.

As a result of uniting these models. an integral model is constructed for the form-
ing of the cost estimates (block 2.4). The integral model should not be the mere
total of the isolated models. In constructing it it is essential to consider the
interrelations between the characteristics of the different groups of factors in
forming the cost estimates.

Regardless that the integral model is to a certain degree approximate it serves as
a good basis for further research. Using it it is possible to establish a prelim-
inary list of problems which the researcher will encounter in the process of con-
structing the cost model. Most importantly, the logical modeling stage makes it
possible to draw up a list of characteristics from which it is possible to start
forming the statistical information file on the developmental prehistory of the cost
estimate's object.

The formation of the file of initial statistical information (block 3) is an intera-
tion process with a direct link and feedback with all subsequent modeling stages.
This stage consists of a number of repeating operations: determining the informa-
tion sources, working out the forms of information carriers, the collection and
systematization of information, assessing the reliability and uniformity of the in-
formation, its correcting and the clarification of the block (3.1-3.5).

The iterative nature of the process of forming the data file is explained primarily
by the fact that the logical modeling makes it possible to obtain only a rough
sketch of the scheme for forming the cost estimates. As a consequence of this, the
data content corresponding to the initial list of characteristics is subsequently
adjusted as the research is' deepened. horeover. such operations as assessing the

reliability and uniformity of the information can be carried out only in the process
of statistical analysis or in constructing the cost models. Due to the designated

factors the formation of the initial information file can be considered complete
after the final variation of the model is obtained.

In the general instance the file of initial statistical information is a time-
systematized series of prototypes for the system's functional element each of which
has its corresponding actual cost estimates, functional and design parameters, as
well as characteristics of the studied life cycle stage and the environment. The
designated characteristics reflect the state of the developmental processes for the
cost estimate's object over the examined period of its prehistory. In possessing a
sufficiently representative series of state characteristics it is possible to move
on to studying the process of forming the cost estimates.

However. it is advisable beforehand to carry out a logical statistical analysis
of the very characteristics of the state of the object's developmental processes
(block 4), bearing in mind the realization of the following basic goals: estab-
lishing the integral quantitative indicators which accumulate the influence of the
corresponding group of characteristics on the cost estimates; dividing the overall

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
aggregate of characteristics into dynamic which have certain time trends and the
stationary; the static which are not related to the developmental processes; the
continuous and the discrete. The first is essential in order to narrow the range
of examined indicators and to level out the existing contradictions between the in-
dividual characteristics; the latter is required in order to clarify the basic
tasks and to choose the research methods.

The integral indicators can be obtained directly by the correlation and regression
analysis methods (see Section 2.5) and on the basis of expert estimates. In the
latter instance the integration of the characteristics can be attained by employing
estimates for the relative weights of the individual characteristics. Here two
methods can be employed for constructing the integral indicators: additive and mul-
tiplicative. In the first instance the integral indicator's model has the form of
the weighted total of the individual characteristics:

I
P: ' ‘2' “(P10 (10. 19)
in the second. a weighted product
OI
P .. h
‘ 2.”: (5.20)

where p1--the normed value of characteristics 1;2
81--the relative weight of characteristics 1 in the process of forming the

cost estimates (£1 has I).

For obtaining the integral indicators it is essential that the synthesized charac-
teristics be expressed using a finite number of quantitative measurements. How-
ever. in a number of instances the state characteristics of the developmental proc-
ess reflect purely qualitative features which cannot always be reflected by a finite

number of quantitative estimates. Moreover, it is essential to bear in mind that in
forecasting the cost estimates on the basis of integral indicators. the need arises
of compiling forecasts for each synthesized characteristic. This can cause insur-
mountable difficulties if special models and methods are not worked out for fore-
casting the individual state characteristics of the developmental processes. For
this reason under certain circumstances, for simplifying the procedures of cost es-
timate forecasting. unformalired methods can be used for choosing the integral in-
dicators. These methods are based upon the proposing and subsequent checking of the
logical hypotheses about the relationships of the individual characteristics and
their impact on the cost estimates.

In using the unformalized methods for synthesizing the characteristics. the use of
the following basic rules can be helpful: the movement from cause to effect, since

2One of the possible methods for norming the characteristics is given on page 109.

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0FT1C1AI.US£‘DNLY

the latter can be determined quantitatively; the movement from effect to cause if
the same conditions are satisfied; the choice of indicators which determine certain
states of the examined processes but are not related to the latter by cause-and-
effect ties; the localization of the influence of factors which cannot be estimated
quantitatively by the creation of isolated models; the establishing of indicators
for adjusting the models. Let us illustrate the use of these rules in the given
sequence using specific examples.

The characteristics of the state of the environment (block 1.3, Fig. é.9) in which
the macroeconomic factors belong, include: the level of the material and technical
base of the national economic sectors; the industrial and national economic manage-
ment system; the level of specialization and cooperation, the structure and prin-
ciples for locating the industrial sectors.

In the process of developing the BTS, all factors progress, that is, the material
and technical base of the sectors is improved. new highly productive equipment and
new production processes are introduced, the level of automation and mechanization
rises, the forns of the organization of production and labor, the management levels
and so forth are improved. In accord with the changes in domestic and foreign
policy, the state confronts the national economy with new tasks the implementing of
which necessitates a reorganization of the management system. New industrial sec-
tors arise, while the forms of specialization and cooperation, the structure of the
sectors, the principles of their location and so forth change.

A quantitative estimate for the state of even one aspect of this process would re-
quire the use of more than a score indicators. Even in this instance there would
be no absolute certainty that all the particular features of the influence of these
factors on the cost estimates had been considered. The elaboration process and the
assessing of the adequacy of the integral indicator's model require a great deal of
time and effort and the model is obsolete before it has been obtained.

Moreover, its use for forecasting purposes will be of dubious value as it is essen-
tial to elucidate the state of the entire aggregate of indicators over the fore—
casted period and this requires the presence of forecast models for each indicator.
At the same time. a change in the macrovariables can have a noticeable impact on the

forecasting results of the cost estimates even over a short period of time. The way
out of this situation can be found if one expresses the influence of the macroeco-

nomic factors by the consequences of those processes the action of which they re-
fleet.

The processes of scientific and technical development in the national economic sec-
tors lead to a rise in social labor productivity and this ultimately is expressed in
a decline in the cost of industrial products. Consequently, the introduction of an
indicator for the reduction of costs into the general mathematical economics model
will make it possible indirectly to consider the effect of the macroeconomic factors
on the cost estimate level in the forecasting. Thus, the action of the factors
which act as a cause of a certain process can be considered by using an indicator
which reflects the consequences of this process.

The use of the second rule is characteristic for modeling a process involving a
change in the cost estimates under the influence of the design features of BTS

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFTTC1AI.USE(NVLV

functional elements. Among the design features, for example, one could put: the
geometric shapes of the design elements, the mechanical properties of the employed
materials, the classes of precision and roughness in piece working, the design
scheme of the article and so forth. Each of the designated characteristics reflects
a certain aspect in the mechanism of forming the cost estimates. However, a whole
series of characteristics reflects the quality features of the object and cannot be
expressed by a finite number of quantitative measurements. Where this is possible,
their number is extremely great. From this it follows that the attempt to synthe-
size such characteristics encounters as many difficulties as was the case with the
environmental characteristics. At the same time, if one turns to the factors which
determine the need for various design solutions, one will see that they are com-
pletely caused by the characteristics of system operational effectiveness.

Thus, an increase in the payload of a passenger aircraft involves an increase in its
overall dimensions and design weight. If constraints are imposed on these character—
istics, then the need arises for using lighter and stronger elements making it pos-
sible to increase the effective volume of the cargo and passenger cabins. This, in
turn, involves a rise in the mechanical properties of the structural materials, it
complicates the configuration of the design elements and so forth. In precisely the
same way an increase in aircraft speed requires the use of heat-resistant high-
alloyed steels and alloys, a change in the geometric shape, the complicating of
aircraft systems and so forth.

Thus, if an aircraft's basic functional characteristics are incorporated in its cost
model, one can thereby establish the influence on the cost estimates of the design
features which are the consequence of a change in the functional characteristics.

The third of the formulated rules for selecting the indicators is widely employed in
analyzing the microeconomic factors. With the overall development level of the
material and technical base, specialization, concentration and cooperation of the
serial-production and developing enterprises, the state of the production processes
for the functional elements is largely determined by the scale of their serial out-
put.

For example, with a high general level of mechanization for the production processes
at a specific enterprise, the mechanization level for the manufacturing processes of
the cost estimate's objects can be below the average due to the small scale of out-
put. The larger the scale of output for the functional elements the more preferred
it is to deepen specialization, increase the level of automation. the equipping of
the production processes and so forth.

Thus, the scale of production, without being linked to the designated factors by
cause-and-effect ties, determines the possible states of the production processes for
the individual subsystems. Consequently, the incorporation of indicators for the
output scale into the model will make it possible to reflect the impact of the cor-
responding group of factors on the expenditures level when the modeling of the ef-
fect of their direct indicators causes certain difficulties.

If the influence of the individual factors is only qualitative, it is possible to re-
sort to isolated models. This is how they proceed when one functional element com-

bines the functions of several special elements in the system. For example, a

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

booster-cruise engine combines the functions of the take-off and main engine. with
the same characteristics such a combined engine will differ from an ordinary cruise
engine in a number of design and technological features and many of these features
cannot be given a uniform quantitative estirite. In this instance, a mathematical
economics model is worked out separately for each engine subclass: lift-off, cruise
and booster-cruise.

The last of the named rules is employed in those instances when the influence of the
factors is a discrete one, that is, certain conditions influencing the structure and
level of the cost estimates change in abrupt shifts. Thus, in converting to the new
planning and economic incentive system adopted by the September Plenum of the CPSU
Central Committee in 1965, there were changes in prices for many types of raw prod-
ucts and materials, the sources and forms of paying bonuses to industrial workers
and so forth. In this instance the mathematical economics models obtained on the
basis of retrospective l'formation and encompassing the period preceding the change-
over of the enterprises to the new system would not be able to reflect the particu-
lar features of that period for which the cost forecasts were being made. From this
viewpoint, forecasting accuracy could be increased by incorporating in the model cor-
rection factors which would consider the corresponding changes in the cost estimate
structure.

From what has been stated it can be seen that the stage of selecting the quantita-
tive indicators which reflect the influence of factors that determine the basic form-
ative patterns of the cost estimates is linked to carrying out profound comparative
and semantic analysis of information about the actual expenditures. to studying the
particular features of the extant prototypes of the object and to studying the
organizational-economic conditions of their creation, production and operation as
well as the environment characteristics. The results of this complex of research
are represented by a set of hypotheses on the nature of the impact of the designated
factors on the cost estimates. The advanced hypotheses require an experimental
verification.

The hypotheses are verified by the methods of mathematical statistics and probabil-
ity theory. This stage is called selecting the influencing factors (block 5). Be-
low we give the procedure for selecting the influencing factors for constructing
cost estimate models in the form of multiple regression equations.

The choice of the influencing factors consists in establishing a certain range of
quantitative indicators which during the prehistory period of the object's develop-
ment had a determining influence on the process of cost estimate formation. Here
it is assumed that the prototypes of the functional element represent a particular
selection from a certain general aggregate of elements the_sta£e characteristics of
which are distributed normally relative to their averages X1, x2, 2...2xp, and Ehat
the spread of these properties can be described by the variances 01' oz, ..., a ,
where p--the number of indicators describing the entire aggregate of studied stgte
characteristics.

If the expenditures in ths general aggregate are distributed normally with the aver-
age X] and the variance 01: then the essential influence is considered to be the one

of that indicator out of the total set X2, X3, ...2 XP_1. the variance of which ex-
plains a certain portion of the general variance 0]. however due to the absence of

202

FOR 0F11(1A[.USEZONLN
FOI:OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

data on the general aggregate, under real condition! ens operate: with the estimates
of the averages i1, i2, ..., Eb and the variances $1, $2, ..., Sp calculated on the
basis of sampling data.

In this regard an estimate is introduced for the easentialness of the observed sta-
tistical relations. that is, an estimate of to what degree the relationships estab-
lished on the basis of sampling research reflect the state of the general aggregate.

The estimates of essentialness or reliability are made with a certain predetermined
degree of confidence in the correctness of the advanced hypotheses. This confidence
is expressed numerically by the probability that our estimates will be within the
limits of a certain confidence interval the width of which depends upon the amount
of the mean square deviation S. the size of the sampling n and the set probability
7. and does not depend upon the shape of the distribution curve of the sampling data

[30]. In particular, the true mean of the general aggregate is estimated by the in-
terval

X—I,VS:<X<X-H9733. (4.21)

where --the criterion for estimating the significance of the random value i with
the as level of fiduciary probability GP) and the number of degrees of freedom v -
[1-1.

Formula (6.21) is read as follows: with a probability equal tgd’, it is possible to
assert that the mean general aggregate x is within the limits x: qp(S//;). The use
of the significance estimate criteria plays a large role in studying the process of
expenditure formation as it makes it possible to isolate the regular from the random.

Before moving on to an estimate of the quantitative effect of the indicators chosen
on the basis of preliminary analysis, it is essential to make certain that the exam-
ined aggregate of objects is uniform from the viewpoint of the quality features

which can he described by quantitative indicators. For example, it is essential to
establish how much the cost estimates are influenced by the design and production
features caused by the combining of the functions of lift-off and cruise engines into
one propulsion unit. In formal terms it is essential to answer the question: are
the lift-off. cruise and booster-cruise engines a part of a general overall aggre-
gate from the viewpoint of the influence of their design and production differences
on the level of the cost estimates?

Since each of the designated engine varieties is characterized by certain expendi-
tures. the task is to disclose how essential is the difference between the expendi-
tures on each engine group. For these purposes we can employ the method of estimat-

ing the differences between average values [30].

The essence of this method is in testing the hypothesis that the two independent
particular aggregates with a volume nl and n2 have_baen taken from the same normally
distributed general aggregate having a mean value x and a variance 2?. If this is
the case, then the difference between the particular values x11 and x12 should not
differ substantially from zero. This so-called zero hypothesis is tested with the
Student criterion t:

203

FOR OFFICIAI.USE‘0NL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

geﬂeﬂtlfﬁuy. _ ($.22)

where in and Ely-average expenditures for each of the compared engine groups;
s--square root of the full estimate for the variance of the differ-
ence 711 and in.

The criterion t? is found from tables with a umber of degrees of freedom v -

n1 +n2 -2. If the condition of (5.22) is not satisfied, it follows from this that
the influence of the design and production features of the compared engine varieties
on the cost estimates is so great that their joint study can lead to distorted ideas
about the influence of the remaining factors on the cost estimate formation process.

In addition to the described method, similar problems can be solved using rank cor-
relation aethods (see, for example, [67]).

The correspondingly grouped prototype aggregates for the cost estimate object are
subsequently studied for the purpose of establishing the quantitative ties between
expenditures on each stage of their life cycle and the quantitative indicators re-
flecting the influence of the individual groups of factors.

The relation between expenditures and any indicator reflecting the influence of one
or a certain aggregate of factors is established by paired correlation coefficients
for linear relations and by correlation indicea if the relation is nonlinear (2.84).
In the latter instance it is also possible to use a correlation coefficient but with

the stipulation that the natural variables are replaced by their nonlinear functions
(see Section 2.5.2).

The significance of the correlation coefficients and indexes is estimated from (2.86)
or (2.87). If the conditions of (2.86) and (2.87) are satisfied, the influence of
the given indicator on expenditures is considered significant. However, under real
conditions one must deal not with one but with seVeral indicators. Here it is es-
sential to bring out which of the designated indicators has had a significant is—
pact on the expenditures during the prehistory period of the system's development.

The basic difficulty in solving this problem is that between the indicators them-
selves there are definite ties called a covaristion of variables [47]. Thus, there
is a relation between the speed and range of an aircraft, the weight and power of a
radar, the specific thrust and specific weight of an engine and so forth. In all
instances it is important to determine to what degree one or another indicator in-
fluences the expenditures if the remaining ones are fixed. For this purpose a par-
tial (pure) correlation coefficient (or index) is used:

p.

I" "‘ 4.8.4.43) .

...U- I

’n.so...s "' "M"- ’ " '
V0 -' lp.8...(0*")

where “2.3... , . p--partial correlation coefficient between indicator x1 and x2 with
x3, x“, ..., xp as constant.

         

     

(6.23)

The partial correlation index is employed in the case of nonlinear relations and is
figured using the same formjla under the condition that the variables are expressed
by the corresponding functions.

20!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The significance estimate for a partial correlation coefficient or index is carried
out using the Fisher 2 ceiterion

_1_ Hr. -
"NW—71:33?“

(6.24)

with degrees of freedom u - n- 2- (p- 1) [67].

This criterion makes it possible to select out of a multiplicity of indicators those

the influence of which on expenditures are determining and to begin to construct
multiple regression equations (block 6).

For modeling cost estimates it is possible to use linear and nonlinear multiple re-
gression equations of the sorts (2.119)-(2.122). Thus, cost estimate modeling neces-
sitates the choice of a form of relation between the variables.

The nonlinearity of a majority of dependences between the cost estimates and the
factors of their formation is a general logical prerequisite for choosing the type
of mathematical economics cost model. This is due, in particular, to the existence
of sensitivity thresholds in the cost estimates to a change in individual indicators.
For example, an increase in the production scale of functional elements leads to a
decline in their production cost. However the rate of this decline is not con-
stant, since however great the scale of output costs always maintain a certain value
which differs significantly from zero. Moreover, the sensitivity of the cost esti-
mates through an increase in the functional characteristics of the system elements
rises as the characteristics approach their limit amounts.

The list of arguments in favor of nonlinear models could be extended, however this
is better put off until the following sections where we will examine the particular
features of forming the cost estimates by the life cycle stages. But here we would
add that in employing general multiple regression equations as a model of the cost
estimates the nonlinear models are preferable, since they are capable of simultane-
ously describing linear and nonlinear relationships. For example, if the actual
relation between variables is a linear one and a logarithmically linear model (2.120)
has been chosen, the parameters of the variables linked to the cost estimates in a
linear manner will be close to one. Thus, if in (2.120) the parameter bz=].and

the model has the form

x; - blxzxgaxku,

then this shows that the relationship of the variables x; and :2 with the fixed :3,
x“ is a linear one. Of course it must be remembered that here there is a certain
simplification of the relationships. Moreover, what has been said cannot be extended
to models (2.121) and (2.122). For this reason the final judgment about the type of
dependence must be made on the basis of the statistical criteria for estimating the

model after calculating the parameters of the regression equations (see Section
2.5.2)-

The examination of the methods for censtructing and estimating the multiple regres-
sion equations shown in Chapter 2 makes it possible to point up certain properties
of them which must be considered in modeling the cost estimates.

205

FORtﬂﬂﬁCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. The relationship between the dependent variable and each independent variable
is described by the same mathematical function.

2. The number of model variables is limited to the quantity of objects for which
statistical information exists (to the volume of the initial aggregate). Thus,
from (2.138) it can be seen that a ratio p ( n-l should be maintained between the

number of variables p and the volume of the initial aggregate n. Otherwise no con-
clusions can be drawn on the model's reliability.

3. An increase in the number of independent variables leads to a drop in the model's
sensitivity to a change in each individual variable, since the overall variation of
the dependent variable is broken down into ever-smaller components. From (2.130) it
can be seen that the multiple regression coefficients are linearly dependent upon
the correlation coefficients. The latter, even with the complete absence of a re-
lation between the variables, are always different from zero due to the existence

of unobservable estimate mistakes. As a result, with the addition of a new variable,
the amount of each of the regression coefficients will diminish, since the correla-
tion coefficients are interdependent. Moreover, if the dependence between the vari-
ables cannot be strictly linearized, the estimates of the mean variances and, con-
sequently, the correlation coefficients are greatly biased and this leads to the
distorting of the model's parameters.

The listed properties of regression equations pose the following basic problems:

the choice of the configuration of the mathematical economics cost model in which
the specific features of forming the cost estimates would be reflected by unique
analytical functions; the reduction in the number of simultaneously modeled factors.

These problems can be solved using factor modeling, that is, by constructing com-
posite mathematical economics models of the cost estimates.

The composite structural model should consist of several submodels, each of which
can function independently under the conditions of the known constancy of the other
influencing factors. In this instance each submodel is constructed with certain
fixed values of the indicators which are independent variables of other submodels

and is expressed by a mathematical function which best corresponds to the character-
istics of the described fragment of the cost estimate formation process.

The choice of the influencing factors and the modeling of cost estimates for the pur-
pose of obtaining a composite model must be carried out in the following sequence:

a study of the influence of the state indicators of the life cycle (l.c.) stage; the
eliminating of the influence of local (static) relations; studying the influence of
the state indicators of the environment; eliminating the influence of discrete and
continuously operating characteristics; studying the influence of the object's char-
acteristics; synthesis of the submodels and estimating the accuracy of the composite
model.

In considering that the influence of the individual groups of factors is modeled
separately. the composite model can consist simultaneously of simple and multiple
regression equations which reflect the statistical ties, of time trend models as well

as elements inherent to the comparative models. In other words, factor modeling

makes it possible to employ a wide range of forecasting methods for the cost esti-
mates. For this reason the composite model is the most flexible forecasting tool

206

INJR 0FF1C1AL.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the cost estimates as it possesses high sensitivity to the characteristics of
the BTS developmental processes.

The concluding stage in modeling the cost estimates for the BTS functional elements
is the setting of constraints on the changes in the independent variables. The
establishing of constraints for the change of the independent variables is required
to determdne the acceptable limits for applying the mathematical economics models
expressed by multiple regression equations in forecasting the cost estimates.

The constraints on the changes in the independent variables can be divided into in-
ternal and external. The internal constraints are imposed on changes in the inde-

pendent vsriables within a range of observed values in the initial statistical ag-

gregate, and the external ones are imposed beyond this range. The problem of set-

ting the constraints is directly linked to the procedure of forecasting the cost

estimates and to the calculating of errors and setting the confidence intervals.
For this reason all the listed questions will be examined simultaneously.

As was pointed out, multiple regression equations are determined by breaking down
the general variance of the dependent variable into components, each of which is ex-
plained by a variance of a certain independent variable. The mean measure of varia-
bility for the dependent variable. with a change in any independent variable, is
characterized by the corresponding parameter of the equation. Each parameter of a
multiple regression equation expresses a quantitative relation between the dependent
and independent variables under the condition that all the remaining variables re-
main unchanged.

The designated property for the parameters of multiple regression equations is

caused by the fact that in calculating the amount of a certain parameter, the influ-
ence of other variables is eliminated. The eliminating of the influence of vari-
ables is achieved by considering their joint paired distributions as is seen from the
the formula proposed by B. Yule [£7] for determining the multiple regression coef-
ficient

.... at“-.. - (4.25)

where r12.3“...P--partial correlation coefficient determined from (6.23);
02-3h---P’ 02.3“...p--mesn square deviations of dependent and independent
variables.

The partial correlation index employed in the case of nonlinear relations is calcu-
lated from the same formula under the condition that the variables are expressed by

their nonlinear functions.

From (4.23) and (4.25) it follows that the multiple regression coefficients maintain
their force only within the areas of the joint distribution of the independent vari-

ables in the limits of the observed range of their change in the initial statisti-
cal aggregate. In other words, the domain of existence of the function expressed by a

multiple regression equation is restricted to the intersection areas of the subsets
belonging to the sets of the possible combinations of independent variables.

207

FIN!€NWN(JA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

5_" 9., 9 Dub h-u‘b
Fig. «.10. Domain of existence for Fig. 4.11. Domain—of existence—for__-—__-
function expressed by regression equa- function expressed by regression equa-
tion with two independent variables tion with two independent variables
with a one-way link with feedback

Such domains are shown in Figs. 4.10 and 6.11 for equations with two independent
variables with a one-way (Fig. 4.10) and feedback (Fig. 6.11) correlation link with
the following conditions:

The two variables 81 and xP are independent variables of the multiple regression
equation x1 - b1+bjxj+bpxp; ’

The initial statistical aggregate from the data of which the equation parameters b1,
bj and bp were calculated contains n pairs of values of ‘1 and apt, where i - 1. 2.

..., n;

The values of the variables lie within the limits set by the system of inequalities

XI“. ‘3‘ <x,..,:

X... < x, <3"... (4.26)

The rectangles shown in Figs. 4.10 and 6.11 have been formed by the intersection of
the vcrticles with the sbscissas xp max and x1) min and the horizontals with the or-
dinates x max and Xj min' Obviously the area of the rectangles contains a multi-
plicity 0% all the possible combinations of the variables x: and x within the limits
set by the system of inequalities of (4.26), while the areas limitgd by the dotted
lines contain only those combinations of independent variables which are encountered
in the initial statistical aggregate. The multiple regression coefficients have
been determined precisely in these areas.

I
From this it follows that the shaded areas of the rectanbles represent zones with

undetermined (unpredictable) interpolation errors. And the greatest errors in fore-
casting muat be expected when the point with the coordinates of m (x3; xp) coincide

with one of the critical points mﬁp and IQ .which are most distant from the center of
of the area of the joint distribution of t e variables. Thus, interpolation errors
can reach very impressive amounts if the appropriate constraints are not imposed on
the changes in the independent variables.

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From what has been said it follows that the constraints defined by the system of in-
equalities of (6.26) are necessary but insufficient disciplining conditions for the
interpolation forecasts.

The disciplining conditions can be considered sufficient if to the constraints of
(6.26) one adds a constraint which would be an area of acceptable values for one
variable when the other assumed a certain new previously unobservable value.

Such an area can be described if it is assumed that the joint distribution of two

variables which are the independent variables in the regression equation xp and x1
is a normal one.

 

- Tr? .- — .
“st XI) 1.: ——28V.|-—'—I’O.ﬂq c ‘ ’ [(I'oﬂ") +

 

 

+ (II—i, )'- 2 u"; ‘1‘}! l.

0;, 0., 0.,

where r--correlation coefficient for values up and :1.

In crossing the distribution surface with planes parallel to the plane XPOXJ and
projecting the sections on plane xPOIJ, we obtain a family of similar and uniformly
distributed ellipse with a common center (Rh, 2}), the equations of which have the
form

 

 

 

(4.27)

where a--the fiduciary probability.

As a general statistic which iszcalculated from the values of many variables, it is
possible to use the statistic Tu, which is related to a Fisher distribution in the
following manner:

2( —l)
71’ :— Fa' (4.28)

where Fu--the statistic having 2 and (n-2) degrees of freedom.

The radiuses of the ellipses will change depending upon the value of the fiduciary
probability a. From equation (4.27) it can be seen that the e111pse is determined by
five parameters Rh. I}, 035, exp, r.

The symmetry axes of the ellipse form with the Oxp axis the angles determined by the
equation

“1".

1‘29-m- (4.29)

' I

209

FOR 0F11C1A1.USE1NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equation of the ellipse assumes a canonical for. if the coordinate axes coincide
with the symmetry axes of the ellipse. Let us designate the variables in (4.27):

__. Ira-3; . '1‘}:
la 0,, I (a a "I

 

e

Let us love the beginning of the coordinates to point (ﬁg,‘i ) and turn the coordi-
nate axes to angle 9: as determined by the equation of ( .29 . In this case. the
equation of the ellipse will be expressed by the for-ula

'-_.—'; (d. 'l‘ I}, - 2l.'!,lr) — Ti. (6.30)

In a standardized scale, the center of the ellipse is at the start of the coordi-
nates (t - 0. tx - 0) and the axes of the ellipse are directed along the bisec-
tor of :32 coordi te angles: the first and third angles for the first axis and the
second and fourth for the second axis.

The coordinates for the ends of the first axis are:
A.(T. Vic T- y "F"
«(—V: -r-‘V"—t?).

The coordinates for the ends of the second axis are:

e-(n L7 44/?»
"'(- 74/537. r.1/'—,——:7).

With r > 0, the first axis is the'.ajor axis of the ellipse and the second is the
minor one. The greater lrI. the more the ellipse is extended along the major axis.
If r - 0. that is, the random anounts xp and x3 are not correlated, then the ellipse
is turned into the circunference of the radius Ta and the equation of this circum-

ference is t§p+t§j - 1:.

The transition to the variables xp and x5 is carried out according to the following
fornulas:

I, a “'0'! + :3: X. “talus! +;l-

Thus, the constraints for a model with two independent variables are detersined by
the system

210

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEGJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5“<g<gm;
x,..<x,<x,..;

x -? . ‘I’;I . t -; ’1‘?!

LL + _2J_s_,_r:(n_r’),

0., '3' '3’

(4.31)

 

0"

In the general case, for n variables, the equation for the function limiting the
confidence area can be written in the following manner:

 

 

‘.,- T:- xa-le; (I. 32)
X = IX| —X‘. x.—x.. nu. X. — X.'.

The matrix X7 is the transposed matrix for the X matrix

- X- X. -
x'- Kg—X.
_x.—X’.

The inverse matrix 0'1 is calculated in the following manner:

2
“u“.m- ‘ ' the
o...- - «a.

Consequently, if there are n independent variables, then the constraints imposed on

their change will assume the form:

‘X.-.<X.“|—I:

.\' <1 <X 3
"‘"' ' "'" (4.33)

x, m < x.< x....;
1:: x«-'x'.

In the event of a curvilinear regression, instead of a correlation coefficient a
The center of the ellipse is located at the point

correlation ratio is used (2.85).
c, "jc which represent the coordinates for the center of

with the coordinates
gravity of the curve and are calculated by the formulas:
a o
I"; ”("1" ‘1) a I‘d/”('5' 'I) a
x” ‘—-———; xn=.'_‘_.____, (4.34)

fVl -l' (1;, ,J'dr
211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USEZONLY

The values of the integration limits correspond to the beginning and end points of
the given curve. The confidence area for a curvilinear regression of two variables
is shown in Fig. 4.12.

with the formulated constraints on the change in
V the independent variables of regression models,
I the probability of the occurrence of unpredictable
interpolation errors is minimized.

In observing the disciplining conditions expressed
by the corresponding system of constraints on the
/ changes in the independent variables, it is pos-
sible to establish the degree of accuracy of the
A forecast estimates using the multiple regression
equation (see Section 2.5.2).

5‘ >

The accuracy of forecasting cost estimates is in-
Fig. 4.12. Confidence area for versely proportional to the error of the indi-
curvilinear regression of two vidual prediction (2.160) and is determined by the
variables confidence interval of (2.143).

As was already pointed out, the closer the new values of the independent variables
come to the limits of the observed (in the initial statistical aggregate) range of
changes the greater the forecast errors. since the errors of the regression coeffi-
cients are equal to zero with the equality of the independent variables to their
averages. However. in the space of the observed combinations of independent vari-
ables, the nature and strength of influence of an individual variable on the cost
estimates are not uniform. As this is so, the greater the danger is that the nature
and strength of influence of the variable on the cost estimates will change if the
variable goes beyond the limits of this space.

The question of to what degree the relations change between the cost estimate and
the independent variables cannot be solved by formal methods and for this reason
the imposing of external constraints represents largely a conceptual problem. Its
solution depends to what degree the values of the independent variables differ from
their limit states near which the probability of disrupting the established ties is
increased. In this regard the imposing of external constraints becomes possible if
for each variable values are set for the limit states as their existence is beyond
dispute. Thus, for the BTS elements it is essential to know the theoretically
achievable limits of their functional characteristics. Then. proceeding from an
analysis of the tine trends of the functional characteristics, it is possible to
formulate the external constraints.

An indispensable condition for formalizing the external constraints should be a suf-
ficient distance of the extreme limits of the acceptable changes in the functional
characteristics from their limit states. Here an important disciplining condition
should be the constraints related to the areas of the reciprocal correspondence of
functional characteristics, that is, constraints of the type (5.27) should be satis-
factory. In particular. in extrapolating a statistical dependence of two independ-
ent variables xi and xp (see Fig. 4.10). in assigning new values xp>'xp max or

xp <xp mino it s essential that the extrapolation value of x3 remain within the

212

FOR.OFIWC1AL USEZCHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

limits of the confidence area of (4.27). In observing all the necessary precautions,
the extrapolation mistakes can be commensurable with the interpolation errors on the'
nearby boundaries of the existence domains of functions expressed by the multiple
regression equations. For calculating the extrapolation errors it is possible to use
formula (2.140), and for calculating the confidence intervals, (2.143), as an as-
sumption on the possibility of extrapolation in principle presupposes spriori that
the errors of the forecast estimates are unsystematic and are subordinate to a norm-
al distribution law.

In forecasting cost estimates using composite mathematical economics models which
are a linear and nonlinear combination of statistical dependences, the total fore-
cast errors is calculated from (2.146) and (2.145).

The forecast for the value estimates of 3T5 functional systems, like any other fore-
cast, requires verification. The verification of cost forecasts is also particu-
larly essential in extrapolation when there are fears that the established depend-
ences can be disrupted.

The verification of forecasts for mathematical economics models can be carried out
using a duplicate forecast made by a different method. For the purposes of verifi-
cation of cost forecasts it is most effective to use the conversion factor method if
the integral model of the mean conversion factors includes indicators which could be
selected in the process of logical and statistical analysis of the formative process
of the cost estimates (block 6 in Fig. 6.9). Then the mean conversion factor model
and the mathematical economics model of the cost estimates will be comparable, since
they will contain the same indicators. The difference in the regression coefficients
from the weight coefficients set by experts will indicate the basic sources of dis-
crepancies in the results of the forecast estimates and this can help in determining
the area of search for a better model if the decision is taken to carry out a re-
peated cycle of analyzing and modeling the cost estimates. Thus, the use of the
conversion factor method for the purposes of forecast verification, in addition to
carrying out verification per se, can help clarify the mathematical economics models
of the cost estimates.

In concluding an examination of the forecasting methods for cost estimates, we would
like to draw attention to the following. The mathematical economics models, un-
doubtedly, are the most objective and flexible tools in forecasting the BTS cost es~
timates. In reflecting the general patterns in the change of the cost estimates
under the influence of the characteristics of the system developmental processes,
the mathematical economics models make it possible to assess the consequences and
effectiveness of the decisions taken to control these processes. Using the mathe-
matical economics models. along with selecting the optimum BTS parameters, it is
possible to choose the variations for the processes of creating, serial production
and operation of their functional elements. However. all these merits are realized
only in the instance that the model has been correctly constructed in carrying out
all the logical and formal procedures examined by us.

The modeling process, as one can see, entails great expenditures of time and re-
quires the involvement of highly skilled specialists. For this reason, as was al-

ready pointed out in 4.2.1, the use of mathematical economics models should be
justified by the forecasting goals. Among these goals we would put the choice of

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

optimum parameters for systems, production processes and so forth, that is, the
solving of such problems when it is important to know the influence of one or an-

other parameter on the cost estimates. But in those instances when the influence of
the individual parameters on the cost estimates is not major, the time trend extrap-

olation methods can be successfully employed for forecasting purposes.

As for the accuracy of the estimates. as we have seen in forecasting using the
mathematical economics models. this depends largely upon how correctly the con-
straints have been set for changes in the variables of the mathematical economics
models. Since the procedure of setting the constraints is not always formalizeable,
there is always the probability of the occurrence of unpredictable errors. Thus

in individual instances the extrapolation errors using mathematical economics models
can be comparable with the errors of time trend extrapolation.

4.3. Basic Patterns in the Formation and the Forecasting Methods for the Costs of
NIR and OKR of Large Technical Systems

Scientific research work and prototype design work (NIOKR) which are frequently
linked by the common term "creation," are the two most important stages in the life
cycle of a BIS. Precisely here, in these stages, start the processes of scientific
and technical development of systems and these determine the evolution of the ap-
pearance of the systems and their functional properties and the means and methods of
materializing these properties in the broad sense of this word. NIOKR includes a
series of events in the system's life cycle from the genesis of the initial idea
(concept) for creating the system up to the construction and development of the
prototype.

Scientific research work (NIR) includes research on the processes of the external
and internal functioning of the systems as well as the physicochemical processes

occurring in the subsystems and functional elements. Along with research on the
systems and their elements, the NIR is carried out for the purpose of seeking out

new design materials, fuel and other energy resources, production processes and the
methods of organizing, planning and controlling the creation and production of the

systems.

On the basis of the tactical and technical requirements formulated considering the
results of the predesign scientific research on the systems, their prototype design
work (OKR) is carried out. The OKR encompasses a range of design work and the
building (manufacturing) and testing of the prototypes of the systems and their
elements.

The increased complexity of scientific and technical problems related to the crea-
tion of modern technology is a reason for the constant increase in the absolute ex-
penditures on NIOKR and increasing their proportional amount in general industrial
expenditures. Thus, in U.S. industry in 1940-1965, the volume of expenditures on
NIOKR rose almost ZOO-fold while their proportional amount in the nation's budget
increased from 0.82 to 15.4 percent (Fig. 6.13). Here in the total volume of allo-
cations on NIOKR. around 90 percent is taken up by expenditures related to the cre-
ation of large technical systems such as: aviation, missile and missile-space com-
plexes and thermonuclear weapons.

214

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the general NIOKR expenditures. the highest
proportional amount is taken up by OKR. This
is explained by the high material and labor

 

Fig. 6.13. Dynamics of expendi- The increased outlays on the NIOKR for large
tures on NIOKR in the United States technical systems, in outstripping the growth
Key: 1--Expenditures on NIOKR; rates for NIOKR expenditures in general in-

2--Proportionsl amount of
expenditures on NIOKR; 3-Ex- to the questions of forecasting production

penditure growth index;
a--Proportiona1 amount of ex-

penditures on "IOKR forecasting methods of the cost estimates em-

carry out experimental work which is done for the purpose of testing the results of
theoretical research on mock-ups and models.

In terms of its character the scientific research work conducted by the N11 is
divided into three types:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0F11C1AL.USE¢DNLY

3) Applied research ained at solving particular problems involving an improvement

in the quality of designs. production processes, the organization of production for
s certain type of product and so forth.

The exploratory, fundamental and applied research create the scientific potential
for carryingout ORR and serial production of the systems and their functional ele—
ments. Here a majority of the NIR results is used in working out and producing a
series of system generations. Thus at each moment of time the NI! are solving
problems related to the development prospects of the sector. The designated diver-
sity and perspective orientation of the NIR are the reason that the attempts at
modeling NIR expenditures, depending upon the characteristics of the systems or the
individual stages of their life cycle, have not been crowned by success.

At present the methods of an indirect estimate for the costs of "18 have become
widespread. An indirect estimate for the cost of the NIR related to the creation
of HTS presupposes a forecasting of these expenditures proportional to a certain
cost estimate which is sensitive to a change in the system characteristics. Con-
sidering that scientific research by its nature comes closest to the processes of
OKR and. in addition, is financed from the same source, the state budget, the MIR
expenditures are set proportionately to the ORR costs. Here the share of expendi—
tures on sectorial NIR which should be put against the costs of the OKR of a spe-
cific system is determined from an analysis of the existing proportions in the sec-
torial budget allocations for the creation of new technology.

In the general instance, expenditures on the creation of a system functional ele-
ment are determined by the fornula

cniokr " Com-(1 ”1:12). (4.35)

where Cokr--the costs of the OKR for a system element;
Kn1I--a proportionality factor characterizing the ratios existing in a given
sector between NIR and ORR costs.

As was already pointed out, the growth rates for the NIR and OKR expenditures are
not constant over time. This is reflected in the fact that the proportionality co-
efficient “air has a certain time trend and for this reason the forecasting of NIR
expenditures with the known Cop, presupposes the modeling and extrapolation of a
time trend for the proportionality factor.

If a function reflecting the time trend of a proportionality factor is differenti-
able, for forecasting the expenditures it is possible to use the following formula
[34]:

d
“1.1: ' K31: ——K“1§:1) A1. (4.36)

where K§15-the index for the NIR and OKR cost ratio in the base period To;
1

dKnir
dr

 

~the gradient for the index of the N13 and 0K8 cost ratio;
Ar--the time gap; Ar - 1‘-ro-

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The correct determining of the possible ratios for the N13 and OER expenditures in
the future has a marked impact on the results of the forecast estimate for the cost
of creating the BTS. For this reason it is essential to show great attention to an
analysis of the time trends of the proportionality factor Knit in order that the
function describing these trends correctly reflects the general patterns in forming
the NIOKR expenditure structure.

However. there is no doubt that the accuracy of forecasting the OKR costs for the
BTS has the basic impact on the results of the forecast estimate, as the ORR holds
the largest proportional amount in the general expenditures on creating the systems.
The model for the OKR costs of a BTS functional element can generally be expressed
by a multiple regression equation in which the independent variables represent the
characteristics of the functional element and the process of its OKR. For a loga-
rithmically linear form of dependence. a model for OKR costs is written

Eek: - 0. ﬁ x7. (4.37)
[-2

The model (b.37) is a very approximate reflection of the process involved in forming
the cost of an experimental subject. A multiple regression equation does not con-
sider. and indeed cannot consider, all the particular features of OKR and these par-
ticular features. as will be shown below, have a substantial impact on the process
of OKR cost formation.

The OKR of systems and their functional elements is carried out at prototype design
bureaus (0K3) and is characterized by three basic stages: designing, the manufac-

turing of prototypes, testing and adjustment.

The first stage includes the work of designing the prototype, carrying out experi-
ments and working out the working drawings and technical documents required for
manufacturing and testing the prototypes. In the second stage work is done to manu-
facture the prototypes, as well as to design and manufacture special fittings and
tools. The third, concluding stage of the OKR provides for the carrying out of ex-
perimental adjustments and testing for both the system as a whole as well as its
individual elements.

Each of the designated stages is carried out to a certain degree by an independent
functional complex of the 0K8. Designing is carried out by the designing complex
(PKK), the manufacturing of prototypes by the production complex (PK) and testing
by the testing complex (IK). For this reason the ORR process for a system element
can be represented as the process of the sequential transformation by each function-
al 0K3 complex of its specific inputs into specific outputs (Table b.7). The spe-
cific input of the PKK is the information input. for the PK it is the material, and
for the 1K the object (the latter in Table 6.7 is shown as part of the material in-

put).

The specific information input is the concept of the system (element) represented in
the form of a technical designing requirement or tactical-technical requirements

(TTT) for the system (element). This is the organizing specific input of the 0K3.
In the designing process, in addition, scientific-technical information is employed

217

FOR OFINC1A1.lEﬂE(NULY
.uuo .uuaqlsoo.
cud-0v huusaav uoo.
.aanaov ouou: . ..
.ooouaouou no on:
uuuuonnouoao .oouo.
unannouo>¢v «Haven
nun .aouaau new naaaouuom
can copy coda-«>09 no ouauuunon

.ouo
.ovuovccum cucum
.uouuo>anuv uo cowuna
now> .uaaoauauu mo
mcwuuoocuu .uuuoav
:dun nu «mango .uuoao
uuo>ov Eda-haaso an
BBB uo uuoﬂuuwuuau
Inez .NB Gd uuwunsu

oouuguouuu

HUCGOGHUM

:.oHo>ov mBn mo ou=.u=o vac ou=.:w mo usuz

U...

an Aug:
cu vocuahu .o nun-aium

.no-nou
nowuoavoum .ana
no ouuosvoouoo on

..ouo .Ouuulauuquu

.uaquuuw .ucuﬂnuaco

nouuosvoun .oousu
-25. .5533.
o uuauﬂono we soon
.unuauouu>ao cuuw
muuoco uo noon

mono
.30 ago: culuaou cu

aucaashuadu .nunOI
uncouuu .unnuuuwm
.aHOOu .uauanasvo
nauuuauoum .aousu
nosuua .oucavuuan

.hwu0:0
no woman uncuua>

 

”HOCO

ouaoaaoaa>on maﬁa
Iowa no onooomou.
.oucuaduQuo .ouhoa .
.auadlauov :ouuoscon.
nonuo a oouuuAu and”
oucaizouuu“ Ion .avosuoﬂ noduos.
can uncuuuuw u. coma uo¢n¢>uuoou«.

amassinu .ouovol . .oﬂbuuhunan now _ cannuso
unslxoo: .uoHnIo .oucalauauo aunsuo
no ounaaoao ans. :«uoou .oaouuuauuau_
Iw>uvuu no snow. aneuunwuooon .aouah.
.aauama uc “can. aqueouo sauna no,
onounv ammuOuoum aucuaaoov Guano:
nu. .
Iaoov o>uuoouuv a y
uuuauoumun “out“ .ouo .oouoooou.
luau“ ugOSu .couuuu.owu0=voun .uuuanwa.
nonooo an vouo>uuo..uuquauaa nun no nu”.
nonhu0uoua acuohm .no«uqlu0u:« use» :
.ouao uao ch. cuuouou a uu«>.
«usacu
=oua>oaam .uououuuu
vounaoouooum .ouos.
.ouosv0ha and Ia¢£00u ucoﬂaoHo>on
you no Bouncy”: couuuauouuw
«unauao

.a ouamsa
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which forms the basis of knowledge in this area. The embodiment of the concept in
the design of a system (element) occurs by mental processes which generate new in-
formation in the form of design decisions. The variation of the plan which satis-
fies the TIT forms the information specific output of the on.

The specific input for the production complex is the material input in the form of
the subjects of labor which change their properties tmder the impact of the means
and implements of labor. The prototypes of the system (element) are the result of
this effect and they form the specific object output of the PK.

The specific input of the testing complex is the system (element) with its initial
level of ambiguity relative to the conformity of the functions and the ability for
them to meet the TTT. This ambiguity is minimized or completely surmounted under
the effect of the range of monitoring and metering equipment employed in the testing
process. A system which carries out the specified functions with the required level
of effectiveness forms the specific object output of the 1K and the ORB as a system.

The distinction of the specific inputs and outputs determines the uniqueness of the
basic OKR stages and this must be considered in forecasting the on expenditures for
BTS. The predominance of information processing the generating processes gives the
design stage an exploratory nature and this explains the high degree of aabiguity in
the process and its end result. The wiguity of a design process is particularly
great in the early stages of elaborating the system's design. These include the
elaboration of the preliminary project. the technical requirement and the technical
proposal.

A technical development requirement gives the technical, operational and production
requirements made on the syn. and its subsystems. A technical requirement estab-
lishes the basic purpose. the f light-technical characteristics of the article to be

developed. the conditions for its employment as well as the composition and basic
characteristics of the subsystems and elements.

A technical proposal is an aggregate of design documents which contain the techni-
cal and technical-economic feasibility studies for the elaboration of the system on
a basis of analyzing the technical requirement and the different variations for the
possible solutions for the articles as well as a comparative estimate of the solu-
tions considering the design and operational features of the to-be-developed and
existing articles as well as patent materials.

In the above-listed stages. the design studies are particularly closely tied to the
NIR, as in the process of the preliminary studies new problems are frequently
brought to light the solving of which necessitates special am. The results of
this research cycle are considered in the further working out of the design.

The degree of ambiguity in the result is noticeably reduced only in the draft de-
sign stage. The amount of information in this stage increases significantly and
the data from the preliminary design stage are clarified and established by experi-
mental data. Bxperimenting is conducted by creating mock-ups of the individual sub-
systems and elements in the system.

219

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFTC]AI.USE‘DNLY

A draft study is the first stage in which the design parameters of the article to be
designed are defined and the design appearance of the system to be designed is forsr
ed. 0n the basis of the draft design, in the process of technical designing, the
working components of assembly units, schematic diagrams for fuel supply, electri-
cal equipment and so forth are worked out.

In the stage of technical designing, questions arise which are analogous to the
questions of draft designing, but the number of variations for solutions is substan-
tially reduced, since some of them were rejected as a result of mock-up construction
in the draft design stage.

The stage of working designing is characterized by an extensive work front to cre-
ate the drawings for the article, its individual units, assembly units and parts.
0n the basis of the working drawings, directive methods are elaborated for manufac-
turing the prototype of the system (element).

But still, regardless of the rather thorough elaboration of the design, the ambigu-
ity about the conformity of the system (element) to the TTT remains high until the
carrying out of full-scale testing, and for this reason in a number of instances the
failures discovered in the testing lead to the halting of experimental subjects even
before they are complete. The reason for the premature halting of 0K3 at times can
be found in the miscalculations made in elaborating the preliminary project and the
TTT for the system. The low scientific and technical potential contained in the TTT
leads to the obsolescence of the sytem which is in the OKR stage. Obviously under
the conditions of a high degree of development ambiguity, the mistakes leading to
the halting of work are one of the common patterns in the ORR. For this reason, in
forecasting the expenditures on the OKR of the BTS it is essential to consider the

estimate for the average probability of successfully completing the OKR.

The average or mean probability of success u is determined by the ratio of the cost
of the successfully completed work over the past period of time rk-ro to the total
cost of all the work performed over the same period [34]:

‘1
I cgrma
'0

" "' ——“ ° (4.38)

In the event of the continuing of the OKR following the testing results, the design
documents and prototype undergo the corresponding changes and the testing is re-
peated. The number of such cycles is rather difficult to predict, and for this
reason the testing process, like the designing of the system, is characterized by a
high degree of ambiguity. This significantly complicates the process of modeling
GKR costs for systems and their elements.

The process of manufacturing the prototypes is more determined in comparison with
the first and third stages. in a number of instances it possesses common traits
with the stage of serial production but also has a number of specific features.

220

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11CJAL.US£10NLY

In contrast to the first and third 0K3 stages, the process of prototype manufacture
on the input and output has mainly material flows. Prototype production requires
raw products, materials, semifinished goods and preasssmbled articles but its end
result is the prototypes of the articles being designed.

Experimental enterprises are classified in single-unit type of production, although
they differ from classic single-unit production in a certain focus of the production
process and specialization of production on a uniform group of articles. In addi-
tion, in single-unit production there is no change in the technical specifications
for the order and no supplementary work and this is characteristic for experimental
or prototype production. The limited range and scale of output also tell on enter-
prise size. Experimental plants are significantly smaller than serial-production
plants in terms of the number of employees and the productive capital.

The manufacturing of new articles in units (or experimental batches) causes a num-
ber of particular features in experimental production such as the lower equipping

of production with special tools and fittings, and, consequently, the small capacity
of the tool shops; the use in the production process basically of universal equip-
ment, the high skills of production workers and the consolidated elaboration of
production methods.

The designated features of experimental pro-
duction increase the production cost of proto-

a) types in comparison with costs in serial pro-
: duction. However, the dynamics of expendi-

f tures on manufacturing articles in the process
* of experimental and serial production shows

_§ col-Ion trends: the costs of each subsequent

z specimen are less than the previous one. In

§ other words, in experimental production costs
: are influenced by the degree of developing the
3 design and the manufacturing methods of the

5 article. This is one of the most important

i features of serial production (this question

will be examined in detail in the following
section). As a consequence of the influence
of the degree of production development on the
costs of prototypes, the cost: of the experi-
mental batch increase more slowly than the
:2::::: ﬁgzndzziiogfngxgzii::::age- sizes of an experimental batch. The latter
batch tells also on the behavior of ORR expendi-

tures with a change in the number of proto-
Key: a--Indexes for change in ex. types.

penditures; b--Por one proto-

type; c--Por an experimental The cost dynamics of prototypes J1 of the ex-

batch; d--Bxperimental batch perimental batch J; and the total 0K3 expen-

ditures for articles J, depending upon the

number of examples manufactured from the start of prototype production, are shown
in Fig. 4.14. The designated patterns are apparent even with the comparatively
small experimental batches. In a number of instances the experimental batches reach
significant sizes and then the similarity of experimental production with serial
production is further increased.

 

Fig. 4.14. Dynamics of expenditure

221

FOR OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The entire amount of OKR [3b] is carried out on the first prototype complex which
includes the flying prototype, the models for static and dynamic testing and re-
peated load testing (for each subsequent flying model, starting with the second,
there is only the stage of manufacturing and testing with the necessary amount of
rework and adjustment). In this manner consideration is given to the invariance of
design expenditures to the size of the experimental batch. A model for this type of
ORR costs has the following configuration:

c" s 71‘ (7. + 1,n:“‘)c...'(;). (6.39)

where y°--the proportional amount of conditionally fixed expenditures in the costs
of the first experimental complex;

y°—-the proportional amount of variable expenditures in the costs of the first
prototype set;
n°-the number of examples in the experimental batch;
An+1--e1asticity coefficient for variable expenditures in relation to size of
_ exterimental batch determined empirically;
Cbkr1(X)-the costs of the first experimental set of aircraft expressed in the form
of an equation of dependence upon the vector of the functional and design
characteristics.

The specific weights of the conditionally fixed and variable expenditures are de-
ternined on the basis of analyzing the time trends in the 0K3 cost structure over
the previous period of time.

The model (4.39) is most effective for forecasting the 0K8 costs of the system ele-
ments when the number of examples in the experimental batch is comparatively small
and their purpose is controlled by the adopted testing system as occurs in the de-
velopment of aircraft. In manufacturing prototypes in large batches and with sig-
nificant fluctuations in the batch size (the latter often depends upon the degree
of originality and newness of the articles), it is essential to consider the impact
of the scale of experimental production on prototype costs. For this purpose it is

essential to make the process of forming expenditures in the stage of manufacturing
the prototypes into an independent object of modeling.

In considering that the number of prototypes directly or indirectly influences the
testing costs, the OKR cost model is best shown in the form of the total of the
particular expenditure models for each stage.

The cost model for the experimental batch generally is expressed by the following
formula:

C.- =- C... (1?. MM... (4.40)

where cno--the average cost of the prototype expressed in the form of a dependence
upon the characteristics of the functional element and the number of prototypes.

The dependence of prototype costs upon the size of the experimental batch no can be
approximated by the step function

Cu. =4 amt“. (4.1.1)
222

FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE|DNLY
FOR‘0FFHJAL.USEZONLY

where ex and An-the equation parameters determined empirically and An < 0.

This dependence can be expressed in a dimensionless form if as the base one selects

the amount of the prototype costs found from (6.61) with a certain fixed size of

the experimental batch. In the given instance the most suitable base is the proto-

type cost corresponding to the arithmetic average from the amount of the experiment-
al prototype batches of the functional element:

- C
n. - A "win. (4.42)

where n--the number of prototypes in the initial statistical aggregate.

Then the relative influence of the experimental batch on prototype costs is express-
ed by the index

’6... " c-Jci.’ (4.43)

where Cﬁo--the cost of a prototype from a batch equal to 30.
In substituting the values Cno and C30 calculated from (4.61) for no and no, respec-

tively, in (b.63) we obtain the dependence of prototype costs upon the size of the
experimental batch in a dimensionless form

uo'V
1%: (—3-.- , (AM)

Now, having expressed the influence of no by Jcnov (6.40) can be written in the
following form

can: ng(x-)"o('%:')‘n' _ (5.45)

Thus, the cost model for the 0K3 of functional elements which are characterized by
large ranges in the change of the scale of experimental production, can be repre-
sented by the following equation:

car " '+[CA(X) + cm (X) “4%)" + 047. 15)] . “'46)

where Cd--designing costs;
Ct--testing costs.

The establishing of the dependence of design coats Cd upon the characteristics of
the functional elements. as was already pointed out, is a difficult task due to the
high degree of process ambiguity at this OKR stage.

223

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the system functional elements where among the characteristics it is possible to
isolate a base parameter that characterizes the geometric dimensions of the element
(for example, the weight of the aircraft frame, absolute engine thrust and so
forth), designing costs are approximately expressed by the equation of dependence
upon this parameter. However the choice of the base parameter is possible not for
all the functional elements of the systems while the modeling of designing costs
using other parameters requires a further breaking down of the designing process
into smaller items. since the sensitivity of designing costs to the various parame-
ters is not the same for all the elements in the internal structure of this process.
Thus, the obtaining of a good model for designing costs for a rather complicated
functional element can take up a good deal of time and effort even for an experi-
enced research collective.

At the same time, an analysis of the OKR expenditure structure shows that, regard-
less of the tendency for an increase in designing costs for complicated systems,
their proportional amount in overall ORR costs is relatively slight and for certain
functional elements is 2-5 percent. Naturally, under these conditions, even major
errors in design expenditure forecasting will not have a substantial impact on the
accuracy of the overall OKR cost estimate. For this reason, in a number of in-
stances, when the obtaining of a reliable mathematical economics model of forecast-
ing costs requires the carrying out of a complex range of research, it is possible
to permit a certain simplification. For example, as an adequate model for the form-
ing of designing expenditures one can adopt the average designing costs calculated
from actual expenditures for the designing of the prototypes of functional elements:

c,—:,'|,L;t-<c4<a,+c,=—s. (M7)

where sad--:he estimate of the mean square deviation of actual expenditures from the
arithmetic average.

The procedure for forecasting OKR costs can be further simplified if the proportion-
al amount of designing expenditures 76d in the total OKR expenditures of a function-
al element is sufficiently stable or a certain time trend for this indicator is
known. Then the OKR costs are determined from the formula

 

cur "" (ém+cc) ' (4J8)

' -ih;

The forecasting of testing costs C; is somewhat facilitated by the fact that in the
testing process a large amount of energy resources is required. For this reason,
with other conditions being equal, the testing expenditures will be sensitive to a
change in the capacity of the energy sources and to the consumption of energy re-
sources per unit of capacity. However, due to the ambiguity of the testing process,
testing cost models usually introduce a large error factor into the total error of
an OKR cost forecast in comparison with the expenditure models for experimental pro-

duction.

The OKR processes for the BTS are constantly being improved and this is one of the
manifestations of the factor of an increase in social labor productivity. Moreover,

224

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
this factor influences the costs of the products of past labor consumed in the de-
velopment of the systems. In this regard, in forecasting the OKR expenditures, it
is essential to consider the trend in the decline in ORR costs related to the growth
of social labor productivity. The influence of this factor can be considered by
using the cost time trend coefficient in the sectors producing the BTS and their
functional elements:

I:t - (1+0.01ﬁ)re"ro

(4.b9)
where w-the average annual reduction in the costs of industrial product consumed
in the OKR process, X;
Te--the year of carrying out the ORR of the system's elements which are the
objects of the cost estimate;
To--the year of drawing up the cost forecast.

The total cost of working out the system S is the total expenditures on working out
the individual system elements considering the possible use of results from the de-

velopment of elements in other systems and the overall development cost of the sys-
ten:

- \
CsurSrJ 2; count-w '1‘ to" (4.50)

where cokr j--the OKR coats for element 1 of the system;
yak, j--the proportional amount of expenditures on developing element 1 re-
lated to the development costs of the system being designed;
Cop s-the costs for the general development of the system.

6.4. Basic Formative Patterns and Methods for Forecasting the Costs of Serial
Production of the BTS and Their Functional Elements

4.6.1. Particular Features of the Serial Production Process and Cost Formation

The process of serial production for the functional elements of the BTS can be con-
ditionally divided into three basic stages: 1) the development of the first serial
models or the stage of production preparation; 2) the development of serial produc-
tion or the development stage; 3) full-scale serial output or the stage of estab-
lished serial production.

The first stage encompasses the period from the start of the preparations for pro-
ducing the article up to the output of the first serial model. At this stage or-
ganizational and technical measures are carried out related to preparing the enter-
prises to turn out the new article. Production preparations for the new article in-
clude the following measures: the rearranging and reorganization of existing shops
and sections; the elaboration of serial-production drawings for the product and pro-
duction fittings; the elaboration of serial production methods; the manufacturing

of the required amount of production fittings (the first stage of fittings); the
testing of the initial materials; the manufacture and testing of individual struc-
tural elements and units of the article; the manufacture, assembly and testing of
the first serially produced model.

225

F0ﬂ10FFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is essential to point out that a portion of the work related to production prep-
arations for the new articles is carried out in parallel with their serial output.
The latter is explained by the need to shorten the overall production preparation
cycle in the aim of accelerating the output of the first articles. The output of
articles of the head series and their subsequent putting into operation are needed
to eliminate design shortcomings the discovery of which is possibly only under ordin-
ary operating conditions. As a consequence of this the final adjustment of the
article's design is made at a serial-production enterprise in the process of dis-
closing and eliminating the existing shortcomings. The designated circumstances
necessitate the manufacturing of the prototypes under conditions where the produc-
tion process for manufacturing the article is equipped with a minimum range of spe-
cial production fittings and without which the output of the article is essentially
impossible.

Thus. the conditions for turning out the first serial-produced models of the article
have the following particular features: production instability and a relatively low
technological level: low equipping of the production processes; imperfect forms for
organizing production and the work areas; the absence of work skills for the workers
and insignificant experience of technical personnel; the absence of technical stand-
ards for labor intensiveness; the incompleteness of the article's design and so
forth.

The listed characteristic traits inherent to the moment of completing the first
serial production stage are the reason for the relatively high costs of the first

articles. Subsequently. as serial production is developed, article costs decline
substantially and in a number of instances by the end of the second stage are 15-20
percent of the initial.

The decline in costs at the production development stage is achieved by introducing
measures aimed at raising the organizational and technical level of production. At
this stage the serial production drawings and the serial production methods are
finally elaborated; the manufacturing of the production set of fittings is fully
completed (the level of equipping in a number of instances reaches 90—95 percent);
the production areas and lines are determined; technical standards for labor inten-
siveness are introduced (the proportional amount of technical standards reaches 70-
75 percent); adjustments and improvements are incorporated in the article's design;
the workers gain work skills and the technical personnel gains experience in manu-
facturing the new article.

The production development stage is characterized by an increase in product output
per unit of time. By the end of this period. the enterprises reach a steady pro-
duction program and for this reason, in speaking about developing the production of
BTS functional elements, it is essential to bear in mind not only the process of
developing the design and the production methods for the articles but also reaching
designed output scale.

Thus, the production development of new articles is a dual process. On the one hand,
the production development of new articles is accompanied by a rise in the organiza-
tional and technical level of serial production (the qualitative aspect), and on the
ether, in keeping with the development of serial production there is an increase in
the quantity of articles produced per unit of time (the quantitative aspect). The

226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first factor influences primarily the labor and material intensiveness of the arti-
cle. The action of the second factor is manifested in the fact that with an in-
crease in product output per unit of time there is a decline in the share of the
shop and general-plant expenditures and in the expenditures on carrying out special
testing and setting-up outlays. Expenditures decline on production fittings per
unit of article.

The two mentioned aspects of the process of cost formation are interrelated and the
basic is the quantitative aspect. Thus, the production scale has a direct impact
on the optimum level of outfitting the production processes in manufacturing the
articles. Under the conditions of producing large batches of articles, the Outlays
on production fittings become more advisable, as here the increase rate in the ex-
penditures on serial production provided by the increase in production outfitting
outstrip the growth rate of the expenditures on outfitting. The higher the scale
of product production the more the optimum level of outfitting is felt and thereby
better prerequisites are created for producing the expenditures on the serial pro-
duction of the articles.

The output scale ultimately predetermines the possibilities of organizing mechanized
and automated production, the use of specialized production equipment and the intro-
duction of advanced production processes.

The product output scale also has a substantial impact on the level of specializa-
tion and cooperation. The deepening of specialization and the widening of the in-
terdepartmental and intrasectorial ties become effective only under the conditions

of large-series production making it impossible to employ the most progressive means
and methods of specialized production.

The scale of output. in characterizing, in addi-
tion, enterprise production capacity, is an in-
direct indicator of the production concentration
level in the sectors specialized in producing
the BTS functional elements.

The dynamics of cost reduction and the reaching
of the designed product output scale are shown
in Fig. 4.15. The degree of the serial produc-
tion development of the design and the reaching
Egggggtéggt §“%1 of the designed product output scale influence
r o d: cti o u 1p“: not only the level and dynamics of the cost de-
p n per ° cline but also the ratio of the individual ex-
penditures included in its structure. Fig. 5.16

Output

 

product costs

Fig. 4.15. Change in product shows a typical change in the cost structure
costs and output in ghe Proceg‘ occurring under the influence of the designated
of serial product1on factors. As is seen from the graphs, in the

process of the production development of the
article there is a rise in the proportional
amount of expenditures on wages and materials and a decline in the share of the

shop and general plant outlays and the direct aggregate expenditures (expenditures
on special fittings, testing and so forth) in the full production costs.

227

FOR OFTWCIAL USEIMVLY
FOR OFFKJA1.USEGNVLY

The third stage or the stage of established
serial production is characterized by the

following basic features: a further im-
provement in the design and production
methods of the articles; the broadening and

improving of the production set of equip-
ment and fittings; the improving of the
organization of production and labor; a
rise in the automation and mechanization
level of the production processes; the ex-
production period tensive introduction of rational methods
for producing the initial stock and so
forth. The given range of organizational

 

Fig. 4.15. Change in proportional and technical measures is carried out over
smut of basic expemitures 1n the entire 'erul production period. but“
full product costs in the process ing this period one most strongly feels

of developing their serial production: th‘ 1'P'Ct °f the factors related t° the

rise in social labor productivity.
1--Hateria1s; 2-Shop expenditures;

3"5PGC181 fittings; 6--General plant In the stage of full-scale serial produc-
expenditures; 5""3899; 6--Testing tion, when the reserves for cost reduction

brought about by the newness of the article
and by other particular features of the production development stage have been
basically exhausted, a further decline in production costs occurs as a consequence
of improving the technical means and organizational forms of serial production and
the other factors which determine the growth of social labor productivity. However,
in contrast to the second stage of serial production, during this stage the inten-
sity of the cost decline does not exceed 4-2 percent per quarter.

Research on the particular features of serial production and the nature of the
change in expenditures during its various stages has made it possible to draw the
following conclusion. The process of forming the costs of the BTS functional ele-
ments is shaped under the influence of three basic factors which characterize the
organizational and economic conditions of serial production of the systems: the
organizational and technical level of production; the degree of the production de-
velopment of the design and the serial output of the articles; the production scale
of the articles.

The organizational and technical level of production accumulates the influence of
both the macro- and microeconomic factors and the impact of the latter on the cost
of new articles to a significant degree is determined by their output scale. In

this regard, the task of establishing the indicators which characterize the scale
of product serial output moves to the forefront.

The scale of serial output can be estimated using the following basic indicators:
the number of articles manufactured from the start of serial production N; average
daily output calculated for a certain production period q; product output per unit

of time (quarter or day) reached by a certain moment of time in the designated
period q.

228

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The number of_articles N manufactured since the start of production and the average
daily output q characterize the scale of aerial production only when combined with
the third indicator, the length of the period t during which N articles have been
produced or an average daily output q has been reached. The daily output q, in con-
trast to the first two indicators, is an independent characteristic of the output
scale at the given concrete moment of time during any segment of the aerial produc-
tion period of the articles.

   

k 1
U ‘9
. i
55 1.3 la
'0 u ‘ n. 5 D
'5 4, g 'm , c E?
g '1: g .35
8 “ ,z: a :3
a , I
v 3 8 I:
'9
. o t o a a n n
quarters
Fig. 6.17. Influence of absolute Fig. 6.18. The influence of the ratio
product output scales on cost of the initial and established product
dynamics and level output scales (1) and (2) on their cost
dynamics

The influence of daily output on the cost level and dynamics is illustrated by the
examples of Figs. 4.17 and 4.18. Fig. 4.17 characterizes the dependence of cost
dynamics and level upon the absolute serial output scale under the conditions of
established production. In Fig. 4.18, cost dynamics are compared with the product
growth rate. From the diagrams it is obvious that product costs decline more in-
tensely the higher the scale of established production and its increase rate in

the process of reaching serial output. The more intense rates of cost decline with
an increase in the difference between the initial and established output are ex-
plained by the fact that the output of the first serially produced examples, inde-
pendently of their quantity, occurs under approximately equal organizational and
technical production conditions. Conversely, under the conditions of established
serial production the organizational and technical level will be higher the greater
the output scale under the same conditions.

Thus, the process of cost formation can be conditionally divided into two parts:
the formation of cost dynamics and the formation of the cost level.

Cost dynamics are chiefly determined by the particular features of developing serial
output while the level is determined by the output scale of developed articles and

by their design and production features which are determined by the operational ef-
fectiveness factors. By the cost level one understands the cost of articles corres-
ponding to the start of established serial production. It is felt that under these

conditions the influence of the factors characterizing the processes of reaching

229

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(”NLY
FOR OFTWCJAI.lEﬂE(M‘LY

serial production has been virtually exhausted and that subsequently the process of
serial production will occur with an established level of production equipping and
other organizational and technical characteristics of serial production. The start
of established serial production is usually linked with the moment of producing the
so-called serially developed product. Here it is assumed that the cost of a serial-
ly developed product, in contrast to the cost of the previously produced articles,
shows a relative resistance to a change in the output scale and the other character-
istics of the product production development processes.

Establishing the cost of a serially produced product is essential for achieving com-
parability in terms of the degree of serial production development for prototype
articles of a system's functional element when these comprise the initial statisti-
cal aggregate. The costs of articles which are compared from the viewpoint of the
degree of developing a design and the reaching of the designed output scale are used
as the initial base in studying the influence of the functional and other character-
istics of a functional element. In addition, the costs of a serially produced arti-
cle make it possible to establish the influence of its level and output scale under
the conditions of established production. Determining the costs of a serially pro-
duced article comes down to setting the moment of moving from the production da-
velopnent stage to the stage of full-scale serial production. The time interval
(ordinarily the ordinal number of a quarter, starting from the beginning of serial
output) at which this transition is made has been given the name of the "serial out-
put point."

Above it was stated that the process of reaching serial production of products has a
quantitative and qualitative aspect. Here the quantitative aspect which is the
reaching of the designed output scale largely determines the qualitative aspect of
the production development process, that is, a rise in the organizational and tech-
nical level of production. The conclusion arises that it is possible to speak about
the moment of transition from the production development stage to full serial produc-
tion only proceeding from the dynamics of daily output. Obviously the time interval
by which daily output reaches a relative stable level will correspond to the serial
output point.

The relative stabilization of daily output
~71 s__t_ar:t'"6f§§7€1_7>p_e1_pra. is achieved at various moments of time
, —«*” depending upon the pace of developing the
production program. The development pace
of the production program for turning out
various articles can change in a rather
broad range. Fig. 6.19 shows the most
characteristic curves for the change in the
daily output of functional elements of a
system. From Fig. 4.19 it can be seen
‘ , ,0 ,, .b t that the time intervals corresponding to
quarters the moment of relative stabilization in
daily output vary between 8 and 15 quarters
counting from the start of production.
Fig. [0.19. Influence of development This shows that the determining of the
rate of output production program on serial output point is a necessary condi-
duration Of serial develOPment period tion for eliminating the influence of the
degree of product development on costs.

    

output cost index
E

Q
N
O

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The serial output point, depending upon the pace of developing the production pro-
gram, can be determined if one imposes certain constraints 6 on the relative rate
of increase in daily output per unit of time.

The time trend for daily output is best described by the dependence
q (1) - d. arctg (4,! + d.) + d.. (4.51)

where t-the time counted from the start of serial output (in quarters);
d1. d2, d3. d“-equation constants determined empirically.

The relative increase rate in daily output can be determined as

q'(t) ‘qmax' (0.52)
d
where q'(t)-the derivative function of (6.51); q'(t) - d1 ---2--- ;
1+(dzt4d3) 2

Qmax"the function maximum of (6.51).

The function maximum is found from the condition

H." (I (I) = d' .‘k‘g w + d.s (b.53)

l no

hence

«I... -d. 3- +d... (4.54)

In reducing («.52) to the set value of 6 and solving the obtained equation
(q'(t):qmax - 6) for t. we determine the ordinal number of the quarter corresponding
to the beginning of developed production, according to the following formula:

I iaih
1. J7.- l—d, -I- V— ' 4- 3m . (4.55)

The concrete amount of the constraint 6 imposed on the relative increase rate of
daily output from the viewpoint of the comparability of various articles from proto-
types which are in the initial statistical aggregate is not of fundamental signifi-
cance. It is important that it is constant for all the compared articles. However,
this amount should be rather small in order that the serial output point is to the
right of the area of intense output growth. In the given example (see Fig. 6.19).
the serial output point was set at 6 - 0.01. It is not difficult to see that under
these conditions the growth of daily output is virtually halted.

The setting of a serial output point makes it possible to select with sufficient
soundness the values for the costs Co and the daily output 90 for serially produced
articles and this plays a major role in forecasting the costs of 8T5 functional
elements. Cost forecasting usually starts by determining the probable amount of
costs for a serially produced article. After this the possible cost changes are

determined over the entire extent of the aerial production of the articles. that is,
231

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a forecast is made for the cost dynmnics. However, research on the cost formation
processes must start by analyzing the cost dynamics of articles in the process of
their development and for this reason it is most convenient to start an exposition
of the cost forecasting methods from the cost dynamics forecasting methods.

6.10.2. Forecasting Production Cost Dynamics of 31s Functional Elements

The forecasting of cost dynamics consists in determining the possible changes in the
costs of a specific article depending upon the asstnned conditions of developing its
serial production. Above it was pointed out that a decline in costs is a character-
istic feature in the stage of developing the production of products. Homver, this
reduction occurs at different rates. The establishing of the regular changes in the

cost reduction rate also creates the necessary prerequisites for forecasting cost
dynamics.

From the preceding material (see 4.4.1), it is obvious that developing a new func-
tional element represents a process of the adaptability of an enterprise to the
serial output of the product. The qualitative aspect of this process is the develop-
ing of the design per se and its quantitative aspect is reaching the designed out-
put scale. These are interrelated aspects. And the primary one is the quantitative
aspect since the possibilities (and often the advisability) of increasing the organ-
izational and technical level of production are restricted to the designed output
scale. Proceeding from this, the methods of forecasting cost dynamics are based on
the assumption that there is a quantitative relationship between the cost reduction
rate and the product output scale. For this reason the methods given below differ
only in the principles for estimating this relationship.

Fig. 10.20 shows the graphs for the increase in the total number of articles manu-
factured since the outset of serial production and the corresponding graphs for the
change in costs. As is seen in the figure. product costs decline more intensely
than total product output grows. In the general instance this dependence can be
expressed by the multiple regression equation:

c =- b,~‘q‘a {1 .27. (4. 56)

I“

where N--the total number of articles produced since the start of series production;
t--the time over which N articles were produced;
arr-characteristics of the system's functional element;
b1. b2, ..., bp--equation constants determined empirically.

The model of (4.56) expresses the dependence of product costs upon factors determin-
ing both cost dynamics and level. A characteristic shortcoming of the model (4.56)
is that it does not meet the demand of product comparability in terms of the degree
of serial production development. As was shown (see 4.2.3), the parameters of the
multiple regression equation are calculated under the conditions of eliminating the
influence of other variables and for this reason express the dependence between the
dependent and independent variables when all the remaining variables are held on
the level of their averages. This means that the constants bu, b5, ..., bp express
the cost dependence of a system's functional elenent upon the element's character-
istics with N and t corresponding to their average arithmetic values W and t.

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-— 1,, However, as is seen in Fig. 4.19, the con-
ditions of comparability for each individu-

‘v ally taken article change very substantial-
ly (in the designated example to changes by

'1 alaost double) and depend not upon the ab-

solute amount of N but rather upon the rate
of developing output. Thus. the conformity
of II and t to the comparability conditions
fcr even one article of the initial statis-
tical aggregate can be the result of only
a random coincidence and in any event can-
not be extended to all remaining articles.
The given circumstance can lead to major
distortions of the product cost dependence
upon product characteristics, as these de-
pendences will be influenced by the degree
of serial production of the article.
Naturally it is very difficult to judge the
reliability of forecasts made using models
of the type (10.56).

 
 
 

:
amr
ma

product output index

actual goat index
‘37
J
o. . C

‘1‘

§
-\ n
-|‘s‘&\

A sore attractive sethod from the desig-
' 1 ° 5 i '0 " ‘ nated viewpoint is one based upon the use
quarters of a multiple regression equation to model
the cost index Jco which represents the
ratio of the article's cost observed in
each time interval of the studied period
of serial production to the cost of the
serially produced article. In this in-
stance the requirement is observed of product compatibility in terms of the degree
of serial production and a model describing the cost dynamics has the form

Fig. 4.20. Dynamics of product costs
depending upon output size

Jco - blnbztba. (4.57)

The model (10.57), in comparison with (4.56), provides more dependable forecasts,
however the effectiveness of its use is reduced as a consequence of the existence of
internal constraints on the change in the independent variables which are inherent
to multiple regression equations (see Section é.2.3).

In terms of the problem of forecasting cost dynamics using the model (6.57), to the
ordinary constraints examined in Section 6.2.3, one must add the specific con-
straints related to the transformations of the initial statistical aggregate. These
occur in calculating the parameters of the multiple regression equation of (6.57).

The initial statistical aggregate consisting of n prototype articles of a function-
al element contains n pairs of values (Cl, "1); “2' N2), ..., Ck; Np) for each time
interval of serial production (t - l, 2, ..., 1:). At the same time for calculating
the parameters of a multiple regression equation it is essential that for each ele-
ment C: of set Sc there be the corresponding fully determined value of N: for set
S}; in each tise interval t. For achieving this correspondence it is essential to
average the values of C1, 02, ..., ck and their corresponding values of N1, N2, ...,
“R in terms of the number of articles n in the initial aggregate for each t (t -

l, 2, ..., k).

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In Fig. 4.21, the domain of existence of
the function 6 - F(N, n) has been shaded.
It is not hard to see that the zones of
the undetermined interpolation errors com-
prise a significant portion of the area of
the rectangle which includes the possible
variations for the distribution of output
over time.

From what has been said it follows that
from the viewpoint of forecasting, the
pair of series (Nt, Ct)1 in its nature in
no way differs from any other pair

(Nu, 6:)1, i - 1, 2, ..., n, and for this
reason the equation (4.57) does not re-
flect the general pattern of the change in
costs for the entire initial statistical
aggregate.

Two basic conclusions follow from an anal-
ysis of the models (6.56) and (6.57):

l) the modeling of the dynamics and level
of costs must be carried out separately;
2) the model of cost dynamics should be
constructed under the conditions of the

constancy of one of the two indicators N,
t characterizing the production scale of
the articles.

236
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

Considering that output is a controllable indicator for the production scale, it
is most advisable in forecasting to utilise the influence of the latter on cost

dynamics within a certain period of serial production which is constant for the

studied articles. For the purposes of meeting the requirement of product compar—
ability in terms of the degree of their serial production. the studied aggregate
can include only those articles for which the duration of the production develop-
ment stage to varies within insignificant limits (one or two time intervals). If
the cost of each article reached by the end of the selected period T and the cor-
responding output NT is taken as one. then the dependence of the cost index JCNT
upon the amount of output for an individual article is expressed by the equation

1:2”, .- 0»~"’: (A < 0). (a. 58)

In a logarithmic system of coordinates, the dependence of (6.58) for a certain ag—
gregate of articles will be represented by a family of parallel straight lines (if
we disregard the random errors in estimating the l parameter), as is shown in Fig.
b.22. From Fig. b.22 one can see that each straight line has an intersecting

point with the coordinate axes. The point of intersection for the straight line
with the ordinate axis corresponds to the maximum amount of the cost index with

N - l and is numerically equal to the parameter an in the equation (b.58). In turn,
the point of intersection of the straight line with the abscissa axis corresponds
to the cost index under the condition that the number of articles N manufactured
since the start of production numerically equals the amount of the output batch

N1 over period T. It becomes obvious that for each amount of the batch NT there is
a corresponding ordinate (lg Jc“)1 - 8N1 and this also characterizes the cost re-
duction rate.

 

Fig. 6.22. Dependence of cost dynamics upon quantity of articles
manufactured since the start of serial production

The dependence of the ordinate au1 upon (N1)1 is expressed by the equation

3N ' 81"82 18 N‘1‘- (4.59)

In substituting (4.59) into (6.58), we obtain a model of cost dynamics in a final
form:

1m, = (I. -l- as"! N1) N". (6.60)

where A“ = const. with T - const.

235

FOR OFINC]AI.USE¢JNLY
FOR OFFHIA1.USE13NLY

Thus, if we know the size of the product batch NI manufactured over the period T

since the start of serial production and the cost of NT article cho then from
(4.60) it is possible to determine the cost of any N article from this batch.

Calculations have shown a good convergence of the cost dynamics estimates for cer-
tain functional elements of systems (the deviations of the actual values from the
calculations have not exceeded 10 percent). However, it is essential to emphasize
that the designated method of forecasting cost dynamics entails certain complica-!
tions in obtaining models of the type (4.60). Thus, in considering the constraints
related to the requirement of product comparability in terms of the degree of pro-
duction development. the initial statistical aggregate of articles is broken up into
groups with close values of the serial output point.

Consequently, instead of one general model for cost dynamics it is necessary to
build several particular models for the individual product groups. Hith the general
smallness of the initial aggregate, the number of products in each group can be in-
sufficient for establishing reliable statistical dependences (see Section 4.2.3).

In problems involving the modeling of the costs of system functional elements where
a characteristic feature is a limited number of prototypes, the latter circumstance
can play a crucial role since the very possibility of constructing a model for prod-
uct cost dynamics is in jeopardy.

The designated shortcomings are largely eliminated if one uses a method of cost dy-
namics forecasting based upon the following principle: a reduction in costs will
be more noticeable the higher the output of articles per unit of time established
toward the end of the stage of developing serial production. The forecasting of
cost dynamics using this method is carried out from a model which is often called

a "development curve" equation:

c u) lm'é. (4.61)

where t--the time since the start of production measured in quarters;
3;, 35-equation constants set empirically and 8§‘<°-

From (4.61) it can be seen that the approximate value of the cost C(t) in the given
quarter t can be determined by the simple substitution of a numerical value for t,
if the constants 3; and 85 are known.

An analysis of (4.61) shows that with t - 1, the value of the 3; parameter will
numerically equal the amount of product costs in the first quarter C and which
coincides with the start of serial output. At the same time, if in (4.61) we sub-
stitute the forecast value of the cost for the serially produced article Co corres-
ponding to the serial output point to, then it is possible to write:

(3.. 1111?. (4.62)
In making a simple transformation of (4.62), it is possible to express the 8; param-

eter through the cost of a serially produced article Co and the value of the serial
output point:

I _“:I
"I ""Cu’o . (10.63)

236

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR 0F1WC1AI.USE‘0NLN

In substituting (6.63) in (6.61), it is possible to construct a model for forecasting
product costs in any time interval of the serial production period:

an;
Cup-(5.1.! . (6.64)

From (4.61.) it can be seen that when (to and to are correspondingly determined. for
calculating the entire cost dynamics series it is merely a question of calculating
the absolute amount of the exponent 85 since for each product the values co and to
are constant.

As was shown in Subsection 4.4.1, the cost reduction rate is influenced by the scale
of established serial production (see Fig. 6.17). Research has shown that there is
a close connection between the output scale expressed by the daily output of a de-
veloped product qo and the cost reduction rate and these are described by the abso-
lute amount of the exponent in the equation (4.61). This relation is depicted by
the following dependence:

lﬂilum-l-"I'Wim (4.65s)

where IB§I--the absolute amount of the exponent in the equation (4.61).

Another variety of the model (b.65a) is the dependence of 85 upon the logarithm of
the ratio of daily output for the developed product qo to the daily output in the
first quarter of serial production ql:

”53' m... .|.mzlog%. (4.651»)

Regardless that the ratio qolql is a simplified description for the growth rate of
the daily output within the interval (t°-t1), the model (b.65b) does not provide
any substantial improvements in the accuracy of the estimate in comparison with
(6.65s). This is explained by the fact that regardless of a certain fluctuation in
the initial daily outputs q}, the first serially produced models are manufactured
under approximately equal organizational and economic conditions and the degree of
further change in these conditions depends upon the output scale of established
serial production. For this reason, cost dynamics determined by changes in the
organizational and economic conditions in the process of developing serial produc-
tion with a sufficient degree of approximation is characterized by the output of
the serially produced products and this is reflected by the dependence (10.65a).
Thus, out of the two models (4.65a) and (b.65b) one must choose the first as the

simplest one which also requires a smaller amount of information about the character-
istics of the serial production process for the forecast object.
Thus, considering (6.6Sa), the serial production cost model which reflects the gen-

eral patterns in the formation of product cost dynamics in the process of developing
serial production can be written in the following form:

c (I) .-. CJ:!'”‘1"'0(‘ "I '"au'a'. (’0. 66)

237

FOR 0F1ﬂCJAI.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of the model (4.66) for forecasting involves, as one can note, the necessity
of preliminary calculation of the length of the production development stage to and
the amount of daily output for the developed product qo. Prom equations (4.55) and
(4.51) it follows that for determining to and q0 it is essential to possess data on
the distribution of daily output over the time of serial production q(t). However,

with the existing practices of long-range planning. the enterprises are given quotas
for the output of the entire batch of the given articles with a distribution of the
production program over the years of the assumed period of serial production. Con-
sequently. the quarterly distribution of daily output, as the proposed cost fore-

casting method requires, must be specially calculated using the data of the annual
product output plans.

This problem is solved in the following manner. At the end of each year of serial
production. the amount of the integral (in a running total) daily output is estab-
lished using the formula:

,.
0.117291% (4.67)

where Dk-the average number of workdays in the quarter;

Nr--the planned output of articles for the corresponding year of serial pro-
duction.

Here, the integral daily output achieved by the end of each year of serial produc-
tion is assigned a corresponding number of the quarter counting from the start of
serial output. For example, the integral output 011 at the end of the second year
is identified with Q3 for the eighth ordinal number of the quarter. Considering
that the stage of developing serial production will last usually not more than 4
years. it is enough to calculate the integral outputs for 4, 8. 12 and 16 quarters.
The calculated values of the integral daily outputs are approximated by the function

1’
am _.. [cum (4.53)

In solving (4.68) using (4.51), we obtain the following expression for the integral
function of daily output:

Q(t) I: dld2{(d2t+d3) arctg (d2t+d3)- %1n[l+(d2t+d3)2]}+dntz ((0.69)

If it is assumed d2 = 1, then d3 will equal the abscissa of the bending point of the
daily output curve. Then the parameters d1 and d“ can be found in the following
manner. Having designated in (4.69) the expression in braces by F(t), we have

q(t) - d1F(t)-#dgt. In using the least square method we find:

I l
d.— gnu—4.21:! (4.70)

if“): .

 

238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF1ﬂC1AL.US£lMNLY

$QIF(‘)$’U)‘”$P(0 $04!

do=———-r—t—T——-
[$35ou —¥.mo)",n “’71)

where t--assumes successive the values 4, 8, 12, and 16 while Q; respectively equals
Ql. ' 01; Q8 - QIID 0". Q15 ' QIV'

Then the calculations are carried out by the successive approximation method by sub-
stituting in (4.70) and (4.71) the values of d3 expressed by numbers of a natural
series. The criterion for the closeness of the function (4.69) to the set values of
Q: can be the maximum of the correlation index

ﬁlm—o

2; IO! —3|'

    

(4.72)

The calculations continue until a value is found for d3 whereby the correlation in-
dex "Q assumes a maximum value.

Thus, the forecasting of product cost dynamics, after a forecast has been made for
the cost of the serially produced article Co, should be carried out in the following
sequence:

1) 0n the basis of the long-range annual plans for product output. an integral
daily output is determined for the end of each year for the first 3 or 4 years of
the proposed period of serial production;

2) Using formulas (4.70) and (4.71) by the method of successive approximations to
the maximum expression of (4.72), the parameters are determined for the time trend
curve of daily output (4.51);

3) For formula (4.55) an ordinal number is set for the quarter to corresponding to
the start of developed production;

4) Using formula (4.51) by the substituting of t - to the amount is established for
the daily output of the serially produced article qo;

5) The found values to and 90 are substituted in (4.66); the model (4.66) is trans-
formed to the type (4.61);

6) Product costs in any quarter of the serial production period are determined by
substituting in (4.61) the numerical value of t corresponding to the ordinal number
of this quarter.

The calculations made by the designated method show that the closeness of the calcu-

lated values of C(t) to the initial data is comparable vith the approximation accur-
acy for the cost of individual products using an equation of the type (4.61). This

strengthens the confidence in this method.

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion it must be pointed out that the nature of the dependences for the
change in the cost reduction rate upon daily output qo and the size of the product

batch NT [see (4.59)] fully coincides. This shows the adequacy of the models (6.59)
and (4.65s) to the depicted processes. '

Attention must also be drawn to an interesting feature of these dependences: the
cost reduction rates grow initially more intensely and then much more slowly than
the output scale. Here, as in experimental production, one feels the existence of
the cost sensitivity thresholds to a change in the production scale. This circum-
stance formalized by the equations (6.59) and (6.65s) can be considered not only in
forecasting product costs but also in the problems of optimizing a production pro-
gram for product output.

6.6.3. Forecasting the Production Cost Level of BTS Functional Elements

By the serial production cost level, as was pointed out in Subsection 6.6.1, one
understands the cost of a serially produced article. Since the cost of a serially
produced article is considered comparable in terms of the degree of developing seri-
al production, research on the change in these costs in the initial statistical
aggregate makes it possible to judge how costs are influenced by factors which char-

acterize the scientific and technical development processes of large technical sys-
tems .

As a whole the costs of articles3 are most strongly influenced by their design and
production features and these, in turn, are determined by the demands made on the

functional and technical-operational characteristics of the articles. At the sane
time, the cost level is influenced substantially by the macro- and microeconomic
factors. In the forecasting of product costs, of the permanent macroeconomic fac-
tors it is important to consider the factor of the rise in social labor productivity
(the methods for modeling the influence of this factor have been examined in Sub-
section 6.3). The influence of microeconomic factors on the product cost level is
chiefly explained by the difference in the organizational and technical level and
the scale of serial production under the conditions of stable product output.

As was shown above, cost dynamics are caused by changes in the organizational-
technical level and the scale of production within the period of the aerial output
of one individual article. In opposition to this, the cost level is determined by
the difference of organizational and economic conditions in the serially developed
production of a parametric series of functional element prototypes. Fluctuations
in the cost level under the impact of microeconomic factors are determined by a
change in the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of serial production.

In the process of forming the level, like cost dynamics, the main role is played by
quantitative characteristics, that is, by the product output scale. '

The output scale has a direct and indirect influence on the cost of developed arti-
cles, determining in the last instance the organizational and technical level of
serial production (this question was examined in detail in Section 6.6.1). The

 

3Here and below for the sake of brevity the term "serially produced“ will sometimes
be omitted.

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

direct consequence of this dual influence of the output scale on the cost of aerial-
ly produced articles is the reduction in costs with a rise in daily output under the

conditions of stable serial production. This reduction occurs according to the law
of a step function

0... “ Mt" (4.73)

where q°--daily output of serially produced article;
sq. Aq--equation parameters set empirically and *q“03
CPo-the cost of a unit of base parameter Po (proportional cost of article).

In the general product cost model the influence of the scale of developed production
can be considered using the index of proportional costs

0 ‘ .
I...-(-§)'.

where q°1--daily output of article i;
i°--daily output taken as base.

If it is assumed do - 1. then (4.74) will be simplified:

a
1.3.0 = «7.;- (4.75)
If simultaneously one considers the influence of the factor of the rise in social

labor productivity (see Section 4.3), the product cost model can be represented in
the following forn:

(1‘u tcoﬁnyu -|-0.0|V)""°. (4.76)

where Co(i)-the cost of the developed article. as a function of the characteristics
of the forecast object;
1°--the year of output of the serially produced article used as the stand-
ard representative of the initial statistical aggregate;
tn--the output year of a serially produced article which is the object of
the forecast.

It is not hard to see that with 90 - l and tn . to. the last two Iultipliers of
(4.76) are turned to one and the cost under these conditions will be expressed by a
dependence upon the characteristics of the article Co - 00(2). The articles which
are part of the initial statistical aggregate differ not only in terns of their
characteristics but also in terms of the output scale qo. Moreover. their output
occurs in different years which encompass the forecast object's prehistory. For
this reason, before beginning to analyze the influence of the object's characteris-
tics on costs, one must adjust the actual data about the cost of the initial para-
metric series of articles which are the prototypes for the system's functional ele-
ment. The actual data are corrected using the formulas

.. l ,
‘ﬁ‘ Ch 7,; (1. < W (4.77)

241

FOR OFTHC1A1.USE|DNLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

‘7.“ (Thu | 0,1)IW)‘"-" (Tv<n), (4,73)

where c 1-actual initial cost of article i;
C 1--actual cost of article i corrected for actual daily output Qoi;
c?1-actual cost of article i additionally corrected for actual year of serial
output 11.

From (4.77) one can see that if the actual daily output of article i is less than
one, its corrected cost will be less than the initial (the output scale is more and
the cost less). Conversely, if q°1>l, then Ch >Cf1 (the reduction in the output
scale entailed an increase in costs). In the same manner, if the article was manu-
factured before the date used as the base a. then under the conditions 0 the cost
of such an article shouldube lower as a consequence of the increased social labor
productivity To-11 <1, Cf1 <c§1 and so forth.

Practice shows that such calculations when made sufficiently correctly significantly
free the researcher from distorted ideas about the degree to which costs are in-
fluenced by the characteristics of the BTS functional elements.

Research on the cost dependence on the product characteristics ordinarily start by
selecting the so-called base parameter which is an indicator determining the trend
in the change of costs under the influence of the characteristics of the system
functional elements. The base parameter should accumulate the influence on costs
of the geometric dimensions of the object, its volume, the areas of worked sur-
faces, the number of design elements (pieces, assemblies and units) and so forth.
The base parameter should be both a design and functional characteristic of the
article.

Due to its universality the indicator of the weight of the design of system func-
tional elements has become most widespread as the design base parameter.

An increase in the geometric dimensions and weight for the design of a functional
element. with other conditions being equal, leads to an increase in the labor in-
tensiveness of manufacturing the design elements, to a rise in the consumption of
materials and to an increase in the overall dimensions and weight of production
equipment. It is essential to use heavier equipment, have larger areas available
and so forth. All of this, naturally, leads to increased costs for producing the
products.

The influence of product weight on the absolute amount of costs has been confirsed
by numerous research. As a whole there is a positive correlation between coats and
weight. However, the costs of products grow more slowly than the weight of a de-
sign increases. This is explained by the fact that with an increase in the weight
of a product, the number of design elements per unit of weight is reduced and the
average weight of one piece grows. with an increase in the weight of a piece, the
area of worked surfaces also rises but the influence of this factor on product labor
intensiveness is compensated for by the reduction in the total number of piece-
related operations which are performed in the various stages of the production
process, by the reduction in the number of assembly units of the design and the
range of production equipment, by the reduction in the consumption of materials and

242

HOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

so forth. As a consequence of this, the cost of a unit of design weight, with an

increase in its absolute weight, drops. This reduction is subordinate to the follow-
ing pattern:

C0 ”00"” (4.79)

where Cc-proportional cost of article calculated per unit of design weight;
G--design weight;
ac, Ac-equation parameters set empirically and lc‘<0.

The dependence (6.79) is a reflection of the influence on costs by the factor which
can be conditionally called the "design scale factor." It is important to point out
that such a pattern is found in the behavior of product costs with a broad range of
weight changes, as a consequence of which it is not always possible to establish

the dependence (4.79) from the data of the initial statistical aggregate. For this
reason, if such a dependence is lacking in forecasting product costs where the
weight differs substantially to either side from the observed extreme values, the
influence of this indicator on proportional costs must be additionally considered,
in resorting to expert estimates for help.

The weight of a design as a basic parameter must be used in estimating the cost of
the functional elements when among the characteristics of the elements it is pos-
sible to isolate a more encompassing indicator which simultaneously determines both
the cost and the consumer value of the articles. In actuality weight characterizes

not the functional properties of a system's element but rather the payment for these
properties.

Thus, the necessity of increasing aircraft payload and range necessitates an in-
crease in the overall weight of the design. In precisely the same way, for an in-
crease in jet engine thrust or the power of other types of engines, for an increase
in computer storage capacity or the power of energy sources and so forth, one must
pay by an increase in the design weight of these articles. For this reason, in
practice most often one stpts as the base parameter the characteristics which
simultaneously reflect the quantitative indicators (voluae, area, number of design
elements and so forth) and the functional properties of the article. Because of
the greater information capacity of such indicators their link with product costs
is closer in comparison with the design weight.

In the process of the scientific and technical development of systems, this rela-
tionship has been further strengthened, since an increase in the base parameters of

a functional element related to its specific purpose is accompanied by a desire to
simultaneously reduce the product's design weight. The latter is achieved by hard—
ening the operating processes in the functioning of the elements (increasing temp-
erature, pressure, speed and so forth) and this, in turn, necessitates the use of
expensive and hard-to-work structural materials with increased mechanical proper-
ties. Along with this, demands are increased upon the precision of parts and joints,
the roughness of machined surfaces and so forth. All of this taken together leads
to a rise in proportional expenditures per unit of design weight.

The tendency for a change in the proportional expenditures per unit of design weight
can be traced from the example of the dynamics of the proportional cost of the

243

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[13R OﬁWﬂCIAI.lJS£I(NULY

frame for a number of the U. S. fighters (Fig. 4.23). As is seen from the graph,
it is assumed that the tendency for an increased cost of 1 kg of airframe design
weight will be maintained in the future.

3—!
V
\k\\‘

  

Undue mum in may
AMMWM
\
_ Wm m may
ﬂames

 

I!“ on I!“ "I! I"! mo .1}!
2)Ihlnnnnstqunhusnpauaumwb

 

Fig. 4.23. Change in the cost of Fig. 4.24. Change in the cost of 1 kg
1 kg of airframe design weight for of turbojet engine thrust over years

sequential segigztzisu.s. Air Force Key: l--Cost index of 1 kg of engine
thrust; 2--Year of beginning
Key: l--C08t index of 1 kg of serial production
design weight; 2--Years

The increased cost of a unit of design weight for the BTS elements, in addition to
increasing the indicators of their weight advancedness, is determined by the action
of other, stronger operational factors of the system's specific effectiveness (see
Section 4.1). For this reason, the growth trend characterizes not only the changes
in the cost of a unit of design weight but also the costs per unit of the functional
base parameters. This, in particular, is confirmed by research on the time trends
for the cost of a unit of absolute thrust in the turbojet engines (Fig. 4.24).

From the drawing it can be seen that engine cost related to 1 kg of maximum thrust
shows a steady growth trend.

What has been said makes it possible to conclude that the dependence of product
cost upon the functional base parameters of the products, in comparison with the
dependence upon design weight, possesses greater forecasting value. However, the
functional base parameter does not exhaust the influence of the entire aggregate of
operational effectiveness factors on costs. For this reason, the establishing of
the influence of product weight or the functional base parameters on product costs
must be viewed as a preliminary stage in studying the influence of the operational
effectiveness factors on costs. Subsequently, there must be a careful analysis of
the behavior of proportional costs in order to establish its change patterns under
the influence of the operational effectiveness factors which were not involved in
the research in the first stage.

If the necessary information for these purposes is lacking or also for forecasts not
requiring high estimate accuracy. the model for the time trend of the proportional

costs of a functional element can be a simplified model of product costs. However,
a product cost forecast which is to be used for solving optimization problems should

244

INJRioFFICIAl.lﬁSEZ(HVLY
FOR‘OFTNC1AI.US£!0NLN

be carried out using mathematical economics models which include product character-
istics determining the growth trend of proportional expenditures as independent

variables. In a general form, a proportional cost model can be represented by the
following expression:

6... :4 C“;) leos (l0 . 80)

where Cp(i)-—the cost of a unit of base parameter expressing the dependence upon the
object's characteristics;

Jcp°--cost index for a unit of base parameter considering the influence of the
"design scale factor" on costs.

1.3,. = (7%)”, (6.81)

here P°--base parameter of forecast object;
Fb-base parameter of typical representative of initial statistical aggregate
of products;
Ap--equation parameter for dependence of proportional costs upon absolute
amount of base parameter and found from statistical data (Ap<<0).

Considering (6.80), a general model for the costs of serially produced BIS function-
al elements can be represented in the following manner:

‘ a . h -
6'. P..C.- 6') (41") ”'th + 0.0177)" "1 “-8”

A model for the cost of a functional element in each time interval for the assumed
period of serial production considering (6.82) is written:

. 1.
CU) - I'..(-'v..(\)(%1) l"0:4“ I 0.0IV)"" "' x l5"""""t"“"" "'°’. (4-33)

The procedure for constructing the mathematical economics model (6.83) is a typical
example of factor modeling of cost estimates. From an analysis of (6.83) it can be
seen that each element in the model reflects the influence of a certain group of
factors and the uniform relations have been localized. This makes it possible to
forecast costs in running through a multiplicity of variations for the possible
states of the development processes and this, in turn, facilitates the procedure
for choosing the optimum areas for developing the BTS.

Let us take up the possibilities of the use of the model (6.83) for forecasting

the prices for new BTS functional elements. The setting of prices is an essential
element in economic forecasting as the expenditures on serial production are in-
cluded in the model of the system economic estimate criterion not in terms of costs
but rather in the form of the prices of the system functional elements. Price fore-
casting involves the determining of proportional capital investments into the cost
of the fixed and working capital calculated per article.

265

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The proportional capital investments K ydc into serial production undergo changes
both in the process of the scientific and technical development of the system func-
tional elements as well as in the process of developing their serial production.

The direct Iodeling of cost estimates for fixed and working capital for price fore-
casting purposes requires the carrying out of special research. At the same time
the trends for the change in capital investments per unit of product are largely
determined by the nature of the change in the coat of the system functional elements.

As is known, the cost of fixed capital is considered in production costs by expendi-
tures on amortization while the cost of working capital used in the creation of pro-
duction inventories, incomplete production and so forth is related to a majority of
the other economic elements which are components of product costs. Thus, it can
conditionally be assumed that capital investments into serial production of arti-
cles will change proportionally to their cost. Consequently, in forecasting the
cost of systen functional elements it is enough to know the amount of the general
ratio Yf between the value of the productive capital and the cost of enterprise
gross output (if at the assent of comiling the forecast the enterprise is still un-
known, then for the sector) where the production of these articles will be located.
Then, in knowing this ratio, the amount of proportional capital investments calcu-
lated per article can be determined from the simplified formula:

Kydc . Y£¢(t)- (6.84)

Naturally, the effectiveness of this method for determining proportional capital in-
vestments will depend upon the stabilization of the Yf indicator, and for this

reason it is advisable to carry out research, and when necessary, the modeling of
the time trend for this indicator.

6.5. Basic Formative Patterns and Forecasting Methods for BTS Operating
Expenditures

6.5.1. Particular Features in the BTS Operating Process and the Classification of
Expenditures for This

The operation of large technical systems includes the system functioning processes
(specific operation) and the work related to the maintaining of the systems in
proper technical order and functional readiness (technical operation).

Specific operation is characterized by the system functioning conditions (the inter-
action of the systems with the enviromnent) and by the functional properties deter-
mined by the purpose of the systems.

Technical operation is among the auxiliary processes. Its purpose is the periodic
performance of a range of measures related to the maintenance and repair of the sys-
tem elements in the aim of maintaining or restoring a certain reliability and dura—
bility level in order to ensure safe operation over the service life of the func~
tional element. Technical operation consists of maintenance and major overhaul.

Maintenance includes preventive measures performed for the purpose of maintaining
and partially restoring the required level of quality, reliability and durability
in the systems and subsystems. The maintenance process has a cyclical nature. The

246

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

range of work involved in maintenance includes: operational maintenance (0T0) and
periodic maintenance (PTO).

The basic purpose of operational maintenance is the tending and supervision of
materiel and this is carried out by performing external inspections and testing
the state of the systems and subsystems as well as by the partial carrying out of
preventive work not requiring great expenditures of time to perform.

For maintaining the required reliability and durability in the functioning of the
system over the entire period between repairs. at stipulated intervals a range of
work is carried out termed periodic maintenance. The PTO work is performed as re-
quired after a certain number of system operating hours. The content, scope and
time of performing the PTO are set for each functional element individually and re-
main constant over the amortization life. As periodic maintenance is performed,
routine repairs are carried out simultaneously. Existing malfunctions are elimin-
ated by replacing or repairing the defective parts and units.

A major overhaul is carried out for the purpose of maintaining the functional ele-
ments and the system as a whole in a state of constant readiness for use and for
maintaining operating capacity between repairs during the entire service life. A
major overhaul is performed after the previously set time between repairs has lapsed
or with damage (breaking dam) of the basic elements.

In many instances, and this is particularly characteristic for the present develop-
ment stage of the BTS, a major overhaul is often combined with modernization. As a
result of modernization, a functional element is returned to operation with improved
performance, and for this reason in analyzing the major overhaul process it is essen-
tial to distinguish its two aspects. In the first place, a major overhaul per se

as a process of restoration (eliminating physical wear) and, secondly, the perform—
ing of improvements as a modernization process, that is, the partial elimination of
obsolescence in a functional element.

The operating expenditures are classified by four features (Table 4.8).

By composition all expenditure items can be divided into simple and composite. The
simple expenditures are ones of a uniform nature. These include the expenditures on
68!! [fuels and lubricants], amortization and current repairs. The 68!! item includes
expenditures only for the central element of the system, while amortization includes
expenditures on renovation and major overhaul over the service life. Fuel expendi-
tures and amortization deductions for the remaining system elements are accounted
for separately. The item "Current Repair" includes expenditures on spare parts,
instruments, equipment and materials consusd in current repair and maintenance as
well as all expenditures on this type of work when it is performed by the enter-
prises.

Among the composite items are expenditures which either themselves consist of sev-
eral expenditure items or include expenditures for different employee groups servic-
ing the BTS subsystems (wages and social security deductions).

Depending upon the volume of work performed by the system, operating expenses are
divided into those which depend on this volume (variable expenditures) and those

which do not depend on the volume (conditionally fixed).

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I1)R‘OF1WC3AL.USIZ(N§LY

Table 4.8

  
   
   

  
 
 
  
  
 

Expenditure Classification Features

By depend-
ence upon
amount of
work

By method of
relating to
operation

   
      
 

 
   
    

By tie with
operation

By
composition

     

Expenditure Items

    
     

Wages

Deductions on social
security

Fuels and lubricants
Amortization of equipment
Current repair

Expenditures on ground
facilities

Key: a--Simp1e; b--Composite; c-Direct; d--Indirect; e--Basic; f--0verhead;
g—-Variable; h--Conditionally fixed

M

The variable expenditures include those which rise proportionally to the amount of
work. For example, for aircraft systems used in the national economic sector this
would be the quantity of carried passengers. cargo and mail: accrued flying time

and aircraft take-offs. The given group of expenditures would also include expendi-
tures on GSH, amortization, flight personnel wages, maintenance and current repair
of subsystems, a portion of expenditures on the upkeep of runways and so forth.

The conditionally fixed expenditures. with an increase in the volume of work, either
remain constant or rise to a smaller degree than the amount of work and the number
of operations performed by the system. They are called conditionally fixed because
they do not change until a certain limit is reached for an increase in the amount

of traffic. Upon reaching this limit, the expenditures which do not depend upon

the amount of traffic jump and then for a certain period again remain fixed (or
almost fixed) until a new rise in the amount of traffic causes them to jump again.

Thus. an increase in the number of aircraft take-offs does not change the total ex-
penditures on the amortization of the airfield runway (VPP) and the airport adminis-
trative and management expenses. But when the number of aircraft take-offs exceeds
airfield capacity and the capability of the airport staff, the VP? must be extended
or a new one built, personnel must be increased and so forth. Then the expenditures
on BPP amortization and the wages of administrative and management personnel will
grow and the expenditures which do not depend upon the amount of traffic as a whole

for the airport increase. However, per aircraft take-off these expenditures can be
less than before.

268

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4.5.2. Forecasting BTS Operating Expenditures

Depending upon the purpose of the research for the required calculation accuracy
BTS operating expenditures can be set with a varying degree of detail. In the gener-
al instance their amount is calculated according to the equality

6e - c,(1+-enxyd.)xe, (4.85)

where C,-BTS operating costs per unit of time;

En--normed sectorial capital investment effectiveness coefficient;
Kyde--proportional capital investment;
1e--duration of examined BTS operating period.

Generally the forecasting method for BIS operating expenditures is carried out using
an aggregate mathematical economics model in which the cost indicators and the basic
characteristics of the system and operating stage are analytically interrelated.

Below, from the example of air transport BIS, the method is given for calculating

expenditures on their operation per unit of time (for 1 hour of accrued flying
time).

Direct operating expenditures (PER). The direct expenditures (see Table 6.7) in-
clude the expenditures the amount of which can be directly related to the cost of

a system flight hour. These are expenditures on the wages of flight personnel (LPP),
fuel and lubricants (68H), amortization and maintenance of the aviation BTS.

Lff’uuges. The hourly wages of the LP? with the existing wage system over the en-
tire aircraft life can remain constant, as the amount of the salaries and bonuses
with kilometrage wages does not depend upon the aircraft amortization life or the
period between repairs.

Proportional LPP wages can be determined when one knows the number of passenger
seats or when the number of crew members, the amount of the annual flying hours per
crew and the take-off weight of the aircraft are known. However, the number of
passenger seats and crew members shows a correlation dependence upon the aircraft
take-off weight 00. As a consequence, L?P wages depend most upon take-off weight
and can be calculated from the following equation:

xc
cltlpp - acoco 0. (4.86)

05M expenditures. In a general form the hourly GSH expenditures are determined in
the following manner:

1:8,“ ' Qa(1+0)Pr. (4.87)

where Qa--average hourly fuel and lubricant consumption by all aircraft engines in
the air. tons;

0--coefficient considering additional 08“ consumption in operation of en-
gines on ground;
PT--price of 1 ton of fuel, rubles.

269

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As is known, the average hourly fuel consumption Qa changes depending upon the
cruising hourly fuel consumption ch and the length of the non-stop flight Lna'

In turn, the cruising hourly fuel consumption shows a correlation dependence upon
aircraft productivity verso. where Vcr-cruiaing speed of flight. Thus, having ex-
pressed in the equation (6.87) Qa by Lns and Go, we obtain the following type of
calculation formula for hourly GSH consumption expenditures:

c1,8‘m - 38,.(v¢,c°)*1L3§ , (6.88)

where A; < 0.

Amortization. Amortization deductions include outlays on renovation and major over-
haul of the airframe with equipment and engines. Hourly renovation deductions are
calculated as the quotient of dividing the cost of the functional element minus its
residual amount Greg by its amortization life 11:

n C -c
CE, _ 2 otr res. (4.89)
1.1 1".
where Catt—sectorial cost including expenditures on NIOKR and serial production of
functional element;
n—-number of elements in system. The amount of the residual value Creso

depending upon the type of element, varies within the limits of 2-8
percent.

The proportional (per unit of use time) expenditures on major overhaul are deter-
mined as the ratio of the cost of the entire quantity of major overhauls over the
service life to the amortization life of the functional element.

The cost of a major overhaul on an airframe with equipment can be calculated depend-

ing upon the weight of the empty aircraft Ge. the ordinal number of repairs nkrpl
and the size of the repair inventory “rpl

ckrpl ' aurce‘E“N$§$n§§31 (6.90)

where Ag“ <0.

The cost of an engine major overhaul is calculated depending upon the thrust “man or
the power "max for the ordinal number of the overhaul “krdv. and the amount of the
repair inventory Nrdv:

A A x
ckrdv ' au,R.§: ":23 “kggv’ (4.91)

P
where AZd <0.

Considering that an aircraft can have several engines, the proportional expenditures
on major overhauls should be increased by the number of engine mountings "dv'

250

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ehpenditurss on maintenance. The maintenance process has a cyclical nature (it is
repeated after each major overhaul). For this reason aircraft maintenance expendi-
tures related to a flying hour cdto can be determined depending upon the length of

tine between repairs ‘mr' In ad ition it has been established that these expendi-
tures depend upon the take-off weight of the aircraft:

1 Alto AZto
ctto - :8 ataco In 3 (4.92)

where tenamortization life of aircraft.
1.513 4.9 Ihdir‘ct Opeﬂatina expenditures (KER). In

calculating the cost of an aircraft flight
hour, in addition to the direct expendi-

 

 

  
      
    

l 2 § 3 g b tures, it is also essential to consider the

. 3‘ g so-called airport (airfield) expenditures

§ ”mm m“ :3 :g which are part of the KER group. At pres-

: c-MMn-.' 8 is out the air rt ex enditures are et ro-

. a g P0 p s p

9 ;,g 'e portionately to the direct (flight) expend-

g 5;. g: itures or to the aircraft take-off weight.

i an! 3! Either method leads to substantial inaccur-
acies and does not make it possible to op-

" ”(E-5’5” 1031030 3-; timize the series of aircraft parameters

m w§d>m mqodm aMpuuuntManaﬁtuuwﬁam

Iv l0,-G.5~L5 <|0 OM landing characteristics.

 

Airport expenditures are significantly in-
fluenced by the airport class required for
the designed aircraft and the closely re-
lated amount of traffic for these airports.
3;;2::;:8:p::::::n:n°=3;o°f In this regard, with aggregated methods for
ton-kn- 4--Airport expendi- calculating the cost of an aircraft flight
ture coefficient hour, the amount of the airport expenditures
should be determined proportionally to the

direct operating expenditures (the calcula-
tion base), but in a differentiated nanner for the required airport class or amount
of traffic (Table 4.9).

Key: l-Airport class; 2-Aircraft
take-off weight. tons;

Proportional capital investments. In an economic estimate of the designed aircraft

and in optimizing their parameters, it is essential to consider not only the current
expenditures but also the one-shot (capital) expenditures. Direct capital invest-

ments include investments into the required aircraft and engine fleet and into air-
port productive capital. Since the traffic volume is measured in ton-km. it is ad-
visable to calculate the proportional capital investments (or proportional produc-
tive capital) fl" per 1 ton-kn. A transition to proportional capital investments
per flying hour £11 in this instance is rather simple:

f” - flaw“, (4.93)

where Hit--hourly productivity of designed aircraft, ton-km,

251

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFIWC1AI.lﬂﬂE(MﬁLY

w” - vccptxt; ($.94)
here vc-average cruising speed, km per hour;

6 -payload weight. tons;
-load factor.

The proportional capital investments into the aircraft and motor fleet can be cal-
culated proceeding from the forecast amount of aircraft coat Ca and engine coat Cd
in their output program N, and Nd and annual productivity "yr:

f!" '- T ; (4.95)

"yr - "1,571.; “d - lglmu‘g
where Hyr-accrued annual aircraft flying time;

md-number of engines on aircraft;
1.15-coefficient considering required engine replacement stock.

Consequently.

deans-“Cd
f1" - W . (4.96)

The proportional capital investments into airport productive capital can be calcu-
lated on the basis of empirical data for the various classes of airports.

252

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORl0FFNJAL.USIZONlY

5.1. General Characteristics of Methods

According to the above-accepted classification of effects. it is essential to dis-
tinguish the annual effect and the full effect over the entire service life of new
equipment. The concept of the full effect can be broadened if one considers not one
specimen but rather the entire output of the given model of new equipment or the en-
tire output of equipment needed to implement a certain national economic program.

In the literature. along with the term "full effect," there is also found the con-
cept of the integral effect which is employed in estimating the effect from carry-
ing out integral programs over 10-15 and more years. V. P. Krasovskiy notes that
the advantages of integral calculations are that they provide an amount of effect

ing both the gradual increase in the effect during the production development proc-
ess as well as its possible decline due to obsolescence. Furthermore the integral
effect calculations provide an opportunity to more fully realize a national economic
approach to selecting the investment programs, to anticipate possible changes in

the market conditions, the consequences of further technical development and the
future social conditions as well as caution against hurried and unsound decisions
taken solely from the short-term gains of the next few years. The integral effect
calculations over an extended period correspond more to the tasks of investment
programs than do the annual effect calculations [16, page 19].

We must fully agree with the conclusions of V. P. Krasovshiy. In estimating avia-
tion equipment, an integral approach has long been employed. in truth, under differ-
ent names such as a comprehensive approach, a dynamic approach and determining the
effect over the system's life cycle.

The annual effect can be calculated for a certain year as an average annual effect
over the entire service life. If the annual effect is calculated as an average
annual effect, then there are no fundamental differences between the methods of cal-
culating the annual effect and the full effect and these differences are purely of

a quantitative nature. If the annual effect is calculated for a certain year, then
these calculations have a definite static nature in contrast to calculations for the
entire system life cycle which are of a dynamic nature. Proceeding from this it is
possible to propose two methods for calculating the economic effectiveness of the
BTS: dynamic and static.

253

FIH!(HHW(1AI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A dynamic approach makes it possible to consider the dynamics of a phenomenon which
arise under the influence of a large number of changing factors and for this reason
the results of the dynamic approach are more accurate than the static one. However.
the use of a dynamic approach requires a large number of initial data which, depend-
ing upon the nature of the calculation, have a forecast or planned nature and encom-
pass a significant period. With a static approach the initial data are more reli-
able and accurate and for this reason it possesses greater certainty than the dynam-
ic approach. This particular feature of the static model and its simplicity have
been responsible for its wide use.

However. the development of methods for planning and forecasting the economic param-
eters of technical systems and the introduction of program planning and forecasting
methods have set a trend to an ever-greater transition from the static to the dynam-
ic methods of calculating system economic effectiveness. Evermore elements of the
dynamic method are being incorporated in the static method. Subsequently we will
be talking about the dynamic method as the most general calculation method. Along
with this we can recommend an approximate calculation method which combines indi-
vidual elements of the static approach to elements of the dynamic method.

The use of one of the two recommended methods-dynamic and approximate--depends upon
the nature of the problem to be solved and the amount of initial information.

Global problems, for example, the involving of the economically sound periods for
the change of 3T5 generations or determining economic effectiveness of replacing

a functioning system by a new one and so forth, can be most successfully solved by
the dynamic method. The local (particular) problems which can be solved with a min-
imum of initial data. for example. the choice of optimum parameters for a system
element in terms of an economic criterion with the set basic system parameters or

a feasibility study for an element to be used in a given system and so forth, can
be successfully solved using the approximate method.

5.2. The Dynamic Method for Determining National Economic Effectiveness of the BTS

An estimate of BTS economic effectiveness assumes the determining of two effective-
ness criteria; the national economic and the cost accounting effect. The solution

to the problems of determining BTS economic effectiveness using these criteria as-

sumes the constructing of mathematical economics models which show the dynamics of

capital investments and current expenditures on NIOKR as well as in serial produc-

tion and operation over the entire system life cycle period.

The dynamic calculation method is based upon the constructing of a dynamic model
for the BTS economic effectiveness criterion, that is, a model of expenditures on
the development, manufacture and operation of the BTS. In constructing this model,
major difficulties arise in the mathematical description of capital investment and
current expenditures dynamics over the years. A dynamic expenditure model should
be based upon the model for the production and reproduction of the entire BTS fleet
over a significant period of time. It is very complicated to construct such a
model, as hundreds and even thousands of articles are in operation. The BTS fleet
circulates from the serial production plant to operation, then to repairs and back
into operation. It is complex to construct a model for the production, reproduc-
tion and operation of the BTS fleet in a natural scale. however. it is significantly
more complicated to construct an expenditure model, as the articles manufactured at
different times differ both in terms of expenditures and in the calendar time of
their making.

254

FOR‘OFFHHAI.USE(NNLY
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USEIDNLY

The acquired experience in constructing dynamic models of the BTS economic effec—
tiveness criteria makes it possible to formulate the basic provisions for the elab-
oration of such models. A dynamic model for the BTS economic effectiveness cri-
terion represents a system of time-coordinated particular dynamic models for the
production, reproduction and operation of the BTS (a model of the natural indica-
tors) as well as dynamic models of expenditures made over the BTS life cycle stages
(the model of cost indicators).

For the practical use of the designated dynamic model, of crucial significance is
the aggregate of initial data used as the basis for estimating BTS economic effec-

tiveness. The most important element in the initial base is the national economic
demand which the designated 8T8 should satisfy. The national economic demand is
characterized by a range of qualitative and quantitative parameters which determine
the amount of work produced by the given system over the period of operating the
system To. The second element in the initial base for constructing the model is

the range of parameters characterizing the quality of the designated system varia-
tions.

The amount of the system's work over time during To years and the values of the
system parameters, particularly those which characterize its productivity and oper-
ational effectiveness,1nake it possible to set the required number (fleet) of sys-
tem elements. Let us recall that the elements of an aviation system are the air-
craft and its structural parts: the airframe, power unit, flight equipment and the
ground support facilities.

The third initial element for constructing the model is the available material and
human resources needed for the creation, production and functioning of the BTS.
First of all it is a question of production capacity possessed by the scientific
research, prototype design and industrial enterprises which create and manufacture
the various system elements as well as the organizations which operate the DIS. A
comparison of the demand for system elements with the production capacity of the
corresponding organizations and enterprises makes it possible to disclose the lack-
ing production capacity and the amount of required capital investments and human
resources.

The calculated demand for the BTS serves as the basis for calculating the output
program for the BTS elements at the corresponding enterprises, proceeding from the
existing production capacity and capability for building new capacity. Analogous
balance calculations are made for the repair enterprises. This makes it possible
to determine the time parameters of the system life cycle:

1) The start of capital construction in the various spheres such as scientific
research institutes, design organizations, industry and in operation;

2) The duration of capital construction in the corresponding sphere;

3) The beginning of carrying out the scientific research and prototype design work
(NIOKR) for the various system elements;

a) The duration of carrying out the NIOKR for the various system elements;

255

FOR 0F!1CLAL.USE€DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5) The start of manufacturing the various system elements and the duration of the
manufacturing period.

All the time parameters should be interrelated and coordinated and precisely in
this case do they characterize the system life cycle.

The presence of technical parameters for the designated system elements, the quan-
titative data on the demand for them, the time characteristics of the system life
cycle and data on the availability of production resources and the completion of
new resources make it possible to determine the system's coat parameters: the cost
of the N10!!! for the various system elements. the cost of manufacturing the system
and the cost of operating the system.

Thus, the dynamic model of the BTS economic effectiveness criterion includes the
following partial models: the model of the specific ITS effect; the model for the
quality parameters of the system elements; the model for the production and opera-

tional dynamics of the BTS; the expenditure models in the stages of the system life
cycle.

The method of constructing the particular models and synthesizing them into a gen-
eral effectiveness criterion model is best examined from the example of a certain
specific large technical system. An air transport system can serve as an angle
of a large technical system and for this reason let us examine the method of con-
structing a dynamic model for the BTS economic effectiveness criterion using the
example of an air transport system (ATS).

The national economic effectiveness of an ATS is calculated using the criterion
(3.26). The annual effect from introducing the new system is determined by (3.27)
and the full effect by (3.28). In a dynamic calculation method, a dynamic model of

the ATS effectiveness criterion is employed and this includes the particular models
listed above.

Model of the specific effect of the ATS. The ATS variations are compared with a
constant fixed amount of the system's specific or telic effect. The specific effect
is the volume of air transport work 3; which the system carries out over the period
of time To ”so: Tao]. The volume of air cargo shipments is measured in ton-km and
passenger traffic in passenger-km while the total volume of cargo and passenger
shipments is given in reduced ton-km which are determined by adding the cargo and
passenger turnover multiplied by a coefficient of 0.09 indicating how much a passen-
ger with a free baggage allowance weighs in tons (90 kg).

The system's volume of traffic is determined by the seamed spheres of its use, that
is, by the transport network which is characterized by the aggregate of air routes
set by the length (distance) I. - {L} and by the volume of air shi{pments 6(1, t) in
reduced ton-km for each distance L from the designated aggregate l} for each year t
of the period T .

Model of quality parameters for the ATS elements. As was pointed out above, the
system's elements are characterized by a large number of quality parameters, includ-

ing: functional. technical and economic. In an economic estimate of a system. one
considers not the entire range of parameters but rather the basic ones. For '

256

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

example, for an aircraft which is the central element of the system, the basic
initial parameters for the calculation are the following:

1) The given class of aircraft (an aircraft for local lines or trunk lines, passen-
ger or cargo, and so forth);

2) Maximum aircraft payload 6:3};
3) Planned aircraft load factor K2;

4) Calculated range (cat or the maximum non-stop flight range with the maximum pay-
load;

5) Change in the payload Geo“; and consumed fuel 6:; depending upon the flight dis-
tance (Fig. 5.1) and the change in the cruising speed vcrt depending upon the length
of flight Z;

6) The average annual accrued flying time per aircraft T8;

7) Take-off weight co, weight of empty aircraft cam and airframe Height G‘f;

8) Number of engines on aircraft Nd;

9) General technical life of aircraft airframe 13;;

10) Service life between repairs for airframe t.;.

11) Number of airframe major overhauls n,,.

Fig. 5.1. Dependence of payload (a)
and cruising speed (b) on flight range

 

 

b)

The basic initial parameters for an engine are:

l) Thrust R0, 8c; and specific fuel consumption Cgo. Cnc, (under take-off and
cruising conditions);

2) Operating time between repairs rd and general technical life fat of engines in
operation;

FOR OFFHJA1.USE(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) Number of engine major overhauls am.

Model of production and operation dynamics of “'3.1 For normal operation of an ATS.
it is essential to have a certain nuaber of its elements, that is, aircraft, en-
gines and so forth. Let us examine the method of determining the required number
of aircraft and engines.

The number of aircraft needed to handle the set volume of air shipments in year t of
operations, “Bot is calculated from the following formula:

.‘
”sot-LNsotaz-aﬁ‘i. (5.1)
i a

where “sot, L-number of aircraft required to handle set volume of air shipments
over distance L in year t;
Bsz--annual productivity of one aircraft for distance l.

If it is considered that annual aircraft productivity is:

ngt ' ccomlvcrtrgxzo

then (5.1) assumes the form

61 t
u,“ - E EOE-€— vcrgrsxz. (5.2)

The following stage is to calculate the demand for the delivery of new aircraft for
operation in such a quantity as to ensure the functioning of the aircraft fleet.
For this it is essential to consider not only the growth of the fleet but also the
taking of a portion of aircraft out of service at the end of their lives. Let us
designate the amount of the demand of operation for receiving new aircraft by
"sore t' The nature of the behavior of the amount “soreqt over the designated
peri can be rather complex. At the same time, serial production is adapted only
to a steady production pace. The problem arises of optimizing the relation between
the demand for the ATS elements with their production programs.

Thus it is essential to determine programs for the serial production plants ﬂg“
which would meet the operational requirements for the ATS elements considering re-
production in operation, being at the same time stable programs.

Before examining the calculation algorithm for production programs. let us describe
the models for the production and operation of the aircraft fleet and then, using
these models. let us construct the calculation algorithm. Let us introduce a con-
cept for the increase in the aircraft fleet AN.°c which represents the increase in
the number of aircraft in operation (increase in the fleet) during year t.

 

lModel was worked out jointly with Engr V. H. Dikushin.

258

FOR OFFKJAI.USEibNLY
FOR OWCIAI. USE ONLY

'l'he valua of the amount All,” can be determined by calculating the difference be-
tween the values of the current "sot and previous thou-1) years, with the exception
of the first year of operation for which the value All.“ coincides with the fleet
size of the first year:

"so: With t I T‘o + 1;

ANnot ' (5.3)
“so: - “3°(t-1) with r30 + 1 < t ‘ 1.0,

where '1'“, Tea—beginning and end of operational period of aircraft fleet, years.

The amount AN,“ indicates how many aircraft must be produced in year t proceeding
from the needs of increasing the fleet (not counting the reproduction of the air-
craft fleet). Let us designate by N3“); the nulber of aircraft required for cre-

ating the fleet of the given type of aircraft for the period ['r” + 1, Tao] not
counting the aircraft which have gone for reproduction:

Nah): ' N32+NUO at! (50‘)

where Nap-nunber of aircraft required for the program of creating the given type of
aircraft fleet;

most-«the number of written off (taken out of operation) aircraft of the given
type over the period To.

He would point out that the values of the amounts “.2 and NV“; do not depend upon
what production dynamics and annual program we adopt. The nature of consumption,
that is, of operation which is deternined by the amount 0830;, remains constant.
With the various production programs and models, only the volune of the fixed capi-
tal of the operating organizations changes. As a consequence of this, the number
of aircraft can be calculated from the production model constructed under the sa-

sumptzon that the output dynamics corresponds to the nature of the fleet's growth
in operation and the ensuing dynamics of fleet reproduction.

Such a production model 8;“ will reflect the behavior of the amount 8.0““. It
can be used as a rough approximation for calculating production programs. The
amount of Hg“ is determined from (5.4):

“so: With TOO < t < 130 + ‘OtITS'
a
Nsmt " '
"so: + N“(c-tazlts) with Tao + t.z/T8 < t < 130’
where the term “é“(t‘Tst/Tg) considers the reproduction volume of aircraft put into

operation (Tet/T8) years ago.

*The prime mark in designating the amount 8}“ indicates that the given formula is
not a real production model but is used solely to calculate the demand for new air-
craft in operation.

259

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total number of aircraft N. needed to carry out the set volume of air shipments
for the period [130+ 1, Tea] is determined from the formula

Teo

“n:- X 11;“, (5.5)

while that portion of the aircraft which has worhd its life over the designated

period Rm; is calculated by a separate totaling of the term “I'llk-tggl'rg) using
(5.5)

“mt ' )é “Ina-tang) °

Analogous calculations can be made for the engine fleet.

Let us designate by Rd (1') the number of engines required for the initial making up
of the aircraft fleet 83(1) :

Nam - Namwd- (5-6)

The amount of Rd (1.); determines the amount of capital investments into the engine
fleet. All the engines above this amount go to reproduce [replace] the initial

ones. The total demand for engines over the designated period Nd; can be deter-
mined by the formula

1'
Nd}: " "3(1): % . (5'7)

where the amount 152/13}; represents the ratio of the general technical life of the

airframe rs; and the engine ‘d determining the nmber of engines per mounting and
required for the normal operation of the aircraft until the end of its full operat-
ing life.

The required number of operations in operation (on the aircraft or in replacement
stock) during year t is determined by the formula

“dot ' msotnd (1 4’ K0) 9 (5.8)

where [qr-coefficient considering that a portion of the engines is under repair.
in storage, en route.

The value "dot is analogous to "got and is related to it by a directly proportional
dependence. As for the aircraft, let us determine the increased demand for engines

in operation Nag; which is related to an increase in the volue of air shipments
carried out by the given fleet:

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let us assume that we know the range of
discret values for the amounts of the pro-
grams N9, dn determined proceeding from
possible production with the varying de-
gree of utilizing production capacity for
the given production program. Let us
designate by N3. dmo the initial value of
the range of progress, and by As, duk"
the difference between the sequential

values of the production programs from
the set range:

As, disk - Na. dn(k+l)-Ns, a“, k-0.1,
K-l.

where Kr-number of divisions in set range
of programs.

Let us also assume that we know a certain
production progran from the number set

Ne dnk which knowingly satisfies the oper-
ational requirements for any year t. The
corresponding production duration Ta, dn
is calculated from the fornulas
FOR¢0FFKHAL.USE(NVLY

ELL .
Ts “+1: with 1<t<T,.d°,

“a,“ With 1.. d°<t"1'.' «-13, do;
Ne, dmt ' (5‘12)

Ns dmk
m (Ts, dm+1 It);

With T3, dn-Ts’ do‘t‘ra’ d.’

and for an existing aircraft and engine, that is Kd - l, formula (5.12) assumes the
form

"a. m With 1‘ t‘ra’ h'T3. do

“d mk
“s, dnt ' m (Ta-+1-t) (5.13)

with re, (la-r“ down” an.

Pormulas (5.12) and (5.13) are obtained by dividing the production dynamic graphs
into stages with uniform processes. Thus, in formula (5.12), the production period
T, dm is broken up into three intervals: 1) starting up of production-the period
of developing serial production; 2) serially developed aircraft output; 3) curtail-
ment of production. For each of these intervals there is a formula corresponding
to the process occurring in it.

N
In the first interval, the ratio Tf‘-§E%7I indicates the annual production increase.
In multiplying the amount of the annual production increase by the number of the
production year. we obtain the number of produced aircraft or engines in the current
year within the limits of the serial production period 1‘ t ‘Ts do- In the second
interval there is the even output of aircraft and an even N. d-ko The formula for

the third interval, as is seen fromthe graphs of Yig. S. 2, reflects the process of
production curtailment going on in a procedure inverse to the process of developing
production.

Let us set the following problem. It is necessary to determine the value for the
annual production program N9 dm which, with the given production model, would meet
the operational requirements in any year t and be the minimum possible number of all

the set values of N3, dmk- Let us designate the sought value by “:1“ .. Thus, we
0
are searching for the lower level of the production program which would meet produc-
tion requirements. For calculating “:1ndm let us adopt the following altorithm.
O

1. Let us appropriate the values: t - l, k - 0.

in

2. Let us appropriate to the value Nn
s, dm

the value of the greatest values of the

amount N8, dmk or N5. dot:

262

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(MWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“2nd“ ' “x013, dmk- ANs, dot}:

where ANS, dog-increase of fleet in operation during year t. In the first step
we, dot ' 5N3, d¢~

3. 0n the basis of the obtained values for the amount “:1ndn’ with the various out—
9

put models. let us calculate the production cynamics models sequentially for (5.4)-
(5.7), (5.10)-(S.l3), that is, we will obtain the values N3, dmt' Nag. “d0”: Ndz,

Tu. Tu]. “amt. Ndmt-

lo. For each year t let us calculate the difference of the suns q. of the following
type:

t

t
sh - 2N9. dmt‘ 2 “ma, dot+"s, dm(t“8v «It/Ts”-
1 t'TBO'H'

5. Let us verify the sign of the amount mm:

a) If mm is negative in any t, let us increase the value It by one, that is, k-k+l.

in in
“Isl. dm N's, dm+A‘! duh

and return to step 2;

b) If all the possible values for the production programs (It - K) are exhausted,
additional capacity is required.

c) If the amount «5. is non-negative for all the values of t, then we have completed
the calculation, and if at a certain point of t the amount of u, is negative, then
we increase I: by one and repeat the calculation starting at step two.

Thus, as a result of the designated procedure we obtain the minimum acceptable
level of annual output which can be used as a constraint in the general problem of
optimizing the ATS parameters in terms of the economic effectiveness criterion. For
completing the description of the fleet dynamics models it is necessary to describe
the dynamics of aircraft and engine repairs.

The number of aircraft repairs during year t is determined from the formula

T
0 with T30 < t5 Tao +?;- ;

_ “30(t-18/1's) + "mum/rs) with Tao + «If; < t< Tao + tBZ/TB3

Nrst (5-14)

"nu-rang) + Nu(t—Tc/Tg) - “nu-rszll'g)

with Inn 4- tax/Ts < CG Ten»

263

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORAOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

where rang--the calendar time for the operation of the aircraft between two major
overhauls:
rag/Tg--service life of one aircraft.

In the event that in calculating the ratios r./Tg and 1’.le8 we obtain fractions,
it is essential to take the whole number closest to the obtained result.

The number of engine overhauls in year t is deter-ined from the formula

1'
o with r“, < tr r.°+ 71%;
“MPH/Ts) + Nrd (Fla/78) with N“, + ml‘r8 < t 6 Tue 4» tag/T8;

"rat ' (5.15)

Ndm(t-Td/Tg) +“rd(t-1d/Tg) ' “d-(t-rdz/ 1‘3)
With T30 + Tax/T8 < :6 Teoo

The general principle for construction (5.16) and (5.15) consists in dividing the
operational interval into intervals with uniform processes. Thus, in (5.15) in the
time interval Tao < t4 rsonslr , the number of overhauls N,“ - 0, since none of
the aircraft had yet operated the amount of time between repairs.

In the interval ‘rso + 1’9ng < t‘Tso'Ha/Ts. the aircraft manufactured in tﬁl'r8
years before the current moment of time T begin to go into repair in the number
N,m(t-t IT ), and a second overhaul during the following r./r years "r3(t-f°/T8)o
Obvious y uring the first years (up to 1.04-2r./r ) of this interval, the amount
Nrs(t—rs ITS) will equal zero, in repeating the vagues of the annunt “rat in the
first in erval. As yet there has been no writing off of the aircraft.

In the third interval Tso+"sE/Tg‘t‘Teos a portion of the aircraft begins to be
written off instead of undergoing repair, and for this reason from the amount of

repairs “rs t-? [18) it is essential to subtract the number of aircraft to be writ-
ten off pro uceg Tet/Tg years ago from the current moment of “3"(t’t312/Ig)’

Ewendimre models for stages of system life cycle. The obtained nodels of the
physical indicators make it possible to move on to constructing expenditure models

for the ATS life cycle stages. Expenditures in the various life cycle stages vary
and they include current and capital expenditures. Initially let us era-ice a
model of current expenditures for the entire life cycle of the system T3. The cur-
rent expenditures considered in the criterion of BIS national economic effective-
ness would include current expenditures on NIOKR for each element cjniokr' current
expenditures on manufacturing the system elements can and current expenditures on
operating the system elements C30.

Current expenditures on NIOKR for each system element cjniokr include the expendi-
tures on NIR cjnir and on OKR cjokr' Current expenditures on “IR can be determined
proceeding from the dependence of (5.35):

cjnir ' cjoerjnir: (5.16)

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where anir-coefficient characterizing the ratio between current expenditures on
N13 and OKR.

Thus, the OKR expenditures are the basis for determining the NIR expenditures. The
method of forecasting OKR expenditures has been examined in Chapter 6. If, for
example, we take the central element of the system, the aircraft, then the expendi-
tures on creating it can be calculated using an empirical equation as a function of
the parameters X3 (maximum take-off weight, maximum speed and so forth):

cjokr - b Il_'|lX7'. (5.17)

where b and bj--empirical coefficients.

Models of the type (5.17) make it possible to forecast the total ORR expenditures.
At the same time the criterion considers the annual current OKR expenditures. The
annual ORR expenditures C okrt can be determined on the basis of the total expendi-
tures. In knowing the toial expenditures cjokr and in knowing the standard dis-
tribution of expenditures over the years “okrt indicating what percent of the total
expenditures is spent in year t, it is possible to estimate the annual current OKR
expenditures for element j:

630m ' cjokrnjokrc-

Above, in Chapter 6, the basic formative patterns and methods of forecasting BTS
element costs were established. Three stages were exalined in the process of serial
production and conditional limits were set between the individual stages of the
process. The limit between the stage of developed serial production was called the
beginning of the period of serially developed production. If one measures the time
from the beginning of production in quarters, then the start of the period of seri-
ally developed production is characterized by a certain quarter with the start of
production to. The average cost of the articles manufactured in the given quarter
will characterize the cost of the serially produced article C .

The cost of a serially produced product characterizes the cost level at a certain
moment of time. For describing not only the level but also cost dynamics, it is
essential to elaborate a model which would describe cost dynamics from the produc-
tion parameters. Above it was pointed out that for characterizing production fac-
tors which influence product cost dynamics. the following indicators are used: the
number of manufactured articles since the start of production N, the calendar time
since the start of production t and the daily product output q. The product cost

model reflecting the cost level and dynamics can be represented in the following
form:

cu - Cola: (5.13)
C", t - Com, :3 (5.19)
ct, q ' coKt, q- (5-20)

265

FIMICNHHCIAL USEE€MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

where K", K", t and Kt. q-coefficients of cost dynaaics depending upon the indi-
cators N, t and q.

The cost models for the system elements are constructed on the basis of the above-
given concepts. Let us eramine these models from the example of two ATS elements,
the aircraft and the engines. The aircraft cost model is constructed in the follow-
ing manner. The cost of the serially produced aircraft C8° is determined as a func-
tion of the aircraft functional parameters, that is, weight, speed and so forth. 0n
the basis of the amount of Gas» the average cost of one aircraft in year t is de-
termined or cslmt° The total aircraft production cost in year t equals the product
of the cost of one aircraft calmt by the annual output N..t.

The cost of the engines in year t cdmt is determined analogously as the product of
the cost of one engine in year t Calm; by the number of engines manufactured in the
same year “dmt' The cost of a serially produced engine cdo is determined from em-
pirical formulas depending upon its parameters such as thrust, specific fuel con-
sumption and so forth. The cost of one article (of an aircraft cslmto of an engine
Cdlmt) is determined from formulas (5.18)-(5.20) on the basis of the coat of a
serially produced article and the coefficients Kg. In. t and Kt. q.

The cost dynamics coefficient KN is determined from the empirical equation K" -
b1Nb2 where N--total number of articles (aircraft, engines) manufactured from start
of production to the middle of year t which can be designated by let; b; and b2-
parameters of the equation

t-l
Nun' i “mt+%- (5.21)
t-T,n+l

In the given formula ones takes one-half the amount of output in year t in order to
obtain the average cost of an article during year t. The cost dynamics coefficient
K“. t is determined from the empirical equation

-b' -b
KN, t ' billiard z t '.

where bi, b5 and b3-empirical equation parameters.

As for the coefficient K: q, the deriving of the formula to calculate it needs
certain clarifications. The production indicators characterizing in the given case
the cost level and dynamics are the amount of the daily output q and the time since
the start of production t. The influence of the q and t indicators on cost dynamics
and level can be represented in the form shown in Fig. 5.3. Let us assume that
three plants produce the same articles (1. 2 and 3) but with different daily out-
puts (q', q" and q"9. Let us assume that the daily product outputs in the first
quarter (q{. q? and qi“) and at the beginning of the serial production period (q5,
q3 and q5") are characterized by the following ratios:

vi - oi: q? > 413;
4'. > 42: q; =- q;-

266

FOR OFTHCJAI.USEGDNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The amounts t', t" and t3" euqal, re-
spectively, l , 13 and 12 quarters. The
designated articles 1 and 2 differ in the
amounts of daily output at the beginning
of the serial production period and, con-
sequently, during this period their cost
levels should differ as is shown in Fig.
5.3. For the articles 2 and 3, q" - QB" ,
and hence 6'5 - CB" . Since qb>qo, then
Cb<CB. Product cost dynamics are influ-
enced by the amounts of daily output at
the beginning of the serial production
period ql and in the first quarter qo by
the duration of the production development
period to as well as by the nature of the
increase in daily output over the quar-
ters.

 

Fig. 5.3. Diagram of influence of t

and q indicators on product costs C Research on daily output dynamics over time

and its influence on expenditure dynamics
has been carried out in Chapter 4. If one somewhat simplifies the problem and ac-
cepts that the dependence q - f(t) is of a linear nature, then the cost reduction
curves C', C" and C"' can be presented in the form_

a . —.’ . . ' . . m
C um! ’; c =b.t"°; c -m‘”. (5.22)
In these equations, the exponent b characterizes the cost reduction dynamics and

depends upon ql, go and to. The increase rate of daily output is characterized by
the index for the tangent of angle u:

“—
‘gMET'l. (5.23)

The problem comes down to determining b3 - f(tg u). The dependence of the index b3
upon the amount of tg u is approximated by the following curve:

0, =- b. (tg «or» (5.21.)

Having determined tg w from (5.23) and then from equation (5.26) the value of the
index h , it is possible to establish the engine cost reduction dynamics using the
formula (5.22).

Now let us determine a model for current system operating expenditures. The operat-
ing costs cot are formed from the operating costs of the basic elements, that is,
the aircraft, the engines and airport expenses:

Co: " csamt * Catt + Cutppz; 4‘ Cdamt + cdtt + Pit + Ctht + Capt: (5- 25) .

where csant. Cdagt—-amortization deductions for aircraft (engines) in year t;
Csttv cdct-expenditures on maint:nance of aircraft (engines) during year t;
Cuzpct--uages of flight personnel in year t;
ﬂft--expenditures on fuel in year t;
cotht--other expenditures in operation;
Capt--airport expenses in year t.

267
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Amortization deductions in year t include expenditures on the major overhaul of the
aircraft and engine and renovation deductions and are calculated by the formulas:

3;:

ccant ' l’sr-t""1._& Nsot; (5.26)
at
F 1'‘

Cdant ' l’drt“’ :dr "dot, (5.27)

where Parts Pdrc--expenditures on major overhaul of aircraft (engines) in year t;
F}. Pa--average price of aircraft (engine) for entire manufacturing period;
Tag. tdz-General technical life of aircraft (engine).

Expenditures on major overhaula during year t of operation are determined from the
formula

Pa, an ' Ya. aria, m, an. (5.28)

where Ya, dr--the coat of one najor overhaul of an aircraft (engine) in fractions of
its price.

The average price of the aircraft (engine) is:

Fs. d ' Es. «Hank. a. (5.29)

where 5;, d-average cost of one aircraft (engine) over period of aerial production;
F3, d--proportional capital intensiveneas in serial production of one aircraft
(engine):
Rn-normed profitability.

As is seen from (5.29), the average price of an article is set on the basis of the
average cost over the period of serial production. This cost has been named the
average aggregate cost. For example, if over a certain period of tine N articles

was manufactured, then a distinction is drawn between the average aggregate coat of
one article Uh from batch N in contrast to the so-called individual cost of N arti-

cle C". Depending upon what indicators are used to describe the conditions of
serial production N; N, t or t, q, it is possible to distinguish also the types of
average aggregate costs Ck, Ch. t and Ci, q. The amount of the average aggregate
coat is determined by formulas analogous to (5.18)-(5.20):

aIv ‘ 3.75m
aWJ"2:JCLﬁ

ab 0 " CORI. r

where §5--gyerage aggregate cost of serially produced article;
K", K", t and K; q--dynamic coefficients for average aggregate cost depend-
ing upon indicators N; N, t and t. q.

268

FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬂiE(ﬂVLY
The values of the amounts co, KN and I“ are determined by the method analogous
to the method of calculating the amounts Co, Kg and I" t as shown above. The co-
efficient R: q is calculated in the following manner:

7a

I ”(.610
Ru" 77—"

I ”03"“

where C t--the cost at moment of time :3 determined by the cost of the serially pro-
duced product:
—0
Cv=c (-‘- -.-) '

After integration of the expression Kt q and certain transformations. we obtain.
for example, for model 2 (Fig. 5 2):

—_ 2 :- Irma—t“-
KM“ u a.) ._|__

"l—b. 0 __ 5)) (2 ._ ‘3) (ZTM— (a)

The amount of current expenditures on aircraft maintenance in year t is determined
from the formula

:1
Catt ' T3 ,2? E Cunt ".9; (5.30)

 

where can, "hourly expenditures on aircraft maintenance for range L;

N
“80:: -coefficient for equal distribution of aircraft in operation during
“a .
year t,

when the entire fleet is in operation, this coefficient equals one. The amount
csthl can be calculated from an empirical formula of the type

vs C
a2 1"?” +a3]+ {an}; —+n5+ d—°:,

where tpzuduration of trip for given range £,

 

 

c15ch ' [Md 4'

1
crl

 

‘9"v

In (5.30) the expression Z Cathlnao g comprises the hourly expenditures on main-

tenance totaled for all distances. After multiplying by the average annual accrued

269

l-‘OIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFTNCJAI.USIZ(MNLY

flying time T , we obtain the annual expenditures on aircraft maintenance. The
method for calculating the amount of current expenditures on engine maintenance
cdtt is analogous to the aircraft calculation method.
The wages of flight personnel during y’sr t are determined from the formula

cutppc - Cutpph TgNeot: (5.31)

where cuzpph-hourly wages;

ll
I .6 .
Cum £119 0

where K1-wage coefficient for crew members in relation to the wages of captain
taken as one;
n--number of crew members.

Fuel expenditures in year t Pf; are determined by the formula

N G
c r
”it ' Ts :st Pug: iii-Lin Vet: Net, 1. (5.32)

where Pkgf-price of 1 kg of fuel;

 

chonx L-fue1 consumption in flight over distance 1.

Other expenditures in operation during year t (expenditures related to the training
of flight personnel) are determined by the set coefficient for other expenditures
Koth according to the formula

cotht " [(98, drt+cs, dtt+cw£pptl 1‘0th (5.33)

Airport expenses in year t of operation are set by the formula

c.‘Pt - gamma? (5.36)
where CaPh--hourly airport expenses:

caph - (among/t”:

here c and d-equation parameters;
tPt-average duration of trip in year t with length L.

In determining the economic effectiveness of the BTS, including the air transport
systems, for the criterion (3.24) the least studied question is that of determining
the amounts of capital investments into prototype and serial production as well as
into operations. Let us give certain recommendations on solving the given ques-
tions.

270

IN)R¢OIFIC1AI.IIBE ORWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Capital investments into prototype during year t may be calculated in the following
manner. Initially one determines the capital investments needed by prototype pro-
duction for developing the new article niokr8° This amount can be determined by
a direct calculation. However, in the s age of system forecasting, it is essential
also to forecast the amount of capital investsents for NIOKR. In the elaborated
model for the ATS effectiveness criterion, it has been proposed that the amount
aniokrt be determined in fractions of the cost cjniokrﬁ

aniokr}: ' cjniokrzxjkniokro (5.35)

where K kn okr-—coefficient expressing ratio of amount of capital investments into
developgent of system to the cost of the NIOKR for the system.

The amount of the coefficient Kjkniokrt is set on the basis of processing the sta-
tistical data and this is the cause of the shortcomings in the proposed calcula-
tion method. There is no doubt that here modern forecasting methods must he em-
ployed for forecasting the amount of the capital investment coefficient. At present
the various industrial sectors are at work on forecasting the NIOKR expenditures.
However, as a rule, all this work is devoted to just the current NIOKR expenditures
Cniokrt- At the sane time, the amount of capital investments into the NIOKR in a
majority of instances. particularly for fundamentally new types of technology, is
in no way less than the amount of current expenditures. Obviously. we must be con-
cerned with working out methods for forecasting capital investments into the NIOKR.
At first it would be possible to obtain a dependence for the amount of capital in-
vestmenta as a function of the system's parameters x of the following type:

II
- n O‘.
xjniokrt b‘th;

Capital investments into NIOKR in year t Kjkniokrt may be determined from their
total amount anioer using a coefficient of capital investments dynamics njkniokrt

indicating what percent of the total amount of capital investments is made in year
t.

The amount of capital investments into the serial production of element 3 of the
system in year t K2“:
prototype production, that is. initially one determines the total amount of capital

investments and then their annual amount using the coefficients for capital invest-
ment dynamics in serial production. The total amount of capital investments is de-
termined from the rates of proportional capital investments.

can be determined by a method analogous to the one used in

The capital in manufacturing the system's element 3 in year t can be deter-ined as
the product of multiplying the annual program for the system's element 1 (aircraft,
engines and so forth) by the coefficient for the capital intensivenesa of manufac-
turing chnz

Fjllt - “thKJCII' (5.36)

271

FOR 0FFKJM1.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Capital investments into operations are expenditures on new aircraft and engines
(not considering expenditures going to replace worn out aircraft and engines) and
capital investments into airport facilities It“. The latter are determined in the
following manner:

Kit " "3:6: +ndFd)Kcincitv

where Ker-proportional capital investments into airport facilities (in the given
case it is considered that they have been calculated in relation to the
cost of the aircraft and engine fleet);
nut—coefficient expressing capital investments dynamics into airport facili-
ties.

5.3. Approximate Method for Determining National Economic Effect (From the Example
of the ATS)

The approximate method differs from the above-examined dynamic method in the compo-
sition of the expenditures considered. Since at present there are no methods for
determining the amount of capital investments into prototype design work Kniokr in
production related to the creation of new technology K. and K. , these expenditures
cannot be accounted for with the approximate calculation methos. Naturally as these
methods and the proportional capital investment rates are worked out these expendi-
tures must be considered in the approximate method.

In the approximate method the system variations are compared not from the condition
of an equal volume of work over the forecasted or planned period, as in the case of
the dynamic method. but from the condition of the same volume of work which is
carried cat by the system during the year of its developed operation. e annual
volume of transport work for the ATS is determined on the basis of the following
data:

1) The length of the routes 1. - {U on which the given system will be operated;

2) The volume of air shipments in reduced cargo tons Gt calculated for a year of
developed operation of the system for each distance £91..

The ATS variations are compared with a fixed amount of the system's specific effect.
The specific effect is the volume of air transport work Ag in tons of cargo and is
calculated in the following manner:

As I EGL. (5.37)

On the basis of the given annual volume of air shipments and the range of parame-
terr characterizing the quality of the designated system variations (for the ATS
thia is Cc“. LC“). the required aircraft fleet can be determined using the
formula:

Gt
Na; - E chcmthdTg . (5.38)

where Kzna ircraf t load factor.

272

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the calculated number of aircraft one determines the required number of engines
using the formula

"a .3 ME, (5.39)
z 3‘ 1d£

The presence of technical parameters for the system elements and quantitative data
on the demand for them make it possible for the methods given in Chapter 4 to de-
termine the cost parameters of the system, as follows: expenditures on NIOKR. the
cost of manufacturing and operating the system which, in turn, as component elements
becomes part of the ATS economic effectiveness criterion.

The system's economic effectiveness criterion with the approximate calculation
method is the minimum of reduced expenditures for the annual volume of its work:

 

 

7
Q "\ _
L " i.“ -f—-l-—-'L.(Cw+ Lula/u “+5 ‘ +
O ‘\ u l' E’_‘ - I“.
'2':
_ . Zea-r tell»... ”1 1'1" 7124-4-4-
4r,[~ (n+5) rzn, ”I (1-H?) r

“I

+Pe +152“ P, 3 Kg) AS and". (S 60)
l ' '

where Dc--annual productivity of system's central element, ton-km per year;
Tc--service life of system central element;
c--system central element;
j--element of system central element;
mj--numher of considered elements of system central element;
Ccot--expenditures on operating system central element during year t;
Cjoc--expenditures on operating system element in year t;
Zcokr--expenditures on working out systen central element. rubles;
Nc--the size of manufacturing batch of central element, pieces;
--lead in making expenditures on OKR for central element to the system's
operation. years;
Zjokr--expenditures on working out system element;
H --size of manufacturing batch of system element;
szokr_o--lead in making expenditures on OKR in relation to system's operation,
years;
Pc--price of system central element, rubles;
PJ--price of system element;
K1--other capital investments into operation of system (not counting cost of
system elements).

okr-o

273

IKTR (HﬂﬂCIAl.lﬂ5EI(NWLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The expression (5.60) can also be given in the following fern:

Z - ZydAs. (5.101)

where Zyd—teduced expenditures per unit of systen work;

zyd - cyd+sn|yd, (5.42)

where cyduproportional cost of a unit of work;
It’d—capital investments per unit of work.

The calculations using the formula of (5.60) provide a differentiation of expendi-
tures for the individual aircraft elements: engines, equipment and so forth. In
existing practices calculations are isolated for just one elaent, the engines, and

for this reason we will divide the aircraft conditionally into two elements:
a) engines; b) all remaining aircraft elements.

Let us designate the aircraft by the index ta, the first elenent, the engines, by

the index d and the remaining elements by pl. Considering this (5.10) will assune
the form

1 - 5': 7,~—'—— gm,“ +n,q...)(l +5)" +
2, (I +5)"

’. I-‘

T T
+Enlzﬂo~o (I + E) ”‘“‘-n "Emu +15) “”44-

.. a; +1uﬁ0+koH Kzl "f‘w'mf (5.43)

where Dar-annual aircraft productivity;
Ila-aircraft life;

C Lop-expenditures on operation of aircraft (without engines) in year t;
gdotnexpenditures on operation of engine in year t;
ndnmmber of engines per aircraft;

Zpgokr, Zak—expenditures on the developeent of the aircraft and engine, re-
spectively, for the manufactured aircraft (without the engine) and the
engine;

TPZZokr-o’ Cdzokr_°--lag in asking expenditures on on in relation to operation;

sz. Pdnprice of aircraft (without engines) and of engine;
Icy-coefficient for replacenent stock of engines in operation;

Kin-capital investments into fixed facilities in operation per aircraft,
rubles/units.

In comparing several systea variations the expenditures are totaled either for the
longest service life Tu of all the examined variations or for the adopted calcula-
tion period. If it is accepted that the current annual expenditures in operation

are constant over the service life of the aircraft, that is. Opt“ - cpzo - coast.

276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and cdot - cdo - const. [where 0%: and Odo—annual expenditures on the operation
of the aircraft (without the on; ) and of the engine], then under this condition
the criterion of national economic effectiveness of the ATS will sum the for-

r r
1 P3 1: dz hr
2 - 31-1: [cp£0+ndndo+sn|}pbk(1+s) -° r'°‘1»ndzrm1u.(1+13) ° '°+

sz+ndpd(1+ko) “(1] - min. (5.66)

The formula (5.“) considers the full total of one-shot expenditures and the costs
of the entire annual volume of the systes's work. Along with such indicators it is
also possible to use proportional indicators, that is, the proportional one-shot ex-
penditures and the proportional cost of a unit of aircraft work. In this instance

the national economic effectiveness criterion is the minimum of reduced expendi-
tures per ton-kn:

2th I Cu. + EnKth,

where Calf-the cost of l ton-km;
Raf-capital investments per ton-h.

Pros formla (5.43) it can be seen that

Tu

Cum - ﬁL:—— 2 (Cpbt+ndcdot)a+3)‘t; (5.1.5)
0&2 (mart "'1
t-l
Tm _ sz -
Km. - luau-(1+3) “t °+ndzdokr(1+r) “r °+sz+nde(l+k°)+-K1.
(5.66)
If it is seemed that current expenditures in operation are fixed, then
C +1‘rlcdo
cm .. "Hatﬁ— ; (5.47)
Ian I: rmokr-o szokr-o
ztlun Cum-0- m zplokr(1+3) +ndzdok,(1+s) +
Pp£+nde(1+k°) +K1] I Ilin. (5.198)

where kz—sircraft load factor.

275

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR 0FT1C]AI.USEIDNLY

The method for calculating the amount ctkm is generally known and for this reason we
would point up the features in calculating the other components of formula (5.48).
The capital and current expenditures on NIOKR, the leads between the various stages

in the life cycle of the system elements and the amount of capital investments into
operations are determined from norms which, in turn, are the result of correspond-
ing forecasts or long-range plan calculations.

The price of a system element (airframe, engine) is determined by the formula

where C n--the average aggregate cost from batch NJ for the system element;
an--normed profitability;
F3.-avernge amount of capital intensiveness for system element.

In the absence of norms for the capital intensiveness of system elements, their
price is determined by the formula

where Rc--profitability rate calculated for cost of element 1.

In determining the national economic effect from the operation of a BIS, a calcula-
tion is made of the annual and full effects and the effectiveness level.

The annual national economic effect from the operation of a BIS is calculated from
the formula

Y8 ' (Zbyd ' znyd)A8I (5.49)
where zbyd and Znyd--proportional expenditures for base and new variations.

The full effect over the system's operation period is:

0
v; - zgt§1(1-+t)-t. (5.50)

The level of national economic effectiveness for the new system is:

de-Cna
a ._L_L . 5.51
‘. Knyd'Kbyd ‘ ’

In terms of ATS, the annual national economic effect from the operation of the ATS
is calculated from the formula

Yg ' (zbtkl"zntkm)Ag' “°52)
where thkm' chkm--expenditures per ton~km for the base and new variations.

The annual effect from the operation of one aircraft is calculated in the following
manner:

276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yam " (25th ' zntkll)A3u9 . (5.53)
where Asgar-annual volume of work of aircraft. tkma

The full effect of a new aircraft is

Tu
Y m - Vela: 1(mart. (5.54)

The level of national economic effectiveness for the new A18 is determined by the
formula:

cbtkm ' cntkm

Br I Kntkm'Kbtkm '

(5.55)

where Kntkmr Kbtk.--proportional (per ton-km) capital investments for the new and
base variations, rubles per year per tkm.

The proportional capital investments for the new variation of the system are:

sz

1 + ndzdokr (1 + B)

kr-o
—— 2pm, 1+3 °
ccochrTgkz [ ( )

okr-o

Kntkm ' +

Pp£+nde(l+ko) “(1] - min.

If as the base variation one uses the system put into operation, the amount of the
proportional capital investments put into the base system is determined in the fol-
lowing manner

1 1- “: [sz+nde(l+k°)+K1]. (5.56)

Kbtk' . Gcochr g

5.4. Dynamic Method for Determining Cost Accounting Effect of 3T8

The cost accounting effect of a new BTS is the savings in expenditures from its
production and use in comparison with the BTS adopted as the basis for comparison
with the set volume and quality of product. The cost accounting effect is apparent
for the manufacturer and user of the system. and for this reason it is possible to
differentiate the annual effects for the system's consumer and manufacturer and the
full effect over the period of producing and operating the new system.

The annual cost accounting effect for the manufacturer from producing the new 3T8
is determined on the basis of the criterion of (3.26) from the formula

277

FOR OFFICLAI.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.
cht " Jilunjnt ‘ (cnjnc '* l;nm1‘njlnt)] " [ijllt ‘ cbjnt+ 3.1.153“) I} (5.57)
or
I
cht ' jill (Pnjmt ‘ cnjmt) ' (ij-t ' cbjnc) ' 3.1.09.3“ ' 153“) l - (5.58)

If we designate the amount (Kant-K53“) by AK)“, then the formula assumes the
form

I
Yemt ' Jzipnjmt ’ cnjmt) ' (ijmt ' cbjmt) ‘ Ian-15‘3“]. (5.59)

where Pnjmuthe price of manufacturing element 5 of the new system in year t;
annnthe cost of manufacturing element 1 of the new system in year t;
PbJDt' Omar-price and cost of manufacturing element 3 of base system in

the year t;
Emnthe normed coefficient of capital investment effectiveness in the man-
ufacturing sector;
axing-additional capital investments for manufacturer in year t (increase in
amount of capital for manufacturer in year t).

In an analogous manner v2 determine the cost accounting effect for the consumer (in
operating the system:

Yeot ' (Pnot ' cnot) " (Pbot ' cbot) ' Enodkot, (5.60)

where Pnotv Ones-price and cost of operating new system in year t;

Pb“, ot--price and cost of operating base system in year t;
°--normed coefficient of capital investment effectiveness in the

consuming sector;
Altar-additional capital investments in operations during year t (in-
crease in amount of capital for consumer in year t).

The full cost accounting effect in the year t will be:
Yet ' Yemt+Yeot- (5.61)

The full cost accounting effect over the period of producing and operating the sys-
tem is determined by totaling the annual effects:

we; - 2 ya,“ fvm. (5.62)
t-l t-l
278

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic question in determining the cost accounting effect for the consumer and
manufacturer of the systen is the setting of prices for the system elements. If in

the forecasting stage the price of a system's elasent in year t is determined from
its so-called lover limit from the formula P3“ - Cju‘O-Bul' mt (here {int—capital

intensiveness of the systas's element in year t), and the pr ce for the elements of
the base system is adjusted in such a manner that it provide the manufacturer vith
the normed profitability, then the effect for the manufacturer will equal zero and
the consumer will receive the entire effect. In actuality, according to formula
(5.58) we obtain:

Yen: ' 1X1! (cnjmt * 3m + P‘s-c - cnjmt) - (cbjmt + Ens-Pun: ' cbjmt) -

qunjmt - ijlt)] I 0. (5.63)

In this instance, the full cost accounting effect in the year t will be Yet - Ye“.

If it is accepted that the prices in operating the system remain fixed. that is,
Pnot - Pd“ - const.. then the full cost accounting effect of the system in year t
can be determined by the formula

Yet ' (cbot ’ cnot) ' BnoAKot' (5.64)

The full cost accounting effect of the system over the period of operation is:

To
Ye: ' fluent-Gnu) - Emmet]. (5.65)
‘-

The level of cost accounting effectiveness for the new 31‘s is determined by the in-
dicator for the effectiveness level of additional capital investments

To
)2 [(Pnot ' cnot) (Phat ' cbot”

EI- - E‘L—T‘T———-— . (5.66)

X AK
t-l 0:

The amount of the indicator E, is compared with the sectorial normed coefficient of
capital investment effectiveness.

The indicator 2, indicates the level of the new system's effectiveness in comparison
with the old system. Along vith the effectiveness level also of interest is the in-

dicator of the general effectiveness of the new system, the effectiveness level of
the full capital investments:

279

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIJCJAI.USE2(H§LY

 

To
1
T 3103“ ' CM!)
Yet - I: , (5.67)

where Kn°-full amount of capital investments into operations under new system.

The amount of the indicator ch is compared with the aectorial standard and the
analogous indicator for the base system.

5.5. Approximate Method for Determining Cost Accounting Effect (From the Example
of an ATS)

The criterion for the cost accounting effectiveness of an AIS can be obtained by the
full and proportional expenditures.

In the first instance, in accord with the formula (3.26), the criterion will be
Ye - (Pno - cm) - (PM, - cbo) - 3.10m, - lax. , ' (5.68)
where Pno' cno’ P50. Cb°-price and cost of average annual volume of work for new
and base systems;
AK°-additional capital investments into operation.
If one uses proportional indicators, then the criterion will be
Yetkn ' (Pntkm ' cnetkm) ' \Pdckn' cdeth) ‘ Bnom‘etkll ' max. t (5'69)

where Pntkn’ Pdtk.--price of l ton-km for new and base systems;
Cnetkno Cbetkm--the cost of 1 ton-km for new and base systems;
AKetk.--additional annual capital investments per ton-km.

For the ATS. the most typical case is Vno I Pbo° In this instance the equations of
(5.68) and (5.69) can be rewritten:

Ye ' (cbo*BonKbo) ’ (cno+BonKno) ' u") (5.70)

Yetlun ' (cbetkn+ EonKbetkm) ' (cnetkm+nonxnetkm) ' max. (5-71)

The expressions in parentheses are the reduced cost accounting expenditures which
can be designated by zbetka and znetkm‘

The annual cos: accounting effect of a new ATS is calculated from the foraula (5.68).

If we use proportional expenditures and also assume that the prices for transport
services are fixed. then the annual cost accounting effect in operations is:

Ye; - (Zbeum - zumng. (5.72)

where zbetkm' Znetk.-cost accounting reduced expenditures per ton-km for base and
new variations.

280

FOR‘OFFKJALIﬁﬂEONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The method of calculating the cost of a ton-km is generally known. The amount of
the proportional capital investments is determined from the formula

1
Ketlun - m [Pm+nde(1+ko)+K1]. (5.73)

The full cost accounting effect over the period of operating the systems is calcu-
lated by the formula

Yet ' egro- (5.74)
The annual cost accounting effect from the operation of one aircraft is:

Yeglll. ' (Zbetlua' znetha’k ° (5-75)

The full effect of the new aircraft is:

Vita - Yglailao (5.76)
where TL4--service life of aircraft in years.

The effectiveness level of additional capital investments is:

cbetlrm ' cnethl

E I . (5.77)
r Knetkn"xbetkn
The effectiveness level of full capital investments is:
Pum- cetIua
Y . (5.78)
Cf I‘etkn ’

where Pump-price of one ton-km.

5.6. Determining the Limit Price of an Aircraft in the Stage of Its Development

In the feasibility studies for a new aircraft, along with the calculations for the
economic effect and the economic effectiveness level. its limit price is also set.
The limit price is a compulsory parameter of a technical requirement for the design-
ing of an aircraft and is determined in the following manner.

The upper price limit for an aircraft is derived from the conditions of equal advan-

tage from the operation of the new and base aircraft, that is. the annual effect in
operations is reduced to zero. With the given condition, according to formula (5.72)

znetkl ' zbeths

Ol’

cnetlul + Bnol‘etkll ' cheek: + Enox'betkl' (5. 79)

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0F1WCJA1.USEIDNLY

Having brought out the content of the individual components of equation (5.79). we
obtain

L242: Ema P .
xnh[‘ + ‘nla +1nh+anoﬂ

 

_1_ Pm + Pwﬂrm
th ‘btta ‘m

+ Ibh+ﬁno %]. (5.80)

where xnh. h—-productivity per hour for new and base aircraft, til/hour;
1, -expenditures on one aircraft overhaul in fraction of its price;

Inh: Ibh-expenditures on one hour of operation of the new and base aircraft
(without renovation deductions), rubles/hour.

In solving equation (5.80) for Plavp' we obtain

th sza Pmeau

—-—-+

M -
_ xbh Tbtla Ma + “ha“ ’3 I“

Pu . (5.81)
VP 1 +Yr£a +‘Eng
tnzta tnla Tg

 

 

 

The limit price for the aircraft is calculated by the formula

Putz - 910.va (5.32)

where B~-reduction factor related to a decline in production outlays for aircraft as
a result of developing their serial output.

5.7. Estimating Economic Effectiveness of BIS Functional Elements

Above we have examined the criteria and methods for an economic estimate of the BIS.
The BTS have a complex hierarchical structure and include a large number of elements.
The question arises of the criteria and methods for estimating the individual ele-
ments and their connection to the criteria and methods for estimating the system as
a whole.

In the literature there are two approaches to the question of an economic estimate
of system functional elements: 1) a functional element is viewed as an independent
object and in its economic estimate there is a restriction to basic consideration of
the technical and cost parameters for it alone; 2) the functional element is viewed
in an organic relationship to the system and the element's effectiveness estimate

is based on a consideration of the system's functional and technical-economic indi-
cators which can be obtained in using elements with different parameters in the sys-
test.

282

IWUR‘OFFICIALIISE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us exanine the first approach to an economic estimate of a functional element
from the example of an aviation engine. Modern aviation gas turbine engines (GTD)
are characterized by a broad range of possible parameter values such as thrust, air
consumption, specific fuel consumption, specific engine weight and so forth. The
entire multiplicity of engine parameters can be reduced to the following groups:
specific, limiting, technical and economic.

An example of the engine's specific property is its capacity to develop thrust which
is used by the aircraft for carrying out its specific property, the ability to trans-
port cargo.

Among the limiting parameters of an engine are: heat resistance, frost resistance,
noise level, the degree of polluting the environment with fuel combustion products,
maximum speed, maximum altitude, fire safety and so forth.

In addition to the specific and limiting properties, an engine has properties which
in their aggregate determine the consumption of resources related to its production,
storage, transporting and operation. These properties are determined by the techni-
cal parameters of an engine (the degree of increasing pressure in the compressor,
gas temperature ahead of the turbine, the degree of pressure rise in the fan and so
forth) and by economic parameters, for example, by price, by manufacturing labor
intensiveness, by engine material intensiveness and so forth. The engine's techni-
cal and economic parameters determine its technical level and the level of its qual-
ity and are divided into natural and cost. An example of the natural indicators for
engine quality level is: the specific weight Y (the ratio of engine weight to its
thrust), specific fuel consumption Cg (the ratio of fuel consumption per hour to the
amount of thrust), the specific frontal area ffro (the ratio of the area of the en—
gine's maximum cross-section to the amount of thrust). If the weight, overall
dimensions and fuel consumption are viewed as expenditures, then it turns out that
the reduced proportional or specific parameters characterize the individual aspects
of engine efficiency. The less weight, volume or fuel which must be spent to achieve
a certain thrust with a certain dependability level, the more efficient an engine is
in operating it on an aircraft. The range, altitude, speed of flight and other in-
dicators of aircraft quality depend upon the amount of these indicators.

In assessing an engine, cost indicators can also be used, for example, the indicators
for the proportional expenditures of serial production: Cg--the proportional price
of 1 kg of engine thrust; Pu, g--proportiona1 material expenditures per kg of engine
thrust; Cu. p—-proportional wage expenditures of production workers per ;z of engine
thrust. The list of the proportional coat indicators for engines could be broadened.
The aggregate of such proportional indicators sufficiently describes an engine as an
object of production.

Of all the listed indicators, the most widespread is the indicator for the cost of
1 kg of thrust which is calculated by the formula

PR . Pd:R,

where Pd--engine price;
R--engine thrust.

283

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us attempt to transform this indicator by incorporating other engine parameters
into it. If we introduce the operating life indicator, then we obtain an indicator

for engine cost per kg of thrust in a unit of time of work (hour) Pd:(er;).

It is also possible to broaden the scope of considered expenditures and along with
engine price consider operating expenditures: expenditures on major overhaul, ex-
penditures on fuel and maintenance and so forth. Then we will obtain an indicator
which expresses the proportional cost of 1 kg of engine thrust per hour:

l’cH- gpdr+cdng+vn
1

thg - --—-—-———-‘—"—‘—'.
thz

where Pdr—-the price of one major overhaul of an engine;
Cdnz--expenditures on engine maintenance over period 14;;
Pf;--price of fuel consumed by engine in tax.

The indicator Gang can be given in the form:

can: ' thﬂl.
where th--cost of 1 hour of engine operation.

The indicator thg considers a number of engine properties: thrust, service life,
specific weight, specific fuel consumption and specific frontal area. However,
certain engine properties are not fully considered by this indicator. The specific
weight and specific frontal area are reflected in the cost and price of the engine
while fuel consumption is shown in operating expenditures. However these engine
properties are-pot sufficiently considered in just the engine price and its operat-
ing expenditures. The specific weight of an engine, the specific frontal thrust and
fuel consumption influence the load factor of the aircraft and its transport effec-
tiveness. If the engine is viewed separately from the aircraft, then in an economic
estimate these engine properties cannot be accounted for.

In an economic estimate of an engine. for any stationary unit these properties can
be disregarded. But for aviation engines. the weight, frontal area and fuel consump-
tion are important p-operties which must be considered in their economic estimate

and for this reason for a 'ull economic estimate of an aviation engine it must be
viewed in relation to the aircraft.

Thus, in an economic estimate of an aircraft engine, as an independent object, it is
possible to use a number of proportional cost indicators of which the most general

is the price of 1 kg of thrust developed by the engine per hour. However, with such
an approach the engine estimate is incomplete, as it cannot consider a number of en-
gine properties (y, CR. ffro) which are manifested in relation to the aircraft. For
this reason the fullest estimate of engine economic effectiveness can be achieved in
the aircraft--engine system.

Let us recall that an aircraft engine here is viewed as an example of a system func-
tional element. For this reason it can be concluded that a full estimate of a sys-
tem functional element can be given if the functional element is viewed in an

284

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

inseparable link with the system. However, let us return to the example of the air-
craft engine.

One other attempt can be made to fully estimate such engine properties as specific
frontal area and specific fuel consumption. For this, in the indicator Cab; it is

possible to consider not the entire amount of engine thrust but only its useful or
effective part.

Effective thrust Reff is determined from the full engine thrust minus the thrust
used to overcome the drag of the engine's key and the moving of the intrinsic
weight kc as well as fuel 36;:

Reff ' R-Rcy-Rc-Rcro
Engine drag is determined by the formula

2
v
Rcy ' cxcy £5- Pmid:

where Cxcy--drag factor of engine nacelle;
Fn1d--the engine cross-section area, m2;
p--air density.

The thrust consumed on moving the engine and fuel in flight is calculated by the
formula:

nc-cﬁ; RGf'Gfia
where G-—engine weight;

Gf--weight of fuel on aircraft;
Kn--aerodynamic quality of airframe;

Kn I Cy§Cxp,

where Cy--wing lift coefficient;

Cxp--drag coefficient of airframe (without power unit) under cruising flight
conditions.

Thus, if we incorporate in the indicator thn the effective thrust Beff in the
place of thrust R, then the indicator of the engine's economic estimate will be the
amount ctheff' The indicator thneff, in comparison with Gang. better reflects

certain engine properties (1, CR. ffto). However. this happens precisely because
the given indicator considers a number of important aircraft indicators along with
the engine indicators. Such an indicator can be used only in approximate calcula-
tions. as it does not make it possible to fully consider the influence of engine
properties on the economy of the aircraft. For a full economic estimate of an en-
gine. it must be viewed in a single aircraft-engine system in which engine parame-
ters depend upon the aircraft class and the conditions of its operation.

As a rule. engines are created for a specific aircraft and their economic estimate
is made on the basis of the given aircraft. If it is necessary to compare engines

285

FOIIOFF1CLQLIJSE1NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE4ONLY

independently of a specific aircraft (sometimes aircraft shortcomings can have a
negative impact on the estimate of a good engine). then in this instance one may use

hypothetical aircraft which can be created on the basis of the compared engines with
a certain development level of science and technology. It must be emphasized that
the engines are estimated while the aircraft are a means of estimation. For compar-
ing several engine variations, the expenditures related just to the aircraft remain
fixed and do not influence the comparison results. In the comparison consideration
is given only to those expenditures and effects which are related to the quality
features of the compared engines.

Engines can be also viewed as a functional element of an aircraft system. Naturally
just as there is a relationship between an element and a system there is a relation-
ship between the criteria for estimating them. The main thing related to the cri-
teria for the element and the system is that the element estimate criterion should
reflect the degree to which the adopted partial solutions (the solutions relating to
the element) correspond to the interests of the system's general goals. It is very

difficult to solve such a problem in elaborating the particular criteria for an ele-
ment.

For functional elements, this can be solved in the following manner. If one views
the system's hierarchy, then the criterion for estimating the system itself can be
the criterion for estimating any element. Strictly speaking, the system's criterion
is not the criterion for estimating an element. Here, in essence. it is a question
of estimating several variations of a system which differ in the parameters of the
elements comprising them. In assessing the vario ‘ variations of a system, we there-
by give an estimate to the different variations of the elements. Experience has
shown that this approach to estimating aircraft engines has proven effective. Pos-
sibly, to a significant degree this is explained by the fact that in the effect and
in the expenditures for an aircraft system the engines hold a large proportional
amount. Suffice it to say that in the price of an aircraft, the share of engine
costs approaches 25 percent, and in aircraft operating expenditures. the proportion-
al amount of expenditures related to the creation and operation of engines approach-
es 50 percent.

Thus, if we adopt the above-given ideas on estimating system elements to the engines.
the full estimate of the engines can be made only within the aircraft--engine system
using the criterion for estimating this system. The aircraft--engins system. in
turn, can be viewed as a subsystem of the higher level systems: in the aggregate of
a certain class and type of aircraft; in the air transport system; in the unified
national transport system. and so forth up to the national economy as a whole.

For decision taking on each level of examination. it is essential to have a corres-
ponding hierarchical system of criteria and models describing the structure and dy-
namics of the given level phenomenon. If one examines such an element of a system
as aviation engines. it is possible to establish two basic classes of problems re-
lated to its economic estimate:

1) Determining the optimum combinations of different types of aircraft and engines,

that is, the problem of optimizing the structure and composition (quantity) of the
aircraft and corresponding engine fleet; this problem is examined on the level of

the aircraft engine fleet for civil aviation;

286

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN]! OFFICIAL USIIC”ULY

2) Determining the optimum engine parameters in terms of the economic criterion
with the set basic aircraft characteristics; such problems correspond to the level
of the aircraft-engine system.

In the first class are the problems of long-range planning for technical progress

in aircraft engine construction. that is: determining the optimum parametric series
of aircraft and engines; determining the economic effectiveness from the introduc-
tion of a ncw type of engine or modification; determining the additional effect or
loss from reducing (increasing) the development time and the earlier (later) begin-
ning for the development and operation of a new type of engine or modification;
modeling the forecasting problems for economically sound moments to replace genera-
tions of aviation equipment.

In the second type are the problems of determining economic effectiveness for varia-
tions of the same type and purpose of engine and the optimization of its parameters
for economic criteria with the set basic aircraft parameters.

All the above-listed problems are solved with the help of particular criteria for
estimating the economic effectiveness of aircraft engines: in the system of a
certain class and type of aircraft fleet; in the system of the engine fleet.

The most general case is the estimating of an engine within a system of a certain
class and type of aircraft fleet. Since the engine is estimated in the aircraft
system, here one can fully apply the dynamic and approximate models for estimating
the economic effectiveness of the ATS as given in the previous paragraphs of the
present chapter.

In order to determine the economic effect from an engine or any other system ele-
ment, it is essential to allocate the overall effect in the system between the indi-
vidual elements. In the work [10] it is recommended that the effect be distributed
proportionally to the expenditures on wages related to the development and produc-
tion of the elements and to the coefficients for the scientific and technical sig-
nificance of the work on element j. Thus, the annual or full economic effect of a
new engine (element 1 of a system) is determined by the formula

.3 . m (5,8,,

n
I Kstjzuj
1-1

where n--number of elements accounted for in system (usually two elements are ac-
counted for: airframe and engines);

zwj--expenditures on wages related to the development and manufacturing of sys-
tem element 3;

Kstj--coefficient for scientific and technical significance of development of
element 5.

For establishing the design of a system functional element. it is essential to de-
termine its limit price. The limit price of a functional element can be calculated
1n the basis of the limit price of the system central element. For example, the

287

FOR OIIJCJAI.lEﬂi(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

limit price of a new engine in the development stage is determined on the basis of
the limit price of the aircraft.

The upper price liait of an aircraft can be represented in the following form:

1’qu - ppmudpdvp, (5.81.)

where Paw—upper price limit of airframe;
Pdvpnupper price limit for engine.

Let us assume that the upper price limits for the airframe and engine are in the
same ratio as their lower limits, that is:

PPLVP : Pdvp - sznp3Pdnp;

*np - ppgnpzrdnp. (5.85)

Having substituted the expression for the upper price limit of the aircraft (5.84)
in the equation (5.80), we obtain

_1- [3&2 + “dim. + szvgvrgz + 9mm + In}: + Em Ppygmrml .
th tnipl ‘l’nzd rm Ind T8

P P I P P P + P
_1-[_b&+1d_§9_+ b Yri+£ﬂ+ 1bh+gn°—"P£—M]. (5.86)
Km Tbtla Tbtd sza ma T;

In substituting the value PPLVP from the equation (5.85) into the equation (5.86)
and solving it for Pdvp. we obtain

 

P P P P Y P + P
M bpl +“dbd+ bg7r2£+ hdrd+1bh+zno bpl ndbd 'Ih

W Th: 1nd '1: L ‘bd Ts “
pi p . (5.87)

 

Pva“
32.4. “6 +1£E+lﬂ+gnoﬂ

tnzpz Tnzd tapt tnd Ts

 

The engine limit price is calculated from a formula analogous to (5.82).

288

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGMPIIY

l. ”Haterisly XXV 8"yezda KPSS [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow, Polit-
izdat, 1976. 256 pp.

2. Akopov, P. 1... "Certain Methodological Questions inthe Forecasting of Expenditures
on ORR and Serial Production of Aircraft Engines," "Teaisy Dokladov na Vsesoyunnoy
Konferentsii 'Ekononicheskiye Probleny Prognozirovaniys Razvitiya Bol'shikh ‘rekh-
nicheskikh Sisren'" [Theses of Papers at the All-Union Scientific Conference on
"Economic Problem in Forecasting the Development of Large Technical Systen"), Hoscow,
Izd. MAI, 1971. pp 32-34.

3. Akopov, P. I... "Calculating the Costs of Increased-Life Machines," STANDARTY I
Kacazsrvo, No 9, 1968. pp 61-63.

lo. Amosov, N. 34., 'Mdelirovaniye Slozhnykh Sisten" [Modeling Couple: System], Kiev,
Naukova Dunks, 1968, 88 pp.

5. Barabssh, Yu. 1... Verskiy, B. V., Zinov'yev, V. '1'. et a1., "Voprosy Statistiches-
koy Teorii Raspoznsvaniya" [Questions of Statistical Pattern Recognition Theory] ,
Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1967, 399 pp.

6. Beshelev, S. 1)., Gurvich F. G., "IIatenatiko-Statisticheskiye Hstody Ekspertnykh
Otsenok" [Statistical Mathematics Hethods of kpert Estimates], Moscow. Statistika,
1971., 159 pp.

7. Butkovskiy, A. G. . "Teoriya Optimal'nogo Upravleniya Sisteaani s Raspredelennyni
Paranetrani” [Optima Control Theory for System with Distributed Parenteral, Moscow,
Nauka, 1965. 67!; pp.

8. Venttsel', Ye. .2 . 0vcharov. 1.. A., ‘Teoriya Veroyatnostey" [Probability Theory],
Moscow, Nauks, 1973. 366 pp.

9. Gatovskiy, 1.. IL. "Nauchno-Tekhnicheskiy Progress i Eltononiks Razvitogo Sotsisl-
izna" [Scientific and Technical Progress and an Economy of Developed Socialisn],
Moscow, Nauks, 19710, 631 pp.

10. Golosovskiy, s. 1., "Ekononicheskaya Bffektivnost' Nauchnykh Isslsdovaniy i

Razrabotok" [Economic Effectiveness of Scientific Research and Developnent], Moscow.
Hoskovskiy Rabochiy, 1975, 167 pp.

289

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

11. Grubov, V. I., Ivakhnenko, A. 6.. Mandrovskiy-Sokolov, B. Yu.. "Pronyshlennaya
Kibernetika. Spravochnik" [Industrial Cybernetics. A Reference Manual], Kiev,
Naukova Dunks, 1966, 447 pp.

12. Denidovich. B. P., Maron. l. A., Shuvalova. B. 2., “Chielennyye Metody Analise"
[Numerical Analysis Methods], Moscow, Nuuka, 1973. 367 pp.

13. Dobrov, G. M.. "Prognozirovaniye Nauki i Tekhniki" [Forecasting Science and
Technology]. Moseow. Nauka, 1969. 208 pp.

15. "Dolgosrochnyye Progra-my Kspital‘nykh Vlozheniy. Ekononicheskiye Prohlemy i
Modeli" [Long-Range Capital Investment Programs. Economic Problems and Models],
edited by V. P. Kresovskiy, Moscow, Ekonomika, 197A, 270 pp.

15. Draper, N., Smith, 8., "Prikladnoy Regressionnyy Analiz" [Applied Regression
Analysis], Moscow, Statistika, 1973. 392 pp.

16. Ezekiel, M., Fox. K. A., "Metody Ansliza lorrelyatsii i Regressiy Lineynykh i
Krivolineynykh" [Methods of Correlation and Regression Analysis: Linear and Curvi-
linear], translated fron the English, Moscow. Statistika, 1966, 558 pp.

17. Kaspin, V. I., "Factor Analysis in Statistical and Forecast Research." in the
book: "Tezisy Doklsdov I Konferentsii po Prileneniyu EMM i Sredstv VT v Upravlenii
Standartizatsiyey i Kachestvon Produktsii. Metrologiyey i v Spravochno-Infernatsionnon
Obsluzhivanii" [Theses of Papers from the First Conference on the Use of Mathenatical
Econoeics Methods and Computers in Standaridization and Product Quality Control,

in Hetrology and Information References Services]. Moscow, Izd. Coastandarta. 1971,

pp 37-41.

18. Ksspin, V. I., Lisichkin. V. A., "The Concepts of Porecasting,” in the collection:
"Sorevnovaniye Dvukh Sisten" [The Competition of the Two Systems]. Moscow, Nauka.
1971, pp 469-592.

19. Kulikov, N. K., "Multifactor Forecasting on the Basis of Flexible Structure
Functions," in the collection: "Osnovnyye Probleny i Zadachi Nauchnogo Prognoziro-
vaniya“ [Basic Problems and Tasks of Scientific Forecasting]. Moscov, Znsniye, 1972,
p 151.

20. Kulikov, N. K., "Elenenty Vysshey Matenatiki na Osnove Punktsiy s Gibkoy Struk-
turoy" [Elements of Higher Mathematics on the Basis of Flexible Structure Functions].
Moscow, Izd. MTIPP, 1972, 125 pp.

21. Lange, 0., Banasinski, A., "TeoriyaStatistiki"[Theory of Statistics], trans-
lated fro. the Polish, Moscow, Statistiks, 1971. 399 pp.

22. Lisichkin, V. A., "Otrsslevoye Nauchno-Tekhnicheskoye Prognozirovaaiye" [Sec-
rorial Scientific and Technical Forecasting]. Moscow. Ekononika, 1971. 231 pp.

23. Lisichkin. V. A., "Teoriya i Praktika Prognostiki" [Theory and Practice of
Forecasting]. Moscow. Nauka. 1972, 226 pp.

290

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

26. Lisichkin. v. A., Ratnikova. Ye. I. Kaspin. V. I.. "Prognozirovaniye lelio-
technogo Dela v SSSR” [Forecasting of Library Sciences in the USSR]. Moscow. Izd.
GB in V. I. Lenin. 1972. 56 pp.

25. Lopukhin. H. M., "PATTERN--Hetod Planirovaniya i Prognozirovaniya Nauchnykh
Rabot" [PATTERN-~A Method of Planning and Forecasting for Scientific Projects].
Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio, 1971. 159 pp.

26. Lowly. D. 8.. Maxwell. A. 8.. "Paktornyy Analiz kak Statisticheskiy Hetod"
[Factor Analysis as a Statistical Method]. translated from the English, Moscow.
Mir. 1967, 164 pp.

27. L'vov, D. 8.. Rubinshteyn. A. Ya., "Izmereniye Effaktivnosti Proizvodstva"
[Measuring Production Effectiveness]. Moscow. Ekonomika, 1976. 1&3 pp.

28. Heleshchenko. Yu. 8., ”Tekhnika i 2akononsrnosti Yeye Razvitiya" [Technology
and its Developmental Patterns]. Leningrad.Lenizdat. 1970. 266 pp.

29. Hesarovich. M., Make 0.. Takahara, Y., "Teoriya Iyerarkhicheskikh Mnogourovneykh
Sistem" [Theory of Rierarchicalnﬂulti-Level Systems]. translated from the English.
Moscow. Mir. 1973. 364 pp.

30. Hitropol'skiy. A. K.. “Tekhnika Statistichcskikh vychisleniy" [Statistical
Computation Techniques]. Moscow. Fizmatgiz. 1961. 680 pp.

31. Rumshinskiy. L. 2.. "Hatematichsskaya Obrabotka Resul'tatov Eksperinenta"
[Mathematical Processing of Experiment Results]. Moscow. Nauka. 1971. 192 pp.

32. Sarkisyan. S. A., Golovanov. L. V.. "Prognozirovaniye Razvitiya Dol'shikh
Sistem" [The Forecasting of Development for Large Systems]. Moscow, Statistika.
1975. 192 pp.

33. Sarkistyan, s. A.. Kaapin. V. 1.. Nechayev. P. A.. "Prognozirovaniye Razvitiye
Grazhdanskoy Aviatsii" [Forecasting Civil Aviation Develop-cut]. Minsk. lad. N113
pri Gosplane SSSR. 1973. 47 pp.

34. Sarkisyan. S. A., Hinayev, B. 8.. "Ekononicheskaya Otsenka Lotatel'nykh
Apparatov" [Economic Evaluation of Aircraft]. Moscow. Hashinostroyeniye. 1972.

179 pp.

35. Starik. D. 8.. Kanpin. V. 1.. "Prognozirovaniye i Bffektivnost' Nauchno-
Tekhnicheskogo Progressa" [Forecasting and Effectiveness of Scientific and Technical
Progress]. Moscow, Izd. MAI, 1975. 61 pp.

36. "Statisticheskoye Iznereniye Kolichestvennykh Kharakteristik" [Statistical
Measurement of Quantitative Characteristics]. Moscow. Statistika, 1972. 171 pp.

37. Theil. H., "Prikladnoye Ekonomicheskoye Prognozirovaniye" [Applied Economic
Forecasting]. translated from the English. Moscow. Progress. 1970. 510 pp.

291

IWDR¢OFIICJAL USEICMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

38. Theil, IL, "Ekononicheskiye Prognozy i Prinyatiye Resheniy" [Bcononic Fore-
casts and Decision Taking]. translated from the English. Moscow, Statistika. 1971.
(.88 pp.

39. "Teoriya i Praktika Prognozirovaniya Razvitiya “sold 1 Tekhniki v Stranakhu
Chlenakh SEV" [The Theory and Practice of Forecasting the Developaent of Science and
Technology in the CEMA Countries]. Ibscov, Ekonouika. 1971, 607 pp.

40. Terekhov, 1.. L.,"EEbnonika-Matanaticheskiye Metody" [Matheaatical Econouics
Methods], Moscow. Statistika, 1972. 360 pp.

lol. Timofeyeva. N. M., Skoroduaov, S. A.. Negro. A. 1.. "Metodicheskiye Polozheniya
Razrabotki Prognozov Razvitiya Tekhnologii Otrasli Mashinostroyeniya" [Procedural
Provisions on Working Out Forecasts for the Development of Production Methods in the
Machine Building Sector], Minsk, Izd. BelNITI 1 1'8. 1975, 201 pp.

62. aarnan, FL. "Sovreuennyy Faktornyy Analiz" [Modern Factor Analysis]. translated
from the English. Moscow, Statistika. 1972, 686 pp.

1.3. Haustein. 6.. "Metody Prognozirovaniya v Sotsialisticheskoy Ekononike" [Pore-
casting Methods in a Socialist Economy]. translated from the German. Moscow. Progress.
1971. 398 pp.

64. Himlblau, 1)., "Analiz Protsessov Statisticheshim Metodaai" [Process Analysis
by Statistical Methods], translated from the English. Moscow, Mir, 1973. 960 pp.

45- Churchnan, "-a Ackoff. R... Arnow. I... "Vvedeniye v Issledovaniye Operatsiy" [In-
troduction to Operations Research]. translated fro- the English, Moscow, Nauka.
1968, 486 pp.

66. Ayres, R.. 'Nauchno-Tekhnicheskoye Prognozirovaniye i Dolgosrochnoye Planiro-
vaniye" [Scientific and Technical Porecasting and Long-Range Planning]. translated
from the English, Moscow. Mir. 1971, 296 pp.

(.7. Yule, G. U., Kendal. M. 6., "Teoriya Statistiki" [Theory of Statistics],
Moscow. Cosstatizdat, 1960, 779 pp.

108. Yampol'skiy. s. M. Lisichkin. V. A.. "Prognozirovaniya Nauchno-Tekhnicheskogo
Progressa" [Forecasting Scientific and Technical Progress]. Moscow. Ekononiks. 1974.
206 pp.

49. Yampol'skiy. S. M.. Khilyuk. P. M.. Lisichkin. V. A.. ”Problemy Nauchno-Tekhni-
cheskogo Prognozirovsniya" [Problems in Scientific and Technical Forecasting],
Moscow, Btonomika. 1969. 163 pp.

50. Yanch, 2.. "Prognozirovaniye Namhno-Tekhnicheskogo Progresaa" [Forecasting
Scientific and Technical Progress], translated from the English. Progress. 1974,
586 pp.

0 Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye" 1977

10,272 - m -
CSO: 8144/1366

292

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY