FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10015
25 September 1981

Translation

WORKS. OF THE 10TH ALL-UNION SCHOOL-SEMINAR

ON STATISTICAL HYDROACOUSTICS

Ed. by

V.V. Ol'shevskiy. et al.

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOOlS
25 September 1981

WORKS OF THE 10TH ALL-UNION SCHOOL-SEMINAR
ON STATISTICAL HYDROACOUSTICS

Novosibirsk TRUDY DESYATOY VSESOYUZNOY SHKOLY-SEMINARA P0 STATISTI-
CHBSKOY GIDROAKUSTIKE in Russian 1980 (signed to press 23 Oct 80)
pp 2-144

[Complete contents of collection of works "Works of the 10th All-Union
School-Seminar on Statistical Hydroacoustics", edited by

V.V. 01'shevskiy, N.G. Zagoruyko, s.v. Pasechnyy and L.Ya. Taradanov,
Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of
Sciences, 400 copies, 144 pages]

CONTENTS

mnoutionaoonoossoo00O.aoI...toot...osocoo-00000000000000.0003.cocoa-ooo~aeoa 1

Statistical Hydroacoustics and Oceanography: Review of lbdels and
Operators and classification of Problem

(v. V. ol‘shevsuy).as...so...eac.0000.00.00.00...Cocoaoosooeoaosoooooo 2

Applied Aspects of the meory of Linear Random Processes
(B. G. mrchenko)0000l0000.000.000.000...II..0...IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOUOOOI. 16

Synthesis of mteminative System in Problem Involving Investigation
of the Horld Ocean

(Yuo Ye. siwrov)oassoacoO0090.0o000.0aona000.00....oaoooaoooaooooeoooaa 19

A Linguistic-Information nodal of Statistical Hydroaooustics
(v. P. sodiivko)0000000C0.00......I0....ICIOOOOOOIIOOOIOOOOOOOOIOOCOOOO 27

Stochastic Algorithms for Investigating Nonoonvex Pmctions With Many
Variables

(Vs Io AlekseyewoaO00000ooso.ooooaoosoo-0000.00.00sooeooeeooostooosooe 29

Simulation Couputer lbdeling in Acoustioo-Ooeanographic Research:
Purposes, Special Features, Scientific Problem

(V. v. ol'shevakiy)aolcaveasoCae.eacacao.Goose'oeeaeeaaoeeoeoaacoeocaaa 31

' a ‘ [I - USSR - E F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Volumtric Noise Spatial Correlation Function for Surface Antennas
(Yu. B. md‘amv ”d I. L. women“)OOQIOOOOOIDIIOOIOODII.OIOODODOOCI

Low-Frequency Reverberation Camed by the Scattering of Sound on the
Foamy Surface of the Ocean

(v. Po clomv)ooooooooooooooooooloooooo...son.ooooooosooooooroooooooooo

Infornation Characteristics of Reverberation Caused by Hide-Band
Sources in a Shallow Sea

(T. v. Polyanskaya)ooso...OOIoOso.so.aoso.ono.00000000000000.0000...Coo

Statistical Analysis of Acoustic Signals Scattered by a Sea Surface
(Ya. P. Dr‘s” and I. “Q Yawnkiy)...‘OOOUCOOOQOOOCOOOOOICOOOQ£0.00...

Investigation of the Interference Structure of the Acoxstic Field of a
Dbdel Waveguide
(G. K. Ivanova, V. N. Il'ina, Ye. P. Orlov and G. A. Sharonov).........

mltidinensional Pbdeling in Statistical Hydroacoustics
(v. v. 01'.hevskiy)OOIIOOIOOOOCOIOOOODOOOOOOOOOOIOUIOOOOOO.DIOD00......

Spatial (bvariation Function of a Sonic Pield
(v. H. Kudryuhov).I0.00.0.9.0000...CODOIOOOOIOIIUOOOOOOO...00.0.0.0...

m the Question of Anisotropy of the Ocean's Noise Field

(B. I. Klyachin)oooooooocoonsonoose.ooooooosooonoooooosos00.00.000.00so

A hthod of lbdeling a Robot With an Bcho-Ipcator
(D. Ye. (khotsimskiy, A. K. Placonov and V. Ye. Pryanichnikov).........

(haracteristic Differences in Arrival Angles and Times of Signals in
Separate Beans lhder (bnditions of a Clearly Expressed Zonal Structure

of a Sonic Field
(v. P. “ulicheva)00Iii...OOUOOOQOOOIOOOOI.OOOOCOIIOCCOIOOOOOOI00......

Spatial Filtration of a Signal in a Field of Reverberation and Noise
Interference During Scattered mission and Reception
(V. v. Kdd‘EOWRiy ad 8. v. Paedlllyy).~.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOODDOIODOOO

Detecting Noise Signals in a layered, Neterogeneom Pbdiul With
Dispersed Receivers
(v. c. Beﬂum. md v. s. Pusan”)...0....OIO...IOOODODOOOOOOOOOOOOICI

Controlling the Positions of Radiation Pattern Zeroes in Antenna Arrays
With Digital Signal Processing
(L. N. Danilevskiy, Yu. A. Domnov, 0. V. Korobko and
n. I. Taumsmskiy)IOOIOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOO...OOOOOOOIOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOOOO

Concentration Factor of a Horizontal, Linear Antenna During Nultibeam
Propagation of a Noise Signal in the Sea
(V. I. Bardyshev and V. A. Yeliseyevnin)...............................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Passive and Active Inverse Synthesis of the Aperture in Dispersed Systela
(V. V. Karavayev and V. V. Sazonov)....................................

Relationship Between Results of Optimal and Nonoptinal Processing of Broad-
Band Signals Received by a Scanning Antenna

(Be He sum)ocooccocooooooooossaloooaooooso...oeaaeooaeaaocoolooocoose

0n Adaptive Optimization of the Detection Algorithm in a Spatiotemoral
Information Processing System

(V. G. Gusev and Ye. V. Guerenkova)....................................

(h the Structure of an Adaptive Goniometer
(Yu. KO Wholdin ma L. A. mhemv)ooooitCOIIOOOUOIOCUIIIUOOC000......

Holographic lbthods for Spectral Analysis of Random Sonic Fields
(3. I. Dbl'treger and Ye. I. Fheyfets).................................

(h the Bffect of Large-Scale Nonunifomities in the Refractive Index on
Shifts in Evaluations of Op tinum Gonionetric Sys ten
(“0 I. I‘m, L. A. kshewv and c. m. Takidi)OOOOOOIOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOO

Processing Hydroacoustic Inages on a Real-Tine Scale
(V. N. Mikhaylovskiy, V. V. Gritsky, B. V. Kisil' and A. Yu. Lutsky)...

Ihe lbthod of Correlated Hologram in Acoustic Investigations of the Ocean

(Yes Po Orlov)oaoeooooe000.000.000.000...asoaaseaesaaasaeaaeaosoooeooao

Pal'm's Random Field
(A. G. Buynov and H. T. Beshetnikov)...................................

Cowining the Principles of Invariance and Nondisplaceability With
Other Solving Rules Synthesis Methods Lhder Conditions of Prior
Indeterninacy

(Y0. Ye. sidomv)...asaGooseoscooooeasacoocoo-son's.aoooooeaoaocaooosoo

Basic Concepts of the Stability of Statistical Procedures
(P. P. Taraenko md v. P. shulenin)olO...0.0I0.0.0....0.00.00.00.00...

Adaptive Processing of M-(buponent Noise Siglals

(V. P. Pashkov)ooa...sosaoooooscooaoooooooooooooo-oooooooosaccuses-ease

Effect of Concentrated Reflectors on the Effectiveness of Hydroacoustic
Information Processing
(A. P. Tnfmov md Y“. s. Radchenko)00.0.0...OIIOOIOODOOOOIOOOIODOODO.

(h the Quality of Some Evaluations of Maxinun Likelihood

(V. V. Borodin)...oooooaaoooeesaoeooooa...oooossesoaeosaeosaoohashes...

Gawain Signal Detection With a Long Observation Tine
(K. B. Kﬂowkiy-sinevtch)0000000D...I.0.0.000000000000000000000000000

0n Selecting the Interference Classifier for Signal Detector System
(A. H. Zil'bel’shteyn and Y“. s. Natkovidl)........o..................u

— c -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

94

97

99

103

106

108

111

113

117

120

128

134

136

140

143

145
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.\'

Noiae Signal Identification Ihder conditions of Interference and
Frequency-Independent Distortions
(V. V. Geppener, V. B. Nazarovzand H. A. Senilov)......................

Phthoda for macovering the Properties of (bjecta on the Basis of the
halyaia of a Set of. kturn Signals
(I. 0. Arro, 1‘. Yu. Sullakatko and V. R. Kheynrikhaen).................

m an Algorithm for the Renate [Eternination of Paramtera of Shells
(Ya. A. mmawet)o.0III.OII.O.IOO00......0OOOOOOICOIOOOO0.0.0.0.000...

Ibasuring the Quality Factor of the Primary Filters of a Human Being'c
Directional Auditory System
(1.. A. mestyannikov, V. A. Zwrev and V. A. 01aplygin)................

Principles of the Design of an Operational Syaten for Predicting the
Acoustical Situation in the Ocean _
(V. V. Ol'ahevakiy, V. S. Tinerkayev and z. D. Uamanov)................
0n Selecting the Minimum Distance Between 'lVo Antennae "hen Determining

the (brrelation Function'a lbpendence on the Space Angle
(V. V. Buryachenko. V. S. Gorbenko and 1.. Ya. l‘aradmov)...............

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WTATION

/Text7 This collection contains materials from the 10th anniversary All-Union
School-Seminar on Statistics‘ Hydroacoustics, which was organized by the Scientific
Council on Hydrop. ys1cs of the USSR Academy of Sciences' Presidium, the USSR

Academy of Sciences' Acoustics Institute, the Mathematics Institute of the USSR
Academy of Sciences' Siberian Department and the Kiev Polytechnic Institute.

The seminar was held in Sukhumi, from 17 to 21 October 1978.

This collection' s subject matter includes methodological questions on modern sta-
tistical acoustics; questions on the study of a hydroacoustic channel and its char-
acteristics; questions on the processing of signals against a background of noise
and the transmission and processing of information on biological objects.

The materials in this work will be of interest to scientific workers and special-

ists in the field of hydrophysical research and information processing, as well as
graduate students, engineers and senior students.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STATISTICAL HYDROACOUSTICS AND OCEANOGRAPHY: REVIEW OF MODELS AND OPERATORS AND
CLASSIFICATION OF PROBLEMS

[Article by V. V. Ol'shevskiy pp 3-15]

liex£7 I. Introduction. The development of the theory and methods of statistical.
hydroacoustics. particularly in the last 10-15 years (see, for example, 11-6, [2,
127), made it possible, on the one hand, to solve a whole series of scientific
problems related to the development of statistical models, the analysis and synthe-
sis of algorithms for the processing of hydroacoustic information, :he formulation
and conduct of simulated computer experiments and so on; on the other hand, the de-
velopment of statistical hydroacoustics engendered new problems directed at a more
thorough examination of various hydrophysical phenomena and the mechanisms of their
functioning, as well as the study of the interaction of hydroacoustic information
systems with the ocean. Primarily, these types of problems have to do with inves-
tigations of acoustico-oceanographic models--namely, the determination of the spe-
cial features of their formation, the analysis of the interrelationships of special
and general models, and the solution of different statistical problems emanating
from the need for a more thorough understanding of the acoustical situation, the
acoustic weather and the acoustic climate in the ocean 1127.

Generally speaking, acoustico-oceanographic research as a scientific field ap eared
quite long ago. It is sufficient to point out the fundamental works Ll, 7-19 to
make clear the definite direction of different investigators: for more than 30
years now, steps have been taken toward a joint (integrated) examination of oceano-
graphic and acoustic phenomena. In the 10 years since 1969, the annual All-Union
School-Seminars on Statistical Hydrogcgustics have been playing a significant role
in the formation_of these outlooks £6_/, along with the First Congress of Soviet
Oceanographers 1117, which was held in 1977, the annual regional seminar on
"Acoustical Methods of Investigating the Ocean" 113/, which has been held_since
1976, and the First Seminar on "Acoustic Statistic Models of the Ocean" 112/, which
was conducted in 1976. Along with development in this direction, the last 10-15
years have also seen the development of a general methodology and constructive com-
puter programs for image identification (see, in particular, 114-11] and others).
In these methods we have synthesized many heuristic ideas about searching for and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
analysis was improved, procedures and programs for computer modeling were developed
and so on. At the same time, ideas about computer data banks have also been devel-
oped intensively in recent years: methods for forming them have been created,
along with information retrieval programs, interpreting programs, operational con-
trol systems for computers and so forth. All of this--the development of
acoustico-oceanographic statistical models, the accumulation of experimental data
about the ocean, the development of image identification methods and the theory of
data banks, as well as methods for creating and using them-makes it possible, from
a rather general viewpoint, to form an opinion about contemporary statistical
acoustico-oceanogrsphic problems, to review the models and operators that have been

el. On the whole, this work is of a systems (integrated) nature: essentially, it
seems to us, it is only such an approach that can make it possible to tie special
and general models together into a unified whole, indicate the position of indiVid-

2. Formal Description. Let us introduce the following sets: 03 - the set of
oceanographic characteristics; 0y = the set of the ocean's acoustic characterist-
ics; 6x = the set of characteristics of the acoustic fields in the ocean; 0R -
= the set of output data of a hydroacoustic information system. The elements of

ink 02, Y(n)EOY, 7K3): ox, KEEN- GR, (1)
it being the case that each of these vector functions describes the following oh-
Jecrs 3(i) — oceanographic characteristics, Y(§) = acoustical characteristics of

output data. Let us further introduce the transfer statements between pairs of
vector functions, so that

with the characteristics of the acoustic fields in it; operator pr couples the
hydroacoustic information system's output data with the acoustic fields; in addi-
tion, from (3) it follows that QXYZ B QXYQYZ and Qnyz - QRXQXYQYZ' Let us mention
here that since, in the general case, operators QRX: QXY and Qyz are a combination
of linear (smoothing) and nonlinear (modulating) operators, their rearrangement

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when determining the combined operators QXYZ and QRXYZ is not permissible. Further,
in the space of the vector functions (1) under discussion, it is necessary to in-
roduce distance or the degree of proximity. Let us write the distance functionals
as follows:

dz(k,£) - dﬁﬁbjﬁn, dy(k,2) = dﬁﬂbﬁﬁn.
dx(k,£) = a,§,(3).i£(3)], dR(k,l—) - d[§k(ﬁ),ﬁl(ﬁ),.

where k, l = numbers of the vector functions, the distances between which are being
determined. Let us now discuss the form of the description of the vector functions.
when investigating acoustic phenomena and information systems in the ocean accord-

(4)

ing to model (2) and (3), the original vector function is the random one i(?),
which characterizes the oceanographic situation. A completely probable description
of the vector functions in the group of sets Oz, 0y. 0X and 0R is given by the com-
bined probability distribution law
++++
Pr(Z,Y,X,RIK) (S)

of the vector functions under discussion, as well as by the distribution law

9,6), (6)

it being the case that in the general case, the multidimensional value X character-
izes the complete set of acoustics-oceanographic conditions: in this sense, proba-
bility distribution (5) is provisional. It is obvious that the construction of the
complete acoustico-oceanographic probability model (5) and (6) is a practically un-
realizable task at the present time. Therefore, the first constructive step in
this direction is the construction of partial probability models of the type:

pﬁ/iz), pﬁ/ip, pﬁ/KX), prti/KR) (7)
together with the probability models of the operators

P1,.(Qyz/I )Iz)’ Pr(QXY/I ,Xy). Pt(Qu/xksxx)s (8)

where :2, KY» Xx and l characterize the corresponding oceanographic and acoustic
conditions, the probability distributions of which must also be determined:

prdz). pray), prdx), prdk). (9)

A second approximation to a full probability description of acoustico-oceanographic
conditions (5) and (6) is the assignment of the first joint distribution laws of

the type
rum/123,), pﬁj/Kwi'x), p,(§,ﬁ/Xx,'in), (10)

which are possibly the probability distributions of Operators (8), as well as the
conditions

+» ++ ++
Pr(Az,AY), Pr(ly,lx), Pr(lx,AR). (11)

This, as is the case with approximation (7)-(9), is an incomplete (partial) proba-
bility description of the acoustico-oceanographic models, although it is much more
difficult to realize it than description (7)-(9). Among the other approximations
to a complete probability model it is necessary to mention the correlational level

(5

FOR OFIﬂCJAl.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the description of the acoustico-oceanographic phenomena. In connection with
this, of course, an estimate of the degree of completeness of the description is
not guaranteed in the general case, although in a number of cases correlational
models prove to be quite effective. This type of correlational model of the vector
functions under discussion is presented in the form

mien/$21 = w? 3%,). «mm/Iv: - «(3' .E'viy).
mam/xx] = we ,3"/"Xx), mam/"KR; - KEG- ,ﬁ'vik)
together with the correlational models of the corresponding paired operators
mom/ivy), Mon/XXJY), Manx/lag), (13)

it being the case that as in the other cases under discussion, correlational models

(12)

are provisional in the sense of the acoustico-oceanographic situation K2, X1, Ix
and KR! for which its own probability description must be given at (for example)
the level of (9).

3. Interpretation. Let us now discuss and give an acoustico-oceanographic inter-
pretation of the formal concepts of vector functions that were introduced in
Section 2.

3A. Vector function

2m = x.,<;,>,z,<;2>.....zq<?q)1 <1“)

I o -’ o
is understood to mean the set of scalar functions z-(y-), i = l, , of vector ar u-
; 1 q g

ments ?i that describe the oceanographic--in the broad sense (atmospheric, aqueous
and geological)--phenomena affecting the ocean's acoustic characteristics. Primar-
ily, this means:

the characteristics of the layer of atmosphere adjacent to the ocean's suiface: in

a a a -) a a o a
connection with this, 21(11) describes the depcnucnce of the instantaneous wind ve-

- a I -. +
locity on the spatiotemporal coordinates, 71 I (p,t);
the characteristics of the state of the water surface: in connection with this,

zz(;2) describes the displacement of the water surface as a function of the spatio-

. -> ->
temporal coordinates, Y2 I (p,t);
the characteristics of the air bubbles in the layer of water near the surface: in

connection with this, 23(;3), 24(;4) and 25(;5) describe, respectively, the number

of air bubbles in a certain volume, their sizes and their rate of motion as a func-

. _ . -> + + +
tion of the spatial and temporal coordinates, Y3. ya. 75 I (o,t);
the characteristics of the solid particles in the ocean layer: in connection with

this, z§(;6), z7(;7) and zg(?3) describe, respectively, the number of particles in
a certain volume, their sizes and their rate of motion as a function of the spatial
and temporal coordinates, 76' Y7. 13 I (s,t);

the characteristics of the mixing of water masses and currents: in connection with

this, z9(;9) describes the rate of motion as a function of the spatial coordinates

gig, $9 - (3,0;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAL.US£(NNLY

the ocean's temperature characteristics, including both its surface and subsurface
+

waves: in connection with this, 210(110) describes the temperature's dependence on

.y .

the spatial and temporal coordinates, 110 I (J,t);

the ocean's salinity characteristica: in connection with this, :11(?11).

zlz(;12),...,zz(;z) describe the concentrations of different salts in the ocean as

a function of the spatial and temporal coordinates, $11,?12,...,;¢ I (3,t);

the characteristics of biological objects: in connection with this, zz+l(;z*l)’

z +2(? +2)....,z (; ) describe the species composition of biological objects as a

z ,2 p c, , + a w +

function of the spatial and temporal coordinates, yz*1,yz*2,...,yp = (n,t)i

the characteristics of the ocean's bottom: in connection with this, zp§1(vo*l),

s (; )....,zq(;q) describe the relationships of the different components of the

0*2 0+2
bottom, including its surface, as a function of the spatial coordinates,

u) -> +
irony-«(q .. (p).

a.
Yc+l'

All of these functions zi(;i) are random in nature, so their description is given
with the help of probability laws or their parameters.

33. Vector function
ME) = [y,(El),y2(§2),.”49(30): (15)

is understood to mean the set of scalar functions yj(§j), j = 173, of vector argu-

ments 3. that describe the acoustic characteristics of the ocean that affect the
formatign of acoustic fields in it. Primarily, this means:
the scattering characteristics, also including coherent scattering,onirregulari-

ties in the water surface: in connection with this, y1(§1) describes the depend-
ence of the undulating surface's scattering function on the spatial and temporal

coordinates and the acoustic signal's frequency, 31 I (3,t,w);

the water surface's reflection characteristics: in connection with this, y2(§2)

describes the dependence of the surfsce's scattering function on the spatial and

temporal coordinates and the signal's frequency, 32 I (3,t,w);

the scattering characteristics, also including coherent scattering, on air bubbles

in the layer near the surface: in connection with this, y3(§3) describes the de-
pendence of the layer'a scattering function on the spatial and temporal coordinates

and the signal's frequency, 33 I (3,t,u);
the characteristics of scattering on the solid particles in the ocean layer: in

connection with this, y4(Eh) describes the dependence of the particles' scattering

s o s .' I’
function on the spatial and temporal coordinates and the frequency. 84 I (p,t,m);
the characteristics of scattering on temperature irregularities in the ocean: in

connection with this, y5(§5) describes the dependence of the irregularitics'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scattering function on the spatial and temporal coordinates and the frequency, E5 .

a.
- (n,t,m);
the scattering characteristics, also including coherent scattering, on biological

objects in the ocean: in connection with this, y6(§6), y (37),...,yz(§z) describe
the dependences of the scattering functions of different ypes of biological ob-

jects on the spatial and temporal coordinates and the frequency, 56,37,§8,...,§z =

.5
' (ODtOm);
the refraction characteristics related to the nonuniformity of the ocean's tempera"

turc and salinity: in connection with this, y +l(§z+l)’ yz+2(§z+2)""’ym(§m) de-
scribe the dependences of the acoustic wave refraction parameters (during their

propagation) on the spatial and temporal coordinates and the frequency, 3

‘5 ”-5 '(3,t,w);

,.
tﬁezabsorpgion characteristics related to the effect of the ocean's temperature and
salinity, irregularities in its boundaries, air bubbles, biological objects and the

(h)

C0-

z+l'

structure of the bottom: in connection with this, ym*l(§ l)'ym+ (§ 2),...,y
describe the dependence of the absorption functions on th803pltla a3; temporai

o -b .p .5
ordinates and the frequency, Bm+ ,E +2""’BA ' (p,t,w):
the scattering characteristics, alsg including coherent scattering, on irregulari-
ties on the bottom and nonuniformities in its structure: in connection with this,

yH (31+1)'yl+2(31+2)””’y (3 ) describe the dependences of the indicated objects'
scaftering functions on the teroral and spatial coordinates and the frequency,

a ->
E +1.8 2,...,§ ' (p,t,w);
the reflection Eharacteristics of the ocean bottom and its different structural

formations: in connection with this, yml 8 .1 ,y + (E g ),...,yv(§v) describe the
dependences of the reflection functions on the apaEigl ﬁns temporal characteristics

5

and the frequency, E 1,3 +2,..., = (3,t,w);

the characteristics 3f thg sourcesvof underwater noises in the ocean, including
wave action from the water's surface, cavitation phenomena in the ocean, sources of
biological origin, manmade underwater equipment and seismic sources related to the

->
* v+l)’yv+2(8v+2)""’
...,y (B )deacribe thedependencea of the sources' functions on the spatial and

E "39 ' (3,t,w).

The functions y-(§-) under discussion--as was the case with zi(?i)--are random, so
their descripti n is given with the help of probability laws and their parameters.

i
dynamics of the water masses: in connection with this, yv+l(8

P P
temporal coordinates and the frequency, 3

vsl’ v+2"'

3C. The vector function

as) a [x,(;,),x2(i;2>,...,xm(3,,)) (16>

is understood to mean the set of scalar functions xk(;k), k I l,m, of vector argu-
ments “k that describe the acoustic fields in the ocean that affect hydroacoustic
information systems. Primarily, this means:

the field of direct signals: in connection with this, x1(;1) describes these

FOR 0F1ICJAI.US£(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fields as a function of the spatial coordinates of the observation point, time and
the frequency, :1 - (3,t,u);

the field of reverberation signals: in connection with this, x2(:2) describes
these fields as a function of the spatial coordinates of the observation point,
time and frequency, 32 - (3,t,w);

the field of return signals: in connection with this, x (33) describes these
fields as a function of the spatial coordinates of the ogservation point, time and

frequency, 33 = (3,t,m);

the field of underwater noises: in connection with this, x4(;4) describes these
fields as a function of the spatial coordinates of the observation point, time and

+ ->
frequency, ob - (p,t,u).
JD. The vector function

M) = [:,(R,),r2(ﬁz),..4,61,); <17)

is understood to mean the set of scalar functions rk(ﬁp), k I l,n, of vector argu-
.§
ments "k that describe the processes at the hydroacoustic information systems' out-

puts. Since these systems are of a measuring type, §(h) usually means a set of
statistical evaluations of different probability characteristics of the acoustic
fields for which one or more features are being studied. These can be evaluations
of mathematical expectations, moment functions of different orders, probability
densities, characteristic functions, correlation functions and others.

a. Data Banks. The basis of the solution of many informational acoustico-
oceanographic problems is data banks. Information on the sets 02, 0y, ex and 9R is
stored in them. In connection with this, the information is represented by the
subsets

A a. A

ozcsz, oycoy, excex, eRcoR,
since the sets themselves are ideal (complete) models, while the actual information
in them (indicated by the sign "‘" above) essentially corresponds to the working
models; that is, models obtained on the basis of experimental investigations, con-
structive theories and modeling. Along with these data banks (18), there are also
other banks in which information on the operators Q¥z, QXY’ QRX' QXYZ and QRXYZ is
stored. In a manner analogous to (18), the banks 0 operators naturally contain
information on the working operators, which are subsets of the ideal ones; that is,

(18)

sz‘ QYZ' er‘ va' an ‘ onx' vaz C vaz’ anvz‘ Quiz’ (19)

since we do not know the ideal operators.
Acoustico-oceanographic information of the following types is stored in the data
banks:

1. The results of experimental investigations, including:
samples of random values, processes, fields and vector functions characterizing the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

phenomena observed in the ocean;

statistical estimates of the probability characteristics, as obtained by processing
the samples.

2. Empirical regularities about the acoustico—oceanographic situation.

3. Equations (and their solutions) describing acoustico-oceanographic phenomena, as
well as the characteristics of the hydroacoustic information systems.

5. Statistical Methods. The development of mathematical statistics methods, which
took place intensively over the course of many decades, resulted in the emergence
of a powerful (and one that has already become the classical) apparatus for pro-
cessing the results of observations and testing hypotheses. However, two fundamen-
tal questions concerning the use of statistical methods have still not received
full and constructive answers. The first question concerns the use of statistical
procedures under dynamic conditions of observation of investigated phenomena and
objects: these are problems of the statistical analysis of heterogeneous samples,
nonstationary processes, nonisotropic and nonstationary fields and so on. The sec-
ond question concerns multidimensional statistical procedures. These two fields
are being developed at the present time, primaril within the framework of the
overall problem of an artificial intellect /14-17§. Despite the fact that in con-
nection with this many methods are heuristic and- in a number of cases even non-
rigorous. the successes and constructive results of the area of statistical analy-
sis are obvious.

6. Formulations of Several Typical Problems. As follows from what was explained
above, most problems in the field of the investigation of acoustico-oceanographic
models include the following main aspects: first, each problem must be given a
clear acoustico-oceanographic interpretation; second, it is necessary to formulate
a problem on the basis of clearcut formal definitions and concepts; third, it is
not mandatory to look for the solution of a problem with the help of analytical
methods, since image identification and similar methods are more appropriate here;
fourth, the solution of a problem will most likely be obtained with the help of a
computer (that is, with the help of numerical methods, modeling and computer simu-
lation methods. Below we will discuss several typical acoustico-oceancgraphic
problems, following the concepts explained in Sections 2-5 and keeping in mind the
methods from identification theory developed in the works of N. c. Zagoruyko and his
colleagues (see [15,16, 18. 19/ and others)

6A. Filling Spaces in a Data Bank and Editing Its Elements. A data bank--particu-
larly a set of acoustico-oceanographic situation banks that are in accordance with
"(18) and (l9)--cannot, of course, bv full. The reasons for this lack of fullness
are, in the first place, the practi'al impossibility of obtaining exhaustive exper-
imental data on an entire set of scoustico-oceanographic conditions; in the second
place, the presence of errors when conducting experimental research; in the third
place, incomplete monitoring of the acoustico-ocesnographic situation during exper-
iments; finally, in the fourth place, the lack of general acoustico-oceanographic
models at the present time. All of this results in a situation where a bank of
acoustico-oceanographic conditions is a set of tables (files) containing spaces in
the elements, the_ lines and the columns. The primary processing assignments of
such a bank are [15,16,18,l9/:

filling the available spaces with the' ’most probable," "most nearly correct" image;
detecting errors in the data bank' s tables; that is, "editing" it.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Both these problems are solved by image identification methods that have now been
developed, in connection with which the objective redundancy of the information in
the data bank is used and the information content of the effect of some parts of
the tables (lines, columns) on the different elements is investigated beforehand.

Thus, according to (18) and (19), a bank of acoustico-oceanographic conditions con-
sists of sets (see Sections 3 and a) characterizing the properties of the four vec-
tor functions

0 ' GZIJQYUeon , (20)
as well as the bank of operators of their interaction
Q ' QYzUvauqnxUvazUsz' (21)

After the solution of the problems under discussion by image identification methods,

* a
we obtain the improved banks 0 and Q , which satisfy the conditions

.* . .* .
0:0 >0, Q>Q no, (22)

where 9 and Q are ideal (complete) models of the sets of vector functions and oper-
ators, which, of course, are not known precisely.

63. Determination of Classes of Oceanographic Characteristics According to Acoustic
Features. One of the problems in image identification theory is the determination
of classes (groups, taxons or clasters that are equivalent LlS-l7,127) into which
several objects in a space of features can be divided. For a whole series of prop-
ositions it is necessary to divide oceanographic characteristics into classes. The
main problem in connection with this is selecting the features in the space of
which the classification will be made. Keeping in mind the hydroacoustic aspects
and the final purpose of the solution of such a problem, as the features it is ne-
cessary to take acoustical ones; that is, according to (l)-(3) and Section 3 (see
SC and 30) they can be vector functions

VG) e <3; (23)
Ol'
‘* “k
R (3); ok, (21.)

which are available in the data bank (see above, problem 6a).

With the help of taxonomic methods 1:5-17,127, by introducing distance dx(k,i),
dR(k,t) in the spaces of vector functions (23) or (24) in accordance with (A), the

*
set Oz of oceanographic characteristics can be divided into the following subsets:
.* ** ~* -* . ,
Us“ - oz; 6“":ij - 4». 1 i J, (25)
i

'* . .
where 32i’ i - l,Nz, will also be the unknown, nonintersecting classes of oceano-
graphic characteristics. Let us mention here that when solving this problem, it is

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICMWRCJA1.US£|DNLX

necessary to give either the allowable values of distance dxo, dRO corresponding to
any of the classes-9:i or the desirable number of classes "2 into which set 02 is
divided.

Thus, the division of set 0; into classes vii according to acoustic features (for
example. according to vector functions i(:)) is done according to the following al-

a.

gorithm: into class 3;i enter all the vector functions
zk’l’i(;)€ 921, k,£ I var, (26)
for which the condition

k,!.

occurs. It goes without saying that in connection with this, one keeps in mind the
maximally complete utilization of information about the coupling operators (19) of
the vector functions under discussion.

(27)

66. Determination of Classes of Acoustic Characteristics According to 0ceanographic_
Features. By its nature, this problem is similar (symmetrical) to problem 63, the
only difference being that the space of the features is the set of vector functions

describing the oceanographic characteristics (see Sections 3 and 3A):
A*+

z (m 6;, (28)

while set (23) or (24) corroborates the division into classes.

' **
In connection with this, the division of (for example) set 0; into classes‘ORj ac-
cording to oceanographic features (that is, vector functions 2*(;)) is done accord-

ing to the following algorithm: into class 3:j enter all vector functions

Rk,£,i‘°;i’ k,l I var, (29)
for which the condition
k,l

cecurs .

For class &;i there must Occur conditions of the type of (25):

.* .* . .* . .
\‘Nni ' 9R3 ’Einﬂj . 6. 1 i J. (31)
1

** . —-—- . .
where d -. i I l,NR, are the unknown, nonintersecting classes; NR I the total num—
ber of ﬁhese classes.

60. Identification of the Acoustic Situation. Problems of this type are formulated
in the following manner: the classes of objects to be identified are given (in

this case, the classes ’Ei of the hydroacoustic systems' output effects. Y°§i I 0;,

i I l,Np. or the classes 3&5 of the acoustic fields,\,9§j I 6§, j I 1,Nx); also
i

 

ll

FKIlCNﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR 0F1HCHAL USIZCMHLY

given is the space of identification features (in this case, the vector functions

Z*(y)£ Oz of the occanological characteristics). when solving this problem, for

the given realizations 21(7), =1 ,L, it is necessary to establish the classes #31

or -9'x£ cowhich 2 :(y) belong; that is, to determine the correspondence
"* a

2,11) —) 5: (32)
or

'* +

21(Y) "9 3x1. (33)

Such a problem is solved by standard image identification methods [id-IQ], and its
specific nature in the acoustico-oceanographic interpretation under discussion is
only that it is necessary to allow correctly for the following operator couplings:

11%) = é‘ﬁmtiﬂm (34)
01'
32*(3) - (3325"?) , (35)

keeping in mind the fact that Q:XYZ and Qin are of a stochastic nature.

68. Identification of the Oceanographic Situation. This problem is similar (sym-
metrical) to problem 60, the only difference being that what is given is the class-
es-3zi of oceanological characteristics, (13% '92: while the features are the
space R *(n)¢ 0R of the hydroacoustic information system's output effects or the
spacex §*(a)€ 0x of the acoustic fields. The solution here is the determination of
the affiliation of realizations Rp(n), p-1,P, or xq *(o), q- IT——, to one of the

classes 92p or 3gq; that is, determination of the correspondence

or
“a + ‘*
xq(a) -) 32,1. (37)

6F. HierarchyrofClasses: Acoustical Situation. Acoustic Heather and Climate.

Above (see problems 68-6E) classes of acoustico-ocesnographic models with some
boundary distances d given in the space of the selected features, such as d 0 (ac-
cording to (27)) or g 20 (according to (30)) and so on. In connection with t 15
analysis, however, the spatiotemporal coordinates (that is, the different regions
of the world ocean) were not figured in explicit form. He will assume that the
acoustic characteristics that are of interest to us are described by the vector

function §*(:), although the entire discussion can also be applied, in full measure,

-> -> ,
to the acoustic fields' vector function X*(o). Let us introduce the concept of
spatiotemporal limitations

v - (oe (avzanv); :¢(rv14‘rv)), (38)

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJA*3USE(MNLY

where Ev determines the spatial coordinates of the center of the selected region;

+ . . . . . . .
--its area; TV--the Inltlal moment of time; ATV--the observational time interval.

He will call the acoustic situation that set of realizations of the vector func-

tions ﬁ30(ﬁ) that is defined for the limitations $0:

vo - (zuﬁvmﬁvo); : c<rvmvo>):{i$o(ﬁn, (39)
where ARQo and ATVO are selected on the basis of the statistical uniformity of the

ensemble of realizations {§:o(n)}. In connection with this,

man 9§vo<3vﬁv>s (no)
that is, the vector functions under discussion form a set depending on the initial
coordinates iv and the current time Tv' The‘determination of classes (40) must be

made in the space of oceanographic features 3*(;) according to the technique de-
scribed in problem 6C, using taxonomic methods. Let us mention here that the
choice of limitations V0 according to (39) can be made on the basis of the intro-
duction of a boundary value of distance dzoo in the space i*(;). which essentially
also determines class (40) as a function of the spatiotemporal coordinates. we
will consider the term "acoustic weather in the ocean" to mean seasonal changes in
the acoustic situation in same region of the ocean. This means that, according to
(40), acoustic weather corresponds to the set

§¢grg5ivo(§§'Tv) ' savu(§vw)n (41)

where va defines a region with homogeneous (in the statistical sense) acoustic
weather satisfying the condition

ﬁvw I arg [sup d (k,£) s dR ], T 6 (0,").
k.l R0 9 V (42)

where dRo(k,l) - distance between corresponding vector functions (60) with numbers
(k,1); dug - permissible level of the difference in these vector functions within

the limits of a single weather region iv". Thus, set (61) determines the weather
changes in the given region. "Acoustic climate in the ocean" means durable changes
in the acoustic weather in some region of the ocean. This means that, according to
(41), acoustic climate corresponds to the set

§¢4°ivw(3§w) ' .gvk(§vk)' (‘3)

.p
where Rvk determines a zone in the ocean with homogeneous (in the statistical
sense) acoustic climate satisfying the condition

Rvk - arg (so: dRo(k,1) s de1, (ha)

where (in addition to the definitions used above) de - permissible level of dif-

ference in vector functions (so) within the limits of a single climatic zone Hvk'
Thus, according to (60), (al) and (as). the hierarchy of acoustico-oceanographic

13

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

classes has the following form:

m‘wanﬁwﬁ" 5EW<LJVD - égwdw); = 53m,» - 93. (as)

i
7. Resume. In this article we have discussed some contemporary statistical aspects

of the investigation of acoustico-oceanographic models, using image identification
methods and methods from adjacent fields as tools to solve the corresponding prob-
lems. The problems formlated above naturally require additional specific defini-
tion and the development of constructive methods for their computer realization.
In this area there are, of course, certain difficulties that, it is to be hoped,
will be overcome.

BI BL IOGRAPHY

l. Chernov, L.A., "Rasprostraneniye voln v srede so sluchayyym neodnorodnostyami"
LHave Propagation in a Medium with Random lrregularitiegl, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo
AN SSSR LUSSR Academy of Scienceg7, 1958.

2. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Statisticheskiye svoystva morskoy reverberatsii" _/_§tatisti-
cal Properties of Marine Reverberation7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1966.

3. Middleton, D., "A Statistical Theory of Reverberation and similar First-Order
Scattered Fields," 1338 TRANS. INF. THEORY, IT-13, 1967, pp 372-392, 3916-41,.
(Parts I and 11), IEEE TRANS. INF. 111., 11-18, 1972, pp 35-67, 68-90 (Parts III
and IV).

4. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Statisticheskiye metody v gidrolokatsii" Lgtatistical Meth-
ods in Hydrolocation7, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1973.

S. Middleton, D., "Characterization of Active Underwater Acoustic Channels," TECH.
REP. ARL-‘l'R-7lo-6l, Applied Research Labs, University of Texas at Austin, 19710.

6. "Trudy Vsesoyuznykh shkol~seminarov po statisticheskoy gidroakustike" Links of
the All-Union School-Seminars on Statistical Hydroacoustics7, Novosibirsk,
Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Department, AN SSSR, 1969-1978.

7. Mleshchev, V.I., editor, "Fizicheskiye osnovy podvodnoy akustiki" LPhysical
Principles of Underwater Acoustics-f, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo “Sovetskoye radio",
1955 (translated from English).

8. Shuleykin, V.V., "Ocherki po fizike morya" LEssays on the Physics of the 8e27,
Moscow-Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo AN SSSR, 1049.

9. Tolstoy, N., and Kley, K., "Akustika okeana" lacean Acoustici7, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Mir", 1969 (translated from English):

10. Brekhovskiy, l..M., editor, "Akustika okeana" lace“. Acoustics-i, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Nauka", 1974.

11. "I s"yezd sovetskikh okeanologov. Refgraty dokladov" [First Congress of Soviet
Oceanographers: Abstracts of Reportgl, Moscow, 1977.

14
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

l7.

18.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Akusticheskiye metody issledovaniya okeana" licoustic Methods of Investigating
the Ocean, collection of workg7, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", No
237, 1976; No 255, '977 (materials on exchange of experiences).

"Trudy pervogo seminars 'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye nodeli okeana‘" liorks
of the First Selina: on "Acoustic Statistical Models of the Oceanzy, Moscow,
Acoustics Institute, AN SSSR, 1977.

Sgbestian, G.S., "Protsessy prinyatiya resheniya pri raspoznavanii abrazov"
[Decision-Making Processes in Image Identificatiog7, Kiev, Izdatel'atvo

"Tekhnika", 1965 (translated from English).

Zagoruyko, N.G., "Metody raspoznavaniya i ikh primeneniye" licentification
Methods and Their 0557, Moscow, Iadstel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1972.

Zagoruyko, N.c., "Iskusstvennyy intelekt i enpiricheskoye predskazaniye"
LArtificial Intellect and Empirical Prediction], Novosibirsk, Novosibirsk State
University, 1975.

Dyursn, 3., Odell, P., "Klasternyy analiz" ZElaster Anslysig7, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Statistika", 1977.

Zagoruyko, N.G., Yelkin, V.N., and Tinerkayev, V.S., "The '75' Algorithm for
Filling Spaces in Empirical Tables," in "Vychislitel'nyye sistemy" [pomputer
System57, Novosibirsk, No 67, 1975, pp 3-23.

Yelkin, V.N., and Zagoruyko, N.G., "Quantitative Quality Criteria Prom Taxonomy

and Their Utilization in the Decision-Making Process," in "Vychislitel'nyye
sisteny", Novosibirsk, No 61, 1975, pp 3-27.

15

FOI,OIIN(JA1.USEGMNLY
FOR‘0f11C]Al.USEIDNLN

APPLIED ASPECTS OF THE THEORY OF LINEAR RANDOM PROCESSES

[Article by B. G. Harchenko pp 16-18]

Lfex£7 Introduction. An orderly and compact statement of many questions in the
theory of stochastic integrals can be obtained within the framework of the class of

linear random processes. In the extensive propagation of linear random processes
for the solution of applied problems, an essential role is played by the fact that
for linear random processes presented in an integral form, the general form of the
characteristic functional is known and the physical meaning of the parameters and
functions that are part of it is described [1,3], which in a number of cases makes
it possible to obtain the moments and semi-invariants of such processes compara-
tively simply or, speaking in the language of physics, for such processes there is
a generalized theorem on the imposition of random disturbances.

2. Linear Random Processes: Definition. An actual, random, separable process
5 (t) in a probability space {9,B,PT], where T is a unidimensional set with separa-
bility set To = {tj, j - l,2,...,t-c T}, is called linear if it can be represented

as a limit in the sense of weak cogvergence of the distributions in the for

n
(“(t) . lim 2 nnj(t,m), (l)
n-Dw j-l

where {nnj(t,w), j - iTH, n I l,2,...} is an infinite sequence of processes that
are independent for each fixing of n, the sequential sums of which satisfy the con-
dition of uniform infinite smallness; that is,

lim max Plln -(t,m)| ; c} = 0
n-Mo j "J (2)

for each s > 0 and te‘l‘o.

2. Processes Hith Independent Increments. He will define them in terms of n(t) and
give them on the semiaxis or the entire number-scale axis. These processes’ incre-

ments are independent in nonintersecting time intervals and the general form of
their characteristic function's logarithm is

16
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

ln f(u,t) I In H exp{iu|n(t2) - n(t1)]] '

. . 2 (3)
(e“”‘ - 1 - %)H+G(dx x uptzl),

2
= iu[u(t2) - m1); - 92—[o(t2> - m1): + _Z
where u(t)» 0(t) a 0 I some numerical functions determined unambiguously by n(t),
while C(dx I [t1,t2]) I Poisson measure of the discontinuities. It can be said
that separable random processes with independent increments satisfy the definition
of linear random processes formulated above.

4. Integral Representations of Linear Random Processes. The linear processes that

have been most thoroughly studied are (cil'bert) linear processes represented by a
stochastic integral in the form

an - j c(t,t)dn(t), at, (a)

where t(r,t) is a nonrandom numerical function satisfying the condition
_2 (2(t,t)dr < a for all t0 T; {n(t).n(0) = 0, ti (-w,w) =\a Gil'bert process with

independent increments; T = an arbitrary set of real numbers,including the multi-
dimensional spaces R“. The logarithm of the characteristic function of process (4)
is determined by the expression

iu€(t)

E

In f(u,t) I In Me 2‘

I iu_Z :(t,t)du(1) - Z Czif,t)dD(t) +

(5)
- . 2 ;
+ -Z .2 [eiuxc(r,t) _ l _ 1u:f§1,t)‘l:: 3(dg x dr),

where u(r), D(1) and C(dx x d1) are defined as in formula (3) and characterize a
process with independent increments n(t).

The general form of the characteristic function (5) of process (4) makes it possi-
ble to conduct a complete analysis of the responses of linear systems: find the

semi-invariants and density of the probability distribution or the response distri-
bution function, and study the distribution of discontinuities in its realizations.

5. Connecting Linear Random Processes with Other Processes. The convenience of the
utilization of a model of a linear random process consists not only of the fact
that practically all the characteristicscanbe obtained for such processes, but al-
so in its close relationship with other, no less important models such as--for ex-
anple--harmonizab1c and periodically correlationsl random processes (PKSP).
If, in representation (a), the nucleus satisfies the condition

C(T,t) = C(T + T,c + T). te (0.»). (6)

for all 1 and ti (-°,°), process (4) will be a PKSP; that is, its correlation func-
tion will also satisfy a condition analogous to (6). Such processes are encounter-
ed quite frequently in practice and are used to describe rhythmic phenomena.

As is known, a process permitting a representation in the fczm

cm - _Z enmazm, (7)

17

FOR OFFKJALlEﬂIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 2(1) I some random process, the correlation function of which has limited
variation, is said to be (Loev) harmonizable.

If we assume'that 2(A) in (7) is some process with independent increments (not ne-
cessarily uniform ones), (7) will then be a harmonizable, linear random process
with complex signs.

5. Physical Processes Described With the Help of Linear Random Processes. Along
with the solution of the problems mentioned above, which are related to linear and
nonlinear transformations of random processes, linear random processes also prove
to be extremely useful when creating primary, original models of different real
physical processes, which models can be constructed starting with an elementary
pulse structure and the physics of the formation of such processes.

In conclusion let us note that a model of linear random processes can be used to
obtain series of pseudorandom numbers, with previously assigned characteristics
and interconnections, with the help of a computer. Such series can be used in the
solution of problems by the statistical modeling method.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Marchenko, 3.6., "Hetod stokhasticheskikh integral'nykh predstavleniy i ycgo
primeneniye v radiotekhnike" Libs Method of Stochastic Integral Representations
and Its Use in Radio Engineeringl, Kiev, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1973.
2. Harchenko, 8.6., and Shcherbak, L.N., "Lineynyye sluchaynyye rotsessy i ikh
prilozheniya" llinear Random Processes and Their Applications , Kiev, Izdatel'-
stvo ”Naukova dunks", 1975.

3. 01'shevskiy, V.V., "Statisticheskiye svoystva morskoy reverberatsii" lgtatisti—
cal Properties of Marine Reverberatiog7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1966.

18

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Article by Yu. Ye. Sldorov pp 18-26

Ziex£7 I. Introduction. Every year there is more interest in problems concerning
the investigation and mastery of the world ocean, which--as far as its importance
and the extent to which it is being studied--has become a "second space." In the

In connection with this, the question of equipment and methods for investigating
the hydrosphere is an extreaely urgent one. The basic facilities for collecting
oceanographic infonmation are: 1) buoy stations (sea buoys); 2) ships; 3) aviation
(airplanes, helicopters); 4) artificial Earth satellites and other flying space-
craft (KLA). The information obtained with the help of buoy stations, ships and
aviation is of a regional nature, while that obtained with the help of KLA is of
the global type. Other facilities for gathering regional information are balloons
(controlled and uncontrolled), dirigibles (automatic) and sounding balloons and
rockets. Different equipment for remote investigation of the ocean (by, for exam-
ple, photography) can be placed in the cars of balloons and sounding balloons and
the bodies of rockets. The basic methods for obtaining oceanographic information
are contact and remote (noncontact) methods; the latter include: 1) visual obser-
vations; 2) photographic and television surveying of the surface of a water area;
3) infrared and multispectral surveying (in the wave band A 5 0.3 um to 1 mm); 4)
radiophysical methods (radiothermal location, radar) with X i 1 mm to l m; 5)
acoustic location; 6) optical (laser) location. Remote sounding methods can also
be divided into two groups: active and passive. The active methods include radar
and acoustic and optical location, while the passive ones include visual observa-
tions, photographic and television surveying, radiometric measurements and images
obtained with the help of scanning radiometers in the visible light, near infrared
and microwave bands, and acoustic methods.

Each of the methods listed above can be used to obtain some bit or another of
oceanographic information that is of interest to us. The most promising and

19
can nvvvoral new nwrv
Ftﬂl(”ﬂﬂC1AL USE‘DNLY

informative methods are the remote methods for sounding the ocean, which are based
on the emission and reflection of electromagnetic and/or acoustic waves by the
aqueous medium.

A special place is occupied by radiohydroacoustic methods of investigating the
world ocean in combination with aviation and KLA, which p£oduce the basic flow of
information about the ocean's depths (see Figure 3.1 in £_L7).

 

Figure 1. Illustration of problems and methods of investigating the world
ocean: 1. world ocean; 2. investigations of the surface and the surface
layer; 3. underwater hydroacoustic investigations; 4. hydrophysics prob-
lens; 5. temperature irregularities and layers; 6. dangerous phenomena;
7. underwater part of an iceberg; 8. reefs, shallows; 9. tsunamis; 10.
biological products from the ocean; 11. sea life; 12. fish; 13. plankton;
16. structure of the bottom; 15. global; 16. local (for engineering pur-
poses); 17. investigations of the nature of the Earth's surface beneath
the world ocean; 18. search for useful minerals (marine geology); 19.
special problems; 20. navigation problems; A. active methods; ﬂ. passive
methods; 21. deve10pment of optimum algorithms for classifying and evalu-
ating signal parameters (for different levels of prior information about
probability models and their characteristics).

The possibilities of solving various scientific and national economic problems con-
cerning the study and mastery of the world ocean's depths with the help of aero-
space radiohydroacoustic sounding methods in active and passive hydrolocation modes
are illustrated in the block diagram shown in Figure 1. As an example, Block 2 is
concerned with the study of the water's surface (determining temperature, boundar-
ies and types of ice covers, degree of wave action and pollution and so on) by the
different methods listed above as Nos 1-6 and 6. The necessity of obtaining ocean-
ographic information that is as nearly complete as possible (which is achieved by
the integrated utilization of various sounding facilities and methods), its opera-
tional and objective processing (including the finding and supplying to the consum-
er of certain solutions), and the multibranch nature of the data supplied to the
consumer all require an examination of the problems involved in creatin an ASOAOI
Lautomated system for processing asynchronous oceanographic informatiog§.

2. Some Propositions of the Theory of Complex Hierarchical Systems. The need for a
systems approach to the synthesis of an ASOAOI is dictated by the direction of the
development of automated control systems toward the study of objects and processes
of ever-increasing complexity. A clear example of this is the investigation of the
ocean. The desire for an accurate and as nearly complete as possible accounting of
the variegated phenomena and processes taking place in the ocean and the set of

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂClAL USE ONLY

factors affecting these phenomena and processes cannot be satisfied without con-
structing an appropriately complex automated system. This means that the research-
ers and developers are faced with new scientific and technical problems. These
problems are the substance of a new scientific and technical field: systems analy-
sis. The mathematical basis of systems analysis is the theory of complex (or
large) systems 12-37.

At the present time there is no clearcut (from the viewpoint of constructing a rig-
orous theory) definition of a complex system.

One spec .431 class of complex systems is information system, the structure of which
is adaptable to the implementation of special functions (such as receiving, stor-
ing, processing and publishing large masses of informgtion) and which are intended
for operation on especially large information flows LL7._ In addition to this. an
information system satisfies the following requirements LSJ: l) the nature of the
input signals is random and is formalized within the framework of a theoretical-
probahility apparatus; 2) the system can be part of a larger system, but its func-
tion criterion can be formlated autonomously, to some degree; 3) the system oper-
ates according to an algorithm emanating from the function criterion that includes
the extension of several statistical decisions.

The question of the presence or absence of a hierarchical organization in the sys-
tems is of extreme importance.

If we consider that the essential characteristics inherent in all hierarchical sys-
tems are _/_3_l: a) sequential, vertical arrangement of the subsystems constituting
the given system (vertical decomposition); b) priority of action or the right of
interference by subsystems on a higher level; c) dependence of the higher-level
subsystems' actions on the actual_performance of their own functions by the lower
levels, then any ergaticheskaya Ltranslation unknown7 system is hierarchical, so
that man--an upper level of hierarchy-wan interfere in the operation of the system
and monitor it, and his activities naturally depend on the results of the lower-
level subsystems' operations. Here the concept "system" or "subsystem" (module)
has the additional meaning of realizing the process of transforming input data into
output.

Three levels of hierarchy are recognized: I) the description or abstraction level
(stratum); 2) the level of complexity of an accepted decision (layer); 3) the or-
ganizational level (echelon). The echelon concept refers to interlinking between
the decision-making elements that form the system. It implies that l) the system
consists of a group of clearly defined interacting subsystems; 2) some of these
subsystems are decision-making (determinative) elements; 3) the determinative ele-
ments are arranged hierarchically in the sen_s_e that some of them are affected or
controlled by other determinative elements £3_7. Such systems are called multi-
echelon, multilevel or multipurpose.

The basic stages in the synthesis of determingtive systems (in the methodology of
systems analysis) can be defined as follows _/_3_7: 1) description on the verbal

level; 2) conceptualization and representation in the form of a block diagram; 3)
formalization and formulation of problems (within the framework of the systems'

general theory); 1.) analysis (with the enlistment of additional mathematical con-
structs) and investigation of properties. The verbal (word) description of the

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system makes it possible to construct a block diagram of it that shows the inter-
action of the subsystems and the connections among them. The next stage is formal-
ization of the block diagram's description and the obtaining of a model in the form
of an abstract system. For this model it is possible to construct a mathematical

description and study the system's behavior analytically or with the help of a com-
puter.

3. Global Structure of the ASOAOI. This system is used to obtain information on
the status, development and quantitative evaluation of various oceanographic pro-
cesses and objects (such as water temperature, salinity and chemical composition,
the location and direction of migration of biological objects, bottom relief,
underwater storms, icebergs, tsunamis and many other things). The basic problems
that the system must solve are: collection of primary information; classification
and evaluation of the parameters of the processes and objects that are of interest
to the consumer; presentation of solutions to the consumer. An ASOAOI has the fol-
lowing requirements: operativeness and accuracy of data processing and publication
(in different forms); formulation of solutions with the fewest possible errors and
maximum efficiency (probability that the solution is correct); the system must be
of a minimum size and economically justified.

An ASOAOI's structural diagram must contain the following subsystems (modules): a
measurement complex; an information reception, storage and processing system; an
information transmission system; an information display system; a monitoring and
coordination system; a system for detecting and eliminating malfunctions.

The equipment and methods for obtaining oceanographic information must be deter-
mined for the measurement complex (this was discussed in Section I). The measure-
ment complex naturally contains the appropriate surveying and measuring equipment.
The information reception, storage and processing system must include: 1) a recep-
tion center; 2) storage devices; 3) a primary (preliminary) processing system; 4) a
system for sorting information and tieing it in with some geographic region or
another, transforming the scales and standardizing and interpreting the data; 5) a
system for making decisions.

  

Figure 2. Block diagram of ASOAOI: 1. external environment

(world ocean); 2. measurement complex; 3. information reception,
storage and processing system; b. information transmission sys-
tem; 5. information display system; 6. information consumer; 7.
monitoring-coordinating center; 8. repair and operating center.

0n the basis of the verbal description it is possible to draw up a block diagram of
the ASOAOI that reflects the system's global structure (Figure 2). From a prelim-
inary familiarity with the basic problems solved in this system and its block

22

FOR¢0FFKJAl.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

diagram, the diversity of the functions performed by the system-the main ones of
which are related to the stage-by-stage processing of large flows of information--
is quite clear. Moreover. an ASOAOI satisfies requirements (1-3) for information
systems that were [emulated in Section 2; for instance, it can be part of a larger
system (a system for remote sounding of the Earth). Therefore, our system can un-
doubtedly be assigned to the class of complex, cybernetic intonation systems; its
special feature must be a high degree of automation based on the use of high-speed
computers that are functionally joined into large computer complexes.

4. Formalization of the Description of the System. For purposes of description and
analysis of its operation, a complex system must first be broken down into separate
elements, with their functioning being studied first, it being the case that this
division is not always carried out unambiguously and is largely determined by the
specific purpose of the system. Our system can be assigned to the class of hierar-
chical, multilevel. multipurpose systems. This assignment agrees completely with
the definition of such systems given in Section 2. For example, the purpose of the
reception. storage and processing system is to distinguish useful information with
the maximum probability, while the transmission system's function is to transmit
this information undistortedly and with minimum error. It is also obvious that the
ASOAOI's other subsystems have distinctive (local) purposes, it being the case that
each of these subsystems has its own function criteria and criteria for evaluating
the quality of its own actions. Thus, an ASOAOI is fundamentally a multicriterion
system. A formalized mathematical representation of an ASOAOI is possible in terms
of a relationship between sets X and Y:

ssx xv, (1)

where X = the input set; Y = the output set, while elements xs X and yaY are in-

puts and outputs, reSpectively. If S is the function s:x->Y, the system is called
functional _/_3__7 Thus, the representation of the system in the form of a relation-
ship is a representation in the "input-output" form. It is possible to discuss the

0
space of input signals (states) X = X1 X X; X...K Xn of the system; here Xi,
a

i - l,n are the elementary axes (subspaces nd an input signal at is a point in the
o

0
space X described by the coordinates x1,x2,...,xn (in the general case, X X).

Analogously, the space of the system's output signals is the direct product
0

0
Y - Y1 X Y2 X x Ym, YC-Y. Such operations are, naturally, also correct for each
0
of the subsystems, so that Y is the space of the output signals for a higher-level

(such as the r-th level) subsystem and the space of the input signals for a lower-
level ((r-l)-th) subsystem. It is particularly convenient to define the system in
terms of a decision-making problem. The system SSX X Y is called determinant if
the family of problems Dx, xs X is given, along with the set of solutions 2 and the
mapping Tzz—W, Vx 6X and VyGY of the pair (x,y)& S only if there exists an ele-

z 2 such that it is the solution of the problem Dan: and 1(1) = y. In most cases
the output is the solution of the formulated problem and z - Y; that is, '1' is an
identity mapping 117.

Any system formalized in the form of an "input-output" model can be represented in
the form of a determinant system, and vice versa. Systems possessing a hierarchi-
cal structure are distinguished by the fact that their subsystgm' functions can be
interpreted easily as the search for and making of decisions /37. If the decision
(operation) algorithm is determined for each of an ASOAOI's subsystems, the entire

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system's algorithm can be represented in the form of a combination of separate al-
gorithms. This is possible because of the fact that an ASOAOI (as is the case with

all technical hierarchical systems) belongs to the class of reflex systems, the re-
action of which to a disturbance is completely unambiguous.

5. 0n Optimality and Evaluating a System's Efficiency. The concept of "optimality"
of a hierarchical system is extremely diffuse, since there exists the possibility
that each subsystem can independently make a decision; this applied, in particular,
to maximizing its own functional. As we know, a hierarchical multipurpose system
is a multicriterial system (an ASOAOI, for example). Therefore, here we need to

find rational mathematical formulations of problems and give a reasonable meaning
to the concept of optimality.

There are several possible ways to optimize such systems.

A. The problem of searching for satisfactory solutions. Let g:X x 9-sV and 1:9-sv,
where X = the set of all solutions; 0 I the set of indeterminacies; V I the set of
payoffs; g I the object function; 1 = the permissibility function. The problem

117: given subset X*§X, it is necessary to find at in X” such that Vuen and

g(x,w) s 1(u). (2)
Criterion (2) is the satisfiability criterion. The quartet (g, 1, X*, 0) defines

the problem of finding satisfactory solutions, while any x from X* for which (2)
realizes VueSIis a solution to this problem.

2. The matched optimum principle ((Pareto's) principle). This principle appeared
in the theory of nonantagonistic analystical games, which solves the problem of
finding points that maximize several functions at the same time. An analytical
game is understood to mean the following mathematical setup 117.1) In the game
there are n players (subsystems, in our terminology) 51,...,Sn. The situation is
described by n analytical gain functions 11 I f1(x),...,ln I fn(x), where Ii I gain
of the i-th subsystem, while x is the vector of the control parameters. 2) the
space of control parameters x X is continuous. The set of functions {fi} deter-
mines the "metrics" of this space. 3) The set of control parameters x is divided
into n sets x I (x1,...,xn), where xi is the set of parameters monitored by the
i—th subsystem. b) Each subsystem, by selecting the set of parameters monitored by
it, strives to maximize its gain Ii-

Hatched optimum means the conversion of a conflicting situation into one in which

none of the subsystems can improve its status without causing "harm" to the others
by its actions. Therefore, the matched optimum status is the best for all the sub-

systems; that is, it is optimal £i[7. The marched optimum point is determined by
the equation

Df/Dx = 0, (3)

where f I (f1,...,fn) I a vector composed of gain functions f1, while 0/0: I the
Jacobian of vector transformation 1 I f(x).

It is sufficiently optimal in the sense that any player (any subsystem) withdrawing

from it can increase its own gain (improve its own quality functional) without
thereby reducing the gain (without causing the quality functional to deteriorate)

2h

INJR‘OITHCJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the other participants (subsystems). Therefore, the disruption by any partici-
pant in the game of the matched optimum conditions is "punished“ by all the other
participants by measures directed against the “disrupter” (for example, by increas-
ing the penalty function. This gives stability to the matched optimum point (pro-
viding, of course, that all the participants know each other's object functions,
which are assumed to be stable).

3. Stage-by-stage synthesis of hierarchical systems, using different optimization
methods. There is more information on methods for optimizing a system for making
statistical decisions in 1L7.

Since the ASOAOI's functioning (as is the case with any complex system) takes place
under conditions where a significant effect is exerted by random external factors,
the system's achievement of its final goal will be subject to the influence of
these factors. Therefore, it is advisable to evaluate the system's efficiency with
the help of various probability characteristics. In practice. the efficiency indi-
cator ifLY is the probability characteristic that is frequently used as the quanti-
tative measure for expressing a system's efficiency.

Any efficiency indicator is
Y = Y(€1,€2,...,€n; n1,n2,...,nn), (6)

where 51:52:---»€n . the system's parameters; n1,n2,...,nn - parameters character-
izing the effect of the external environment.

Along with its dependence on the system's parameters and the external environment,
which figure clearly in expression (A), the efficiency indicator also depends on
the system's structure, the nature of the connections between elements, the form of
the control actions and the functioning rules; that is, on factors that do not
yield to description with the help of parameters. These factors are taken into
consideration both by the form of the function V (or the form of the algorithm that
makes it possible to compute the values of Y if there is no explicit expression for
it) and the introduction of additional structural parameters £_{j. As a rule, ex-
pression (4) is awkward to derive, and the task of calculating it frequently re-
quires the realization of a rather complex algorithm and the handling of a large
amount of information, which can be done only with a modern, highly productive com-
puter. Maximslly simple models that take into consideration only those factors and
connections of substantial significance are used in the experimental-theoretical
calculation method 117.

Let us mention here that in this article we have made an attempt to take a broader
look at the problem of studying the hydrosphere, both from the viewpoint of solva-
ble problems and investigative methods and facilities and from the viewpoint of
methods for describing and formalizing the proposed global structure of a system
for processing asynchronous oceanographic information. It seems that this approach
to synthesizing an ASOAOI from the standpoint of the theory of complex hierarchical
systems is quite convenient and effective and demonstrates graphically the utility
of theoretical-set structures for the formalization of such systems.

25

FIHICHWHCJAI.USE(NNLY
l.

5.

FOR1OFFN3AI.USE(MNLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sidorov, Yu.Ye., "Metody statisticheakogo sinteza algoritmov obrabotki aero-
kosmicheakoy informatsii" [yethodg for the Statistical Synthesis of Aerospace
Information Processing Algorithmgl, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo Leningrad Polytech-
nic Information imeni M.I. Kalinin, 1977.

. Buslenko, N.P., Kalashnikov, V.V., and Kovalenko, I.N., "Lektaii po teorii

alozhnykh sistem" liectures on the Theory of Complex Systemg7, Moscow, Izdatel'-
stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1973.

Hesarovich, H.. HakoL D., and Takakhar., 1., "Teoriya iyerarkhicheskikh mnogo-
urovnevykh sistem" [Theory of Hierarchical Multilevel System17, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Hir", 1973.

. Hoiseyev, N.N., "Elementy tcorii optimal'nykh sistem" /Elements of the Theory of

Optimal System57, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1975.

Levin, B.P., introductory article to thematic issue of the magazine TIIBR LER-
pansion unknown], No S, 1970, pp 3-5.

. Volgin, L.N., "Printsip soglasovannogo optimuma" lirinciple of the Hatched

Optimum7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio": 1977.

. Sharakshane, A.S., and Zheleznov, 1.6., "Ispytaniya slozhnykh siatem" ZTeats of

Complex Systemi7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Vysehaya shkola", 1974.

26

FOR OFIWCJAL USIICNVLY
FOR‘0FF1C1AI.[EHE(MVLY

A LINGUISTIC-INFORHATION MODEL OF STATISTICAL HYDROACOUSTICS

[Article by V. P. Sochivko pp 26-28]

lfex£7 1. An analysis of the texts in a set of 103 publications on statistical
hydroacoustics shows: a significant part of the texts consists of verbal (word),
mathematically unexpressable elements; the linguistic structures of the titles,
annotations, essays and conclusions inform the reader quite accurately of the basic
results represented in the text; the final results of the symbolic (mathematical)
transformations of the physical processes and structures of statistical hydro-
acoustics permit a verbal representation (although some part of--mainly--the phys-
ically unrealizable transformation operators "escape" an unambiguous verbal formu-
lation).

2. The problem of constructing a linguistic-information model of statistical hydro-
acou-:ics was formulated. The model must satisfy the following requirements: ex-
plain the basic concepts and categories of statistical hydroacoustics with an un-
ambiguous interpretation of the professional terminology; present the terminology
of statistical hydroacoustics in the form of a unified, correlated system; describe
the structure of the semantic field that has been built up in this field of knowl-
edge; facilitate the accumulation of new knowledge and data on statistical hydro-
acoustics; create a foundation for standardizing the descriptions of prototypes of
documents; assist in the formalization of information inquiries when searching for
needed data; support the information search for needed documents and specific
factographic data; support the information-logic processing of available data;
unite the aggregate information on statistical hydroacoustics with the other.parts
of the entire spectrum of knowledge.

3. The following formalization is possible: there is a set of events 9 that can be
discussed within the framework of statistical hydroacaustics. Set 5 of observa-
tions on the results of experiments Aza + S gives a verbal-symbolic representation
of texts st + T that are registered in documents (articles, reports and so on).

It is necessary to construct a model
L-m = {C,A,B x M) «r ‘1‘},

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where C - signature of the basic concepts of statistical hydroacoustics; A - the
language of the theory; A, B - basic representations (an experiment and the symbol"
sign formulation of the results).

4. It can be said that a linguistic-information model of statistical hydroacoustics
is a specialized microthesaurus (a standardized reference dictionary in which all
the descriptors and keywords that are synonymous with them are listed in general
alphabetical order and in which there is also an explicit expression of the most
important paradigmatic relationships among the basic concepts) that is linked with
the general thesaurus "Hydroacoustics."

5. The first version of the "Hydroacoustics" thesaurus was worked out by the author
in 1971. The most recent edition, published in 1977, contains more than 1,800 key-
words, of which 1,400 are descriptors. The "Statistical Hydroacoustics" micro-
thesaurus, the first version of which is being presented for discussion by the par-
ticipants in this school-seminar, contains about 1,000 keywords, of which 900 are
descriptors.

6. The "Statistical Hydroacoustics" thesaurus is an information retrieval one; that
is, it makes it possible to index publications, formulate search samples of inquir-
ies and documents and support linguistically the procedures used in information re-
trieval.

7. The thesaurus is a linguistic-information model in the sense of all the other
requirements listed above. For example, its linguistic coupling with some other
thesauri produces intersections, the results of which admit of interesting inter-
pretations: in an intersection lie (Adamar's) and (Uyelsh's) transformations,
which have proven themselves in general identification theory, statistical radio
engineering and other fields. within the framework of scientific organizational
activity it is necessary to call the attention of investigators to these transfor-
mations; an analogous conclusion can be reached for discrete (digital) algorithms
and other elements.

28
INNI‘OFIICJAl.lEﬂ£(HWLY

STOCHASTIC ALGORITHMS FOR INVESTIGATING NONCONVBX FUNCTIONS HIT“ MANY VARIABLES

[Article by V. I. Alekseyev pp 28—29]

[iixEY The identification of the structure of an investigated function with many
variables by the well-known methods of regression analysis and experiment planning
involves large material and computational outputs, particularly when planning
second- and higher-order experiments.

Let us discuss stochastic methods for localizing the extreme areas of a multi-
extreme function and identifying the structure of the extreme area. The method for
identifying the extreme area's structure is based on regression analysis. The re-
gression control factors are computed with the help of the nonlinear, nonparametric
averaging operators

 

. N (xi + Biuil) (c,Q(x + Bul)) (1)
xi= Z N , i,...,u,
'2'1 2513(e,Q(x 0 But))

with a random sampling of the experimental points. The following symbols are in-
troduced in formula (1): x - vector of the parameters (factors) being evaluated;
8 I vector of the averaging interval; u - vector of the uniformly distributed ran-
dom numbers from [-1.1]; Q(x + 8u) I the function being investigated;

B(e.Q(x 0 Bu)) ' a bell-shaped weight function; t = scalar parameter of the bell-
shaped function that gives its width, such as c - Q(x); N - number of experiments
(computations) performed. when operator (1) is used, the greatest weight is given
to those values of the factor (x + Bu) for which Q(x + Bu) has the smallest (larg-
est) value.

In the most general case, wheauthe investigation is carried out with incomplete
knowledge of the mechanism of the phenomena being studied, it is natural to assume

that the analytical expression of the function is unknown and is represented in the
form of a polynomial:

29

FOR OFPTCTAL USE ONLY
FOI10FFHJAI.USEIJNLY

. n n
a .. 2.... £..?
y b° + igl blxt + itj bLJxli + i=1 bnx1 +... (2)

with the theoretical regression coefficients b0, bio b-- b - Estimates of the

regression control coefficients (2) are found by usingloperigor (1); namely:
bi ' [£1 u:B(€.Q(x° + Brain”;1 B(€,Q(x° + mini-1, i - l,...,n,
N N
gij - [£51 uiu;3(c.Q(xo * Bulb”;l B(e.Q(x° + Bul))]-1, i - l,...,n, j - i,...ig)
N N
bijk ' [£51 uiugu:B(E,Q(xo + 8u2))][ £21 B(€,Q(xo + Bu£))]-1.

i = l,...,n, j - i,...,n, k = j,...,n,
and so on, where x0 = value of the basic level's factor. An estimate of the free

term he is found with the help of the linear smoothing operator [1;7
. N
. z 1
b0 1x1 Q(x° + Bu )h(l),

where h(£) = a weight function.

The total number of coefficients in regression equation (2) is ed » where d - the

n+d
order of the polynomial. In the classical variant, in order to evaluate c:*d it is
necessary to have N z c experiments. In the method under discussion, as is ob-

n+d

vious from expressions (3), the number of experiments N can also be less than cd

n+d'
. Localization of the extreme areas of a multiextreme function is accomplished by
conducting experiments at randomly selected points in the factor space and keeping

in mind those values of the factor. with the help of operator (1), for which the
experiment's value is less than that of a fixed level.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. thkovnik, Ya.V., "Lineynyye otsenki i stokhasticheskiye zadachi optimizatsii"

Llinear Evaluations and Stochastic Optimization Problemg7. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka",
1976.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

SIMULATION COMPUTER MODELING IN ACOUSTICO-OCEANOCRAPHIC RESEARCH: PURPOSES,
SPECIAL FEATURES, SCIENTIFIC PROBLEMS

[Article by V. V. 01'shevsk1y PP 29-49]

methods and procedures of statistical measurements and quantitative experimental
acoustico-oceanographic research, machine modeling and, finally, the creation of
systems analysis methods for analyzing and synthesizing complex acoustica-
oceanographic information measuring systems. Modern computers, which make it pos-

lation computer modeling. Simulation computer modeling in acoustico-oceanographic

research naturally did not appear out of the void. The basis of this approach lies
primarily in the following areas:

the theory and methods of investigating special and general acoustico—oceanographic
models ll-a,6,8,9,l9,23-25,27-29,36,40,é8-50,53,58,527;

the theory and methods of experiment planning, including statistical measurements,

as applied to different fields of research i7,10,13,26,32,6l,43,§§7;

the theory and methods of modeling in different branches of science and technology

£5,ll,la,l7,18,22,5§_7; _ _

the theory and methods of image identification £16,35,§§/.

Having been born within the framework of several previously developed areas of sci-
ence and technology, simulation computer modeling comparatively rapidly--basically
in the last 8-10 years 136,39,44,45,49,51,52,55,ﬁl/--took shape as an independent
research field. with a clearcut methodology, with the separation of heuristic and
formalized problem-solving procedures, and with-which is obviously the most basic
of all-a clearly expressed applied, constructive direction for the results that
are obtained. At the present time the situation relative to simulation computer

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJA1.USEIMVLY

527 in physics, economics, the social sciences, psychology, the solution of trans-
portation problems, personnel policies, the planning of experimental research in
the most diversified fields and so on. There is no doubt that simulation computer
modeling will make it possible to solve many problems in the field of acoustico-
oceanographic research, the moreso since, as has already become clear, with its
help it has become possible to formulate and solve problems that it was not possi~
ble to solve correctly with traditional approaches or could be solved only on an
intuitive level, which involves emotional judgments. The main thing here, perhaps,
is that simulation computer modeling made it possible, for the first time, to ap-
proach the solution of the problem of complexity from fully clear and constructive
viewpoints. Along with this, the development of simulation modeling naturally also
gave birth to a whole series of new scientific problems that proved to be far from
trivial and that still have to be solved.

Below we will discuss the special features of simulation modeling and some scien-
tific problems that arise in connection with this in the field of acoustica-
occsnographic research.

2; Some Definitions and the Inevitability of Using Simulation Computer Modeling
£5~8,1l-22,29-65,47-55,57-Sg7. Here we will give several definitions of the basic
concepts that we will use later. In general, it is a well-known fact that there
are few things that cause so much debate and pretentiousness (which is, by the way,
most often correct) as definitions. Meanwhile, if anyone relies on concepts that
are not clearly defined and make it possible to give an ambiguous treatment to
questions under discussion, this creates an even more unsatisfactory position in
comparison with the situation where there are definitions, even if they are not un-
questionable from the viewpoints of various specialists. Therefore, some defini-
tions will be given here, even though the author is aware that, from the viewpoint
of the conjectural readers of this article, part of them may prove to be trivial,
while part of them may be debated. In any case, the definitions presented below
correspond to the author's convictions today and, it seems to him, do not contra-
dict the content of most of the works cited at the beginning of this section.

A system is a group (set) of objects that is united by some form on interaction and
that carry out certain functions in order to achieve a given goal. The greatest
interest is evoked by the so-called large or complex systems, for which the follow-
ing basic features are characteristic:

the system interacts with its environment, it being the case that some part of this
environment can, when necessary, be included in the discussion of a complex system;
the system has several "inputs" and "outputs," as well as a definite structure;

the system's structure and characteristics can change as the result of the action
of natural factors and as the result of purposeful activity;

on the whole, the system's properties are distinctive from the properties of the
objects of which it is comprised.

An acoustico-oceanographic system is a complex system composed of water masses, in-
cluding the atmospheric and bottom layers adjacent to them, and facilities for
studying the oceanographic characteristics, the acoustic characteristics of the
ocean and the acoustic fields in it.

Measurement is the establishment of quantitative relationships between two objects,
one of which is the real object (of natural or artificial origin) that is being
investigated, while the other is taken to be the pattern (standard).

32

FIHICNHNCJAL USElDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us mention here that with such a generalized concept, measurements here, of
course, also apply to the problem of detecting signals against a background of

noise (binary measurement), problems of evaluating, recognizing and identifying
parameters and so on.

An information measurement system is the set of measurement facilities that is ne-
cessary and sufficient for the conduct of a given experiment, as the result of
which the measurement information on the quantitative values of the investigated
object's characteristics should be obtained.

Starting with these definitions and considering the requirements and trends of
acoustico-oceanographic research, let us mention here that values, functions, or
probability characteristics of investigated objects may be subjected to measurement.

A model is an idealized image of the real object (or system) that is being investi-
gated, in which image those properties of the object that are essential in the
problem being solved are reflected.

In the problem we are discussing, our greatest interest is in analytical, algorith-
mic, empirical and descriptive (evaluational) models.

An acoustico-oceanographic model is a description of oceanographic phenomena, the
acoustic characteristics of the ocean, the acoustic fields in it and the inter-
related oceanographic and hydroacoustic information measurement systems that is ade-
quate for the solution of a formulated scientific and/or applied problem.

From this it follows that an acoustico-oceanographic model is a description of a
complex system consisting of hydrophysical and technical objects. Such an associa-
tion is necessary for various reasons: first, no experimental investigation can be
conducted without a measurement system; second, if the information processing pro-
cedures are not optimized with due consideration for changing measurement condi-
tions, the conduct of full-scale investigations in the ocean can entail significant
irrational expenditures of materials; third, to study the entire (or almost the en-
tire) set of acoustico-oceanographic conditions when nmking direct measurements in
the ocean is practically impossible, even in the distant future, as a result of
which clear planning of future experimental research is required; fourth, the lack
of acoustico-oceanographic models of this type makes it impossible to plan, at the
present level, the appropriate information systems and to make substantiated deci-
sions.

This is a far from complete list of reasons in accordance with which there has
arisen the necessity of developing the acoustico-oceanographic models under discus-
sion as complex systems.

Systems analysis (or, which is almost equivalent, the systems approach and the in-
vestigation of operations) comes to this: the investigator studies the behavior of
a complex system as a whole, without concentrating all his attention only on some

single element of this system, although this element may also be (under a more de-

tailed examination) a complex system and is extraordinarily interesting in the sci-
entific sense.

In systems analysis we are, naturally, dealing not with real objects and complex
systems, but with models of them.

33

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further, we will make a single preliminary remark on acoustico-oceanographic models
(later we will return again to a discussion of this extremely important question)
that concerns several debatable aspects of this problem.

Hardly anyone would say that a satisfactory model of the ocean can be constructed
if sufficient thoroughly investigated separate acoustico-oceanographic objects are
not available. On the other hand, however, even having thoroughly studied special
acoustico-oceanographic phenomena at our disposal, we undoubtedly cannot assume
that a model of the ocean has already been constructed.

The situation with the investigation of information measurement systems is com-
pletely analogous: elements of these systems can each be studied separately in ex-
treme detail, from the viewpoint of specialists in these elements, but, meanwhile,
no one has yet succeeded in changing over to an examination of the functioning of
an information system as a complex system that is a unified whole with the ocean
and a mechanical association of the indicated elements.

An even more composite problem in connection with the systems approach is the com-
bined discussion of acoustico-oceanographic phenomena, acoustic fields in the ocean
and information measurement systems. Besides the complex structural interactions
of the large number of objects in such a system, we should also remember the fact

that these objects, in and of themselves, have been studied extremely inadequately:
the specialists who are doing research in specific narrow areas can confirm this
completely competently and convincingly.

In View of what has been said and possibly other subjective reasons, the impression
can appear that it is practically impossible to create a model with such a degree
of complexity and incompleteness of description. Moreover, since bad bricks cannot
be used to erect a good building, the following question also arises: should not
all the basic attention of investigators be concentrated exclusively on extending
our knowledge about the elements of a complex system; that is, on the "bricks"? In
connection with this, it is either explicitly or nonexplicitly assumed that it is
too early to construct a generalized acoustico-oceanographic model, since the time
for this has not yet arrived.

Without in any way disparaging this possible viewpoint that has been formulated,
which draws much from natural scientific skepticism, let us examine the question of
the creation and utilization of acoustico-oceanographic models (in our general for-
mulation) from other viewpoints.

Cognitive activity in the field of acoustico-oceanographic research (this situation
is analogous to other fields, also) has traditionally taken place according to this
cycle: EXPERIMENT-ANALYSISrﬂAKINC 0F DECISIONS-EXPERIMENT and so on.

In connection with this, between the analysis and decision-making stages the inves-
tigator studied possible variants, constructed hypotheses, examined the results
previously obtained and, finally, made decisions and formulated further problems.
This sequence fully satisfied scientific workers, in any case, until there appeared
three important elements, as the result of analysis. in the field of acoustica-
oceanographic research: multidimensionality of the results, their random nature
and an understanding of the presence of complex interrelationships among many
acoustico-oceanographic objects.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation that has been created is, of course, characteristic not only of the
field of acoustico-oceanographic research. It arose in almost all the basic areas
of human activity, primarily as the result of the scientific and technical revolu-
tion, the accumulation of specific knowledge and the increased complexity of the
problems that the increasing practical requirements of people have placed before
seience.

And so the following cycle of cognitive activity appeared: EXPERIMENT-ANALYSIS-
SIHULATION COMPUTER MODELING-MAKING 0F DECISIONS-marlin“? and so on.

What is simulation computer modeling as applied to the field of acoustica-
oceanographic research?

Before formulating an appropriate definition, let us list those problems that (in
the opinion of specialists in the field of computer simulation) can be solved by
means of simulation computer modeling):

a more thorough and intelligent understanding of real activities;

an improvement in intercourse among specialists, primarily those whose investigat-
ive results are included in the simulation model;

training and practice on a large class of examples and simlated situations;
predicting the situation and behavior (evolution) of systems and their separate el-
ements;

planning technical systems and their separate elements;
planning new experiments.

At the present time there are several definitions of simulation computer modeling
that differ primarily in the special features of their applications, thanks to
which formulated problems can be solved. As it applies to the field that we are
discussing, this definition can be as follows.

Simulation computer modeling in acoustico-oceanographic research is the creation of
a model of a real, complex acoustico-oceanographic system and the conduct, with the
help of a computer, of numerical experiments with this model for the purpose of
learning the regularities inherent in the system for different input data, limita-
tions and criteria.

The following terms are synonyms here: simulation computer experiments, computer
simulation, computer experimentation.

Simulation computer modeling is distinguished, of course, from the previously gen-
erally accepted use of computer methods and from the so-called modeling that is
understood, in the normal narrow meaning, to be a numerical method for solving var-
ious analytical problems. In simulation modeling the model can contain both ana-
lytical and logical objects, and objects in the form of programs for computers, and
the results of expert evaluations, and empirical rules. It goes without saying
that such a model of a complex system can contain random values and field processes
that are formulated in accordance with given probability characteristics.

3. Basic Stages in the Organization and Conduct of Simulation Modeling 136,339,102,
44,45,h9,51,52,55,517. Simulation computer modeling is a sequence of definite
stages, each of which is--even by itself--a quite complex scientific problem. In
this sense, the methodological principles of the organisation and conduct of simu-
lation modeling acquire special importance.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As in other fields of science and technology, when investigating acoustico—
oceanographic models computer simulation includes the following six basic stages:
Stage l: formulating the problem, determining the goals of computer simulation,
introducing criteria.

Stage 2: developing mathematical models.

Stage 3: creating the software.

Stage 4: evaluating the quantitative degree of adequacy of the adopted model for
the actual objects of the investigation.

Stage 5: planning and conducting simulation computer experiments.

Stage 6: processing and interpreting the results of the computer simulation.

These stages, as applied to simulation computer exPeriments with acoustica-
oceanographic models, have different degrees of complexity and problematicness.
Below we will discuss each of these stages briefly and formulate those scientific

tasks that simulation modeling is capable of performing at the present time as far
as acoustico-oceanographic research is concerned.

4. Formulating the Problem £§Z,30,36,45,51,55,517. Computer simulation, as in any
scientific investigation, begins with the formulation of the problem; that is, with
the compilation of a list of problems that it is necessary to solve as the result
of simulation experiments. It should not be assumed that this stage is quite sim-
ple in the substantive and quantitative sense, although it sometimes seems that the
purposes of an investigation are, it goes without saying, clear, otherwise the ac-
tual formulation of the problem and the performance of the investigation would not
make any particular sense; that is, there would be no need for it. In much re-
search of a physical nature--exploratory research, in particular--it is sufficient
to describe these purposes qualitatively, in the form of some scientific areas
trends and unformalized hypotheses. Such a descriptive formulation is frequently
sufficient for an investigator of a specific physical area (at any rate, many in-
vestigators are convinced of this).

When formulating simulation computer experiments, the situation is different.

Since the investigator is dealing with a computer in this case, the problem and the
goals of the computer simulation must be formulated specifically and unambiguously,
in a quantitative form that is expressed in mathematical concepts. In connection
with this, the following scientific problems arise in the field of acoustico-
oceanographic research.

1. Substantiation, selection and formalization of the hypotheses that it is neces-
sary to test during the conduct of simulation modeling.

2. Substantiation, selection and formalization of the quality criteria for the in-
formation systems that give an adequate description of the requirements placed on
them from systems of a higher order (supersystems).

3. Determination of the special and general quality criteria for the systems that
reflect, respectively, the solution of individual special problems and sets of them
(solution of the criteria convolution problem).

4. Determination of limitations (individual and combined) that must be placed on

both the acoustico-oceanographic conditions that will later be simulated by the
computer and the systems characteristics of the information systems.

36

FORIOFTNCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Determination of the temporal evolution of the criteria and limitations: an
analysis of their dynamics in the past, present and future.

At first glance these problems can be solved quite simply by (for example) using
the method of expert evaluations by competent specialists in different areas. This
is partially so, however (let us emphasize again this important factor) it is ne-
cessary to represent the results of the solution of these problems in a quantita-
tive, mathematical form that is suitable for use in a computer.

Let us also mention that here we are talking not about the solution of any specific
set of problems concerning systems and acousticoooceanographic models, but about
general methods for solving such problems and their theoretical (systems, physical
and mathematical) interpretation.

5. Determining Simulation Models 1I>537. In the next stage after the machine simu-
lation problem has been formulated and the purposes and goals of the investigation
have been determined, it is necessary to construct acoustico-oceanographic and sys-
tems mathematical models. To determine a mathematical model means to substantiate
and formulate the set of equations, relationships, algorithms and conditions with
the help of which the acoustico—oceanographic conditions' quantitative character-
istics would be related to the information systems' quality indicators. Since the
overwhelming majority of acoustico-oceanographic problems permit a formal, paramet-
ric description (although, it is true, it may be an extremely multidimensional one),
the mathematical model must relate the following groups of parameters to each other
in spatial-frequency-temporal coordinates: a. parameters characterizing oceano—
graphic characteristics; b. the ocean's acoustic parameters; c. the acoustic param-
eters of signal sources; d. the parameters of the acoustic fields in the ocean; e.
the information systems' parameters; f. the information systems' quality indicators.

From this list, as well as from an analysis of the state of acoustico-oceanographic
and systems research, it is clear that the models under discussion will be compos-
ite deterministic-statistical ones. It is also obvious that these models will be
depressingly complex, particularly from the viewpoint of traditional analytical
methods of solving physical and systems problems. The construction of such a simu-
lation model is a task of exceptional complexity, since here it is necessary to
combine the most diversified viewpoints of specialists, analyse experience, make
use of expert estimates and so on. In the opinion of the author of 1517, such a
task is more an art than scientific research in the generally accepted meaning.

In any case, the heuristic beginnings during the construction of a model are clear-
ly expressed. It should be mentioned that far from all scientific workers regard
such problems as being worthy of serious attention. Moreover, both in the area of
acoustico~ocesnographic research and in other areas of science and technology, it
was not so long ago assumed that the only serious scientific research was, in some
classical sense, "pure"; that is, a correctly formulated and specific physical,
systems or technical investigation, but in no case a composite one. Many scientif-
ic workers regarded (and frequently still do) combined (complex) investigations as
some compilation that was of no particular scientific interest.

There is some common sense in this, since in the creation of models of complex
systems their basis is always a set of results of special investigations. But how

is it in the case where these special investigations were conducted from different
viewpoints, their results explained in different forms and frequently with the use

37

FI"!(HWH(JAI.USE1DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of different concepts, parameters and methods of description? In our opinion, the
combination of special models into a general one is undoubtedly a creative scien-
tific activity that does not contradict research in special areas. Essentially
this is the so-called systems analysis, theory of operat‘Jns and allied cybernetic
and information fields mentioned above.

In many respects, the mathematical model creation and formalization stage is the
key stage in this problem of computer simulation, since it is on to what degree
this model corresponds to the actual investigated objects (hydrophysical phenomena
and the characteristics of technically realized information systems) that the suc-
cess and scientific validity of simulation experiments as a whole depend. It is
completely obvious that computer experiments with a low-quality and inadequate mod-
el are not useful, even if they are realized on a computer at an extremely high
level with respect to the software used.

Everything is far from clear as far as the development of acoustico-oceanographic
mathematical models is concerned, although explicit progress has been made in this
area in recent years. Let us now formulate several more scientific problems that
still need to be solved in connection with this.

1. The creation of acoustico-oceanographic data banks into which the results of ex-
perimental research, empirical regularities and theoretical relationships for the
entire set of studied objects in the ocean must be entered.

2. The investigation of regularities in the progress of different phenomena in the
ocean, including combined, multidimensional deterministic and statistical regulari-
ties.

3. Classification of acoustico-oceanographic conditions and determination of the
acoustic situation and acoustic weather and climate.

4. The development of a mathematical model for predicting the ocean's acoustic
characteristics, including multidimensional modeling of acoustico-oceanographic
conditions.

5. The development of mathematical models for the spatial-frequency-temporal pro—
cessing of information with the help of an extensive set of algorithms, including
the determination of the quality indicators (special and general) of the systems
for all known models of the fields affecting the antenna systems.

6. The development of Optimization models for multiparametric, multiextreme prob-
lens.

The question of the formulation of mathematiCal models, as has already been said,
is the key question in the entire problem of computer simulation. of course, the
problems related to the construction of such models require a maximum concentration
of efforts from investigators with the most diversified profiles and styles. True,
another opinion is sometimes expressed: since scientific research was always di-
rected at the construction of some models or another of phenomena and elements of
systems when solving specific acoustico-oceanographic problems, here nothing new
appears in the scientific plan. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Moreover, in
the field of acoustico-oceanographic research we cannot complain about an excess of

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

struction of any special hydrophysical or systems model. Many specialists working
in other areas of science and technology became convinced of this as soon as they
started to construct models of complex systems (see, for example, 136.45.55.517).
It very quickly turned out to be the case that even with the presence of special
models--which, by the way, have been being developed for decades-at the stage of
the creation of a model of a complex system (on the basis of the indicated special
ones, of course), it is especially important to utilize the erudition and

the solution of specific scientific problems proved to be a most interesting _
scientific-heuristic problem in systems analysis. Here everything is in dialectic
interrelationship: the special models determine the level of description of the
generalized ones, while the latter affect the examination of the former from the
viewpoint of the demands made on them. It frequently proves to be the case (such

developed on different levels in the space of different, unmatched parameters, so
that in the generalized model they do not ”adjoin." Such a matching of models is a
creative scientific problem in an of itself, without even mentioning the necessity
of reviewing the formulations of separate special problems and enlarging the
"spheres of influence" of different investigators.

problems by numerical methods. Here we are talking about the creation of a system
of programs that are informationally interrelated with due consideration, of course,
for the real memory and high-speed operating capabilities of modern computers. Ac-
tually, the problem comes down to the so-called systems programming for a general,
integrated mathematical simulation model, allowing for the possible simplications
allowable errors and capabilities of modern computers.

1. Development of machine methods for multidimensional modeling on a computer for

given probabilities or empirical joint Zword illegible? of the distribution of
probabilities or a set of random values.

39

FOR 0FFﬂJAl.USE10NlY
FOItOFFﬂﬂAl.USE13NLY

2. Creation of "fast" algorithms for solving problems during integral
and mixed transformations for large masses of information.

3. Development of methods for evaluating the errors in a computer's computational
procedures with respect to given mathematical models; that is, the creation of met-

5. Creation of information retrieval programs and programs for controlling computer_
_simulation experiments, with due consideration for the "man-computer" system, using

computers places certain requirements on the methods used to develop models of phe-
nomena and systems: these models, no matter how much we talk about their pro-
grammed realization on a computer, must not be simplified formulated mathematically,

a

but must be created with consideration for their embodiment in the form of computer

7. Evaluating the Quantitative Degree of Adequacy of a Model for the Actual Objects
of the Investigation 1.20.24.26.32,33,36,39-45,49-52,54,55,517. The problem of ca-
tablishing the suitability of a simulation model and reducing to a quantitative

evaluation the degree of adequaCy of the adopted model for the actual investigated

no way known to the investigator? Further: can we count on the adequacy of a gen-
eralized integrated model of a complex system if the degree of adequacy of the

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special models is known? And yet one more question: is it possible to plan and
carry out in the ocean a statistical experiment that in structure and size is simi-
lar to a computer experiment? This list of questions could, of course, be contin-
ued by building the appropriate analogies between the ocean and its mathematical
simulation model.

It is clear that it is not so easy to answer such questions from either the general
or the practical (applied) viewpoint, the moreso since here we are not talking
about a qualitative discussion of the questions (even by extremely competent ex-
perts), but about the correct evaluation of adopted decisions in a quantitative
form and with a known degree of accuracy. Thus, obviously, this problem is a com-
plicated one. However, this indication of the complexity of its solution is, of
course, little comfort for researchers who are conducting simulation computer ex-
periments.

Actually, if the quantitative degree of adequacy has not been established, the
whole idea of conducting simulation computer experiments does not withstand the
most elementary criticism. As is correctly noted in £3é7, in the first place,
"...it is necessary to determine whether or not a model describes the system's be-
havior correctly. Until this problem is solved the value of the model remains in-
significant and the simulation experiment is converted into a simple exercise in
the field of deductive logic." Later in this work: "...experimentation on a com-
puter with an inadequate model is of little use, since we will simply be simulating
our own ignorance."

Thus, what can be said about the possibilities of evaluating the adequacy of an
adopted model and the actual object of investigation?

Starting from the general concepts of the dialectic theory of knowledge, let us
mention that when evaluating the adequacy of a model we should start with the fact
that the model must the main property of enabling us to predict (forecast) real
facts. “ere, of course, two variants of prediction are possible: predicting ex-
perimental facts that were previously obtained (retrospective prediction) and pre-
dicting future facts (prospective prediction). In view of the statistical nature
of a simulation model and in view of the fact that the ideally accurate monitoring
of acoustico-oceanographic conditions during the conduct of full-scale experiments
in the ocean is practically impossible, and also because of the finiteness of our
resources (a finite number of samples, a finite time for observing them), the com-
parison of experimental data with results obtained with the help of simulation mod-
els must be based on the use of statistical criteria. with retrospective predic-
tion according to a simulation model the question is more or less clear (in its
fundamental sense, of course): here it is necessary to organize the statistical
processing of the available experimental data correctly and reduce it to the level
of a measurement procedure. Less clear is the question of prospective prediction:
here, apparently, we cannot be satisfied with traditional methods of obtaining
acoustico-oceanographic experimental data, but must create a new foundation for ex-
periments in the ocean, the basic purpose of which will be to confirm and correct
the model that has been developed. In general, quite a lot has already been done
in this field, although there is still a whole series of scientific problems that
require substantial deveIOpment work. He will point out some of these problems.

1. Development of special and general criteria for matching a simulation model to
real acoustics-oceanographic and phenomena and hydrophysical signals (degrees of

Al

FOR'0FFK]AI.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difference and convergence, the distance in the space of multidimensional functions
and other factors).

2. Development of a theory and methods for determining the representativeness of
the final selections of multidimensional random values and multidimensional deter-

ministic series in connection with their nonlinear interaction in a simulation mod-
el.

3. Creation of a general theory and constructive methods for planning purposeful
full-scale experiments in the ocean that in nature and volume are sufficient to es-

tablish the quantitative degree of accuracy of a simulation model.

It is obvious that each of these problems is actually a whole scientific field and
cannot be solved by researchers in any narrow field: here we need a concentration

of efforts by specialists in different areas and their close creative interaction
in discussions and matching of positions, which can sometimes prove to be mutually
exclusive propositions.

8. Planning Simulation Computer Experiments L7,l3,36,45,55,ﬁz7. Computer simula-
tion experiments must be planned just as physical experiments must. The basic rea-
son for this necessity is the practical impossibility of conducting computer simu-
lation for an entire set of acoustics-oceanographic conditions and systems parame-
ters; consequently, in the planning under discussion an effort is made to provide
the greatest information content for such experiments, with permissible expendi-

tures (of human, material, technical and temporal resources). While noting that
several quite effective methods (stochastic search methods with adaptation, gradi-

ent methods, nonlinear filtration and prediction methods, nonparametric statistical
procedures and other) have been developed in recent years in the area of planning
simulation computer experiments, we must nevertheless mention several problems that
still remain to be solved in this area.

1. A search for methods of solving extreme multiparametric problems for randon
functionals (criteria) when the original functions are not given analytically but
are calculated on a computer, while in the area of optimizable parameters there ex-
ist common dynamic, nonlinear limitations.

2. The development of constructive computer methods for evaluating the stochastic
convergence of the results of statistical experiments on a computerwith finite vol-
umes of sampling date for multidimensional, modeled initial data.

In the solution of these problems, we must naturally use the powerful and well-
developed methods of the theory of statistical hypothesis testing and the theory of
experiment planning, which has already become a classical method.

9. Statistical Processing of the Results of Simulation Computer ExPeriments 110,13,
17.26.32,36,38-al,55,517. The result of the conduct of a simulation computer ex-
periment is some set of values that it is necessary to process for the purpose of
reaching some conclusion or another and making the appropriate decisions. Let us
stress this important fact: the result of a computer simulation is some statisti-
cal regularity inherent in the simulation model, and the utilization of this regu-
larity is the proper business of the investigator or the people who are the consum-
ers of the results that are obtained. In other words, making appropriate decisions

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTICSAl.lEﬂE(NVLY

on the basis of the results of simulation modeling goes beyond the framework of the
problem we are distussing.

Thus, the final stage in computer simulation is the processing of the results ob-
tained by the computer. Generally speaking, all the classicial statistical proce-
dures for analyzing random values, including multidimensional ones, are used to
process the results of computer experiments. Moreover, during computer modeling a
whole series of statistical methods of analysis can be realized substantially more
nearly correctly than under the conditions of a full-scale hydrophysical experi-
ment: by using a computer it is possible to obtain the necessary volumes of samp-
ling data, observe the conditions of statistical homogeneity of experiments and so
forth. Along with this, however, here there arise certain specific problems, some
of which we will list below.

1. A search for effective quantitative congruence criteria that are adequate for
the acoustico-OCeanographic problems that are being solved and that should be used
in the statistical processing of the results of simulation computer experiments.

2. The creation of a theory and methods for evaluating errors in simulation comput-
er experiments, including the errors related to inadequacy of the adopted simula-
tion model and the closeness of the realization of the modeling algorithms (other
types of errors-~finiteness of the samples, finiteness of the number of characters,
temporal discreteneas of the readings and so on--are analyzed by the usual methods).

3. A search for stable (robust) statistical analysis procedures based, in particu-
lar, on the methods of nonparametric statistics.

10. Summary. As follows from this brief review of the content, special features
and scientific problems in simulation computer modeling, the problem under discus-
sion is quite complicated in the scientific sense and-—which is an extremely imper-
tant factor--also an integrated one. Naturally, it cannot be solved without the
efforts of specialists in hydrophysics, acoustics, cybernetics, computer mathemat-
ics and prograumﬁng. The development of this field, of course, requires signifi-
cant expenditurea of creative and material resources for an extended period of time.
Specialists in the field of simulation modeling have already analyzed the_available
ax erience in the conduct of research in this area (see, in particular, £36,45,55,
51 . At the present time it is considered that the creation of a single simulation
model-~from its conception to its realization on a computer in a form suitable for
the conduct of simulation computer experiments--takes from 3 to 10 years, depending
on the complexity of the system being modeled and the degree of development of the
special models. In connection with this it is assumed that the number of special-
ists--highly qualified, of course--working on such a problem is 8-10 people, not
counting approximately the same number of progrannnrs with standard qualifications.
It is interesting to mention also the amount of computer time needed (based on the
most efficient computers in the early 1970's): the creation of a single simulation
model requires from 104 to 105 hours of computer time (including the debugging of
the special and general programs, the organization of computer data banks and ser-
vice systems, the making of calculations for a set of situations and so on). Since
the creation of acoustico-oceanographic simulation models is a problem of increased
complexity, it is obvious that it will require significant efforts on the part of
many researchers. However, such significant expenditures are justified by the
bright prospects for the solution of many interesting (in the scientific sense) and
important (in the applied sense) problems, the primary ones of which include:

43

FIMICNHHCJAL UBE2CNVLY
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY

the creation of generalized ac0ustico-oceanographic simulation models, including
the corresponding computer data banks, and the determination of the regularities
inherent in these models;

the planning of purposeful, full-scale experimental investigations in the ocean on
the basis of the conduct of simulation computer experiments, including an evalua-
tion of the quantity and value of the information obtained during the conduct of
full-scale acoustico-oceanographic research;

systems-analysis planning of oceanographic and hydroacoustic information systems;
the prediction of the acoustic situation in the ocean and the evaluation of the
quality of the functioning of information systems under these conditions.

Naturally, these and many other interesting and important problems can be solved
only by using the most modern computers. providing that the appropriate software is
created for them. In this sense it is no accident that it is precisely the power-
ful and highly efficient computers that have stimulated the most extensive develop-
ment of simulation modeling projects abroad, where they have been going on for more
than 10 years on extremely large scales and in the most variegated fields of sci-
ence and technology. It should not, however, be thought (let us emphasize this one
more time) that the question of the development of simulation modeling boils down
only to the use productive computers. It is important, every time, to emphasize
the attention that must be given to the necessity of conducting physical acoustica-
oceanographic research on the broadest possible scale and in the most purposeful
and thorough manner. In this respect, we cannot help but agree with the opinion of
USSR Academy of Sciences Corresponding Member N.N. Moiseyev, who, in his foreword
to the Russian edition of a book £3§7, remarked:

“It is necessary, with total clarity, to understand that the problem of construct-
ing a simulation model--as is the case with any other model--is a problem of the
adequate description of the real world's objective laws. This problem has been be-
fore science for many centuries, and the appearance of the most powerful computer
technology has still not solved it. I am convinced that now and in 20 years, as it
was 20 years and 20 centuries ago, the discovery of new laws (that is, the con-
struction of new models of the phenomena occurring in the world around us) will be
worth the tense creative activity, will be worth the inc edible expenditures of hu-
man intellect and spirit. No amount of computer time can replace them, since the
computer merely makes this process easier by taking over the performance of more
and more routine procedures."

What Hoiscyev said needs no further comments.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Hyasishchev, V.I., editor, "Pizichgskiye osnovy podvodnoy akustike" [ﬁhysical
Principles of Underwater Acoustical, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio",
1955 (translated from English).

2. Brekhovskikh, L.H., "Volny v sloistykh sredakh" lﬁaves_in Layered Hediumé7,
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo AN SSSR LUSSR Academy of Sciencegl, 1957.

3. Chernov, L.A., "Rasprostraneniye voln v sredc so sluchaynymi neodnorodnostyami"
[Have Propagation in a Medium With Random Irregularitiegl, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo

AN SSSR, 1958.
44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

12.

13.

11a.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Statisticheskiye onystva norskoy reverberatsii" l§tatisti-

cal Properties of Marine Reverberationj, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mauka": 1966.

. Buslenko, V.N., "Modelirovaniye slozhnykh sistem" Lﬁodeling Complex Systemé7,

Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1968.

. Tolstoy, 1., and Kley, K.S., "Akustika okeana" iacean Acoustich, Moscow, Izda-

tel'stvo "Hanks", 1969.

. Finni, D., "Vvedeniye v teoriyu planirovaniya eksperimenta" [introduction to '

the Theory of Experiment Planning7. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Naaks", 1970.

. 01'shevskiy, V.V., "Mathematical Models and the Statistical Description of

Hydroacoustic Signals," :Trudy Pervoy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminars po statisti-
cheskoy gidroakustikg" lﬂorks of the First All-Union School-Seminar on Statis-
tical Hydroacousticgl, Novosibirsk, 1970, pp 3-33.

. Middleton, D., "Multidimensional Detection and Discrimination of Signals in

Random Mediums," TRUDY INSTITUTA INZHENEROV P0 ELEKTROTEKHNIKE I RADIO-
ELEKTRONIKE, Vol 58, No 5, 1970, pp 100-110 (translated from English).

Gol'tsmnn, F.M., "Statisticheskiye modeli interpretatsii" lgtatistical Models
of Interpretation7, Moscow. Izdstel'stvo "Nauka", 1971.

Bykov, V.V., “Tsifrovoye modelirovaniye v statisticheskoy radiotekhnike" LDigi-
tal Modeling in Statistical Radio Engineeringy, Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye
radio", 1971.

Cermeyycr, Yu.B., "Vvedeniye v teoriyu issledovaniya operatsiy" [introduction to
the Theory of Investigation of Operation37, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1971.

Fedorov, V.V., "Teoriya optimal'nogo eksperimentn" lihc Theory of an Optimum
Experiment7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1971.

Pollyak, Yu.c., "Veroyntnoyc modelirovaniye na EVM" lfrobability Modeling on
ComputeréY, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo “Sovetskoye radio", 1971.

Kontorov, 0.8., and Golubev-Novozhilov, Yu.s., "Vvedeniyc v radiolokatsionnuyu
sistemotekhniku" Llntroduction to Radar Systems AnalysigY, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo
"Sovetskoye radio", 1971.

Zagoruyko, N.C., "Mctody raspoznovaniya i ikh primeneniye" lidentification
Methods and Their Utilizatiog7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoyc radio", 1972.

Li, T.G.. Adams, 6.5., and Geynz, U.M.,_"Upravlcniyc protsessami s pomoshch'yu
EVM. Modelirovaniye i optimizatsiya"_£pontrolling Processes with the Help of
Computers: Modeling and Optimizatiogl, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio",
1972.

Martin, P., "Modelirovaniye na vychislitel'nykh mashinakh" lﬁodeling on Comput-
erg7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovctskoye radio", 1972.

65

RMOFKMLWEOMX
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

FINR(NNWCJAI.USEGDNLY

Zavadskiy, V.Yu., "Vychisleniye volnovykh poley v otkrytykh oblastyakh i volno-
vodakh" Lpalculation of Have Fields in Open Areas and waveguides], Moscow, 1:-
datel'stvo "Nauka", 1972.

01'shevskiy, V.V., and Rosenberg, V.Ya., “The Problem of Evaluating the Adequa-
cy of a Probability Model of a Random Process in Statistical Measurements",
"Materialy Pervoy Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii 'Teoriyg i praktika ismereniya sta-
tisticheskikh (veroyatnostnykh) kharakteristik'" ZMaterials of the First All-
Union Conference on "Theory and Practice of the Measurement of Statistical
(Probability) Charactersticsz, Leningrad, VMIIEP lAll-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of Electrical Measuring Instrumentg7, 1973, pp 61-66.

01'shevskiy, V.V., "Statistical Measurements Under Conditions of Dynamic Models
of Random Processes," "VI Vaesoyuznyy simpozium 'Mgtody predstavleniya i appa-
raturnyy analiz sluchaynykh protsessov i poley'" LSixth All-Union Symposium on_
"Representation Methods and Equipment Analysis of Random Processes and Pieldsﬁl,
Leningrad, VﬂIIEP, Section 1, 1973, pp 30-35.

Gold, 8., and Reyder, 1., "Tsifrovaya obrabotka signalov" Lﬁigital Processing
of Signalgl, Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1973.

Maharov, S.S., "Zakonomernosti formirovaniya poley skorosti zvuka v okeane"
[Regularitieg in the Formation of Speed-of-Sound Fields in the Oceag7, Moscow,
TsNIITERKh Zexpansion unknownl, 1973.

01'shevskiy, V.V., "Statisticheskiye metody v gidrolokatsii" lgtatistical Meth-
ods in Hydrolocatiogl, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1973.

Brekhovskikh, L.M., editor, "Akustika okcana" [ﬁcean Acoustics], Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo “Nauka”, 1974.

01'shevskiy, V.V., “On the Role of Probability Models of Random Processes in
Statistical Measurements," "VII Vsesoyuznyy simpozium_'Metody predstavlcniya i
apparatuynyy analiz sluchaynykh protsessov i poley" LSeventh All-Union Symposi-
um on "Representation Methods and Equipment Analysis of Random Processes and
Fields:/, Leningrad, VNIIEP, 1974, pp 61-66.

Middleton, 0., "Characterization of Active Underwater Channels," Technical Re-
port ARL-74-6l, Applied Research Laboratories, University of Texas at Austin,
1974, Parts 1 and 2.

Middleton, D., "Doppler Effect for Random Moving Scatters and Platforms," J.
ACOUST. SOC. AM., Vol 61, No 5, 1974, pp 1231-1250.

Manin, A.S., Kamenkovich, V.M., and Kort, V.G., "Izmcnchivost' Mirovogo okeana"
Zyariability in the World Ocean7, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo Gidrometeoizdat, 1974.

Kantyug, A.A., and 01'shevskiy, V.V., "Mathematical Aspects of Modeling in Sta-
tistical Hydroacoustics with the Help of a Computer," "Trudy Shestoy Vsesoyuz-
noy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoye gidroakustiki" Lﬂorks of the Sixth All-
Union School Seminar on Statistical Hydroacoustic57, Novosibirsk, Institute of
Mathematics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1975, pp 33-44.

46

F0!tOF1ﬂC1Al.USE(NNLY
31.

32.

33.

3h.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

62.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ol'shevskiy, V.V., and Panfilov, V.A., "Digital Modeling of Marine Reverbera-
tion," "Trudy Shestoy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seninara po statisticheskoy gidro-
akustiki", Novosibirsk, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1975, pp
59-65.

Rosenberg, V.Ya., "Vvedeniye v teoriyu tochnosti izmeritel'nykh sistem" lintro-
duction to the Theory of Measurement System AccuraczY, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo
"Sovetskoye radio", 1975.

01'shevskiy, V.V.,'?kthodological Questions in the Modeling of Random Process-
es in Connection with Statistical Measurement Problems," "VIII Vseoyuznyy sim-
pozium 'Mgtody predstavleniys i apparaturnyy analiz sluchsynykh protseasov i
poley'" lﬁighth All-Union Symposium on "Representation Methods and Equipment
Analysis of Random Processes and FieldsﬂY, Leningrad, VNIIEP, Section 4, 1975,
pp 3-ll.

Andreyeva, 1.3., "Firicheskiye osnovy rasprostraneniya zvuka v okesne" lﬁhysi-
cal Principles of Sound Propagation in the 0cean7, Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo
cidrometeoizdat, 1975.

Zagoruyko, N.G., "Iskusstvennyy intellekt i empiricheskiye predahazaniye" 13}-
tificial Intellect and Empirical Predictioﬁ7, Novosibirsk, NGU lﬁovosibirsk
State Universit17, 1975.

Neylor, 1;, "Mashinnyye initatsionnyye ekspetimenty o modelyami ekonomicheskikh
sistem" lpomputer simulation EXperiments on Models of Economic Systems],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1975.

01'shevskiy, V.V., "Modeling in Statistical Hydro-caustics," "Trudy Shestoy
Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy gidroakustiki", Novosibirsk,
Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1975,
pp 3-24.

Tarasenko, F.P., "Neparamgtricheskaya statistika" lionparametric Statistical,
Tomsk, Izdatel'stvo TCU [Tomsk State Universitz], 1976.

01'shevskiy, V.V., "Simulation Experiments in §tatistica1 Hydroacoustics," in
"Akusticheskiye mctody issledovaniya okeana" Zﬁcoustical Methods for Investi-
gating the Oceag7. Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1976, pp 30-38.

Ol'shevskiy; V.V., "Vvedeniye v statisticheskuyu teoriyu aktivnoy gidro~
lokatsii" Llntrogpction to the Statistical Theory_of Active Hydrolocation7,
Taganrog, TRTI llaganrog Radiotechnical Institute], Part l, 1971; Parts 2-5,
1976.

Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Osnovy teorii statisticheskikh izmercniy. Konspekt lektsii"
lprinciples of the Theory of Statistical Measurements: Synopses of Lectures],
Taganrog, TRTI, 1976.

01'shevskiy, V.V., "Some Problems in the Computer Simulation of Random Process-

es in Connection With Statistical Measurement Problems,“ "IX Vsesoyuznyy simpo-
zium 'Metody predstavleniya i appsraturnyy snaliz sluchaynykh protsessov i

47

F0R10FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
F0R40FFKJAL.USE(MNLY

poley" [Ninth All- -Union Symposium on "Re resentation Methods and Equipment
Analysis of Random Processes and Fields" ,Leningrad, VMIIEP, Section 4, 1976,

PP 3-6

Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Statistical Measurements Under Conditions of Dynamic Acous-
tic Experiments," "Trudy Vtoroy nauchno-technicheskoy konferentsii po informa-
tsionnoy skustike" lworks of the Second Scientific and Technical Conference on
Information Acoustics7, Moscow, Institute of Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences, 1976, pp 67- 71.

. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., ”Simulation Experiments in Statistical Mydroacoustics:
Selecting Models and Checking Their Adequacy for Real Phenomena," in "Akusti-

cheskiye metody issledovaniya okeana," Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye",
1977, pp 6-17.

Buslenko,_ V. N., ”Avtomatizatsiya imitatsionnogo modelirovaniya slozhaykh

sistem" [Automation of the Simulation Modeling of Complex Systemgl, Moscow, 12-
datel' stvo "Nauka", 1977.

. Dyuran, 3., and Odell, P., "Klasternyy analiz” Lilaster Analysis], Moscow, Iz-
datel'stvo "Statistika", 1977.

. Grubnik, N. A. , and 01' shevskiy, V. V. "An Acoustic Model of the Ocean," "Trudy
Pervogo seminara 'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'" [Works of the
First Seminar on "Acoustic Statistical Models of the 0cean"/, Moscow, Institute
of Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 3-11.

. Middleton, D., "A Statistical Acoustic Model of the Ocean," "Trudy Pervogo se-
minsra ‘Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'", Moscow, Institute of
Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 12-55.

. Ol'shcvskiy, V.V., "Models and Simulation Computer Experiments in Statistical
Hydroacoustics," "Trudy Pervogo seminars 'Akusticheskiye statistichcskiye mode-
li okeana'", Moscow, Institute of Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp
70-85.

. Middleton, D., and Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Contemporary Problems in Constructing
Acoustic Statistical Models of the Ocean," "Trudy Pervogo seminara ‘Akustiches-
kiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'", Moscow, Institute of Acoustics, USSR
Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 86-90.

. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Simulation Computer Experiments in Statistical Hydro-
acoustics: Models, Algorithms, Measurements," "Trudy Vos' moy Vsesoyuznoy
shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy gidroaiustike" IHorks of the Eighth A11-
Union School- Seminar on Statistical MydrouCOustics7, Novosibirsk, Institute of
Mathematics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 138-156.

. 01' shcvskiy, V. V. ,"Vybor modeley pri imitatsionnykh mashinnykh eksperimentakh
v statisticheskoy gidroakustike" /Selecting Models for Simulation Computer Ex-

periments in Statistical Hydroacousticsl, Moscow, Institute of Acoustics, USSR
Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 23- -32

#8

INDR‘OFFICIAl.lﬂSEZ(MVLY
53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ngndskiy, V.Yu., "Akustika i EVM. Voprosy sudostroyeniya. Seriya: akustiks“
[Acoustics and Computers: Questions in Shipbuilding. Acoustics Series], ‘l‘sNII
nRumb" [expansion unknowg7, No 10, 1978, pp 80-90.

Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Modeling in Statistical Measurements: Problems and Metro-
logical Aspects," "X Vsesoyuznyy sinpozium 'Metody predstavleniya i spparstur-
nyy analiz sluzhaynykh protsessov i poley" 110th All-Union Symposium on :Repre-
sentation Methods and Equipment Analysis of Random Processes and PieldsZI,
Leningrad, VNIIEP, Section 4, 1978, pp 2-7.

Kleynen, Dzh., "Ststisticheskiye metody v imitatsionnom modelirovanii" LStatis-
ticsl Methods in Simulation Modeling7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", lst
and 2nd editions, 1978.

Rabineg, l... and Gould, 13., "'l‘eoriya i primeneniye tsifrogoy obrabotki signa-
lov" [theory and Utilization of Digital Signal Processing/, Moscow, Izdate1'-
stvo "Mir", 1978.

Shannon, 11., "Imitatsionnoye modelirovanixe sistem---iskusstvo i nsuka" [Simula-
tion Modeling of Systems--Art and Sciencgl. Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Mir", 1978.

Grubnik, N.A., and Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Methodological Questions on the Con-
struction of Acoustic Models of the Ocean,” "Trudy Chetvegtoy nsuchno-
tekhnicheskoy konferentsii po infomtsionnoy akustike" LHorks of the Fourth
Scientific and Technical Conference on Information Acousticg7, Moscow, Insti-
tute of Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1978, pp 3-10.

01'shevskiy, V.V., "Principles of the Investigation of Acoustico-Oceanogtaphic
Models," "Trudy Chetvertoy nauchno-tckhnicheskoy konferentsii po informatsion-

noy akustike", Moscow. Institute of Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1978,
pp 11—22.

49

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VOLUHETRIC NOISE SPATIAL CORRELATION FUNCTION FOR SURFACE ANTENNAS

[Article by Yu. 3. Concharov and I. L. Oboznenko pp 49—52]

15ers? In this article we discuss the effect of the reflecting surface on which
acoustic pressure receivers are located on the spatial correlation function of vol-
umetric, isotropic noise. The receivers' inherent diffraction effects are not tak-

en into consideration; that is, they are assumed to be point receivers.

Let us examine an unlimited space D that
contains an arbitrary body 5 (Figure l),
on the surface of which are located point
receivers A1(p1,01,¢1) and A2(pz,62,¢2)
(9,8,0 - spherical coordinates of the sur-

face points relative to the center 0; °3 =
= radius vector describing the surface of
8). Let space D - V0, where V0 is the

volume of the scattering body, be continu-
ous and filled uniformly with point noise

sources Q(:0), roe (D - V0). Let us as-
sume that the noise field on the outer
surface of S is homogeneous and that the
voltage at the outputs of point receivers A1 and A2, as well as that of an external

 

(relative to the surface of 8) point receiver P(?o), ?oe (D - V0), is proportional
to the total pressure p at the indicated points. We will assume that each noise
source creates a pressure in space D - V0 that is characterized by identical sta-
tistical properties and that the noise formation process itself is ergodic. We as-

sumv that the phases of noise sources Q(;o) are random for all :0: (D - V0) and

.5
that at a random frequency w the amplitudes of the total pressure p(r) are dis-
tributed relative to the average value and that the average for the ensemble equals

the average with respect to time. By analogy with £l,g/ let us determine the nor-
malized spatial correlation function of the noise interference at the two points

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

            

”-
I
..n.. .
u .;n ~_ I
o -- - - t .2. ' '__—9 -
a- _ ’V "_ "" ""' ""
v -- :i..l;._l *- L_l_..|____.
Figure 2. Figure 3.
A1(31) and A2(;2) (Figure l) in the form
a<|31 - 32|.T) - R(d,0)cos mt, a - 131 - 321, (1)
where
< 2>12 (u2>
R(d.0) . -1L———— - 1 - -——-12 = 1, u - 0p, (2)
2<p2>o 2<u2>o

1 = time lag of the process; 0 . sensitivity of the point receivers; <u2>12 and
<u2>o I mean squares of the voltages at the output, respectively, of the two (at
points A] and A2) and one (reduced to a certain point on the surface of S) receiv~
ers sensing noise from volume D - V0.

As a reduction point, let us take one of the points on the surface (0,0,0). Let
+
us represent the pressure waves falling from point Q(ro) and scattered at point

P(ro) in the form

3i(?,:) - pi(:)e-iwt; Es(¥,c) = ps(;)e-imt, (3)

where pi. ps - complex pressure amplitudes in the incident and scattered waves, re-
spectively. At points A1 and A2. the total pressure amplitudes are

a + 4 -) -> 9
plinl) - pil(ﬁ1) + Psl(°1)’ p2(02) - Pi2(°2) + p82(02). (a)

If we select point Al on the surface of S as the reduction point, in accordance
with the procedure [21/ for computing spatial correlation function (2), we obtain

I I Ip I2
R(d.u) = %'I I '22 av - I. (5)
g P]. (iv

-v -> -o + + ->
p12 ' ’1‘”1) ‘ 92(92) ' Pi1‘91) * ”i2(°2) ’ ”31(01) * "32(92)‘ (6)

Here,

Since the pressure in the incident wave is assumed to be known for any source Q(?o),

?o‘ V, at an arbitrary point PG), 'rEV. including points on the surface of s, in

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

order to determine spatial correlation function (5) it is necessary to find the
scattered field at point P (and, in particular, at the points on the surface of S).

For a spherical, acoustically stiff surface the expression for the spatial correla-
tion factor of volumetric noise has the form

a as -1
_ (2n + 1) (cos 0) (2n + l) s . 2
R(d,0) n50 ——P-n———Dn(ka) “50 W , Dn(ka) Ihn(ka)l . (7)

Figure 2 shows the dependences of the spatial correlation functions of isotropic,
volumetric noise for acoustically stiff [R(d,0)] and acoustically transparent
[Ro(d,0)] spherical antennas on the spatial location of the two receivers A1 and A
for different values of the wave size ka. Figures 3 and 4 show the dependences of
functions R and R0 on wave size ka for fixed spatial positions of receivers A1 and
A2. As is obvious from these figures, for average values of the scattering sur-
face's wave sizes, functions R and no can differ substantially. For large surface

wave sizes, differences between functions R and R0 are observed only in the area of
weak correlation.

 

2

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Eckart, 6., J. ACOUST. SOC. AM., Vol 25, 1953, p 195.

2. Kron, 8., and Sherman, 1.. "Spatial Correlation Functions for Different Models
of Noise,“ in "Nekotgryye problemy obnaruzheniya signals maskiruyemogo flyuktua-

tsionnoy pomekhoy" LSomc Problems in Detecting a signal Masked by Fluctuating-
lnterferencg7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1965.

52

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[KM-FREQUENCY REVERBERATION CAUSED BY THE SCATTERING OF SOUND ON THE FOAM‘! SURFACE
OF THE OCEAN

[Article by V. P. clotnv pp 52-56]

[Eext7 It is a well-known fact £l,g7 that resonance scatterers in the form of
pulsing air bubbles form in a thin layer of water that is disturbed by wind-caused
waves. What is of interest is the low-frequency surface reverberation (hack scat-
tering) that occurs under extreme meteorological conditions--a foamy, irregular

ocean surface (wind speed v > 6-8 m/s)--when the scattering is great not only at
high, but also at low frequencies (”1 kHz). A characteristic feature of this sta-
tistical problem is accounting not only for the wave action, but also the acoustic
interaction of a bubble with its mirror image. As the model of the scattering me-
dium let us take a stochastic complex consisting of a large-scale irregularity
(that is fluent and sloping) and an underlying layer of bubbles, the concentration
of which is constant (throughout the layer) and the radii a of which are small in
comparison with the wavelength l . 2ﬂ/k in the water and the distance between them.
We will separate a layer of bubbles of thickness H = 0.1A that is adjacent to the
surface and compute its contribution to the total scattering. The other part of

the layer is of no interest, since its effect on the reverberation has already been
studied in detail 13,57.

 

Figure 1.

Let a narrow-band pulse, the spatial length L of which exceeds the irregularities'
correlation interval, strike an agitated surface at a glancing angle O (to the

53

FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plane z = 0, Figure 1). Now let us find the intensity of the reverberation from
layer ll .

At low frequencies (1 kHz and lower). 'rad a k2a2 ; rn (loss resistance) and the

scattering cross-section of a bubble in a limitless space can be represented ap-
proximately as

o I brazlrrad I Azln. (I)

For the intensity of the reverberation from laye: R we have £3.37:

rm = (So/man lv|2|c|2du>, ' (2)

where 3 I average concentration of bubbles in the layer; 7 I disturbing sonic field
under the irregular surface (in the layer); 0 = Green function; u I volume of the
layer; <-> I averaging with respect to the collective of irregularities.

In the propositions formulated above relative to the surface (soft, fluent and

sloping). the field beneath it can be represented in the following form iii? (we
ignore the contribution of the bubbles):

 

|v(§)| , 2;<§)-‘ﬁ§’. (3)

where ﬂ = unit normal vector to the irregular surface at the current point i;

5(a) I distance from volume du to the irregular surface along the normal to it; R I
I distance from do to the observation point.

Let us now determine the Green function. From the figure it is obvious that the
indicatrix of the dipole (the bubbles plus their mirror image) has the form:

o2(x) - sin? (kg-sin x), (a)

where x I the scattered wave's angle of yaw to the tangent plane.

From formula (4) it is obvious that the indicatrix has maximums in different direc-

tions. For kg 5 "/4 (that is. Cmax 2 ﬂ = 0.1x) the indicatrix has a single maximum
in a direction close to the tangent plane's normal. In this direction the oscilla-

tions of a bubble and its image are almost opposite in phase (the intensity equals
the square of the sum of the pressures):

. ' 2(kg (kr 2 H
1mm . v2U3322R m ) : IR) .f' (5)

where v I the number of oscillations (v I 2); Us I a bubble's scattering power in a

limitless space; m — a factor (0 s m s l) allcuing for the change in a bubble's re-
sistance in the presence of an absolutely soft interface (rrad = mkzaz).

Factor I can be related to the axial scattering concentration 1:157:
11/2
I
-I/2

We see that for k: z u, m a 1 (there is no interaction). 0n the contrary, however,
for kg g u/a the interaction is great, since m I 2/3(k£)2, which means a sharp

m I sin2(kL-sin x)cos xdx I l - (sin 2k€/2k£). (6)

54
FOIIOFFNJA1.USE13NLN
FOR OFFKJAI.USE{DNLY

intensification of a bubble's pulsations and, consequently, scattering. For a thin

layer RH s n/b. according to (5) and (6) the intensity of the scattering at the in-
dicatrix'a maximum will be

1mg“ = 6(Hs/4nR2); (7)

that is, 7.8 dB more than in a limitless space under the same conditions. For the
intensity at angle x we obtain (k: s n/b):

i()() = imez(x) E (Ha/lonHGIz. (8)
where D2(x) = (k£)'2¢2(x) = k2(3“)2 = normalized indicstrix;'; - wave vector of the
scattering of the wave; |G| = absolute value of the Green function:

|c| = Iguiﬁinkm. (9)

Considering expressiOJs (3) and (9) and integrating (2) with respect to the thick-
ness of the layer, we obtain

- N -
(‘revbtui = 8n;z:%<If (hﬁ)4dso>, (10)

where so - the surface limiting the scattering volume (so - ZIRL).

Further calculations of the reverberation level can be made only if the statistical

properties of the agitated surface are given. Assuming that the slopes of the
large-scale isotropic irregularities are distributed according to the normal law,
according to (10) we obtain

rm, = 8H3sor’0c(¢,5), (11)

where C(¢,5) I a function depending on the incident wave'g glancing angle and the
root-mean-square angle of the irregular surface's slope /

e

Let us calculate function C(¢,5) for the reverberation aspect of the glancing an-
gles (e + 0). we have:

62

)1 a as“. (12)
2¢2

a E 2
C(¢,6)°_’0 = ¢ [1+ 6(.) (1+

Substituting expression (12) into (13) and converting to the surface reverberation

factor mp(¢) . 4 llrpRzlroso, where r0 = R2 is the intensity of the direct wave, for
6 * 0 we obtain

mp“) = 961161136". (13)
Thus, for small glancing angles the value of the factor (0) does not depend on
the angle. but on the root-mean-square angle of the irregular surface's slope (a
linear dependence on G LTL7) and the average concentration of bubbles (an exponen-

tial dependence on v 1T,27). It is easy to see, however, that formula (13) gives
an exaggerated reverberation value, since part of the bubbles are "shaded" by the
irregularities in the surface when d * 0. Let us introduce the appropriate correc-
tion factor. For the "shading" function at glancing angles we have i if:

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

q(o,6) s s(¢,s)/s0 = 2.566'1, (1a)
where S(¢,6) . the effective area.

Allowing for (14), we will finally have _
mp(¢) = 24OInH363Q; (15)

that is. the reverberation' 8 spatial subsidence follows the law R' 4, since
0 = 20/8, where 20 is the depth of submergence of the hydroacoustic system.

Let us evaluate the equivalent radius of the surface reverberation for an undirect-
ed hydroacoustic system. Assuming that f - 1 kHz, 20 = 100 m, H . 15 cm, 6 = 0.17

(G - 15 111/11),-10"’-lo'7 cm 3 (the extrapolation value of the concentration of
resonance bubbles according to the optical data in / 2/ and L = 50 m, we obtain
aequ = a- 12 m (independent of distance).

Thus, the contribution of a thin layer of bubbles (foam) can be extremely signifi-
cant.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Glotov, V.P., Kolobayev, P.A., and Nauyman, 6.6., "Investigation of the Scatter-
ing of Sound by Bubbles Created in Seawater by an Artificial Hind and the Sta-
tistical Distribution of the Bubbles' Dimensions," AKUSTICHESKIY ZRURNAL, Vol 7,
No 4, 1961, pp 421-a27.

2. Kolobayev, P.A., "Investigation of the Concentration and Statistical Distribu-
tion of the Sizes of Bubbles Created in the Surface Layer of the Ocean by Hind,"
OKEANOLOCIYA, Vol 15, No 6, 1975. Pp 1013-1017.

3. Glotov, V.P., and Lysanov, Yu.P.. "0n Surface Reverberation Caused by Resonance
Air Bubbles," TRUDY AKUSTICHESKOGO INSTITUTA, No 2, 1967, pp 26-32.

a. Clotov, V.P., and Lysanov, Yu.P., "0n the Relative Role of Air Bubbles and an
Agitated Sea Surface in the Formation of Reverberation," AKUSTICRESKIY ZHURNAL,
Vol lb, No 3, 1968. PP 371-375.

5. Bass, F.G. and Fuks, l. H. , "Rnsseyaniye voln na statisticheskoy_ nerovnoy po-
verkhnosti" [Have Scattering on a Statistical, Irregular Surfacel, Moscow, Izda-
tel' stvo "Nauka", 1972, pp 183, 351, 243.

6. Kur'yanov. B.F.. "Scattering of Sound on 3 Rough Surface With Two Types of Ir—
regularitics,” AKUSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL, Vol 8, No 2, 1962. pp 325-333.

7. Skuchik, Ye., "Osnovy akustiki“ iﬁrinciples of Acousticg]. Moscow, lzdatel'stvo
Inostrannoy literatury, 1958, Part I, p 293.

8. Cox, 6., and Hunk, H., "Measurement of the Roughness of the Sea Surface From
Photographs of the Sun Glitter," J. 0PT. SOC. AHER., Vol 44, 1954, pp 838-850.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

INFORMATION CHARACTERISTICS OF REVBRBERATION CAUSED BY HIDE-BAND SOURCES IN A
SHALLOH SEA

[Article by T. V. Polyanskaya pp 56-57]

Lfex£7 An analysis of works devoted to the study of the characteristics of rever-
beration in lakes and a shallow sea when wide-band sources are used showed that at
the present time insufficient attention is being devoted to establishing a connec-
tion between the reverberation signal's characteristics and the spatial-structural
characteristics of the medium's boundaries, with the low-frequency area being the
least studied of all.

In this article we stady the information characteristics of low-frequency (f < l
kﬁz) reverberation (which include duration, the shape of the signal's envelope and
its spectral characteristics) caused by an explosive source in lakes and a shallow
sea. In order to obtain the initial data, we made experimental recordings of re-
verberation signals under different conditions (in Lake Svityaz' in Volynskaya
Oblast and in Lake Ladoga, as well as shallow bays in the Barents Sea, with the av-
erage depths for all of this work being 10-130 m). Different geometric arrange-
ments of the monostatic and bistatic sound sources and receivers were used. As a
signal source we used explosive charges of various sizes, while the receivers were
nondirectional hydrophones, the depth of submergence of which equaled the depth at
which the charges were detonated. The wide-band reverberation signals that were
received were recorded on a tape recorder. The characteristics that were analyzed
were duration, envelope shape and signal spectrum. The spectral characteristics _
were obtained during the processing of the signals, using a 3?? lexpansion unknown].
for frequency values of 0-5.000 Hz and a 2-H: band, in connection with which the
realization was divided into sections lasting 0.5 s. The analysis that was made of
the experimental results showed that the geometric characteristics of the body of
water can be determined from the duration of the reverberation. We constructed an
empirical law for the dependence of the duration of reverberation on the area of
the sonicated water area (for those cases where the area of the basin was evaluated
preliminarily with certain reflectors) that showed that the duration of the rover-
beration is almost directly proportional to the area of the basin. The experimen-
tally obtained reverberation duration valuea were compared with theoretical ones

57

— FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculated with Yu.M. Sukharcvskiy's formula £_Lj for boundary reverberation. The
best correspondences were obtained for the regions with the least broken land pro-
files, when small charges were used, and for depths not exceeding 15-20 m. In the
general case the experimental values are always higher than the calculated ones.
which can be explained by the fact that the formula used does not allow for such
essential (in this case) parameters as the size of the body of water. the land pro-
file and the simultaneous presence of both bottom and surface reverberation. Peri-
odic brokennesa of the spectrum of a reverberation signal with an amplitude of 8-10
dB and a frequency of 25-h5 Hz is seen in the spectrograms of recordings made in
open areas and rather wide bays. This can be explained by the effect of the pulsa-
tions of the gas bubble appearing in connection with the detonation of the explo-
sive charge, since the frequency of the pulsations diminishes with a decrease in
the depth at which the charge is detonated and in increase in the weight of the ex-
plosive used. This makes it possible to link a reverberation signal's character-
istics with the working conditions and the depth of detonation of the charge. The
statistical regularities of a reverberation signal were studied with 5h: help of a
discrete, canonical model of reverberation for broad-band emissions [_Zj. V.V.
Ol'shevskiy showed that in such a case, the reverberation process is essentially
nonstationary, since the form of the correlation function (and not only its disper-
sionl depends on the current time. Research conducted by us and reported in detail
in [.2] showed that reverberation from an explosive source in a shallow sea is a
process that leads to a stationary one, in connection with which the stationary
component of the reverberation signal is distributed according to the normal law.

Thus. our research demonstrated the promise of the study of the information charac-
teristics of reverberation caused by broad-band sources for the study of the spa-

tial and structural characteristics of the boundaries of a medium. The development
of this area of research can move along the path of predicting marine reverberation,
as well as the study of the effect of the frequency characteristics of the scatter-
ers and the marine medium on the temporal and spatial correlation of reverberation.

BlBLlOGRAPHY

l. Sukharevskiy, Yu.M., "Theory of Harine Reverberation Caused by the Scattering of
Sound." DOKLADY AN SSSR, Vol 55, No 9, l9ﬁ7, pp 825-828.

2. Ol'shcvskiy, V.V., "ﬁtatisticheskiye metody v gidrolokatsii" [gtatistical Meth-
ods in Hydrolocatiogl. Leningrad, lzdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1973.

3. Gonopol‘skiy. A.L., Cronskiy, Ya.l., and Polyanskaya. T.V., “Some Results of
Experimental Investigations of Reverberation Caused by Broad-Band Sources in a
Shallow Sea," in_fTrudy 9-oy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy
gidroakustiki"_£horks of the Ninth All-Union School-Seminar on Statistical
hydroacousticgl, Novosibirsk, I978.

58

FOR 0F11C1AI.USEIDNLY
mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF ACOUSTIC SIGNALS SCATTERED BY A SEA SURFACE

[Article by Ya. P. Dragan and I. N. Yavorskiy pp 58-59]

[Text] Let us examine the methods for obtaining statistical evaluations of the
characteristics of biperiodically correlated random processes (BPKSP) and the algo-
rithms used to compute them. Algorithms for determining evaluations of the charac-
teristics of periodically correlated random processes (PKSP) are derived from them
as special cases. A BPKSP is a random process, the mathematical expectation

(t) . E; (t) and correlation functionB (t.r) = El£(t + 1) - m£(t + 1)]
m2“) - m€(t)) of which are almost periodic functions of time v1th Fourier indica-
tors "at I n(21/T1) + 1(2n/T2 ), where n and t are whole numbers, so that they can
be represented in 1the form

m£(t) = exp jAn it’ B£(t,1) = _Q3£n(1)eXp jA t.

n,E=-°m£n t.§' n1

Evaluations of these characteristics can be found by calculating the evaluations of
components ”in and an(t), and when the periods of correlatability of the process
T1 and T2 are commensurate (that is, when qu - p12 ) they can also be calculated
directly. Unskeued evaluations of the components are the statistics

A

m ' 11m T 6 E(t)exp (-JAntt)dt’

in
MT (1)
Bin (1) = 11m%f {(t + 1)E(t)exp (— 'jAn t)dt.
0

These evaluations will be valid for certain conditions that are imposed on the cor-
relation function and the fourth moment (see, for example, / 37). The direct eval-
uation of the characteristics of a BKPSP is based on the properties of readings at
points that are multiples of the value pTz, Tl < 12. Unskewed and valid evalua-
tions of the mathematical expectation and covariation, under the conditions men-
tioned above. will he the statistics

‘(1 ‘"7°'( + 1-)

111K to — .010 L.t? up 2 ,

N (2)

a

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-'l-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

. . . . . . . . (2)
a. "-0
Bc(to,t) I % “£0 £(to + “PTZ * t)£(to + inz), 1- 0,qp.

In order to find the value of the correlation function, it is convenient to repre-
sent the data entered in a computer in the form of a matrix, the rows of which are

sequences of readings: E = “étpu' in I €(to + 2A + “PT2)’ A - quantification step.

P

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Dragan, Ya. P., and Yavorskiy, I. N., "Probability Description of Sea Waves," in
"Trudy Sed' may Vseaoyuznoy shkoly-aeminara po statisticheskoy gidroakuctike“_

[works of the Seventh All- Union School Seminar on Statistical Hydroacousticsl,
Novosibirsk, 1976.

2. Dragon, Yn.P.. and Yavorskiy, I.N., "0n the Representation of a Conumnication
Link with Reflection From a Sea Surface in the Form of 1: Linear Filter," in
"Trudy Sed'moy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po atatisticheskoy gidroakustike",

Novosibirsk, l976.

3. Cudzenko, D.I., "0n Periodically Nonstationary Processes." RADIOTEKHNIKA I
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol (0, No 6, I959.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INVESTIGATION OF TRE INTERFERENCE STRUCTURE OF TIIE ACOUSTIC FIELD OF A MODEL
WAVEGUIDE

[Article by G. K. Ivanova, V. N. Il'ina, Ye. F. Orlov and c. A. Sharonov pp 59-61]

[Iexg/ In this work we conduct an experimental test of the method of generalized
holograms _/_l_7 during an investiJation of the mode structure of the acoustic field
in model waveguides of two types: a two-layer waveguide and a symetrical sound
channel with a deepened axis.

The sliding spectrum of an intensity hologram 1—1_7 with tempora1_ay_ersging, allow-
ing only for the interference term at great distances, will be LZJ:

t" -‘ﬂ
B(Q,w,t) - 53F%(w,t)anPm(w,z,zo)Pn(w,z,zo)cos Aummn ‘ tdt. (1)
1
where z, 20 = horizons of the source and the receiver; r - vt; M = equality of

the longitudinal wave numbers of the modes m, n. Extreme values it)? the function
BUM-J) will be seen at 9 '- vAﬁmW). The lines of the extreme values of Man”) on
the plane 9,0) will correspond to the waveguide's characteristic curves. while the
values of the function 8 (Run) on the line U . WV ' M ('0) will be determined by
the amplitudes of the excitation of the modes Pm(w.z,zo%n(w,z,zo).

For a two-layer medium on the plane 31,10, the area of modes encompassed by the wave—
guide is limited by the straight lines 03/»: = Cl and 6/4: = C2 i3_/. 0n the plane
u,w the area of existence of a difference in the modes' longitudinal wave numbers
will be bounded by the axis Asian I 0 and the line Aﬁm ' w(c2 - cﬂ/(clcz). The
behavior of the lines Ant“ - AﬁmW) is such that as the frequency increases, the
values of an(w) diminish for a given pair m, n _/_3_7. The distribution of the
values of B(u,w) on the plane u,w is determined by the amplitudes of the excitation
of the modes Pm(w,z.zo)l’n(w,z,zo), which depend on the horizons of the emission and
reception points.

For a waveguide with a deepened channel axis with a profile
C(z) - (l/C; - quu2 for z > 0; C(z) I (1/6: + q'z) at z 0.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICNWWCJAI.USE¢JNLY

A* (w) I Ji{[1 - 3nc6(! ‘ l/2)2/3 [/2 _

)2/3 1/2
on Co w l

1 - ZuCo(!‘-‘ll2
m

}. (2}

C 1 2 .
u - 391%,“; + 61?” ’3

The area of existence of differences in
the modes' wave numbers lies beneath the
straight line 1mn(u) I mac/co, where Ac I
I the maximum difference in the speeds of
sound in the distribution C(z) for the
link. From (2) it follows that the inter-
ference frequenties We“) for fixed a, n
increase as the frequency does. Let us
examine the results of a modeled experi-

 

speed of sound in an experimental bath;
these profiles were obtained by the method described in /.gj. Curve 1 corresponds

o

to the two-layer waveguide, curve 2 to the waveguide with a deepened axis.

(A I 4.2-2.1 mm); _Figure 2 135: reproduceg7 shows the hologram recordings for the
two waveguides 1 i]. In a two-layer medium, the hologram recording was made for
movement of the receiver away from the emitter (r I 0.3 cm) to distances of up to
r I 500 cm (”1.2-103'Amax). with horizons z I so I 1 cm (2.4'Amax). Figure 3 inot
reproduced] gigeg the results of secondary processing of the hologram by a method
presented in lﬁj’for the distances: a. 0.3-165 cm, b. 165~300 cm. c. 330-b95 cm
with averaging with respect to distance at 165 cm (“390'Xmax). In Figure 3b, the
boundary of the existence of B(u.w) is clearly visible: the line Au I Am, where
coefficient A, determined experimentally. equals 9.5:10"7 cm/s‘l. which coincides
with the calculated value of 5 (9.3-10' cm/s'l). The experimental determination
of coefficient A makes it possible to determine the speed of sound in the under-
lying layer (C2) if Cl is known. The structure of the lines u I Axmn(w). which
correspond to the extreme values of B(u,w)--as is obvious from Figure 3--corres-

concerned £f2_. The number of the interfering modes is determined experimentally
according to the maximum value him“ I Aslﬂ. On the lower frequency of 360 kHz,
A‘lH I 1.93 cm ‘1 (41" I 3.3 cm), H I 18. Calculating M according to C(z) gives
the same value. The distance between adjacent modes along the u axis is on the
order of ~0.1 cm”1 (at a frequency of ‘ﬁOO kHz). The areas of the greatest values
of 8(u,w) on the plane u,w are localized in accordance with the distribution of the
amplitudes of excitation of the modes (Pm(w,z,zo)Pn(W.z.zo) and their location

of up to 330 cm. The source's horizon and the receiver's trace were the same: 2 I
I 30 = 8 cm (”l9-Xmax). Figures ha and 4b [not reproduced/ show the sliding spec-

trum of the hologram of B(u,U) for the following distances: a. 0.3-165 cm. b.
165-330 cm with averaging at 165 cm. A large number of interference bands are seen
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

. Orlov, Ye.F., "The generalized Hologram Method in Acoustical Investigations of
the Ocean," this collection.

. Brekhovskikh, L.H., "Volny v sloistykh sredakh" Lﬁavea in Layered Mediumg7,
Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1967.

. Tolstoy, 1., and chy, K.S.. "Akustika okeana" [acean Acoustical Moscow, Izda-
tel'atvo "Mir", 1969.

. Barkhatov, A.N., "Hodelirovaniye rasprostraneniya zvinka v more" Liodeling the
Propagation of Sound in the 8e37, Leningrad, Gidroneteorologicheskoye izdatel'-
stvo, 1968.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HULTIDIHENSIONAL MODELING 1N STATISTICAL HYDROACOUSTICS

[Article by V. V. 01'shevsk1y pp 61-64]

[Text7 I. The special features of the mathematical modeling of acoustica-
oceanographic problems /1- h/ lead to the necessity of carrying out multidimensional
modeling of random variables, the functions of vector arguments, the vector func-
tions of scalar arguments and, finally, the vector functions of vector arguments.
However, even when the most productive computers are used, direct multidimensional
modeling entails practically unsurmountable difficulties. It is sufficient to say
that the sampling data volume "n needed for the direct, combined modeling of a ran-
dom variables, when each of them is represented by m values, is determined by the
rela ionship

an = m”. (1)

In time these difficulties gained the name of "the curse of dimensionality," and
for a long time now researchers have been asking the following question: howa can

the sampling data volume be reduced without discarding the essential regularities
(statistical connections) among the random variables being modeled? The contradic-

tion posed by these two tendencies (reducing the sampling data volume and losing
statistical regularities) is obvious; nevertheless, simplified multidimensional
models are now being introduced. In this article we propose one such simplified
multidimensional model that is based on the assignment of a full set of two-

dimensional distributions of random variables.

2. The "Mixing" of Random Variables. Let yj, j= l, e random variables for
which the unidimensional probability densit1es H(Yj)h =1," are given. Let us
form a new random variable

a = mix(yj,rj), j = l,H, (2)

where ”mix is the "mixing" operator of the original random variables in propor-
tions of r According to (2), "mixing:_gssentially means the formation of a new
random variable 2 from the set yj, j = 1,H, it being the case that the sample ZR

consists of R - . lrj values of the original variables yj, each of which is
J-

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FT1C1AI.US£i3NLY

represented in ZR by rj values. It can be shown that

1 H
"(2) = i jglrjw(vj). (3)

3. Evaluating the Two-Dimensional Distributions. Let us discuss the sample

.5

X" I (X1.....Xn)u (’6)

where n = a dimensional random variable consisting of N values. We will be inter-
ested in the two-dimensional joint probability densities

“(Xk,Xg); k > z; 2.x - 1,n, (5)

or, which is equivalent, the unidimensional unconditional and two-dimensional con-
ditional probability densities

“(Xk), "(Kg/Xk); k > 1., k,l ' 1,“. (6)

These densities w(xk,xl), "(X and §(X£/Xk), k > t, t,k - ljh, can be evaluated
with the help of polygrams iii? that minimize the error of the statistical evalua-
tions for any sampling volume N.

Thus, about the n-dimensional random variable (4) we know only the pair statistical
relationships of the type of (5) or (6) and according to these relationships, by
solving the following problem we attempt to achieve the most likely model of the
entire set of random variables. It is clear that such a description is incomplete;

however, it is related to a significant economy of all the statistical procedures.

4. Modeling a Multidimensional Random Variable With the Help of Two-Dimensional
Distributions. As soon as the distributions of type (5) and (6) are given for n-
dimensional variable (4), it is necessary to organize the modeling procedure on the
basis of the assignment of the two-dimensional probability distributions. As a ba-
sis for the modeling, let us examine conditional probability densities (6). In
this case, the modeling procedure takes form as the following sequence:

random variable x1 is modeled in accordance with "(X );

variable x2 is modeled in accordance with the conditional "(X2/X1) and uni-
dimensional "(X2) distributions;

variable x3 is modeled in accordance with the conditional “(X3/X1), "(X3/X2) and
unidimensional H(X3) distributions and so on.

Thus, in the general case the random variable x is modeled in accordance with the
distributions

 

w(x1), w(x£/xk); k - 1.1-1; 1 - 373. (7)

And now for the essential part of the modeling procedure: its algorithm. Under
the conditions that have been formulated. the choice of the multidimensional model-

ing algorithm is not an unambiguous problem. However, it is possible to suggest
several heuristic procedures, one of which is being discussed here. This is the

“mixing" of random variables (see Section 2), in connection with which--according
to (2) and (3)--the resulting probability distribution equals the sum of the densi-

ties (with the appropriate weighting factors). Taking (7) into consideration. for
the probability density HH(Xg/X1,...,X£_1) of the modeled random value an, we have:

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2-1
uH(x,/x,,...,x,_l) 71—1 k51"(x‘/x“)‘ (a)

It is not difficult to show that, according to (8) and (9), the unconditional prob-
ability distribution

0 '1
HMO“) ' f._.‘l_..r "Ho‘l/XI . . . . ,Xl-1)H(x1, . . . ,X1_1) '“ldXi (9)
1:
equals HM(X‘) = H(X2). (10)

Modeling algorithm (8) corresponds to the "mixing" that is being discussed and is
formulated on the basis of statistical evaluations of the probability densities of,
for example, the conditional two-dimensional polygrams.

Let us mention here that for the modeling of a random variable with the help of
two~dimensional distributions on the condition that each of them is realized by m
values, the sampling data volume N2 will be

n(n - 1)m2.

N2 - “T“ (11)

From a comparison of the values of N2 with the case of full n-dimensional modeling
(1), for n I 10 and m . 10 there is a vast savings (about 5 orders of magnitude) in
the amount of sample values of the random variables during multidimensional model-
ing with the help of two-dimensional probability distributions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Simulation Experiments in Statistical Hydroacoustics: Se-
lecting Models and Testing Their Adequacy [or Real Phenomena," in "Akusticheski-
ye metody issledovaniya okeana" LAcoustic Methods of Investigating the Ocean7,
Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", No 255, 1977.

2. Grubnik, N.A., and 01'shevskiy, V.V., "An Acoustic Model of the Ocean," in
"Trudy Pervogo seminars 'Akusticheskiye statistichekiye modeli okegha'" lyorks
of the First Seminar on "Acoustic Statistical Models of the Occanzl, Moscow, In-
stitute of Acoustics. USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977.

3. Ol'shevskiy, V.V., “Models and Simulation Computer Experiments in Statistical
Hydroacoustics," in "Trudy Pervogo seminara 'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiyc mo-
deli ukeana'", Moscow, Institute of Acoustics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977.

4. Middleton, D., and Ol'ahevskiy, V.V., "Contemporary Problems in the Construction
of Acoustical Statistical Models of the Ocean," in "Trudy Pervogo seminara

'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'", Moscow, Institute of Acoustics,
USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977.

66

FOI:0FFKJA1.USIZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPATIAL COVARIATION FUlICTlON OF A SONIC FIELD

[Article by V. M. Kudryashov pp 64-67]

[Tex57 The spatial correlation function of the stochastic part of a sonic field
for observation points moving along a line in the azimuthal plane has already been
calculated 1 L7. A new variant of the program is suitable for the case where the
line along which the observation points are moving is located along the z axis;
that is, along the cross-section of a waveguide. The program is written in FORTRAN
for a BESM-6 high-speed computer. The subject of discussion here is a sonic field

in a waveguide (am .< z s H. o s r < .; £- {x,y}) filled with a liquid medium.

the speed of sound C in which depends on the depth 2, since the density is constant.
The waveguide’s upper boundary is acoustically soft or is a solid plate with ir-
regular surfaces (the latter variant will not be discussed here). Let us assume
that the irregularities in the boundary are distributed according to the normal law
and are statistically uniform. isotropic and sloping. it being the case that

<s(;)> . 0, <s(; + 3)s(F)> = 02R(p), where 02 I <32(?)>, R(0) - l. Calculations
were made for R(n) ‘ exp (-pzlpg). The angled brackets designate an averaging op-
eration with respect to the ensemble of boundaries. The boundary 2 = H is charac-
terized by a sound reflection factor that is independent of the coordinates. The
sound source is a point source emitting a harmonic wave of frequency f. The sound
source's coordinates are r - 0,2 - 20. Let us represent the sonic potential in the

form ?(;,i‘exp(-i21[t), where t U time. Let us look for a solution of the

Helmholtz equation for Y(r,z) that satisfies the boundary conditions, the condition
on the sound source and the principle of extinguishnbiiity at infinity. Let us
represent the coherent field in the form of a superposition of normal waves:

“V(r,z)e - mgl<vm(r,z)e, (I)
where
<?m(r,z)> I <Am(r)>¢m(z).

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

For the corresponding normalization of the eigenfunction 0‘(z),

(l)
0 (cmr)’

where (I - eigenvalue for the m-th normal wave of the coherent sonic field.

<Am(r)> . isvm(zo)ﬂ

The complete field can be expanded with respect to the coherent field's eigen-
functions and we obtain:

v(?,z) - "21Am(?)om(z). (2)

The sonic field's normalized covariation function K is determined by the relation-
ship

x(;,A;,Az> = <y(?1.zl)v*(¥2,z2)> //k|v(;l,zl)|2>¢|v(r2,z2)|2>. (3)

Here. ? . ($1 + ?§)/2, A? - :1 - :5. Az - 21 - 22. If Y(?,z) a <1(r,z)>. then
|K(?.A?)| a 1; that is, <Y(r,z)> is a coherent field. If there is a stochastic
component Ys(;,z) - V(;,z) - <y(?,z)> in the waveguide, then |K(;,A;,Az)| < l for

IA?| f 0 and A: f 0; that is, deviation of |K(?,A?,Az)l from unity is an indicator
of the existence of a stochastic component in the waveguide. Its spatial correla-
tion function is determined by the expression

 

» + -+ - *
Ks(r,A?,Az) - <vs(rl.zl)f:(r2, zl)>//k|Vs(£l,zl)|2><|V‘(?2,zl)|2>. (4)
According to formula (2),
+ *-b - '0 a *-D *
<!(rl,zl)y (r2,22)> n’§.1<Am(r1)An(r2)>°m(zl) on(zl). (5)

Let us assume that the Rayleigh parameter for wave number m is small in comparison
with unity. It is then the case that for sloping (o/no <<l) irregularities, multi-
ple rcscattering oi the waves is substantial only in the range of angles close to a
mirror angle. Ignoring back scattering, we have

_ r - - _
Dn(r.Ay) = o (r) + z I D (p.60)3 R(J|z /€ le>e Zlm‘u(' ”). (6)
m i 0 2 in m 2
which is equivalent to the relationship

a I ‘
ﬁomwma) - _2Imgmbm(p.Ap) + l D£(p,Ap)BtmR(r)|£n7(£|Ap). (7)

Here,
.’ .p l 1*
<Am(r1)A;(r2)> - Dm(r.Ay)(n/2)IRe£mIH3 )(Rcﬁmrl)Hé ’

(l)*
)Ho (Rcﬁmrz),

(Reimrz).

<Am(rl)><A;(r2)> - 5m(r)(ﬂ/2)|Re nlﬂél)(Reﬁmrl

‘ . “ . , 02 a .3 2 °
an” ”I! Bmdo Emls-z-olh) #“(zuw (I)MD)10(Re€m0)lo(ke€!n)ndn.

.68

HDR¢NHHKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR ()l-‘l-‘lC'IAI. “SI-1 ONLY

The waves forming Vs(;,z) are not coherent if
+ * + + a, +

<An(r1)An(r2)> <Amirl)- An(r2)> (8
for m # n. In actuality,

_) * a - ‘

<Am(r1)An(r2)> - <Am(rl)><An(r2)-cxp[0(r)l (9
for m f n, where
2 " r
= o d _d 2 AZ
a(r) ml? (2) 3:0“(z)|z.o “I, MON!) 6 R( r n)dn.

The substitution of formula (9) for (8) is pennissible if no‘<<Rm, where Rm is the
length of the cycle of wave number m.

Formulas (3)-(9) are the basis of the program's algorithm.

I.” 4 I.”

   

' """ ' '" 306
Figure 1.

0n the righthand side of Figure l is the result of the calculation in the waveguid
for which the profile C(z) is depicted on the left side of Figure l, with e = 3 m.
“0 I 50 m, H I “,000 m, z I ”0 I 50 m, f I 90 Hz. r I 301 km.

The dependence of [KS] (above) and IKI (below) on Ar have been plotted. The num-
bers l, 2, 3 and 4 designate the cases 1) Ax I 0, 2) 6x I Ay, 3) Ax = Shy, 4) Av =
I 0. It was ascertained that IK5(?,A?)I has two correlation scales in the azimuth
al plane: a longitudinal one and a transverse one. The transverse scale is real-
ized in pure form if the observation points are shifted along the coherent field's
front. In connection with this, IKSI decreases monotonically as the observation
points disperse and the distance increases. The longitudinal scale appears when
when the receiving base line is located along the direction toward the sound sourc

As a rule, the longitudinal scale is substantially greater than the transverse one
it being the case that as the observation points disperse along the direction to-

ward the sound source, IKSI and IKI can oscillate.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.

There is yet a third correlation scale, along the vertical; that is, .1 field scat-
tered on nonisotropic irregularities is essentially not isotropic. Figure 2 shows
the graphs of “(5' (on the left) and IKI (on the right) when one of the observation
points moves downward from the surface. A second observation point is at a depth
of 50 u. The numbers 1 and 2 correspond to r = 5 and 501 km. As the distance in-
creases, the vertical correlation scale decreases. The change in the absolute val-
uc of the complete field's covariation function as the observation points are dis-
persed is determined by the change in K5 and the value of the sonic field's coher-
once parameter.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Kudrysshov, V.H. , "0n Calculating the Correlation Function of 3 Stochastic Sonic
Field in a Waveguide," in :‘l‘rudy Vos'moy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seninara po statis-

ticheskoy gidroakustike" _/_Works of the Eighth All-Union School-Seminar on Sta-
tistical Hydroacousticg, Novosibirsk, [977, pp 14-15.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

ON THE QUESTION OF ANISOTROPY OF THE OCEAN'S NOISE FIELD

[Article by B. I. Klyachin pp 67-70]

[55‘57 In 1i,g7 the authors solved the problem of the effect of reflection and re-
fraction on a noise field. It is necessary to supplement this model by discussing
scattering on the ocean's surface. Actually, if the surface is disturbed there are
noise sources on it and it will scattering any sound waves striking it. Let the
noise sources be distributed in the layer near the surface and be isotropic, which
corresponds to the proposal of constanCy of the hydrometeorological conditions in
some extensive body of water. Also, let the distribution of the speed of sound def
pend only on the ocean's depth, and let its bottom be level. The problem of propa-
gation is examined in a beam approximation. Let I be the density of the sonic en-
ergy arriving at a unit area at a unit solid angle. In view of the symmetry of the
problem, this value depends only on the angle and the depth. It is clear that the
function [(2.0) possesses symmetry relative to the vertical. since different
amounts of energy cannot arrive from different directions at angles that are sym-
metrical relative to the vertical because of the nondifferentiability of the direc-
tions to the right and the left relative to the point under discussion.

In 1T.§7 it is shown that when such sound field symmetry is present, it is not ne-
cessary to allow for divergence of the beam tubes. If 1(0) is the intensity of the
noise on the ocean's surface when 2 . 0, then at all other depths it is the case

that

1(0,z) - 1(0')e'““'

where 0' = angle of the beam corresponding to 0 at the horizon z I 0; B = energy
attenuation factor; A1 = distance along the beam from horizon 2 I 0 to horizcn 1.
Let 1(0) he the density of the energy of the noise sources located on the surface.

The energy

1(02)c-81(02)dwds

arrives at angle 0 at point A from point
B, which is at a distance of 1(02) (the

 

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

total length of this beam's cycle). Here we assume that [Val I l, which simplifies
the formla and does not lead to a loss of comonality. while 1(0) is

2
1(0) - 2 “Fm - sin20°2(t)/cg)-ldt,
o

where co I speed of sound on the surface; 2.0x = maximum depth to which the given
beam sinks. ‘

 

(1)

Let us discuss the energy that has departed from point A at angle 01. This energy
is composed of the energy emitted by the "live" sound source at this angle, the re-
flected energy that arrived at angle 01, and the energy from all angles of approach
that was scattered at angle 01:

r/Z

1(91) - y(el) + |vn|1<ol)c‘““°l’ . 2. , m3(ol,ez)i<oz)e‘3“°2)aez sin 02, (2)
0

where IVnI I absolute value of the reflection factor from the surface; :15 = sound
scattering coefficient on the surface. which-~according to ilk-equals the ratio

of the energy scattered into the solid angle to the energy striking the second sol-
id angle. Let us rewrite (2) in the following manner:

 

y(01) “ll/2 _
-Bl. + —L-ﬁ - I sinezm Ie “602 I 1(01), (3)
1- IVnIe 1 - Iane o 9

that is, we obtain a (Fredgol'm) equation of the second type. In order to solve
equation (2):. let us make use of the expression for the scattering factor that is

obtained [3/ by the method of small erturbations:
.. .. P
ms I (lo/'1)(kaz)(klllo)2cos2 01°cos2 02,
where k I wave number; 02, 0
their correlation distance.

(lo)

0 = root-mean-square height of the irregularities and
Substituting (4) into (3), we obtain

(4/“)(k02)(k90)2cos2 02 -./2 2 -3:
_ + .. - 2! I sin Ozcos 02I(02)e d02 I 1(02).
1 - IVnIe 1 - anlc ° (5)
Let us designate
' /2 . 2 -8!.
2n 0 sin 0cos 0I(0)e d0 = H. (6)
It is then the case that
y(0) + (4/“)(k0)2(k00)2cosz o-u
1(0) = _—_-ﬂ—__° (7)
l ' Wale
Further. by substituting (7) into (6) we obtain an expression for M in terms of
known functions: 8'.
21""I/Zsin tacos2 0-1(0)e
-m.
H g —0————L;J¥..LL___—. (3)
-‘lzsin ecosl' o-(k )2(ko)2/lo
l - 21! f —-'———£n$i——d0
o 1 - IVnIe
72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where i is determined by formula (1). Such a simple result is obtained when the
variables in the scattering factor are separated. In the more general case it is
necessary to look for the solution of equation (3). From (7) it is obvious that

for m = 0, H = 0; that is, for total reflection we obtain a formula that is com-
pletely equivalent to the results given in 11,27:

_ (0)
“°’ thw'

Vne

This means that allowing for the scattering on the surface, in comparison with the
problem that takes only reflection into consideration, means the presence of some

additional effective sound sources located at the surface and having an energy flow
density of

ycff - (6/:)(ko)2(kpo)2cos2 O'M.

From formula (6) it is obvious that for a scattering factor that is independent of
the angle of incidence, 2M means the sonic energy that has arrived at a point on
the surface. It is precisely because of this energy that the effective noise
sources appear. It is not difficult to see that the effective sources will be
greater than the primary ones if the following inequality is fulfilled:

610 < anl(1 - IVnI).

Thus, it is possible to have conditions under which the effective noise sources are
significantly--or even much--greater in power than the primary sources. This hap-

pens, for example, in the absence of attenuation and as little scattering as possi-
ble.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Tulham, R.Y., "Ambient Sea Noise Model," J. ACOUST. SOC. AMBR.. Vol 36, No 8,
1964, pp lSAl-lShh.

2. Purduyev, A.V., "Ocean Noises," in "Akustika okeana" lﬁcean Acousticg7, Moscow,
lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1974.

3. Lysanov, Yu.P., "Sound Scattering by Irregular Surfaces," in "Akustika okesna”,
Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", l97b.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

A METHG) OI" MODELING A ROBOT WITH AN ECHO-LOCATOR

[Article by D. Ye. 0khotaimsk1y, A. K. Platonov and V. Ye. Pryaniehnikov pp 70.71]

Liex£7 The basic purpose of this project is the construction of a high-speed math-
ematical model of the reflection of waves by a complicated relief, in which the ba-
sic physical processes of the formation and reception of the return signals by a
robot are taken into consideration.

In this work we calculate the character-
istics of return signals in the robot
movement mode at some height H, above the
reflecting surface's average level 2 -

I F(x,y). In connection with this. the
emitter's and receiver's radiation pat-
terns are oriented downward and divided
into quite small solid angles--the ele-

mentary beams ¢1 ‘02 are such that a

 

._.._“_ __. _____-.__ .. spherical wave of the appropriate ampli-
Figure 1. Diagram of echo-location tude is propagated inside them (Figure 1).
measurements with a moving robot. The size of the section of surface irradi-
Key: 1. Robot's echo-locator ated by the elementary beam is substan-

tially smaller tr "5.

Such an orientation of the radiation pattern can be required for the specialized
information system of a walking robot that plans the robot's next movements and se-
lects the points where its feet are to be put. Another example is an automatic
manipulator operating on a conveyor and identifying different parts.

The robot makes nwasuremeuts as it moves; therefore, it is necessary to model a
large number of acoustic measurements from points that are quite close together.

In order to reduce the number of computations it is sufficient to construct the re-
flected signal for only a few positions of the emitter that we will call the base

positions. The intermediate values of the reflected signal are found by linear in-
terpolation, with the addition of a correction factor for noise.

7h

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY
FOR OFFTCJAL USEZCNVLY

The relief is given by the surface 2 - F(x,y), the acoustic properties of which are
given comparatively simply in the model. In our work we used the robot visualiza-
tion system and the method of modeling its external environment proposed in 12.27.
We introduced three levels of descriptive detail, each of which has its own hori-
zontal scale of squares in the plan of the relief elements. The flat faces of the
relief elements are also squares in the plan or are situated vertically. The re-
lief elements on the different levels are superimposed on each other so that the
face of the larger of them is a foundation for a smaller one. On the whole, the
surface obtained can be characterized as piecewise linear, piecewise continuous and
piecewise translational with respect to X and Y. The description is formulated in
a special, rather simple, language. Each face receives its own set of numerical
characteristics and coefficients that define its reflection.

A parameter matching algorithm supports the existence of those emitter positions
that we call the base ones and in which one surface face F' falls flatly inside
each elementary beam. In the base positions the computation of the elementary sig-
nals Sii(t) becomes simpler, since this is a problem of determining reflection from
a plane} Thus, the computation of the overall signal S(t) comes down to the solu-
tion of N"! I ““2 problems of calculating elementary return signals. For an arbi-

trary emitter position. the reflected signal is found by interpolation of the re-
turn signals for the adjacent base positions.

The elementary return signals are computed by finite formulas that correspond to
integration with respect to infinitely small, diffusely reflecting areas do. The
phase interactions of different sections of a face. the location of the front and
rear edges of the sonicated area, and the material of which the reflecting face is
composed are all allowed for.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Okhotsimskiy, D.Yc., Platonov, A.K., Borovin, C.K., Karpov, 1.1., Kiril'chenko.
A.A., Kugushev, Ye.l.. Lazutin, Yu.M., Pavlovskiy, V.Ye., Pryanichkov. V.Ye.,
and Yaroshevskiy, V.S., "An Integral Locomotive Robot: a Complex Mechanical
System,: in "Referaty dokladov Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po optimal'nomu upravle-
niyu: lﬁbstracts of Reports Given at the All-Union Conference on Optimum Con-

trol/. Moscow, l97h.

2. Platonov, A.K., and Pryanichkov, V.Ye., "A Method for Describing the External
Environment of Robots," in "Trudy I Mezhdunarodnoy kgnferentsii molodykh uche-
nykh po problemam diskretnykh sistem v upravlenii" Lﬂorks of the First Inter-
national Conference of Young Scientists on Problems of Discrete Systems in Con-
trol Sciencgl, Minsk, 1977, pp ans-460.

3. Pryanichkov, V.Ye., "The Visualization Problem of a Robot Interacting With Its
External Environment in a Mathematical Model,“ in "Trudy Vsesoyuznogo simpoziuma

po robotam i manipulyatoram" [ﬁorks of the All-Union Symposium on Robots and
Manipulators], Tol'yatti. 1976, Vol 2.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHARACTERISTIC DIFFERENCES IN ARRIVAL ANGLES AND TIMES OF SIGNALS IN SEPARATE BEAMS
UNDER CONDITIONS OF A CLEARLY EXPRESSED ZONAL STRUCTURE OF A SONIC FIELD

[Article by V. P. Akulicheva pp 71-72]

liex£7 As is known, each point in the sonic field of a point source in a layered,
nonhomogeneous medium is characterized by rigorously defined angular and temporal
structures in the vertical plane.

In order to determine the regularities of these structures. it is necessary to ana-
lyze a large mass of their realizations as functions of such parameters as hydro-
logical conditions and source and receiver depths, as well as the distances between
them. Let us perform such an analysis for the purpose of evaluating the character-
istic differences in signal arrival angles and times for the most couunn hydrologi-
cal conditions that characterize a clearly expressed zonal structure of a sonic
field.

'1 ’1
N

w hillv'l’l“ gang)! }'-al' . 'llngi'l’; swan? t.’

Figure I. Figure 2.

The angular and temporal structures were calculated on a BESM-6 high-speed computer,
using a program developed by A.A. Vagin, assuming unvarying hydrology along the
trace and three-ball wave action (moderate seas). Calculations were made for the
near zone and the first convergence zone, with a distance spacing of 200 m for a
single receiver horizon and 3 source depths. In each angular structure the 3 most
intensive beams with a difference of no more than 10 dB were selected for analysis.
after which the 3 differences between the angles and times of their arrival were
determined. The histograms of the characteristic differences in beam arrival times
and angles that were constructed on the basis of these data are shown in Figures 1
and 2. Here the X-axes were used to plot, respectively, the differences in beam

76
FOR OFFICIAL IZSE ONLY
l-‘OR OPHCIAL l8! ONLY

arrival angles (An), in degrees, and the differences in the signal arrival times
along these beans (I), in milliseconds, while the frequency of these differences
was plotted along the Y-axes.

The results of the analysis showed (Figure 1) that in 25 percent of the cases under
discussion. the difference in the arrival angles of the most intensive beans at the
reception point is no more than 0.S°, while in 105 percent of the cases it does not
exceed 2°. Another interesting fact is that 70 percent of the time this difference
is less than 6°, while in 30 percent it lies in the 20-26° range.

The difference in arrival times of signals along these elementary beans (Figure 2)

is less than 1 ms in 10 percent of the cases and less than 5 ms in 50 percent. The
maxim value of 1 for the indicated conditions does not exceed 65 ms.

77
FOR OfﬂCIAL USE ONLY
mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPATIAL FILTRATION OF A SIGNAL IN A FIELD OF REVBRBERATION AND NOISE INTERFERENCE
DURING SCATTERED EMISSION AND RECEPTION

[Article by V. V. Krlzhanovskiy and S. V. Pasechnyy pp 73-78]

[Text] Let us analyze the noise stability of a linear. vertically arranged equi-
distant antenna during detection of a signal against a background of a multi-
component interference field. The antenna belongs to an emitter-receiver system
that can be dispersed vertically. The interference field includes the following
components: _thermal noise brought to the antenna's input AFLY, the isotropic noise
of the sea L 47, anisotropic dynamic noise from sources just below the surface

1f2:7 and reverberation noise. The latter is caused by single scattering on ir-
regularities in the body of water and on the surface and bottom. Models of the
correlation functions of reverberation interference have been based on_theoretical
models obtained through the use of the method of small perturbations £9.57. The
signal field and the reverberation interference are formed regularly by a homogene-
ous waveguide that corresponds to the model of a nearby location. The signal is
assumed to be a brief one. and the volumetric irregularities are approximated by
thin horizontal layers, so that the irradiated scattering volume can be considered
to be located in the Fraunhofer zone relative to the emitting-receiving system.
Since the structure of the reverberation interference's angular power spectrum de-
pends on time, the waveguide's geometry, the characteristics and location of the
scattering sources, the directivity of the radiation, the horizons of the arrange-
ment of the emitter and the receiver in the waveguid. and the reflective capability
of the boundaries. we performed a separate analysis of the effect of these factors
on the effectiveness of the spatial filtration of the reverberation interference.
In order to define our calculations concretely, it was assumed that the basic volu-
metric reverberation sources are: a sound-scattering layer of scatterers (ZRS) and
the layer of bubbles near the surface. Calculations were made for a lO-element re-
ceiving antenna balanced in the direction of the signal's arrival. The waveguide‘s
height in h . 6,000 m. The emitter and the receiver can be placed on one of three
horizons: z a 300, 3,500, 5,500 m. The center of the ZRS layer is on the horizon
2c = 500 m. The surface was assumed to be absolutely soft. The interference
weighting factors were chosen on the basis of a condition of normalization of their
total power to unity at moment t = 10 s. The irregularities in the boundaries were

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 0le

characterized by a Gaussian correlation function with a correlation distance 0 -

- l/ZI. The coefficient of reflection from the bottoa is characterized by a re-
fractive index n = l and a soil density v = 1.5. In all of the figures presented
below, the value of the wave distance All between antenna elements is plotted along
the x-axis, while the interference level is plotted (in decibels) along the Y-axis.
The curves describing the changes in the interference level use the following let-
ter designations: .. I components of the reverberation interference from the ZRS
layer; cn ' from the layer of bubbles; b I from the botton; s = from the surface.
The curves defining the change in the signal-to-noise ratio (in decibels) arc ls-
beled c/n.

 

Figure 1.

Figure I shows the results of the calculation of the power of the interference at
the antenna's outlet for a fixed moment of location tine t . 10 s and the 3 receiv-
er location horizons mentioned above, with the emitter horizon being 2" = 300 m.
The emitting antenna is a directional one. From the graphs it is obvious that as
the receiver gets deeper, there is a substantial deterioration in the filtration of
anisotropic interference (by about 18 dB) and the isotropic and reverberation in-
terference from the volumetric scatterers (by about Z-h dB) and an increase in the
surface reverberation level (by about 25 dB). As a result of this, the signal-to-
noiae ratio decreases. Bottom reverberation is basically received by the side
lobes. Calculations show that from the rereflccted reverberation components, the
basic contribution to the scattered field is made by the components reflected from
the surface, which yield an increase in interference power of about 6 dB. The role
of the other components is about 0.5-1 dB. An exception is the surface reverbera-
tion components, for which the components reflected from the bottom (because of the
significant increase in the level of the scattered signals in the vertical direc-
tions) are also substantial. In view of its 6-correlativity on the antenna ele-
ments, the thermal noise level does not depend on All and for the chosen interfer-
ence ratio has the same form as in Figure l in all cases. Analogous results occur
for emitter horizons 20 a 3,500 and 5,500 In.

In Figure 2 the broken curves illustrate the effect of increasing the bottom re- ~
Election factor (n - 0.8, u I 2.7) on filtration efficiency. In this case, because

79

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

of the increase in the contribution of the rereflected reverberation components
there is an increase in the level of reverberation from the volumetric sources of
1-2 dB and from the surface and bottom sources of 5-6 and 10-15 dB, respectively,

in addition to substantial reverberation penetrating through the side lobes (see
the appearance of spikes on the curves).-

 

Figure 3.

Figure 3 depicts the results of an investigation of the effect of constricting the
emitter's radiation pattern. The emitter has a sector radiation pattern with lobe

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

widths so = 120°, 60°, 30°, 15°. 6°. The aureole's level was 0.1 of the level of
the main lobe's power maximum. The volumetric scatterers were represented by [0
thin layers distributed equidistantly below the surface to a depth ol 1,000 m.

From Figure 3 it is obvious that for volumetric reverberation (curves 2-5c) as well
as surface reverberation (curve ls), narrowing of the radiation pattern from A0 8
120° to A0 I 15° has practically no effect on the reverberation level, while when
it is narrowed to 6° (curve 6c) volumetric reverberation is reduced by 3 dB and
surface reverberation (curve 23) by 8 dB. There is a substantial reduction in the
level of bottom reverberation (by about 10 db) when the emitter's pattern is nar-
rowed from 60 = 120° to A0 I 60° (curves lb. 2b). Curve 1c characterizes filtra-
tion of the interference from the thin layer with its center at a depth of 500 m
and a scattering power equivalent to that of the 10 thin, distributed plates dis-
cussed above for A0 I 120°. From a comparison of curves 1c and 2c it is obvious
that the difference in spatial filtration for these models is not substantial for

t I 10 s, which makes it possible to allow groaser approximations of the areas con-
taining the volumetric irregularities. These same figures show the results of cal-
culations taking into consideration the presence of the expressed scattering indic-
atrices of the reverberation sources. For the volumetric irregularities (curve 7c).
when their correlation distance is increased from o = 0 to p I 3A/2I, the interfer-
ence level drops substantially (by about 30 dB). For bottom (curve 3b) and surface
(curve 38) reverberation there is also a reduction in the level of this interfer-
ence (by about 10-15 dB) when the correlation distance is tripled (o I 31/2n).

 

Figure 4.

Figure 4 illustrates the change in the efficiency of spatial interference filtra-
tion as time passes. Curves [-4 correspond to the reception time moments t I 2, a,
3 and l6 s. From the figure it is obvious that as time passes the effectiveness of
the spatial filtration of reverberation interference deteriorates. He should also
note the nonmonotonic change in the level of the reverberation components with time
that is caused by the increase in the number of elements in these components as
time passes, which is manifested particularly strongly for the surface reverbera-
tion components (drops in the level of up to 30 dB are possible). As far as an-
isotropic noise is concerned. its filtration improves with time. Let us mention

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.

here that as the waveguide's parameter II decreases, there is an analogous tendency
for a change in the nature of the interference filtration with time. but beginning
sooner.

Finally, Figure 5 depicts the results of a comparison of the combined surface layer
system with the scattered system during the reception of the return signal from a
fixed point in space. The enitter's radiation pattern had an aperture AG a 15°.
Curves l, 2 and 3 reflect the change in the reception conditions when the emitter
is submerged to the 3 previously indicated horizons and the reception horizon is
fixed at an I 300 m. From the graphs it is obvious that the system with the deeply
submerged emitter gives up almost nothing to a combined emission-reception system
near the surface as far as the signal-to-noise ratio criterion is concerned.

From the results that were obtained the following conclusions can be drawn:

when the receiver is sunk deeper there is a substantial deterioration in the fil-
tration of anisotropic interference from surface sources;

for reverberation interference, the components that have been reflected from the

surface are substantial;
the surface reverberation level is essentially nonmonotonic with respect to time

and increases as the receiver goes deeper;
a change in the bottom parameters within the limits allowable for a model of the

"liquid soil" type results in tangible changes in the reverberation field's level
and structure;

narrowing of the emitter's radiation pattern within a broad range of angles has
little effect on the level and structure of reverberation;

the presence of scattering indicatrices at the reverberation interference sources

leads to a substantial reduction in the level of this interference;

as time passes the efficiency of the spatial filtration of reverberation interfer-
ence drops, while for anisotropic interference it improves;

a system with a deeply submerged emitter is insignificantly worse than a combined
system near the surface when receiving a return signal from the same point in

space.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

\.
FOIIOFFKJAI.USEIMVLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Fal'kovich, S.Ye., "Otsenka parametrov signala" liraluating Signal Parameters],
Moscow. Izdatel'ctvo ”Sovetskoye radio“. 1970.

"Akuatika okeana" lﬁcean Acousti.4/, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1975.

. Bass, r.c., and Puke, U.M., "Rasaeyaniye voln na atatiaticheaki nerovnoy po-

verkhnosti" Ziave Scattering on a Statiatically Irregular Surface], Moscow, Iz-
datel'stvo "Hanks". 1972.

. Krizhanovskiy, V.V.. and Pasechnyy, s.v., "Spatiotenporal Correlation of a Re-

verberation Interference Field," in_"Trudy Vos'noy Vseaoyuznoy shkoly-seminara
po statisticheskoy gidroakustike" lyorks of the Eighth All-Union School-Seminar
on Statistical Hydroscousticg], Novosibirsk, 1977, pp 49-59.

83

Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DETECTING NOISE SIGNALS IN A LAYERED, HETEROGENBOUS MEDIUM WITH DISPERS- RECEIVERS

[Article by V. c. Berkuta and V. S. Pasechnyy pp 79-82]

ifext-l' Let us discuss the problem of detecting noise signals with a group of re-
..

ceivers dispersed in space so that the interference between the processing areas “k

and an (5k n an = 0) is not correlated. We will assume that a Fraunhofer approxi-

nation is realized in each processing area 3k (I. - l.n) and that the signal's wave
front has an arbitrary shape between different areas. It can be shown that the al-
gorithm for the optimum detection of steady-state Gaussian signals against a back-
ground of steady-state Gaussian interference, with full correlation of the signals
between processing areas, has the form D_7

u n -‘ ->
“0 ' _{°|K(w) 2 sk("’)e Jmkﬁ!U(u;x)Lk(w;;)d;I2dw, (l)
k'l k

where “((056 is the solution of the integral equation

{0(w’2’;1)1‘k(w’;l)d;l ' e—juakx,
2k
g (m)
|x((..)|2 - ’ <2)

2mm + 778‘”) 2 82(01):! (um,
8“ 8N (I, kal k k

dk(w) = {Lk(w;;)ejw3kxd;,

0(w;;,;1) - spatial correlation function of the interference at frequency u; 330»).
gum) I spectral densities of the signal's and interference's power, respectively;

3k = I5/(Iiiklc); ;k - vector determining the location of the k-th area relative to

the source; 1k - Iiikllc; c = average speed of signal propagation;

810

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

- .V I
12 lo 0.13...“ 2 A.
“ le r-l r’

r‘lA' = anomalies of signal propagation in a layered, heterogeneous medium in the

s:( u) '

 

beam approximation; 8 = kilometric attenuation of the signal; In - umber of beans
reaching the k-th reception area.

 

Figure 1. Block diagram of optimum receiver (1): 0 - filter
with transmission factor Lk(w;xl); L2“ .- lag line for time t.;
0(1) = filter with transmission factor Sk(m); 9 - filter with
transmission factor k0»); PU - threshold unit. '

Key: 1. L2 2. PD 3. Yes 4. No
[subscripts illegible]

Figure l is the block diagram of a receiver that realizes algorithm (1). In ac-
cordance with this diagram, in each area at there is optimum spatial processing of
a plane wave arriving from direction 3k. The amplitude-phase distribution of

l«(u;;) in the k-th area is chosen with due consideration for the interference's
spatial correlation function and the direction from which the signals arrive. The
output voltages of the spatial channels are then delayed, filtered (by the filters
with transmission factors SIG») and, after out-nation, sent into the optimum tem-
poral processing channel , which is realized according to a "filter-square law
detector-integrator" arrangement.

Let us examine the case where the signals are not correlated between the processing
areas. It can be shown that the Optimum processing algorithm takes on the follow-
ing form:

n a .p
uo- x IIIS‘(w)Sk(w) IU(u;;)Lk(w;;)dx| a... (3)
Pl -- 35k
where
lxk(w)|2 ' 88(w)
2 33“”) 2
gnu-”[1 * Wk(w)dk(m)l

Figure 2 is the block diagram of a receiver that realizes algorithm (3). In each
area of space 3k there is optimum spatial processing of a plane wave arriving from

direction 3“. There then follows filtration (by the filters with the transmission

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0_. - filter

, - filter with transmis-
Qk(u); PU I threshold ' .
Key: 1. PU

_ 2. Yes 3. No

isubscripts illegiblg7
factor Qk(w) - Kk(u)sk(w), detection and integration of the output effects of the
spatial processing channels, after which the temporal processing channels output
voltages are stored.

hat given for a fixed proba-
false alarm. Assigning the
dependence D = D(x,y,z) on the spatial co-
ordinates of a noise signal's source, 30
detection zones were calculated for the
system, each of which consists of 2 spa-

tially dispersed receivers. The 30 calcu-
lations were made

 

geneous medium and a layered, heterogeneo

shown in Figure 3. In the calculations the
the x- and y-axes) r '

mogeneous medium.
probability of the

' o be 0.9, while the proba-
bility of'a false alarm was F . 10“.

Receiver (3) does somewhat worse than rec '

signals are being received
if ° '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

" 'z t)

Figure 4. Figure 5.
Key: 1. Receiver (1). profile 1 Key: 1. Receiver (1), profile 2

Calculations of the 30 noise signal sources in a layered, heterogeneous medium
showed that the noise stability of receivers (l) and (3) is practically identical.
Because of its simpler technical realization, this makes receiver (3) preferable.

The 30 volumes of a noise signal picked up by a dispersed system in a layered, het-
erogeneous medium exceed those picked up by a single receiver in a homogeneous me-
dium by an average factor of 16, which is basically explained by focusing of the
sound. An analysis of the 30 for the sound propagation conditions described by the
C-profiles in Figure 3 showed that although the 30 volumes have individual peculi-
arities, "continuous exposure" is maintained for all the cases under discussion for
all practical purposes (Figures 4, 5).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Berkuta, v.c., Krasnyy, L.G., and Pasechnyy, S.V., "Noise-Signal Detection by
Spatially Dispersed Receivers," accepted for publication ’n RADIOTEKHNIKA I
ELEKTRON IKA .

2. Berkuta, v.c.. and Pasechnyy, S.V., "Signal Processing by a Scattered Group of
Receivers."_in "Trudy 1X Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminar po statisticheskoy gidro-
akustike" [Works of the Ninth All-Union School-Seminar on Statistical Hydro-
acousticg7: Novosibirsk, 1978.

87

FOR OIIHCJAI.USElMHLY
FOR OFIHCIAI.USEINNLY

CONTROLLING THE POSITIONS OF RADIATION PATTERN ZEROES IN ANTENNA ARRAYS WITH
DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING

ggrgiiléenby L. N. Danilevskiy, Yu. A. Domanov, 0. V. Korobko and B. I. Tauroginskiy

[Text/ Let us solve the problem of controlling the positions of radiation pattern
(DN)- zeroes while simultaneously providing a low_ side lobe level. He will make use
of the amplitude weighting methods proposed in / 1/. In order to control DN zeroes
let us introduce additional limitations; namely, it is required that the amplitu-
dinal DN be equal to zero at given points. In connection with this, by changing
the sector value 6, it is also possible to change the level of the side lobes. For
a linear antenna array with N elements, to problem comes down to minimizing the

functional

I ao+6
Q(ai) . 6 P(o)sin ado - o‘L P(n)sin odo; (1)
0
-with the additional limitations P(nm) a 0: u = 1.....H;
N
2 Ii' 1, (2)
i=1

where P(o) = DN of an N-ele-ent antenna array that, with respect to power, has the
form:

N N
P(o) . 2 t ai a nexp [j--(xi - xn)cos a - (Ti - Tn)]. (3)
i-l n-l
“ 2
P1(o ) I t a. exp (j-cos on - 1.), I - l....,M, (b)
n i-l 1

xi = coordinates of the array's i-th elenent; ‘i 3 weighting factors; M 8 number of
controlled DN zeroes; ‘i - discrete phase shift in the elements of the array, which
equals:
kl-l
1. t A! 2 sign (311.cos o - 360). (5)
1 2 A 1 0
B”'(kl'l)

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where
k . ﬁne 21 (xN - xl)cos go

no = phase discreteness value.
Substituting (3) and (4) into (I), we obtain

N N sin [(2:/A)(xi - xn)]cos (Ti ‘ 1 )

2
Q“i" tai’ z “ain—ﬁﬁ—R—T—L-

i-l i=1 n-l 2! X xi - x

N
azsin sin 5 —
2i “o

n i-l
N N sin [(2ﬁ/l)(x. - x )cos (a + 6) - (t. - T )1 -
z z aian{————————————7——R————7‘ " ° 2"; x Ex (6)
i-l n=l i n

- sin [(ZI/lXxi - xn)cos (6 - co) - (1’i - 1a)]

 

].

In order to minimize the functional Q(ai)
with additional limitations (2), we use
the method of indeterminate Lagrange nul-
tipliers. As a result, we reach a system
of equations that are linear with respect
to a1:

.33.- 2R.-n°"1_“'wl
3
3ai asi m ai
N
where R - E a. - l; n, n = Lagrange co-
i=1" “'
Figure l. efficients. Figure 1 depicts DN's with
two controlled zero positions that corres-
pond to the weighting factor values that were computed during the solution of sys-
tem of equations (7) for different phase discreteness values.

- 0, (7)

 

When amplitude quantization is taken into consideration, expressions (l)-(2) will
be rewritten in the form

2 N N ° h (i)h (n) I ao+6
Q(ai) ' r‘a“: x x a.an i —E(§;:¥77— ‘ {I ogm+l(0)sin «do - I 0?".l(u) sin ado,
2(21')"i=l n-l ‘ m-O ‘ o "‘ no-5 1“ (a)
with the additional limitations
N N a L—l 211
Z a. . l; P (a ) - X ( X sign (exp[-—x (cos a - cos a )1 - Eel), (9)
ill 1 l m i-12 1--(L-l) A l m 0

where q = value of the quantization step. while the values of parameters Dij(“).
hm(i) and 2L are given i“.£?_/' Substituting (8) and (9) into (7), we obtain a
systel of equations that are linear with respect to ‘i' in which the unknown coef-
ficients depend on the quantization parameters. The problem has been solved for a

lZ-olement, linear, equidistant antenna array,githa different number of

89

IN)! OWWHCIAI.USI2(HULY
quantization equations, for the case of
control of a single DN zero. Several DN's
are represented in Figure 2. It is obvi-
ous that for a small number of quantiza-
tion equations, the exact setting of a DN
zero in a given direction is not accomp-
lished. The exact establishment of a D“
zero turns out to be possible for L > 32.

Thus, the proposed anplitudinal weighting
technique makes it possible to control the
positions of zeroes in the DN's of antenna
arrays with digital signal processing. In
connection with this, there is precise es-
tablishment of the establishment of D“ ze-
roes in a given direction for any phase
discreteness values, although the level of
the DN's side lobes increases substantial-
ly as A0 does. Anplitudinal quantization
of the input signals has a more substan-
tial effect on the positions of DR zeroes.
The precise establishment of a DN's zero

in a given direction is possible for L >
> 32.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCENTRATION FACTOR OF A HORIZONTAL, LINEAR ANTENNA DURING MULTIBEAM PROPAGATION
OF A NOISE SIGNAL IN THE SEA

[Article by V. I. Bardyshev and V. A. Yeliseyevnin pp 86-88]

£Tcx£7 It is a well-known fact that the phenomenon of multibeamness leads to a de-
crease in the spatial correlation of a noise signal prOpagating in the sea when
there is longitudinal (in the direction toward the source) dispersion of the hydro-
phones that pick it up. When working with a horizontal antenna, this results in
the expansion of its radiation pattern and the reduction of the concentration fac-
tor. Below we present the results of calculations of the effect of the propagation
conditions, which are described in 11,3], on the value of the concentration factor
of a horizontal, linear antenna.

A noise signal at audio frequencies, with a relative band width of about 12 percent,
was propagated in the see, under conditions of strongly developed multibeamness, at
a distance ofup to 29 km. The signal emission and reception points were located
close to the underwater sound channel's axis. Signal fluctuation was insignificant.
the signal-to-noise ratio was high, and the basic effect on the correlation of the
received signal was exerted by its multibeam nature. The low coefficient of beau
reflection from the muddy bottom and the presence of a well-developed thermocline
resulted in severe attenuation of the bottom and surface reflections and the forma-
tion of a sonic field that was basically composed of refracted "water" beams con-
centrated along the underwater sound channel's axis. Transverse (relative to the
direction to the emitter) dispersal of the hydrophones in the horizontal plane had
no effect on the cross-correlation of the received signals. For longitudinal dis-
persal AL (along the direction to the emitter) of the hydrophones, the value of the
maximum of the spatiotemporal cross-correlation factor Rm was reduced because of
the distribution of the signal‘s energy relative to several correlation maximums
corresponding to cross-correlation of signals arriving along different beams with
differing propagation times. At distances of 20-29 km, RIn (AL) was described quite
well by the empirical formula

g 0.3 + 0.7 exp -o.06(AL/A - 8) , ALIA > 8,
sum.) {1 ’ AL“ s 8’ (l)

where l = the wavelength corresponding to the noise signal's central frequency.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPTICAL USE ONLY

The subject of discussion was a horizontal, linear, discrete, equidistant antenna
consisting of N point, nondirectional hydrophones placed at intervals d I X/2,
where A I length of the audio wave. The antenna's radiation pattern was rotated in
the horizontal plane, through angle 8, by a compensator that realized the time lag
in the channel of each i-th hydrophone according to the law If = (i - l)(d/c)sin B,
where C I the speed of sound. with several simplifying assumptions, the signal's
correlation function at the antenna's output can be written in the form

N N *
3(1) = 2 2 n (AL..)<u(t - t )u (t - t. + 1)>, (2)
i=1 j=l " ‘3 1 3

where the angular brackets designate temporal averaging; the asterisk a conplexly
conjugated expression; u(t - 11) = signal at the output of the i-th hydrophone,

shifted by time ti I 12- 3' T? I (i - l)(d/c)sin a I time lag of the front of the

11,
wave in the channel of the i-th hydrophone, which is rotated toward the antenna at
angle 0; t = current time; T I lag time.

Assuming the emitted noise signal's spectrum to be constant in the frequency band
(ul,w2) and equal to zero outside this band, by making the appropriate transforma-

tions it is possible to write the following expression for the antenna's radiation
pattern with respect to power:

1 N-l

001,3) I -—2[N + 2 2

N i'l

where V I Zli(d/1)(sin a - sin 8), P a Am/ug, ms - (w? - u1)/2, Aw - ”2 - ”1‘
ine

The antenna's concentration factor k was de in terms of its radiation pattern
by the well-known formula

sin PV
PV

 

(N - i)R (AL..)cos v I, (3)
m l]

I/z _1
k - 2:! 0(a,8)cos ado] . (a)
-1/2

During reception of a noise signal, along with the main lobe the antenna's radia-

tion pattern has an "aureole" that reduces the antenna's concentration factor.
Discorrelation of the audio signal leads to an additional reduction in the concen-
tration factor.

The figure depicts the results of calcula-
tions of the dependence of k/n on the com-
pensation angle 8 during reception of a
noise signal (9 I 0.12) that is dis-
correlated with respect to space according
to expression (1), .Jr antennas with dif-
ferent numbers of elements (curves 1, 2, 3
and 6 correspond to N I 20, 60, 100 and
120, respectively). For cooparison, curve
5 shows the dependence of k/n on 8 for N I
= 100 and a tonal signal, while curve 6
does the same for a noise signal with p I
0.12 that is completely correlated throughout the antenna's entire aperture. It

can be seen that the reduction in the signal's spatial correlation caused by the

 

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

multibcsm nature of the pr0psgstion leads to a 20-30 percent reduction in the con-
centration factor for compensation angles of 50°-90° for an antenna with In aper-
ture of 50A.

BIBLIWRAPHY

1. Bardyshev, V.1., Vssil'yev, N.A., and Gershusn, 5.6., "Investigation of the Co-
herency of e Continuous Audio Signal in the Sea." AKUSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 3,

1970.
2. Bardyshev, V. I. , and Gershman, S. c. ,"On the Horizontal Correlation of a Noise
Signal, ' in "Tezisydokladovvos‘ may Vsesoyuznoy Akustisheckoy konferentsii"

[Summaries of Reports Given at the Eighth All-Union Acoustics Conference].
Moscow, 1913.

93

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(MﬂLY
um (“T-11"“ I"! "NI \

PASSIVE AND ACTIVE INVERSE SYNTHESIS OF THE APERTURE IN DISPERSED SYSTEMS

[Article by V. V. Karavayev and V. V. Sazonov PP 88-90]

lfex£7 The research on active synthesis of an aperture that is available in the
literature is limited to the case where the locations of the receiver and the
transmitter coincide. For passive systems, the problem was solved in the first ap-
proximation according to the ratio of the system's base (the distance between the _
positions) to the distance involved. Both of these problems were discussed in LlLl.
The second-order effects relative to the indicated ratio were taken into considera-

tion only in [727; where only several special cases of the problem's geometry were
examined.

In applied problems, on the other hand, a hydroacoustically observable moving ob-
ject can turn out to be at distances comparable with the base of a dispersed system
(aetive or passive). This report is devoted to an analysis of this phenomenon,
which is a case that has not previously been discussed in the literature. We will
show that in the active case, two-position synthesis has a number of fundamental
special features in comparison with the traditional one-position variety.

The maximum resolution of systems is described by an ambiguity function. As was
shown in [L7, it is given by the eXpression

10!) = $1; exp {mum - .(cjnmﬁ, (1)

where N - normalizing multiplier, selected so that 1(0) . 1; integration is carried

out with respect to observation time; ¢(c,Z) - phase of the received oscillation,
which depends on the moment of observation t (because of the movement of the source
or base) and the displacement of this source relative to some selected point 0. In

active systems, 9(t,3) must be understood as the phase of the reflected signal in
the receiver (we are not discussing effects related to modulation of the transmit-
ter, since they do not effect the synthesis process). In a passive system, however,

->
¢(t,A) is the phase difference between the first and second receivers on which the
noise emissions of a random, delta-correlated source act.

9h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

lf we designate as E1 the radius vector of the indicated zero point that leads from

the transmitter (the first receiving position of a passive system), as 32 the radi-
us vector of that sane point that leads from the receiver (the second receiving

point in a passive system), as t(t) the vector from point 0 that describes the
source's motion, and as h the unit vector perpendicular to the plaae formed by vec-

tors KI and i2, in the Fresnel approximation for the source's movement relative to
point 0 we find

¢(c,o) - m3) - 3mm, (2)
where H I an operator that in dyad notation has the form
" 1 + + l -> -s l l

H ﬁlle‘hl 1 E|v2><v2| * ('3'; : gnixﬁl. (3)

it being the case that .51 I R—IIIHII, ‘52 " 'RLZIﬁZJ' The "+" sign applies to active
synthesis, the "-" sign to passive.

For a short synthesis time, the source's motion relative to the receiving-
transmitting system (or this system's motion relative to the source) can be regard-.
ed as rectilinear and uniform. This simplifies the formulas substantially. and for

the ambiguity function we find
..2 u- «)2
1(K) sin LAEEp|(LAEEp) ,
where p I 3H1; 3 I unit vector in the direction of resolution I; A I the modulus of

vector Z; I I unit vector in the direction of the source's motion; L I the path
covered by the source during the observation time (the length of the synthesized

aperture).
Prom formula (3) it follows that if the direction of synthesis is perpendicular to
31 and i2, resolution is achieved in the same direction. In connection with this,

. l l
the value of p 18 (R1 1 §;)'

In other cases this is not so and, generally speaking, resolution is achieved in a
direction different from that of the source's motion. This effect is described by

the nondiagonal part of operator M, which is

l + + l + +
ﬂ ‘3 il—llvl><vl| 1 §|v2><v2|.

The natural system of coordinates for the problem under discussion is elliptical.

Let vector 3 be directed along the tangent to the ellipse at point 0. In connec-
tion with this, it can be written in the form

I - (31 + 32mm + cos 9), cos 0 - (31:2).

95

Itﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1AI.USE(N'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

+ 9
v v
In connection with this, MI: I -;'-R—: 1 “—2- . The length of this vector determines the
resolution value; it equals
1 l l - 2 cos 0
2/32 * 32 ‘ “1“2'
1 2

If the velocity vector is directed along the normal to the ellipse (along the nor-

mal to the conjugated hyperbole), szolution is achieved along the vector
+ +

v v
if? = (R—1 ; R—z'),
2 2
the length of which is (—1- + i ; LEM)U2/2.
2 2 R R
R1 R2 I. 2

The elliptical system of coordinates is not the main one for operator II, so its ax-
is does not coincide with the directions of maximum resolution. It is easy to show

that the maximum of the bilinear form 0 = 3H1 is achieved if both I: and '3 are la-
'\a
tent vectors of operator )1. Uncomplicated computations demonstrate that with vec-

tors iil and K , this operator's latent vectors form angles :11 and (:2, the cosines
of which are found in the relationship

 

 

cos (:1 (l1 Y)r’(l 1 Y)2 + 1. sin2 0
cos o2 I - Zycos G ’

(Y I Rl/sz while 0 is the angle between i1 and i2). In the formla, the signs "t"
in front of the radical apply to the first and second latent vectors, while the
signs in the expression "1 + " apply to the active (the first) and passive (the
second) synthesis modes. The value of the resolution that is achieved is deter-

a.
mined by the eigenvalues of operator H. They are different for the two latent vec-
tors and equal

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Kgravayev, V.V., and Sazonov, V.V., "Osnovy tcorii sintezirovannykh antenn"
[Principles of the Theory of Synthesized Antennas], Moscow. Isdatel'stvo

"Sovetskoye rad io" , 197a .

2. Hel'nik, Yu.A., IZVESTIYA W209, RADIOFIZIKA, No 9, l972, pp 1376-1379.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOB OFF“ 1“. "SF. ONLY

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RESULTS OF OPTIMAL AND NONOPTIHAI. PROCESSING OF BROAD-BAND
SIGNALS RECEIVED BY A SCANRIM ANTENNA

[Article by B. H. Salin pp 90—92]

ifcx£7 This work is a continuation of 1L], in which we discussed several methods
for processing broad-band noise signals received by an angularly scanning linear
antenna operating in the passive mode. We discussed an antenna with a radiation
pattern No.0) that depends on the received signal's frequency w. Uith several as-
sumptions about the statistical properties of the signal, noise and antenna's scan-
ning rate v, the optima: (according to the criterion of a maximum signal-to-noisc
ratio) algorithm is one that carries out cross-correlation processing inf-the slid-
ing spectrum of the output of an antenna with a function in the form [LA

K(w,t,o) - If(m;vt - ¢)|2'Ss(u)/S:(w.t) (plan 1),

where 88 and Sn are the spectral densities of the signal's and noise's power, re-
spectively. In Ll_7 it was also shown that for the case of spatially istropic
noise, optimal processing can be successfully replaced, with a small decline in the
signal—to-noise ratio, with standard signal processing with plan 2, which is a fil-
‘er, a square-law detector and_an integrator, it being the case that the loss is
determined by the expression _/_ L7

6/Q = ulmﬁ‘V‘dwdn'm. (1)

where Q and Q are the signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the processing unit
realizing plans 2 and 1, respectively, and

IFIZ . |r(u.¢) 2.Ss(w)/Sn(u),
1’: ' greatest eigenvalue of the integral operator with the series

9 7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

'rhe purpose of the present article is to evaluate the minimum values of (l) for
various combinations of lrlz, S and Sn and to determine the areas of utility of
the optimum and quasioptimum (plan 2) processing algorithms.

In order to find the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of [FIZ in analytical form, two
radiation pattern types were used:

N 2

1. m2 - z A.e"i°-x.(u); (2)
12-1 1 1
12 " '
11. | | - iflAi-xiuhim). (3)

where

xx...) - . - °

1 1, A»; < w < Aw(i + 1); xi(¢) 1. |¢| - 1(1 o oi).
The dependgnce of the radiation pattern' s width on the frequency was selected in

the form ai l + a(i - l), with the actual case corresponding to the value a - 1.
As calculations have shown, the minimum values of Hi are achieved for the following
forms of noise and signal sp--tra: Ag - ai JE/Au/; (the first case) and

Ai ' (1 + ui)/Aw. Table 1 shows the values of loss QIQ that are obtained when us-

ing the given values of ?(w,¢), as a function of parameter u and the number of
splitting elements N.

Table 1.
Form of |?|2 1 I 11 II 11
o N 10 30 3 10 so
2/“ - 1 0.97 0.98
9/N - 1 0.93 0.94 0.82 0.85 0.86
a9lN - 1 0.89 0.91 0.77 0.82 0.80

By summing up the data in the table, it is possible to draw the conclusion that for
the case of steady-state noise at the antenna's output that does not depend on the
direction of the antenna's central beam, processing with the filter-square law
detector-integrator setup is not more than 2-3 dB less than optimal when the param-
eters of the filter and the integrating element are chosen correctly.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Antonets, H.A., and Salin, B.H., "0n the Question of Selecting the Optimum Pa-
rameters of the Integrating Unit when Processing Broad-Band Signals Received by
a Scanning Antenna." TRUDY 86-9. Novosibirsk. 1977.

98

FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ON ADAPTIVE OPTIMIZATION OF THE DETECTION AMORITHH IN A SPATIOTEMPORAL INFORMATION
PROCESSIM SYSTEM

[Article by V. G. Cmev and Ye. V. Onerenkova pp 92-94]

[text] The problem of adaptive optimization of spatiotempgral processing systems
is an area of research about which much has been written 1_L7, although--in our
opinion--two propositions in the basic works 12,27 are in need of refinement and
development.

1. It is important to have a solution for the problem of synthesis without an indi-
cated limitation, so that the transfer function of a multidimensional continuous
filter will then be that theoretical standard 1717 that is necessary for the prac-
tical selection of the indicated parameters of the corresponding multidimensional
discrete filter that is actually realized by the digital method. In order to solve
this problem, let us examine an antenna array with H elements, at the input of
which is given a multidimensional random process X(t) I S(t) + N(t) + P(t), the
components of which (the signal, isotropic noise and local interference, respect-
ively) are random processes with given spectral density matrices Gs(ju). GN(ju) and
Gp(ju). All of them are Hermitian matrices, it being the case that

csm) - gs(u)is(jw)l-:(ju); Gp(jw) = gp(w)IoP(jw)I-:(jw), (1)

where g (u) - power spectrum of the signal, while the m-th element of vector Ls(jw)
is exp -jmtm); tn . time lag between the m-th element of the array and the corres-
ponding point on the signal wave's plane front; for local interference the varia-
bles gp(u), Lp(jw), exp (-jwon) and 0In have analogous meanings. The signs "-" and
"T" mean conjugation and transposition.

The information processing system under discussion (Figure l) is a multidimensional
spatiotemporal filter. The filters' transfer functions Hn(ju)(m - l,...,H) must
be defined so as to maximize the ratio of the increase in the mathematical expecta-
tion of the variable z at the low-frequency filter's output (caused by the signal)
to the effective value of the fluctuations in this same variable that appear when
it is acted upon by all three processes. This ratio can then be representEd i" the

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR*0FF1C1AL USEGDNLY

 

Figure 1.
Key: 1. Square-lav generator
2. Low-frequency filter

form

q - (“T—")4” fiT(ju)Gs( jw)H( 5mm r [ﬁ'ﬁ jm)0x( 5mm ju)}2dm]-1/2 (2)

where 6x I G + G“ + GP: H = vector with the component Rn. Relationship (2) is a
functional 0 the vector function H(ju). Having expressed the quadratic forms in

(2) in terms of spurs of matrices, it is not difficult to obtain the solution to
the corresponding variational problem, as a result of which we find the optimum
transfer function of a continuous, multidimensional filter:

H(jm) ' lgszu5G-;(ju)is(jm). (3)

2. When realizing filters Hm(jm) based on multibranch delay lines by the discrete
method LZ_7, their transfer functions take on the form

L .
a*<j...) - 2 h (me'JW, (1.)
III 1'0 3

where the number of time delays L corresponds to the order of the discrete, non-
recursive filter, while the unit lag A is the quantification interval. For fixed
parameters L and A. the weighting factors hm(tA) are determined on the basis of the
minimum of the integral quadratic error of the approximation of the optimum func-
tion nm(jh) with the help of amt.) (5). He then find that

A All
h (2A) - - IA (tacos to (u) + wblldw, (5)
m I 0 m m

where A-(w) = mod (jm); 0m ' arg Hr(jm). Assuming that the spectra of the input
effects are limited y frequency w6,‘the quantification interval is A < I/w6 and

relationship (2) for the case of a discrete, multidimensional filter vauires the
form

n/A_ “IA _ -
q* - (1)1” 1 “ﬂu-um (jw)H*(ju)dw{ r [aﬂqm (ju)H*(ju)]2dm} "2' (a)
4' -r/A S -n/A X

An approximate realization of vector function H(ju) with the help of “*(ju) results
in Q < Q, it being the case that the larger L and the smaller A are, the smaller
the losses. Starting from the permissible losses, it is possible to make a sub-

stantiated selection of the indicated parameters by analyzing the entire set of
interference-signal situations.

100

FOR‘OFIlCJAL.USEIDNLN
FYHICIHNCJAI.IEHE(NVLY

3. Let us now modify the adaptive optimization procedure proposed in _/_ if] for
(Vinerovskaya) filtration, as applicable to the detection problem. In this work,
the variance of the signal filtration error at the output of the summator in the
system in Figure l is minimized; that is. error t(t) I y(t) - s(t). Let us design-
note the optimum transfer vector function in this case as H(jw). It is not diffi-
cult to show that the spectrum of error c(t)'s power is

gem) = ﬁT(ju)cx(5u)u(ju) - 235mm [WT(ju)Ls(jm)l + ssh»). (7)

O
From this it is obvious that error variance 0: . 3%; I gr(w)dw is a functional of
0-.

the quadratic type of vector function H(ju). Having solved the corresponding vari-
ational problem, we find the multidimensional filter’s optimum transfer function

H(jw) - gs(w)c;1(jm)is(ju). (a)

From a comparison of expressions (3) and (9) LEiST it is obvious that

ﬂ(jm) I Jgs(m)u(ju), (9)

that is, the indicated vector functions coincide with each other with an accuracy
up to that of the scalar multiplier. As a result there appears the practical pos-
sibility of a spatiotemporal processing system that maximizes relationship (2) by
using as the adaptive procedure an algorithm that minimizes variance as. This fact
is extremely important, since 0% is a quadratic functional, the minimization of
which is accomplished on the basis of a convenient iterative procedure 1517' Di-
rect adaptive maximization of criterion (2) is difficult because of its nonlinear-
ity (type of relationship).

a. Hhat has been done above enables us to say that a spatiotemporal processing sys-
tem that solves the problem of detection under conditions of local interference has
a form similar to that of the system in Figure l, where the multidimensional fil-
ter's transfer function is determined by equality (9), while after the summator

there is a filter with the transfer function (lgs(w))-1. Discrete realization of
the transfer function W(jm) results in expressions similar to (5):

L .
* -
w (ju) - z w (me 1““, (10)
m m
1'0
it being the case that the adaptive procedure given in 1:17 can be used to deter-

mine factors w (IA). Parameters L and A must be selected beforehand on the basis
of the permissible losses of noise stability 0* (7) in relation to Q (2).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Belonozhko, G.N., and Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Review of Adaptation Methods in Prob-
lems of Statistical Hydroacoustics," in “Trudy VI shkoiy-seminara po statisti-

cheskoy gidroakustike" Ziorks of the Sixth School-Seminar on Statistical Hydro-
acousticgl. Novosibirsk, 1975.

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Undrou,_B., et a1., "Ada tivnyye antennyye sisteuy" lzaeptive Antenna System57,
TIIER lexpnnsion unknown , No 12, 1967.

3. Critfits, L., “A Simple Adaptive Algorithm for Processing Antenna Array signal.
in Real Time." TIIER, No 10. 1969.

b. Ggpev, V.G., "Metody issledovaniya tochnosti tsifrovykh avtonaticheokikh sisten"
lyethods for Investigating the Accuracy of Digital Automatic SysteuiT, Izdatel'-
stvo "Nauka", 1973.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ON THE STRUCTURE OF AN ADAPTIVE GONIOHETER

[Article by Yu. K. Vyboldin and L. A. Beshetov pp 95-96]

ﬁfex£7 Let us synthesize a mltidimensional discriminating device. At the anten-
na'a input let there be an additive mixture of signal and Gaussian steady-state
noise fields with a zero average and a known covariance matrix. By analyzing the
frequency area, with accuracy up to that of a constant factor we can write the
logarithm of the functional of the probability relationship as

Q[I(w),31 = g5 r[i(u) - ﬁ(w,3)1*n“(e)tx(u) - w<w.3)rdw. (1)

where the asterisk designates a Hermitian-conjugated matrix; ﬂu), Wu) . Fourier
transform of the realization and the form of the input signal, respectively;

ilk-10¢) I inverse matrix of the noise's spectral matrix. If the model of signal
§(m.:) can be represented as the result of matrix transformation §(m,3) =

- U(w.;)§(m). the evaluation of the least square of the vector Eh») of the emitted
signal‘s shape that minimizes the functional Q has the form _/_L/

m) - Flmmm, (2)

in...) - ﬁ*(...)i$"(u)ii(u). 6(a) - 6*(u)ﬁ“(u)it<u) and, consequently. the estimate of
the signal at the antenna is

in.) - Eu») - 6mm). (3)

For the case of measurement of the angular coordinates of many sources of signals
of unknovn shape, the expression for the optimum statistics can be written 1&7 as
O
9 -> 'N' +.
Hx(w),ol - zl'fc («or ‘(w)E(u)aw. (a)
.0

In order to construct a discriminating goniometric system, let us assume that the
deviation of the reference value of parameter 30 from the true value 3* is not

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHI(Nﬂﬂ(JAl.USE1ONLN

great. If we assume that the fluctuational part of functional 1 is considerably
less than the mathematical expectation of this functional, we can represent A as a
Taylor series in degrees of An. In connection with this,

3 - '50 + Flﬁ, (5)
where a = column vector of the functional's first derivatives with respect to the

parameter being measured; 6-1 I the matrix that is the inverse of the matrix of the
second derivatives of A, with a minus sign.

From (5) it is obvious that the goniometer's structure will be basically determined

by elements the elements i. In order to find them, let us represent 3 in the form
of the sum of matrices with zero elements in all columns with the exception of the
H
m-th column, 6 I 2 Km. Let us designate the following matrix as 3;:
m-l

. 3 .
Rn I diag {53;[Zk(w,on) + Jgeko(m,un)l}. (6)

where Zk(u,on) = integrated radiation pattern of the k-th element of the antenna on

frequency w, Eko(w.;m) I spatial lag, in the direction toward the m-th source, be-
tween the k-th element and the antenna's phase center on frequency w; H I total
number of emission sources. It is then the case that

°° . 9: in»: 4*
H - 71x N ( 1' -[U+§-lﬁﬁ'1]E'KmFlﬁ + ﬁp‘lxmkmt'f - ﬁ— Tlu Iii-132m, (7)

where f I a unit matrix.
In the case of the reception of a signal from a single source (H = l) on an antenna
I

consisting of nondirection receivers with unit sensitivity Zk(w,o) 1 and a dis-
tance h between elements, from formula (7) we obtain

1 h cos a,” . . . -*

H I ﬁ‘mT-LX (w)l|(k ' P)exp [JE’h‘k ' P)3'~“ °d||UWX(W)ldU’ (8)
where L I total number of receivers in the antenna; k, p I l,...,L. Analogously,
by computing the elements of 6-1 we obtain

Au h
. L e 2 1.- 2 _
<C> 2“(Tcos uo) q[8(L 1)]. (9)

a
where q I f I8(m)l2u2du/Nobw: I spectral signal-to-noise ratio; Awe = energy band
-m
of the signal. From (8) it follows that in order to construct a discriminating
goniometric system for a signal of unknown shape, we should set the antenna's radi-
ation pattern in the direction toward the source of the signal and organize cross-
correlation processing between the signal at the k-th channel's outlet with the de-
rivative of the signal at the p-th channel's output. Comparing the obtained struc-
ture with that of a goniometer used for the processing of signals with known co-
variance, we see that in our case, at the Output of the receiving channels there

are no filters that are matched with the signal's energy band.

106

FORlDFFKJAl.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
. Schueppc, F.C., IEEE TRANS. INF THEORY, IT-llo. 1968, p 3.
. Agnnovskiy, K.Yu., Vyboldin, Yu.K., and Reshctov. L.A.J_ "Vtoraya Dal'nevostoch-

naya akusticheskaya konferentsiya 'Chelovek i okean'" LSecond Far Eastern
Acoustics Conference on "Man and the Ocean17, Vladivostok. 1978.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HOLOGRAPHIC METHODS FOR SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF RANDOM SONIC FIELDS

[Article by B. I. Hel'treger and Ye. I. Kheyfets pp 97-99]

ljextl In order to carry out spectral analysis with the help of holographic meth-
ods, information about a sonic field is represented in the form of changes in opti-
cal thickness or transparency in a hologram. When it is reproduced in coherent
light in the rear focal plane of the lens, which is set behind the hologram, there
appears a light pattern, the analysis of which makes it possible to evaluate the
spectral characteristics of the sonic field. The methods of greatest interest are_
those in which the hologram represents an instantaneous samplin of the field £1,2/
or temporal changes in the field at the receiving aperture 12,; . In the first
case, the hologram's carrier is a multichannel light modulator controlled by sig-
nals from a receiving array. when there is weak modulation of the light field, in-
ertial registration of the distribution of the light's intensity in the Fourier
plane (u,w) of the lens makes it possible to evaluate yl of the projection C(a) of

the field's angular spectrum C(I) for a narrow band of temporal frequencies and to
evaluate Y2 of the temporal spectrum for a narrow angular spectrum concentrated

near Y - (I,n) ¥ 0, where I I unit vector of the wave vector, 3 I normal to the re-
ceiving array, a - sin y. In the second method signals are recorded in the form of
parallel tracks on the hologram carrier (photographic film, for example) that is
moved along the direction of the tracks during reproduction. Inertial registration
of the light's intensity I(o,¢) makes it possible to evaluate y3 of the projection
F(u.u) of the spectral-angular density of the field's dispersion F(w,I), where p
and ¢ are polar coordinates in the (u,w) plane. Besides this, analysis of the
light pattern makes it possible to evaluate Y6 of the projection 6(a) of the

field's angular spectrum C(I) = F(w,I)dm.

In order to ascertain the quality of these evaluations, assuming that the random
sonic field is a steady-state one and subject to the normal distribution law, ex-
pressions have been derived for the statistical moments of the first and second or-
ders. If the field is created by noncorrelated sources located in the receiving
aperture's far zone, the average (for realizations of the field) light intensity in
the reproduced picture is composed of three parts, one of which is caused by the

106

FOR Off-1C ML USE ONLY
INJR*OFINC1AL.USEZ(NNLY

optical carrier alone, while the other two, which are symmetrical relative to point
u - 0, v = 0. represent the field's spectrum. Calculations and experimental inves-
tigations have shown that the evaluations that are obtained can be regarded as
asymptotically unskewed, for all practical purposes. An analysis of the expres-
sions describing the relative dispersion of the fluctuations in the evaluations of
yq, q . l,...,4, shows that for all the evaluations under discussion the following

relationship is fulfilled: (<y§> - <yq>2)/<yq>%L+~* 0, where T is the registration

time and L is the aperture size of the receiving array; that is, the evaluations
are valid. Thus, holographic methods are an effective means for the parallel spec-
tral analysis of random sonic fields.

BIBLIWRAPHY
l. Shcnderov. Ye.L., "Formation of Sonic Images in a Phase Holographic s stem," in
"Radio- i akustichcskaya golografiya” [Radio- and Acoustic Holography},
Leningrad. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1976.

2. Svot, V.D., "Hetody akusticheskoy golografii" Ziethods of Acoustic Holography],
Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo "Rumb". 1976.

3. Penn, V.A., and Chovan, V.L., "Utilization of Holographic Methods in Hydro-

location," in "Akusticheskaya golografiya" lzkoustic Holograph27. Leningrad, Iz-
datel'atvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1975.

107

FOR‘OFFMJAI.USE(NULY
FINICNNWCJAI.USEIONLX

ON THE EFFECT OF LARGE-SCALE NONUNIl-‘ORHITIES IN THE REFRACTIVE INDEX 0N SHIFTS IN
EVALUATIONS 0F OPTIMUM CONIWETRIC SYSWS

[Article by H. I. Levin, L. A. Reshetov and c. Rh. Takidi pp 99-100]

[Text] In this article, on the basis of the method of small perturbations we eval-
uate the effect of solitary, spherical heterogeneities on the discrimination char-
acteristic of a maximally probable goniometer. assuming that the emitted field is a
steady-state one and Gaussian in nature.

An optimum goniometer must form the following statistic [.17

N uraxnkurcz)

o = —————T—S————— (I)
N NT axnk tl,t2 2 ’

where xn(t) = output signal of the n-th receiver; Knk(t1,t2) = cross-correlation of
the signals from the outputs of the n-th and k-th receivers.

Let a plane wave Po -l(“t-kX) fall on a spherical heterogeneity with radius to.

= e
Let us assume that u =A?Ac/co) << no a l, where “0 and u are the refractive index in
the medium and the increase in the index at the limits of the extent of the hetero-
geneity; (lug/r) << 1, where z . distance from a point inside the heterogeneity to
the observation point; 6 << (l/kro), where 6 I angle between the x-sxis and the di-
rection from the center of the heterogeneity to the observation point.

Then, using the method of small perturbations, we obtain the following expression
for the pressure in the far zone:

P _ Aoe-i(wt-kx) ik(R-x)]’ (2)

where R . distance from the heterogeneity‘s center to the observation point,

[1 - 0(k,6)e

10 8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJALIEEZONLY

x I R cos 6 and

hkzurg

3R '

 

0(k,6) =

Let the incident wave have the form P0 I C(cot - x), where €(t) I a stationary
Gaussian process with a zero average, with an amplitude spectrum A(w) and a power
spectrum S(u):

So, all <w<w2,

S( I
u) O,m<ul,w>w2.

For a narrow-band process, the computation of the cross-correlation function at
points with coordinates X1! R sin 6 : h/2. 0, where R>>ll, by integrating with re-
spect to frequency the product of the expressions of the type of (2), with due con-
sideration for the equality <A(u)A(u')> I S(w)6(u - u’), gives

k n6 62

0
2 koR2)+

tl,2(1) = D{cos wot - 6(k06)[cos (wof -

 

(3)

 

k h5
O cos (mot - 2

where “0 (w1,u2); k0 I wD/co; D I SOAu/nz; 1 I difference in the time reading at
the indicated p01nts. Substituting expression (3) into formula (1) for N I 2, and
assuming that the receiving field has uniform sensitivity, we obtain

. 20(k06) hko hko Rho 2
<Au> I ———sin (—6)cos(—6 + —6 ). (4)
hko 2 2 2
For m I 2r~100 Hz. r0 I~50 m, h I 10 m, 6 I 5°, it is possible to compile a table
of the dependence of <Aa> on u and R.

6
4’ koR§)] I»

 

 

2 0-51 ll 25 22

R (km)
0.5 o.s° 1.60 a.9° s.2°
1 -o.2° -o.3° -o.9° -1.5°
1.5 -o.a° -o.s° -2.s° -a.2°
2 -o.a° -o.7° -2 1° —3.6°

The formula for calculating the mean-square error of a optimum goniometer 1:17 for
an observation time T I 1 s and a signal-to-noise ratio q = 10 yields <Ao> I 0.7°.

Thus. when planning acoustical systems working with a high signal-to-noise ratio,

the essential factor limiting their accuracy in the goniometric mode can prove to

be the scattering field on solitary, large-scale heterogeneities in the refractive
index.

109

FOR OFFKJAI.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Agrenovskiy, K.Yu., Kartashev, Yu.A., Kudsshev, Ye.B., and Reshetov, L.A.,
"Direction Finding of a Noise Source in a Rondo-1y Heterogeneous Media" in

"Irudy Devyatoy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy gidroakustige"
[yarns of the Ninth All-Union School-Seminar on Statistical Hydroacousticgl,

Novosibirsk, Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of
Sciences, 1978.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fl"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.lﬂﬂE(NULY

PROCESSING IIYDROACOUSTIC IMAGES ON A REAL-TIME SCALE

[Svamary of report by V. N. Mikhaylovskly, V. V. Gritsyk, B. V. Kisll’ and
A. Yu. Lutsyk pp 100-l02]

Llextl When processing hydroacoustic images for the purpose of recovery and iden-
tification, it is important to solve the problen under conditions of a real-time
scale 1 L]. We will discuss the problem of processing when noise is present. Let
a receptor field R of dimensionality n n be given, with f(x,y) the density of the
distribution of interference in R. We will use the following definitions: l :

I K1/n2 I intensity of the interference; K1 I number of single errors in R / 2/.

We will discuss the value Kt' where t is the quantity of multiple errors !_{]. Let
g I a random value consisting of the appearance of t (a multiple error), while

P(£ I t) I 9(I,t) I the law governing the distribution of variable z for the fixed
interference distribution law f(x,y).

1n the report the following problems are solved:

an investigation of the dependence of the recovery of an image for a fixed inter-
ference distribution law f(x,y) on the intensity 1 of the interference's action;

an investigation of the recovery of an image for different distribution laws f(x,y)
and a given intensity I;

an investigation of the possibility of carrying out the recovery of an image in R
with different algorithms, depending on the interference distribution law f(x,y)

and the image‘s structure.

when errors with a multiplicity of up to t, inclusive, are corrected, the image
will be recovered with probability

t
P- aru- i). (1)
iIl

For a fixed interference distribution law f(x,y) in the receptor field, the average
number of t-multiple errors m(I,t) can be determined as a function of the intensity
I of the interference's action. The possibility of a recovery algorithm--thnt is,

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the capability of reducing the intensity of the interference in the image's recep-
tor field--is determined according to function m(I,t).

Let I be the intensity of the interference's action on the image's receptor field
until recovery, and 11 be the same after recovery.
It is then the case that
I - I
I

is the image recover (correction) factor for the ideal case K . l.

l

K I: (2)

 

The possibilities of an image recovery algorithm for correction of erros with mul-
tiplicity of up to t, inclusive, for interference action intensity I and distribu-
tion law f(x.y) are

“2

K(I) - (I - z n(I,t))/I. - (3)
t't+l

This is the filter's characteristic as a function of the intensity of the interfer-
ence's action, given a fixed law for its distribution.

He also presented examples of the recovery of hydroacoustic images under conditions
where interference was active for different distribution lavs lit], and demonstrat-
ed the possibility of parallel processing in order to recover inages under condi-
tions of a real-time scale.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Critsyk, V.V., Zlatogurskiy, 8.8., and Hikhaylovskiy, V.N., "Rasparallelivaniye
algoritmov obrabotki informatsii" lpisparallelization of Information Processing
Algorithmg7, Kiev, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1977.

2. Gritsyk, V.V., "Image Recovery During Image Identification Under Noisy Condi-
tions," in "Otbor i peredacha informatsii" LInfornation Gathering and Transmis-
sion], Kiev, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", No 47, [976.

3. Critsyk, V.V., Kisil', B.V., and Kolesnikov, A.N., "Modeling Interference in Re-
ceptor Fields of Arbitrary Dimensionality on a Yes-1020 Computer: Methods of
Disparallelization of Information grocessing," in "Doklady i soobshcheniya
nauchno-tekhnicheskogo seminars" [heports and Notices Fro. the Scientific and
Technical Seainaﬁ7, L‘vov, Preprint No 3, 1977.

112

FOR‘0FFHJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

THE METHOD OF CORRELATED HOLOGRAHS IN ACOUSTIC INVESTIGATIONS OF THE OCEAN

[Article by Ye. F. Orlov pp 102-104]

[Eexgj One of the basic question in hydroscoustic metrology is that of comparing
experimental data with theoretical calculations.

In this article there is a discussion of the question of the possibility of compar-
ing theoretical calculations with some characteristics of a field that are averaged
with respect to space but still reflect the fine interference structure of an
acoustic field in a medium. Let us discuss the signal at the output of an acoustic
receiver in a medium in the field of a concentrated, broadtband source. The fol-

lowing equation is taken from [T2j7:
g(t,r.z,zo) ' I f(t - r)h(1,r,z,zo)dr * n(t), (l)
0

where f(t) = the signal at point of emission (0,30); h(t,r,z,zo) I response of the
medium to pulse excitation during observation at point (r,z); n(t) = additive in-
terference. -

In the method we are proposing, measurements are made during continuous movement of
the receiver (or emitter). In this case the received signal will be essentially a

non-steady-state one because of the change in the medium's transient characteristic
as a function of the source's and receiver's coordinates. Let us introduce the in-
stantaneous signal spectrum g(t) into this discussion:

t§T -iwt t+T -imt
Gr(w,t) ' f g(t)e dt + N(w.t), where N(m,t) ' I n(t)e dt. (2)
t t

Function GT(m,t) can be subjected to two-dimensional processing by holographic and
optical information processing methods, either for the purpose of recovering the
original signal after the necessary filtration or for the purpose of measuring cer-
tain parameters of the signal's non-steady-state nature. In this respect, we will

call the two-dimensional function CT(w,t) the hologram of signal g(tylGT(u,t)l)2

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY

an intensity hologram, emphasizing by this the essential difference between the in-
stantaneous spectrum and the generally accepted concept of the spectrum of steady-
state processes as a function that is the result of statistical averaging £_17t
Taking (1) into consideration, the square of the absolute value of the instantane-
ous spectrum--the intensity hologram--will have the form:

|c(u.,:)|2 =- F2(m,t)H2(w,r(t),z,zo), (3)
where
t+T . err _.
r2(...,:) - | ; rm “‘"dqz, H2(w,t) = | I h(1,r(t),z.zo)e “"an
t t

are, respectively, the emitted signal's instantaneous spectrum and the medium's
transfer function.

Secondary spectral analysis of the intensity hologram makes it possible to derive
the following twovdimensional functions:
the sliding spectrum of the hologram, with averaging with respect to time:

t+T .
3 -
3(9,m,c) - r IGT(u,t)|2e mac, (4)
C

where frequency 0 - uv is related to the spatial frequency of the changes in the
"hologram, u I 2n/A (A = the spatial period); v I relative rate of movement of the
receiver; TB - integration interval during secondary analysis - Ar/v.

Taking (3) into consideration, (a) will be:

r/v+Ar/v _. t+TB _.
B(u,u,r/v) = I F2(w,t)ﬂz(u,r/v,z,zo)e iur.%§ + I N2(m,t)e mtdt; (5)
r/v t

the sliding spectrum of the hologram, with averaging with respect to frequency:

")2 _. (4)2 _.
C(1.r/v) = IF2(w,t)H2(u,r/v,z,zo)e mtdm + IN2(w,t)e “"dm; (6)
«)1 ml
the two-dimensional spectrum of the intensity hologram:

wzr/vsAr/v

0(u.1) = r r2(m,c)u2(m,r/v,z,zo>e"‘“‘*“"dw‘{l—' +
wlr/v
“2MB (7)
* I N2(u,t)e-l(nt+w1)dwdt.
wlt

As is known 1717, an acoustic field in a layered medium, which is a solution of the
wave equation, can be represented in the form of the product of a radial function

and a function that is a function of z:
P(w,r,z,z°) - R(r)Z(z),

11h

ECNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V where R(r) and 2(2) satisfy the wave equations

2
”3“” + £2R(r) = o; 3—2242) + 122(2) = o;
a;

where 12 I (oz/c2 - «2 I k2 - ‘2, plus the conditions on the boundaries.

Solution 2(a) is presented in the form of a sum of the normal modes 2(Y.,z) - Zn(z).
The eigenvalues 7m and ‘n are determined by the appropriate characteristic equation

[1.].

Representation of the field in a layered medium in the form of the sum of the nor-
mal modes makes it possible (for xr>> l) to write the medium's transfer function in
the form

52(u.r,z,zo) ' min(P:(u,z,zo) + P:(u,z,zo) + 2Pn(u,z,zo)Pn(w,z.so)cos Axnn(m)r),

where

Aﬁmn(w) . xh(w) - xn(u) ' 211MIln

is the difference between the radial wave numbers of modes numbers n and n. The
interference effects are characterized by the term

H§(u,r,z,zo) = ZntnPn(w,z,zo)Pn(w,z,zo)cos Axhn(u)r. (8)

The basic parameters of the field's interference structure are the values of the
space interference frequencies A‘mn‘“) and the mode excitation amplitude PmPn. The
sequential, point-by-point measurement of the spectral amplitude of a monochromatic
signal for given values of r, z and so, followed by a comparison of the measurement
results with theoretical calculations is, as was mentioned earlier, a difficult as-
signment to perform experimentally. At the same time, calculation of the transfer
function at great distances requires a high degree of accuracy in assigning the
frequencies Axmn(w) that cannot be achieved because of inaccurate knowledge of the
medium's parameters.

The method of correlated holograms makes it possible to compare experimental data
with calculations by measuring the differences between the normal waves' spatial
frequencies and their dependence on the frequency and comparing them with the theo-
retical values. The amplitudes of the excited modes Pm?“ and the frequency Axmn(u)
can be determined experimentally, as extreme values of the intensity hologram's
sliding spectrum B(u,u,z) and the values of frequencies u for which these extremes
are observed. The two-dimensional picture B(u,w) makes it possible to find the de-
pendence of these parameters on the frequency (dispersion characteristics of the
waveguide).

The intensity hologram's two-dimensional spectrum makes it possible to measure ex-
perimentally the phase shifts of the normal modes, as a function of frequency. with
respect to the values of A! and 1 that correspond to the extreme values of the

function 0(u,t) (expression (7)). The intensity hologram's sliding_s ectrum, with
averaging with respect to frequency--C(1,r)--is a (r - r) diagram !_19.

115

ETHICHNWCIAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

These characteristics of the interference structure of an acoustic field in the
ocean are connected, by well-known relationships [_L7} to the hydrophysical parame-
ters of the medium, the bottom and the surface, the experimental investigation of

which is a matter of great interest.

BI BLI OGRAPHY

l. Brekhovskikh, L.H., editor, "Akustika okeana" [ﬁcean Acousticgj, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Nauka", 1976.

2. Tolstoy, 1., and Kley, K.S., "Akuatika okeana" Lacean Acoustich, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Mir", 1969.

3. Kharkevich, A.A., "Spektry i nnaliz" [gpectra and Analysigj, lzdatel’stvo
Fizmatgiz, 1962.

h. Brekhovskikh, L.M., "Volny v sloistykh sredakh" liaves in Layered Hediumé7.
Moscow, lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1957.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAL'M' S RANDOM FIELD

[Artible by A. c. Buymov, and H. T. Reshetnikov pp 104-106]

15:23:57 In connection with the digital modeling of hydrolocation systems. there
arises the problem of the computer simulation of fluctuations of _t_he medium's pa-
rameters, such as temperature, impurity concentration and so on 1L7. In this ar-
ticle, as one of the possible approaches to the solution of this roblem we propose
one based on generalization of a model of a telegraph signal L2 into a three-

dimensional case. As with the model in 13]. we also regard recovery flows to be
the engendering flows.

Let xijk be the tensor of the spatial fluctuations of the mediun's modeled parame-
ter X; n I P(xi‘k I gs) I unidimensionsl distribution of the fluctuations at point
ijk; 11 t u) = Puexi‘k I 89' Km I g ) I the provisional two-dimensional distribu-
tion; 13,} I the ordered set of possible values of parameter X; u = a random value
that is

= ‘0, if there are no changes in parameter x between points ijk and m;
2‘1. if there are changes,
and is distributed according to the law

P(u,0) = V(ijk.£mn). (1)
p(u . 1) = 1 - V(ijk,lmn).

Henceforth, let us limit ourselves to the case where probability V depends only on
the distances 11 I ll - i, 2 I m - j, 3 =- n - k; that is,

V = V(ijk,£mn) = V(11,12.T3).

Further. let

n.5,t, if u - o,

"s:(“) ' nsnt, if u - 1;

that is, if parameter X changes between ijk and inn, the values X. 'k I g3 and
Xm I gt are selected from {3s} independently. In connection with this, the

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unconditional two-dimensional distribution of the fluctuations is
n - \
n t "3(nt + (68t nt)v . (2)

In order to obtain realizations of the random field of parameter X it is possible
to use (for example) this method: a three-dimensional, rectangular, nonequidistant
array with random distances between the generatrices is generated in space. It is
generated by three recovery flows. The values of parameter X in each of the rec-
tangular parallelepipeds that are obtained are constant and are selected from the
same general set. regardless of the values of parameter X in the other parallele-
pipeds. If the flows are independent, probability V in (2) is factored:

V(11,12, T3) ‘ V1(11)V2(12)V3(t3). Probabilities V(1), functions 9(1) and densities
"(1) of the distribution of the recovery flows' interpulse distances are related by
(Pal'm 's) formulas /2—a7:

v(r) - 1 - } (1 - F(z)ldz/} (1 — P(z)]dz,
° ° (3)
r(1) - 1 + (“16(t), "(1) - 1‘16<x), A - -v(o).
0n the basis of the properties of the probabilities, their distributions and formu'

las (3), it is possible to conclude that the recovery flows' probabilities V(1)
satisfy the conditions

1 5 V(T)> 0; V(1)< <0; V(1)> (a)

that is, they form a class of nonnegative, nonincreasing convex functions. Formu-
las (2)-(4) are a probability description of the model of the random field, which
in the future we will call "Pal'm's field."

By computing the first and second moments of distribution (2), we can show that the
normalized correlation function of the field's fluctuations does not depend on its
unidimensional distribution and coincides completely with probability V, as intro-

duced by formula (1). This result, together with formula (2), makes it possible to
mention that in Pal'm's field, independence and noncorrelatability of the fluctua-

tions are equivalent.

The figure [not reproduced? shows a cross- section of one of the realizations of the
field for the case of Gaussian fluctuations with an exponential correlation func-
tion. The image was obtained on a 1020 computer, using a program published in I 3/.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l.01'shevskiy, V. V. , "Statisticheskiye metody v gidrolokatsii" IStatistical Meth-
ods in Hydrolocationl, Leningrad, Izdatel' stvo ”Sudostroyeniye", 1973.

2. Tikhonov, A.I., and Mirono", H.A., "Harkovskiye protsessy" [harkov Processes],
Moscow. Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1977.

3. Buymov, A.G., and Reshetnikov, H.T., "Model of an Image in a Two-Dimensional Re-
covery Flow,“ in "Korrelyatsionno-ekstremal'nyye sistemy obrabotki informatsii i

118

l(”l(uﬂﬂC1AL USEZCMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

upravleniyﬂ [Extreme Correlation Information Processing and Control Systena7,
Tomk,1zdatel's:vo rcu from]: State Universit17, 2nd edition, 1977

. Gnedenko, B. V. , and Kovalenko, I. N. ,"Vvedeni e v teoriyu masovogo obsluzhiva-
niya" [Introduction to the Theory of Queueing,ﬂoscov,1'zdatel stvo "Nauka",
1966.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

COMBINING THE PRINCIPLES OF INVARIANCB AND NONDISPLACEABILITY WITH OTHER SOLVING
RULE SYNTHESIS METHODS UNDER CONDITIONS OF PRIOR INDETERHINACY

[Article by Yu. Ye. Sidorov pp 106-111.]

LTex§7 I. Introduction. In solving a number of problems in classifying and evalu-
ating signal parameters in order to roduce optimum solving £9199, the combined use
of the principles of invariance 1'L_ or nondisplaceability Ll,27 and other optimum
procedures for testing statistical hypotheses proves to be both necessary and pos-
sible. In a number of cases, such a combination makes it possible not only to find
the optimum solution of a problem, but also to obtain solving devices with addi-
tional properties that are desirable and practically important when working under
conditions of prior indeterminacy.

2. The Principle of Invariance for Sequential Signal Parameter classification and
Evaluation Models. The use of the invariance principle in combination with the
sufficiency principle is advisable when synthesizing sequential solving rules for
classifying and evaluating parameters in connection with prior parametric indeter-

(n)’A(n)’P(n))

minacy. In a sequential model, let the statistical structure {(X
(n)

3
n - l,2,...} be determined, where X is the Euclidean space of the observations

of random values (x1,...,xn) at the n-th step; A(n) is the (Borelevskoye) 6-field

in x(n); P(n) . (n)A(n)

is the family of probability measures in (X ), n = 1,2,..., it

being the case that sequential inclusion of the 6-fields A(l) c A<2)C . takes
place. As is known, a sequential procedure assigns a set of stoppage rules

{0“(x1.-...Xh); n I 1,2,...) that are A(n)-measureable statistics. In accordance
with the rule On(x1,...,xn), the set (x1,...,xn) is given some integral value in
such a manner that if on(xl,...,xn) - n, after the n-th observation a decision is
made about halting the observations. Otherwise, an additional observation ”n+1 is
made.

( )

As a rule, the family of distributions P n I {Po &(x), (0.3) e 9, x 6 X} depends
9

on parameters 0 and 9 (which are possibly vector parameters), which belong to the

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parametric space a I n“ U 9K. In this case, the problem of classification (or
evaluation) is equivalent to the problem of sequential testing of hypotheses:

H:(0;9) a 93 (for example, 0 I 00); K:(9,0) G 9K (o I so; for example, 0 I 01),(l)

while parameter 9 is indeterminate and interfering. In view of the presence of ,
hypotheses H and K are complicated, which does not make it possible to use the se-
quential criterion of ratios of probabilities 1.1j7.

Let the problem of testing hypotheses (l) in a sequential model be invariant rela-
tive to the groups of mutually unambiguous transformations EX I X, EA I A and g? I
I P, g t G, E G G, and let each i e G generate at the n-th step the transformation

§(n) on X(n). If g transforms observations x I (x1,...,xn) component by component,

then at the n-th step, §(n)(x1,...,xn) I (glx1,...,§nxn). Let us assume that 5(n)
is a group of transformations generated in X(n) at the n-th step; it is then possi-

ble to find the statistic U(n)(x) that is the maximum invariant (HI) relative to

group 6(n) of transformations in space X(n), on which should be based all the in-
variant, sequential solving rules (at the n-th step).

Let us assume that function U(n) has the distribution f(U,V) and that the transfor-
—(n)

mations G of the sampling space X I (x1,...,xn) initiate the corresponding

( )

transformations 6 n in the parametric space n. relative to which the MI is the_
function V. It is then the case that, according to theorem 3 in Chapter 6 of 11:7.
the distribution f(U;V) depends only on HI V and, instead of testing the complicat-
ed hypotheses (l), it is sufficient to test the simple hypotheses

sz I V0; K:V = V1. (2)
According to A. (Val'd's) rule ZiL] and a statement in lji7, sequential hypothesis
testing rule (2) consists of comparing at the n-th step the probability relation-

ships If") = L(“)(u(“)) - £(u(“);v1)/f(u(“);vo) with the two thresholds Co -

I 3/(1 - a) and c1 I (l - B)/u, where o and B are the probabilities of Type I and
Type II errors. In connection with this, we adopt the hypothesis R if

 

—L- < L(n) < u and 1.“) < B < l; (3)
1 - a u ‘ l - a

adopt the hypothesis K if

B < L(n) < l - 8 (n) l - B

l-a u

 

> 1, (4)

 

 

and continue the observations if

(n) l ' B (s)

 

 

Thus, the fact that in the application of the invariance principle to a sequential
decision-making scheme the decisive statistics at the n-th step must be based on

the MI 0‘") makes it possible to construct a classification or evaluation procedure
quite simply.

lZl

IIHICHWWCJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR'OFIﬂCJAl.lEN£(NHLY

If we further abridge the original data by application of the sufficiency principle

(for example, carry out a reduction for each KI ”(n) at the n-th step, a > 1), it
is possible to simplify the solution procedure even more. In this case, observa-
tion continuation condition (5) is written equivalently in terms of unidimensional

HI u‘")(x) in the form [4]:

U3n) < U(n)(x) < 0:"), (6)

where the threshold numbers U3“) and 0(a) are determined from the equations

1
('0 = ci, i - 0.1.

L

3. The Invariance Principle and the Probability Ratio Method. In a number of in-
variance problems the solving rules can be based on the probability ratio statistic,
which is a nontrivial invariance statistic 11,27. Such solving rules have a stable
structure and stable qualitative characteristics under real underwater observation
conditions.

In hypothesis testing problem (1), let the parametric subsets ﬂu and 9K be invari-
ant relative to the group of transformations G and countable, while 9K is separable.
The following statement is then correct: the probability ratio (0?)

"(x) - sup Pe(x)/sup P (x)
9K a“ e (7)

is invariant (almost invariant) relative to the group 5 of transformations of the
sampling space 1L7 (P (x) = dP0(x)/du; u - some measure). The 0? statistic "()0
has a number of valuab?e properties that make its use for the solution of several
parameter classification and evaluation problems advisable.

In the first place, statistic W(x)--as is the case with statistic HI-reduces the
original observation space. In the second place, although statistics MI and DP are
not equivalent (for example, statistic "(x) is unidimensional, while HI can also be
multidimensional), in a number of invariance problems where MI is unidimensional,
after the statistic H(x) is determined it turns out that it is the M1 relative to c
and, therefore, all the invariance solving rules are expressed in terms of it. In
the class of these rules it is possible to find rules with optimum properties:

most powerful, locally or uniformly most powerful (RNH). In the third place, in
order to test a general linear hypothesis (hypothesis testing problem (I) can be
reduced to such), a rule based on the 0? statistic is an invariant RNH (RNHI) 15,
page 3427. In the fourth_place, if statistic H(x) is the HI relative to some
group of transformations G8 and is a functign of the invariantly sufficient statis-
tic S, then, being invariantly sufficient £3, theorem 2.7.17, it determines the op-
timum invariant rule for testing hypothesis (1). Finally, in the fifth place, in
some (rare) cases the statistic w(x) determines an RNMI rule that will also be an
undisplaced REM (RNHN). This can occur when "(3) and the family of distributions

P - {P9 o(x),(§,9) e n,x c_ﬂ) of the observed sample are subject to the conditions
of theorem 1 11, Chapter 2/ and theorem 6 L1, Chapter £7.

4. Invariance and Minimax. Let the statistical structure (X,A,P) be defined and
let the distributions P , 0 e 9, be dominated by a o-finite measure in (X,A). In
order to test the complicated hypotheses “:0 6 9n and x:e 6 9K for the unknown

122
NOR‘OFFKJAI.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parameter 9, along with the invariance principle there exists another optimum pro-
cedure_that minimizes the risk function's maximum and is called the minimax proce-
dure £_L7b The use of this procedure is reasonable. since it insures a minimum of
the heaviest (on the average) losses when a false solution is found. It is partic-
ularly valuable in the presence of any assumptions about the expected values of
(but that are not sufficiently reliable for the use of the (Bayyesovskaya) proce-
dure), when it is advisable to use this (even if it be only a small amount) prior
infonnation, having protected oneself (in case-of its inaccuracy) from catastrophic
losses. In order to do this, it is possible to assign an upper limit to the risk
function R(0,¢) and discuss only those procedures 0 for which R(0,¢) 5 R* for all a,
it being the case that here constant R must be greater than the minimax procedure's
maximum risk (otherwise, a procedure satisfying this inequality will not be found).

In order to test hypotheses H and K for any mutually nonintersecting subsets n“ and
9x, here there also exists solving rule 0 with significance level a that maximizes
the minimum power (probability of correct solution) on OK; that is, it maximizes

B - inf 89¢(x) (8)
9K

in the class of all solving rules of level a that are based on X (Ee - averaging
sign). If densities P (x) - dP (x)/du are measurable (according to some a-finite
measure) relative to (X x B) an? (A x 3'), where B and B' are given o-fields in ﬁg
and 9K» there exists 11, Chapter 8, theorem 1/ a unique maximin and most powerful
rule 9XA' of level o in order to test hypothesis “:0 6 an (A and A' are the pair of

any distributions in B and B' that are the least favorable in the sense that for
any other pair (v,v'), the power Bv,v' ; 31.1.).

The basic difficulty in solving specific problems is finding the pair (A.A') of
least favorable distributions. In some cases this search is made easier by the use
of invariance considerations, namely: if group G of transformations of sampling
space X induces a corresponding group G in the parametric space 9. leaving the sub-
sets 9H and 9! invariant, the problem of testing hypotheses H and K is symmetrical
relative to those 0 that can be translated relative to each other by transforma-
tions from group G. If in this case A and A' are not also synnntrical relative to
G. they make the problem of synthesis easier and, therefore, will not be the least
favorable ones.

However, it is more natural that when the problem of testing hypotheses H and K is
invariant relative to some group of transformations, the pair (A,A') of least fa-
vorable distributions is also invariant and that there generally exists an in-
variant maximin rule. In an important class of problems the existence of such a
rule (Y) satisfying the condition

for all 6 e 9 and g e c is postulated in ii, Chapter 8. lesnm 37. If group C I
m

. {g1,...,gm} is finite and 7(X) I i 2 ¢(§2,x), then V will be a critical function
t-l

that is invariant relative to G and satisfies condition (9), since 59¢(ix) -
- Eg ¢(X), and E@!(X) is the average of several values, the minimum and maximum of
whicg coincide with the first and second terms in (9), respectively.

123

FOR¢OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
INJR10FF1CJAI.lI5EZ(HHLY

Providing that RNMI rules exist, the successful utilization of the maximin approach
to obtain optimum solving rules is possible most parameter classification and eval-
uation problems. -As has already been mentioned, all invariant solving rules are
expressed in terms of the H1. The changeover to this statistic provides a substan-
tial reduction in the original data, including the reduction of the maximin problem.
This can be demonstrated in the following manner, using (Khant-Steyn's) theorem and
theorem 2, Chapter 6, in LL].

Let a group of transformations 6, relative to which the problem of testing hypothe-
ses H and K is invariant, be generated by two subgroups D and E in the sense that
it is the smallest group containing D and B (group G then contains the set of prod-
ucts emdm,...,e1d1, m I l,2,..., di G D, ei 6 E, i I 1,m). Let us also assume that
y I S(x) I the MI relative to group D. For each e e B the following condition is
fulfilled: the equality 8(x1) I S(x2) entails 8(exl) = 8(ex2), and that z I t(y) I
the HI relative to group 3*, which consists of those elements e* such that e*y I

I S(ex) when y I §(x). Also, let groups D and 3* satisfy the conditions of Khant-
Steyn's theorem ZJLY, which proves the existence of an almost invariant critical
function !(X) that satisfies condition (9). There then exists a maximin rule de-
pending on the HI y I S(x) and a maximin rule depending on the HI s I t(y) lflj.

Thus, reduction of the maximin problem is accomplished sequentially, step by step,
by finding the maximum invariants relative to the subgroups of the group of trans-
formations G.

Changing over to the maximally invariant statistic, it is possible to make a fur-
ther attempt to find the RNHI rule. If the assumptions of the Khant-Steyn theorem
are fulfilled for some group of transformations 6, then for any problem that is in-
variant relative to G and permits an hNMl rule, this rule maximizes the minimum of
the power (is a maximin) in the class of all invariant rules. This conclusion can
be drawn from condition (9) by the way indicated in the proof of lemma 2 in Chapter
8 °f.Li;7- 0n the other hand, if it is established that in any specific problem
the rule that is RNHI relative to C does not maximize the power's minimum, the pre-
requisites of Khant-Steyn's theorem cannot be fulfilled. However, this in no way
scans that in another problem (with another distribution P (x)) that is invariant
relative to the same group 5, the RNHI rule will not maximize the power's minimum,
because this depends not only on the group of transformations, but also on the fam-
ily of distributions P = {Po(x).0 c 9,: e X}.

5. The Nondisplacesbility and Hinimax Principles. As we have seen, the single-

alternative problem of classifying and evaluating signal parameters when there is

parametric prior indeterminacy comes down to testing hypotheses Hze e a“ and

K:6 6 9K about the unknown parameter 0 continuously with respect to 0 for each A of

the distribution P0(A) I I P9(x)du(x), where A I any set from sampling space X; p =
A

= some o-finite measure on (X,A), while the nonintersecting subsets n“ and 9K, as

before, meet the condition 9“ U 9K I 9. In single-alternative classification and
evaluation problems, the loss function L(0,di), i 8 H,K, is usually constant in
sets 9“ and 9K, so let L(0,di) I ‘i for e e 05(j f i) and L(6,di) I 0 for e 6 hi.

Corroborations. If there exists a minimax rule for testing hypotheses H and K, it
must be nondisplaceable; each nondiaplaceablc rule for testing these hypotheses,

providing that there is at least one cannon point 00 on the boundary of subsets 9“

12h

IIII(HNWCJAI.USE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and ﬂu; is ninimax [fl]. Let us show the correctness of these statements, because
' L _/ they are presented without proofs.

In the case of the first statement, the condition of nondisplaceability when test-
ing hypotheses H and K is equivalent to the inequality

sup R (e) < £3 (10)

which is derived from expression (3) in I? 7. allowing for expression (1) in that
work for the average risk function R(e,¢7 (compare (10) with the condition R(0.¢) s
5 R* in Paragraph 4). Actually,

aNPe{O(x) - dH} for 91 e 9

K.
so that expression (3) in [Z7 reduces to the inequalities
aﬂP0{¢(x) - an} a °xpe{°(“) - dx} for ee “a (12)
and
aeruu) - ‘11:} a aHPeiﬂx) = a“) for e e 9K (13)

Since Po{¢(x) - d“) + Pe(¢(x) - dx} I l for 0 “H (9‘), nondisplaceability condi-
tion (3) of the rule 0(8), as written in [LT is converted into the inequality

_‘x_
‘11”‘1
‘H

Pe{¢(x) ' dx} 5 ail—ﬁt;

Peiﬂx) - d“} E
I for 0 G 0H; (110)
|

p “(,0 -d } <__
0 a ‘ +
5' 'KLorec—rzx.

‘H a
P0{.(X) ' dK} >, W; (15)

Inequality (10) is fulfilled for any minimax solution-selection rule, which is ob-
vious from a comparison with rule 000 l d“ or 0(x) - dx, which make decisions d“
or dK with probabilities aKI(aa + ax) and iii/(all + ax) according to expressions
(lb) and (15).

In the case of the second statement, in view of the continuity of the risk function
“(9). for any nondisplaced rule the value of this function on the boundary between

9H and ”K is
“(90) - “H‘K/(au + ax). (16)

Therefore,

sup R¢(9) ' sunk/(aH + ax), (17)

125
FOR¢0FFNJA1.USE(NVLY

which satisfies condition (10). Consequently, any nondisplaced rule for testing
hypotheses H and K is a minimax one.

6. Examples. As is known, problems in detecting and evaluating the parameters of
hydrolocation signals can be solved with the help of different methods (criteria).
Therefore, the question of an objective camparison of the effectiveness of differ-
ent methods is an urgent one. One of the variants of this comparison can be the
following. Let there be two methods for solving such problems (we will assume that
they are detection problems): A and B. Let there be n tests of these methods; if
an object exists (does not exist) and with the help of any method a decision can be
made about its presence (absence), the test is considered to be successful and its
outcome is provisionally assigned the symbol "1"; otherwise. the test is considered
to be unsuccessful and its outcome is assigned the symbol "0". These outcomes can
be regarded as independent random variables xAi and “Bi: which take on the values
"1" and "0," i = l,n. Let Xi - l for xAi > “Bi and Xi . 0 for xAi < ”Bi- Let us
designate Pi . P{Xi I l} and discuss the problem of testing hypothesis Hzp > 1/2
(methods A and 3 are equivalent) relative to the alternative sz1 > l/2 for all i
(method A is better than method B).

The problem of testing these hypotheses remains invariant relative to the group of
n permutations of the values X1....,Xn, and the HI relative to this group is the

n
function X = 2 xi. There exists 1_l/ an RNMI rule for testing these hypotheses
i-l n —
that rejects H if E Xi > C, where C is the threshold determined according to the
i=1
given significance level . At the same time, lemma 2 11, Chapter El is applicable

to this problem. It shows that condition (9) is correct for our RNMI rule and that
it has a desirable maximin property (max inf Ep0(x)) in the class of all invariant

“1

rules.

Let us mention here that the problem of constructing a rule for determining the co-
ordinates of an object, which was solved in LQJV, was also reduced to testing hy‘
potheses analogous to those written above, so that the rule for testing these hy-
potheses (formula (1) and (2) in [1[7) is also a maximin RNHI.

7. Conclusion. The suggestions that have been made about combining the principles
of invariance and nondisplaceability with other synthesis methods in order to solve
hydrolocation signal parameter classification and evaluation problems are feasible,
since their realization makes it possible to obtain solution schemes with addition-
al desirable properties that make them even more desirable and effective when work-
ing under real conditions. Let us mention that combining the invariance and mini-
max principles sometimes results in optimization of the solving rules even if there
is nonparametric prior indeterminacy. For example, it is possible to construct
uniformly maximin most powerful rules for classifying and evaluating signal parame-
ters. However, the main uses of the minimax principle (or its inverse form--maxi-
min) will be found in problems with parametric prior indeterminacy.

126

FOR‘OIINCIA1.USE4DNLY
IIIICMNNCJAI.USE(MNLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

. Leman, 5., "Proverka statisticheskikh gipotez" Ziexting Statistical Hypotheaei7,

Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1965.

Linnik, Yu. V., "Statisticheakiye zadachi s _Ieshayushchimi paranetra-i" [Statis-
tical Problems With Interfering Parameters], Moscow, Izdatel' stvo "Manta", 1966.

Zaks, Sh. , "Teoriya statisticheakikh vyvodov" /Theory of Statistical Conclu-
sions7, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1975.

. Prokof'yev, V.N., "Using the Invariance Principle in the Sequential Detection

and Discrimination of Signals," RADIOTEKHMIKA I ELEKTRDNIKA, No S, 1976, pp
1027-1033.

. Kendall, M., and St' yuart, A , "Statisticheskiye vyvody i svyazi" [Statistical

Conclusions and Connections], Moscow, Izdatel' stvo "Nauka",l 1973.

. Prokof'yev, V.N., "Invariant Signal Detection Rules Based on the Maximum Proba-

bility Statistic," RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, No 12, 1975, pp 2459-2466.

. Sidorov, Yu. Ye. , "The Principles of Nondisplaceability and Similarity in Prob-

lems of Classifying and Evaluating Parameters with Prior Indeterminacy,"1
"Trudy Devyatoy Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy gidroakustike"
IUorka of the Ninth All-Union School- Seminar on Statistical Hydroacoustics7,
Novosibirsk, Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of
Sciences, 1978.

. Sidorov, Yu.Ye., "An Invariant Rule for Determinin the Coordinates of Targets,"
8

RADIOTBKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, No 8, 1976, pp 1759-1762.

127

IIMRCHWH(JAI.USE1DNIX
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BASIC CWCEPTS OF THE STABILITY OF STATISTICAL PROCEDURES

[Article by F. P. Taraaenko and V. P. Shulenin pp 114-119]

model, led to the develgpment of nonparametric_procedures I339] and stable statis-

of statistical models. Different authors interpret the term "stable" (robust) dif-
ferently. Perhaps the most comon and, at the same time, diffuse definition is
given by (Kendall) and (St'yuart) / 77: "A statistical procedure that is in-
sensitive to deviations from the assumptions on which it is based is called sta-

cedure is indicated, the possible deviations from the model are defined more pre-
cisely, and a definite meaning is given to the term "insensitive." Thus, when dis-

cussing gtablc procedures it is necessary to answer the following questions (see
Bickel £8_7:

1. Stability of what? It is necessary to define precisely the type of statistical
:rocedure.

128
Ftﬂll)F1ﬂ(JAl.IISE2(NVLY

3. Stability in what sense? In order to answer this question the quality criteria
that are used and the goal we hope to achieve should be defined specifically.

Generally speaking, the stability of statistical procedures can be defined in terms
of resistance to the most variegated violations of the statistical model's assump-

tions. Let us examine the most important deviations from a model. For a paramet—

ric model, the conditions of a specific experiment make it possible, to a great de-
gree, to guarantee assumptions (1) and (2) and, therefore, deviations from the par-
ametric form of distribution are of the greatest practical interest. In such situ-
ations we will talk about resistance toa change in distribution, and henceforth our
basic attention will be devoted to this type of stability.

2. A Qualitative Approach to the Stability of Statistical Procedures

Let the sequence x1....,xn of independent and identically distributed random varia-
bles with distribution function (FR) F(x) be given. Let T(x1,...,xn) ' some sta-
tistic (this can be either an evaluation of a parameter or a criterion statistic).
The qualitative approach to the stability of T(§ ...,xn) relative to a change in F
relies on the following intuitive requirement‘Lﬁt7:
Quite small changes in F . L(x) must correspond to arbitrarily small changes in the
distribution law L(T(x ,...,xn)) of statistic T. This requirement can be formulated
more accurately as follows: for appropriately selected metrics d in the PR's space
S and an ideal model F0 5, let us define supermodel S, in the form Sn =

- lF:d(Po,F) S n}. in connection with which it is required that for any a > 0 there
existed that 6 > 0 and no, such that for all n > no,

d(Fo,I-‘) < 5 + d(l.Po(T),LF(T)) < c. (1)

As Hampel mentioned [717, requirement (1) is nonconstructive and therefore changes
to an asymptotically equivalent nonstochastic variant--the requirement of continui-
ty in the space of functionals of the FR. Let us mention here that many well-known
evaluations, including that of maximum probability, and many test_statistics can be
considered to be evaluations of the appropriate functionals £2.13]. Let
T(xl,...,xn) - T(Fn(x)), where Pn(x) is an empirical FR, be an evaluation of the
functional NF). It is then the case, as Hampel demonstrated L9_/, that (l) is
equivalent to the following requirement:

d(F1,l-‘2) < 6 + [11?!) - r(a2)| < c, sne r (2)

1'F2'
Condition (2) makes it possible, in the space of functionals T(F), to limit the pos-
sibilities of the selection of the functional appropriate for the given problem for
the purpose of obtaining a stable (in the sense of £1)) evaluation T(F). Using the
concept of continuity and absolute continuity, in L9_7 the author presents a whole
series of different definitions of qualitative stability.

3. A Quantitative Approach to Defining Stability

Let the statistic T(xl,...,xn) be given and the ideal model P0 6 S and some super-

model Sn - U {P:d(Fo,P) < n) be defined. The quantitative approach to the sta-
F005

bility of statistical procedures reflects the goal that we wish to achieve with re-

apect to the criterion of the quality of statistic T. of course, the goals can be

extremely variegated. which gives rise to a whole series of definitions [3,197.

129

FORtOFEKJAl.USE!0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us define the functional of the quality of statistic T for PR P in terms of

Q(‘!').

Definition 1. The real function 1(F), which represents the FR's space in R1 and is
defined in the form '

I I - '
1‘70?) sup .QP(T),P 6 Sn} inf {QF(T),F € 8“},
is called Q, or the stability of statistic T relative to the enlargement of S to Sn.

Definition 2. Statistic T1 is more stable than statistic T2 if for each P i Sn:
rT1(r) s rT2(r).

Definition 3. Statistic T is uniformly more stable in the class of statistics m if
FT“) 5 131.4?) for all P 6 Sn and all 1." G u.

Definition 4. Statistic T is absolutely stable if PT(F) = 0 for each F e Sn.

Let us now examine the given class of statistics T(Y;x1,...,xn). the specific
structure of which is determined by some function 7 5 H and let us be interested in
achieving the minimum of QF(T). The minimax approach then leads to the following
definition _/_2_/:

Definition 5. T;(P), defined in the form

r*(F) = min max QF(T(!,X

.,x ))
I Yen pesn n '

1,“

is called minimax Q, or the stability of statstic T in class m relative to the
supermodel S".

4. Characteristics of the Stability of Evaluations

Let it be necessary to evaluate some parameter 9. given in the form of a functional
T(F); P ,F 6 Sn. The choice of the appropriate functional is made on the basis of
the definitions of qualitative stability. We will look for the evaluation of the

parameter in the form T(Fn); _for many known evaluations the following asymptotic
representation is correct _/_2_/:

1(rn) - r(r) + I ﬂ(x;P,T)an(x) + Op(n-1/2), (3)

where ﬂ(x;F,T) is the effect function introduced by Hampel, which is defined in the
form

9(x;l-‘,T) I lim "(PX t) - “FD/E,
M I

where

Fx c(y) = (l - t)F(y) + cc(y - x), c(3) - {1:3 ; 0,0:9 < 0}.

I

Effect function ﬂ(x;F,T) is the most important local characteristic of the stabili-
ty of evaluation T and characterizes the effect of an individual observation on the

value of the evaluation. In connection with this, it is used intensively during
the study of the effect of "overshoots" and "malfunctions“ on statistical proce-

dures. Besides this, from (3) it follows that /E(T(Fn) - T(F))/OF(T) has an

130
INIR 0F11CJAI.US£10NLN

asymptotically standard normal distribution, with 0%(1) I f 92(x;T,F)dP. For this
class of evaluations the natural quality criterion QF(T) is disgersion 0%(T), and
all the definitions in Paragraph 3 can be formulated by using °P(T)' Some numeri-
cal characteristics of the stability of evaluations can be determined directly, in
terms of the effect function £9_/:

1. Sensitivity of evaluations T to gross errors ("malfunctions") is defined in the
form YF(T) ' sup |n(x;P,T)|.
x

2. Sensitivity to grouping and rounding off is defined with the help of Lipshits's
constant AF(T) = sup (|9(X;F.T) - 9(y3F.T)I/IX ' VI}-
xfy

The global characteristic of the stability of an evaluation is the "stability lim-
it" (breakdown point), whicn characterizes the maximum possible deviation from the
ideal model (in the sense of some distance, such as (Levi's)) at which the bias of
the evaluation still remains limited. Let the deviation from the ideal model F0 be
given with the help of Levi's metrics:

dL(Fo,F) - inf {c:F(x - e) - e g F°(x) 5 F(x + e) + a}
and

3(a) - sup {T(F):dL(P0,F) 5 c}.

*

Stability limit c is then defined in the form e* = su (5:3(5) < a}.
P

5. Example

It is necessary to evaluate parameter 0 according to the results of measurements

yi-0*£isi'1w-uni (a)

where 5- are independent and identically distributed erros in measurements (inter-
ference with PR F(x). It is a well-known fact that if F(x) ' 0(x/o), with being
the standard normal distribution, the optimum evaluation is the sampling mean.

Let a measuring device with probability 1 - c operate in its basic mode, in connec-
tion with which the measurement errors have PR 0(x/o) and with a low probability

in the "malfunction" mode, in connection with which the PR is 0(x/ol), 01 > o . It
is then the case that noz(i) ' (l - c)og-Oco . For a ' 1, c = 0.1 and 01 ' we
have 02(i) I 1.8, while for 01 . 5 we have a (i) . 3. . Thus, the sampling mean's
dis ersion increases rapidly as 01 does and, moreover, it can even equal infinity

['5_ .

In order to illustrate several of the concepts that have been introduced, let us
discuss the functional Tu(F), given inexplicitly in the form

 

F'1(l-a) l _ 20
I F(2T°(F) - X)dF(x) - 2 , 0 4 u < 1/2.
F’1(a)
we will look for the evaluation of parameter s from (4) in the form Tu(F). It is

not difficult to satisfy ourselves that the evaluation (we will label it H/Lh) has

131
FOR 0FF1C1Al.lﬂiE(NVLY

the form

H/Lc - med {Hij,(i.j) e sum“), 1: - [on],

where "ij = (x(i) + x(j))/2; sk+1 n-k . the set of pairs of indices (i,j) such that
k + l S 1 s j s n - Ki 'ned" meani median. The characteristics of the “IL“ evalua-
tion are derived in 1117.

The effect function of evaluation H/La has the form

(1 - 2a)sgn x, |x| > P.1(l - a)

9(X;F,H/Lu) a A(°'F).{2P(X) _ 1, le < F-1(1 - a).

\

The sensitivity to gross errors is Yp(H/La) - (l - 2a)A(dF).

The sensitivity to grouping and rounding off if

AF(H/La) - 2A(a,P)°f(xm). l-u
where xm = the node of the density f(x), A(6,F) = 1/2 I E(F‘1(t))dt.
0

Sensitivity limit c* of evaluation "/1.0 is

* {1 - 1/2(2(1 - 602) 1’2, a < 1/6,
c I

a'l(1 + 2a), a > 1/6.

For the purpose of comparison, the characteristics of several evaluations for a
normal distribution are presented in the table below.

 

. 2 *
Evaluat ion ‘01 7—. 10— E—
i 1.000 0 1.00 0.00
med 1.571 1.25 n 0.50
H/L 1.067 1.77 1.41 0.29
H/Lo.1 1.092 1.52 1.52 0.31
H/Lo.2 1.170 1.60 1.86 0.35

Thus, the evaluations' characteristics are substantially different and the choice
of the appropriate evaluation must be determined by the goal we wish to achieve.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Tukey, T."., "A Survey of Sampling From Contaminated Distributions," in "Contri-
butions to Probability and Statistics," Stanford University Press, 1960, pp 468-
686.

2. Huber, P.J., "Robust Statistics: a Review," ANN. MATH. STAT., Vol 43, 1972, pp
1041-1067.

3. Fraser, D.A.8., "Nonparametric Methods in Statistics," H., N.V., 1957.

132
10.

ll.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. Cayek, Ya., and Shidak, 2., "Teoriya rangovykh kriteriyev," LTheory of Rank

Criterig7. Izdatel'atvo "Nauka", 1971.

. Yershov, A.L. , "Stable Methods for Evaluating Parameters," AV‘I‘ONATIKA l TELE-

HEKRANIKA, No a, 1978, pp 66-100.

. Bickel, P.J., and Lehman, E.l.., "Descriptive Statistics for Nonparametric Hod-

e13: I. Introduction," ANN. STAL, Vol 3, 1975, pp 1038-1046.

. Kendall, H.Dzh., and St'yuart, A. "Statisticheskiye vyvody i avyazi" [Statis-

tical Conclusions and Connectiong , Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1973.

. Bickel, P.J., SCAND. J. STATIST. THEORY AND APPL, Vol 3, No lo, 1976, pp 1105-

168.

. Hampel, P.R., Ph.D dissertation, University of California (Berkeley), 1968.

zielinski, m, BULL. m: Vacuums powxmsa nns scmcns. SERIE ans scrnucas
mm, A5111. :1- pms., Vol 25, No 12, 1977, pp 1281-1286.

Shulenin, V.P., "0n the Stability of the hodgea-Lenan Class of Evaluations,“
in "VII_Vsesoyuznaya konferentaiya po teorii kodirovaniya i peredachi informa-
tsii" _/_Seven_§_h All-Union Conference on the Theory of Information Encoding and
Transaissionl, Hoscow-Vil'nyua, Part 6, 1978, pp 147-151.

Dmitriyev, Yu.G., Koshkin, G.M., Simakhin, V.A., Tarasenko, F.P., and Shulenin,
VLF” "Neparametricheakoe otsenivaniye funktsionalov po statsionarnzn vyborkan"

LNonparametric Evaluation of Functional: According to Fixed Samplegl, Izdatel'-
stvo Tomskogo universiteta, 1971..

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWDR OFVWCJAL USFZ(NNLY

ADAPTIVE PROCESSING OF TWO-COMPONENT NOISE SIGNALS

[Article by V. P. Peshkov pp 119-121]

£1ext7 Let us discuss the problem of detecting an additive mixture S(t) = 81(t) *
O Szzt) of narrow-band 81(t) ' A(t)cos [mot + Y(t)] and broad-band 52(t) Gaussian
signals against a background of Gaussian interference N(t) under conditions of pri-
or indeterminacy (the central frequency and band Aw of signal 81(t) are unknown, as
are the correlation functions K52(t,t1) and KN(t,t1).

According to results published in 11,37, the optimum receiver for a two-component
signal is a two-channel one.

The Broad-Band Channel. The adaptive detector of the signal's broad-band component
is realized on the_basis of narrow-band spectral analysis (on the basis of a DP?

[Ehpansion unknown], for example) with subsequent weighted stgra e that allows for
the spectral properties of the signals and the interference !_l . In connection

with this, detection is accomplished in two stages.

During the first stage, nonoptimum temporal processing with a preselector in the
form of an ideal band-pass filter takes place for the purpose of determining the
reference channels. In order to do this, the results of the processing in each
spatial channel are retained for several review cycles. The matrix of numbers

H - N x m that is obtained is used to determine the threshold by successive deter-
mination of the signal channels and the elimination of them from the procedure of
computing the threshold in the next iteration. The procedure is repeated until
newly segregated signal channels are not observed after a normal iteration.

In the second stage there is an exaluation of the spectral densities gN(w) and
gSN(m), the transmission factor [Ia] is formed, and there is adaptive processing in
each spatial channel, using the iterative procedure for computing the thresholds.

The results of modeling showed that a given algorithm makes it possible, after sev-

eral iterations, to eliminate almost completely the effect of the signal channels
on the magnitude of the threshold, achieve a given false alarm probability, and de-

tect a signal with a high degree of reliability.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY

The Narrow-Band Channel. The above-mentioned iterative procedure for determining
the threshold can also be used in the channel for the detection of narrow-band sig-
nals, in connection with which: spectral analysis of the input sample is performed
according to the BPF's algorithm; from the mass of numbers that is obtained, slid-
ing is used to form groups of numbers (with 22 + 1 numbers per group), in each of
which there is a minimum number; from the mass of numbers that is obtained, an
evaluation of the interference spectrum is formed by smoothing it with respect to
2p + 1 numbers; obeleniye Ltranslation unknown] of the input signal's spectrum is
carried out by dividing it by the obtained evaluation of the input spectrum; the
recurrent threshold computation procedure that was explained above is applied, with

segregation and elimination of the signal channels, and the excesses above the
threshold are found.

The results of modeling of this algorithm showed that the error in evaluating the
spectral density of the signal's narrow-band component does not exceed 1 dB, even
in the most unfavorable situation, when there are also narrow-band components in
the neighboring frequency channels.

In order to accomplish adaptation with respect to the band, it is necessary to com-
bine all the adjacent elementary components that exceeded the threshold. An inves-
tigation of the algorithm that accomplishes the band adaptation showed that it is
necessary to introduce two thresholds into the system: one threshold is used to
evaluate the signal's band (gate), while the other, which provides a given false
alarm probability, finds the excesses inside the gate that are then combined by cu-
mulative or weighted storage. The determination of the gate can be by optimum or
cumulative storage of the results of spectral analysis for several cycles. The
modeling results showed that band adaptation increases resistance to interference
and eliminates ambiguity in determining the number of discrete signal components
during detection.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Peshkov, V.P.. "Band Optimization," in "Tezisy doklsdov na Respublikanskoy
nauchno-tekhnicheskgy konferentsii 'Problemy peredachi informatsii provodnymi
kanalami svyazi'" LSummaries of Reports civen at the Republic Scientific and
Technical Conference on "Problems of Information Transmission Over Hire Communi-
cation Links:7, Kiev, 1975.

2. Krasnyy, L.G., and Peshkov, V.P., "Adaptive Detection of Noise Signals," in_
"Trudy VIII Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy gidroakustike" lﬂorks
of the Eighth All-Union School-Seminar on Statistical Hydroacousticgl, Novo-

sibirsk, Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences,
1977.

135

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGNHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EFFECT OF CONCENTRATED REPLECTORS ON THE EFFECTIVENESS 0F HYDROACOUSTIC
INFORMATION PROCESSING

[Article by A. P. Trifonov and Yu. S. Radchenko pp 121-123]

[feat-l- Por a hydroacouatic information transmission channel, it is typical that

reception of the useful signal’s field So(t,;;Io) takes place against a background
not only of fluctuation noises, but also of interfering signals reflected from the
bottom, the surface and intervening objects. Let us given the name "quasi-

determined interference" to the group of n interfering signals {Sk(t,§;?.k)

(k I 1—,n') with unknown parameters 1k I {tk1,....tku}€t that are present in the ob-
served data with probabilities pk.

Into receiving aperture D over time 10.1], let there enter a mixture y(t,;) of the
useful signal's field So(t,§;I°) (which depends on the vector of the parameters

to I {"01"""‘0 )GI), the quasidetermined interference and Gaussian noise; the
signal at the ougput of the receiver's linear part then has the form

‘1' n A
"(1’) - r I y(:,‘£)a(c,§)aca§ - Juosmo) + 2 $563,339} + sum. (1)
0 D kIl

where B(t,;) defines the structure of the receiving system 11].; z I useful signal-
to-noise ratio; zk - ratio of the useful signal's amplitude to the amplitude of the

k-th interfering signal; {Si(T,I,-_)) (i I 6-,?) I normalized signal functions (gener-
alized indeterminacy functions) of the useful and interfering signals _/_.‘f._7. The
term )0 equals either 0 or 1, with probability pkzxk I l and with probability

qk = l - Pk‘Ak I 0.

Assuming that the receiving system is optimum only in the presence of a useful sig-
nal and noise at the input, let us find its characteristics when it is affected by

quasidetermined interference. If the parameters of the useful and interfering sig-
nals are not known, one method for overcoming the prior indeterminacy is the

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

maximum likelihood method \HHP). In accordance with the MMP, the detection algo-
rithm has the form H(iﬁ) ' max “(t) 2 h, where h a the threshold. As an estimate
of parameter 3b we will use I“, which is the location of the absolute maximum of

H(I) in area I. In order to calculate the characteristics of the maximum likeli-
hood receiver (PMP), it is necessary to know the distribution function of the abso-

. . + . . . . .
lute maximums of the field H(l) in area i. There 18 no precise solution to this
problem, so let us use an approximate (asymptotically accurate) approximation of
this distribution function. The approximation can be written as

n
mo - P[max am < h] , rum n rkm, (2)
k'O
where, according to 17L7,
"-1 2
exp[-€h—+fexp (- h7)], h >,Ju - 1
sum - (2") 2 (3)
0, h < in - 1
and for high signal-to-noise ratios 2, Fk(h) has the form
Fk(h) I qk + pko(h - z/zk). (6)

Here, p I 0, q I 1 if A0 I 0 and so I 1, p0 I l, qo I 0 if A0 I 1. When deriving
(2). (3 and (a , we used a method with division of the area into signal subareas

Ifk} (k = 5:3) in the vicinity of points {ik} and the noise subarea in that is sup-

plementary to them. In the case where So(t,§;zo) and {Sk(t,§;Ik)} are narrow-band
wave fields with a random phase,

n
F(h) - Fn(h)k20{l - ka(z/zk,h)}. (5)

In (5), Q(u,v) = a (Harkum) function.

The probability a of a false alarm and 3 of signal transmission into the PHP can be
written. using (2), (3) and (S). as

n
n = leax H(I) > hIAo = O] I l - F"(h) H (l - ka(z/:k,h)},
k‘l
(6)

n
8 I leax "(1) < hle I l] I FN(h) n {l - ka(z/zk,h)).
k=0

In (6), p0 I 1, z I l. The results of the calculation of the characteristics of
detection of an ogject at an unknown range according to formulas (6) for n I l, in
accordance with the criterion of an ideal observer, are presented in Figure l. The

solid curves are calculated for an optimum threshold h, which was selected with due
consideration for the possible presence of interference. The broken curves are

calculated for the threshold h I z/2, which is asymptotically optimum when detect-
a signal against a background of noise.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omaAI. USE ONLY

   

l 1 3 7 l I

Figure 1. Total probability of detec- Figure 2. Provisional scattering of
tion error. range estimate.

(k)

Let us characterize the reliability of the evaluation by probabilities p I

I “In '3 I’Lk] (k = 0—,n'). Using (2), (3) and (5). pm) can be written as

(k) ' "
o . [{Fu(h) n Fi(h)}de(h) -
'” i'° (7)
2 2
I h + (z/zk) hz n
I iFn(h)h exp l- 2 110(_zk)i20u - Pi0(zlzi.h)}dh.

If the accuracy of the evaluation is characterized by the scattering matrix (of the

second starting ummenta of the errors) Vdo) I «In - 10) + (In - IO)>’ we obtain

n n
‘ (k) “ " (k) " +
v(I ) - 2 p l + D 1 + (1 - z p )v (2 ). (8)
o k_° “k k k-o u o

. _. . - 2._ . ‘-l . -

Here, ak - (IR “‘0) + (Ik - Io), bk (ck/z) sk sosk , where sk

a ”[328 (1,7. )/3!..3!..]I , The systematic and fluctuational errors in the evalua-
k k I. J

. . . + . + ‘ 2 _ _
tion are determined in the subareas {Lk}, while VN(9.0) “loitoj + Lian/12" ma

trix of anomalous errors related to taking a noise spike for a signal. The results
of the calculation of the distance to an object, using formula (7) and (8) for n I

I l, u I 2 are presented in Figure 2. Here, 9 I lZV/Lz, A I 1.1 - 2 . The signal
functions {Si(l,li)} (i I 0.1) were assumed to be bell shaped and 0 unit duration.

Theoretical relationships (6). (7) and (8) are asymptotically precise for h >> 1,

E >> 1, 2 >> 1. In order to establish the limits of their applicability, the detec-
tion and evaluation algorithms (according to the m) were modeled on a computer.
The results are plotted in Figures 1 and 2.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Gatkin, N.G., "Algorithms for the Optimum Spatiotemporal Processing of Random
Fields; in "Trudy IV Vsesoyuznoy shkoly-seminara po statisticheskoy gidro-

skustike"_/_ﬁorks of the Fourth All-Union School Seminar on Statistical Hydro-
acousticgl, Kiev, 1972.

138

POIOI’FIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (SI-Z ONLY

2. Kulikov, Yc.N., Radchenko, Yu.s., and Trifonov, A.P.. "Characteristics of a
Maxim Likelihood Receiver in the Presence of Quasideternined Interference,"
Izvzsrm vuzov. mmmxmomn, Vol 9, 1978, pp 3-9.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

ON THE QUALITY OF SOME EVALUATIONS 0P MAXIMUM LIKBLIHOOD

[Article by V. V. Borodin pp 123-125]

[iexg7 The maximum likelihood principle is frequently used in problems involving
the evaluation of random or unknown quantities.

It is frequently necessary to evaluate parameters on which the mean of the normal
distribution depends in a complex, nonlinear fashion. In this article we investi-
gate the quality of the maximum likelihood evaluation (OH?) in such a case.

Let there be a random vector quantity § - {y1,y2,y3}, distributed according to the
normal law, with a unit covariance matrix and an average value §(§) that depends

functionally on the two-dimensional vector ;, with

+ + exp 1-0/2)"; - my
F(y|x) = (2‘)3 2 . (1)
Also, let:

1. the condition of separability be fulfilled for vector §(§); that is, §(§1) f

f ;(;2) for all :1 f :2 G D, where D . the area of change in vector ;;

2. function ;(;) be continuously and twice differentiable;

3. Gramme's matrix rij(§) = <ai§(§),aj§(§) be not degenerate for all ; D. In+
connection with these assumptions, the probability density of the evaluation of x--

providing that the true value of 2 is :0--has the form
exp {-(1/2)||;<I) - ;(;o)||2p(x)} ——

 

4 + +
F(X|xo) I 2' ldet rij(x).
2 2 + -(1/2)(:—c0(;))2 (2)
° I " (I ' ".(me —— dt.
I(x) s-l J5;
140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhe variables introduced here have the following meanings. Functions SR2) deter-
mine the two-dimensional surface R2 in the sampling space Y. Operator N9 is the
operator of the orthogonal projection onto the plane tangent to 82 at point Wig).
Variables 316:) and 6126) are the main Gaussian curvatures of surface R2 at point
376?); 36?) is the unit vector of the normal to surface 32 at this point; £06?) I

I @9360) - 37(3)» Interval 1(3) for which the integration is performed is de-
ternined in the following manner.

Let

inf {2<3(I),§(§') - gab]
Mg“) =3.» ||y(x') - y(x)||2
x'cD

so that three different cases are possible: ‘1 <_ A2 < 0, [(2) . (AIR-9,»);
h < o < x2, 1(2) - (A;l(§).lgl('§)); o < Al < 12, 1(2) - page».

If vector '3? h“ n components, ; ' {y1,...,yn}, while the vector ; being evaluated

has (n - 1) conponents. :- {x1,...,xn_1}, and Conditions 1, 2 and 3 are applied to
the vector as was done above, in this case the the probability density of the GNP--

providing that the true value of i is :0, has the form

exp {-(1/2)||;G) - ;(;o>||22(;n

NEH; ) = ——-—-—7——/¢et r..('x').
0 (2‘s)k 2 1']

2 (3)
n-l e-(1/2)(t-to(§))
- I n (1 - tts(x))—-——dt.
1(1) 3-1 0?

Here P6) is the operator of the orthogonal projection onto the hyperplane that is

. -> a -> . .
tangent to hypersurface Rn-l at paint y(x), 8(1:); 3 I l,...,n - l I train Gaussian
curvatures of hypersurface Rad at this point. All the other terms have the same
meaning as before.

In the general case, when vector yhas n components, § I {y1,...,yn}, while vector

i has It components, 5? I (x1....,xk}, k < n, the expression for the provisional (MP
probability density can be written in the following form:

exp (-(1/2>ll§(§) - §<§o)||2p('£)’

PG: 5: ) I -—-——T———— v/detl'. .62)
l 0 (210k 2 l]

" " " " ' (a)
det Di.(§|§)e’(1/2)“; - itxo) - y(x)o(x)u‘
I
90:) det rij(‘£)(2.)(“"‘)’zoy
141

MOFFIOALUSEONLY
FOR OPE-TOM. USE ONLY

Here, P(;) is the operator of the orthogonal projection on the plane tangent to

_ ++ + + _ . *" -
surface Rh at paint y(x); Q(x) . E - P(x); 8 = unit operator. Matrix Dij(ylx) 18
given by the expression

++ -> 2++
Dij(y|x) rij(x) <aijy(x),y>,

while area 9(;), with respect to which the integration is carried out, lies wholly
in the subspace of (n - k) measurements that is orthogonal to plane Rk at point

;(;) and is determined by the following expression:

sup 2<+ »(;') - +(;)>

+ . + _ + + < 1}.

BIBLIMRAPHY

l. Zaks, Sh., "Teoriya statisticheskikh vyvodov" [fheory of Statistical Conclu-
sionéY, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1975.

1102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORfMﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY

GAUSSIAN SIGNAL DETECTION WITH A LONG OBSERVATION TIME

[Article by K. B. Krukovskiy-Sinevich pp 125-126]

liexgj In a number of cases a return signal can be regarded as the reaction to the
sounding message of a linear filter with a randomly changing transient character-
istic of the form

h(t) - a(t)n(t). (1)

where a(t) and H(t) are random and regular functions. respectively. If we assume
that a(t1)a(t2) = 8(t1 -t2) and examine sounding signals with an ambiguity function
characterized by high resolution with respect to distance. from (1) it follows that

R(t1,t2) - Ro(t1 - t2)H(t1)H(t2). (2)

The terms in (2) are defined as follows: R(t1,t2) - the return signal's correla—_
tion function; R0(t1 - t2) = the sounding message's correlation function. In £_Lj
there is a definition of an optimum (according to (Bayyes's) criterion) receiver
for a weak Gaussian signal with a correlation function of type (2) and additive
Gaussian interference. For a sufficiently homogeneous (within the observation lim-
its (-T/2,T/2)) function H(t) and APT>> l. where AF is the effective width of the
signal's spectrum, it is logical to use the Gaussian probability distribution law
for the process taking place at the output. In this case the computation of the
probabilities of false alarms and correct signal detection does not present any
difficulties. However, as was pointed out correctly in 1_Lj, the magnitude of the
error related to the approximate model of the output process is not always obvious.
In order to evaluate these errors, let us examine the following example:

"0’ It] < T/Z,
0. ltlaT/Z.
solar, lu - on < nAF,

H(t) = (3)

Fo(w)' (A)

O, Iu - ”0' a nAF,

where Fo(w) = energy spectrum of the sounding signal; 80 = its energy. As is known,
the spectra of signals witl linear and hyperbolic frequency modulation that are

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI<HNHCJAI.USEIDNL¥

widely used in practice approximate the spectrum of type (A). For the indicated
H(t) and Po(u), Po--the probability of correct detection--is defined for different
values of the product AFT and a fixed false alarm probability that equals 0.1. The
detection characteristics were calculated both for the Gaussian approximation and
without allowing for it. These computations showed that for P0 W 0.9, the Gaussian
approximation results in errors of less than 5 percent.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

. 1. Van Tris, 6., "Teoriya obnaruzheniya otsenok i nodulyatsii" [Theory of Detection
of Estimates and Modulatiog7, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetakoye radio“, Vol 3, 1977.

144

FCIICIHH(JAI,USIZCHULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ON SELECTING THE INTERFERENCE CLASSIFIER FOR SIGNAL DETECTION SYSTEMS

[Article by A. M. Zil'bershteyn and Yu. s. Natkovich pp 126-127]

£fext7 We are discussing the problem of signal detection under conditions where
the interference belongs to a given discrete set (the elements of which are assumed
to be relabeled) and can be registered in "pure" form in the initial processing
time interval preceding the moment of the signal's possible appearance. For such
problems it is possible to use a two-step detection procedure [_l7; according to
which a sample of the pure interference is used for classification for the purpose
of determining its probable number 7 61‘ = {1,n}. while a "signal" sample is used
for signal detection, assuming that the background is interference with the number
7 that was selected during the first stage. The system that realizes the two-stage
detection procedure contains the interference classifier and "engaged" (depending
on its solutions) detectors.

In this article the feasibility of using a system with a classifier is evaluated by
comparison with a system for the optimum processing of a signal sample alone (with-
out taking the pure interference sample into consideration).

The basic goal of this investigation is to determine the requirements for a rule
for classifying a pure interference sample (for given arbitrary detection rules in
the channels), the implementation of which guarantees the advisability of using the
two-step procedure.

Let us designate as ¢k1(y,x) the solving rules of a detection system that realizes
the two-step procedure and the processing of pure interference sample y and signal

sample x.

Let the following be given: conditions of full prior information; a detection rule
optimality criterion that is the minimum probability of mistaken solution of Ole] =
= x oylpl. where

Y‘r ¢Y[¢] - qa¢(y)ly + p I 8 (y.0)l'(d(y,0)).

W00

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICHHWC]AI.I£§E(HNLY

where 0 - arbitrary detection solving rule; q, p I probabilities of interference

or mixed situations; (D - set of values of signal parameter 6; A , A' - prior dis-
tributions in T and F x CD; o¢(y), 8 (1,0) - provisional false alarm and signal
passage probabilities. The optimum detection rule for the signal sample alone is .
the (Bayyes) rule ¢*(x) (for a simple loss matrix). The use of ¢k1(y,x) in compar-
ison with ¢*(x) is advisable if

01mg“): < 01mm. (1)
Statement 1. In order to fulfill (I) it is sufficient that for any 1 P,

d=y * -1
l (y) > (1 - OYIO (1)1)(1 - Oyl¢day(x)l) (2)

(«ND - 173 = solution of the classifier; ldeh) - provisional probability of
the correct solution of the classifier; Oa(8) = channel rules).

Now let there be conditions of prior indeterminacy relative to ly, A', q and p; the
optimality criterion is minimax for u¢(y) S n, Y e F.

The use of ¢k1(y,x) in comparison with the optimum 3(x) under such conditions is
advisable if

max 8 (1,0) < max (Y,0). (3)
W 0 out”) “08801)
Statement 2. In order to fulfill (3) it is sufficient that for any Y ¢ P,
6'7 -1
t (y) > (1 - max 8 (7,9))(1 - max 8 (y,0)) .. (6)
rxo *(X) rxo od-Y(‘)

classification rules satisfying conditions (2) or (b) can be obtained according to
the results published in £2_/.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Natkovich, Yu.S., and zil'bershteyn, A.H., "On One Tho-Step Signal Detection
Procedure," in "Doklady XII Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po teorii kodirovaniyo i
peredachi informatsii" Lﬂeports Given at the Seventh All-Union Conference on the
Theory of Information Encoding and Transmissiqﬁ7, Moscow-Vil'nyus, Part 6, 1978,

pp 96-101.

2. Fomin, A.S., "Classification of Observations Under Conditions of Indeterminacy."

RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 21, No 7, 1976, pp 1608-1616.

166

IN]! OFIﬂCJAI.lEﬂ£(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NOISE SIGNAL IDENTIFICATION UNDER CONDITIONS OF INTERFERENCE AND FREQUENCY-
INDEPENDENT DISI‘ORTIONS

[Smary of report by V. V. Geppener, V. B. Nazarov and H. A. Senilov pp 127-128]

[_Tex_t_..7 In this work we discuss questions relating to the identification of random
noise signals (processes) in the presence of additive interference and frequency-
dependent attenuation in the medium. Linear solution functions are derived and
the existence of a condition of solving rule invariance to the power of the inter-
ference is indicated. with due consideration for the latter statement, the problem
of forwlating a linear solution function that is invariant to the effect of inter-
ference of unknown power is set. Various noise-resistant analogs of parametric and
nonparametric solving rules are found.

There is also a discussion of solution rules that are invariant relative to
frequency-dependent distortions in the medium. As experiments have shown, the con—

struction on a digital computer of solving rules using invariant descriptions pro-
vides higher quality identification in comparison with noninvariant algorithms.

14 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY

METHODS FOR DISCOVERING THE PROPERTIES OF OBJECTS ON THE BASIS OF THE ANALYSIS OF A
SET OF RETURN SIGNALS

[Article by I. 0. Arts, T. Yu. Sullakatko and V. R. Kheynrikhsen pp 128-130]

_/_Tex£7 In many branches of science and technology (hydroacoustics, geology, flaw
detection and so on) there arises the need to evaluate the parameters of an object
that is being investigated. The informative signals are frequently return signals
y(t). in which-~along vith the directly reflected signals 80(t) that characterize
the object's external parameters and the attenuation caused by the mediumm-there

appear components Si“) that carry information about the_ob'ect's internal parame-
ters (configuration, material parameters and so forth) 11]]

n +++
y(t) - E si(t,xan,Y) + n(t), t e [0.1], (l)
i'O

+ a
where n(t) '- white noise; x(t) . vector of the information parameters; ¢(t) . vec-

tor of the completely known parameters; :(t) - vector of the random (interfering)
parameters.

Let us assume that the system has only one input and one output; that is, there is
only one source of sounding pulses and a single return pulse receiver, although the
dynamic and spatial characteristics of the electroacoustic converters must also be
taken into consideration. Components si(t) can frequently be regarded as linear-L
invarient (with respect to time) representations of the sounding.signal u(t) 11/.
In the absence of noise, the total, integrated Fourier spectrum Sy(ju) from the re-
ceived signal forms the sum of the spectra of the component pulses:

N
Sy(Ju) I ifosi(JU)s (I) ‘ (”p”)-

1108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The latter are formulated from the object by the sounding signal's spectrum:
Si(jw) I Sv(jw)§i(jw), (3)

where §i(jw) I a component transfer function.

All the information about the object is contained in the set of component transfer
functions {F (ju)}. The object' s total transfer function is:

.2 F (ju) = $ y(ju)/$v (jm). (4)
=0

If fi(jw) is known with an accuracy of up to the constant factors of the real and
imaginary parts; that is,

§i(ju) - aciai(w) + jbsibi(u), (5)

where a l(u), bi (w)= given functions; sci, bsi - unknown variables, the problem can
be solved on the basis of the method of least squares as applied to the real and

imaginary parts of equation (4). In the general case, F (jw) should first be ap-
proximated by a function determined by the least number of parameters for the given
approximation accuracy. These parameters' specific values are determined on the
basis of the selected quality criterion until equation (4) is satisfied. However,
this method is not advisable, because even for simple, realized, physical transfer
functions, the number of parameters selected is quite large.

If the sounding signal is a harmonic oscillation of unit amplitude; that is,

évu...) ,. m, - .10), (6)

the object's total transfer function is determined by (7):

N N
igoriuuo) - Sy(Juo) - Aye + Jays - 150““ + JAis). (7)

Equation (7) does not make it possible to determine Aic and Ais: since they also
acquire new values when the frequency changes. However, some integral estimate can
be obtained if the sounding signal is a narrow-band one relative to Fi(jm), but fi-
nite in duration Tu. The received signal then has the form

N
y(t) I iEOAia(t - 1i)cos [mot - Oil. (8)

where a(t) I normalized envelope of the sounding signal, Ai' ti I amplitude and
time lag of the i-th pulse; 0i = initial phase of the i- th pulse, which can be ran-
dom. A matter of practical interest is the processing of the low-frequency, inte-

grated envclope in square channels, which is equivalent to the introduction of new
coordinates Aic and Ais°

Aic I Aicos .i’ Ais I Aisin .i' (9)

The vector of information parameters is transformed accordingly:

+ + +

x = [A .m} + {£383}. (10)

149

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬁﬂ(]AL USE(NVLY

If we assume that i is known or enlarge the number of equations to each element of
resolution wilh respect to lag, it is possible to find Aic and Ais as the solutions
of the following equations:

N N
iEOKiinc - Bjc’ ifoxiin’ - Bjs’ 0 < j < N, (11)
where
'r a
Kij - g aj(t - tj)ai(t - 1i)dt, kii ' 1,
T T .
Bjc - 3 y(t)2 cos wotaj(t - tj)dt, Bjs . f y(t)2 sin wotaj(t - Tj)dt.

0

For a long duration of the realization and a short duration of an element of reso-
lution with respect to lag. the number of initial equations is extraordinarily
large and it is advisable to solve the problem on the basis of adaptive search al-
gorithms. The zero approximation (initial state) is obtained on the basis of a de-
termination of the extreme values of Bjc and 83,, where ‘j e [0,T] for all elements
of resolution with respect to lag.

The test of the evaluative realisation's convergence to the original one is made
according to the mean-square criterion.

0n the basis of what has been said, an adaptive correlation filter for evaluting
the amplitudes and lags of the set of interfering radio pulses can be constructed
according to the following block diagram:

 

Figure 1. Block diagram of a quadrature measuring device: an -
* memory unit; an I microprocessors; l - correlator; 2 - solu-
tions of linear equations; 3 . iterative procedure controls.
The properties of objects are determined on the basis of X3, Kc, ? and prior data,
during secondary processing.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Netsaveer, Ya.A., and Pikk, Yu., "Return Signal of Finite Pulse From a Cylindri-

cal Shell Filled with a Liquid." IZVESTIYA AN sssa. FIZIKA I MATEHATIKA, Vol 25.
No 3, 1976, pp 260-268.

150

FOIKOFFKJAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. ﬂigul, U.l(., editor. "Bkho-signaly ot uprugikh ob"yektov" Lieturn Signals From
Elastic 0bjectg7, Tallin, Institute of Cybernetics, Estonian SSR Academy of
Sciences. Vol 2, 1970. p 346.

. Kangur, 0.5.. Kollom, U.A., Ots, A.E., et al., “On an Algorithm for Determining
the Parameters of Elastic Shells From Return signals," in "AN SSSR IX Vsesoyuz-

naya akusticheakaya konferentsiya“ LESSR Academy of Sciences' Ninth All-Union
Acou3tics Conference], Moscow, 1977, pp 21-24.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ON AN MORITHH FOR THE REMOTE DETERMINATION OF PARAMETERS 0F SHELLS

[Article by Ya. A. Hetsaveer pp 130-134]

£Eex£7 In this article we will discuss the determination of the parameters of a
single class of objects--thin elastic shells--on the basis of an acoustic return

signal.

As the parameters of the return signal, let us use the amplitudes and times of ar-
rival of the first return signals, as well as the shapes of these return signals
and the shape of the sounding pulse. This difference in pulse shape is caused by
distortions taking place during wave propagation in the shell or its filler and,
consequently, is a carrier of information about the object's internal structure.
Distortions in the shape of return signals can be divided into "quasi-steady-state"
and "prefront." In order to define them, let us represent return signal pn(t) with
the help of a Fourier integral, in the form

°° . m w 0
pn(t) " ffF(u)Fn(m)e-lmtdw = }( )dw + f( )dw + I( Hm, (I)

where fF(m) I spectral density of the sounding pulse; Pg(w) 3 transfer function
(spectral characteristic function) on the n-th return signal; ”1' ”2 - limits of
the frequency band beyond which function fF(u) equals zero, for all practical pur-
poses. "Quasi-steady-state" means those distortions that are described by the in-
tegral from ”I to w , while "prefront" means those for the description of which the
remaining infinite integrals play an essential role.

In order to select the parameters of the quasi-steady-state approximation of the
return signal, it is advisable to look for those constants that are invariant rel-
ative to the sounding pulse; that is, in terms of which the amplitudes, arrival
times and quasi-steady-state distortions of individual return signals are defined
for any sounding pulse. In order to find these parameters we should study the be-
havior of the individual return signals' transfer functions Fn(m). As an example.
Figure 1 depicts the absolute values of the functions Fn(u) of several return sig-
nals from a cylindrical aluminum shell of thickness h/R - 0.05 that is filled with
water and also immersed in water.

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

ﬂlhﬂ

 

Figure l: l. reflected pulse; 2. first emitted pulse of moment-
less mode; 3. first emitted pulse of flexing mode; a. first re-
fracted pulse.

From the behavior of transfer functions Pn(w) it follows that the latter are quite
smooth and can be approximated by functions containing a small number of constant
return signal parameters. A quasi-steady-state approximation of the return signal
from a thin spherical or cylindrical shell can be represented approximately by the
integral

U a o
p(t) = xsz<u)|po(u,.oj) + z p<u,anj)1e"""a , (2)
ml “'1

where F0, P I approximating functions for the reflected and secondary return sig-

nals' transfer functions; ank (n I 0,1,...) I constant approximations I parameters

of the return signal; n = serial number of the return signal; jo. k? I numbers of
a

reflected and secondary return signal parameters. The following re tionships can
be used as transfer functions:

Fo(x,aoj) = 30(1 + aolx-a02)-lexp [i(ao3 + aoax +a05arctg a06x)l.
(3)

- 8 1 2 .
F(x,ank) Box n exp {an2 + ansx + anax + ilan5 +an6x + an7arctg (an8 + angx)]},

where x I 2Ifh/c; f I frequency of the oscillations. Such a representation of the
return signal means expansion of the signal into separate return pulses. The in-
formation in each pulse is determined by the small numbers jo or k0. It stands to
reason that the number of these return signal parameters is significantly greater
than the investigated object's (shell's) number of parameters. Therefore, it turns
out to be advisable to divide the return signal's parameters into basic and auxil-
iary ones; the introduction of this concept proves to be necessary only in order to
find the return signal's basic parameters. A return signal's basic parameters can
be used as the most constant approximations of the transfer functions, as well as
some combinations of the latter. For example, in the case of empty, circular, cy-
lindrical shells, by taking anl I 0, n I 0,1,2, in (3), as the return signal's ba-
sic parameters we can use the constants 80h and °n2' an3 and an“ for n I 1,2, as
well as a16 where the pulse with index n I 1 corresponds to the first reflected
pulse of the momentless mode and the one with index n I 2 corresponds to the first
reflected pulse of the flexing mode. If the shell's parameters lie within the lim-
its 8 = 2.40-3.80; Y I 2.50-9.00; A = 0.01-0.05, the basic return signal parameters
mentioned above are determined in terms of the latter by the formulas

Bo - (R/L)l/2/2, a

04 - 2(L - R)/h;

153

INJR (HHHCJAI.IISIZ(NVLY
FOR OFINCJAI.IEHECNVLY

a I 1.88 + 1.02: - 0.638 + 0.287 - 0.21e8+0.06c7 - 0.0187;

- 3.32 + 1.96: + 1.388 - 0.95y + 0.29és - 0.08:7 + 0.0187;

= -6.00 - 1.9a: —o.2ne + 0.407; (a)
316 I [0.93 + exp (1.86 - 0.608)]IA;

a22 I -2.81 - 2.40s - 0.168 - 1.041 + 0.8668 + 0.06ey + 0.3281;
a23 I -4.lh + 1.86e‘02.368 + 0.831 - 0.47:8 - 0.00:7 + 0.1981;
‘26 = 2.52 - 0.12s - 1.106 - 0.137,

where c I In A; A I h/R; 8 = [E/(l - v2)pI]1/z/c; y I 91/9; L I distance to the
shell's axis; R, h I radius and thickness of the shell; 8, v, 91 I modulus of elas-
ticity, Poisson's ratio and density of the shell's material; 9, c I density of and
speed of sound in the medium surrounding the shell.

The search for the return signal's parameters (approximation constants) according
to its realization is the subject of _/_S_7. In order to determine the object's pa-
rameters, the transfer functions of the individual return signals that have been
found should be identified. This should be considerably simpler if it is known to
what class the object being investigated belongs.

In order to establish whether a shell is empty or filled with a liquid, it is suf-
ficient to investigate the amplitude of the first reflected pulse. If the reflect-
ed pulse's amplitude is a function of frequency w, the shell is filled with a liq-
uid; otherwise, it is empty.

For the classes of shells being investigated, having dependences of types (3) and
(a) in order to determine a shell's parameters according to the quasi-steady-state
approximation of the return signal, it is sufficient to: 1) obtain from a recorded
return signal the transfer functions for a small number of first return pulses; 2)
establish the class of the shell; 3) identify the obtained transfer functions; a)
find the approximation constants of the transfer functions of the reflected and
first emitted pulses in the momentless and flexing modes (of the first refracted
pulses, also, in the case of shells filled with a liquid); 5) find the shell's pa-
rameters by solving, for example, a system of type (a) in the least squares sense.

Let us mention here that the algorithms for determining the parameters of the
shell and the filler that were presented here were done so only for the purpose of
demonstrating the theoretical possibility of determining all the shell and filler
parameters with the exception of the shell's material's Poisson ratio. The latter
cannot be determined from the return signal, since a change in it within limits of
0.2-0.3 has no effect on the return signal's parameters for all practical purposes.

In the case of complex shells, the return signal consists of separate return pulses,

each of which has its own excitation mechanism, so that the deterministic approach

for determining their structure that we have been discussing is not applicable.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Hickling, 8., "Analysis of Echoes From a Hollow Metallic Sphere in Hater," J.

ACOUST. SOC. AMERICA, Vol 36, No 6, 1964, pp 1124-1137.

154
2.

FOR 0F1ﬂCJAl.lEﬂECMVLY

Hetsaveer, Ya.A., "0n the Scattering of Waves by Elastic, Spherical Shells in an
Acoustic Medium" YZVESTIYA AN EST. SSR. PIZIKA I HATBHATIKA, Vol 19, No 6, 1970,
pp 615-422.

. Hetsaveer, Ya.A., and Pikk, Yu.P., "Return signal of a Finite, Spherical Pulse

From a Spherical Shell Filled with a Liquid," PRIKLADNAYA HATBHATIKA I HEKHANIKA,
Vol 40, No 4, 1976, pp 648-654.

Kheyfets, Ye.I., and Shenderov, Ye.L., "Formation of Caustics [Erobably Acous-
ticg7 During the Interaction of Sound With Shells," AKDSTICHESKIY ZHURNAL, Vol
18, No 3, 1972, pp 456-463.

Arro, 1., Sullokatko, 7., and Khaynrikhsen, V., "Methods for Determining the
Properties of Objects on the Basis of an Analysis of a Set of Return Signals,"
this collection, 9 1&8.

155
FOR!0FFK]AL.US£(NNLY

MEASURING THE QUALITY FACTOR OF THE PRIMARY FILTERS OF A HUMAN BEING'S DIRECTIONAL
AUDITORY SYSTEM

[Article by L. A. Zhestyannikov, V. A. Zverev and V. A. (haplygin pp 134-135]

LTexg/ A model of the human directional auditory system that was constructed on
the basis of an algorithm for aperture synthesis in the frequency area has been
used to measure the quality factor of the human directional auditory system's pri-
mary filters. It has been demonstrated theoretically that in the adopted model,
the intensity of the sound from a sonic source that is perceived by a person, even
without allowing for diffraction of the sonic waves around the head, essentially
depends on the angular position of the sonic source in the horizontal plane, on

the emitted signal's spectrum, and on the primary filters' quality factor. Since
the emitted signal's spectrum is a physically measurable value, experimental data
on reducing the intensity of the sonic source's emissions that are sensed subjec-
tively by a human being when the source's angular position changes make it possible
to determine the primary filters' quality factor. However, a man cannot measure
the intensity of a sound-emitting source subjectively, but can only compare the
sound from sources that are turned on in sequence or determine the threshold of
perception of one signal against a background of another one. Besides this, a
strict accounting of the frequency-dependent effects of sonic wave diffraction
around the head of a listener is extremely difficult. so a measurement technique
was chosen that includes the use of headphones and a delay line that simulates an
angular shifting of the source through 35°. As test signals we used two non-
coherent noise signals, one being in a broad band up to 18 kHz, while the other was
in a l-kﬂz band with an average frequenCy of 1 kHz. The broad-band noise was con-
stantly suppressed, while the narrow-band noise was controlled by a pulse generator
during the time intervals when the electronic key was open. The pulses lasted for
1 second, with a pause in between of 10 seconds. The listeners determined the bi-
naural threshold 0f audibility 0f the narrow-band noise signal against the back-
ground of the broad-band signal in both the presence and absence of a lag in one of
the stereo signal channels. The threshold was registered on an automatic recorder.
The measured audibility threshold values were used to calculate the primary filters'
quality factor, which came to a quality factor value Q = 4.1 9 0.4. The measured

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quality factor value was somewhat less than that obtained by E. Taviker and R.
Fel'dkeller (Q = 6) and approximates the values obtained by measuraaents made di-
rectly at the baailar membrane of a dead body. The value obtained for the quality
factor of the primary filters of a human being's directional auditory system is in-
dicat ive of the absence of accentuation of the frequency characteristics of the

filters of a human being's auditory system on the neuron level.

157
FOI‘OFIHCJAL USEZCNNLY

PRINCIPLES OF THE DESIGN OF AN OPERATIONAL SYSTEM FOR PREDICTING THE ACOUSTICAL
SITUATION IN THE OCEAN

[Article by V. V. 01'shevskiy, V. S. Timerkayev and z. D. Usmanov pp 135-139]

1iéx§7 Ihe_most effective method for investigating the ocean is the acoustical
method Ll-Zl. Therefore, the interest of investigators in creating acoustical-
ocean-oceanographic models and developing methods for predicting its characterist-
ics on just this basis is completely natural. Along with this, various aspects of
the theory and methods of pattern identification have been developed in recent
years, which places in the investigator's hands an effective and constructive tool
for the solution of problems of this nature. Let us discuss the basic concepts
that are needed in the solution of the problem of acoustico-oceanographic predic-
tion and examine some questions concerning the design of an Operational system for
the computer realization of prediction algorithms.

1. Basic Concepts. Let us introduce (see, for example, 1;;17) three sets ox, ﬂy
and Oz corresponding to the description of the characteristics of acoustical fields

in the ocean, i<3) 6 0x, the acoustical characteristics of the ocean, §(§) 6 0y,
, . _ 4-» ++ + +->
and oceanographic characteristics, Z(Y) G 62, where X(o), Y(§) and 2(y) are vector

functions describing the elements of these sets. Vector function §(K) is under-
stood to mean the set of functions defining the dependences of different parameters
of the acoustical fields (levels, correlation functions, probability distributions

and so on) on the spatiotemporal coordinates and the frequency; vector function ?(E)
is understood to mean the set of functions defining the dependences of the ocean's
acoustic parameters (reflection, scattering and absorption factors and so on) on the

spatiotemporal coordinates and the frequency; vector function E(;) is understood to
mean the set of functions defining the dependences of the oceanographic character-
istics (wave action on the surface, the ocean's biological composition, water tem-
perature and salinity, bottom soil composition and so on) on the spatiotcmporal co-
ordinates.

158
PIMR()FPHCJAI.IISEZ(HHLY

Many years of research in oceanography and ocean acoustics ll- 77 have been essen-
tially directed at obtaining a mapping of the ocean' s hydrophysical characteristics
into acoustical ones; that is, in formulating equations of the type

2(3) - rams}, (1)
?(§) - pthi<¢)), (2)

where ny and PYZ are operators of the indicated mappings, different components of
which can be determinant as well as stochastic. Naturally, we can also talk about
mappings that are the reverse of (l) and (2):

ﬂ?) - gum». M)

where sz and ny are operators that are the reverse of Pyz and ny, respectively.

Let ox, 0y, 0,, ny and Pyz be data banks, respectively, of acoustic field charac-
teristics, the ocean's acoustic characteristics, its hydrophysical characteristics,

and the operators that define their relationships. It is obvious that 0x c 0x,

0’ C 0 y’ Oz C 02' Px WP C Py , since data banks, in principle, cannot en-
compass all the poss1ble s1tua¥1ons of conditions in the ocean, but can only de-
scribe approximations to the general sets of such situations. These data banks
contain both experimental data and the results of theoretical investigations in
oceanography and hydroacoustics and are the basis for the creation of a system for
predicting the acoustic situation in the ocean.

The design of the prediction system must be based on the principles of pattern
identification I8-ll7, since--in our opinion--therc exist no alternatives to this
approach. Further, it is necessary to introduce a proximity (similarity) measure
in the spaces 9x! ﬂy and Oz:

ox(lt,£) - a 91153)} (3)],

i
oy(k,2) - a m (3H * (3)], (3)

°x(k11) = 0:[2k(7)12£(?)]9

where ox, Gy and oz must correspond to the existence of a solvable problem that is
a question requiring a special discussion in each case; when solving the problem of

predicting the acoustic situation, metrics of the Euclidean type can apparently be
used.

2. Conceptual Model of Prediction of the Acoustic Situation. The information base
of the prediction system is composed of data banks of the acoustic fields' charac-

teristics 9x» the ocean' s acoustic characteristics Gy, and oceanographic character-

A

istics 92. With their help, the operator banks P and Pyz are formed and, further,

xy
a correspondence among vector functions x(a), Y(8) and 2(y), which are the subject
of the identification process, is established.

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us determine the two basic stages in solving the problem of predicting the
acoustic situation in the ocean. The first stage is analysis of the infatuation in
the data banks and determination of the oceanographic characteristics' classes.

The second stage is assignment of the spatiotemporal limitations on the situation
being predicted and the actual solution of the prediction problem. From this point
of view, let us examine the methodology for solving the formulated problem. Since
the final goal is prediction of the acoustic situation, our features should be

acoustic ones; that is, we should formulate the space of indicators §(;). In con-
nection with this, the objects to be identified are vector functions i(;), and the

subsequent problem reduces to determining the subsets Oz of oceanographic charac-
teristics such that

A

92 ' UeZ‘ ((0)
In this case, naturally, the solution of the taxonomy problem requires the use in
the space of acoustic indicators of a proximity measure of the type of (3) and the
formulation of condition sup ox(k,2) < 0x0: where the threshold value °x0 is chosen
k,2
either on the basis of heuristic considerations using the available hypotheses, or
by selection in connection with repeated solution of the taxonomy problem. The
second variant for determining subsets (a) is to assign their desirable number,
which--again--is formulated heuristicslly. Hith this, the problem of analysis is
essentially taken care of.

The next (resultant) task is to preduct the acoustic situation. The input data for
the prediction are the spatiotemporal limitations (R, T); that is, in essence an
indication of the area of the world ocean (R) and the time interval (T) to which
the prediction must be related. Hith the help of data bank Oz, limitations R and T

determine indicators i(R T)(y) and, further, subsets (,0, (K T) 3 82 that correspond
to these limitations. Starting with the indicators

2(R,T)(;) ‘ "3;§,T),

, . - *(iirh
with the help of algorithms of type (1) and (2), the vector functions X ' (a) of
the acoustic situation in the ocean are determined, which process corresponds to
solution of the prediction problem. When making the prediction, we can (naturally)
take into consideration the probability distributions of the oceanographic charac-
teristics within the limits of subsets (a).

2. Operational System. As follows from the discussion of the procedure for pre-
dicting the acoustic situation, its realization on a computer is related to the use
of the data banks and packages of applied programs for processing oceanographic and
acoustic information. For the effective solution of this problem on a computer, it
is necessary to have an operational system [12/ that contains the following basic
elements: an input data control system; a processor time regulation subsystem; a
subsystem for distributing the memory and information among the different computer
channels; a file control subsystem; a data bank and applied program bank control
subsystem; an information representation control subsystem; a subsystem for inter-
active investigator-computer intercourse. Such an operational system must,

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

naturally, insure effective utilization of the computer, make it easy for the in-
vestigator to coumunicate with the computer and, finally, provide a high-quality
solution to the prediction problem.

I.

10.

11.

12.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "Statisticheskiye svoystva morskoy reverberatsii" [Statisti-
cal Properties of Marine Reverberationl. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1965.

01'shevskiy, V.V. , "Statisticheskiye metody v gidrolokatsii" LStatistical Meth-
ods in Hydrolocatiog7, Leningrad, Izdatcl'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1973.

Brekhovakiy, L.M., editor, "Akustika okeana" lacean Acousticg7, Moscow, Izda-
tel'stvo "Nauka", 1971..

Grubnik, N.A., and Ol'shevskiy, V.V., "An Acoustic Model of the Ocean," in_
"Trudy Pervogo seminars 'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'" ﬂorks
of the First Seminar on Acoustic Statistical Models of the Ocean], Moscow,
Acoustics Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 3-11.

. Middleton, D., "A Statistical Acoustic Model of the Ocean," in "Trudy Pervogo

seminars 'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'", Moscow, Acoustics
Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 12-55.

Ol'shevskiy, V.V., “Models and Simulated Computer Experiments in Statistical
llydroacoustics," "'l'rudy Pervogo seminars 'Akusticheskiye statisticheskiye mode-
li okeana'", Moscow, Acoustics Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp
70-85.

. Middleton, D., and 01'shevskiy, V.V., "Contemporary Problems in Constructing

Acoustic Statistical Models of the Ocean," "Trudy Pervogo seminars 'Akustiches-
kiye statisticheskiye modeli okeana'", Moscow, Acoustics Institute, USSR
Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp 86-89.

. Zagoruyko, N.G., “Metody raspgznavaniya i ikh primeneniya" [identification

Methods and Their Utilizatiogl. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio", 1972.

. Zggoruyko, N.C., "Iskusstvennyy intellekt i empiricheskoye predskazaniye"

lArtificial Intellect and Empirical Prediction], Novosibirsk, Novosibirsk State
University, 1975.

Yelkina, V.N., Zagoruyko, N.C., and Timerkayev, V.S., "The '75' Algorithm for
Pilling__in Blanks in Empirical Tables," in "Vychislitel'nyye sistemy" LComputer
Systems], Novosibirsk, No 61, 1976, pp 3-11.

Dyuran, B., and Odell, P.. "Klaaternyy analiz" _/_Elastcr Analysis7, Moscow,
lzdatel'stvo "Statistika", 1977.

Likritzis, D., and Bernstayn, F., "Operatsionnaya sistema" Laperational Sys-
tegl, Moscow, Izdatel‘stvo "Mir", I977.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI»0FFKJAI.USE|DNLN

ON SELECTING THE MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN THO ANTENNAS WHEN DETERMINING THE
CORRELATION FUNCTION'S DEPENDENCE ON THE SPACE ANGLE

[Article by V. V. Buryachenko, V. s. Gorbenko and L. Ya. Iaradanov pp 139-141]

LText/ An acoustic interference field can be represented as a sum of isotropic and
nonisotropic components. The interference field's nonisotropic component is char-
acterized by dependence of its probability, spectral, correlational and other char-
acteristics on the space angle, and is of the greatest interest when investigating
a noise field.

In this article we determine the minimum allowable distance between two hydro-
acoustic antennas that eliminates the masking effect of the noise field's isotropic
component when measuring the correlation function between the two antennas' outputs.
1he dependence of the correlation function between the two antennas' outputs on the
space angle makes it possible to evaluate the angular heterogeneity of the non-
isctropic noise sources.

On the basis of works LT,£7, the correlation function of the output processes of
two transparent, discrete antennas is determined in general form by the expression

O
_ _L_2 . * . _ _ ,+ +
K(t1,t2IquI) (2n) :2Iifpr(Jm1)Hq(Ju2)K(tl Tp,t1 rq.1p.1q)drpdrqdw1dw2, (l)
where :P 6 P, i s Q - radius of the antennas' elements' position vector; P, Q .
= sets of elemeats of the first and second antennas, respectively; IRPqI - distance
between the antennas' phase centers; Hp(jw), H (jm) - transfer functions of the an-

tennas' elements (amplitude-phase distribution ; K(t1,t2;?P,?q) . spetiotemporal
correlation function of the noise field.

For the case of an isotropic noise field, in the absence of angular correlation of
the waves and antennas with equiamplitude distributions H (jo) ' H*(j&0 . A, in-

. P q
stead of (l) we obtain

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2 a sin (u/c)r
K(T,|R I) ' 4A zlfc(w)—(7;7r—ESCOB quG, (2)

m m0 "’ M
where C(u) = frequency spectrum of the noise; rpq I GP - r3]; 1 I t1 - t2.

In the case of two identical plane antennas with an equidistant arrangement of the

elements (see figure below), formula (2) can be converted into a form convenient
for computer use:

 

 

2 f ZN-l 214-1 .
x(r;x,v) - 8M 1' G(f)cos 21:1 2 z (N - |u - pl)(M - In - gnwdf, (3)
r“ le q=l "
where
x-Zm— v/(Nx-N+p)2+ (My-H+q)2;
.._. .25--.- -. M, N I number of antenna elements in a row
'ro- --:-- in the vertical and horizontal directions,
:1""; __ a .___°,y respectively; "x = X/d, My I Y/d I dis-
, l p I , ,_ __, placements of the antennas relative to
MI I __: I | .I each other in units d, where d I distances
Jut- l I a ' between adjacent antenna elements horizon-
,‘l L. __i tally and vertically; x, Y I horizontal

and vertical displacements of the antennas.

Correlation function (3) can be defined in terms of an antenna's radiation pattern.
In particular, for Y = 0:

f

K(‘|’;X) I 2 Ic(f)cos zlETIIR2(¢.Y;f)cos (2—::£Xcos ssin y)sin ydyd¢df. (4)
f 00
H

LUpper limit of integration for first integral in (3) and all integrals in (4) al-
most illegible_.] For 1’ - X = 0, from (lo) we obtain:

f
K(0;0) - a: PE? f, (5)
in

where ME) = dependence of the antenna's concentration factor on the frequency.

Let us mention here that computation with formula (3) requires less computer time
than when formula (4) is used.

In order to determine the minimum displacement between the antennas, it is neces-
sary to assign some small value to the normalized correlation function for 1 I 0:

K(0°X Y) <

(0;X,Y) I m a, (6)

for example, a I 0.05. By using (3) and (5) and limitation (6), X and Y should be
determined with the help of a computer. Then, during the experimental determina-

tion of K(t1,t ;;), where «E = the unit vector of the antennas' angular orientation.
the masking ef eet of the noise field's isotropic component on the result of the

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measurement of the noise field's nonisotropic component's correlation function at
the two antennas' outputs will be eliminated.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gatkin, N. 6., and Gorbenko, V. 8. "Some Models of the Correlation Functions of a
Random Process' 5 Field, “ in "Trudy IV Vsesoyuznogo simpoziuus. _Hetody predsta-
vleniya i apparaturnyy analiz sluchaynykh protsesaov i poley" [Works of the
Fourth A11-Union Symposium on Methods of Representation and Equipment Analysis
of Random Processes and Fields], Leningrad, Izdatel' stvo VNIIEP [All- Union
Scientific Research Institute -of Electrical Measuring Instrumentj.

2. Gorbenko, V. 5., Indyk, Yu. Ye. , and Hatsypura, V. T. , "0n the Spectral and Corre-
lational Properties of Processes at the _Output of a Rotating Antenna," in
"Akustika i ul' trazvukovaya tekhnika" _/_Acoustics and Ultrasonic Technology,
Izdatel' atvo "Tekhnika", No 2, 1976, pp 115-118.

END

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY