FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10692

27 July 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO: 12/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes widnin the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY
(rouo 12/92)

CONTENTS

ELECTRIC mum
Introduction of Punt-Production Capacities 1n Intogratod

Power ﬁstula
(G. mum, 8. mm; mcmcmm

smlm'sm. Apr 82)..00009000000.ooooooooooooootoooooooo l

PIPELINLS

Gooplan Should nationalize Output, Use of All types of Pipe
(11. Begum; W0?! HIOZYAYS‘NO, Apr 82)................ 13

GENERAL

Territorial-Production (implant in 11th Pin-Your Plan
(A. Gladyohcv. V. "02111.: SHAGI 00mm:
rmtmm'm-norzvoosrvm ms! SSSR, 82)....... 23

- a - [III - ussa - 37 2000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOﬂ‘K‘IALUSEONLY

ELECTRIC PM

000 621.31.002.2

INTRODUC‘HG' 0P POWER-PRODUCT!“ CAPACITIES 11' mm PM srsrnrs
Moscow mamrcmzsxon STROI‘TEL'S‘NO in Russian No 6. Apr 82 pp 66-49

[Article by G. A. Illarionov and Sh. I. Kali-an, candidates of technical sciences.
and A. I. Kusovkin. candidate of physicamathematical sciences: "Optimizing the
Introdu.¢1cn of Power-Production Capacities in Integrated Power Systems"]

[Text] When optimization nethods and models for planning the development of power
systens are utilized. the selection of optimization criteria is particularly inor-
tent. since the application of the wrong criteria can lead to totally unacceptable
solutions. At present we have yet to find a clear anmr to the question of which
criteria should be applied in problens regarding the optimisation of power systems.
Even if a criteria is selected. all of its parameters cennot always be determined
exactly. especially those which depend upon the economic situation. As an eagle,
let us examine the criterion for minimizing the calculated expenditures P. - 8K + C
(where B is the normative coefficient of capital-investment efficiency; It is the
capital investment; and C‘ is the operating expenses). This is one of the most
economically sound criteria. The decision to apply it in the power industry was
approved by the State Co-ittee on Science and Technology. There is not sufficient
basis. however. to use the cononly applied figure of 0.12 for E. Moreover. the
results of calculations for this criteria can be distorted due to fluctuations in
the prices for resources.

Therefore. in the opinion of the authors of this article, when solving problems re-
garding optimizing the development of power systems, it is necessary to carry out
calculations according to various criteria and adopt a final. heuristic solution
based upon the results of these calculations. Below are presented the results of
short-term calculations of an optimal plan for introducing power-production capaci-
ties at thermal electric-power stations of a conventional power system. The calcu-
lations were carried out using the criteria for nininising calculated expenditures
F3. capital investments Pk. the volume of construction and installation work P8 and
the maximization of the introduction of power-production capacities IV. The latter
three criteria reflect only that portion of the production process associated with
the construction of thermal electric-power stations. The other part-the operation
of electric-power stations and electric-power transaiesion linesuis not touched
upon. The application of these criteria. however. makes it possible to make allow-
ances for a shortage of capital investsents and other resources and to increase the
concentration of resources at these complexes which will begin operating first.

MWIBIONLY
.03..» .035

no 23:3- uo 28.3.3-
.uuoa ﬂown . Gdansk no .xuoa coda
533.5 vs. «8::- Jnol 3: 5:303 can
guano-Bo 5.095 Hanan-o $25.6 830952.00

HH 03”.?

3.3.6. no
23:5! 58.
$0093 .3398

Q6
3.6
am;
«To
8.0
on...
3.0
am...
«50
on a

GI.

mun¢mohoao

 

— 0.38.
MWLMONLV

N

d

o
o
o
n
o
m
c
n
N
n

 

0.— nah
MWWMY

An analysis of results fron calculations carried out according to the entire set

of criteria listed sakes it possible to draw up a better-substantiated plan of con-
struction for installations which are to cone on-line first and those already being
built and increases the efficiency of capital invest-eat. Calculations were carried
out according to the models presented in [1.2]. The functional extra-um in these
nodsls is detersined with limits iQosed on the sun total of introduced capacity. the
delivery of power units and the possible ranges of fluctuation in capital investment
and the volume of construction and installation work at individual sites and through-
out the power industry as a whole. In this case. electric-power overcurrents along
high-voltage lines were taken into consideration. The progrsns being utilized to
search for an optimum solution snake it possible to determine a nultivariant solution
that depends upon such indicators as the total voluae of capital investment K. con-
struction and installation operations 8 and the overall introduction of power-produc-
tion capacities N. The feasibility of carrying out nultivsriant calculations is of
considerable importance for the further analysis of the results obtained.

The authors of this article have calculated optianl variants of a plan for the intro-
duction of capacities in integrated power systens at dozens of conventional GREs's.
The acceptable variants of a plan for introducing capacities at GRES's are presented
in table 1.

It should be noted that the acceptable variants of the plan for introducing capacities
at individual installations are not dependent on one another; that is, the plan for
the power systel as a whole can include. for examle, the first variant of the plan
for cars No l and the second variant for GRES No 2. If provisions have not been
made for the introduction of new capacities at a particular installation over its
planned service period. then it will be necessary to apportion a certain aininun
voluse of capital investment X‘i and plan the corresponding volume of construction

and installation work 5‘1; (here i is the nuaber of the installation). Thus. only

the distribution of the relaining resources is optimized:

(“g“).

in]

In the example being considered. it was assumed that equipment for no more than four
SOD-HP power units or two BOO-HR power units be delivered to a power-production in-
stallation during its planned service period. A figure in the range of 3,500 to
6.520 m was selected for the total power-systea desand.

Table 2 presents 16 variants of optinizad calculations for the introduction of new
capacities at each electric-power station. These calculations were obtained using
the criterion of aininiution of capital investment Fk for various values of demand
in the power ayaten II. Final results of calculations for these variants of the plan
are presented in table 3.

The optimized function is a piecewise-constant function of 17. Tables 2 and 3 present
only those variants of the calculations for which the value of the demand for power
"Z (Z is the number of the variant) corresponds to the discontinuities of this func-
tion; that is. using the data in table 3 one can nake a deter-instion about the de-
pendence of the Bel-an function [3] upon the values of the paraneter N.

FOIOFI’ICIALWONLY
cod—Pu no 283:!
5362?. $33538

and? no 08.3.23
.83: 63.3332:
and gauguuacoo

coda—E mo «633.3.
5302:: ”3.310

 

n canon.

”WWMY
FORMALUSEONIJ

An analysis of the results of calculations shows that the structure of the optimal
plan for the introduction of capacities changes with an increase in the system's
demand for power: a under of power mite are excluded from the plan and others are
inserted into their places. This is associated with the discreteneee of the model.
The most apparent change in the plan's structure is manifested with a increase in
the power demand from 6,610 to 6,430 uw (variants lb and 15 in table 3).

The reason for the change in the structure of the optimal plan is the fact that there
may not be sufficient capital investment for introducing capacities at an electric-
power station with a low actual cost per kilowatt of introduced capacity (considering
the reserves). As a result, the system's demand for power is covered by introducing
pover units with a higher cost per kilowatt of installed capacity. With a growth

in the overall volume of capital investment. capacities can be introduced in the
future at electric-power stations with lower values for this indicator. This process
occurs with a transition from one calculation variant to another and can be followed
most clearly in the exawle of GEES No 6. No 300-!“ power units are introduced

in variants 2. 3, 6. 10. I3 and 16, while one unit is introduced in the remining

lO variants. Thus, with a change in the parameter NZ over a broad range the nonline-
arity of the problem leads to the absence of a monotonic dependence of the value of
the introduced capacity at individual electric-power stations upon the total power
demand N .

In order to determine all discontinuities of the Belman function. it is necessary
to carry out optimizaiion calculations for all values of power demand NZ (with an
incremental change All - NZ“ - NZ) or the entire volume of capital investment K1
(with an incremental change AKZ - K”1 + Kl).ﬁ

In order to determine the entire set of optimal solutions, the increeent Ml or AK2
must have a sufficie tly small value. For example. in calculations using the criter-
ion Fk (table 3), M should a mat to ’0 m. while AXZ should be 1 million rubles.
An increase in the values of A19 and AK can lead to certain discontinuity points

in the Belman function not being found. If. for example, AKl - 5 million rublesand
the initial volume of capital investment K‘ - 581 million rubles, the 7th and 15th
variants of the calculation are not determined. In these cases. however, one can
frequently find solutions for the intermediate values of N1 (or Kl). Por exawle.
when N - 3.730 m. the optimal solution is given by the fifth variant (table 3). in
which the total introduced capacity is equal to 3,810 H". In this case, it ie no
longer necessary to carry out calculations for NZ - 3.740-3800 m.

The value of the Belman function and the corresponding optiml solutions make it
possible to avoid the undesirable effects inherent in the majority of linear and
estimting models. In order to cover a minor shortage of power. for example. the
introduction of an additional large power unit is not required.

The dependence of the increase in the volume of capital investment 6K1 upon the in-
crease in capacity Ml is not a monotonic fmction. Prom table 3 it follows that

1' Calculations of the volume of construction and installation work are carried out
in a similar manner.

:0NLY
—————

.ants for caiculuing planned Intrc

—_—

2 3 lo 5
—______—
.000 500 l 500 500

2 10 2 10 2 10 2 10
300 300 300 300
500 500 $00 500
300 300 300 300
300 300 300 300

0 0 0 0
100 100 100 100
800 1600 800 1600

2 10 0 0 210

#
M “MAI. USE ONLY

for the same values of AM, the values of M1 vary over suih a broad range, whereupon
the relationship Mil/ANZ can decrease with the growth of N , that is. with the growth
of 1. In this case, with the increase in NZ, the cost of l w of introduced capacity
in the power system decreases; that is. the dependence of the per-unit capital in-
vestunt upon the amount of output required is not monotonic. The same can be proven
for the other indicators. In the 11th variant (see table 3), for example, the expen—
ditures cited for the introduction of 6.220 ml of capacity are less than for the
introduction of 3.810 M" (variant 5), while the volume of construction and installa-
tion work is less than with the introduction of 3,610 m (variant 3). The maximal
expenditures cited (231.6 million rubles) correspond to calculation variant [6 using
the criterion Pk. while the maximum volume of construction and installation work
(389.9 million rubles) corresponds to variant 16. The minimum expenditures cited
and the minima- value for the value of construction and installation work (178 and
335 million rubles, respectively) are reached in the first variant. with the intro-
duction of 4.630 or 10.520 m. the voluse of construction and installation work de-
creases.

in the calculations cited, the minimum volume of capital investment necessary

I0

2 K»

It!
amounts to 1.5L! million rubles, which corresponds to an introduced capacity of
3.010 M". The remaining portion of the system's power demand is covered through
the introduction of additional power units at 6 of the 10 electric-power stations.
The nutter of power units whose introduction is possible during the planned service

period varies from one to three at individual power stations.

Table 6 presents optimal plan variants for introducing capacities at individual power
stations. These variants are calculated using the criterion for minimizing the vol-
ume of construction and installation work 1’8. Table 5 presents variants computed ac-
cording to the criterion for minimizing calculated expenditures Pa. Final results
from calculations of the planned introduction of capacities according to these mini-
mizat ion criteria are shown in table 6.

It can be seen from tables lo and 5 that a variation in the solutions according to
criteria [’3 and F3 is possible at the same six electric-power stations as in the
case of calculations using criterion Pk. Naturally. this fact is associated with
the selection of a number of acceptable plan variants and with the system of limita-
tions. If. for exawle, we relax the limitations on the voluse of equipment deli-
veries, assuming that equipment for more than four SOD-H" power units can be deli-
vered in the planned period then additional capacities can be introduced at CRIBS
No lo. In this case. for Ni- 4,510 MW there exists an optimal solution according

to F's, differing from the solution for variant 8 (see table 6) which provides for
the introduction of a second power unit at GRES No 4.

The priority of various power stations varies. For example, the results of calcula-
tions according to criterion 1" show that with a power system demand of {4,520 m.
the introduction of a power un t at (IRES No lo is more preferable to the introduc-
tion of a second unit at 61238 No 3 (see table 2). Using criterion F‘, the opposite
case is true (see table 5).

MWWONLY
FOR‘OFFﬂSAl.USE(HNLY

anon-nulonov Isa

h.~—N
N.N~N
o.co~\c.~n~
c.~o~\o.o~u
~.¢o~\o.noN
~.no—\n-
o.oa~\_.~on
o.co~\ooN
n.no«\—.oo~
onuxonn

.nk conuOuwuu ou

”.man

o.nnn
n.o~n\w.nhn
c.non\n.noa
o.o~n\o.oon
—.own\0.0nn
«.mnn\—.onn

~.onn\n.ocn
c.0nnxm.mcn
nnnxnnn

uuuvuoooa use vouuuco can og vac o oucnau¢> .n

.om acquOuuuo cu uauvuoooo «noun-aaouoo uo wuuauou.onu 35:0

n.nho

«.500
o.ono\m.ooo
N.~co\n.oco
n.9no\n.nec
n.nNo\n.Q~@
c.noo\n.n~o
eooxn.woo
~.oam\n.Noo
n.~an\n.~om

.nm nouuouauu cu unuwuoooa

cucuauonlc ash

cunt

one:
o—neonmq
owne\o_ne
ouoeonNe
oaocxo~oc
ouanxo—oc
Ounn\o_¢n
o~nnxounn
ounn\0unn

.— "acuoz

d

nuncnonwo‘c

IOI¢0FIIJAI.UGIII‘LY

aoanau «o acouaaua
.xuoz coaunaaouonu
can coauuauuouoo

nonnau no unbuuuul unqauu>

Cows.“ uO Ogﬁdﬂdl
.unaauau>uw Hauuaao ceauqasonuo

.noonuauo vouuaaoaao

 

o OHDQH
K, millions of rubles I

-20 '
«46
-12
-11
4/43"

___—.__—-‘———

move the values of AR and AC
r- 0.1 or 0.08.
l-‘OI 05110“. USE ONLY

It should be noted that optimization according to one of the functionals does not
always lead to an optinl solution with respect to the other two. For certain values

of N . however. the extremum of the various functionals can be achieved on one and

the same plan. For example. when N1 - 3.510 and 4.010 W, the optimal plans for the
introduction of capacities coincide for Pk. F, and ’33 when N1 - 3.720. 3.810, 6.020,
4.220. 4.310 and 6.520 m. plans coincide for Pk and Fe; and when Ill - 6.630 m. plans
coincide for Pk and F8.

Thus. the optimal solution also minimizes Pk for all eight calculation variants ac-
cording to F3. This occurs because of the natural relationship between the volumes
of construction and installation work and capital investment. The noncoincidencs
of the solutions according to criteria Pk and F, is associated with the fact that
operational expenditures at capital-intensive power stations can be lower than at
those that are less capital-intensive.

In order to delect a final solution. it is necessary to conduct an additional analy-
sis of the calculation variants under examination. The data cited in tables 3 and

6 show that the gain in calculated expenditures leads to an increase in capital in-
vestment (usually small) and to a considerable increase in the overall volume of
construction and installation work. For a power-system demand of 4.520 HR, for exam-
ple. the realization of an optimal solution according to F, insures a reduction in
calculated expenditures of 18.9 million rubles. For N1 - 4,310 N", these indicators
are 16 and 17.2 million rubles, respectively. For N1 - 6.220 HR. they are 3.1. and
4.8 million rubles. and so forth.

Therefore. it is important that the optiml plan for the introduction of capacities
calculated according to the minimization criterion 1', does not exceed the limitations
on the total volume of construction and installation work. If the total volume of
work does not exceed 361 million rubles. the optimal solution according to criterion
F2 with a power demand of (5,220 MW coincides with calculation variant 11 (see table
2). in which a power unit is installed at 01138 No 10 instead of the second power
unit at CRES No 3. This plan will be an equilibrium point (optimum according to
Pareto) for F8 and F3. Since, as we have noted, the value of the normative coeffi-
cient of capital-investment efficiency E (0.12) is not sufficiently substantiated.

it is necessary to check the stability of the optiml plan when this factor varies.
Therefore. calculations were carried out for the optimum introduction of capacities
for 10 electric-power stations using the criterion F, with E - 0.06; 0.08; 0.10;
0.12; and 0.15. Power-system demand NZ was taken to be equal to 3,150, 3,300, 3,600,
3.500 and 3.600 PM.

The results of the calculations showed that the optimum solution was sta 1e with
fluctuat ions in 5 over the indicated range of values for all values of 1' except
1'." - 3,600 MN. The difference between the solutions derived and the optimal plan
calculated according to Fk is characterized by the values presented in table 7.

Instability of the solution with a minimization of the calculated expenditures was
also observed in other practical calculations. Thus, the optimum solution according

to this criteria should be confirmed by calculations using other criteria, stability
studies and additional analyses.

11

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWUSEONLY

The final selection of a plan for the introduction of power-production capacities
should be carried out on a heuristic basin, with consideration given to the results
of nultivariant optinieation calculations which characterize the behavior of basic
plan indicatore with variations in the noet inortant plan linitatione.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Kali-n. sn. 1.. Kuzovkin, A. 1.. end Panfilov. v. 10.. "A Model of the Annual
Diatribution of Capital lnveatnent in the Construction of Initial Electric
Power Stations and of Stations Already Being Built.” mulcnsrm

srmtm'swo No 3, 1977. pp 73-78.

2. Kalinen, Sh. 1., Kumkin. A. 1.. and Panfilov. V. IL. "Hodela for the Optimal
Distribution of Capital Inveetnent in the Power Industry," mmrmm
STROITE'STVO No 6. 1978. pp 72-77.

3. Belun. R.. "Dinanicheekoye progranirovaniye" [Dynamic "ogre-ins], Hoecow,
Izdatel’etvo inoetrannoy literatury, 1960.

COPYRIGHT: hergoiadat. "Energeticheekoye atroitel'etvo". 1982

9512
(:50: 1822/ 185

12

mammal“
INDR 0F?1C1AL.USIZC”VLY

PIPELINES

GOSPLAN SHOULD RATIONALIZE OUTPUT. USE OF ALL TYPES OF PIPE
Moscow PLANOVOYE KﬂozYAYSTVO in Russian No 4. Apr 82 pp 67-72

[Article by N. Bogatov. deputy chief of a USSR Gosplan section: "ways to Save
Netal During Pipe manufacture")

[Text] The circumstances of social production have experienced considerable chan-
ges in recent years. The regions where raw materials and mineral fuels are ob-
tained are consistently more distant froa the traditional places of consumption.
and. accordingly. the freight turnover for all types of transport is increasing.
Expenditures for protecting the environment are rising substantially. And other
factors are complicating economic development.

Under the prevailing situation. improvement in management of the economy and in the
planned guidance of economic affairs. and. particularly. the development and execu-
tion of specific-purpose integrated scientific. technical. economic and social pro-
grams within the state plan for the USSR's economic and social development are be-
coming urgent tasks. Among the programs that are paramount in the immediate future
is that of saving metal.

Experience indicates that it is practically impossible to make up a unified. inte-
grated program for saving all types of metal.

It is desirable to discuss the use of metal products of the same kind. for example,
steel. cast-iron and nonmetallic pipe. By doing this. the time consumed in
preparing and realizing the programs is reduced and production effectiveness is
increased. since the problem of savings can be examined more broadly and comprehen-
sivcly. This approach distinguishes the specific-purpose integrated scientific and
technical programs for improving the pipe-consumption structure in the national
economy. including capital construction. that USSR Gosplan has developed jointly
with GKNT [state Committee for Science and Technology], USSR Gosstroy, USSR Min-
chcrmet [Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy] and other interested USSR ministries and

agencies.

The intensive development of pipeline transport for moving crude oil and natural
gas over great distances. the creation of new irrigation systems in areas with an
arid or unstable climate. the great scope of housing and municipal-services con-
struction. and the rising output of machinebuilding products are necessitating an
increase in steel-pipe production. In the last 5 years it has grown by 3-3.5

million tons.

13

lﬂlI‘OFIlCJAI.ll5EZ€NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consumption norms govern the distribution and consumption of pipe in the national
economy. The role of scientific justification of consumption is exclusive here. A
study of the methods for pipeline analysis and engineering solutions and of the
construction norms and regulations for the design of pipeline systems shows that
they are not identical. Some computational methods yield overstated thicknesses of
the pipe walls. This is explained by the fact that the computed resistance of the
pipe material intended for trunk gas and oil pipelines that operate at pressures up
to 7.5 MPa is asst-ed to be 30-50 percent higher than for less heavily loaded (0.0-
1.5 MPa) air lines. gas-distribution lines. water mains. land-reclamation and other
piping systems. Thus the aetsl intensiveness of the aboveunamed systems is exag-
gerated right at the design stage.

Further. various construction nouns and regulations restrict the area of use of
welded pipe unjustifiably. Preference is given to seamless pipe. which is more ex-
pensive than welded pipe and whose manufacture causes great specific technologi-
cal losses of metal. The use of seamless pipe where operating conditions allow
welded pipe to be used raises considerably the cost and setals intensiveness of
utilities structures.

USSRGosstroydesign institutes (TsNIIproyektstal'konstruktsiya [Central Scientific-
Research and Design Institute for Metal Constructional Structure], VNIIvodgeo [All-
Union Scientific-Research Institute for Mater Supply, Sewerage Systems, Hydraul-
ic-Engineering Structures and Engineering Hydrogeology) and Vodohanalproyekt [In-
stitute for the Design of Mater~$upply and Sewerage Systeas] and USSR Minchermet
[Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy] scientific-research institutes (VNITI [All-Union
Scientific-Research and Technological Development Institute for the Pipe Industry]
and UralNITI [Urals Scientific-Research and Design-Development Institute for the
Pipe Industry]. with the participation of similar USSR organizations of interested
ministries and agencies, have analyzed design solutions for the construction of 442
representative facilities of 11 branches of the economy.* Proposals for changing
the standardizing documents that govern the use of pipe in capital construction and
for establishing a structure for steel-pipe consumption that is less metals-inten-
sive were set forth. The data cited in table 1 show that rationalization of the
consumption structure for steel pipe will enable the weight of the pipe to be re-
duced from 1,399,190 tons to 1.029.370 tons without reducing the length. that is.
a reduction of 29.3 percent of the weight.

Based upon a study of engineering solutions for construction of the very sase rep-
resentative facilities. the Plastik NPO (science and production association] worked
out proposals to replace steel pipe with plastic pipe. Thus. instead of the
364,000 tons of steel pipe called for by the designs. 105,000 tons of plastic pipe
can be used (table 2). Proposals were worked out for replacing steel pipe with
pipe manufactured also from other nonmetallicamterials: reinforced concrete. glass

and so on.

The total reduction in the consumption of steel pipe in capital construction
through reduction of the metals intensiveness of the pipe and the replacement

'Automotive plants. oilfields. blast furnaces. pipe-rolling departments and others
are included.
1‘

FOR 0iF1C1AL.US£1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reserves for Reducing Metals Intensiveness of Pins-line Systems Based upon

Unification of Methods for Analyzing Pipelines

Mei; t o pipe t

 

supports the func-
tioning of represen-

Table 1

Reduction in

 

 

"mm” tative facilities gigs weight
(thousangzczzlzons) 1.000 Per-
Design by institutes ons cent

USSR Ministry of Land Reels-ation and Mater
Resources.O...OOOOOOOOOOCOOOIOOOCOO'0....0. 58498 437.1 147.7 25.3
USSR Ministry of Agriculture................. 235.7 162.5 73.2 31.1
Ministry of Petl‘oletll Industl‘y.......n....n 12109 9201 2908 2‘94
USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurg.......... 119.8 99.5 30.2 25.3
Ministry of Che-ical Industry................ 63.0 61.7 21.2 25.6
Ministry of Gas Industry..................... 75.7 63.0 12.7 16.6
USSR Miristry of Pour and Electrification... 61.3 43.3 18.0 30.6
USSR Ministry of Nonferrous Metallurgy....... 55.0 37.9 16.1 32.3
Ministry of Automotive 1ndustry.............. 47.9 32.4 15.5 32.3

Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural

Machine Building........................... 11.0 6.4 2.6 23.6
USSR Ministry of Geology..................... 2.1 1.3 0.6 26.4
Total.................... 1,399.2 1,029.4 369.1 29.5
Table 2

Amount of steel Pipe Replaced by Plastic Pipe for
the Construction of Representative Facilities
(fro. Computations by the Plastik Science and Production Association)

Pipe Heigﬁt

(thousands of tons)

Ministry

USSR Ministry 0? m Reclalation :53 Mater

Resourceso.0I.0..I.OOOOOCOQIOOOOOIOOOIIOOO
USSR Ministry of Agriculture................
Ministry of Petroleum lndustry..............
USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy.........
Ministry of Cheuical Industry...............
Ministry of Gas Industry....................
USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification..
USSR Ministry of Nonferrous Metallurgy......
Ministry of Automotive Industry.............
Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural Machine

Buildin...MOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQ00.00.00...O...
USSR Ministry of Geology...”...............

Total..................

181.3

ﬂu

wNOOu-abou

0......
“Nbbnuuﬂc

§teel a stain- Plastic to re-
loss steel replaced place the steel

 

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thereof by plastic, reinforced-concrete and glass pipe can reach 2-2.5 million
tons by the end of the 11th Five-Year Plan.

Progress in pipe production is manifested in the more complete and rational use

of the engineering potential of existing tube mills and units; expansion in the
variety of pipe, especially hot-rolled pipe; and the use of composites that combine
the best properties of steel. plastic and other materials and of anticorrosion lin-
ings. There is also a great reserve in the increased manufacture of welded pipe
with walls thinner than those of the traditional varieties.

Seamless pipe less than 52 mm in diameter is manufactured at present by cold defor-
mation. However, this method is marked by intensiveness in materials, capital,
labor, and energy greater than for hot-rolled pipe. An expansion of the mix of the
latter with a reduction in the diameter at existing continuous pipe-rolling mills
and the creation of new mills with greater capabilities are among the main areas

for improving equipment and technology in ferrous metallurgy in the short term.

In the chemical, petrochemical. oil-refining and certain other branches of indus-
try, pipelines are extremely often designed for the transport of aggressive sub-
stances. Expensive high-quality pipe made of stainless steel goes into these de-
signs. But in such branches as shipbuilding, the use of lined pipe. which combines
the high strength of steel pipe and the chemical resistance of plastic pipe. has
proved itself well. Current output of the pipe is about 450,000-500,000 tons per year
and does not by far satisfy the national economy's needs. The appearance of new
areas for using this pipe instead of stainless steel will increase the reliability
and longevity of pipeline systems and reduce considerably expenditures for produ-
cing it.

Organization of the large-scale production of enameled pipe should be a promising
area.

An analysis of the steel-pipe consumption structure indicates that a substantial
portion of industrial pipelines in certain branches of industry is intended for
transporting product that is highly abrasive. Product pipelines erected from thin-
wallcd carbon pipe arepoorly suitable for such purposes, and they do not last long
(1-2 years of service). Thickening the walls of steel pipe does not bring a con-
siderable increase in the length of service of industrial pipelines and does not
reduce operating costs. The use of cast-stoneware pipe yields substantial bene-
fit. However, large-scale output of it has not been arranged yet.

Scientific and technical progress in developing the production of pipe made of
nonmetallic and of composite materials should be aimed in the next few years at
raising its load-carrying capability (strength) and heat and chemical resistance.
The investigation of nonthreaded pipe and of joining methodsthatare reliable but
not labor intensive, the development of methods for bending thin-walled pipe with-
out loss of stability of the cross-section, and the organization of production with
maximum preparation of the product for assembly are associated with the use of pipe

in the consumer sphere.

An acceleration of scientific and technical progress in pipe production can at
first lead to an increase in specific and overall expenditures. Therefore, an

isolated evaluation of the effectiveness of measures for improving equipment and
technology will be unreliable. An evaluation of these measures should take into

16

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE|MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

account the reduction in the use of materials. labor, energy, investment and other
expenditures throughout the whole metallurgical cycle-from the mining of the ore
to the production of the pipeline systems.

Tons and meters are being used as in-kind indicators for pipe production. Fifteen
different types of pipe are planned and distributed in tons and meters. The output
thereof in 1979 amounted to 16.6 million tone. or 1.588 million meters. Only

5 types of pipe. whose output that year was 1,028 million meters (which corresponds
to 1.1 million tons» are planned and distributed in meters.

In our view. the linear measurement helps to a great extent to raise production
effectiveness. Its acceptability for planning, costing and accounting has been
proved by the many years of work experience of pipe plants.

Some economists consider it possible to retain the weight measurer for the volume
of production output. In order to justify their point of view, they point to the
striving of customers whose funds are allocated hitons toorder pipe with reduced
wall thickness in order to allow a larger amount of product (in linear units of
measurement) to be obtained for the very same amount of funds. And, on the con-
trary, the allocation of funds in meters would seem to persuade customers to order
pipe with increased wall thickness. which will enable the longevity and reliability
of utilities structures to be raised.

In resolving the question of the priority of indicators for pipe production. the
following should be kept in mind.

The productivity of pipe mills is a function of the sizes of the pipe being manu-
factured. with increase in wall thickness but the same diameter. the hourly pro-
duction of pipe mills in tons increases proportionally. With decrease in wall
thickness. the opposite picture is observed: the productivity of the pipe mills in
units of weight is reduced. while in linear units it grows or stays unchanged. If.
as a result of improving the consumption structure of pipe, wall thickness must be
decreased. the use of the weight indicator causes a reduction in production volume.
The result will be a seeming reduction of resources.

Also among the planning, evaluative and fund-forming in-kind indicators is the
amount of output of products of the highest quality category. which is measured
also by either tons or meters. Accordingly. everything set forth relates also to
the planned production of this output. The assertion of the proponents of the
weight measurer that the distribution of pipe in tons promotes the ordering of
less metals-intensive output is not confirmed in practice.

The interrelationships of the planning organs and pipe producers and consumers
take the following form. Development of the annual production plan (in tons) is
begun in the first quarter of the preceding year. when the requirement for pipe for
the following year by size is still not known. to either the customer or the plan-
ning organs. The plan calls for the complete use of high-capacity pipe mills. tak-
ing the product mix into accOunt. The desire of the customers at the plan-reali-
zation stage to obtain a larger number of meters is practicable, provided there is
a reduction in production in tons. But revision of the distribution plan. and
then also of the production plan. is not permitted. As a result. the customer is
allocated products with increased metals intensiveness under the orders schedule.

17

FOR 0FF1C1AL.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pipe production is planned by realized. cosmodity, and gross output indicators.
The last two are categorized as settlement indicators. However. the gross output
indicator is assigned a more significant role than is customarily thought, since
labor productivity is computed by means of it. 'l'his circumstances requires thor-
ough analysis of the influence of scientific and technical progress on the materi-
als intensiveness of the output and the cost indicators of production.

Gross output can be presented as a result of the production of a volt-e of output
expressed in in-kind measurement units. based upon the price of a unit of output.

The price for pipe for a definite amount of output in linear measure-cut units

with a reduction in metals intensiveness is changed in full correspondence with
the change in the socially necessary costs of production. material expenditures
make up about 80 percent of the prime operating cost structure of pipe production.
The remaining 20 percent consists of labor, power and other production outlays.

The first expenditures—the variables—are a function of the amounts of output pro-
duced. The second—the constants—are not functions of it. Specific expenditures
can thus be represented as the sin 0.BS + 0.28 (where S is the prime cost of pipe
production) .

where there is a reduction in the metals intensiveness of the output, if the amount
is measured in linear units, specific materials expenditures are reduced and the
constants are retained. If the output is figured in weight measurements, then the -
material expenditures per ton of output are retained, despite the reduction in
metals intensiveness thereof. and the constants per ton increase because of the
reduction in the amount of pipe production.

The dependence of the price (To) and the expenditures 2 on pipe production can
be expressed by the equation

78‘“:

where K is the coefficient that considers the bulk of the profit in the price of
the pipe.

If. as a result of taking scientific and technical measures, metals intensiveness
of the output has been reduced. by 20 percent for example. then the materials ex-
penditures per 1 meter of pipe also are reduced by 20 percent. and the value of the
constant remains as before. Total outlays for producing output of lesser metals
intensiveness will be equal to

2 3 008.0088 § 0025 ' 008‘s.

The output volume of pipe of reduced metals intensiveness, in meters. has been kept
at the former level, and the amount of gross output (V) is computed in accordance
with the formula

V = 0.84 H’s.
where P is the amount of output expressed in in-kind terns.
The reduction of setals intensiveness of output by 20 percent will lead to a 16-
percent reduction in gross output through a reduction of materials expenditures.

The labor productivity indicator. which is computed in accordance with gross out-
put, is reduced by that same amount.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FilllJFFIC1AL UBEItNULY

Where the output is aeasured in weight units. the results of a reduction of its
aetals intensiveness will not be reflected in the specific naterial expenditures.
They will rennin constant. Only the anount of product output is reduced.

Ihere there is a reduction in the amount of output. specific constants of expendi-
ture will rise by 20 percent. and where there is production of output of lesser
metals intensiveness. they will be

2 I 0.85 § 102.0023 - 1.048.

The anount of gross output when its production is planned in weight aeasureaents
will be equal to:

V ' 0.8?01.04TI I 0e'32PT.e

The influence of a reduction of the naterials intensiveness of output on reduction
of coat-of-production indicators is intensified as the asterisls expenditures for
production decrease. This relates to the production not just of pipe but also of
any other itens in which the aaterial expenditures exceed the other outlays.

Table 3 shows the technical and econoaic indicators that could characterize the
production of electrically welded pipe of just one size at the Volga Pipe Plant. A
reduction of the pipc's aetal intensiveness during a conversion to walls that are
20 percent thinner would enable its weight to be reduced by 36,400 tons (16.7 per-
cent) and the amount of production to be increased by 222,000 aeters (10.6 percent»
However. the gross output and labor productivity would be reduced by 13 percent.
Because of deficiencies in setting prices, profit froa the realization of output at
the plant will be reduced by 900,000 rubles. although the expenditures for produ-
cing the pipe of reduced aetals intensiveness is cut by 4.1 million rubles. The
aaount of the econoaic incentive funds will be reduced by 39 percent as a conse-
quence of the change in the fund-fouling indicators.

Table 3

Technical and Econonic Indictors for the Production
of Pipe of Lesser Metals Intensiveness at the Volga Pipe Plant

Dimensions 0!

 

 

 

 

. . . Chan e of indicators
Indicator W —‘r——In . so- In per-
530x6.0 530x6.0 lute value cent
Pipe production volume:
Thousands of t0n8................o.o.... 218.2 18108 .360‘ 16.7
Thousands of meters..................... 2,066.0 2,310.0 +222.0 10.6
cross output, millions of rubles' worth... 36.4 33.4 -5.0 13.0
Prine production costs, millions of rubles 33.7 29.6 -4.1 12.2
Profit. aillions of rubles................. 4.7 3.3 -0.9 19.0
Profitability, percent.................... 13.9 1208 -100 7.0
Labor productivity, thousands of rubles
Per person.............................. 24.9 2106 “Se: 13.0
material-incentives fund. percent.......... 100.0 61.0 - 39.0

-_—_——__——————_—__——___-——____——_—_-—_———u——————______———————————————_—————-———-

change in the technical and cconoaic indicators of the production of pipe of re-
duced metals intensivcness at the Chelyabinsk Pipe-Rolling Plant. the Leningrad
Pipe Plant. the Vyksa Metallurgical Plant and other plants has that sane tendency.

19

FOR'OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE10NLY

A paradox arises: the greater the influence of scientific and technical progress
on reduction in the metals intensiveness of output. the less the output of gross
product. and the lower the labor productivity. It can be eliminated if the indi-
cator for standard-equivalent net output. which materials intensiveness does not
affect, is used as the indicator for planning production and evaluating the collec-
tives' activity.

The objectivity of evaluating scientific and technical progress in pipe production
is intensified if the introduction of new equipment and technology. improvement of
product quality, and reduction in expenditures for the manufacture of pipe output
are reviewed, taking into account the qualitative and quantitative changes that
emerge throughout the whole cycle of metallurgical production, beginning with the
mining of the iron ore. For example. water-andrgas conduits from 20 to 76 ml

in disaster and with a wall thickness of 2.2-4.5 mm are being used widely to pro-
tect electrical conductors. At the saae time, experience has also indicated the
acceptability of thin-walled electrically welded pipe with wall thickness half as
great. Each year the amount of use of water~and-gas conduits for the indicat-
ed purposes in the national economy totals about 200.000 tons. Replacing them with
thin-walled electricallywelded pipe. which was occasioned by a number of changes
in the technology for manufacturing metal products and with reworking thereof in
the consumers' sphere, enables rolled-metal consumption in pipe production to be
cut in half for the same number of meters of pipe.

rolled but from cold-rolled strip. Thus, prior to replacing water-and-gas
conduits with thin-walled electrically welded pipe, the production of almost
100,000 tons of cold-rolled steel coils per year should be organized. for which
about 20 million rubles of capital investment is needed. This path for satisfying
the national economy's rising requirement for rolled metal by saving in the tra-
ditional areas of its use is preferable to organizing new rolledqaetal production
throughOut the whole metallurgical cycle. when the creation of production capacity
for the mining and beneficiation of iron ore. the production of coke, the melting
of pig iron and steel, and, finally, the output of rolled metal. is required.
Capital expenditures for creating capacity for 100,000 tons of rolled metal
throughOut the whole metallurgical cycle will exceed several tens of millions of

A scientifically sound choice of directions for technical progress in the produc-

tion of pipe (or metals, materials, and other types of output) will enable a re-

duction in capital investment for the industry’s development and the creation of a
potential for the selective use of the resources that have been saved for solving
social problems: the construction of housing. children's institutions and facili-
ties for public health, culture. education and so on. Moreover. additional possi-
bilities for improving the systea of collective material stimuli are opened up.

Part of the metal saved and the additionally aanufactured output that is less ma-
terials intensive can be partially or completely allocated in a planned procedure
to manufacturing enterprises and to conauaer organizations for such output. above
the established voluae. Additional allocation of material resources precisely to
those enterprises that have reduced their consumption will enable fixed assets.
labor resources, fuel and electricity to be used more completely and the material
basis for the development and realization of counterplans to be established.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1981 our country manufactured more than 18 million tons of steel pipe, more than
the USA, France. the PRG and England put together. However, nonnetallic pipe still
is not being used adequately.

Steel pipe made of stainless steel and carbon steel, pipe lined with plastic, enam-
eled pipe. pipe made of low—alloy steels, thick-walled and cast-stoneware pipe.
electrically'weldedlarge-diameter steel pipe, and reinfbrced-concrete and plastic
pipe possess exceptionally high interchangeability. But the engineering solutions
for operating pipe made from different materials are not equivalent from the eco-
nomic point of view. The intensiveness of capital. energy, materials and labor in
the production of each type of pipe has essential differences, indicating the ne-
cessity for the integrated, mutually related development of pipe production. Such
an approach still has not been realized completely.

Several USSR Gosplan sections are occupied with planning pipe production. Disper-
sion of the development of current and long-range plans for the production of steel,
plastic. reinforced-concrete and other types of pipe is one of the factors in the
disproportions of their output. It has an influence on the engineering solutions
for design. An analysis of designs for the construction of pipeline transport has
confirmed the inadequacy of their effectiveness.

Contractor designs for the erection of ordinary water—supply systems call for
electrically welded pipe. The operating pressures in water-supply systems whose
designs have been approved by consultant services are 0.3. 0.6 and 1 an. When
erecting pipelines that are designed on the basis of this pressure, it is desirable
to use pipe made of nonmetallic materials, the outlays for production, the install-
ing costs and the operating expenditures for which are considerably lower. The
same can also be said about the use of other members of the mix of types of steel
pipe: water-and-gas conduits. seamless and electrically welded oil pipeline,

rolled pipe. and so on.

In order to optimize plans for developing pipe production. it is desirable to con-
centrate the fonmulation of plans for the production and distribution of all types
of pipe in one structural USSR Gosplan subunit.

A characteristic and distinctive feature of program control is the interrelated
step-by-step examination and solution of all questions. The preparatiOn of designs.
the review of standardizing documents and materials-consumption norms. improvement
of the equipment for the technology of production. and improvement.ofproduct quality
and of the system for planning and evaluative indicators of the activity of mini—
stries. production associations and industrial enterprises are organically incor-
porated into an overall integrated program, despite the diverse nature of the tech-
nicul and economic methods of control. within the framework of a specific-purpose
integrated program, it is possible to establish tasks for various stagesamd types
or operations. indicating the implementers and the deadlines for implementation.

In generalized form, the methodology for developing integrated programs for saving
material resources is:

scientific study of existing material—resources consumption;

improvement of methods for analyses and for standardizing documents that regulate
the terms for using material resources:

21

FOR 0i1l€1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the development and coordination with customers and manufacturers of a progressive
materials-consumption structure;

the execution of measures for improving equipment and technology in the spheres of
production and consumption of materials resources;

a review of the system of plan indicators: and

improvement of the system: of economic levers and stimuli and of the production con-
trol structure.

Any stage (or chapter) of an integrated program is of an interindustry nature and
should be reflected in the national economic plan. Specific-purpose integrated
programs that call for a basis forasystems. step-by-step approach to the solution
of questions of improving design matters. consumption nous, improvement of output
quality on the basis of scientific and technical progress. and strengthening of the
effect of economic methods of control are reliable means for raising consider-
ably the effectiveness of social production and quality of work.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Eltonomika". "Planovoye khozyaystvo“. 1982

11409
cso: 1822/162

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nmmmAn-Pmownou mums III 111'! mm M

Moscow SW ODIMBM: mmnnn'no-pmzzvonsm KOIQLIKSY $38!! in
Russian 1982 pp 40-57, 62-72

[Selected chapters from book 'Stridse of the Eleventh: 'l‘erritorial-Production
(Duplexes of the USSR", by A. N. Gladyshev and V. P. Mozhin, Politizdat]

[‘Dextl 1. Rest Siberian merritorial-Production Couple):

“Ensure further development of the
West Siberian territorial-produc-
tion couples.“

From the “Basic Directions. . . . "

The eoonosic growth of the west Siberian cosplex is based on the diversity of
natural resources concentrated on its territory. The fuel resources, in relation
to the total reserves of which the comlex occupies a leading place in the country,
and its timer and fresh water have especially great significance to the national
econony. What is inportant here is that these resources are relatively close to

industrially developed regions experiencing an increasingly greater demand for
then.

Among the problems of further development of the ﬂeet Siberian m [territorial-
Production Oouplex], special importance is attached to increasing extraction of
petroleun and gas, which play the leading role in the entire country's fuel and
energy balance. Here is what 1.. I. Brezhnev said in this regard in his speech to

the 28th Komsonol Congress: I"i‘he Tymn' reserves will still keep us going for
many long years. And in the next decade, we intend to achieve the main increment

in the extraction of petroleu and gas and in the production of valuable chemical
raw materials fron these resources mainly at 'lyunen'. In this connection a new,

more complex stage of West Siberia's development is beginning or, to put it more
accurately, has already begm. The volune of all operations must be doubled and
tripled there. This will require both new outlays of materials and equipment and
an influx of people into this region."

Construction of the cowlex is proceeding, and it is undergoing development. In
the harsh natural-climatic conditions, in permafrost, marshes and sweeps, a powerful

'Brezhnev, L. 1., "leninskim kursoa' [Following Lenin's Course], macaw, Vol 7,
1979. PP 287-288.

'23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic potential has been created, one promoting intensive development of the
underground treasurehouse of fuel. ‘lhe increase in extraction of petroleum, in-
cluding gas condensate. exceeded an average of 100 million tons and gas extraction
exceeded 50 billion m3 every 5 years throughout the entire period of the cleex's
development. For comparison, let us recall that about the same quantity of petro-
leu was extracted in the whole country in 1955. and of gas in 1960. Ming the
10th Five-Year Plan petroleum extraction in lyinenskaya (blast increased by a
factor of two. while gas extraction increased by a factor of 4.3. This is a world-

unprecedented rate of development of oil and gas fields. 'lhe West Siberian m
is already playing the decisive role in formation of the country's fuel balance and

in providing petrochemical raw materials to the national economy.

These outstanding successes became possible owing to the far-sighted policy of our
party and the harmonious creative labor of many thousands of laborers, engineers.
scientists and technicians. ‘l‘he energetic activities of a large nulber of enter-
prises supplying the complex with progressive technology and equipment do not play
the last role either. This is precisely what made it possible to wage an offensive

on the riches of the “est Siberian complex from the very beginning not by the
strength of nunbers but by the strength of knowledge, with the assistance of the

most up-to-date equipunt and procedures.

New, even more grandiose tasks associated with the complex's further development
will be conpleted in the llth Five-Year Plan. Extraction of petroleum, including
gas condensate, is to be increased by another 80-90 million tons. In this way, the

complex is not only compensating for a certain decline in petroleum extraction in
other regions, but it will also be responsible for the total increase in extraction

in the country. In 1985 the cosplex is to produce 385-395 million tons of petrolein.
including gas condensatsuthat is, more than 60 percent of the total extracted in

the Soviet Union. Each year 1 million tons of liquid fuel will be extracted froe
its subsoil.

The tasks of gas extraction are even greater. The Hedvezh'ye gas field

has already been developed. 1he larger 'multistory" Urengoy gas field is now
flexing its giant muscles. Waiting in the wings is the northernmost and most diffi-
cult deposit--the Yasburg gas field. Exploitation of these larders of the Yamal

Peninsula and between the Pur and Tax rivers as well as gther deposits in the 'lyuien'
North will make it possible to extract 330-370 billion m of gas in the end of the

llth Five-Year Plan. And this means that the daily gas yield of the couples will
be 1 billion n3.

Understandably. completion of these large-scale tasks would be possible only on
the most up-to-date technical basis. Much has already been done in this regard.

A new procedure for extracting petroleum has been created and placed at the basis
of a unified system of oilfield remote control. Subterranean energy and deep pups

are being used to transport the petroleus from wells to central handling stations,
making it possible to reduce the mater of oilfield structures by many times.

Special modular equipment. which together with the telemechanical system makes

up an integral oil extraction organism. has enjoyed broad application. and it has
served as the basis of integrated automation of the oil extraction processes. But
even this is no longer enough. The problems of technical progress are acquiring
even greater significance in connection with the need for developing new oilfields
in even harsher natural and climatic conditions, for progressing to deep and

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ultradeep wells, for increasing the oil output of the beds, for raising the level
of construction's industrialization, for creating more economical forms of trans-
portation and for providing population centers with mdern facilities.

The amount oil and gas extraction increases depends significantly on the amount

of effort put into drilling and outfitting the wells. The volume of such work will
increase significantly during the present five-year plan through introduction of
progressive drilling methods, application of new drilling equipment and further
industrialization of construction. A highly effective method of cluster .slant
drilling of wells for oil and gas was used for the first time at the West Siberian
complex. This method, which makes it possible to concentrate oilfield facilities

in a single area and broadly eaploy industrial methods of outfitting the oilfields,
can ensure a 10-15 percent decrease in built-up territory and a 30 percent decrease

in the meter of structures and in the length of transportation lines. As a result
the number of service personnel decreases significantly.

During the llth Five-Year Plan, the comlex's oil and gas industry will receive
more integrated drilling rigs designed for general-purpose installation and for
cluster drilling, equipment to sechanize well operation and repair, and automated
and modular equipment to outfit the oilfields. me use of new methods to influence
the oil reservoirs will be broadened. This will increase extraction of oil from
the subsoil. Gas-lift operation of wells and highly productive submersible pups
will be introduced.

A pipeline network of significant length, extending far beyond West Siberia, is an
organic unit of the comlex's petrolem and gas industry, inasmuch as the bulk of

the oil and gas will be transported to other regions of the country, both today and
in the future. Pipelines have already been under construction for 15 years. Petro-
leum is carried from 1yumenskaya oblast to enterprises of Omsk, Al'aet'yevsk and
Kuybyshev, and natural gas is carried to Chelyabinsk, Kemerovo, Gryaaovets and other
cities of the country. A web of thousands of kilometers of oilfield arteries

has ensnared the marshy taiga.

Erection of the petroleun and gas pipelines received a new push owing to creation
of a high-output specialized construction subdivision, Glavsibtmboprovodstroy,

in 1973. While in the first year of this organization's existence it laid about
1,000 km of pipeline, now it is erecting over 4,000 km of pipelines to collect and
transport oil and gas and dozens of compressor and oil transfer stations each year.

These successes can be explained in many ways by the use of modern equiment and
procedures successfully adapted to low temperatures, the lack of roads and the

permafrost. Threaded steel oil pipes with new forms of threaded connections and
anticorrosion films will be introduced extensively in the llth Five-Year Plan, and

production of multiple-wall pipes for gas lines will expand significantly. This
will make it possible to hasten construction of the pipelines, which has priority
significance to gas industry. In addition to the four existing gas pipelines, not
less than six more--larger and longer ones-~must be laid to transport the enormous
quantities of Siberian gas to other regions of the country.

One of the most iaportant construction projects of the country's gas extractors
today is the Pyatyy Luch gas pipeline, 2,800 km long. It is to connect Urengoy to
Moscow. It will pass first through the Numen' North and then through the Komi ASSR

and Arkhangel'skaya, Vologodskaya, Yaroslavskaya, Vladimirskaya and ibscow oblasts.
This pipeline will carry about 100 million n3 of gas per day.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the most serious problems faced by the angle): is that of utilizing byproduct
petroleum gas. A nusber of gas refineries have already been built. but their output
is still inadequate. a significant part of the byproduct petroleun gas is being
burned off for the lament. A ton of Siberian crude contains 60 m3 of byproduct
gas. This means that more than 23 billion :13 of gas were extracted by the couplers
enterprises in 1985. Byproduct gas can be broken down into 70 percent dried gas and

The main consuner of the dried gas is power engineering. 'lhe Surgutskaya ems is
now operating with this gas. Capacities making use of dried gas will also be intro-—
duced at Surgut's thermal plant during the five-year plan. Owing to this. the task
of reinforcing the energy base of petroleum industry and of other national economic
sectors in the middle reaches of the 0b' will be completed. Byproduct gas is also
used for industrial needs in ferrous metallurgy, chemical and cement industry,

the “nobol'sk Petrochemical Codaine in the five-year plan. The ‘lbbol'sk plant will
specialize in the production of synthetic rubber, and the ‘Domsk combine will special-
ize in production of polymerization plastics (polyethylene. polystyrene) and raw
materials for synthetic fibers. In the opinion of specialists it would be expedient
to create two petroleum refineries to support these enterprises. The savings per
ton of light petroleum products resulting from locating petroleum refineries here

in comparison with locating them in the European regions of the Soviet mion would
be 15-17 rubles in capital investmnts and 2-3 rubles in operational outlays.

over, as calculations show, procurement of l m3 of timer here means a savings
of 2 rubles, production of l m3 of inter saves about 7 ribles. roduction of
1.000 s2 of wood fiber panels saves 29 rubles. production of l m of plywood from
deciduous wood saves about 3.5 rubles. production of a ton of wrapping paper saves
6 rubles. production of a ton of writing paper saves over S ribles, and production

of a ton of cardboard packaging saves about 5 rubles. The product yield per ruble
of capital outlays is greater in 1yumenskaya and Mskaya oblasts than in the

forested regions of the Northwest and the Urals. Moreover the forests of these
regions are 2,500-3,000 km closer to the European USSR than are the forests of
East Siberia. In the future the logging volume in ‘lbmskaya and Iyumenskaya oblasts
may grow significantly. Presence of enormous reserves of fuel and water creates
favorable possibilities for erecting large enterprises in this area for chemical
and mechanical wood processing. It would be suitable to create logging complexes
and sawmilling and woodworking combines in the cities of Asino, surgut and

Kolpashevo and in the towns of Kamannyy and Belyy var-ones with an output capacity
of 4-6 million 11:3 of processed wood per year.

Machine building, the main task of which is to manufacture equipment and mechanisms
for enterprises and construction projects of the leading economic sectors--is an

26
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important element of the Rest Siberian m. Construction of a plant producing
chemical and petrochemical equipmnt is to begin in the llth Five-Year Plan. In
the south of the complex, it would be suitable to develop the repair of large
petroleun and gas equipment on intensively.

Analysis of the cosplex's territorial economic ties revealed a sharp increase in
interrayon turnover and local freight traffic. ﬁne lyinn'-Surgut Railroad has
taken on a big load. Its erection significantly accelerated development of new
deposits of natural fuel. The Surgut-Urengoy Railroadmhich will join together
the Khanty-Mansi and Yamalo-Nenets national areas. accelerate development of

their economies and provide the Wmn' North access to the south. connecting it
to the country's railroad network, is to be placed into operation in the llth Five-
Year Plan. the role of motor and river transport will grow, its material-technical
base will be made stronger, and the throughput of river ports will increase. The

river fleet will be supplemented by large steamehips. vessels capable of mixed
"river-sea“ navigation, tugs. icebreakers and comfortable passenger ships. Organi-

zation of year-round navigation in the western part of the Northern Sea Route will
have great significance. owing to which timely delivery of freight to the enter-
prises and population of the cleex will be ensured, especially in those regions
of the complex located in the far North.

Timely preparation of construction sites is an ilportant prerequisite of successful
development of deposits. Dirt andmillions of tons of sand,obtained from river and

lake bottoms by hydraulic methods using hydraulic dredges, are brought in to the
construction sites and approach roads are erected 2 or 3 years before the main

forces arrive. Usually the sand is delivered from far away over poor roads, meaning
that as a rule the outlays on its transportation are tremendous. But sand is
available almost everywhere, though sometimes it is encountered at great depth--
15-20 meters. It could be extracted by the so-called air lift method. where water
and air are injected under pressure into a drilled well to raise slurry to the
surface. Here this method of sand extraction to be introduced throughout. we could
significantly hasten creation of staging areas and oilfield roads, and reduce the

transportation expenses and labor outlays on construction.

further industrialization of construction has priority significance to the cleex.
'me moduluar method is now a full-fledged citizen of Wn'facilities. The bulk

of the equipment is manufactured at the plants and delivered to the construction
sites in finished form, after which it is installed on a foundation and connected
to utility lines. This method reduces construction time a great deal and signi-
ficantly raises labor productivity and work quality. At present, the staging and
support basis providing equipment to the cosplex's construction projects are located
in the southern part of Tyumenskaya oblast and on the Ural. In the future it would
be suitable to create such bases in Kemrovskaya and Novosibirskaya oblasts, using

water transportation to handle the cargo; on the return trip, such transportation
could be loaded with timber.

Welded fomdations and supports are broadly esployed in the erection of the com-
plex's facilities. Until recently the motors and machine mite of petroleim trans-
fer and comressor stations were mmted on monolithic reinforced concrete founda-
tions. But it is not all that simple to pour concrete in extreme cold. Metal

frames are now being used for this purpose. In conparison with the traditional

27
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

sethod, the new one reduces consumtion of reinforced concrete by a factor of

2.5, labor outlays by a factor of S and construction time by a factor of 4. Work
quality inroves as well.

Serious social problems Inst also be addressed in the course of developsent of
natural resources on the territory of the combat. The main one is that of selec-
ting the way of populating the North. Which way would be preferable, to create

base cities with a permanent population, or to develop the natural resources using
the so-called watch and expeditionary methods? After all, it costs the state tens
of thousands of rubles to relocate a worker in a new place. It has been estimated
that the outlays on saintaining an oil prospecting expedition operating according

to the watch method are coqensated for by the third or fourth year. In Wnskaya
Oblast, the watch method has saved hundreds of millions of rubles and made it
possible to hasten development of subterranean minerals by several years. Thus

in and of itself, the watch method is highly economical. Hanover, if we consider
construction of watch towns, which mt be furnished with all necessary conveniences,

all the more so because the watch workers are smjected to especially harmful
conditions, the relative outlays on creation of watch towns would be close to the

relative outlays on creating base cities. Thus in resolving the issue as to what
method we are to use in developing the territory, we should base ourselves on the
concrete conditions, and when necessary we should cod>ine different methods of

developing the natural resources on the couplex's territory. In the first stages
of the territory's development, the watch method would obviously be suitable. In

subsequent stages, however, base cities would have to be created. Thus uadym, the
capital of gas extractors of the Hedvesh’ye deposit, has become a base city. Had

it not been created, development of the Urengoy gas field would have taken many
more years, resulting in tremendous losses to the national economy.

The social problem of the cosplex are not limited to selection of the method for
developing the new territory. There are other issues that need to be resolved

as well: how to provide manpower to the enterprises, how to stabilise the popula-
tion, how to create favorable conditions for the work and rest of the people, and
others. If we are to resolve then in the llth Five-Year Plan, we would need to
expand construction of residential, municipal, cultural and personal service facil-
ities, strengthen the food base by enlarging agriculture and sectors processing
agricultural raw materials, and inement a maﬁa: of other msasuros no less im-
portant to the economic and social development of the comlex.

2. The Kansk-Achinsk Territorial-Production Couples

"Continue formation of the Kansk-Achinsk
'nerritorial-Production Cowlex. "

From the “basic Directions. . . ."

Formation of the Kansk-Achinsk 1?): is associated mainly with development of enor-
mous coal reserves. The name of the :onplex comes from the Kansk-Achinsk coal basin.

1his basin is unusual in its dimensions. It stretches over an area of 50,000 square
kilometers, bordering on the Trans-Siberian Railroad for 800 km. According to the

estimates of geologists, large reserves of coal are concentrated in the Kansk-
Achinsk basin. Here we to base ourselves on the present level of coal extraction

28

”WNW?
“WISCONLY

in our country, these reserves should last us many years. The most praising coal-
bearing regions in the basin are the ltat-Bogotol'skiy, Naurovskiy, Balakhtinskiy,
Priyeniseyskiy. Rybinskiy and Sayano-Partizanskiy. The principal coal beds,
development of which is possible by the most effective open-cut method, are con-
centrated on their territory.

of course. not all of the deposits are ready for practical development today. Many
of them still have to be studied, measured and weighed, so that the future open coal

pits could be built on a sound and dependable raw material foundation. However.
even the coal reserves we have today that are prepared for industrial development
can support development of coal industry on an unprecedented scale.

The mining and geological conditions of developing the melt-Achinsk coal deposits
are exceptionally favorable. The main coal bed, which consists of a seam from
S to 90 meters thick, lies horizontally as a rule, making it possible to develop

it with high-power equipment. Also inportant in this case is the fact that the
coefficient of stripping operations at deposits that may be developed by the open-

cut method is not very great. It varies from 1 to 3 m3 of earth per ton of coal.
This is several times less than in other coal basins of the comtry.

In the future creation of dozens of high-output quarries with a total annual coal
yield of 1 billion tone will be possible on the territory of the Kansk-Achinsk
m. This would be 1.6 times more than the present coal yield of the country as
a whole. Development of the cceplex's coal resources has already begun. M open

pits are already operating at the Nasarovskoye and Irsha-acrodinskoye deposits,
which are producing tens of millions of tons of coal. The Beresovskiy open coal

pit, which will go into operation in the llth Five-Year Plan, is presently under
construction.

The Ransk-hchinsk basin is attracting attention not only in via: of the size of
its coal reserves but also due to the high technical-economic indicators of coal

extraction. Take for exawle an indicator such as unit capital investments. They
are several times less here than in other basins of the country. Given the same

volume of capital investments, eight times larger coal extraction capacities can
be created in the Kansk—Achinsk basin than in the Donets Basin. The cost of

Kansk-Achinsk coal is much below the cost of coal from other basins. An increase
in its extraction to 80 million tons would reduce the average cost of coal mined
in the less by lo percent. and of all fuel by 6 percent. The corrected outlays
per ton of Kansk-nchinsk coal are lower than those on extracting an equivalent
quantity of men' or Orenburg gas. And finally. the Kansk-Achinsk basin has

no equals in terms of an imortant indicator such as labor productivity. Up to
2,000 tons of coal can be mined here per worker per month. This is lo times more

than the average labor productivity indicator of the country's coal industry.

The most ieportant factor, one which primarily defines the high economic effec-
tiveness of coal mining in the xansk-Achinsk basin. is the favorable conditions

in which the coal is situated, making it possible to create high-output open pits.
The output capacity averages 30 million tons, while in the Ekibastus basin it is
17. in the Kuznetsk basin it is Sand in thePodmoskovskiy basin it 18 1 million tons.
The output of some open pits in the complex may be increased to 45 and even 60
million tons. The high capacity of the open pits makes it possible to use pro-
gressive system for developing the coal deposits, using the latest ultrapowerful
highly productive equipent. 29

”WNW?
mommmonu

The Ural Machine Building Plant manufactured the world's most powerful walking
dragline for stripping operath at the Nararovskiy open coal pit. Its bucket,

which has a capacity of 100 .3, can carry a tremendous load for great distances
with the help of a 100~meter boon. A rotary excavator with a productivity of

5,000 m3 per hour is operating at the lrsha-Borodinskiy open pit, and a heavy
excavator plant that will support development of coal pits of the xansk-hchinsk
basin is under construction in Krasnoyarsk. The first generation of this plant,
which may be referred to as the Siberian version of the Ural Machine Building Plant,
will go into operation in the current five-year plan. This will make it possible
to dispense with the extremely significant transportation outlays. After all, the
outlays for delivering high-power excavators to this place from the European re-
gions of the country reach as mch as $0 rubles per ton of their weight. Use of
conveyor transport, which increases the productivity of mining equipment, simpli-
fies delivery of the fuel to the hoppers of therlal power plants and makes it
possible to nove stripped rock to storage dupe with ninisan damage to agricul-
tural land, is expanding.

Resolving the issue of how to use Kansk-Achinsk coal in the national economy. we
should consider its quality. The problem is that Kansk-hchinsk coal contains a
significant quantity of noisture-«q: to 40 percent. when this noisture evaporates.

the coal breaks apart to for. dust, which oxidizes quickly and acquires the capa-
bility of spontaneous cosbustion. The coal freezes in winter. All of this makes

it unsuited to long-tern storage and to transportation over great distances. Nor
can we forget that Kansk-kchinsk coal has a low calorific value-dra- 2.500 to
6,000 calories per kilogram. This sakes it less cometitive than coal from other
basins of the country. Thus outlays on extracting and transporting kansk-hchinsk
coal to the Urals are 20-25 percent higher, per ton of comarison fuel, and mit
capital investments are 6 percent higher than for Donetsk coal. Therefore the
asin direction in the use of this coal is to build large thereal electric power

plants at the places of the coal's extraction. This effort has begun. One of
the country's largest thernal electric power plants--the hassrovskaya GRBS--is
already producing current. Output capacities of the Beresov-skaya GIGS. presently
under construction next to the Berezovskiy Coal Pit No l in the vicinity of the
town of Sharypovo, will be placed into operation in the current five-year plan.

The country's largest power production block at the Kostromskaya GEES recently
began producing current for industrial needs. Saving an output capacity of 1.2
nillion kw, its start-up narked a new stage in the developnent of domestic thermal
power engineering. a new generation of high-power electric machines, ones which
may enjoy broad application at thernal power plants of the Kansk-hchinsk complex.
is being created on its basis.

The effectiveness of developing electric power engineering on the basis of Kansk-
Achinsk coal is extremly great. Thus in terns of the cost of electric power,

the conplex’s large thermal power plants can conpete with hydroelectric power plants
of the Volga-Kama cascade. which is one of the most effective in Europe. This is
all the more indicative if we consider that unit capital outlays per kilowatt of
attained outputat thermal electric power plants are significantly lower than at
hydroelectric power plants. When electric power is transmitted over great dis-
tances. the outlays at the points of consuption rise significantly. nut in this
case they would not be any higher than those for power from electric power plants
in the European part of the country. The uifference lies in the technical concept

30

mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with which this problem is resolved, the essence of which boils down to intro-
aicing ultralong and ultrapowerful trans-ission lines.

But it would be lost effective of all to use the calplex's electric power locally
to create high-energy production operations. In this case the fuel savings would
exceed the additional outlays on delivering the products to consuers and on

isportation of raw materials from other regions. ‘i'hus were we to smelt a ton of

alumina using electric power obtained with Kansk-Achinsk and Donetsk coal and
ccmere the outlays, we would find that they would be less in the former case than

in the latter. Moreover high-energy industrial sectors require significantly less
manpower than do law-energy sectors. This is especially iaportant to the cleex,
since it is experiencing a manpower shortage.

Kansk-Achinsk coal can be used as fuel for power production in other regions of

the country as well. ‘ihere is special interest in the possibility for replacing
more expensive Kusnetsk coal in Heat Siberia by Kansk-Achinsk coal. But this would

require enrichment of the coal: Its calorific value would have to be raised, and
it would have to be made more transportable, which would require additional out-

lays. ‘i‘hese outlays should not exceed 4-5 rubles per ton of cowarison fuel.
Only in this case would this coal coepete with Kuznetsk coal mined by the open-cut
method in the market of the country's central region.

Development of coal industry, thermal power engineering and high-energy production

operations generates a number of serious problem in environlental protection.
mey include land recultivation, protection of the landscape and utilization of

Stripped rock, ”h and clinker. Alanine wastes are being used in Achinsk to produce
cement that is much cheaper than the average for the country.

The Achinsk. Kansk and Nazarovo industrial centers are taking shape on the complex's
territory. 11» production profile of the Achinsk industrial center is represented
by energy-rich production operations such as alumina. petroleum refining and cement,
which will enjoy further development in the current five-year plan. Relying on in-
tensive agriculture, food industry is developing continuously. In the future this
industrial center will be supplemnted by machine building enterprises. The Kansk

industrial center is one of the most isportant centers of development of the Kane):-
Achinsk brown coal basin. It has the potential for developing chemistry on the

basis of enormous reserves of high-quality salt from the Kansko-‘nessevskaya salt
depression. me Nazarovo industrial center is specialized in coal mining and in
the production of thermal electric power. A large material-technical base has
been created here for construction.

Thus the production profile of the Kansk-nchinsk territorial-Production angle): is
represented by coal industry. thermal power engineering, some sectors of nonferrous
mtallurgy and cement production. 'ihe closeness of the mlex to West Siberian
petroleun and its good transportation ties are promoting development of petroleu-
refining and petrochenistry. It would be advantageous to locate enterprises manu-
facturing machines and equipment for fuel. power and mining sectors on its terri-
tory, since this would produce a savings in transportation costs. Agriculture.
construction industry and construction of residential, cultural and personal
service facilities have iuportant significance, since they play an important role
in creating conditions which would attract people and keep the population stable.

31

POI OFT-10M. USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

In the future the Kanek-mhinak Territorial troduction angler will hecoaa one
or the aoat inortant fuel and energy baaee. ensuring the dependability of our
oountry'a fuel and energy balance.

3. me Sayanak ‘iVarritorial-Production angler

'lnaure further develop-ant or the
Seyaneh hrritorial-Production maples."

Pro- the 'naaic Directiona...."

mile living in exile in the village of Shuahenakiy on the Yeniaey River, v. I.
Lenin delighted in the rare beauty or the aomtaim o: Bayanek and dread of a
tine when the liberated people would be able to begin true develop-ant o: thia
unique land and place its highly rich reaourcea in the aervice of a tree Maia.
There are not very aany regiona in our country enjoying auch a coﬁination of
natural and econoaic factore favoring creation of a territorial-production coqlex
aa doee the eouthern part or Kraanoyarakiy Kray. Siuable water, energy and timber
xeaourcea and depoeita of iron ore, nonrerroua aetale, coal. aabeatoe, phoephoritee

and nrble are concentrated here in a relatively .all territory, and there are
convenient area for induatrial and reaidential conatruction. The network of

railroad: and highwaye tiea the couple: to the industrially aoat developed regiona
of Siberia. the relatively aild. 'alaoat non-Siberian" cliaate. which peraite
aucceaatul develop-ant of agriculture and facilitatea attraction and atabiliration
or a population. tavora developeent or a aultiprotile production oleex.

In the future the Sayanak m will becoae one of the largeat not only in Siberia but
aleo in the entire country. It will contain aore than loo large induatrial enter-
priaea outfitted with the lateat equip-ht. More than a aillion peraona will reaide
on its territory.

production or cheap electric power and electro-atallurgy (nonterroua natal
aulting) and aachine building organized on its baeia will become the leading
national econoaic aectora of the Sayanak Territorial-Production angler. onea
predeternining ita all-union epecialiration.

1he heart or the cowlex ia the Bayano-Shuahenakaya as. which will produce about
24 billion kw~hr of electric power annually. wreover the coat oi thie electric
power will be aeveral tiaea lower than the mica average. 'ihe Yeniaey waa aucceaa-
fully darned in October l975 tor conetruction of the 8ayano-Shuahenekaya as. and
as early as in January l976 the tiret cubic netera or concrete were poured into

the part of the den to aerve an the power plant'a tomdation. maturbinea for the
plant's aachine mite are being eanutectured by the uningrad Metala Plant iaeni
xxx: e'yezd ms. 1he tirat aachine mit of the Sayano-shuahenaxaya as went into
operation in late 1978. 8y thia tile about e aillion cubic netera of. concrete had
been poured for the den and the plant building. ihie rate or concrete pouring waa

mprecedented in world practice. In order that the concrete conveyor could work
at full ateal. fundamentally new production proceaaee were introduced into con-

atruction. the neat aophiaticated aachinea and aechaniana were inatalled, and the
productivity 0! concrete planta waa raiaed.

32

”MANNY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Sayano-shushenskaya as has no equals in world hydraulic engineering construc-
tion in terms of many of its technical-economic indicators and engineering concepts.
The height of the dam is almost 250 meters. Its erection required about 10 million
33 of concrete-almost twice more than the Krasnoyarskaya ass. 'nen machine units
each producing 640.000 kw will be installed at the Sayano-shushenskaya .. hydrau-
lic machine units of such power do not yet exist either in our country or abroad.

Nor has such a high coefficient of useful turbine action ever been reached in world
practice: It exceeds 95 percent.

Builders' villages are growing hand in hand with the Sayano-shushenshaya 62.5. In
1975 all of the left-bank villages-Osnachennoye. nuyne and cheremushhiuwere com-

bined into a city that came to be called Sayanogorsk. this is one of the youngest
cities of the 1558.

Planners also developed a highly effective innovation associated with operation

of the first machine units of the hydroelectric power plant. While the former
practice in construction of hydroelectric power plants was to get the first machine

units to begin producing electric power as erection of the dam neared completion,
the Sayano-Shushenskaya ass was able to produce current before the concrete opera-
tions were less than half finished. This innovation, according to the most conser-
vative estinates, will make it possible to obtain an additional 16 billion mm: of
electric power-that is, as much as had been produced by all of the comtry's hydro-
electric power plants just a quarter of a century ago.

Construction of the Sayano-Shushensltaya 635 will basically be finished in the llth
Five-Year Plan. 'lhe bulk of its electric power will support industry, transportation

and the municipal and domestic needs of the complex itself. High-voltage electric
power transmission nainlines will make it possible to deliver surplus power to other
constners of the Siberian power system. especially in high-water years.

The main consumer of electric power in the cleex will be the Sayansk Alu-inus
Plant, some of the productive capacities of which will be placed into operation in
the current five-year plan. This enterprise is being built 20 km from Sayanogorsk.

This airplane metal plant will enjoy the sector's highest level of production and
control automation. Also under construction are the min Nonferrous natal Processing

Plant and the Sonic Iblybdenum Oonbine.

A rail car building plant being erected near Abakan will be the largest machine
building enterprise of the Sayansk complex. When it reaches its planned output
capacity, it will become the country's largest rail car building enterprise. Each
year this plant will provide 40,000 high-capacity rail cars to the national economy.
The Abakan Rail Car Building Plant will be outfitted with Iodern highly productive

equipment, and it will make use of the latest technology. The eight-axle all-metal
120-125 ton boxcars it manufactures will gradually replace the lowar capacity four-

ax1e rail cars presently in use. mey will make it possible to raise the loading
capacity of trains to 10,000 tons without significantly increasing their length.
and to increase the carrying capacity of the railroads.

In order to supply the plant with the material it needs. a large steel casting
operation has been organized and outfitted with highly economical high-capacity
electric furnaces. Each year the plant will produce 320,000 tons of forgings,

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which will not only be used by the plant itself but also be swplied to other
enterprises. mlled aluminum, which can help to reduce the weight and imrove the

stmcture of rail cars and enhance their appearance,will enjoy broad application in
rail car production.

Anothu highly inortant forts of production of the Abakan Rail Car Building Plant
is railroad containers. Forty thousand of the. will be produced each year. Scan
of the output capacities of this plant have already been placed into operation.
"are ti- will be required. however, before this giant enterprise reaches its

planned output capacity. here are plane for building 600,000 .2 of housing space--
that is, practically an entire city.

Construction of electrical engineering enterprises of varying profile and size

will be continued in the Sayansk crawler. The lost inortant of then are to be
located in the vicinity of Hinusinsk. They will produce turbogenerators and hy-
draulic generators, ones with output capacities in the millions, power transformers.
apparatus for high-voltage power lines, various cable and insulating aaterials which
are now being inorted from the European part of the comtry. ‘lhese enterprises

will also produce consuer goods, particularly appliances for electric kitchens.
The electrical engineering plants in hinminsk released their first products as

early as in the 10th rive-Year Plan. The nmer of workers at the electrical
engineering enterprises will be 60,000-10,000 persons when they achieve their full

rated capacity. Owing to coQact location of the electrical engineering enter-
prises, such money will be saved. It has been estiaated that had these enterprises
been located in different places, the outlays on their construction would have been

over 100 million rubles mre, and their operation would have required an additional
l0,000—l5,000 workers.

A large quantity of construction materials enterprises and construction industry
enterprises are being built on the territory of the sayansk cleex. ‘lhus for
exasple the housing construction coﬁine of the abakan Rail Car Building oowlex
is intended for an annual output of 170,000 a2 of housing space. while the pre-
fabricated housing plant of the Sayanskaya GE will have an output of 35,000 I2,
and so on. Most of these enterprises will be supported entirely by local high-

quality raw materials. 'me stoneworking cowine created at the large xibik-
Kordonskaya deposit of high-quality aarble has nationwide significance. Its first

generation, which is already operating. is intended for an annual output of 250,000
‘2 of aarble facing panels. Polished panels aade of colorful Sayansk marble con-

taining more than 20 different shades-white. pink, red, green, black etc.--have
enhanced the appearance of subway stations, theaters, palaces of culture and other
buildings in aany cities of the country. wurite, a precious gels found in Sayansk
and having a blue color rarely found in nature. is extreaely valuable and rare.

However, were enterprises of just the leading sectors to be included in the cospo-
sition of the Sayansk coeplex, as it took for- we would have had to deal with the

problem of providing work for wcuen. after all, the rail car building plant at
the aetallurgical enterprises would be teoying sen for the most part. Develop-
nent of light and food industry helps to solve this highly iQortant probles.

mus a wool priaary prOcessing factory has been built in Cnemogorsk. me well
conceived structure of the ninusinsk industrial center is advantageomly supple-
mented by a knitted glove factory. a wood pulp production operation developing in
xrasknoyarskiy Kray is serving as a base for construction of a synthetic leather
codine in the Sayansk coeples. 3‘

FOIOFII'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Serious attention is being devoted in the cleex's formation to construction of
new railroads and highways and reconstruction of existing ones, both internal
(linking the industrial centers of the couples) and external, leading to neighbor-
ing industrially developed regions.

Creation of the Sayansk complex made it necessary to ilprove the evolved speciali-
zation oi' agriculture in the southern part of Krasnoyarskiy Kray. In order to
satisfy the demands of the fast-growing population, many of the kolkhoses and
sovkhozes specialized in grain farming have supplemented their production with
crops intended to export an urban population, with vegetables being in high pro-
portion among them.

Dozens of scientific research institutes and other organizations have been working
several years on problems associated with formation of the Sayansk m. on the

grounds of its optimum production structure and on the planning of industrial
enterprises within its cosposition. mch attention is devoted in this case to
preserving the natural environment on the coplex‘s territory and preventing pollu-
tion of water sources and the air.

Of course, it will take more than one five-year plan to comlete formation of the
Sayansk TPK, but certain of its enterprises and production operations are already

producing. and others will go into operation in the next few years. the coqlex is
gaining strength. its construction base and construction of housing. micipal,

cultural and personal service facilities are developing. its economic development
is becoming more integrated, the personnel availability is rising and the comlex's

importance to the country's economy is growin .
9

Iv. merritorial Production Couplenes of Central Asia and Kazakhstan

'1'sz have already occupied a first place in the territorial organisation of the
economies of the republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan. 'Ihe Karatau-Dzhasbul
and Mangyshlak coapleanes have taken shape, and they are continuing to develop. The
South Tajik couple: is enjoying further growth in the llth Five-Year Plan, and the
Pavlodareakibastuz TPK is developing as well.

1. 'me South Tajik “Derritorial-Production Complex

”Continue erection of the Yavan
Electrochemical Plant and introduce
new output capacities at the aluminu-
plant of the South Tajik merritorial-
Production Complex.”

Prot- the 'Basic Directions...."

The natural resources and the high concentration of inhabitants and manpower
characteristic of the South Tajik m are advantageous factors determining the
structure and scale of its formation and development. Among the natural resources,
hydroelectric power has priority significance in this area. It represents 7.5
percent of all hydroelectric power resources of the country and about half of the
hydroelectric power resources of Central Asia.

35

NR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The rivers of southern Tajikistan-the Vakhsh, Pyandzh and Kafirniganuoffer
potential hydroelectric power resources exceeding 160 billion kin-hr, of which
almost half can be used today with a great economic inact. In tern of relative
channel power (1 kw per 1 km), the Vakhsh River, which is the right tributary of

the Amu-Dar'ya, surpasses not only the major rivers of Central Asia but also

such giants as the Volga, Yenisey and Angara. According to some estimates eight
hydroelectric power plants can be built along it, with a total channel power of
about 9 million kw and a yield of 36 billion mm: of electric power. an. hydraulic
power resources of the Pyandsh River are even more significant. In the relatively

near future a cascade of 13 electric power plants with the total power twice ex-
ceeding that of the cascade of hydroelectric powerlplants on the Vakhsh will be
erected.

There are significant reserves of mineral resources on the territory of the South
Tajik coupler: deposits of nonferrous metal ores, petroleum. gas, coal, limestone,
fluorspar, dolomite and nephelinic (spenit). A significant proportion of the
country's reserves of table salt are concentrated here.

Southern Tajikistan enjoys extremely favorable natural conditions for the develop-
ment of agriculture. A coabination of intense sunlight, large reserves of water

and presence of sizeable amounts of flat land creates especially favorable condi-
tions for growing the best varieties of cotton, a nuaber of subtropical crops and

the country‘s earliest vegetables on open ground.

The fact that the Tajik 53!! will have a better supply of manpower than many other
regions of the country in the near future will also play an important role in the
development of the South Tajik m.

construction of the Nurekskaya Hydroelectric Power Plant, one of the largest in

Central Asia, represented the start of the first stage of intensive formation of
the South ‘rajik territorial-Production Complex and development of its natural re-

sources. ‘l‘he first three nachine units of the hurekskaya ass. with a stable power
of 900,000 kw, went into operation in 1972. In the lOth Five-Year Plan the power
of the Nurekskaya Gas attained 2.7 million kw. construction of the Ragunskaya ass
with a power of 3.6 million kw is to occur on the Vakhsh niver and the
Baypazinskaya (as with a power of 340,000 kw is to be placed into operation during
the current five-year plan. Later on, the Dashtidshumskaya Hydroelectric Power
Plant with a power of 4 million kw is to be built on the Pyandzh River.

The Rogunskiy hydraulic engineering coupler, which includes the hydroelectric power
plant and a large reservoir (with a total volvne of 8.6 cubic kilometers). will

be significant in ways other than as a major power source. It will play a great
role in regulating the discharge of the Amu-Dar'ya and in development of irrigation.
The Baypazinskiy hydraulic engineering complex will be iQortant mainly for irriga-
tion: It will provide water to the Yavanskaya Plain, and it will regulate the daily
discharge of the Nurekskaya -.

Hydraulic power engineering at the South Tejik coupler is distinguished by high
economic effectiveness. As an exaaple the corrected outlays per kw-hr of electric

power produced by the Nurekskaya ass are only slightly disadvantageous in cowarison
with the indicators of the largest Siberian hydroelectric power plants. However,

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm. use ONLY ‘

in view of the exceptional ruggedness of the republic's mountain terrain, construc—
tion of power transmission lines is very expensive, making transmission of electric
power to other regions mfeasible. This is why using the cheap electric power

locally is the most effective. This significantly predetermines the structure and

rate of growth of the industrial mlex, which is oriented primarily on development
of energy-intensive production operations.

The main consular of the comlex's electric power today is the aluminul plant in
’l‘ursunzade, which processes imported alumina and provides high-quality aluminum to

the country. A new procedure of obtaining alminum using locally produced
calcined anaodes was introduced here for the first time in Soviet practice. As a

it is also significantly reducing harmful discharges into the atmosphere. lbntion
should be made of the high economic effectiveness of the production of South Tajik
aluminum, the per-ton production cost of which is close to the production cost of

Siberian aluinum plants. when new output capacities are introduced at this enter-

prise in the current five-year plan, the plant will transform into one of the
largest in the country.

Chemical industry is a consumer of the comlex's chief electric power. The Vakhshsk
Nitrogen Fertiliser Plant, which uses Central Asian gas as its raw material, has
been producing for several years. The plant provides for a significant proportion
of the nitrogen fertilizer demand of the Tajik $88, and it exports fertilisers to
neighboring republics. In the future the plant's mineral fertilizer output capa-
city will be expanded. inasmuch as the demand of Tajikistan for nitrogen fertilisers
will grow in connection with the planned development of irrigated agriculture.
simultaneously the plant will produce methanol, toxic chemicals, carbamide,
formaldehyde, amium nitrate and other products.

Construction of the Yavan Electrochemical Plant is continuing in the llth Five-Year
Plan. It will be producing high-energy products such as chlorine. chlorine pro-
ducts and caustic soda, and later on it will produce soda ash. metallic magnesium
and other products. There are plans for creating. at the Yavan plant, operations
producing polyvinyl chloride, film and tubing made from the former, fiber glass
and other products satisfying the demands of a mmber of the sectors of the
national economy and the population's personal needs. In 1978 the first line

producing neutral calcium hypochloride was placed into operation. Table salt from
the mt-Bulakskoye deposit, lime from the Puskhurskoye deposit, fluorspar from the

Takobskoye deposit and natural gas brought in by pipeline serve as the raw mater-
ials for its production.

Another electrochemical plant operating on the basis of table salt. enterprises
producing chemical fibers and other chemical enterprises will be built in the
more remote future.

Machine building is also developing in the South Tajik TTK. Its products will
not only satisfy the republic‘s derand but will also be exported to other regions

of the country. The complex is now producing comics products such as refrigerators
and equipment for public food services enterprises and textile industry. The

Kurgandyubinskiy transformer and cable plants are in operation, and spare parts
are being produced for agricultural machinery. The couplex’s machine building

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprises are undergoing reconstruction and expansion. In the future new, pre-
dominantly labor-intensive machine building production operations will be created
on the basis of the rich iron deposits. Considering the nationality characteristics
of Tajik's manpower, particularly the low nobility of the population, small enter-
prises or branches, divisions and shops of machine building plants need to be

built in rural regions.

Sectors of the agroindustrial cosplex are developing intensively in the South 'l‘ajik
'rPK. Cotton growing and processing occupy a leading place, especially in relation
to fine-fiber varieties. The copier produces 75 percent of all Il‘ajilcistan's
cotton, more than 8 percent of all of the country's raw cotton and abouts third of
its fine—fiber varieties. ’l‘oday the cotton yield in southern Tajikistan attains

40-50 centners per hectare. highly productive varieties of cotton which may pro-
duce up to 60 and more centners of cotton per hectare have been introduced. A ton

of fine-fiber ‘l‘ajik cotton can produce lS,000-20,000 meters of fabric, while 10,000-
12,000 meters can be obtained from a ton of media-fiber cotton. Cotton seeds are

used to produce oil and oil cake.

One extremely important problem of unionwide significance is creation of a major
early vegetable, fruit and grape growing base at the complex in order to satisfy
the demand for these products of not only the local population but also the popula-

tions of Siberia and the Far East. At present southern Tajikistan produces only
1 percent of the country's fruits and vegetables. his is much less than its

potential. The natural and climatic conditions of the coqlex's territory permit
the harvesting of early varieties of white cabbage in the first half of April,

cucumbers in the beginning of May and tomatoes in mid-May. Some varieties of vege-
tables may be grown practically year-round in a meter of regions of the cosplex.

The natural and climatic conditions and the land resources of southern Tajikistan
will make it possible to increase the area of orchards in the complex by 2.5 times

and of vineyards by 5-7 times. there are sizeable land areas which can be irrigated
and used for orchards and vineyards. Moreover 350,000-400,000 hectares of rich

land that are presently occupied by cereal crops and sunser pastures, or are not
used at all, may be used for orchards and vineyards. The valley of the Vakhsh pro-

vides all of the conditions for significantly increasing citrus fruit production.

Industrial sectors such as oil milling and tallow, winemaking, leather footwear,
meat and dairy. fruit canning and others are closely associated with agriculture.
As agriculture develops, as its structure changes and as nationwide specialization
in the production of cotton, vegetables and fruits intensifies, food industry sec-'
tors oriented on production of foods for local consumption and for export to other

regions of the country will develop.

The South Tajik couple: also faces serious social tasks. One of them is to develop
cities, to create a large nusber of new jobs within them, mainly in labor-intensive
industrial sectors, and to encourage young people to move to the cities. In this

connection the question of preparing skilled workers acquires special significance.

The development of productive forces planned for the South Tajik m will signifi-
cantly raise the effectiveness of its production and its role in all-union territor-

ial division of labor.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. The Pavlodar-Bkibastuz territorial-Production Ooqplex

‘Increase coal mining and aluina
production, continue construction of
major hydroelectric pcverplants with a
capacity of 4 million kilowatts each,
place the second generation of the
petroleua refinery of the Pavlodar-
Bribastus 'nerritorial-Production ample:
into operation. Basically finish re-
construction of the Pavlodar lPractor
Plant.”

Fro- the “Basic Directions. . .."

The sizeable fuel, energy, mineral and rev material resources of the Pavlodar-
Ekibastuz ‘1?! are the principal foundation for its formation and further developunt.
It possesses large deposits of coal and lignite. of copper and polynetallic ores,

of table salt and of various construction materials. The Skibastus and mykubenskiy
coal basins, which are among the most proaising of the USSR in term of the econonic

effectiveness of their utilisation, have the greatest significance to the comlex's
development.

The Ekibastuz deposit is distinguished by the density of the coal accmulations

and the thickness of the coal seams. me balance reserves of industrial-grade

coal are over 7 billion tons. The deposit produces high-energy and high-calorie
coal, but it is distinguished by a high ash content. The mining and geological
conditions permit open-cut mining to a depth of 600 asters. The cost of extracting
Ekibastuz coal is the lowest in the country today. being a little lore than 1 ruble
per ton. and in the future it will drop to 45-50 kopecks.

In the Maykubenskiy basin. the industrial reserves of which are estinated at 17
billion tons, the thickness of the coal seams attains 1,000 meters. naykubenskiy

coal is a fabulous high-energy fuel. A nulber of deposits of this basin have been
thoroughly explored and prepared for operation. According to data of the
"'l‘sentrgiproshakht' [not further identified] institute the cost of a ton of compari-
on fuel is 1.36 rubles, and relative capital investments are 4.43 rubles.

me Boshchekul'skoye copper deposit, one of the comtry's largest, has ispottant
significance. In addition to copper, the ore from this deposit contains industrial

concentrations of molybdenum cobalt and alu-ina. The Kozhanskoye. Zita-baldiyskoye,
Zhusalinskoye and Priekibastuzskoye deposits occupy a noticeable place in the ore

balance. Hention should be made of the Maykanskoye, ‘nortkudkskoye and a nulber of
other polynetallic ore deposits and of the nickel ore deposit in Bayan-Aul'skiy
Rayon, Pavlodarskaya (blast.

Table salt deposits are highly significant to developmnt of chemical industry,
while deposits of fused limestone are isportant to ferrous netallurgy.

The natural and climatic conditions pernit effective agricultural production in
this area. .

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The location of the Pavlodar-Ekibastuz '1?! is favorable in terms of transportation

and geography. A significant economic potential has already been created here,
and many of the socioeconomic problems have been solved.

The 10th Five-Year Plan was a giant leap forward in the complex's development.
speaking at the 26th CPSU Congress, D. A. Kunayev, a member of the CPsU Central
Co-ittee Politburo and let Secretary of the Kazakh ssn mist Party Central
Conittee. noted that the Pavlodar-zkibastuz complex "is already providing the
country with tractors, ferroalloys, almina and chemical and petroleu refining
products. The complex is becoming the largest fuel and power region, providing
more than .70 million tons of coal per year.... 'rbree power production blocks of
the first Ekibastuzskaya GRES, the output of which significantly exceeds that of
the meproges, are already producing current. And a total of 37 more power produc-
tiOn blocks of this sort are still to be placed into operation. A world-unprece-
dented superlong energy bridge feeding direct current from Btibastuz to the
country's center is now under construction."

Development of the complex's industry is characterised by continually growing

production indicators, high economic effectiveness and broad introduction of the
achievements of domestic science and technology.

May the couples dispatches 40-50 heavy trains of coal every day. Bkibastuz fuel
is used by 20 electric power plants of the Kazakh SSR, the Urals and Siberia for a
total output of 15 million kw--more electric power than the total produced in the
country in the prewar years. while at the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan,

in 1976, akibastuz provided 46.1 million tons to the country, at the end of the
five-year plan it provided over 70 million tone. This rate of increase of output
in mining industry had never been witnessed before in Soviet and world practice.
me output of the world's largest open coal pit, the 'Bogatyr'," is 50 million tons
of coal per year. Following reconstruction. its output will increase to 90 million
tons per year. tbreover calculations confirm the effectiveness of building an
open pit with an output of 20 million tons of coal per year at the Heykubenskoye
deposit.

All of this will create a firm foundation for development of power engineering on the
territory of the complex. In the next 15 years. four large hydroelectric power
plants will be built here in the vicinity of Bkibastus, and another one will be
built near Lake Balkhash, for a total output of 20 million kw--three times more than
the capacity of the world's largest Krasnoyarskaya Gas. The first power production
block of the Ekibastuzskaya GIGS No l began handling an industrial load in April
1980. By the time the 26th CPSU mngress was convened—that is, in less than a
year, three power production blocks were already producing current. Preparations
have been started for construction of the GRES No 2. Efforts are being made simul-
taneously to solve the complex engineering and technical problems of maintaining

a continuous supply of fuel for the large GESs now under construction. For

example after it reaches its peak operating capacity, the am No 1 will construe
2,000 tons of fuel per hour, and it will require 100 m3 of water every second.

 

”XXVI s"yezd KPSS. Stenograficheskiy otchet" rm. 26th CPSU Congress. Stenc-
graphic Transcript 1, Moscow, Vol 1, 1981, p 124.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of power engineering and coal industry on such a scale would have
been iapossible. had the problem of supplying water not been solved beforehand--

had not the high-capacity 500 kilometer Irtyah-Karaganda canal, which is now being
lengthened to Deheskasgan, been built.

The ccmplex's power production facilities will transmit 42 billion kw-hr of electric
power to the country's central regions along the Ekibastuz-Tambov power transmission
line, presently under construction. Asignificant quantity of the complex's electric
power will be used in the Urals and in eastern, central and southern Kazakhstan.
However, it would be most advantageous to use this electric power locally. in the
Pavlodar—Bkibastuz m. for development of energy-intensive production operations.
One such enterprise is the Yermakovskiy Pemelloy Plant, specialised in the pro-
duction of ferrosilicon, ferromanganese , silicomanganese. refined ferrochrome and

other ferroalloys. Its output capacities were increased, production of progressive
forms of ferroalloys needed by the country was expanded, and new production opera-

tions were organised during the 10th Five-Year Plan, per-sitting integrated use of
poor manganese and chromite ore and high-ash Bkibastuz coal.

Aluminu- industry is continuing to develop intensively at the territorial-production
coupler. The principal product of the Pavlodar Aluminum Plantwalueinanbears the
State Seal of Quality. Inthe opinion of specialists favorable conditions for
organizing aluminum production will be created at the 1?]: in the more-remote

future. daeap electric power and presence of water resources and local raw mater-
ials will make this possible. Use of the tailings from nibastuz coal enrichment

as a source of alumina may provide a new iqoetus to developent of alminum industry.

Gmemical industry is developing in the complex. The first generation of an oil
refinery has been erected and placed into operation. The Basic Directions of the
LSSR's Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and in the Period to 1990 fore-

see introduction of the second generation of the oil refinery in the 11th rive-Year
Plan. This will produce favorable conditions for developing petrochemistry, polymer

and plastic chemistry and production of protein-vitamin concentrates so urgently
needed by Kazakhstan’s animal husbandry.

The growing demand of Kazakhstan's agriculture for mineral fertilizers and the
presence of a large quantity of cheap electric power and raw materials make it
suitable to create nitrogen and phosphorus fertiliser production operations in the
territorial-production complex.

Machine building will enjoy significant development in the coupler. The flagship

of this sector is the Pavlodar Tractor Plant. which is now producing tracked ve-
hicles. Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress foresee coapletion of this enterprise's

reconstruction in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

Broad possibilities for raising the effectiveness of the leading industrial sec-
tors are associated with increasing the fullness with which raw materials and pro-
duction wastes are utilized. Thus for exalple. slag from Ekibastuz coal production
may be med to obtain construction materials, particularly line—slag and sulfate-
slag cement. Wastes from alumina production--slurry--can also be used in cement
production. Vanadium and other useful components can be extracted from almina

slurry.
41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

Creation of a sound food base, further developuent of agricultural production and

expansion of the suburban agricultural base are inortant problems of the Pavlodar-
Ekibastuz werritorial-Production Coeplex. the problem of supplying water to

agriculture and developing irrigated farming are acquiring inportant significance
in this connection. The bulk of the irrigated land will be located within the
zone of the Irtysh-Karaganda canal and in areas that can be irrigated by the
lrtysh River. There are plans for increasing the area of river valley irrigation.
A large animal husbandry oleex is to be built and placed into operation in the
llth rive-Year Plan in the vicinity of the city of Ekibastuz. It should play a
major role in providing foodstuffs for the population. It will fatten SLOOO pigs
ayear, and its poultry factory will grow 3 lillion broilers each year.

mch is being done in the territorial-production couples to develop the social
infrastructure. Housing construction is to expand significantly, a nursery providing
plants for the cities is to be placed into operation, and an enterprise repairing
oouplex household appliances and many other facilities helping to improve the popu-
lat ion's living conditions will begin operating in the llth rive-Year Plan.

WPYRIGIT: Politizdat, 1982

11004
C30: 8144/1326 BID

‘2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY