FOR OFFICIAL UE ONLY

JPRS L/10388

15 March 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 16/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OP
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION RE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
(2000 16/82)

CONTENTS

BCONG‘IC

Budget Speech to Cannons by Chancellor of the Exchequer
(Geoffrey HOW; THE TIMES, 10 w 82)....ooocooovooooeooo

-a- [III-WB-L

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rconomc mrrap rmcoou'

BUDGET SPEECH 1‘0 OWNS BY CHANCBLIDR 01' m EXCBEQURR
PKlOlOl? London THE TIMES in English 10 Mar 82 pp 8-10

[Unattributed Parliamentary Report an Annual budget Report Delivered to
British House of Couons on 9 Harsh by Chancellor of the Exchequer Sir
Geoffrey Howe: "Strategy Directed to helping Industry. Jot-a and People"]

[Text] Sir Geoffrey Howe. Chancellor of the Exchequer. opened his speech by
paying tribute to Lord butler whose death had been announced earlier in the
day. He recalled that it was alnost 30 years to the day since nab had intro-
duced his first budget and there were now only a handful of present meters
who were present on that occasion.

It was an historic occasion because it Isrked the end of the transition of the
economy from war to peace and the beginning of the prosperity which was a
feature of the 1950s and 1960s. that had been the first of four budget
speeches and with the exception of Mr Denis Healey. Lord Butler was the
longest serving chancellor since the war.

The tradition has emerged since Rob's time that the budget speech should be
composed in some sense as though it was a detective story with many lengthy
passages of exposition before the denouement. It was supposed to have acne-
thing to do with waiting for the narkets to close.

having listened to a good many of those annual rituals. since first I entered
the house. the thought has occurred to ne—asno doubt it has to otherw-that
perhaps an element of tantalising suspense was thought desirable to keep the
attention of the MP's to fever pitch.

At any rate. I propose to break with that tradition; and to tell the house.
without more ado. that in this budget I shall be proposing substantial reduc-
tions in taxation. while at the same time reducing the government's borrowing
requirement.

This will be a budget for industry—and so a budget for jobs. But it will be
a budget for people as well. It is a budget that will strengthen the founda-
tions of econonic recovery.

To set Iy proposals in context. it is necessary to start with a word about the
past. Hithin the memory of every meter of this house. almost everyone in

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

this country took it for granted. for examle. that our buses. cars. or notor
cycles were made in Britain. from British steel. Most of the world's finest
ships were still being built in our yards.

It is only 11 years since the Erskine Bridge over the Clyde was completed-do
a design which would allow to pass below it a steady line of cunarders free
John Brown's world-beating yards at Clydebenk. So until quite recently we
took for granted one of the highest living standards in Europe. if not in the
world.

But by 1973. all that had changed. He had seen infla ion go above 15 percent
and unemloyment close to 1.5 nillion. Less than half the new cars bought in
Britain were made here. '

Instead of building three out of every 10 merchant ships supplied to the
narkets of the world. as we did Just 25 years ago. we were building only three
out of every 100. Our share of world trade had been halved. And living
standards in several European countries were at least half as high again as
ours.

UK Problems

we had been paying ourselves too much and producing. and selling. too little.
During the 1970s money incomes had gone up 20-timos as much as real output.
That was a sure recipe for inflation. lost sarkets. and lost jobs.

Through all this. of course. many companies. many individuals. continued to
record outstanding successes. But all too often they were swining against the
tide. For our overall economic performance had become one of the weakest and
most inflation-prone of all the major industrial countries.

At the last election we made all this very clear. We made it plain too that
reversing this decline would require a major effort. that would need to be
sustained over the lifetine of more than one parliament. And so it will be.

But this country's problems are not ours alone. In the surnar of 1979. the
whole world was hit by the fresh surge of inflation and renewed recession that

followed the second huge increase in the price of oil. The average price of a
barrel of oil last year was $36. That was 26 times as much as in 1970. when

it cost only $1.30.

The oil shock nade the task of restoring our economy both more urgent and much
more difficult. and it coincided with the surge in pay. and public spending.
which the outgoing government bequetl.ed to us.

So. in spite of North Sea oil. Britain entered the recession in poor shape.
and rather earlier than other major countries.

Britain has. therefore. suffered worse than many. But we have not suffered
alone. In the United States. in France. and in many smaller economies.
unemployment has been rising sharply. In Germany last year. the nutter rose

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by over half a million. There are now about 26 million people out of work in
the industrial countries .

Even so. most governments have reacted by continuing to give priority to the
fight against inflation. And they have been making progress in that fight.
But the battle is by no means won. 80 the outlook for the growth of world
trade remains subdued.

It is in the light of this international environment that British policy has
to be fashioned. All too often people still talk--and behave-as if British
government decisions alone were all that mattered for the British economy. and
as if we could protect or subsidise ourselves against the impact of our
competitors or the decisions of other governments.

Yet the house knows how important for the United Kingdom are the policies of
the OPEC countries in the world's oil markets, of the United States in relation
to economic activity. inflation and interest rates throughout the world. and of
Japan for the balance of world trade.

1 shall have something to say later on about the impact of recent changes in
the oil market. They are likely to have an encouraging effect on the interna-
tional outlook for prices and output. and. in the medium term. on the stability
of interest rates and exchanges rates. But at present interest rate volatility
is causing understandable concern. '

At a time of growing international tension. the United States is shouldering
burdens for the defense of freedom for which all of those on this exposed

flank of Europe should be grateful. The United States Government is also show-
ing admirable commitment to the maintenance of monetary disciplines.

And for that too. we should be grateful. For American inflation affects us
all, because of the importance of the United States and of the dollar in the
worlds economy.

He and our other friends have. therefore. a legitimate interest in the success
of the United States administration in reconciling its spending obligations
with its own responsible pursuit of monetary discipline. If that success were
only partial. there would be a risk of continuing high interest rates. which
would be damaging to recovery-in the less developed world as well as in the
industrial countries.

As I have told the house on a previous occasion. there is no reason to
suppose that we in this country could insulate ourselves from such pressures
by the simple step of participation in the European exchange rate mechanism.
That has not been the experience of the existing participants.

Nor would concerted intervention in exchange markets be able. for any length
of time to contain the movement of funds that can be generated by the widening
of interest rate differentials.

There is therefore. all the more reason for the closest possible understanding
between those responsible for managing the major economies. Por as I have

FOR arr-1:3“ USE ONLY
FIHI()FFIC1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY

said their policies can all have a direct and often speedy, impact upon each
other. we in this country must do our best to exercise our influence on the
policies of our allies and associates. Both directly and through the Euro-
pean community. the Commonwealth. OECD and the International Monetary fund.

And we do. That is why I attach so much importance to the regular meetings
of community finance ministers. and of the World Bank and the fund, and why I
look forward to welcoming to London this summer my counterparts from through-
out the Commonwealth.

But let no-one pretend that we could expect to exert any influence at all if
our own policies failed to command respect abroad.

It is however widely recognised abroad-though not always by some at home--
that in the last three years we have made substantial progress in tackling
our long-term problems.

Thanks to last year's budget. public borrowing has gone down as a percentage
of gross domestic product. giving us interest rates lower than they would
otherwise have been. In the six months following the budget. our rates were
on average four points below American and French levels, and on a par with
German rates. in spite of the difference between German and British levels
of inflation. And output started rising from the middle of the year.

Inflation has been almost halved since the spring of 1980. It should be in
single figures during this year. and lower still in 1983.

Productivity has been rising sharply. In manufacturing industry last year,
output per man rose by about 10 percent.

Lower pay increases. combined last year with fast productivity growth. meant
that unit labor costs in manufacturing rose hardly at all. Our performance
was comparable with Germany and Japan. and better than all our other major
competitors.

And exports were rising again by the end of 1981. In the last four months.
their value and volume was well up on a year earlier. Business surveys, and
most economic forecasts, point to a further rise over the next year.

In the economy as a whole. we now expect it to grow by 1.5 percent in 1982
and by rather more in 1983.

This gives the lie to all those who argued, not least at the time of last
year's budget, that our policies were foredoomed. The recovery that we fore-
saw, and worked for, is now taking place. My aim in this budget. is to nurture
and help sustain it.

I shall start by discussing the central issue of unemployment. Helping indus-
try to become more competitive is the best way of creating future employment.
But there is a clear case for direct action by government as well. I shall
have a new proposal to bring before the house.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I shall then have something to say about monetary policy. and the level of
government borrowing in the year ahead.

Finally I shall come to the tax and other measures which we intend to take,
primarily for the benefit of industry and jobs.

Jobs and Pay

So. I begin with unemployment. To have millions of people at a time without
work, many of them for long periods. is a tragic loss to the col-unity. To
be unable to find work is an affront to personal self respect. This waste of
human resources is today the misfortune of many societies besides our own.

It is a cause of deep concern to every member of this house.

It is no service to the unemployed to suggest that there is any swift or
simple remedy. '

For years. for example. it has been argued—it is still argued today-that we
could get unemployment down. if only we were less concerned to fight infla-
tion. The right dose of relation. more generous public spending. so the
argument runs. would soon see unemployment tumbling down.

would that it were so easy! But successive governments for 20 years have been
tempted to act on that advice. And with what result? All the time the tide
of unemployment has been rising insistently from one business cycle to the
next.

The truth is that "reflation" does not create jobs that last. In the longer
run. it helps to destroy them.

If more public spending was the proper engine for growth and jobs, Britain
would now lead the world in both. Yet in fact.unemploymsnt today is almost
eight times higher than twenty years ago.

"the unemployed deserve a more considered response than that! One that is
based on analysis of the root causes of the social blight of unemployment.

So I want to remind the house once more of two figures that virtually tell it
all. Since 1960 the real purchasing power of the average citizen in Britain
has risen by over two-thirds. But the real rate of return on the capital
enployed in Britain industry has fallen by five-sixths. In other words. our
present living standards have for years been plundered from the store of
investment for the future.

Nor have we put to good use the investment that has been made. too often we
have tried to mitigate the inescapable consequences of poor productivity and
shrinking international competitiveness. by clinging to manning levels that
could not be sustained.

We have only to recall the history of the British Steel Corporation. Bad we
not, throughout the middle 1970e. put off the painful choices, the corporation

FOR OFHCigAL US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and those who work in it would have faced the current slap in world demand
for steel in far better shape to weather it.

tar fewer jobs would have been lost. Acquiescence in poor productive
performance, and overmanning. may put off the evil day. But it only makes
the inevitable adjustment all the harder when it comes, as come it must.

And so today we face the huge task of helping to create the conditions in
which the unemployed can obtain work. in jobs that will last. And. as a
vital step in this. encouraging wages to be at a level which will enable
these. more secure, jobs to be created. Hy principal budget measures will
help us in the right direction.

Some of the obstacles to fuller employment have been created by successive
governments. Actions taken with exactly the opposite intention have often
had the effect of keeping people out of jobs. actually adding to unemployment.

'rhis government has taken action to remove a number of these obstacles. He
are seeking, by our eaployment legislation, to create a more reasonable
balance of bargaining power between the partners in” industry. But in truth
we need much wider change than can be brought about by government or parlia-
ment alone. _we need a clear-sighted change in our national understanding of
the problem. And then a much more practical. more flexible approach.

The key point is this. Somewhere in the gap between the levels of income
which we pay to those out of work and the earnings enjoyed by those who have
a job. are rates of pay which those now out of work would be glad to take.
if they had the chance. But convention and s narrowness of vision prevent
these bargains being struck.

"hen jobs are in abundance. any employer will make sure that he keeps up with
the market, by offering high enough pay to recruit and retain the workers he
needs. And trade unions will naturally encourage him.

But when business is tight and jobs are scarce, the same employer owes it to
the unemployed, as well as to his own employees. to react to the changed
market. to pay at rates which leave room for him to earn enough for further
business and further investment-wand for new jobs.

In this situation too, trade unions haven-or should have—exactly the same
interest. That is the best service that any employer or union leader can
offer to the unemployed.

Attitudes are changing in this direction. And so prospects for employment
are improving. But it will take time.

That is why we have already cousitted substantial sums for special employment
and training measures to help those hardest hit. Our plans for 1982-83
provide nearly 1,5001: pounds for special employment and training measures. By
1984-85, its first full year, we plan to spend over 1,000- pounds a year on
the new youth training scheme alonena major advance for school leavers who
cannot find jobs.

6 _ ,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL
lKMl(Mﬂﬂ(]Al.USEi)NLN

A number of these measures--for example. the young workers scheme-are intended
to help the labour market work more flexibly. to help make wage levels more
responsive to economic reality. and so lead to the creation of lasting jobs.

We should all like to do more. within what the economy can afford. to reduce
the continuing personal burdens of unemployment. It is clearly right to do
all we can for those obliged to spend a long time without a proper job.

He can all see. in our local communities. tasks of environmental improvement.
or of bringing help to those in need. that are crying out to be performed.
Lord Scarman rightly drew attention to this in his recent report. He pointed
out that there could be great advantage in schemes for socially useful
activity. in place of current unemployment and social security arrangements.

Most people believe--certainly this government doea--that it should be possi-
ble to take further constructive action along these lines. Let me give the
house some indication of what we now have in mind.

The central idea would be to give those who have been on the unemployment
register for some time the chance to work for the benefit of their own
community. while still getting broadly the equivalent of their benefit entitle-
ment plus an addition for expenses and the like.

They would remain free to take a regular job if it came along. and it would be
for them to decide whether or not to participate in such a scheme.

This concept may be unorthodox. Certainly it is no substitute for long-term
jobs. But in today's world it makes a lot of practical sense. The government
would like to see it tried. to see it carried through successfully. on a wide.
indeed a nationwide. scale. with people working on non-profit-making projects
brought forward by local sponsors of all kinds. including voluntary organi-
zations and the churches. and indeed local authorities.

The Secretary of State_for Employment (Mr Norman Tebbit) is, therefore. asking
the manpower services commission to work up urgently a flexible and voluntary
scheme on these lines. so that the government can take firm decisions in the
early summer on a new initiative for the commission to run alongside the
present community enterprise programme.

He shall look for the commission's advice on what is possible. but. for illus-
tration. net additional expenditure of some 150m pounds a year excluding
supervision costs ought to be able to support around 100.000 places.

That would be excellent value for the taxpayers' money-~value for the community
and constructive opportunity for those who choose to take part. We should in-
deed be ready to back this kind of development on an even larger scale. if the
demand is there.

The government hopes that all those in the community who could play a part in
promoting this scheme will give it their early and careful consideration. And
I hope that this new initiative will also be welcomed in all parts of the
house.

7 . .
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Monetary Pol icy

I propose next to describe to the house how monetary policy will operate in
the year ahead. I shall nevertheless. do so as briefly as I can. to avoid
trying the patience of the house with detail. The tectmically-minded will

find asple solace in the lapidary prose of the red book.

Ever since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates
in 1971. the need to control the money supply has been accepted world-wide.
In this country. published targets for monetary growth were initiated by my
predecessor in 1976. the year he had to seek help fro- the DIP.

Then as now. monetary control was supported by progressively lower public
borrowing. I am sure that he was right to be converted to monetary end
financial restraint, to persuade individuals and companies alike that infla-
tion would come down.

The medium tern financial strategy which the government launched two years
ago is an extension of this approach.

It has helped us to reduce inflation. and will continue to do so. He now have
a real prospect of sustainable recovery. It is clearly right to Iaintain the
strategy. Of course it is right to adjust. in the light of experience. the
way we pursue it.

But maintain it we must. for it establishes the financial framework within
which day to day po1icy decisions are taken.

In last year's budget speech, I enphasised that no single measure of money can
fully describe monetary conditionsnthey must be assessed in the light-of all
the available evidence. And this remains the basis of our policy.

As intended. the overall effect of policy in 1981-82 has been to maintain
downward pressure on inflation. Sterling m3 has grown faster than the target
set a year ago.

This was due partly to the civil service strike. It has been affected to be
structural changes in the market place—such as the rising market-share of the
banks-which could have long-term affects.

The growth of the wider measures of money probably also reflects greater
demand for liquid assets as a medium for saving. This too could last for some
time. So though the stock of broad money is higher than originally expected.
our judgement is that this is consistent with maintaining the steady pressure
needed to achieve a downward trend in inflation.

Certainly. the evidence as a whole does not suggest loose monetary conditions.
As in several other cOuntries. the narrow aggregates have grown more slowly
than the wider ones. The effective exchange rates have been high—both in

nominal and in real terms. The price of some important assets, for example
houses. has been constant or falling.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 have taken account of these factors in setting sonewhat higher ranges than
were suggested for Sterling H3 in last year’s red book. The target range for
1982-83 will be 8-12 percent. This adjustment in the monetary target does
not imply any relaxation of purpose. 0n the contrary, it is a recognition
of the pace of progress thus far, and, in the light of that. our judgment
that the new ranges will be consistent with continued progress against
inflation.

The new target represents a realistic restatement of our determination to main-
tain a responsible monetary policy. It should be consistent with growth of
money GDP at 10 percent a year. with continued progress against inflation, and
with a strengthening recovery of the real economy.

We shall continue to monitor a range of indicators. To make more explicit
the way in which we do this, the ranges I have just announced will apply to
both the broad measures of money-Sterling M3 together with PSL2-and the
narrow measure. H1.

The exchange rate also normally gives useful information on monetary condi-
tions. For while the government has no target for the exchange rate. its
effect on the economy and. therefore, its behaviour, cannot be ignored.

Evidence on all these variables will continue to be taken into account.
Policy decisions will be aimed at naintaining a monetary environment conducive
to the reduction of inflation.

Targets for the years after 1982-83 will be set nearer the time. slower mone—
tary growth is central to the medium term financial strategy. The path for
further reductions in the rate of money growth from year to year is illus-
trated in the budget red book. The ranges have been constructed on the
assumption that there are no major changes in the exchange rate from year to
year.

What I have just described provides the framework for continuing the conquest
of inflation. He are winning the battle. We are determined to see it through.

Honetary Control

I ought also to mention changes which have been made over the past year in the
techniques of monetary control. From last August. minimum lending rate ceased
to be posted.

The main purpose of this change was to allow market forces a grater influence
on the structure of interest rates, and to allow rates to be adjusted more
promptly in response to changing economic conditions. These objectives have
been met. The new arrangements have coped successfully with some severe
swings both in the international markets and in the money markets here at
home.

We have also been working to even out the flow of revenue over the year. in

order to ease the problems for money market operations and monetary control
generally.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let no give three examples. Over the last nine months. customs and excise
have taken steps. with the agreement of the companies concerned, to secure a
more even monthly flow of VA: into the Exchequer. by adjusting the quarterly
dates on which certain traders are required to account for VAT.

Second, we are seeking a smoother payment of the building societies' composite
rate tax.

Finally and most important, the proposals for oil taxation which I shall
describe later. will spread the payment of petroleum revenue tax more evenly
over the year.

A central element in the government's financial policy is that the gap
between public sector spending and revenue should be financed in a way that
is consistent with our monetary target. We have therefore greatly improved
the balance of government funding.

In 1979-80. when the P833 was similar to this year's, sales of gilt-edged
stock were more than eight times larger than the contribution from national
savings. This year the ratio was down to about 2 to 1. National savings
have exceeded their target. which was raised to 3,500m pounds last autumn.

I congratulate the department on achieving these higher inflows through
increased efficiency, while making its contribution to civil service staff_
reductions.

Interest rates have come down since the current national savings certificate
was introduced.

It will therefore be withdrawn from tomorrow (Wednesday) and replaced as soon
as possible by a new savings certificate offering a lower but still competi-
tive rate of return.

New sales of gilts to the public in the past year have not needed to be more
than about 7.500 million pounds. with less emphasis on_conventional long-dated
high-coupon stocks. In our funding policy we have demonstrated our confidence

in our policies for reducing inflation. Last year I announced. as one part
of our policy of diversified funding. the introduction of indexed gilt-edged

stock. Over the past year, sales ofthis indexed stock amounted to some 2,500
million pounds. '

The right to buy this indexed gilt was restricted to pension funds and certain
other institutions in respect of their UK pension business.

I have now decided to remove this restriction. The Bank of England is
announcing this afternoon a new issue of indexed stock on an unrestricted
basis.

The restrictions on the existing indexed gilts already in the market will
also be removed today. The house may recall that the original prospectus for
these stocks itself provided for the possibility of removing the restrictions.

10
ron omcm. us: ONLY
This broadening of the market should increase the usefulness of indexed gilts
as a funding instrument.

Our policy of diversified funding will continue next year. with contributions
coming from indexed gilts, conventional gilts and national savings. In the
case of national savings. the target for 1982-83 will be 3.000 million
pounds, just a little below the figure for last year.

Borrowing

As well as setting a proper framework for money supply growth, the REFS sets
out the government's views on the proper level of public borrowing in the
years ahead. This cannot make excessive demands on the funds available with-
out putting upward pressure on interest rates. That is what governments in
other countries have found out, to their cost.

Recent experience throughout the world exposes the myth that big budget
deficits are good for growth and employment. On the contrary; a responsible
fiscal policy is essential for both.

Last year I budgeted for a PSBR of 10,500 million pounds. Since then output
has moved as broadly as expected at the time of the last budget. and the 1981-
82 PSBR is still on track for the forecast outcome.

Some argue that our fiscal policy is excessively tight, once account is taken
of the affects of the recession. 1 do not accept this. The acid test for the
PSBR is the level of interest rates at which it can be financed.

My budget decisions last year took account of the recession. and in assessing
the impact of fiscal policy on the economy it is actual spending and tax pay-
ments that matter-mot hypothetical estimates of what they might have been,
if the world were somehow different.

But there are some who say that our interest rates are really determined in
New York anyway; and hence that the amount that we decide to borrow is
neither here nor there. Such reasoning is mistaken. and conclusions drawn
from it dangerously wrong. -

Of course. it is true that international interests rate movements affect the
price that we must pay for money borrowed here. But that in no way diminishes
the responsibility upon us to choose policies likely to hold our interest
rates in the lower part of the international range.

Let us remember what happened last autumn. He could not resist the pressures
of rates rising sharply all around the globe: we would not have been able to
do so whatever the level of our own domestic borrowing.

But because of the firm line taken in my last budget, our own interest rates,
even after the increase in the autum. did not soar to the levels reached in
the financial markets of a number of our cowetitors.

11
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Had I. last March. thrown caution to the winds. our rates of interest would not
have come down last spring. and would have had to go up far higher last autumn.
Indeed the 10,500 million pound PSBR set for the year now ending. and the
determined measures we have taken to achieve it, have again been helping us in
recent weeks to bring down the cost of borrowed money.

The fact is that while there are limits to the influence we can have on the
world background, we can do something more directly about our own borrowing.
The larger the PSBR we start with, the higher the interest rates we shall end
up with and the opposite is also true.

In coming to a judgment about what we can responsibly plan to borrow in the
next financial year there is one further international dimension which I cannot
ignore: the recent fall in oil prices around the world.

I cannot stress too strongly that a lower level of oil prices. if it is-sus-
tained. is basically good news for Britain and the world. It helps to lower
inflationary expectations. It makes room for a faster growth in output. con-
sistent with the proper monetary discipline which is now so widely applied.

And as the balance of earning power between the advanced industrial countries
and the oil producers undergoes some correction, the weight of highly mobile
financial surpluses, which have been such a destabilising influence on world
capital markets in recent years. is likely to be diminished.

For this reason, the prospects for international inflation, for interest
rates, for growth. and for exchange rate stability have all improved in
recent weeks.

But, for my budget judgment. this does to some extent work both ways. My task
has in part already been done for me. A drop in oil prices affects eur own
economy in much the same way as a cut in indirect taxes. or excise duties. or
national insurance surcharge.

Lower oil prices reduce costs and prices all round. They leave people in this
country with more money in their pockets to spend on other things. They lower
the costs of production and distribution. And in addition-which a cut in our
own tax-rates cannot do-a fall in the world oil-price promises to increase
activity worldwide. and with it the purchasing power of many of our traditional
customers in the non-oil developing countries.

But that is not the whole story. When the price of oil drops our tax take from
North Sea production is correspondingly reduced. Other things being equal,

this would increase the borrowing requirement. though not by as much. since
the beneficial effects of the oil price cut boosts our revenues from other
forms of activity. The prospect is bound to be uncertain.

But in determining the size of the PSBR for the year that starts in April I
can assure the house that I have made allowances for these factors as we know
them today.

12
FOR 0FF1C1AI.USE(NVLY
Obviously. if there was to be a prolonged fall in the oil price below the level
we currently expect, then both the beneficial effect on activity and domestic
prices and the revenue-loss effect on the PSBR. would be increased. It would
be wholly irresponsible for me to rule out the possibility of having to take
action to correct the fiscal balance. if that were to happen.

The illustrative projections presented with last year's budget envisaged a
PSBR for 1982-83 equivalent to 3.25 percent of GDP. This would be around
9,000 million pounds at current prices.

In the light of the latest assessment of the prospects I have thought it right
to provide for a PSBR of around 9,500 million pounds in the coming year,
equivalent to 3.5 percent of GDP.

This is about 1.000 million pounds below the expected outturn for this year.
But is also about 1.300 million pounds above what the PSBR would have been
next year on the conventional assumptions-that is to say if the changes to
income tax and specific duties which I am proposing today were only to take
account of the past year's inflation.

That 1.300 million pounds is the PSBR cost of my budget proposals in 1982-83.
Their net cost to the Exchequer in a full year is over 3,000 million pounds
compared with this years' tax and duty rates.

The new revenue and borrowing projects published in the red book envisage a
further decline in the P833 over the following two years to 2 percent of GDP,
on the assumptions about growth and inflation which are there set out.

So the size of the government's borrowing in real terms will continue to
decline from year to year. This will further ease the pressure it imposes on
financial markets. And it will assist progress towards lower interest rates
and lower inflation.

So much for borrowing. I now turn to expenditure.
Public Spending

0n 2 December I announced the government's public expenditure plans for
1982-83. Today (Tuesday) we are publishing the annual public expenditure
white paper. This sets out the plans for next year in more detail and also
contains our provisional proposals for the two following years.

At the same time. the supply estimates for 1982-83 are being presented to the
house. The house_will note the new and greatly improved presentation in the
white paper. I certainly find it much easier to follow.

In the last two years these documents have been published on budget day. so
that all the information would be available at the same time. In this way. the
budget debate can cover both sides of the account. The treasury and civil
service committee is, I know, considering the handling of these matters. and I
await its recommendations with interest.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I explained to the house in December why we had decided to increase planned
expenditure in 1982-83 by some 5,000 million pounds compared with the plans
set out in last year's white paper.

The increases included some 1,300 million pounds of extra finance for the
nationalized industries. 500 million pounds more on defence. and another 800
million pounds on special employment programmes.

They were partly offset by a general reduction in most cash limited expendi-
ture .

Although most of the measures which I shall announce today involve reductions

in taxation. I am also proposing some additions to public expenditure.
totalling some 350 million pounds in 1982-83. This includes an increase of 150'
million pound in the contingency reserve to accommodate some of the expenditure
measures; this brings the reserve in 1982-83 to 2.600 million pounds.

The planning total for 1982-83 given in the white paper is 115,150 million
pounds in cash. compared with 110.200 million pounds which is the cash
equivalent of last year's projections for 1982-83. But the increases I now
propose will be more than offset by other changes in costs. and the total will
therefore be 114,900 million pounds.

Total public sector capital spending is next year planned to be about the
same--l,500 nillion pounds--as expected this year. The plans allow for new
investment by nationalized industries (including that financed from their own
resources) of over 7.500 million pounds in 1982-83. some 26 percent higher.
than the out-turn now expected in 1981-82 and 60 percent higher than in 1980-
81.

Taking account of measures which I shall be announcing a little later, spend-
ing on construction is expected to rise by 14 percent to 10,250 million
pounds in 1983-83.

In particular housing investment. and work done on water and sewerage projects,
should be higher in real terms next year than this. In all these ways the
government is planning for the continued improvement of public sector
services.

For the first time we have published figures for the whole period in cash.
The planning totals for later years are 120,000 million pounds for 1983-84,
6,000 million pounds and 6.000 million pounds respectively. which is included
in the figures for each of these years, has been set to give realistic totals
in a cash planning regime.

The programme figures are provisional and will be reviewed in future surveys.
The starting point will be the cash programmes resulting from this after-
noon's announcements. The figures will not be automatically increased if
inflation turns out to be higher than expected. Any alteration will be a
matter of deliberate political decision. That is the essence of cash planning.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I foreshadowed these developments in my budget speech last year. I am confi-
dent that they will help us to keep expenditure under control.

Social Security

By far the largest single element in public spending is social security. In
1982-83 it will account for 32,000 million pounds. over one quarter of the
total.

About half of this goes to the elderly, who deserve our special consideration.
This government has been determined to preserve the full purchasing power of
the social security retirement pension. We shall accordingly raise the
pension rates. to cover the expected increases in prices for the 12 months

to next Noveauber.

When I published the industry act forecast last December. I expected that
increase to be 10 percent. That was an appropriately cautious central fore-
cast. But the outlook for inflation has clearly improved since December. My
similar forecast now is that prices will go up by only 9 percent in the same
12 months period. ' '

But I do not propose to raise the pension rates only by 9 percent. We intend
also to compensate pensioners for the fact that last year's increase was based
on a forecast of the rise in prices that was 2 percent below the actual rise.

Retirement pensions will thus go up next November by a total of 11 percent.

The standard rate will be increased by 3.25 pounds to 32.85 pounds a week,
for a single person. and by 5.20 pounds. to 52.65 pounds for a married couple.

There is of course no government commitment to full price protection except
for the retirement pension and associated benefits. During the debate on the
government's public expenditure plans, we said that a decision about the 2
percent shortfall in the value of other benefits would 'be announced at budget
time.

The main ones are unemployment benefit and supplementary allowance, sickness
and injury benefit, and maternity allowance. 1 have received many representa-
tions that the 2 percent shortfall should be restored on these benefits also.
And we have decided that it should be.

This means that the rate of unemployment benefit will rise from 22.50 pounds a
melt to 25 pounds for a single person. and from 36.40 pounds to £0.45 pounds
for a married couple. Details of the other benefits will be announced tomorrow
(Hednesday) by the Secretary of State of Social Services (Mr Norman Iowler).

We have also decided on some changes in the rules governing payment of bene-
fits. These are in response to representations we have received. and will be
widely welcomed. The secretary of state will give details in his announcement
tomorrow. .

15
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are. however some further changes which I should announce today. First,
child benefit. whichis an important source of income for many, especially the
lower paid with large families. Tron next November it will go up by 60? a
week from 5.25 pounds to 5.85 pounds. It will thus have been increased by

23 percent over two years. and so fully protected against inflation.

The additional one-parent benefit will be increased by 35? to 3.65 pounds.
And in the case of the family income supplement, the prescribed amount for a
one child family will go up from 7k pounds to 82.50 pounds.

I shall have something to say a little later about the military allowance.

The full year public expenditure cost of all the changes in the social
security which I have mentioned will be some 3,000 million pounds. The extra
cost in 1982—83 will all be accommodated within the public expenditure totals
I have just announced. -

I turn now to help for charities.

The government is deeply conscious of the contribution to our national life
that is made by our charitable organizations.

Two years ago, I introduced substantial new tax relief for covenanted dona-
tions to charities. I also doubled the exemption from capital transfer tax
for charitable bequests or gifts made within one year of death.

we have been urged to relieve charities froa VAT on their purchases. The
attractions of this are obvious. but it raises substantial difficulties. The
more one studies how it might be done-and we have looked into it exhaus-
tively-the more inseparable appear the problems of definition. of administra-
tion, and of equity that stand in its way. So reluctantly, I have had to be
satisfied with other ways of helping charities instead.

First. I propose to take the capital transfer tax exemption for qualifying
gifts to charities a stage further, by increasing it. for gifts made within
a year of death. from 200,000 pounds to 250,000 pounds.

Second. I intend to abolish stamp duty completely on transfers of assets to
charities.

Third, as the National Council for Voluntary Organisations has suggested, I
propose to remove beyond all doubt any liability to development land tax where
a charity disposes of property which has been subject to roll over relief.

Taken together. those measures constitute significant new assistance to
charities and voluntary organisations. They build still further upon the
significant benefits which charities have derived from earlier action by this
government. Our record continues to be one in which we can justifiably take
pride.

I now come to the particular problem of the disabled which we have always had
very much in mind. Last year, the international year of the disabled, I

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
introduced a range of value added tax reliefs for charities concerned with the
disabled. I an concerned with the disabled. I - able to announce three fur-
ther measures of help.

First, there will be some extension of the existing var reliefs for disabled
people and the charities serving them.

Second, nobility allowance. The rate will be increased—by more than the
expected rise in prices-n-fron 16.60 pounds a week to 19.30 pounds. This will
nean that it has risen by over 80 percent since the government took office.
This represents alconsiderable increase in real terns.

In addition, I propose this year to respond to a particularly inortant request
made on behalf of the disabled to successive governnents in recent years.

I propose that free 1 April the mobility allowance should be wholly except from
income tax. This is a najor step: It neane an increase in net incone of up to

5 pounds a week for the working disabled. They deserve every encouragement,
and the change will. I know, be widely welcomed.

\

Public Sector

Turning to management of the public sector. starting with the civil service,
the chancellor said: The provision and organization of welfare benefits in
only one of the many tasks of government.

The whole cost of government auninistration does indeed inose a formidable
burden upon the taxpayer. Out of total spending of 105.0001! pounds in the
current year, the government's running costs anount to over 12,0004 pounds.
The importance of keeping tight control of these costs is. therefore. mani-
fast.

This is why we set ourselves the task of reducing the sire of the civil
service. from 732,000 in 1979 to 630,000 by April. 1986. we are on target.
Nu-bers are down already by 57,000. we now have the usellest civil service
for 15 years.

Local authority manpower. on the other hand, has cone down by only 3 percent
since 1978. less than half as much as in the civil service. The importance
of further progress needs no underlining. Efficient cost control means
getting pay rates right. as well as controlling staff nuﬂers.

Later in the year, the Co-ittee of Inquiry under Sir John liegew will be making
reconendations about civil service pay strangenents for the futm'e. In con-
sidering their report we shall aim to be fair to public servants, and to the
taxpayer.

But the government is also responsible for the nationalised industries.

In deciding how nuch public finance to lake available to tha. the governnent
lust be influenced by their perfomnce in controlling their own costs. Every

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

1 percent they save on labour costs is worth another 1601! pounds that they
could use for investment. or to reduce prices.

Yet even now this lesson has not been fully learnt. Seven out of every ten
days lost because of strikes in the last two years were within the public
sector. The continuing rail dispute. about productivity improve-sets and
up-to-date labour practices that should have been introduced years ago.
demonstrated how far there is still to go.

In the absence of increased productivity. willingly accepted, it is not easy
to justify increased invest-eat.

This is why we intend to widen the exposure of the public sector to the
discipline of the narket place.

One way of doing this. that has been conceded on all sides of the house. is
by the introduction. under the right conditions. of private capital. Those
conditions must ensure fair coepetition with the private sector for capital.
They must also ensure that the consequent higher cost of borrowing is offset
by greater efficiency.

The government has now decided to accept. in principle. the proposal for
British Telecon to issue a bond to raise market capital in this way. The
return to the investor would be based on the profits earned by the corporation.

British Telecon will be expected. as a condition of access to narket finance.
to keep tariff increases at least 2 percentage points below the annual move-
ment in the an. and to reduce real unit costs, in 1982-83. by a minimal of
5 percent. with further reductions to be agreed for later years.

We shall have to satisfy ourselves. in the light of market conditions nearer
the tine. that the bond represents good value to the govern-ant and British
Telecoe. as well as to the investor. Subject to that condition. the aim will
be to go ahead with an initial sale in the autm. of up to 15m pounds. This
will be an inortant experiment in exposing the performance of a nationalised
industry to the judgement of the market place.

But above all it reeains our purpose. wherever possible. to transfer. to the
private sector assets which can be better eanaged there. In the private
sector. businesses have to respond to consumer needs. The pressure on enter-
prises. fornerly in the public sector. to do the ease at once becomes such
greater if they are transferred.

We have made considerable progress. There has been some controversy about the
method of selling shares in harshest International. But for those inclined to
be wise after the event. it is worth pointing out just how nuch greater public
interest in the sale proved to be than comentators expected when the terns
were first announced.

It is. in any case. a cause for satisfaction that the great majority of

Amersham enployees are now shareholders in the enterprise for which they work.
For the great najority of people. this is the right kind of public ownership.

18
.l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Legislation is on the stature book enabling us to transfer to the private
sector the British Transport Docks board, and British Airways. and to permit
the sale of subsidiaries in British Telecom and British Rail. within the
last few weeks we have transferred the National Freight Company to a consor-
tium led by its own management. And British Aerospace. and cable and wire-
less. are now firmly established in the private sector.

Our plans assumed that asset sales of this kind would total about 500“ pounds
this year. we expect to achieve that target. The government looks forward
to further disposals in the next two years.

We are seeking powers to sell the offshore assets of British gas and to permit
the introduction of private capital into the National Bus Company. The most
important transfer will be the sale of 51 percent of Bnoc's oil-producing
business. for which a bill is now before the house.

I now turn to what can be done in this budget directly to benefit business.
Industry. and hence jobs.

Our prime purpose is to help private commerce and industry to help itself. by
cutting its costs, and I have no doubt, from the representations 1 have
received, that the single measure business would, most welcome is a reduction
in the national insurance surcharge.

This surcharge was imposed and then increased by the previous government.
Indeed. in their last two and a half years in office the last government
increased the combined charge on employment, the employers national insurance

contribution and the national insurance surcharge. from 8.5 percent to 13.5
percent.

The surcharge is of course a tax on employment. It raises products-costs. It
is not rebatable on exports and it either puts up prices or cuts into profits.
But it is an extremely cost-effective tax. It raises large amounts of revenue.
at little administrative cost. It is much easier to put on a tax of this kind
than to take it off.

This government has already protected businesses. and so employment from any
increase in employers national insurance contribution rates for two consecutive
years. Had we not done so, employers would have had to find nearly 1,000“
pounds more in the coming year than will actually be the case.

It is now time to offer more positive relief. I accordingly propose to cut
the rate of the national insurance surcharge from 3.5 to 2.5 percent. This
will help reduce costs throughout the economy and will be of value to all
businesses, whatever their tax position.

The cut will operate from 2 August which is the earliest practicable date.

But I am anxious that industry should not suffer from this unavoidable delay.

I shall therefore propose an extra half percent reduction between August 1982
and April 1983. The effect of this will be to enjoy in the last two-thirds of
1982-83 the equivalent of a whole year's reduction of 1 percent in the surcharge.

l9
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This proposal is intended to reduce business costs in the private sector.
however public sector eaployers also pay the surcharge and in order to leave
then exactly where they would have been without the change. appropriate reduc-
tions will be made in the relevant cash limits and the votes of central
government and the RES. in the rate support grant to local authorities, and
in the external financing limits of the nationalised industries.

The necessary changes will be announced as soon as possible. This will reduce
the cost to a net figure of 660! pounds in 1982-83.

The aim of the relief I have just announced is to help business costs and
employment. If it were to find its way into higher pay, that would totally
defeat the object of the exercise, and would obviously have to be taken into
account in future.

It is crucial that this should not happen. In proposing this reduction. we
are offering business and industry. management and workforce. an exceptional
opportunity to improve their own performance and prospects. I believe that
they will take it.

Indirect Tax
1 come now to the indirect taxes. I propose no change in the rate of VAT.

For the excise duties there has grown up in recent years a sensible presump-
tion that they should be adjusted on line with the lovement in prices free
one year to the next. That, after all is what happens automatically with VAT
and the ad valorem duties. and also to the personal tax allowances. unless
parliament decides otherwise. And that is the basis of my approach to excise
duty changes this year.

I start with the duty on tobacco. Last year duty was increased twice-in
March as part of the budget aessures and in July to help recoup the loss of
revenue fro. the DERV duty reduction.

1 have taken account of that in proposing this year an increase that is the
equivalent of 5? including VAT. on the price of a typical packet of 20
cigarettes. There will be consequential increases for other tobacco products.
These changes will take effect from midnight on Thursday.

Next. alcoholic drinks. I propose to increase the duties from midnight
tonight by amounts which represent about 2? on the price of a typical pint
of beer. lOP on.a bottle of table wine, and 13? on a bottle of sherry-a11
including VAT.

The full increase in the price of a bottle of spirits necessary to take
account of inflation would have been over SOP.

However. in the light of the representations about the state of the Scotch
Whisky Industry which I have received from conservative UPS representing

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scottish constituencies and others. I have decided that it would be
appropriate to limit the increase on spirits to 30? a bottle} again including

VAI.

Next. the oil duties. Last year. as the house will recall, I felt it right to
go some way to meet the representations made to me by ass in favour of a lower
increase in the case of DERV than of petrol. in view of the inpact of DERV duty
on industrial and distribution costs. I have decided this year alightly-to
widen that differential.

There is a strong case for a larger increase in the petrol duty than in the
other duties. for our average pump prices are currently among the lowest in
the European community. They have moreover been favourably affected by recent
changes in the price of oil. Pump prices have been falling rapidly.

In proposing a rather larger percentage increase in the duty on claret than on
whiskey I have at no stage had in mind adding to the difficulties of the social
democratic candidate in Eillhead. (laughter) I fancy he may have enough
troubles of his own already.

Against this. it has been impressed upon me by a number of conservative Hrs
from rural constitutencies in all parts of the Kingdom. that pump prices in
'remote areas are very much higher than those in more heavily populated areas.
Yet dependence on cars for transport is greatest in the more scattered

communities.

On balance. I think it would be right. at least at this stage, not to impose
any real increase in the oil duties. I propose. therefore. to limit the
increases in the duties on both petrol and DBRV to amounts which no more than
compensate for'one years' inflation.

The duty on petrol will accordingly increase by the equivalent, including VAI.
of about 9? a gallon or 2? a litre. This will still leave lost pulp prices
lower than they were at the end of last year.

The duty on DERV will increase by the equivalent. including VA: of about 7?
a gallon or 1.5? a litre. As almost all DBRV is used in businesses. this
smaller increase will help to hold down business costs.

As last year. I propose no change in the rate of duty on heavy fuel oil. I
an not able, as some would wish. to cut the duty rate; but leaving it unchanged
will help industry as the duty burden continues to fall in real terms.

Last year I undertook to review the rate of duty applied to aviation gasoline.
or avgas.

I have given very careful consideration to the representations which I have
received on behalf of air taxis. flying schools. crop-spraying and other
specialist services. and from those concerned with air travel in the high-
lands and islands of Scotland. I cannot accept in full the arguments which
have been put to me. but I have decided that it would be right to reduce the

21
F0l10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

avgas duty rate to one-half of that on petrol. Including VAT, this annunta to
a reduction of about 321’ a gallon or 71’ a litre.

All these changes take effect for oil delivered from refineries and warehouses
from 6]). tonight (Tuesday).

I also propose to increase nost rates of vehicle excise duty.. For the motorist
the increase will be 10 pounds from 70 to 80 pounds. Duty levels on most other
groups of vehicles will be increased by about 12 percent.

I propose to make two important changes in the vehicle excise duty on comer-
cial vehicles. I have decided that it would offer a substantial, and
justifiable. help to snall and nedius sized business at this tine to bring

the duties on about half a million light co-srcial vans more closely into line
with those on cars.

0n the other hand. it would be appropriate, in the light of the conclusions of
the Arnitage report. to inpose on the heavier lorries—the 80,000 or so of more
than 9 tons unlsden weight--a licence duty which more closely reflects the
actual cost which they imose on the road network.

So the duty on this category will be increased by about a quarter. These
changes have effect for licences taken out after today.

The changes I propose for co-ercial vehicles reflect the government's inten-
tion to get a fairer balance between the taxation burden on different groups

of lorries and their road costs.

I propose to take a further step in this direction by including in the finance
bill provisions for restructuring the basis of vehicle excise duty on heavy
lorries, to a gross weight method of assessunt and for taxing all light
comercial vehicles in due course at the ease rate as cars.

The house will recall that the framework for this major reform of the system
was set out in the 1981 Transport Act. It will involve substantial changes
in the pattern of conercial vehicle taxation and I think it right that the
road transport industry should have time to adjust. I therefore propose that
the rates of duty on the new gross-weight basis shoald take effect from

1 October.

And. last of the excise duties. taxes on betting and gaming. Many conserva-
tive MPS pressed last year for substantial changes in July. I now propose no
further increase in the rates of duty on general betting and bingo. both of
which were increased then.

But I have decided that pool betting duty. which has been unchanged since
1975, should go up from 1.0 percent to 1.2.5 percent from 1 April. I also
propose increases from the same date in the rates of duty on casinos, where
I believe the existing rates are too low.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Full details of the new rates, and other changes which I shall be announcing
today. will be given in press notices.

The Chief Secretary (Mr Leon Britten) announced last sun-er that customs and
excise would undertake a comprehensive review of gaming machine taxation. A
very large number of representations were received during the course of this
review. from and on behalf of clubs. public houses, amusement arcades. and
others.

In the light of these representations I have decided that it would not be
appropriate to introduce an ad valorem duty on gaming machines, or to impose
an excuse duty on amusement machines, such as space invaders. I have also
decided that duty should no longer be charged on 2? gaming machines which are
mostly to be found in the seaside arcades.

However. I have decided that there should be significant increases from
1 October in most rates of the existing licence duty on SP and 10 gaming
machines.

The total effect of all these changes in excise duties will be to raise an
additional 1.150H pounds in 1982-83 and 1,16SH pounds in a full year.

The impact effect on the PEI will be about three-quarters of one percent.
This has been fully taken into account in my forecast of falling inflation
in the year ahead.

Oil Taxation

I have spoken of the oil duties: I now turn to the oilfields. The develop-
ment of the North Sea has been a story of enterprise and success, which is
almost entirely due to the skill and enterprise displayed. and risks accepted,
by the private sector. '

As a nation. we must never forget the great debt we owe to those on the oil
rigs and elsewhere, who have been responsible for exploration and development.
It is important for them as well as for the British people that the rewards
should be fairly shared.

Last year, in the light of the massive increase in oil prices which had
occurred in earlier years. we changed the structure of North Sea tax, to make
it more responsive to changes in price. At the same time tax revenue from
the North Sea was brought forward. with an increase in the total level of
taxation.

1 also invited the industry to suggest better ways of raising the revenue we
needed. I am grateful to them, and others who have commented, for their
careful and considered response.

As I have mentioned, the current fall in oil prices reduces the revenue the
Exchequer receives. I recognize that it reduces the revenues of the oil
companies as well-but it also reduces the tax they have to pay.

23
FOR‘OFFHJA1.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Detailed study has convinced me that, subject to some marginal adjustment, the
total tax burden is not such as to discourage exploration or development. Nor
is it so high as to deprive the oil industry of a reasonable, and often
attractive, yield.

In these circumstances I cannot reduce the overall tax burden to the extent
that the industry would have wished. But I do agree with then on the need for
some change of structure. I see. in particular, the advantage of profit-
related taxes in relation to additional investment in existing fields.

The supplementary petroleum duty will therefore be abolished with effect from
the end of this calendar year.

I propose at the same time that the rate of petroleum revenue tax should be
increased from 70 percent to 75 percent; and that arrangements should be
introduced for advancing PRT payments. Advance payments of m, although
computed in the same way as SPD. will not be a separate tax but simply an
acceleration of the existing tax.

They will thus differ fundamentally from SPD in being fully set off without
limit against ordinary PET liabilities when these arise. This structural
change is one which representatives of the industry have proposed.

As from mid-1983, there will also be a monthly installment system of payment
of PET in order to secure a smoother public sector cash f law.

These changes will not affect the revenue yield of rather more than 6 .0001!
pounds in the coming year. But in l983-8h there will be a net cost. after
allowing for the saving in interest due to the new system of installment pay-
ments, of some 7011 pounds.

I have spoken earlier about current uncertainties in relation to oil prices
and the future yield of tax from the North Sea. But I am aware of the concern
felt by the industry about the number of changes in the regime there have been
in recent years.

For this reason. my hope is that the new tax structure I have proposed will
provide a more secure and stable regime for the future. permitting development
to go ahead uninhibited by major fiscal uncertainties.

I propose a number of other minor changes, partly in response to the views
put forward by the industry. And I propose that regional development grants
paid in respect of expenditure incurred after budget day should be taken into
account for the purposes of m and ring fence corporation tax.

We shall also need to legislate next year to deal with certain special prob-
lems affecting PET expenditure reliefs, pipeline tariffs, and other non-oil
receipts: these will be the subject of a consultation document which will be
issued shortly.

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Those fiscal measures, carbined with the decisions which have already
announced on the abolution of the state's sole right to buy gas. and on the
creation of the new private sector oil company. will provide a sound basis
for another decade of successful enterprise in the North Sea.

I turn now from the energy industry to its industrial customers. to whose
problems we have given a great deal of attention in recent years.

Energy Costs

Last year, I announced substantial help for industry on energy prices. The
NEDC task force, which has made a valuable contribution to a wider understand-
ing of these matters reported in November that these changes had significantly
improved the position of large energy users here. cowared with their continen-
tal competitors.

But we are very conscious of the problems which remain at least for some
industries.

The govermnent has accordingly discussed with the electricity supply industry
their pricing proposals for 1982-83. I am glad to be able to announce that
these will include new special arrangements to benefit larger users who face
the greatest difficulties.

A scheme will be introduced, under which customers can gain significant reduc-
tions in their charges in return for a comitment to accept load reductions.
The industry estimate that over one hundred major companies should benefit.

This will be in addition to the arrangements for electricity prices which I
announced last year and which will continue this year. But both the number
of customers able to benefit from the new scheme. and the extent of the bene-
fits on average will be greater.

To pay for these measures. we are increasing the external financing limits for
the electricity industry (including Scotland) by some 1on4 pounds in 1982-83.
These costs are additional to the external finance limits shown in the public
expenditure white paper.

Some large industrial users of gas face similar problems; and here. too, we
propose significant relief. For contract customers the price of gas taken
after the first 25.000 therms in the contract year will be frozen at the level
charged on 1 April 1982. This freeze will apply until the end of 1982. The
cost of this measure is forecast to be some 6m pounds.

In addition. we have asked the National voal Board to renew the measures
first announced last year. so as to avoid further increases in the list prices
for foundry coke until the winter. The board's dafipit 32...: ms “gem“
finance limit will be adjusted accordingly and the cost will be met from the
contingency reserve.

25
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Last year I announced the introduction of grants towards the costs of con-
verting from oilfired boilers to coal. We have now decided to extend the
scope of these grants to cover conversions of other industrial oil-fired
equipment and conversions of gas-fired equipment to coal.

The scheme will also now cover conversions in service industries as well as
in manufacturing. At the same time we are reducing the qualifying threshold
for the total project cost from 25.000 pounds to 15.000 pounds. this will
help a large number of smaller firms. particularly in the horticultural
industry. The cost of these changes will be met from within the 50K pounds
allocated for this scheme.

Taken together with the measures announced in my last budget. these three
measures--special arrangements for large electricity users. the freeze on gas
contract renewal prices and on list prices for foundry coke-should reduce

the energy costs of British industry. compared with what they otherwise would
have been by over 250! pounds. Over the two years concerned. they represent

a serious and significant response to the industry's representations on energy
prices.

I.turn now to the continuing effort to encourage innovation in industry. If
we are to win still more worthwhile orders both at home and abroad, British
industry must continue to improve its design and production techniques.

There is no more important area to which this applies than micro-electronics
and information technology. The government has already given a lead by
designating 1982 as information technology year. We have already authorised
investment of well over 2.000H pounds in the British telecommunications net-
work in the coming year-~more in real terms than at any time since 1976-75.

This investment will breed new services. new firms and new jobs. 80 will the
development of alternative and competing services for electronic communica-
tion. such as the new mercury network for business.

Because new technology is important on a wider front. I propose to make a fur-
ther allocation for this purpose. The Secretary of State for Industry. (Mr
Patrick Jenkin) will shortly be announcing a series of new and expanded
schemes. These will include additional assistance towards space technology.
and production engineering--including the introduction of a special scheme of
assistance to small engineering firms.

And the 100 percent first year allowances for leased television sets. which
were due to be phased out this June. will be extended for a further year for
sets incorporating a teletext facility. This will encourage the wider use of
a leasing product of British information technology.

These measures will be worth 130H pounds over three years.

26
FIN!(NHH(JAI.USEGDNLN
INDR<0F1ﬁC1Al.lEHZ(MNLY

Final Justice

I have now virtually completed my review of proposals involving spending.
and spending foregone. I have described my decisions on excise duties. and
the major cut in national insurance surcharge which we propose. In the
remainder of my speech I shall be dealing primarily with fiscal issues.

I wish to deal first. and briefly with the key issue of fiscal justice. All
chancellors of the Exchequer come under pressure every year to remedy hard-
ships and anomalies in the tax system. This year has been no exception and
by the end of this afternoon I shall have been able to meet a large number of
such points.

But there is another side to this medal. Justice is indivisible. Justice to
the taxpayer must be matched by justice to the Exchequer. The revenue must be
protected and maintained if the burden is not to fall more heavily on the
general body of taxpayers.

He must all be glad to see the courts adopting a new approach towards artifi-
cial avoidance schemes. As a direct result. we expect to collect a very large
sum of tax, possibly as much as 600M pounds, which might otherwise have been
avoided. -

The proper vigilance of the revenue departments in these matters needs to be
matched by the determination of parliament to legislate where this is needed.
Last year I asked parliament to do so on a number of important matters. This
year I propose further action.

He must. however. tread a very careful path between safeguarding the interests
of the taxpaying community on the one hand and avoiding economic damage of the
other.

This need for caution applies, for example, to the proposals affecting the tax
liability of companies engaged in international business. on which the inland
revenue put out consultative papers last year.

Those papers and the draft cusses dealing with these matters have caused con-
siderable anxiety. In the case of company residence the primary objective was
simply to replace the present ill-defined rules with ones which were clearer
and more certain. This was not an attempt to extend the coverage of the tax.
But I accept that some people might be adversely affected. The matter there-
fore needs to be looked at again.

The problem of tax havens was a different one.

If one has an open world in which there is free movement of capital and of
persons--something which in itself is a good thing-this offers increased
opportunities for tax avoidance. He must he very careful not to prejudice

legitimate business. particularly because of the importance of London as a
financial centre.

27
ltﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE¢0Nl¥
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We need to find the right middle road. and one which is accepted as right. It
is to this and we shall be directing our efforts. Clearly this precludes
legislation this year on any of these topics.

I now turn to the areas in which I do propose to take action in this finance
bill.

First. international leasing. At present. assets leased abroad attract
capital allowances at what is. in many cases. a favourable rate of 25 percent
per ennun. Leasing of this kind has grown sharply.

Moreover. there is evidence of United Kingdom tax incentives being used to
subsidise deals between other countries--deals by foreign businesses in for-
eign made goods. competing with our own home producers. I therefore propose
for new commitments after today. to reduce from 25 percent to 10 percent the
rate of writing down allowance for all assets leased abroad.

Second. films. Investment in films qualifies for 100 percent first year
allowances.

As with other capital allowance provisions. these investment incentives are
available without regard to whether the file is made in this country or over-
seas. There is evidence that schemes for investment of this kind-primarily
in foreign-produced films--are currently being marketed actively in this
country. The potential loss to the revenue is very great.

I propose. therefore to withdraw the 100 percent first year allownce for

films and to introduce in its place a provision which will in broad terms.
allow companies to write off expenditure over the income-producing life of the
film. _

A change of this kind could have serious implications for the British film
industry. if introduced immediately. at a time when there are signs that it
is Just beginning to establish a new and more competitive position. I intend
therefore to introduce transitional relief for British-made films-broadly
speaking. films registered for the purposes of the BAD! level arrangements-
for a 2 year period. I shall be consulting the industry about the form which
this assistance night take.

Third. shipping. Here again, arrangements are being made to exploit invest-
ment incentives for the benefit of foreign businesses.

In this case. a typical arrangement may involve a foreign shipping conpany
chartering a vessel built abroad from a company specially set up in the United
Kingdom to attract 100 percent capital allowances.

I propose to reduce the rate of capital allowance in these cases to the 10
percent rate for international leasing generally. I am concerned to safeguard
the position of British companies chartering their vessels abroad in the course
of a genuine shipping business, and I shall be discussing with the shipping
industry how best to do this...

28
INIR‘OFIHCJAl.lEHE(MVLY
FOI‘OFTWCIAL.USEGDNLN

On each of these three subjects--international leasing. films. shipping--the
changes will take effect fron today. I shall be bringing forward the neces-
sary detailed legislation at committee stage.

Fourth. so-called Section 233 loans. These are contrived arrangements under
which interest paid on certain bank loans escapes liability to corporation

tax in the hands of the banks. In future these payments will be taxed like
other interest payments. The new rules will apply from today. In the case of
contracts entered into before today. the new rules will apply to payments due
on or after 1 April 1983.

Fifth. by taking advantage of double tax relief banks can lend overseas at
abnormally low interest rates at the expense of the UK taxpayer.

I propose to include in the coming finance bill measures to stop this exploita-
tion of our tax system. They will take effect from 1 April 1982 but in the
case of existing loans will apply only to interest arising from 1 April 1983.

While. the measures I have announced will help. we shall need to give much
further thought in the coming year to the problem of how best to ensure a
sufficient contribution to tax revenues from the banking sector. The problem
is not an easy one. as the benefit of some of the devices I have Just described
is shared between the banks and their domestic customers.

There is a danger that measures directed to ensuring that the banks pay a more
equitable amount of tax are all too simply by-passed by the banks shifting the
burden on to their customers. For these reasons I have foreborne from taking
action earlier. but as Burke said "there is however a limit at which forbear-
ance ceases to be a virtue."

On a different note. a number of building societies have recently issued a new
form of negotiable bond. I have no reason to believe that any improper use
has been made of these new bonds. But as an obvious precaution. I propose to
extend to these bonds. from today. the existing provisions dealing with the
"manufacturing of dividends.“

I also propose sane tightening up of the law relating to very large golden
‘ handshakes. The tax relief will be withdrawn on a sliding scale with the
effect that the excess of sums over 75.000 pounds will be fully charged to tax.

We owe it to the ordinary taxpayer to take action in these fields. It is on
him that the cost would fall if we did not do so.

Construction

I now revert to my principal theme: Help for business and industry. and hence
for jobs and people. Last year's budget contained a number of measures to
help the construction industry. an industry which can make a particularly
significant contribution to the creation of new.jobs. It is. accordingly.
right to give it further help this year.

29
FOR¢OFIHCJAI.UBEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As I have already nentioned. our new public spending plans provide work for
the construction industry in 1982-83 worth about 10.250)! pounds-an increase
of 14 percent.

This year local authorities have greatly underestimated the success of our
policy of selling council houses and land. The extra revenue which this is
bringing in has not been spent.

For 1982-83. they have been assured that they can spend up to a total of sons
3.00m pounds on housing. This will include about 1.000;; pounds of funds
which they can expect to receive nainly as a result of the success of the
right-to-buy legislation. This should allow an increase of nearly a third in
the scale of their capital spending. cowared with what they seen likely to
spend in 1981-82.

In addition I now propose a change for 1982-83. designed to help private home-
owners whose houses fall well short of today's standards.

The value of grants given for aajor repairs. and for the provision of basic
amenities in the hole. under the hone inprovenent grant system will be
increased for a linited period. to a minus 90 percent of the eligible cost.
instead of the 75 percent currently available.

This increased rate of grant will apply only to applications received before
the end of 1982. The purpose is not to add to longer tern demands on the
industry but to encourage the take-up of inediate spare capacity. We also
intend both to enable lore people to get grants for bone insulation and to
increase the value of these grants.

“to pay for these changes and to encourage local authorities to unite sore
general inprovenent grants available, their capital allocations in 1982-83
will be increased by 10C“ pounds. This will be over and above the expenditure
provided for in the white paper.

The Secretary of State for the anironnent. Mr Michael Baseltine has already
announced measures for 1982-83 to give priority to inner city projects that
offer the greatest degree of participation by the private sector.

Building on this. up to 7014 pounds of the provision for the urban programs
and for derelict land reclaaation in 1983-86 will be earnarhed for projects
that encourage participation by the private sector. We have also decided to
offer further encouragenent to the private sector and nationalised industries
to bring derelict land into productive use. We shall increase the grants
payable. iron 50 percent of the cost of reclamation to 80 percent. in assisted
areas and derelict lend clearance areas when legislation can be brought for-
ward. The cost will be contained to new private invest-ant in housing for
rent.

I now propose to introduce capital allowances, at the rate of 75 percent for
the first year only, for expenditure on the construction of properties wholly
for letting as assured tenancies by bodies approved by the secretary of state.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The schene will run for an experimental period of five years. Allowances nay
be clained for expenditure incurred as free today.

In ay budget two years ago. I introduced the snall industrial workshop ache-e.
under which industrial buildings allowance can be clained on the constructim
of stall buildings at the rate of 100 percent. The scheme has been a resound-
ing success.

More than 5.000 new workshops have already been constructed for letting to
small businesses. at an estimated Exchequer cost. spread over several years
of 129! to 15m pounds.

The schsns has succeeded in increasing the stock of industrial workshops at or
near the upper size limit. But there has been relatively little investment at
the very small end of the range. I therefore propose to extend the scheme for
very asall workshops. of not more than 1,250 square feet. for a further two
years. until narch 1985.

I also propose to bring within the scope of the industrial buildings allowance
certain kinds of servicing, repairing and warehousing activities. This too
will inrove the saall workshop scheme.

1 also propose to deal with the liability to VAT of certain kinds of building
alterations. where there has in the past been serious doubt about what was
liable to charge.

A recent judgement of the llouse of Lords would have led. if applied in its
entirety. to VAT being charged at the standard rate on a range of non-
structural building alterations which had previously been free of charge.
Though clarifying the law. this judgenent would have imposed an extra 804
pounds of tax on the industry. which it can ill-afford at present.

So I intend to re-establieh the clarity needed. but in a way which will
relieve the industry of all but 10!! pounds of the extra tax burden.

I shall. in due course, lay before the house an order. which will have the
effect of continuing to zero-rate three inortant kinda of alterations which
night otherwise be adversely affected by the Rouse of Lords' judgment. These
are the nest commonly recognised ferns of double glazing. loft and cavity wall
insulation and denp-proof coursing. This useful sinplication of the law will
cost the revenue about 7m pounds a year.

The other kinds of nonstructural alternation covered by the judgment will
become subject to VAT but. pending the completion of discussions with the
industry. no steps will be taken to apply the tax before about the beginning
of September.

Hy final proposal in this area concerns ate-p duty on house purchase. 1 pro-
pose to raise the exemption by 5,000 pounds to 25,000 pounds and the other
thresholds also by 5.000 pounds at a total cost of 70!! pounds in 1982-83.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OMCIAL USE ONLY .

This change should be widely welconed. It will help to inprove job nobility
and give some encouragesent to house construction. But nost of all it will
help those who hsve been saving to buy their first homes.

By the end of this parliaeent. nearly three out of every five families will
own their own bones. This will represent s significant extension of the
property-owning denocrscy.

Snell Firms

And taken together. these proposals will nean more work for the construction _
industry. and more jobs for those who work in it.

Evident in the neasures l have announced so far is the governeent's consistent
deternination to help crests the right conditions for the new investment
needed to crests new jobs. But this budget. like its two predecessors. is
designed also to provide a special tonic for “0.11 businesses.

There can be no doubt that higher rates of interest and the consequent
reluctance of conpanies to borrow long-tern at high fined rates have caused

s distortion of balance sheets. Too such reliance is now placed on short-term
bank finance. As a result there is additional pressure on nonetary growth.

A nmber of suggestions have been nsde for reducing the burden of interest
rates on conpsnies. . We are all indebted to lir Michael Grylls (North West
Surrey. C) and others for the way in which they hsve focused public attention
on this problen. In many cases. the selectivity in the remedies proposed
would favour lending by the banks. and lending to "tax-exhausted" companies.

Re have considered these ideas very carefully. But they raise difficult ques-
tions of principle. and we are not persuaded that they offer the best solu-
tions to the problses they are designed to solve. lioreover consultations are
still not conplete on some corporation tax green paper. which raises nsjor
questions about incentives to investsent. and we are still considering how
best to ensure a proper contribution to tax revenue by the banking sector.

However. we can all agree that the basic problem of financing profitable
expansion and investnsnt demands urgent and continuing attention. A par-
ticularly inortsnt aspect of this is the provision of equity capital. about
which I'have some new proposals to make.

The business start-up scheme. which provides income tax relief for investsent
of up to 10,000 pounds in the equity of cowenies starting new trades. has
been widely welcomed. I propose for 1982-83 and 1983-81. to increase the
annusl limit from 10.000 pounds to 20.000 pounds.

As less than a full year has elapsed since it became law. sone potential
investors may have been unable to use up the full 10.000 pound limit in 1981-
82. I therefore propose that. in addition. any unused balance of this year's
limit should be added to next year's. This neans that. in sons cases. the
effective limit for 1982-83 will be as such as 30.000 pounds. These improve-
nents should provide a further stimlua to investment in new enterprises.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhere capital for small businesses generally is concerned. many people have
emphasised the importance of the new provisions introduced in the 1981 coupe-
nies act for conpanies purchasing their own shares.

Clearly it would be wrong to change the tax laws in such a way that these
provisions could be used to pay out what would amount to tax-free dividends.
But there is scope for tax changes which will significantly increase the
attractions of equity capital. both to the investor and to the entrepreneur.

I now propose that certain purchases of their own shares by unquoted trading
companies. mainly small and family businesses, should not be subject to ACT
and income tax. They will be treated instead as sales of shares by the share-
holder, and therefore, subject in most cases to capital gains tax only. This
measure will be of special benefit to small companies which have a limited
market for their shares.

Two years ago, I relaxed the conditions governing profit-sharing schemes and
reintroduced legislation enabling employees to take up options to buy shares
in their companies without incurring income tax liability.

I did this because I have no doubt that employees who own shares in the
company for which they work develop a greater sense of connitment to the
success of the business. Since I made my first changes two years ago. the
increase in the numbers of employee share schemes has been extremely encour-
aging. In 1979 there were only thirty such schemes. Now there are over 1.00.
This is exactly as we should wish.

Hider share ownership is good for the business. good for the worker and good
for Britain. It is important to maintain and extend this progress.

Accordingly. I now propose to increase the value of shares that can be allo-
cated each year to any one mloyee from 1,000 pounds to 1,250 pounds.

I also propose to amend the detailed rules to help simplify the administrative
problems arising on rights issues.

We should also give some help and incentive to those who acquire share
options outside the gambit of approved schemes. I therefore propose to make
it easier for them to pay the income tax chargeable on the exercise of such
an option. by providing that it should be collected over three years. rather
than in a single sum.

In the last two years, we have substantially relaxed the rules for tax relief
for interest on money borrowed to invest in small companies. This year I
propose to move a stage further. If a shareholder works full-time in the
management of a business he will in future be able to qualify for tax relief
to invest in that business even though he does not have more than 5 percent
of the shares.

Now. loan finance. In my last budget I announced the establishsant of a pilot
loan guarantee scheme. The scheme started in June 1981. Since then the demand
for loans has far exceeded expectations.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Last October. in response to that denand. we increased the allocation [or the
first year from 50 million pounds to 100 million pounds but with 2.700 loans
worth almost 100 million pounds already approved after only nine months. some
further increase is desirable.

Accordingly. I propose to increase the amount which the participating institu-
tions may lend to 150 million pounds for the first year. In addition a further
150 million pounds will be available for loans under the scheme during its

second year. to June 1983.

I also propose that the limits for the "snail companies" rate of corporation
tax should go up again from 80.000 pounds to 90.000 pounds and from 200,000
pounds to 225,000 pounds. This will mean that this government has increased
the lower limit by 80 percent and the upper limit by more than 150 percent.

As a further help for new businesses. the period for income and corporation
tax relief for pre-trading expenditure will be extended from one to three

years.

Many HPS. I know. have been impressed by the value of the work done by local
enterprise agencies. These agencies depend in the main on businesses already
established in the local conunity. They clearly play a valuable part in
helping mall local firms to start and to prosper.

I therefore propose to allow businesses to deduct for tax purposes the con-
tributions they make to certain enterprise agencies. which concentrate on

.helping small firms .

I hope this measure will encourage more widespread support for such agencies.
The relief will be available from 31 March and will run for lo years.

On VAT. I have two principal changes to propose. The registration threshold
will be increased from 15.000 pounds to 17,000 pounds. And I propose to intro-
duce VAT relief for services supplied before registration. This neasure. and
the extension of relief for pre-trsding expenditure, will reduce the costs of

starting a new business.

The total revenue cost of these measures to help small firms is about 80 mil-
lion pounds in a full year.

I also want to make it easier for those who have recently left school or
college to start a business. Hitherto they have not been able to qualify for
the ao-called 711. certificates under the construction industry tax deduction
scheme. The present system. designed to prevent tax evasion. may actually
keep young people out of work as sub-contractors in the industry.

The certificates are widely used in the industry but the existing rules
require an individual to show that he already has three years good record as
a taxpayer before he can secure a certificate. By definition. someone who has
just left school or college cannot qualify under this three-year rule.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I now propose to change it. so as to enable school and college leavers to
obtain special certificates. I also propose a guarantee scheme which may help
others to obtain these special certificates.

Finally. the self-enployed. A decade of inflation has eaten into the value of
money which they had put aside to provide for their retirenent.

I. therefore. propose to increase the limits on retirement annuity relief for
contributors who are now in their 50s and 60a; to 20 percent for those born
between 1916 and 1933; to 21 percent for those born in 1916 or 1915; and to
2/. percent for those born in 1912 or 1913.

I also propose to alter the present restrictions on the relief to allow sore
self-enployed people to benefit from these higher levels. These changes will
cost 12 nillion pounds in 1982-83 and 25 nillion pounds in a full year. They
will provide a significant improvensnt in the position of the older contribu-
tor whose lifetime savings have suffered particularly fron high rates of
inflation in the 1970s.

The self-enployed play a key role in the economy. Their contribution to its
vitality, its adaptability, is apparent to all. Along with small business-en.
they fully nerit this extra encourage-ant.

Capital Taxes

I turn now to a part of our tax systen which is ineding the efficient working
of capital narkets and doing injustice to individuals and businesses alike:
the capital taxes.

There is room for wide differences of view about the principle of taxing
capital. But there is no case whatever for neintaining a systen of capital
taxes which, by holding back business success and penalizing personal
endeavor, does serious economic and social damage.

In each of the last two budgets. we have taken significant steps to reduce
such danage. I propose a stage further today.

The threshold for capital transfer tax will now be increased to 55,000 pounds.
The rate bands which apply above the thresholds have remained virtually un-i
altered since the tax was introduced in 1975. It is tine they were extended.

Under the new scale, details ofwhich will appear in the Isak. the top rate of
tax will be reached at 2.5 aillion pounds. In real terns. this is still not
as high as the figure set by ny predecessor, when he introduced the tax. in
1975. The lifetime scale will be inproved to a similar extent. The cost this
year will be 35 million pounds; and in a full year 85 nillion paunds.

I also propose that the indexation principles, already applied to income tax
allowances. should in future apply as well to the CT! threshold and bands.

I should add that it is my intention that the finance bill should deal with
the new regime for settled property. Draft clauses were published in Deceder.

35
ms omcun. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The co-sents we have receivedwill help us to clarify and inprove the provi-
sions. They have more than Justified this exercise in open govern-ant. 1 an
grateful to all those who have contributed.

There will also be a nuIber of technical provisions related to the heritage.
I-have decided. in the light particularly of the reductions in the lifetins
rates of charge I lade~last year. not to alter the rate at which the periodic
charge is payable.

1 also propose that foreign currency accounts belonging to individuals who
have no connexion with the United Kingdom should not be caught by the on.

It is iaportant for London's position as the world's leading financial centre
that this natter should be cleared up.

I now come to the incidence of capital gains tax on inflationary gains. This
is a matter which has rightly given rise to a great deal of discontent. No
one has yet succeeded in finding a solution to this problen.

lnnuserable proposals for full indexation. for tapering and other ingenious
devices have been put forward. None, unfortunately over-cane all the practical
difficulties. I cannot. however. allow this injustice to continue. it is
intolerable for people to be permanently conde to pay tax on gains that
are apparent but not real—that exist only on paper.

I propose. therefore. that. as fron this April, gains. including those of
coupanies. will in principle. be calculated after taking account of inflation
which occurs after that date. No relief will. however, be given in respect
of the first year of ownership.

The problea we seek to solve is one which relates essentially to assets held
for a period of years. and it would not be appropriate to extend relief to
assets bought and sold within a cooperatively short period of tine.

Because we have not found it possible to extend the new schene to cover past
gains. I propose also that the ere-pt slice should be increased to 5.000

pounds. That is the best solution to the problem and will simplify
adninistration both for the taxpayer and the revenue. For the future. I

intend that this threshold too should be statutorily indexed.

There will be no revenue cost in the coning year. In 1983-84 the cost of
these two neasures will be 55 million pounds.

But this ought not to be looked at as a measure of the cost to the Exchequer.
It is rather a eeasure of the tax which ought never to have been levied in the
first place. This change is no more than siaple justice. which should be
welcomed on all sides of the house.

The benefit of these measures will be of substantial help to business as well
as the individual. They will significantly increase the attraction of
equities to United Kingdow taxpayers. One result should be that companies
can raise more equity at lower cost than would previously have been possible.
An increase in the scale of equity issues by cowanies will help to reduce
their dependence on bank borrowing.

36
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I also propose a number of other specific changes; in future. rollover relief
will be available on compulsory purchase: and. completing our policy of
avoiding a double charge to CGT and CTT on the one event, rollover relief will
also be available on assets coming out of trust. These proposals involve no
cost this coming year and a cost of 11 million pounds in 1983-85.

I believe that these changes. taken together. will be widely welcomed as a
further major reform of the capital taxes.

Income Tax

But for the vast majority of individuals what really matters is income tax.
And income tax is far and away the biggest source of government revenue. This
year about 26 million income taxpayers will contribute. in round figures.
about 30.000H pounds to the Exchequer.

Quite rightly. people look for some reduction in their own tax burden. As I
have explained at the outset, and demonstrated by my own proposals. the para-
mount aim of this budget is to help industry. to encourage business, to create
jobs. But I want also to assist people directly. The one helps the other.

People need industry: but industry also needs people-ss workers. as customers.
as investors. We remain firmly committed as ever. over the years. to reduce
the burden of direct taxation. It is essential to do so: to improve'incen-
tives: to remove disincentives: to reduce the poverty trap.

There are always, of course. competing arguments as to whether one should
reduce the rates of income tax or raise the threshold at which people pay tax.
Any chancellor would like to be able to do both. But this year. given my
principal sin, I have had to make a choice. '

We have already reduced the basic rate of tax from 33 percent to 30 percent,
and reduced the higher rates of tax as well. I propose. therefore. to concen-
trate the relief that is available this year on raising the tax thresholds.

The single personal allowance will accordingly be increased by 190 pounds to
1,565 pounds and the married allowance by 300 pounds to 3.645 pounds.

The additional allowance for single parents will. as a consequence. rise by
110 pounds to 880 pounds. So too will the widow's bereavement allowance. And
there will be corresponding increases in the age allowances. the higher rate
threshold and bands. and the threshold for the investment income surcharge.
Effect will be given to changes under pay as from the-first pay day after

26 April. '

These increases are up to two percentage points more than the 12 percent
required to take account of inflation in 1981. They are worth 1.800 million
pounds this year and almost 2.500 million pounds in a full year.

As a result some 1.200.000 people who would have paid tax next year will not
now have to do so. This news will he very welcone both to the house and to
the country at large.

37
FT”!(HWWC1AI.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In framing this year's budget it has been w purpose to give as much encourage-
ment as I believe we can afford to an economy which is now moving in the right
direction.

To hearken to the voices that urge us only to "borrow, borrow, borrow," would

perform no service to British industry or to the maployed. 0n the contrary.
it would lead only to the dead end of a pluneting exchange rate or a rocket-
ing rate of interestnor both.

Better by far to secure, as I have done, a prospective level of borrowing that
is below that of the year now ending—and so to maintain our progress towards

stable prices .

And at the same time, as in each of my three earlier budgets, to achieve sub-
stantial tax reforms. to promote the wider ownership of wealth. and to encour-
age the productive private sector. which in these past three years has made
giant strides towards the restoration of Our reputation as a trading nation.

This is a budget that will give confidence at home that growing markets will
be there for those prepared to go out and win them and so a better prospect
of employment opportunities for those who look only for the chance to work;
and confidence abroad. to put a dismal record of performance. behind us, once
and for all.

This budget is designed to give that double boost to confidence. I col-send it
to the house and to the nation.

The chancellor spoke for one hour and 50 minutes.

COPYRIGEr: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

CSO: 3120/48

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY