FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10647
l-July 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 780

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain inforsation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA REPORT
rouo No. 780

Cameras

0mm

Briefs
m Teachers' Training Loan

CHM AFRICA! WC

Intonation Hinioter Gives View on Abortive Coup
(I'm mm, 5 m 82) ooooooooooootoooooooooooooooo

Role of Algerian: Arriving in Chad Described ‘
(Francois Soudan; JEIIIIB AFRIQUB, 12 Hay 82) ...........

W 1MB
Briefs

Financial Situation Studied
Dollar ﬂuctuation Effects

GUINEA

Attempt on President's Life Said To Have Been Inside Job
(Semen Andrianirado; JEUNE moon, 5 May 82)..........

GUINEA BIEAU

BBC Approves Loans for Fishing, Projects, Health Services
W mow: 81' WIRES, 30 Apr 82)........

WASCAR

Secret Report by Honja Joana Recounta Repression of Students
(Senne Andrinirado; Jm AFBIQUI, 28 Apr 82) .........

'8' [III-NESA-li

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MARI
Briefs
New Railroad Line
Petroleum Prospecting
Salaries Increased
Press Holdings Group
MOZAMBIQUB

Details of Cooperation with hence Reviewed
(HARGHBS momma 3r mums, 30 Apr 82)

33mm

Mon: 'Showe Political Courage' in Making Changes in P8
(Sylviane liners; JEUNE AFRIQUB, 12 May 82) ...........

Significance of Election of New curs Secretary Noted
(Sylviane Xanara; Jm AFBIQUE, 5m 82) ............

ZAIRB

New Territorial, Political, Administrative Organization
(MESS TROPICAUX ET maximums, 9 Apr 82) .......

New Administrative Structure for GEOMINBS, 8021004
(MARCHBS TROPIGAUI ET W8, 9 Apr 82) .......

Briefs
Port of Banana
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

CAP! VERDE

BRIEFS

EDP TEACHER? TRAINING LOAN-4n EDP {Buronssn Developnsnt Pund] trsining pro-
gram (grant of [European Currency Units] $50,000 86113), for the period 1981-
1985 envissges provision of grants for in country studies end for trsining
courses for teschsrs end the supply of teaching squipncnt. The first fscst
involves elensntsry and secondary schoolteachers, while the second concerns
asterisls for scientific and technical courses (physics, chemistry, biology.

geology, drawing, laboratory squipnent, scientific publications). [Text]
[Perle W TWICAUX 31' MIWS in MCI! no 1903, 30 Apr 82 p
1138] [m1m: Rene mm: et Ole Paris 1982] 8796

680: 6719/ 906
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

IPMMTION MINISTER GIVES VINS 01‘ Atom 000?
Paris mm mm!!! in French No 1113, 5 May 82 p 61

0‘er "There are soee Frenchmen who wish us barn." Two nonthe later, and
for the first tine. a member of the party in power in Bangui has counted on
Ange Patasse's failed putsch. Lt Col Christophe Grelonbe, the government's
secretary general and minister of infornation, has the reputation—even if he
denies it--of being the leader of the "hawks" on the military conittee.
Here are the main acerpts from what he told us.

The failed coup d'etat of' 3 March: "It is to be explained by Patasse's
devouring ambition, the mltiple debts he had promissd to repay once in
power, and the well-known negligence of the generals who attenpted to carry
out the putsch for him. M'Baikous was a retired military use and Desire an
obscure officer whom Bokassa had promoted because he carried his cane."

French "collusion": "He differentiate between the behavior of certain
Frenchmen who wish us harm and the historical ties which join our two coun-
tries. Certainly. Minister for Cooperation Jean-Pierre Cot has never visited
us. That is his affair. After all, he does not have exclusive respomi-
bility for ﬁance's African policy." (Postponed several times, J-P Cot's
visit is planned for July 1982. ms).

The risk of disturbances in the "Pataesite" areas of the north: "There will
be no destabilization. The army is ready to intervene energetically. That
having been said, we are a united nation, and regionalism is a barbaric no-

tions "

The Hobutn-Kolingba axis: "we have special relations with Zaire. But
there is nothing extraordinary about that. Re are neighbors, after all."

The return of civilians to power: "He will see in due time. For the time
being, it is out of the question. Sons people are putting pressure on us
to go in this direction; they forget that harmony in a country is not
achieved by political theory."

COPYRIGHT: Jeane Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9824
080: 4719/937

FICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ROLE 01’ m WC IN GAD DECIDED
Paris J30!!! APRIQUB in French No 11110, 12 Hey 82 pp 36, 37

ﬂrticle by Francois Souden: "Can Allies Froe the North Save Goukouni
a Second ‘l‘ine? The Algeriena Arrive‘g

ﬂeet? Like the horoccans before then in Sheba, the Tanzanian in Ugande,
and the Libyans in Chad, the Algerian arned forces have thus "gone outside"
their borders. For the first tine in Africa, if one excludes their partici-
pation in the October 1973 Suez Canal var. Not to the sane extent, of course,
nor with the sane tasks as their predecessors; there were about 200 of thee,
and their objective was not to becone directly involved in the fighting.
Where? In Ndjunena, Douguia, Ari—thus in Chad. In Chad, furthermore,
which seems forever feted to suffer foreign intervention. 'Approxinately half
of these coniasioned end nonco-iseioned officers, brought in over the

last few weeks by regular Hercules 0-130 flights to end froe Douguia (80

in north of ndjanene) are sinply technical assistants: doctors for the aned
forces or engineering specialists responsible for repairing the nein roads
which link the Chadian capital with the eastern front, end for ensuring-4n
collaboration with French technicians—the maintenance of the Ndjanena eir-
port.

The others. sone 150 nan, are divided into three groups: “advisers"

properly speaking, who are training Goukouni's troops in the handling of heavy
and nediun arns (nechineguns, RPG—‘l rocket launchers, Katyushas nounted on
Toyota Land Cruisers); staff officers in charge of organizing the leadership
staff of the Integrated National Army (as the cubens did before th- in
Angola and the East Ger-ans in Ethiopia); and finally personal security
specialists. a sort of bodyguard-advisers assigned directly to Goukouni
Heddeye.

This "intervention." discreet for the tine being, is being added to that-
official intervention-«n the 16 any personnel sent by Algeria es observers
of the 0M! peacekeeping force and to the few civilians—web less conspicuous--
given the task of trensforaing the summer (Chadian National Liberation
Front) into a structured and centralized political party, along the lines of

the algerisn m.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No doubt the decision by the OAU's Standing Committee on Chad on 11 February
in Nairobi, enjoining Goukouni to negotiate with his fraternal enemy Eissein
Habre, had something to do with the haste in which the Chadian president
went off in search of further outside assistance. But it is above all the
failure of the counteroffensive, which he personally supervised, that was
conducted by his troops agaimt the PAN [Northern Armed Porceg in the Oum
Hadjer area at the beginning of Hatch, which scans to have convinced him of
the impossibility of fighting alone against Habre's men, who are better
organised and more motivated-particularly as the complete lack of coopera-
tion by the "southerners" of Kamougue and the very considerable permeability
of the security cordon thrown around Ndjamena by the 0A" contingent left him
hardly any choice other than to turn toward ‘ribesti or the help of a "brother
country."

The Libyans having left, and the Ethiopiansnhinted at since Decanberu-having
other uprisings to fight in Eritrea, the hand that was stretched out was
therefore Algerian. Or. more exactly, Franco-Algerian. Because Paris, since
"the Cancun appeal" launched on 22 October 1981 by Francois Hitterrand, has
not resigned itself to giving up the one to whom it had proeised total support.
A matter of honoring one's commitments, no doubt. but also a desire to main-
tain Goukouni in an honorable position in the event of a long war against
Habre or of negotiations with him. After having supplied the GUN? greasi-
tional National Union Government? with about Fr 600 million in military
materiel between October and February, Paris favored Algerian intervention.
If Algiers, which in turn has resolved not to become mired down in the
Chadian bog, appears anxious to obtain pledges in Ndjamena vie-a-vis

Tripoli, there is no doubt that Chadli Bendjedid has no desire to see him-
self accused at the 0A!) of “outside interference."

France—which is the petitioner in this affair~probably promised him that

it would do everything necessary to allay the fears aroused in its moderate
continental friends, even if this entails emphasizing the assistance-web
more modest so far: a few Land Rovers—supplied by Morocco to Rissein Habre.
Convinced of the reliability of the French "coverage"-Paris ambassador to
Algiers, Guy Georgy, thoroughly familiar with the Chadian dossier, for which
he was responsible at the Quaid'Orsay, no doubt spared no effort to this end-
the Algierians consequently organized, as of mid-March, the first 0-130
flights to Douguia (as many as three a day). '

On 16 March, Adoum Togoi, GUN? minister of defense, and Ngollobaye Allafi,
cox-sander in chief of the Integrated Rational Army, traveled to Algiers to
refine the technical details of this assistance. On 25 March, an FAN spokes-
man in Europe announced that a force equivalent to two Algerian battalions, ,
that is to say 1,500 men, was sent by truck from nouguia to the Ati front.
Algiers denied it. Not without reason, noreover, since the number was grossly
exaggerated, including at that time, one zero too many. All the same, the
Algerisns are there, and Goukouni himself does not deny the fact. He stated
that in mid-April: "He believe that the Algerian Government and the Algerian
people will continue to exert thuselvee to assist the Chadian people in
freeing themselves of the war imposed upon them by international imperialism.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We are firnly counting on this support. and we hope that it will becone
increasingly substantial." One could hardly be clearer.

0n Sundey 2 Hey it was learned from official sources in Ndjenene that s
sepent of the Nigerian contingent of the 0M! force had withdrawn. It is
possible that the Zsiriens end Senegalese will follow suit before the wet
seeson (i.e., before July) . which nukes ell ground evecuntion impossible.
Calhouni hes therefore lost, unless the Chadian president is seved for s
second tine by a friend from the north: e colonel, like the one before bin.
Even if the father has neither Green Book nor Isisnic Legion, he hes an any
with a different sort of effectiveness.

COPYRIGH‘: Jeane Africpe GRDPJIA 1982

9826
650: 6719/93?

. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY

CGDRO ISLANDS

BRIEFS

FINANCIAL SITUATION STUDIED—-From 13 to 17 March, at the request of President
of the Republic Ahmed Ahdallah. a delegation led by Bernard Vinny, inspector
general of overseas affairs, assisted by Miss Chantal Vie, conducted a study
of the financial situation of the Comoro Islands. They reviewed all elements
of financial activity with officials of the Comoran Government and administra—
tions: federation, governorates, public establishments, state corporations
and mixed economy entities. This assistance which the French Government has
given the Comoran Government in gaining a detailed understanding of all as-
pects of the domestic financial situation reflects the desire to reexamine
the conditions of financial aid to improve its effectiveness. The Comoran
Government had recently announced (see HARCEES TROPICAD! No 1897 of 19 March
1982) a amber of corrective financial assures whose effectiveness will be
enhanced by this latest detailed study. [Text] [Paris NARCHBS TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French 30 Apr 82 p 1165] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie
Paris 1982] 9920

DOLLAR FLUCTUATION EPFBCTS--Electricity supply in Horoni was seriously
affected in March by a decline in petroleum stocks. This was caused in part
by the changes in the dollar exchange rate. The rise in the dollar has had
unanticipated effects on regularity in the fulfillment of delivery contracts
from the Arab Gulf. Between the time the funds transfer order is prepared and
the transfer is actually carried out the dollar rate has made the funds insuffi-
cient to cover the supply ordered. The delay involved in obtaining a supple-
mentary transfer also holds up the departure of the tanker. This variation in
the dollar rate also affects execution of the loan contracts subscribed by the
Comoran Government in order to carry out its program of major infrastructure
projects to give the country modern equipment. The settlement of interlocking
interests is also affected, and the additional delay in arriving at an overall
settlement correspondingly delays the issuance of later installments of the
loans. Business finances suffer, as well as the work completion schedules.
[Text] [Paris MARCHBS TBOPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French 30 Apr 82 p 1165]
9920

080: 4719/949
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANT 0“ Pmlm's LIFE SAID 1'0 HAVE 333“ INSIDE JOB
Paris JED!!! AFRIQUB in 'Prencb No 1113, 5 May 82 pp 22-24
articleby Sennen Andrianirado: "Sekou Toure Abandoned by His l-‘anilyﬂV

Lhcerptﬂ The asster of Conakry has escaped a new
assassination attenpt. This tine the crine scene to
have been instigated by those in his inediste

entourage .

”He congratulate the coarade who renovated the preaises of the future embassy
of the Popular Revolutionary Republic of Guinea in France. We solennly and
war-1y invite bin to Conakry for the installation ceremonies on 16 May for the
suprene guide of the revolution, Ahned Sekou Tours, after his reelection."
An outcry is heard in the roon. Hubbub; than a voice calls out: "But cas-
rade. Sekou has not even been reelected yet. and you are already announcing
his installation?"

It was Sunday 18 April, in an assenbly rooa on Censier Street in Paris, 3
weeks before the elections on 9 May which were to confirn Ahned Sekou 'roure
at the head of Guinea. The Association of Guineans in France, in favor of the
regine. was giving a reception that day for a craftsman who had conpletely
redecorated a certain hotel on Paisanderie Street-wthe Guinean Embassy until
Noveaber 1965 (the tine of the breaking of diplontic relations with France),
since occupied by (hubs, and today once lore taken over to house the

Conakry delegation. The nesting that night turned rowdy; even among Sekou
Toure's unwavering supporters there is a sensitivity to protocol and. by
definition, a future election is not yet won.

He had tine to shout: "I've cone to avenge Kabassan!"

Moreover, Sekou Tours very nearly did not show up at all. A few days earlier-
8 or 15 May, according to the sources, but "a Thursday"-he had once again
escaped an assassination attenpt. As usual, the fact was not given official
comm-nation. It is nonetheless undeniable. That sorning, as the guide of

the revolution was preparing to leave the presidential palace (where he
resides) for thePeople's Palace (where he works), a young nan jumped over the
surrounding wall and ran toward the private apartments. Intercepted by the
guards, he killed one outri'ght--cutting his throat, according to sons sources;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPIILIAL UDI. UI‘LI

with an sutaatic pistol, according to others-~nnd wounded several, one of
whom died during the day. He was overpowered but had time to shout: "I've
come to avenge Kabassan," before he was sent off to an unknown destination.

Kabassan? The person in question is Abraham Kabassan Keita, dismissed in
March from his duties as minister of public works, urine co-Iander, and

head of the "special departments" (one of the political police forces).
Reason: diverting public funds, with the complicity, it seams, of the
minister of banks. The dismissal of the two men was effective as of 18 March,
but the decision was not "legalized" until 2 April. That Friday morning.
President Ahmed Sekou Toure called a joint meeting at the People's Palace

of the Central Cousittee of the P06 (Democratic Party of Guinea) and of the
Council of Ministers.

The walls of "CAD City" have been built. Inside, nothing.

As minister of public works, Abraham Xabassan Keita coordinated the first
operations preparatory to the holding of the 20th 0A0 sunit in Cmakry
(provisionally in May 1983) . With material aid from the North Koreans, the
walls of "oat! City" have been put up. Inside, there is nothing. The supply
of cement has been exhausted. Furthermore. by order of Kabassan, 5,572 drums
of bitumen were removed without explanation from the storage warehouses.
and 1,187 others are simply missing from the inventory. 0n the other hand,
the minister of public works, on his own authority, had a superb villa
built at Conakry, and three others at Pita, Kankan, and Kissidougou, respec-
tively. Besides the supplies are the funds; the interior modeling of these
personal residences cost several million, and credit for 800,000 leones (1
Sierra Leone leone - approximately CTR Pr 300), entrusted to Kabassan's
management, was spent without vouchers. Altogether, combining goods and
funds, the amount diverted would amount to 20 million silys (l sily is the
theoretical equivalent of CPR Fr 10).

No sooner had the indictment of LInterior Hinisteﬂ Sekou Cherif been com-
pleted when Abraham Kabassan Keita, who had "betrayed the confidence of the
people and of the Supreme (hide of the Revolution," was unsimously condemned.
The verdict fell: "By decision of the Central Committee and of the Council
of Ministers, Comrade Abraham Kabassan Keita is expelled from the Central
Comittee of the PDC and relieved of his duties as minister of public works.
Comander Abraham Kabassan Keita is dismissed and removed from the ranks of
the officers of the Popular Armed Forces." An additional inquiry was ordered.

The condemnation smacks of a settling of scores.
Hhile awaiting the find”, Kabassan was arrested and omitted to the cus-
tody of the Conakry police force. An ordinary procedure, indeed a legal

one, were it not that another incident which arose at the beginning of the
year gave this condemnation the appearance of a settling of scores.

At the time, Kabassan, still the minister of public works. was receiving
representatives of international financial backers who had come to make

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inquiries about the utilisation of their finances. In substance he said
to than: "You ask me for an evaluation of the work! But nothing has been
done! for my part, I have seen precious little of your aid."

Paradoxically, the "easing up" has strengthened the opposition.

Contrary to the advice of those close to him, he maintained the sane position
before President Sekou Toure and—more seriously—in the presence of foreign
experts! At the tine he indicated that other 'ninistersm-in this case, the
minister of urban affairs and housing and the minister of econonic and
financial affairs-were "perhaps" better inforned than he concerning the use
of this foreign aid. It was that day, no doubt, that Kabassan sealed his
own fate. For he broke the truce between Sekou Toure's two faaily groups:
"the clan of brothers" and that of "hrothers-in-law."

The driving force in the first group is the president's half brothers,
Ismael Toure (ninister of nines) and Sinks Toure (transport); one of the
lost loyal of them isthis very Abrahsn Kabassan Keita. The second clan
joins together the close nenbers of his wife's family: Sekou Cherif (ninis-
ter of internal affairs), Mousse Diakite (urban affairs and housing), and
Seydou Keita (youth). Sakou has always governed (and eliminated) by gaining
the support new of one, now of the other clan. He had already tried to
oust Ismael “route in April 1979, but had had to give up the attenpt under
family pressure. Nevertheless, Sekou succeeded in relieving his other
brother, Siakou Tours, of the co-and of the sinister Callp Boiro by appointing
him minister of telegraph and communications, then of transport. This time,
after having disaissed Kabassan, he tried the same tactic by proposing to

nor. The "clan of brothers" reacted violently and called on sone aunts to
arbitrate.

The "fanily"--brothers and brothers-in-law, with Sekou at their head-was
smmnoned to Paranah, the original fief. The verdict of the elders, both sale
and female: Sinks was to stay in his job. A slight success, since Kabassan
had been not only dismissed but arrested, while his supporters' desire for
vengeance found expression in the ridiculous attempt to assassinate Sekou
Toure, caught in a vice between the two clans of his family when he had set
one against the other for too long.

The opposition's part in all this? It denies any involvanent in the attempt,
either direct or indirect--without hiding the fact, on the other hand, that it
has not disarned. It was thought that the "easing up" proposed by Sekou
Toure in March 1978 would weaken the opposition. The result has been the
opposite. On 16 Hay 1980, Sekou escaped a grenade attack. Responsibility

for the attapt was claimed by a mysterious Patriotic Front, of whose exis-
tence the external opposition denied any knowledge. But from Brussels, the
opposition, as a group, had been publishing a communique proclaiming: "This
act of great political import must occur again as soon as possible."

It did happen again. On 21 February 1981, when Sekou Toure was to go by plane
for an official visit to Central Africa, "bombs" exploded at Conakry

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

international airport. No one claimed responsibility for the attack. But
the Patriotic Front was once again suspected.

{he "arned wing of the interior."

A year later, the notorious Front is less mysterious. Since the end of
March 1982, Conakry has been inundated with tracts this tine recognising the
ties between the external opposition as a whole and "its arsed wing of the
interior, the Patriotic Front." They call plainly for a popular uprising
and the "liquidation of the PDG-Sekou Toure." Even if the initials PM are
those of the party alone, one cannot help thinking that the liquidation in
question also concerns the head of state physically. The call has been
heard: Perhaps not by those when the opposition was addressing.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9821.
(SO: 4719/ 937

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA BlSSAU

EEC APPROVES LOANS P09. FISHING, PROJECTS, HEALTH SERVICES

Paris HARQIBS TROPICAL?! 8T MBDITWS in hatch No 1903, 30 Apr 82 pp
1137, 1138

[Text] On 20 April, the European Development Fund's Co-ittee gave a favorable
ruling on new projects which will benefit ACP (African, Caribbean and Pacific]
countries. These projects are as follows for Guinea Bissau (nouns given in
ECUs [European Currency Units]; 1 ECU - around 6.2 French francs):

"Development of traditional fishing industry in Cacheu (a grant of 1.5 million
8611s and a special loan of 1070.000 3611s).

The purpose of this project is to develop traditional fishing in the region
of Cacheu, located in the furthermost northwest part of the country, by means
of several operations intended to increase the amount of fish caught for
domestic consuption, to improve the fishermen's earning capacity and their
living conditions. to create new jobs in that sector and to expand the distri-
bution network for fishing products. To achieve this goal, there is a program
to introduce power-driven boats and to increase the number of fishing vessels;
a program to improve traditional fishing methods and to provide fishing equip-
ment, and plus to improve the infrastructures for storage and marketing and
to give technical assistance in the execution of the project and in the train-
ing of national cadres.

The transition to power-driven boats will be done through a credit systen in
conjunction with training on maintenance and repair work. A supply cooperative
will provide the fishing equipment. The project includes a technical support
facility which will have a small ice factory with silos, a cold storage room,
a washing and processing room and so on. This facility will be built after

a speeded-up call for bids; there will be an international call for bids for
the generators and the outboard motors; the boats and fishing tackle will be
purchased after restricted consultations. Some 20 fishing boats will be
equipped each year for a period of 5 years and on a normal year their output

is expected to be 2,500 tons of dried fish.

Medical facilities and supply of equipment ( grant of 1.9 aillion 3011s). The
purpose of this project is to increase the medical infrastructure of Guinea
Bissau by building two local hospitals. each with 34 beds, and four health
centers in localities of the center and east of the country (local hospitals

11
mammussouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Quebo and Cosse and health centers in Xitole, Pontaingles, Banbadinea and
Rants). The sin of this project is similar to that of the previous Fourth EDP
Project, namely, to inprove health services—to prevent as well as to cure
illness--in rural areas which so far have been very neglected. ‘l‘o attract

the interest of health personnel. housing will be provided for doctors and for
other uedical staff. Each hospital will have a pavillion for tuberculosis
patients (10 beds), two hospital wards for general patients (18 beds), a
maternity ward (6 beds), a section for doctors' offices and trestnent clinics,
a laboratory, 3 phat-soy and annex sections. All these facilities will be
equipped in a simple but functional way. They will be built after a speeded

up call for bids is issued and, for the equipment, there will be an interna-
tional call for bids.

COPYRIGHT: Rene lbreux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
680: 6719/ 906

12
”MANNY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

SECRET REPORT BY HOIUA JAONA ROOMS WRESION OP STUDBITS

Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE in French 28 Apr 82 p 76

[Article by sense Andriamirado: "Confidential Report to President Ratsiraka")

{Text} The docuent of which we are publishing a part was to be classified
"state secret" in 2 weeks by the Malagasy Goverment (along with other material
on the same subject). It will not be so classified, because we are publishing

it--in advance.

What is it about? It be two-and-a-half page letter (in Malagasy) dated

17 March 1982 to President Didier Ratsiraka from the senior member of the
Supreme Revolutionary Council and, by virtue of this position, the second
ranking state official, Horus Jeans. In the letter, the elderly leader of the
Honima Party—who. among other things, organised the peasant revolt in 1971—-
reports on the fatal clashes at the beginning of March in the town of suave
(northeast coast), clashes of which the Madagascar public is not aware. The
following, summarized in French, covers the essentials in the history of these
riots protesting corruption and the black market as reported by the second
highest official in the Democratic Republic of Madagascar.

For several weeks (in February). the students of Sambava General College had
been demanding an explanation from the local authorities: Their families had
contributed for construction of a new classroom. but construction had never
started and the money had...disappeared. no official explanation, from either
the college or the town officials. Instead, promises of a meeting which were
never kept by the chairman of the People's Executive Con-ittee (an elected
"prefect"). One day (the docummt does not say which day), after having waited
for 2 hours for this fine chairman who had again promised to come to the
General College to explain. the angry students decided to march on the town.
They seized and wrecked the People's Comittee offices. The next day, the
money was "found" in the conittee's treasury: 5,978,422 Malagasy francs (the
equivalent in francs CFA) borrowed by a merchant. The students stopped their
strike and demonstration. A few days later, students of the town's high school
in turn demonstrated also demanding an explanation of the use of their school':
funds. They also complained of shortages. convinced that some town merchants,
protected by the officials, were holding back products in order to sell them
on the black market, naturally at a higher price. 0n 5 March these young peo-
ple forced their way into shops and found large stocks of items which could no
be found on the shelves. 0n 6 March. the merchants and businessmen persuaded
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the authorities coil-pose a curfew. On Sunday, 7 March, police and soldiers
were stationed around the town.

The tragedy, the killing, came on the following day, 8 March. Soldiers in
combat uniform, but armed only with clubs, arrived at the GeneralCollege at
0700 to disperse students arriving normally for their classes. Exchange of
insults. Stoning. Outnumbered, the soldiers retreat, but one of them has
been killed and another seriously injured. A half-hour later, several trucks
pull up in front of the school carrying police and soldiers, this time well
armed. They open fire. The unequal battle lasts from 0800 to 1100 hours.
Pour students are killed, others seriously wounded. Some are drowned in try-
ing to escape across the nearby river, still others reach the forest, where
they are tracked by the special commandoes. Order reigns again in Sambava.
The merchants are satisfied with the performance of the forces of order which
call themselves socialist and revolutionary.

Honja Jaona's report concludes with a general view of the economic and politi-
cal situation in Madagascar: Shortages prevail, the Malagasy people are in
despair, and they are not informed about riots and repression. This is no
doubt why Didier Ratsiraka wanted to stamp this document "state secret," since
it raises too many questions about the government's readiness to open fire on
the students, and also to protect the champions of the black market who are

making their fortunes in the name of a socialist revolution, which is in fact
a revolution never begun.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9920
C80: 4719/949

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALAHI

BRIEFS

NEH RAILROAD LINE-~1'he rail line recently built in Malawi with Canadian

f inancing. linking Lilongwe with Mchinji near the Zanbian border, opened

to passenger and freight traffic on 1 February. Freight traffic has been
running on a trial basis since last July. Elsewhere, traffic should be re-
duced by close to a third during the next few months on the heirs-Blantyre
line, due to repair work on part of the track. It has been recomsnded that,
as far as possible, freight forwarders direct to Macala sole traffic which
generally passes through Beira. £1"er Qaris MARGIES TROPICAIJX E'l‘
EDITERRANEEMS inIFrench No 1900. 9 Apr 82 p 97H [GOPYRIGIIh Rene Moreux
et Cie Paris l982ﬂ 9693

PETROLEUM PROSPECTINGnDuring its visit to Malawi in June 1981, an Anerican
scientific expedition fron Duke University (North Carolina) identified areas
in Lake Malawi which night hold petroleum. This is why the Government of
Malawi has signed an exploration contract with Shell which should enable

the country's petroleum potential to be accurately defined. Three-quarters
(30,000 square kilometers) of the lake belongs to Malawi, while the remain-
ing quarter is in Mozambique. Uexﬂ Daria means noncwx s'r
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 97H @OPYRIGBT: Rene Moreux
et Cie Paris 1982,] 9693

SALARIES INCREASEDuMinimn wages in the public and private sectors in

Malawi were increased by 15 percent as of 1 February 1982. The respective
increases are: free 70 to 81 tubalas (1 Kwacha - 100 taabalas - 6.6 French
francs) per day in the cities of Blantyre and Lilongwe; from 60 to 69

tanbalas per day in the other cities; and from 50 to 58 taabalas per day out-
side the urban regions. next: 07am mas 'rsorlcwx s‘r tantrums in
French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 9717 EOPYRIGE‘r: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982]
9693

PRESS HOLDINGS CEOUP--1'he Press Moldings Group, which until now has been
privately owned by President Bands, has been node a statutary body. You
will recall that through its subsidiaries (about 20) and related companies
(about 30), the group controls the key sectors of Malawi's econony. ﬂexﬂ
Eerie MAECRBS MPICAUX ET EDITERRANEEMS in French Mo 1900. 9 Apr 82 p
9717 (Common: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.7 9693

(SO: 4719/929

15
ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm IQ!!!

DETAILS OF CWERA'HON WITH FRANCE mum
Paris means TROPICAUX ET MBDITBWS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1170

[Text] A general cooperation agree-est between France and Horanbique—the
first of its kind to be concluded with an African country since President
Francois Hitterrand tool: office--was signed in Maputo, in nid-Decenber, by
Jean-Pierre Cot, ninister for cooperation, and by Hario Hectungo, his Kazan-
bique counterpart (see mums TROPICAUX 81‘ mrrsmums No 1885 of 25
Decenber 1981, page 3669). By this agreesent, it was decided, anong other
things, to set up a joint co-ission which will neat every 2 years and hold
its first nesting in 1982.

This first nesting, which we announced in our last issue, page 1112, was held
in Paris on 19 and 20 April. Eagerly awaited by both sides, the purpose of
this neeting was, in the words of Jean-Pierre Cot, to enable this bilateral
cooperation "to gain nonentun" while in lbputo it was thought that it would
contribute to "establish French-ibznbican relations for future years." rela-
tions which have already made new progress since the socialist governnent cane
to power in France last year.

On a nore pedestrian level, the purpose of the nesting was, as is know, to
decide how to use the credit of 700 nillion francs allocated for the import
to Mozambique of French goods and services which represent the "second stage"
of bilateral econonic cooperation providing for higher volune of loans along-
side easier terns for these loans, sane of which are spread over a 7-year
period. A first line of credit was used to finance a high-voltage power line
going fro. the Osborn-Bases ban to the north of Hozasbique and built by C68-
Alsthsn.

0n the eve of the nesting, s saber of Mr Hechmgo's delegation noted that
meal-bique wanted to apply the bulk of these credits to large agricultural and
industrial projects and to infrastructure projects particularly in the spheres
of railroad transportation and telecoI-unications.

The French proposals were for the Central Fund for Bcononic Cooperation to
double its financial couitnents to Hosanbique in 1982-1983 and for the
French Hinistry of External Relations [for Cooperation] to treble its credits
to that country.

summon“
A significant event in the n-eting of the joint co-ission was the signing of
agree-ants for the execution of five projects:

“Modernization of the railroad line linking the port of Recala with Entre-
lagos, on the Malawi border.

“Establisbent of a training school for railroad personnel.

«Creation of an agricultural nechanization center in Hilalene, 75 Inns fro-
Maputo.

«Building of an agro-industrial develop-en: couples: on the middle course of
the Inconati.

--Setting up of a fund to conduct feasibility studies on the cooperation pro-
jects.

It lust also be noted that an agreenent on food aid to Mozanbique is under
study. This is something absolutely essential in view of the adverse weather
conditions suffered by the country (a drought in the north and torrential
rains in the south have destroyed part of this year's crops) and given its
econonic difficulties which, as Mario Hachungo pointed out, "are coupounded
by the destructive activities of South African-trained gangs."

The expansion of French-Mozambican cooperation also requires that a solution
be brought to a problas which was discussed by the joint emission: the in-
balance of trade between the two countries. The table below, which gives a
brief conparative picture of trade between France and Hosanbique, is revealing
in this respect. Figures are given in 1,000 francs; by "exports" one must
understand F.0.8. exports from France to Mozanbique; by "inports" one nust
understand C.A.P. imports to France fron Mozambique.

Exports Inports
1980 ' 1981 1980 1981

Agricultural and food products 58,055 103,309 23,459 16,898
Seninsnufactured products 8 38,825 217,727 283 1.660
internediary goods
Raw naterials 1,097 6,613 1,588 8,665
Capital goods 99,391 86,206 72 26
ConsuIer goods 17,463 22,679 18,798 28,066
Total 214,811 632,136 610,200 55,293

1?

mmtmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This table indicates two phenomena: on the one hand, a much faster rate of
increase for exports (101.16 percent increase from 1980 to 1981) than for in-
ports (25.09 percent increase fro: 1980 to 1.981); on the other hand, and ea c
result of the preceding, an increase in the mount of cover rates (685,99
percent in 1980 and 781.53 percent in 1981). For agricultural products and
foodstuffs, the cover rate junped from 2107.47 percent in 1980 to 611.36
percent in 1981; for raw materials, fro- 69.08 percent to 74.18 percent on the
other hand, the cover rate for conetner goods declined from 92.79 percent to
80.09 percent fro. one year to the other; for eenl-nenufactured end interne-
diary products and for equipment goods, there is total inbalance of trade.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Peru 1982.

8796
050: 4719/906

18
F0! WI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3mm.

mom? 'snows POLITICAL comer 1R MAKING ounces IN PS
Paris JEN AFRIQUE in French No 111‘, 12 May 82 p 29

thicle by Sylviane Kanara: "The Horalisation Measures Affecting the
Country Should Not Spare the Socialist Party in Power; Abdou Diouf Sweeps
in Front of Ilia Door'g

mtcerptsj Nine nonths away from the presidential and legislative elections,
the secretary general of the Socialist Party (in power), Abdou Diouf, is
nore than ever detenined to introduce change into the ranks of his own
group. Already, at the co-Iunsl and regional level. administrators who
thought they were f irnly ensconced in their srnchairs have had to give up
their seats. "Renewal has begun, and it will continue," Abdou Diouf told
us. "It is up to the people to decide. It is up to then to choose their
men. Preely, but with discipline." This ”grasroots denocracy" spares no
one. It was seen 18 April in the defeat of the minister of social action,
Babacar Diagne, whoa the activists of the Rational Confederation of the
ﬂorkers of Senegal (011's), affiliated with the PS, did not reelect to his
duties as secretary general, preferring to hill the nunber two nan, Hadia DiOp
(LA. No 1113). This phenonenon can be observed at different levels of the
party. It is not to everyone's taste.

For two reasons: it is the party in power, and it is therefore through it
that one can "arrive." 0n the other hand, unquestionable laxity had set in.
People closed their eyes. But since the establishment of the court for the
elimination of illegal enrichsent and the arrests which followed the budgetary
appropriations affair (J.A. No 1101), they opened then wide.

"As president," Abdou Diouf infer-ed us, "I must fight against all injustices.
Now it is unjust and shocking that in an underdeveloped country like cure,

a privileged few naintain a lifestyle out of proportion to their nerits or
the services rendered to the nation. The fact that they are in the party does
not change a thing; they should sub-it to the law. I know that the purifica-
tion of our political norals will‘eeuse sole anxiety and arouse reactions of
fear. He will exercise restraint in carrying on the fight against corruption.
But no one will be sheltered." Since the P8 numbers several black sheep in
its ranks, the purge should be of najor concern to it. The consent is heard
in those quarters which feel effected that it is "a snart way for the secre-
tary general to get rid of any who are troublesone-to settle scores with

the representatives of the other tendencies."

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'U. urrawaru. Vol". Ul‘hl

Abdou Diouf's position is certainly an uncomfortable one. The Senegalese
expect him, as head of state, to pursue the struggle against corruption to

the end but, as secretary general of the party, he runs the risk of being
accused of eliminating potential rivals. The advantages of the purifica-

tion culpaign are at the same time economic, moral, and political in the
strongest sense of the word. Its disadvantages stem from the politickiug

of politicians. Abdcu Diouf has a choice to make. "I will follow the noblest
course," he affirmed, "and believe me, I have no scores to settle with anyone."

The mode of operation of the Socialist Party has always drawn ironic consents
fro: the opposition. Bailing out, remote control, and favoritism are said to
be the basic principles. People even go so far as to speak of "gangrene."
The term offends Abdou Diouf, who prefers "unweildiness." "It is true that
in the past, and we are all to blame, information on what ought to be done
has been wrung from the PS leadership. Some activists expect me to make my
wishes known, to impose men or ideas. That is not my style. In the same
way that I have wanted openness so as to allow a larger number of people to
rejoin our ranks, I want internal democracy. But it is difficult!"

Because of the uistence of divergent opinions, the secretary general

is taking a risk. Not a very big one, because his popularity is very great--
he has nany convinced around him--but enough to be put in an awkward situation
from time to time. As an opposition activist admitted: "Taking place a

few months from the elections, this push for democratization of the Socialist
Party is a fine demonstration of political courage."

COPYRIGIT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9824
cso: 4719/937

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SERIAL

SIGNIFICANCE 0? ELECTION OF NEW CNTS SECRETARY m

Paris JBUNB AFRIQUE in French No 1113. 5 Nay 82 p 25
[Article by Sylviane Kamara: "The Trade Unions Are Noving"]

[Text] The winds of change are still blowing in Senegal. On 18 April. the
National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (QITS)--which is affiliated with
the governing Socialist Party-«lected a new secretary general: the 56-year
old Nadia Diop. Nr Diop replaces Minister of Social Welfare Babacar Diape.
The latter, furious. left the conference hall before the end of the meeting
to demonstrate his dissent. The election is not without significance even
apart fros this incident. According to law. the secretary general of the
CNTS automatically has a ministerial post. in the context of "responsible
participation." Doudou Ngom. who headed the central organ of the CRTs until
1977. was minister of national education. But on 18 April. this provision
was criticized for the first tins. and the CNTS congress adopted a resolu-
tion—proposed by Nadia Dior-specifying that the secretary general may no
longer be a meter of the government. The CNTS reserves the right for itself.
on the other hand. to nominate more of the confederation's executive
emitter-there are eight of then. representing two different trends-Jar
various ministerial posts related to the trade union movement: public
offices, work and enployment. etc. The secretary general, however. Nadia
Diop told us. should be at the Labor Exchange. "Experience has shown us how
harmful this plurality of offices is. Doudou llgom and Babacar Diagne both
preferred their ministerial portfolios to the defense of the interests of the
working classes. Furthermore, remote from the working world and without con-
tact with the rank and file, they reigned over the GETS like dictators."

Nadia Diop, who does not mince words. is a veteran trade unionist. An
accountant and the father of lb children, he first took up the struggle at
the age of 20 in the African Democratic Rally (RDA). A mesber of the
Senegalese Progressive Union (which becaae the socialist party) from its
inception. he joined the National Union of Senegalese Workers (the future
CNTS) in 1967. His time with the.railroads--whose workers are considered the
best organized in the country-~gave him a taste for tough trade union battles.
He took over the Federation of Food Industries at the 1977 CNTS congress.
This trade union is highly cosbative and—due to the nuliaer of its neiaersn
the lost important. Nadia Diop has been a radical trade unionist and deputy
since 1978, but he was always kept out of the central leadership. "Although

21
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R OFTWCIA1.USIZ(NVLY

he was a member of the Socialist Party." they say in Dakar. "he was
'uncontrollable.' For him the interests of the workers came before every-
thing else." This makes him very popular with the working class.

“is recent election is no accident. Following the directives of the chief

of state, who is also secretary general of the Socialist Party, the democratic
game was played up to the hilt. President Abdou Diuof told JBUNB AFRIQUB:

"I said it was the turn of the rank and file activists, whatever my own
preference may be." Apart from Babacsr Diagne and the group he represents,
everyone has gained: not only-~obviously-the workers, but aslo the govern-
ment, which now has someone to deal with who is a member of the Socialist
Party and enjoys wide support.

The secretary general of the Socialist Party-~of whose executive committee

Hr Diop is now an ipso facto menber-believes changes will be made in the
CNTS leadership. He also told us: "The styles and personalities of Mr Diop
and Mr Diagne are different. So are their methods of performing their duties.

Finally. and this is important. Mr Diop's election was based on a trade union
renewal."

what is not likely to change. on the other hand, is "responsible participa-
tion"--in other words the ties between the CNTS leadership. the Socialist
Party. and the government. Hill Debacar Diagne, who was the symbol of these
ties for 5 years and who has now turned over his position in the PS executive
committee to Nadia Diop. reasin in the government? "I cannot answer that
question," says President Abdou Diouf. "but I do not foresee any changes in
ministerial posts for now."

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
cso: «719/952

22
FOR‘DFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

NE" TERRITORIAL, POLITICAL, AMMSTRAIIVB ORGANIZATIW
Paris NARCEBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1900, 9 Apt 82 p 973

[Iexa The territorial, political, and adainistrative
organization of Zaire, as well as nethods for legislative,
regional, and nunicipal elections and the status of the
city of Kinshasa, were the subject of three important
statutes signed by President Nobutu Sese Seko on

25 February 1982. Here are the basic points of these
provisions, according toan analysis of the statutes by
CBDION in Brussels.

Territorial, Political and Adninistrative Organization

The first statute, which defines the territorial, political, and administra-

tive organization of the country, repeals legislation of 19 Novenber 1977 and
20 January 1978 on the territorial and administrative organization of Zaire.

It confirns the unitary democratic, social, and lay character of the republic
and its division into eight regions plus the city of Kinshasa.

The Region

The region is a decentralized adninistrative unit with legal status and the
following agencies: the Regional Co-ittee of the Popular Noveaent of the
Revolution (NPR); the Regional Asseably; the regional president of the NPR
and governor of the region.

The Regional Co-Iittee of the NPR is coaposed of: the regional president of
the NPR and the governor of the region designated by the president-founder of
the NPR; the deputy governor of the region, designated by the president-
founder of the NPR; the nanager of the region; the urban co-issioner; the
regional secretary for nobilizstion, propaganda, and political sniaation;

the regional secretary for the status of women; the regional secretary of the
NPR Youth; the judge of the Court of Appeals; the comander of the ailitary
region; the regional administrator of the National Research and Investigation
Center; the comander of the nilitary district; the regional secretary of the
National Union of Workers of Zaire (UNTZA); and the regional chair-an of the
National Association of Zairian Enterprises (MBA).

23
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
I'UII UI'I'ILIAL USI‘. URL!

The Regional Assembly is adeliberative assembly which rules by decision. It
is composed of: one-third Ere to bﬂ persons from the region appointed by
the president of the HPR, president of the Republic; representatives of the
urban councils elected to the mend level, with three members per Urban Coun-
cil; representatives of the rural zone cmncils‘elected to the second level.
with one representative per zone; representatives appointed by business and
special interest groups. with one representative per group (UNTZA, mu,
MAPBZA, and all of the recognized religious denominations). In general, the
Regional Assembly has the authority to rule on anything involving the region.
Its mandate is for 5 years.

Other Units

The subregions, urban and rural zones, and collectives are also administra-
tive districts, but without legal status. Their agencies are: a Suhregional
Comittee and a subregional chairmn of the HPR for each subregion; an Urban
Comittee and an urban HPR chairman for each city; a Popular Zone Conittee,
Zone Council and chairman of the Popular Zone Col-sittee and zone connissioner
for each zone; a Popular Committee of the Collective, Collective Council,
president of the Popular Co-ittee of the Collective, and head of the Collec-
tive for each collective.

The City/of Kinshasa

Kinshasa, the capital of Zaire, is a decentralized administrative unit with
legal status. It is subdivided into urban zones, which are subdivided into
districts. The capital's agencies are: the Regional Co-ittee of the NPR,
the Regional Assembly; the regional chairman of the NPR and city governor.
appointed by the president of the NPR, president of the Republic. The region-

al HPR chairman is assisted by two deputy governors appointed by the president
of the -HPR.

The city's Regional Assembly is a deliberative assembly which rules by deci-
sion. It is composed of: one-third ﬁre to be] members appointed by the
president of the HPR, president of the republic; representatives of the urban
zone councils elected to the second level, with three members per zone;
representatives appointed by business and special interest groups, with one
representative per group (UNTZA, ANBZA, ANAPBZE, and all recognized religious
denominations) .

The Regional Assembly of the city of Kinshasa is elected for a term of 5
years; it meets twice a year.

The Urban Zone is a decentralized administrative unit with legal status. It
is divided into districts and has the following agencies: a Popular Zone Com-
aittee; a Zone Council; a chairman of the Popular Zone Co—ittee, and zone
commissioner.

Districts are administrative districts composing the Urban Zone but have no
legal status. They are headed by district heads assisted by deputy district
heads.

2h
ma omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Division of Responsibilities

1he statute defines the division of responsibilities between the Executive
Council and the decentralized units. All questions dealing with the country's
general policy and with national sovereignty are under the sole jurisdiction
of the central authority. These include the following, in particular: jus-
tice; foreign relations; national defense; domestic and foreign state
security; co-ercial policy; econouic stability; currency; the state budget;
the drafting- of legislation; national equalization; large national facili-
ties. especially ports and airports; postal service and teleco-unications;
the najor orientation of national development; overall planning; scientific
and technological research policy; education policy; econonic sectors felt to

be strategic: mining, hydrocarbons, and energy; and national public enter-
prises.

COPYRIGIT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9693
(ISO: 6719/929

25
son omcm. use ONLY
f0“ Ufl'lt 0A0. 08'. URL!

ZAIRB

NEH ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE FOR GBCAHINBS. 802A!!!“
Paris “ARMS TRWICAUX 8‘! EDITEWNS in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 976

(Text? we know that, at the sane tine as some public enterprises are being
nade private, Zairian authorities have decided to place General Quarries and
Mines Company (GBCWES) and Zairian Coupon for the Marketing of Ores
(SOZACOIO under the overall authority of the president of the republic.
GECAHINBS had previously been under the authority of the president. and
SOZACOH @ad beeg under the departnents of Couerce and of cavemen: Invest-
ment Holdings.

The new authority will be exercised through a thtee composed of: the
state conissioner for finance and budget, the state cmissioner for trans-
port and «sanitation, the president's chief of staff, and the director of
the Bank of Zaire.

Unless otherwise expressly provided, authority will be exercised especially
over: the conclusion of labor and supply contracts; the organizing of ser-
vices, organizational structure, status of personnel. and pay scales. as well
as any modifications to than; the annual report; the establishnent of branches
and offices inside or outside Zaire; sales and acquisition of real estate

and stock; loans; investnents or sales of financial holdings; the private
accounting progras; the budget or forecast of insane and expenditures; closing
stataaents; and the balance sheet.

‘lhe boards of directors of the two companies have also been changed. Bron
now on they vill be cowosed as follows:

GBCAHINBS: the president and chairnan of the board of GBCAHINBS; the '
secretary of state for finance; Hr Nda-Ngye Hpia. staff adviser to the
president of the republic; the lat state co-issioner'a deputy chief of
staff; the assistant director of the Bank of Zaire; the head of the Depart-
nent of Mining; the president and chairnan of the board of SNCZ (Zairian
National Railroad Conpanﬂ and the president and chairnan of the board of
0mm [Rational Transportation Office? as representatives of the Depart-
ment of Transport and Comnications; the president and chairnan of the
board of SOZAOOH; the technical manager and the financial manager of
GBCAMINBS.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOZAOOH: the pteeident end chair-en of the board of SOZAOOH; the eecretery
of state for finance; lu- llde-Ngye ﬂue, eteff edvieer to the president of the
republic; the let etete co-ueioner'e deputy chief of eteff; the eeeietent
director of the Bank of hire; the heed of the Depart-eat of Foreign
Caner“; the preeident end churn-n of the heerd of «causes; the technicel
gen-set end the fin-hem me: of scam.

these decisions were the euhject of statutes No 82-011 end 82-013 of 27 Jen-

uery 1982 for owns, an! llo 82-012 end 82—016 of the one dete for
sown.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cu Pene 1982.

9693
60: 4719/ 929

FOIOF'l-‘ICIALUSEONLY
HM Ul' I'IL'IAL 03b ONLY

ZAIRE

BRIEFS

Poser 0? BANANA—The financing of additional studies on the port of Banana,
estinated at lo nillion EnrOpean units of account. was the subject of a nest-
ing in Brussels last February which brought Zaire together with potential
providers of funds. France and Italy pledged to cofinance detailed port
studies and city planning. Belgiu- uill provide financing for studies of
electrical supply, while after the nesting of the joint Germn-Zairian Col-
nission, Heat Gemny could pledge to finance the water supply project study.
Upon the request of the Executive Council, the European Development Md,
for its part, could finance studies on setting electrical rates for the port
and industrial plants. Zaire will essune the expenses for the study of the
Boun-Huands highway. Furthermore, France and Belgium have confined their
agree-eat to grant technical assistance to our (Organization for Equipping
the Banana-Kinshasa), and Japan has confirned its interest in the study and
improvement of the Mandi-Bone railroad. Jena Eerie MRCIBS TROPICAUX
rr mum in stench No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 9757 manna“: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

(30: «719/929 m

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY