FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10393

16 March 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

[FOUO No. 766)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infomtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
lltion was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

its contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Government.

COPYRIG‘XI' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIRATION
0F nus PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

(2000 no. 766)

Cements

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

UNAC Smit Concludes, Problem! Remain
(Siradiou m81103m moon, 6 J“ 82) CCOCOIOOOIOCIOOOI

ANGOLA

Savimbi Tiee, Visit to Morocco Attacked
(mme’ 1 Feb 82) .OOIOOQOO0.0000IIDOQOOODOOOIOOOODOO

Briers
Production of Construction Materials

Phosphate Mining Complex

Angonave Activity

Benguela Meat Shortage
CAP! mm

Briefs
Swedish Aid

WA

Poet-Coup Climate of Fear, Uncertainty Noted
(means TROPICAUX B‘l‘ warms, 22 Jan 82) ..........

GUINEA BISSAU
Briefs
Relations ﬁlth Portugal Normalized
Foreign 'h‘ade in 1981
IVOR_Y COAST

Additional Port Facilities Opened to Petroleum Operators
(HARCEES TROPICAUX ET mums, 12 Feb 82) ..........

-a- [III-ﬂiA-IZO

FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE
' Briefs

Wheat Self-Sufficiency kwisicned
Public works Projects
Construction Difficulties
Camera Surveillance System Planned
National Plan for 1982

SWAHBIA

Partisan, Conpartnentalized Nature of hose Noted
(Jm mm, 6‘)” 82) C...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOO

SIERRA LEONE

Nation Seeks Hays To Avoid Hajor Economic Crisis
(Patrick Anelli; MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET mmms,

29 Jan 82) 000000000.0000000000...00.000.000.00...00.00....

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

urn-moan AFFAIRS

UDBAC SM? WES. MILES mm
Paris JIM APRIQUE in French No 1096. 6 Jan 82 pp Sb-SS
[Article by Siradiou Disllo: "A Canon Harket not Possible?"]

[Text] having stayed away fro. the Union for the last 13 ,ears.
Chad returns to the fold. But the problems retain the sane
after the eu-it nesting in Libreville. '

It is henceforth traditional that Christ-as eve in Central Africa brings the annual
eumit nesting of the Custoes and Bconoeic Union of .Central Africa (UDBAC). The
year 1981 was no exception to the rule. By virtue of the rule of alternating. this
year it was the turn of Libreville (Gabon) to host fron 17-19 December the 17th
emit of this sub-regional organization whose nesbere include Caneroen. Central
African Republic. Congo. and Gabon.

It was at once apparent. however. that the Libreville neetings were going to stray
free the beaten path. and that a truly new orientation was in the offing; not
because of any t pics included on the agenda. since. as usual. they had to do
nainly with technical issues: the hernonising taxation and statistical data. the
inprovenent of co-Lnicstions. the creation cf a school of broadcast engineering

in Libreville. etc .

At first glance. the new direction could be ascertained iron the number and rank
of the observers sent to attend this sullait: seven nations (Angola. Equatorial
Guinea. Sso Tone and Principe. Rwanda, Chad. Zaire. and Burundi). the first six of
which were represented by their heads of state. A list of dignitaries to which

it is fitting to add the secretary general of the Organisation for African Unity.
Eden Kodjo. and the executive secretary of the African Economic Omission, Ahebayo
Adedeji.

It soon becane clear that not all had traveled to Libreville to do sightseeing or
to reuin passive. Thus it was that Chad. which had definitively walked of the
UDBAC 13 years ago. announced through its spokesperson. Goukouni Heddeye. that it
intended to return to the foldnbefore the next Yaounde suuit; since. as the
president of the Transitional National Union Govern-ant (60“?) was to point out.
"He do not wish to return here nerely as observers.” It is true that in spite of
their internal problems the leaders from N'Djanena do not intend to reclain their
seat in the Union mlsss certain problems are solved beforehand. the very problems

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that had originally caused them to walk out: notably. the fact that the three
coastal states of Cameroon. Congo. and Gabon refused to grant a real and consistent
compensation to the two inland and thereby less industrialized states of Chad and
the Central African Republic.

There is reason to believe that. with time, Chad's wishes will be granted. At any
rate, there is no lack of willingness to bring about solutions acceptable to all
parties. The concerned ministers have taken over the case. With the help of ex-
perts. they can scarcely avoid finding solutions either concerning better
operational procedures for the Solidarity Fund. or adjustments in the single-tax
systen. or modifications of the investment code. Por Chad. as well as for the
Central African Republic for that matter, it means making sure that UDBAC benefits
more than just the coastal nations and that in the future there will be a more
equitable distribution of advantages coming out of the integration efforts.

of the seven observers present in Libreville. only Chad had come with the firm
intention of again making UDEAC an instrument for subregional cooperation. The
other six were intent on going beyond that frat-swath. even on expanding it to
include the entire region. In the manner of the Economic Commity of Heat African
States (ECOHAS), which brings together wast African countries regardless of politi-
cal or linguistic differences. what needs to be done is to build an equivalent
organization in Central Africa. And. concerning this subject. the Libreville
sumit seems to have taken a decisive step forward. since the declaration signed

by the 11 participants is unambiguous. It makes a solemn comitment to implement
whatever is necessary to institute an Economic Cos-unity of Central African States.

A similar perspective to what was included in the Lagos plan of action (April. 1980)

would endow Central Africa with a market of some 60 million consumers. which, given
the small size of the states and even of the entire UDEAC which has a population

of only 12 million. would be a more efficient setup. The Coll-unity would allow a
better development of the region's natural resources. while facilitating optimal
industrial production and better-planned development of transportation.

This point has not as yet been reached. UDEAC has not succeeded. 17 years after
its creation. in promoting a true economic union. Aside from petroleum products
and cement, the trade volume within the region has increased only modestly. Trade
between member countries accounts for only about 5 percent of the Union's total
exports. Numerous studies have been done and proposals made with an eye to dis-
tributing industries over the different countries. Under such plans, Cameroon
would specialize in bauxite and aluminum, Gabon in petrochemicals and cement.

Congo in chemicals, and the Central African Republic in pharmaceuticals and
clock-making. But not one of these multinational projects has as yet been realized.
Similarly. in the field of transportation, a plan had been drawn up to build
connecting roads in order to tie all the member countries into the Lagos-Holman
Trans-African Road whose projected route goes through Bangui. A railway from
Banqui to the Atlantic. to be tied into the Trans-Cabonese. was declared to be a
high~priority cooperative project. And the creation of a mltinational freight and

coastal navigation company was proposed. But in these cases as well. all these
plans rennin slumbering in the files of administrations.

To overcome the hurdles erected by lack of funds. an institution, the Development
Bank of the Central African States (BDEAC). was founded. Its headquarters are

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
located in Brazzaville. But heretofore it has been able to play only a narginal
role in creating cooperative projects. Thus it is that iron 1978 to 1981 the total
value of the projects which it financed comes out to only 5.67 billion CPA francs.
as compared to investment budgets which for 1980 alone add up to 57 billion CFA
francs for Cameroon. 71 billion for Congo. and 5.5 billion for the Central African
Republic.

Under these conditions. objections will be node. how can UDBAC. itself. unable to
get going in spite of the many affinities which unite its nenbers. clai- to be able
to motivate a larger and thereby more heterogeneous cox-unity? In the opinion of
the experts of the Economic Comission for Africa (ma). extending cooperation to
all the states in the region is perfectly feasible. In order to do this. they
recomend taking the initial step of restructuring UDRAC and beginning negotiations
between the organization and the various countries. These negotiations. having to
do with joint projects. should strengthen the production capacities of each and
allow a fairer distribution of the benefits of integration.

Zaire is already weaving close ties with nest of UDBAC's Were. And the Chamber
for Compensation and Paynents of Central Africa. created recently. can only further
exchanges between these countries. As long as there exists a true political will,
the management will fall in line. And Central Africa. having enormous natural
resources at its disposal. will in the years to cone be able to live up to the

expectations of the Lagos plan of action whose implementation will be setting
forth the conditions for the development of the continent.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9847
C80: 4 719/503

FOR 0M1. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

sum n23, vzsrr 1'0 morocco Amman)
Perle mountain in much lo 258, 1 rob 82 p 19
[mm-mud article: ”the Sui-bi Show in Robot' 7

Text _7 the flower or whet Portugsl hes in the we; of resctionery Journol-

sts wee invited to Robot, in udodenusry, for s press conference on...dngo-
1s. m the show progrn Jones Sevinbi in person. The correspondent of s
Lisbon rightist weekly. rm, wee there, with es s bonus, the praise or
on exclusive interview with tho Augolsn trsitor. As promised end due, it
did teke plsce, but 3 am lstsr then plsnnod, Pretoris'o puppet hsving
shut hinsol: in for s longtw looting clone with ﬂosssn II in the royol
pslece st norrskesh.

"His meow," sxplsined s mu epokonon to the mo Journslist, 'nevor
lets slip on opportunity to listen st loath to Sewinbd disooursing on in-
teractions]. politics, ospeciolly Atricen problus.‘

ItisstectthetthohoneyloonisonbstweenﬂsesonsndSevi-bi, whowes
received in tho horoooen cepitol with full honors: err-cred olds-obile,
luxurious suite st tho asbst Cholleh...et the king's expense. tho Journolist
specified. And he eddod thst to nuke up for the weit, Seviehi suggested
toting his: book to Lisbon hinselt, in his prints Jet.

Peerless of ridicule, rm quotes the Angelou treitor'e relsrks ebout the
reesons purportedly notivoting Morocco's support o! mu: nelson II hopes
that with Sevinbi in power, Angclo would enjoy... ester religi ouo troodon.
which would sllow 1.1.! to spreed in thet “mam...“

The foot thet horocco should be the lost country in “rice still grsntiog
direct end open sid to mu - espeoielly otter the detection of Senegal,
whichisnownornelisingreletionswithingols-osmotos-oesesurpriso
when one is swore or the strengthening of ties between Robot end Ruhington,
vitsl ties for the sheririen rogino. It is of course on ﬁshingtoo indeed
thst ﬂossen II is coating for lilitory ossietonoe, the only noens of pre-
venting collopse in the Sshsrs.

h
ton OFFICIAL as: 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the palace at Marrakesh, the two nan nust have been rejoicing in unison
over Washington's increased aggressiveness in the defense of ilperialist
interests in Africa. After the defeat of discard in hence, all their hopes
bad been concentrated on the “lite House. Declaring hinself fully satisfied
with the results of his recent visit to Washington, Sui-bi did, however,
regret that the clerk uendnent had not yet been abolished....

On the other hand, he clearly showed his displeasure with the attitude of the
Portuguese goverment, in which he nevertheless has nan: friends. Portugal
has not officially taken any steps in his favor, and that is prinarily been
cause of President Banes' stubbornness. The Angolan bandit's black-ail, in
threatening to kill the Portuguese prisoners ~ civilians captured by the
wahas in the South .- did indeed not succeed in ncdifying General lanee'

at tude.

Hence the char- canpaign before the Portuguese ournalists in Rabat, to who.
he announced the unconditional release of the 2 prisoners. (hoe again, an

unsuccessful naneuver, since the Portuguese president has Just declared false
the news that there had been a nesting between Ull'fl and representatives of
the goverment in Luanda under the auspices of the Portuguese authorities.

No nesting of the sort will take place, as lanes well knows, and he seen to
share Luanda's vievs in asserting to his entourage that the Angolan prole
is not one of I'national reconciliation.‘ Indeed, the Alerican cuspaign can-
not aisleed this nan, who knows perfectly well who savinbi was even before

he threw hins'ehf body and soul in with the South African racists. lie knows
in detail the personal history of the nan who used to work for we fascist
Portuguese colonial am, against the W's Angolan nationalists -- and that
new years before 25 April.

In June 1971:, Amour-A313 published as a worldwide exclusive, selections
from the vast correspondence between the traitor Savinbi and the fascist
authorities, including Castano hinself. mining selections, which defini-

tively put the finishing touches on Savinbi's portrait and his role in the
national liberation struggle.

121h9
080: h719/Sh2

S
roa OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROMOTION OF ”WONG! HAW-Production in Angola'

Cunt production.
[Text] [Paris mucus TROPICAUX 81' “BMW!!!“ in French No 1888. 15 an 82

PHOSPHATE MINING comm-4m lining couple: of Kind
Zaire, was inaugurated last 11 Rovelber as part of ,the celebr
anniversary of independence. The couple: was created
neat signed with Bulgaria. It her capacity to produce 15
phates a year; the coupler consists of a strip line, a tree

tanks to store gasoline
and lubricants and a building for offices and living umdations. ' [Text] [Paris
mans TROPICAUX 3T ﬂaws in French Ho 1888. 15 Jan 82 p 159] (WWW:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

month. But the DINAPROPB [National Cattle Products Distributi

ranch No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 159] (comm: Rene ﬂorets: et Cie
Paris 1982] 8796

180: 6719/507

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CAPE VERDE

WISH Auk-Official nourcu aid on 13 January in ma that, durum th: 1982-
83 period, Swedish aid to Cape Vexde will amount to ”produce” #0 nulion krona:

deal with a difficult situation. “than 1979 and 1981, Sudan pmidod 160 million
krona: to Cap. Verde 1n the ten of bilateral aid. [rat] [Paris mums
TROPICAUX 81' WNW in French 80 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 196] [WPYRIGB‘R

Rene bran: at C1: Parts 1982.] 8796

080: 6719/ $28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POST-0011? CLIMATE OF YEAR, UNCERTAINTY norm
Paris manna TROPICAUX ET MEDITBWS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 200

[Text] For Captain Raviinge and his teen, the Provisional Rational Defense
Council, taking over the destiny of Ghana is once more proving to be a difficult
task.

Early this weeknonly 7 out of the intended ll embers of the council had been
appointed and the goverment, which that council is supposed to sponsor, was yet to
be for-ed.

According to sone sources, nore and ears questions are being raised in the Rest
concerning the role that Libya nay have played in the coup and that country's in-
fluence over the new leaders.

Also, according to sons eyewitness accounts, the recent events caused nore
bloodshed than it was originally reported and several hundreds of people are said
to have been killed. The figure of 700 casualties as even nentioned. )bre exe-
cutions are said to have been carried out in a lore or less mary fashion by a
badly controlled army and by people's tribunals.

In the econonic sphere, the situation is taking a turn for the worse. The chief
of staff, who is in charge of defense within the council, sdnits that the situa-
tion is "very be " and even thinks that the measures adopted regarding banking,
nsinly curtailing cash withdrawals and freezing sone accounts, have had disastrous
consequences for business and for conpanies. Inposing price controls vhich are
difficult to enforce has already had the sane effect as in 1919 of asking consuner
goods even more scarce. As for mobilizing young people and students to transport
the cocoa crop iron the fields, it could hecone an ineffectual operation due to the
lack of neans and to the very bad condition of the roads.

In any case, Ghana is now living in a state of uncertainty and even in a clisate
of fear which gives ground for the neighboring countries to worry about their
own future. Libya is said to have supplied the Ghanaian Arly with allegedly
defensive usapons to forestall a foreign aggression.

Meanwhile, Captain Rulings, who was very nuch in the linelight after his first
coup'd'etat, has hardly appeared in public since the last one and this attitude

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of relative self-effacanent elso gives rise to questioning. The boisterous denou-
strations of support for the young officer node by sons sectors of the population
could have been partly orchestrated. Certainly, not everybody is pleased with the
return of the nilitary even if, this tine. they are trying to surround thuselves
with civilians. For instance. the group formed by the associations of levyers,
doctors and engineers vhich had worked hard to establish a civilian regile recently
called for that regime to be restored es soon as possible. Hill Captain Rulings

heed their request? One can hope that he will do so but, for the tine being,
it is hard to see when end how.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
(380: “19/528

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA BISSAU

mum

RELATIONS HII'B PORTUGAL MMIZBD—The heads of state of Portugal and Guinea
Bissau, Gen Antonio Ranalho Bones and Gen Bernardo Vieira. will hold talks
shortly either in Bissau or in Lisbon. This neeting, taking place at the initia-
tive of the African head of state, will be the first between the two presidents
since the Guinea Bissau coup d'etat of 14 Border 1980. Since General Vieira
cane to power, high level contacts between Portugal and its former colony have
been practically broken off. The release, on last 30 Decaber, of former Presi-
dent Luis Cabral who had been under house arrest since the coup and on whose be-
half General Banes had interceded. has removed the last obstacle to a normalisa-
tion of relations between the two countries. [Text] [Paris NABCBBS TROPIGAUX B‘i‘
MEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 196] ICOPYRIGBT: Rene Horeux et
Cie Paris 1982;] 8796

FOREIGN TRADE IN 1981-According to the latest report issued by the Hinistry of
Comerce, during the first 6 months of 1981, exports from Guinea Bissau totaled
279.3 million pesos (Pr 1.3 nillion) while its imports represented 1,016 billion
pesos (Fr 155 million). Sea food tops the list of exports with 133.2 million
pesos followed by agricultural products (96.3 million), industrial goods (31.1
nillion) and tisber (19.6 nillion). Spain was Guinea Bissau's nain customer
followed by Senegal for Africa and China for Asia. In the chapter on imports,
foodstuffs are at the top of the list for the first 6 months of 1981, followed by
manufactured goods. Portugal was Guinea Bissau's main supplier ahead of Sweden.
Senegal heads the list of suppliers fron Africa. China froa Asia and the United
States from Anerica. [Text] [Paris WES TROPICAIR 31' E' 'DIWS in French
No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 196] IGOP‘YHGBT: Rene Ibreux at Ole Paris 1982.] 8796

080: (019/528

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1DFFKJAI.USE(NULY

IVORY COAST

ADDITIONAL PORT FACILITIES OPENED T0 PETROLEUM OPERATORS
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEIITIRRANBENS in French 12 Feb 82 p 390

[Excerpts] On 29 January, Maritime Affairs Minister Fadika Lamina presided at
the inauguration of an offshore base for petroleum operators. The contractor,
Socopao CI [not expanded], has leased from the port about 4 ha on which, in
addition to its garage and ship repair slips, it is constructing: a metal,
timber-lined pier of 100 m, to b'.extended to a length of 150 m, draught 7 m.
and load capacity 6 tons per cubic meter; clearing behind the pier an area for
pipe racks storage; constructing warehoIaes and offices for the operators and
their subcontractors, providing storage for drilling materials (mud, barite,
bentonite, etc); building a heliport for liaison with platforms.

The minister and the port recently granted Socopao an additional 3 ha for build-
ing rear base sheds for subcontractors, who already have facilities for mooring
auxiliary ships, tending then for servicing the fresh-water platforms, 25-50

ton cranes for loading, etc.

The base, which operators consider provides first-rate services, is opened to
all companies interested in petroleum research in Ivory Coast, for as long as
desired. For example, Phillips, which built its own base, regularly usesthe
Socopao base for facilitating the work of its supply-boats.

The installation can accommodate simultaneously, 6 auxiliary ships and provide

a storage area of 5 ha and 7,500 m2 of warehouse space. The cost of Socopao Cl's
investment is about 1.1 billion CPA francs.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

CSO: 4719/611

11
FORtOFHKJAl.USE(HULY
F0! OPTICAL USE ONLY

numerous

mars

HBEAT sm-smrcma MISIm-lbzadaique is planting experimental wheat crops
sponsored by the no. Yields of 3 tons per hectare have been obtained despite the
fact that not all cultivation rules were strictly observed. Sons 50 tons of the
Helena European variety were planted in the regions of bade. lei-hi, Venduzi,
Angonis and listens. Other varieties, probably Mexican ones, could be tried out;
they are said to be better suited to the country's ecological conditions. Based on
these experiaents, 10 years from now, Ibzaﬁique hopes to be able to produce about
150,000 tons of whest per year which is what it requires to satisfy its needs.
[Text] [Paris M30388 TROPICAU! 81' “NEWS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82

p 215] [commurz Rene Ibreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 8796

PUBLIC uonxs PROJECTS-dime Tanega Construction Company is doing construction work
costing more than 1 nillion contos in the lbsanbique Provinces of Maputo, Gaza.
Nempuls and Cabo Delgado. Sons of these projects are: lengthening the aain runwsy
at Havslane International Airport in Maputo, building an irrigation systaa in
Gaza, building a plant for the TM! [Textiles oi tbzsnbiqre] conpeny in
Nonpula, building a road between Discs and Oasse and other roadworks (in hputo,
the Julius Nyerere Avenue and the access to Ponta do Ouro; repair work on the
Hapapa-C'hokwe road and on the Chicunbane-Xai hi road). [Text] [Paris malts
monumc 31' 11:01am in French so 1889. 22 Jan 82 p 215] (common:

Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 8196

CONSTRUCTION DIPPICULTIBSnl'he Constructors Integral de anuls (GIMP), e Ibsen-
bique building and public works coapany which employs 1,800 people, will not be
able to nest its production targets for 1981. During the first 9 nonths of the
yeer, many construction jobs were not cospleted on schedule because the coapany
failed to receive in tine sole of the inported fittings it required or the blue-
prints for sane or the jobs it was assigned to do. The coapsny was working at no
building sites which included housing accouodstinn in teachers' training centers;
a developnent of to housesin Nanpula; substations for the powerline of Nacala,
lbcspo and Nanpula; naintenance work on 1,900 kns'oi roads (out of the 3.800 Ins
required to transport fern products) sole of which had not been repaired since
1975. In 1982, the work schedule of GINA? will be lighter and tore realistic; road
maintenance work. anong other things, will be assigned to a specinl departnent of
the Hinistry of Public works and housing. [Text] [Paris menus TROPICAUX B‘l‘
MBDI‘I'BRRANEBNS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 215] Ioomrca'r: Rene norm et
Cie Paris 1982.] 8796 ‘

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMERA SURVEILLARCB SYSTEH PLANNED-The Ministry of Security of the People's
Republic of Horsebiqus plans to purchase and install very shortly a system of
microwave cameras in the country‘s major towns. The purpose of this system is to
keep certain public areas (squares, streets and so on) under surveillance and,
therefore, the system will be connected to s television central post. The calorie
will be equipped with s sound recording system. The Ministry of Security also wants
s video recording system with multiple display so the picture can be slowed down
and stopped. Finally, it would like to obtain all technical details on how to
operate the suggested equipment. Firms who msy be interested ere invited to give
their names to the 0103 [Council of Commercial Federations of Europe] (Tel
505-33-22, ﬁrs Debien) and, also contact the commercial attache of the Trench
Embassy. [Text] [Paris HARCﬂEs TROPICADI ET HEDITERRANHENS in French No 1889,

22 Jan 82 p 2151 [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris i982.] 8796

NATIONAL PLAN FOR l982--A 25.5 percent increase in industrial production is one of
the targets set by the 1982 annual national plan recently adopted by the Mozambique
Assembly. The plan. enacted on 1 January, also envisages e 36 percent rate of
growth in the agricultural sector and emphasizes the development of transportation
with, among other things, a 25 percent expansion in rail transportation and 60 per-
cent in sea transportation. In the education sphere, the authorities are hoping

to teach a total of between 600,000 and 600,000 people (the population of Mozam-
bique is estimated to be 10 million inhabitants) to read and write and to provide
them with an education. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in
French No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 159] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

C50: 4719/50?

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PARTISAN. COMPARIHBNTALIZBD NAIURB 0? PRESS NOTED

Paris JBUNB APRIQUB in French No 1096, 6 Jan 82 p 11

[Text] Bars Diouf. director general of the Senegalese national daily LB SOLEIL,
complains that his newspaper seems to have reached its circulation ceiling. Up to
a point, it is a victim of democracy. The Senegalese press offers a rich abundance
of publications which, unfortunately, cannot be listed in any serious survey be-
cause irregularity is the rule with regard to periodicals, with the only exceptions
being LB SOLBIL, ZONE 2 (a weekly sports nagazine) and APRIQUB NOUVKLLE (a weekly
devoted to west Africa).

Apart from a few publications such as AFRIQUB NOUVELLE, APRIQUB TRIBUNE and LE POL-
ITICIBN, this press is partisan and compartmentalized into as many political par-
ties as can be found in Senegal. There is a historical reason for this situation
which is common to all of Africa. Under colonial rule, newspapers (often clandes-
tine) were often the only vehicle for political ideas. when independence came,
most of the countries were ruled by single parties which, to establish their auth—
ority, monopolized the right to speak. This was never the case in Senegal, proof
of it being that the opposition parties which were not recognized-.and were, there-
fore. underground parties--until 1981, were still able to develop openly through
the mere voice of the press. This is what happened with the END (National Democrat-
ic Rally) which has always expressed its views through its daily TAXAH. The same
is true of the political trends that were to give rise to the MD? (Democratic and
Popular Movement) and to the PIT (Independence and Labor Party) and which achieved
recognition through AND! SOPI. -

The contents, arguments and practices of the Senegalese press are determined by
this almost general affiliation to political factions. Offering some slight differ-
ences, APRIQUB NOUVELLB, APRIQUB TRIBUNE and LB SOLBIL are practically the only ve-
hicles of information even though L2 SOLBIL is openly progovernment. The other
publicatons give the general tone of the press which is violent and thundering, at
tines even inordinately polenic. LE POLTTICIER-a satirical publication "appearing
regularly though unexpectedly"--launches its attacks on all directions but, one
must say, it offers the advantage of being generally well informed. L'UNITE leads
the fight on behalf of the Socialist Party (in power) loudly assisted by CAAXAN
PAAXBB, mauthpiece of the socialist youth. 0n the opposite side stand all the oth-
er publications attacking the government and, at the same time, vigorously denounc-
ing one another; they are ANDE SO?! and TAXAH. of course. and also JAAY DOOLB 31
(THE PROLBTARIAN) which resorts to a verbal violence only matched by CAAXAN PAAXBE.

1h
FOI.OFTICLALIJSE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This deliberate choice of verbal sparring actually reflects the tenpsranent of the
Senegalese people who love to speak and engage in polemics. But it has disastrous
consequences for the newspapers and readers: The factions are so divided along the

lines of the parties that only people vho are already convinced read their respective
papers.

COPYRIGRT: Jeune Afrique GRDPJIA 1981.

8796
080: 4719/507

15
won omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

summons

Mﬂw sens ms TO AVOID W08 mane CRISIS
Paris m MICRO: IT NEWS in French 29 Jan 82 pp 241-246
[Article by Patrick Anellil

[Text] Sierra Leone is an English-speaking country of moderate site located in the
West African nuhregion and surrounded by Guinea and Liberia. Except for a brief
period in 1967. before President siaha Stevens came to power. it has so far superi-
enced a political life free of military coupe. The regime's progress through the
stage of dominant party to that of a single party (the All People's Congress (ml)
in 1978 has not been able to stem cabinet crises revealing the tribal tensions and
political opposition existing within the regime.

The events of last sunser and the proclamation of a 6-month state of emergency. on

2 September have left observers puzzled as to the future of a country that has been
cowared with no hesitation to neighboring Liberia and the tragic fall of President
'l'olbert in April 1980. '

Despite a serious recovery effort. sierra teens is in a tricky situation on the macro-
economic level. The burden of external debt and the unsatisfactory results obtained
from the productive apparatus make it a 'disaster area" highly dependent on national
and international silent partners for carrying out its immehaents.

The macroeconomic situation is in sharp contrast to the vealﬂ'ty status of certain
individuals. leading one to think that it is possible to make a fair profit and grow
rich in Sierra leone. While it is easy to identify the few enterprises shoving satis-
factory results. it is more difficult to estimate the extent of the underground econ-
omies that support the country at a different tens.

Strong Presidency

The regime's hardening attitude, strengthened by the proclamation of m. state of
emergency. should not delude anyone: despite the movement toward an authoritarian
presidential system since 1978, Sierra Leone's aritish-inspired political system re-

mains based on parliamentary constitutional foundations.

 

" See mm MIQUX B‘l‘ MIME, 4 809m! 1981, p 2279.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rollowing a reterendun in 1978. the arc because the only party recognised by the con-
stitution. and in effect, the other political groups becane illegal. Despite the con-
centration of power in the hands of the chief of state, who is head at the government.
wander in chief of the armed forces. and chancellor of the university. as well as
the very acute vassalisation of the senior administration, the political systen has
not been able to elininate all opposition. which exists even within the single party.
The party includes groups with various leanings, Dong then the mothers of Parliament
from the former SLPP (Sierra Leone People's Party) a who joined the new najority in
1978.

The legal mechanisms governing succession in case of the president's absence present
a number 0: political prohless. In such cases. the incubent vice president swears
to uphold the constitution, and his exercise of the country's highest office gives
him access to the highest responsibilities in the financial area (couitnente regard-
ing the state guarantee) and in the use of the armed forces and the police.

In other respects. the most important goverment decisions mist be approved in advance
by the cabinet ("cabinet conclusions") at a meeting presided over by the chief of
state. Those decisions are confidential and secret and are not the subject of any
statenent or publication at the conclusion of the cabinet meeting. This concentra-

a slowdown in administrative action. The phenomenon has worsened since 1980. the

Cabinet posts are distributed with scrupulous attention to the majority's various
etlmic conponents. Since the dismissal of certain ministers in 1981. their post-
folios (energy and power, interior, and development and economic plowing) have de-
volved upon the president hisseli', the first vice president, and the minister of fi-
nance, thus reinforcing the concentration of power.

In foreign policy, sierra Leone has sought to strengthen econaic ties with its
neighboring countries. Establishment of the Reno River Union with Liberia in 1976

Africa through the regional comitteesuthe CEAO and scams. Bis international ac-
tion was strengthened on the occasion of the 17th 010 smmit ﬂeeting. which was held

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
problens facing the African continent: Chad and the Western Sahara. But he stuck to
his role as conciliator even when the situation between the protagonists seemed most
an...

Bconuic and Financial Crisis, Recovery Heasures

ror several years, the growing deficit in the balance of payments and the inadequacy
of national production have been leading the sierra Leonean Governaent further and
further into foreign debt (estimated at $350 million in 1980). This has considerably
increased the burden of debt service on public finance. Several debt rescheduling
agreements were reached with the creditor states in 1980 under the terms of the Club
of Paris multilateral agreenent. These took the form of a moratoriua deferring pay-

Upstream from those neasures, and after the stabilisation plan of Septeﬂaer 1979,
the m Board of Executive Directors approved a grant of 162 million some that will
permit execution of a development plan totaling 500 nillion leones (l leone - about
4.8 French francs). Its priorities were decided on in agreement with the IMP, with
preference going to projects in the sectors of agriculture and hydroelectricity.

we release of the first tranche of 27 million leones in 1981 made it possible to
reduce delays in making payments to foreign creditors. 0n the other hand. strict
rules are forcing the sierra Leonean Government to be extr'e-ely severe in its selec-
tion of new investments by not contracting loans for periods of more than 1 year or
less than 12 years.

state of Bcononic Resources

The sierra Leonean econaey supports a sizable private sector alongside a public sec-
tor whose importance should increase as a result of the goverment's determination
to give that sector a decisive role in national development. In addition to the
financial institutions (the Central Bank, the Developnsnt Bank. and the Cmercial
Bank) , the goverxment has established state-owned enterprises in the lost varied
sectors: water distribution and treatment in the city (Gina Valley) . the production
and distribution of electric power (Electricity Corporation), agricultural develop-
ment (Sierra Leone Produce harketing Board (suns) . Sierra Leone Agriculture Produc-
tion Corporation (sumo) , and national Produce Corporation (moon . nanagenent of
the autonomous port of treetown (sierra Leone Port Authority). and petroleun refin-
ing (sierra Leone Oil Factory). '

Alongside those state-owned companies, the government has steadily increased its
capital holdings in nixed-economy coqanies involved in agricultural develop-ant.
the mining sector (National Dianond Mining Company (nmncon. and fishing (Sierra
Fishing Coapany). The new investsent code, now in preparation. should confirs that
trend.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a national character. but without developing a paralysing structure for a develop-
ing country.

'l‘hs relative value of the official statistical apparst and the gradual abandcnnent.
until just recently, of media-tern planning sake it difficult to dig out economic
data in Sierra Icons. This-situation is explained by the existence. parallel with
the legal econceic channels. of an underground scare-y of sisahle dinensions whose
profits are earned from trade relations with bordering countries whose strong cur-
rencies have until now been a lure (Liberia).

subsistence Farming and Mbitious Agricultural Programs

The primary sector accounts for 37 percent of the GDP and smloys over 70 percent of
the country's active population. while earnings fro. agricultural exports. despite a
slight weakening. represent 30 percent of the total earnings.

The weak takeoff of agroindustry. the existence of subsistence far-sing. and the ab-
sence of self-sufficiency in basic agricultural products (onions, rice. and palm oil)
are the doninant features of this sector. despite the goverment's repeated efforts
to encourage agricultural production on an industrial scale or to implement a price
policy acre favorable to direct remneration for the farmers.

Sierra Icons produces traditional foodstuffs. such as rice. manioc. and corn. acre
recently. the growing of tobacco. citrus fruit and other tropical products for dense-
tic consusption has been introduced.

Coffee and cocoa account for almost all of the agrocultural exports and for 37 per-
cent of the earnings from exports. Coffee production dropped by nearly 2.500 tons
in 1980. while cocoa production rose by 3.000 tons. The development of ginger, cola
nuts and palm oil products should enable the 81.?” to increase its exports.

Sierra Leonean Agricultural Production

(in tons)
1978-1979 1979-1980
Rice 620.000 650.000
., Coffee 13 . 500 8 . 500
Cocoa 7 . 500 10 . 500
Corn 14 .000 15 .000
Maniac 82 .000 80 .000
Met potatoes 7 10.000

Source: PLO (indicative statistics)

According to the no, sore than 300.000 farmers, working plots whose average size
does not exceed 1.8 hectares. cultivate the arable land by the sane methods as those
used by their ancestors. This is the case with rice. which is grown on 61 percent
of the cultivated land on the plateau by the burn-baiting nethod under a 3-year ro-
tation system (bush fellows).

The development of modern techniques is hampered by the shortage of skilled manpower.
which is offset slightly by the mechanization of agriculture. although mechanization

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is emetines unsuited to socioeconcsiic factors and poorly adapted to the sire of the
ferns.

Aware of those difficulties, the qoverment has taken an overall approach to agricul-
tural development by setting up integrated agricultural development programs in coop-
eration with multilateral organizations (the m [UN Development Progras] , the no,
and the World Bank) and bilateral organisations mat are aimed at covering the entire
territory.

Since 1975, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry has had a tool for scientific
study and research with which to evaluate soil, water, and vegetation resources (the
Land and Resources Survey Project). Its operations are intended to determine the
real suitability of sierra neonean lands to the various tropical and subtropical
crops. For that purpose. it uses the most nodern techniques and has air coverage of
the entire territory at its disposal. That "data bank" is working in cooperation
with the integrated agricultural developnent projects and West Africa's specialized
research institutes: the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (Inn. of
Nigeria), the IRBO [Institute for Research on Edible Oils and Oleaginoue Products]
of France, the West Africa Rice Develop-ant Association (wanna), and the NBC [expan-
sion unknown] '.

The SIP!!! enjoys a near monopoly on the exportation of certain high-yield products

and is also responsible for establishing the iaport program for certain food resources
such as rice. sierra Leone, which exported rice until 1971, now imports between
40,000 and 80,000 tons per year, or more than one-fourth of its total ilports. The
SLPHB is responsible for stabilizing producer prices and sales prices so as to quash
antes the far-ers of a real and bona fide profit. It has not conpletely succeeded,
since the price of that foodstuff regularly doubles during the period between her

In 1980. two subsidiaries were established to develop the production of coffee and
cocoa (SLAPCO and moo).

Under the bone 11 accords, the ED? [European Developnent Fund] considers agriculture
a priority sector. Particularly urgent intervention neasures have been stressed,

as follows:

Rice grating was the principal single crop in 1980 in the Koinadugu (REC) . Hagbosi
(FRO) , and uoyanba programs, as well as in the Tornabun project carried out with
Dutch assistance.

Market gardening has been introduced in the northern part of the country (Koinadugu).
The distribution of market produce will be facilitated by ending that region's isola-
tion and coepleting the road link behesen Hekeni and labels.

To reduce dependence on the outside world for sugar, two projects are in View: in
hagbas, a plantation and nill set up under state supervision with help from the PK:
should insure the start of production, and a second project is under study in
Pm South by the British consulting fire of Tate and Lyle. It scene to be
ained at the establishment of small production units, which are considered sore
profitable.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A project headed b! SLAPCO in Pendesbu and financed by the World Bank should mks it
possible to quadruple coffee and cocoa production in the nedim tern.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is studying the conditions for a plan to
rehabilitate and expand industrial oil pals: plantations (PAD!) jointly with the vil-
lage cooperatives. No projects have been identified to date:

1. The Daru plantation (about 2.670 hectares). established with the assistance of
the mm in 1960, is currently experiencing serious technical and eanagesent diffi-
culties despite financial assistance free the lorld Bank in 1972 for building an
oil nill. 'lhe oil mill is currently operating at 30 percent of its total capacity
because of inadequate plantings. New financial assistance could be granted as part
of PADI's third phase for Eastern Province.

SPEICBIM, but the lack of maintenance. combined with the shortage of palm clusters.
has caused the nill's production to drop to less than 15 percent of its total ce-

has a small-capacity oil will and operates with the assistance of the mo (an agency
of the Dutch Government). and the other in Port boko. The latter is a larger plan-
tation belonging to Vice President Korma. Both began operations a few years ago.

A feasibility study financed by the British Government has been concerned with the
development of coconut growing on the lunar Peninsula. 'i‘hat ambitious project
would require a sizable investment (about $100 million).

The rubber plantation in Potoru (Southeastern Province) was established in 1964. but
has never reached the stage of industrial operation. It was the object of a deci-
sion in principle by the board of directors of the Cmmealth Development Corpora-
tion (CDC) to grant a loan of 6 million leones (for 20 years at 8 percent) for par-
tial financing of the project. The Sierra laeonean Government has approached the
financial institutions connected with bilateral foreign aid, particularly the Cen-
tral Fund for Economic Cooperation, whose assistance and participation it has re-
quested.

The fishing sector employs over 20,000 small-scale fishermen alongside an industrial
sector in full expansion. with a catch of about 110,000 tone, it contributes 1.5
percent of the GDP. The goverment's first agreement was concluded in 1976 with
the Soviet Union. Running for 5 years and renewable for 3 years. that agree-sent es-
tablishes the conditions for cooperation between the two countries. A training
school for fishermen and navigational personnel was opened in 1980 with technical
assistance tron the USSR. Under the terms of the agreenent. the Soviet authorities
are entitled to operate in Sierra Leone's territorial waters to exploit its fishing
resources by neans of trawlers whose nulber is estwlished in the naster agreement
and for which the sierra Leone Fishing Company holds the required licenses. The
catch is then divided up, with 63 percent of the fish being narketed in the USSR
and Europe by WSW, a nixed-economy cospany owned by holders of French shares

and the USSR's Ministry of Fish Industry.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Sierra Leone Fishing Coupany (linked financially to the 0.s.-Liberian Mesurado
group) is in the front rank of the industrial fishing sector. It sells frozen fish
and deep-frozen prawns on foreign markets through its subsidiary SHRIMPEX (about
188 tons per year). other fishing enterprises located in Freetown are involved in
the industrial fishing of demersal and pelagic species, and the authorities has
reportedly issued nearly 80 fishing licenses.

W"... the agreement with the Soviets expires, the government will probably seek to
replace it with agreements with other partners, there being a tendency to withdraw
from relations with the USSR in fishing matters. The chief of state has approached
the mropean Canaanity in Brussels concerning projects cherished by Sierra Leone in
a sector which is destined to experience considerable development.

Expanding Mining Sector

The mining sector accounts for 10 percent of the GDP, but provides 54 percent of the
country's export earnings, and the active population emloyed in this sector has in-
creased steadily through the years. On the advice of the IMF, the government should
soon begin working new diamond and bauxite deposits. Foreign participation in this
sector remains preponderant (Austria, Switzerland, Great Britain, and the United
States).

Diamonds are the oldest of the mining resources being exploited. In 1970, the gov-
ernment acquired a Sl-percent interest in the cospany operating the country's two
largest concessions-An Tongo and Yengemauwhile the private stockholders belong to
the De Beers and Oppenheimer groups. Production is tending to decline and currently
stands at around 600,000 carats per year. The gradual exhaustion of the alluvial
deposits and the persistence of illegal exploitation may be a partial explanation
for the fall in production. The outlook is moving the goverment, on the basis of
the feasibility study carried out in 1979 by the Selection Trust, to contemplate
the exploitation of several veins of kinberlite that have been identified and lo-
cated since 1937 in Sierra Leone's subsoil.

Since 1963. a fully-owned subsidiary of ALUSUISSE known as smacuco has been work-
ing the Mokanjy deposit under a lease and royalty agreement with the goverment.
Recently, a new deposit was opened up in Gandama, not far from the original conces-
sion, following an investment of so million leones.

In addition, negotiations have been underway for 4 years to open up a sizable baux-
ite deposit (reserves of 150 million tone) at Port Loko. The deposit is low in
alumina and silica and would require partial processing at the site. The size of
the investment and the search for appropriate financing are the reasons for the de-
lay in starting up the project, which would include installation of an alumina
plant.

Sierra Leone is thought to possess one of the world's largest deposits of rutile
(titanium ore). After a gap of 8 years caused by the bankruptcy of the Sherbro Hin-
eral Company, the Aserican consortium of sierra Rutile, Limited is now exploiting

the Bamanga deposit. Despite sizable capital investments ($600 million), production
results have come up to only one-fifth of the objectives (20,000 tons in 1979. the
first year in which production was resuud) .

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

since 1981 the Austrian culpany of nustro Minerals has been reopening the iron de-
posits in Pepel. Operations there had ceased in 1975 due to poor conditions in the

world iron market.

Exploration for precious metals, particularly gold, has attracted Iany small-scale
prospectors to sierra Leone. Over the past We decades, the government has granted
prospecting licenses to local companies partly owned by foreigners, but the results
are difficult to determine because the prospectors are discreet. Several sites have
been identified and located in the country's Southeastern Province (Bomahun), where
concessibns are held by the runocan firm.

sierra Leonean Mining apes-ts
19784979 1979-1980

Diamonds (carats) 797,042 855,104
Bauxite (tons) 804,647 583,262
Rutile (tons) - 7,500
Iron (production halted in 1975

and reamed in March 1981) - -

Industry's Difficult Takeoff, Energy Problm

The industrial sector's productivity is low, contributing 10 percent to the GDP.
Half of its production is provided by the average-sired enterprises, which employ
0.35 percent of the total active population and are concentrated (bio-thirds of the
total) in the Western Region.

The 1960 Development not currently governs the establishment of new industries that
can contribute to the nation's eoonmic development. It provides those firms with
appreciable tax advantages, which are granted to them on the advice of the uinistry
of Trade and Industry and by a subsequent decision by the cabinet presided over by
the chief of state. New industries in the agroindustrial sector enjoy comparable
benefits under the Agra Based Industry Act.

firms in the food group are represented by rice mills, an industrial flour mill
(Seabord West Africa), and, just recently, a sugar complex in Hagbas that is oper-
ated by the PRC under state supervision: (60,000 tons of sugar annually). as well as
a cracker factory (NATCO) belonging to the Indian Choitrame group, an inadequate
number of slaughterhouses in the northern part of the country, and three paln oil
mills, including the Daru and Gambia Hatru coaplexes, belonging to the government.

A brewery (sierra Leone Brewery) established by the one group and Heineken supplies
over 1 million cases of locally produced beer. Two factories for the production of

nonalcoholic beverages and soda (Freetown Cold Storage—a slice group producing
Coca Cola under license--and Sierra Leone Enterprises, which produce:- Pepei Cola)
supply an annual market for over 70,000 hectoliters of nonalcoholic beverages.
Lastly, a state-owned distillery process liquor locally.

The footwear market is dominated by two local firms (Bats. Shoes sierra Leone and
APROPLAST) , which supply a market for over 2 million pairs of cheap shoes (thongs
and plastic shoes). The rest of the demand is met by other isporters.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A refinery (Sierre Leone oil Factory) , with a total capacity of 600,000 tons per
year, processes between 190,000 and 260,000 tons of petroleun products (gasoline,
kerosene and fuel oil) for the local market. and a gas plant bottles oxygen and
acetylene. while a soap and detergent factory belonging to the Indian Chanral group
supplies the local narket for those-products.

Three forest firms operate in the country's interior: the Panguna Saw Mill, belong-
ing to a french operator; the govermsent~owned Kenena Saw Mill; and the third. a

nixed-economy company (SILBTI), that exports logs.

In addition to the sierra fishing Company, several fishing coapanies exist locally.
The aost ilportant are Harine Develop-tent. 'Jnited Fishing Enterprises, and the Inte-
grated Pish Mill Industry.

A clinker grinding plant is currently being set up. It will manufacture cement with
the assistance and cooperation of the trench Origny-Desvroise cement group. Several
local construction firms share the work provided through national or international
bidding (Matter. the sierra Leone Construction Corporation, and the International
Construction Corporation). _

There are also a shop producing mechanical tools (the National Workshop) and units
for the manufacture of building materials, suitcases. chalk. and Iattresses. Their
importance and the market they serve are limited by strong cometition from foreign

imports.

The fact is that Sierra Leone's industrial sector suffers from three major disadvan-
tages: excessive concentration of the industrial sector on the peninsula and in
rreetown. the only exception being the forest firms and the oil mills, which are
scattered; excessive dependence on imported goods. which whittles down the added
value of locally produced goods: and the nonrational use of local raw materials.

Energy dependence is one of the key factors in this country's econoluc takeoff.
The petroleum bill has quadrupled since 1973, totaling 50 million leones in 1980,
or 16 percent of all imorts.

To correct that situation‘s perverse effects on the balance of payments. a hydro-
electric development plan has been established. It calls for execution of a re-
gional program by the Mano River Union (the dam on the Mano River) and construction
of the hydroelectric data at Banbuna to supply the Western Region and Freetown with
electricity. In addition to those two big projects, about 10 sites have been chosen
by the Ministry of Energy and Power for the construction of wall hydroelectric
plants of less than 2 megawatts.

0n the basis of results from preliminary studies. Sierra Leone has started offshore
petroleum prospecting off Sherbro Island. The work is being done by Hobil oil and
a consortium of three capsules (Occidental Petroleum Danson Oil, and venom). If
exploitation: of the deposit becomes possible. the result could be increased activity
for the Freetown refinery, in which the governuent is a majority stockholder.

Transportation and the coununications infrastructure have been imroved considerably.
Port facilities will be diversified, and the work done in preparation for hosting

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the 17th ow Sinit Meeting included modern infrastructure for Lungi International
Airport and a doubling of runway capacity for takeoffs.

inthenorth.andfroml’reetcwntoBointhesouth.

In order to coupress domestic demand and thus reduce the balance of payments deficit.
all imported products are new subject to administrative authorisation granted by the
Ministry of Trade and Industry. which controls the quantity. kind. volue. and price
of products. Applications covering 1 year must be submitted at the start of the cal-
endar year. Certain products are exempt from those regulations but are covered by
specific licenses: they are energy products and foodstuffs considered essential. as
well as raw materials for local industry. According to official sources. however.
the value of import licenses was reduced to 230 million leones in 1978-1979. to 190
million in 1979-1980. and to 175 million in 1980-1981.

of foreign exchange held by the Central Bank. the institution which controls and
authorizes transfer operations. As soon as payment in local currency has been en-
tered on the camercial bank's books. the file is sent to the exchange controller.
who verifies that the importation was legal and actually occurred and checks to see
that the firs or individual entrepreneur has paid the tax (proven by the tax receipt).
Payment is then subject to a delay of fran 4 to 6 months. depending on how the na-
tional economy performs. The system is in general use in sierra Leone. and the

rare exceptions in which transfers are exempt from the authorisation requirement

are limited to small amounts (5.000 leones) or have now lapsed.

Delays in the ”pipeline“ are usually shorter during the second half of the calendar
year. due to the receipt of foreign exchange from the sale of mining and agricul-
tural production on international markets. but the shorter waiting period varies
according to bank (the Bank of Connerce and Credit. Barclays Bank. the Canercial
Bank. and the Standard Bank).

The official list is drawn up by the Ministry of Trade and Industry with cabinet
approval. The rigidity of the controls encourages the appearance of the sure prod-
nets on parallel markets. where they are sold at higher prices. or their replacement
by completely identical substitutes not covered by the ilpoeed price.

By means of decrees or circulars from the Central Bank. the government adopted a

series of measures during 1981 aimed at cmpleting and strengthening legislation on
the payment of taxes (the Income Tax Act of 1970). The delivery of imported goods.
departure from the country. and even the renting of a hotel room or the purchase of

an airline ticket by a Sierra Leonean resident or a foreigner are subject to presen-
tation of a tax receipt.

According to the government. the 'Vouchergate scandal.” as it was named by the press
and public opinion--it resulted in the arrest of three cabinet officials and more

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
than 40 government employees-demonstrated that those measures. which were challenged
on legal grounds. were aimed chiefly at exposing and repressing tax fraud.

0n the whole, this country’s ecmomic development has progressed at a very slow pace
over the past decade, since the GDP rose by less than 0.5 percent annually through
1981. Host of the nation's production comes from exploitation of the mining resources
(chiefly diamonds, bauxite. and rutile) to the detrth of agriculture, which con-
sists mainly of food crops. with a smaller volume of export crops, to which the gov-
ernment has devoted considerable effort and investments amounting to as mch as 25
percent of the national budget. Domestic demand has risen to such an extent that for
several years it has exceeded national production capacity. This situation has con-
tributed to the deterioration of trade, reflected in a very sharp rise in isports,
which are expensive in terms of foreign exchange for a country whose national cur-
rency is nonconvertible and nontransferable and on which the measures establishing
import quotas and restricting licenses have so far had limited effect.

heavy Dependence on Foreign Aid

'me proportion of foreign aid in Sierra Leone’s development has increased steadily
through the years, and it is estimated that in 1980, over $18 million were devoted
to technical assistance, while nearly $121.6 million were devoted to econcmic coop-
eration using foreign funds.

Multilateral aid remains sizable, especially in the form of technical assistance.
The World Bank and the African Develop-ant Bank head the list. hid from the social-
ist countries is declining markedly. except in the case of the PRC and certain peo-
ple's democracies (Romania). -

Total financial assistance for investment (capital investment) underscores the basic
contribution made by the I!!! and the EEK: (301’). In bilateral aid, Japan provided
substantial aid for the acquisition of equipment in preparation for the 17th om
Summit Meeting. Next in order of importance is aid from 0.8. AID, followed by Great
Britain. which in 1980 canceled a sizable debt.

France has sought to strengthen its cooperation ties with sierra Leone in the area
of economic, cultural, and technical cooperation. The cats (Central fund for Boo-
nomic Cooperation) is still the privileged instrument of trench policy for coopera-
tion between the two countries. It finances development projects through long-term
loans at special interest rates. To date, three projects have been set up: finane~
ing for extension of the water treament system in the city of Freetown, installa-
tion of a telephone transit exchame. and construction of a clinker grinding plant.
The government has approach the EEC seeking financing for agricultural projects
(rubber plantations in Potoru and oil palm plantations) and for a project covering
fishing equipment for the sierra Fishing Company.

The recent joint omissions on cultural and technical cooperation (1979 and 1981)
made it possible to decide on the new objectives for future activities aimed at a

better adaptation of scholarships to the country's needs. This will make it pos-

sible eventually to carry out a genuine transfer of technology to Sierra Leone and
to insure a wider diffusion of the French language-through the media.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Structure of Trade and french-Sierra neonun Sconouic Relations

The foreign trade structure is characterised by steadily rising imports of coon-er
goods--chiefly energy products-oat a rate exceeding the rise in exports. which are

doninatedbysiningandagr

icultural products.

Sierra Lsonean Foreign Trade

(in millions of leones)

 

 

 

 

Liv-IBM

 

1976 1977 1978 1979
1'08 inports 163.1 185.1 259.1 288.4
808 exports 126.7 163.6 193.8 234.5
Deficit 36.4 21.5 65.3 53.9
lain ths
(in millions of leones)
1976 1977
Total 163.1 185.1
of which:
Food products 31.0 35.8
Tobacco and beverages 7.6 9.3
Petroleum products 12.4 29.2
Automobiles and transportation 33.2 38.0
Capital goods 51.5 51.0
Hiscellaneous manufactures 16.3 19.3
Sierra Leonean Exports
(in millions of leones)
1976 1977
Total 126.7 163.6
of vhich:
Dianmds 73.8 64.9
Bauxite 4.5 7.9
Rutile - -
Total mining products 78.3 72.8
Percentage 61. 73 .44 . 4‘
Coffee 7.2 50.5
Cocoa 7.7 18.9
Other agricultural products 9.9 8.9
Total agricultural products 24.8 78.3
Percentage 19. St 47 . 8t

 

 

 

308.0
229.9
78.1
1978 1979
259.1 288.4
48.4 40.0
9.7 5.8
35.0 50.0
70.0 80.0
72.4 73.2
23.2 22.6
1978 1979
193.8 234.5
117.8 131.3
7.6 8.4
- 0.9
125.4 140.6
64.75 59.9t
19.1 37.8
22.8 31.8
10.9 15.2
52.8 84.8
27.28 36.1\

Great Britain was sierra Leone's chief supplier from the time the latter became in-
dependent until 1977. when Nigeria took Great Britain's place due to the rise in

value of hydrocarbon imports. of which Nigeria is the main supplier.

Great Britain' s

trading position is also strengthened locally by the dynuisu of Lebanese business-
men, who traditionally turn to that country for their isports. The United States

is in third place. ahead of Japan (automobiles), the m and France.

Until recently,

products imported frost France consisted sainly of auto-obiles and tractors (61.8 per-
cent). with the remainder consisting of sugar and flour products.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The products exported by sierra Leone go chiefly to its English-speaking partners.
This is explained by Great Britain's participation in the operation of diamond mines.
The rise in exports to the United States is explained above all by the latter's par-
ticipation in the mining of rutile. with most of the production going to that coun-

We

The tables below do not include the balance of invisibles resulting from the main
barter agreements in effect with certdin countries. including china and the USSR.
The latter benefits from a special agreement covering exports of sea products.

Sierra Leone's Chief Suppliers and Customers
(as a percentage of the values)
Chief mliers 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977

 

United Kingdom 22.2 1.3 25.1 19.5 17.6
Nigeria 3.6 8.0 7.1 12.6 23.8
United States 8.9 9.0 7.2 8.1 8.7
Japan 9.4 9.6 6.2 7.6 6.8
France 7.9 5.2 4.6 6.9 4.7
no 8.0 6.7 7.5 7.5 5.8
Chief customers

United Kingdom 67.4 61.3 56.1 60.0 49.2
Netherlands 6.114.9 16.8 11.9 19.4
United States 5.7 5.6 7.6 7.4 19.4
PBS 4. 9 4.0 2.3 2.3 0.7

Source: sierra Loom Statistics

Trade Between France and Sierra Leone
(in millions of French francs)
1977 1978 19_7__9 19_8_0

 

French exports to Sierra Leone 49.4 60.8 80.3 96.1
Imports fran Sierra Leone 11.5 9.1 15. 7 l9. 4
Rate of cover for France 429.5 669.2 511.2 495. 4

Source : French statistics

Trade Between France and sierra Leone
Chief imports and exports
(in millions of French francs)

chief French 132% Chief French emrts
1979 1980 1979 1980
Coffee 8.98 3.67 Cars and tractors 22.24 5.42
Beverages, shellfish 2.54 2.96 Sugar. confectionery 19.30 23.60
Wood and byproducts 2.23 6.04 Flour products 8.10 7.50
Metallic ores - 3.03

sierra Leone's particularly difficult financial situation has forced foreign credi-
tors to freeze their policy of granting guaranteed nedium-term cauercial credit
owing to the particularly high rate of losses, and the position of the credit in-

surers is reportedly unanimous today. following the agreements rescheduling the pub-
l c debt.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The growth at trench exports to sierra Icons has been accoqanied by the recent es-
tablishment of French fins in various sectors of the economy: Pougerolle. Origny-
Desvroise Cement, W0, the UTA [Air Transportation Union] , and the am (Tourist
and Hotel Industry Union] have joined the long-established trench firms (the CPAO
[French Company of West Africa] and the soon [West African Trading company!) .

The government's economic recovery efforts make it possible to see the importance of
national or regional (ﬂano River Onion) projects affecting this “set African subte-
gion. since they will give rise to orders for equipment or infrastructure.

In the relatively near future. Sierra Leone intends to:

1. Begin exploiting new mining deposits (diamonds and bauxite) and replace some old
equipment.

2. Start new agroindustrial projects (oil palm, coconuts and rubber).
3. Develop the industrial and small-scale fishing sector and aquiwlture.

4. Build up an energy potential that can satisfy its industrial development require-
ments (hydroelectric dams and small power plants).

5. Undertake the repair and extensiOn of the road infrastructure (the Kabala-Kamabai
road) and a section of the Pan-African highway between Hatrovia, Freetown, and

Conakry.

6. Study the plan for establishing a national airline comany to serve the regional
or even international market.

7. Encourage the establishment of local firms capable of replacing imports with their
own production.

More generally, attention should be drawn to the steady flow of governnent calls for
tenders covering the purchase of censuser goods and capital goods for major govern-
ment departments.

There is no doubt that Sierra lame can hope to base its develop-ant on the indis-
putable advantages of its tourist attractions. The beauty of its places of inter-
est and the picturesque quality of the peninsula and the provinces, which offer
striking contrasts. provide the some 200,000 tourists who visit this country an-
nually with the charms of authentic Africa. The peninsula has hospitable hotel in-
frastructures offering a total of nearly 1,500 rooms and several recent hotels of
international class. among them the Cape sierra, the Bintumani, and the Many Yoko
hotel, which is managed by the French UTE (a subsidiary of the UTA). To cospensate
for the lack of acoosmodations in the country's interior. the -:onstruction of three
SO—roon hotels has been scheduled.

However. the poor condition of the road linking Freetown with the peninsula's

paradise-like beaches has hindered the development of tourist hotels in that area

despite the optimistic prospects contained in the feasibility study conninioned
from the Yugoslav mpm enterprise.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are still some uncertainties today in the economic and financial policy. The
general elections in April 1982 could delay iwlementation of certain projects which
represent a sure hope in a difficult situation. The endemic situation in economic
life does offer some striking contradictions. The national currency. for example,
despite being nonconvertible and nontransferable, has stabilised on the parallel
market over the past few months at not more than 30 percent below par, and social
peace has not really deteriorated since the autusl of 1981.

Despite the size of the noncash sector and the existence of underground economies,
sierra Leone might experience a slowdown in economic life, since the increase in its
growth rate was inflated, sanewhat by substantial investments in connection with the
ow. If so. this would render hypothetical the prospects for a recovery whose main
card remains the stability of the domestic political situation.

However, it remains to be seen whether sierra Leone in caning years will experience
a more critical economic situation made worse by a political crisis or whether. on
the contrary, it will experience the era of prosperity and stability hinted at so
far by the members of the single party. Public opinion in Freetown is beginning i:
wonder whether the wisdom of President Stevens, respectfully nicknanad "The Old Han.‘
will once again be sufficient to prevent crisis.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris l982

11798
CSO : 4719/54? END

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY