USSR Report

LIFE SCIENCES

EFFECTS OF NONIONIZING ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION
(FOUO 1/821

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATiON SERVICE
.ms publications contain informtion primrily from foreign
newepapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea ariginate with the source. Times within itau are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIG‘IT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0P
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L‘
12 my

USSR REPORT
LIFE SCIENCES
EFFECTS or Nomomzme ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION

(rouo 1/82)

CONTENTS

Acute Experimental motions]. Stress in Rabbits Under Conditions
of Modulated Electrmetic Held eooeeoeseeeoeoooeooeeoeeeoeeeoeeo

Rat Behavior in 'Open Field' After Exposure to Magnetic Field ........

Use of Thermal SH? Radio-Frequency Radiation by Hm Body for
Measurement of Visceral Tenperature: Results and Prospects .........

Equipment and Methods of Thenal 8H? and HP in Oncology ..............

- a - [III - USSR - 21m 881‘
MWLWONLY

UDC $38.6:6ll.8l

ACUTE mammal. MORAL STRESS DI RABBITS UNDER CONDITIG‘S 0P MODULATBD
mm FIELD

Moscow IZVBS‘HYA mm: MU! $883: SERIYA BIOIDGIC'IESIAYA in Russian No 5. Sep-
Oct 81 (manuscript received 10 Jul 80) pp 776-780

LKrticle by A. V. Gorbunova, N. V. Petrove. V. V. Portugalov and S. K. Sudekcv,
Institute of Normal Physiology imeni P. K. Anokhin, Moscog7

iTex£7 The effect of a modulated electromgnetic field on the course of acute e-
motional stress induced by intermittent and codined stimulation with an electric
current of ventromedian nuclei of the hypothalamus and of the skin of libsandears
of Chinchilla-line male rabbits was studied. The content of water soluble proteins
was determined according to bowry in the extremal ganglia of the autonomous ner-
vous system and in syqethetic trunk ganglia at the level of the fourth to sixth
thoracic segments. The spectrun of lactate dehydrogenase ieoenzymse was determined
in those locations, as well as in the cardiac conductive system. It was shown that
the nudaer of rabbits pertaining to the group of rabbits predisposed to the devel-
opment of stress in the modulated electrongnetic field decreased. There was no
significant decrease in the content of water-soluble proteins. which occurs under e-
motional stress. when rabbits in a state of stress were placed in the modulated
electromagnetic field. 0n the contrary, their content increased significantly.

The existing tendency toward increased aerobic metabolism in the cardiac conductive
system under emotional stress was not mnifeeted in the modulated electromsgnetic
field. The activity of fast-loving lactate dehydrogenase fractions slightly in-
creased in the superior cervical, stellate and nodose ganglia in rabbits in a state
of emotional stress placed in the modulated electromagnetic field. lnthe i-obilized
intact rabbits in the modulated electromagnetic field the content of water-soluble
proteins increased significantly and the activity of fast-moving lactate dehydro-
genase fractions in all the studied foremtions of the nervous system increased

slightly.

The effect of a modulated electromgnetic field leads to coqlex changes in cor-
tical-subcorticel relations in animls. selectively stimlating liﬁic structures
and suppressing the ascendin activating effects of the reticular formtion of the
stem on the cerebral cortex _1 . It is well known that a modulated electromagnetic
field of certain parameters can change vegetative reactions and self-stimlation
reactions arisin during an electric stimlation of emotion-producing zones of the
hypothalems Q . There are indications of a positive effect of electromagnetic
fields on the course of cardiovascular disturbances of various origins £5, 37. A
dissimilar effect of electromagnetic fields with different modulation frequencies
was established. It turned out that modulated electromagnetic fields with s modu-
lation frequency of 7 a: had the greatest biological activity (6. l3 and ll»).

1
mammowur
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Direct electric stimulation of ventromedian nuclei of the hypothalama alternating
with electrocutaneous stimlatiou induces acute emotional stress characterized by
individual changes in cardiovascular functions in rabbits 12—].

Taking into consideration the effect of a nodulated electromagnetic field on reac-
tions connected with the stimulation of hypothalamic structures, an attempt was
made to clarify the effect of a modulated electromagnetic field on the course of
acute emotional stress induced by intermittent and codeined stimulation of ventra-
nsdian nuclei of the hypothalamus and electrocutaneous stimlation. Solving the
question of the possibility of increasing the resistance of animals to acute ex-
perimental emotional stress by means of a physical factor. which a nodulated elec-
tronagnetic field is. and clarifying the nature of the response of the structures
of the autonomous nervous system to it were the basic tasks of this investigation.

Material and Methods

The experiments were conducted on 86 Chinchilla-line male rabbits weighing 2.5 kg.
Nichrone bipolar electrodes were inserted in ventronedian nuclei of the hypothala-
ma of 66 experimental animls fixed in a special mchine tool.

The development of esotional stress was induced by codained or intermittent stimls-
tion with an electric current of the nuclei of the hypothalamus and of the skin of
lid): and ears of rabbits. The experimen_t.al conditions were described in the ar—
ticle by A. V. Gorbunova and coauthors ﬂ]. Thirty-three rabbits in a state of e-
motional stress were placed in a modulated electromagnetic field for 3 hours. while
the electric stimlation was continued. To clarify the nature of the effect of im-
mobilization on cardiovascular functions. 10 animals were imbilissd and the ar-
terial pressure and cardiac rate were recorded for 3 hours. The 10 inobilized
animals were placed in a modulated electromgnetic field for 3 hours and then sub-

jected to a biochenical investigation. Fourteen rabbits kept in a vivariun served
as control.

The modulated electronsgnetic field had a voltage of 30 V/n. carrier frequency of
39 mils, modulation frequency of 7 Hz and modulation depth of 80 percent. The
field was created between two capacitor plates connected with an ultra-high fre-
quency generator. The imobilized animls were placed between the plates so that
the sagittal body line was horizontal and perpendicular to the power lines of the
modulated electromagnetic field.

The content of inter-soluble proteins was determined according to Iowry and co-
authors in the nodoae ganglion of the vagus nerve. superior cervical and stellate
ganglia, synpathetic ganglia and sylpathetic trunk ganglia at the level of the
fourth to sixth thoracic segments. me spectrum of lactate dehydrogenase isoen-
zymes was investigated in the ganglia of the autonomous nervous system and the _
cardiac conductive system isolated according to H. N. Umovist and A. F. Sinev £122
The results obtained were rocessed statistically according to Van-der-Verden's
nonparametric criterion 5; and Student‘s significance criterion.

Results and Discussion
Three groups with characteristic changes in the arterial pressure are detected in

acute exp-erinental emotional stress induced by stimilation with an electric current
of ventr median ganglia of the hypothalama. Aniuls whose arterial pressure

2
I-‘OIOI'IICMLUSIMY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

remins at the initial level during the 3-hour experiment form the first group.
Either a decrease or increase in the arterial pressure is observed in (adaptable)
rabbits of the second group. However. these changes are not accoqanied by the
death of animals. The third group includes rabbits predisposed to the development
of stress. which died during different times of the 3-hour effect _/57.

Under the conditions of a modulated electromagnetic field under emotional stress
there are no qualitative shifts in the reactions of the arterial pressure. but
there is a significant change in the correlation: of the nunher of aninals of spe-
cific groups (table 1). The saber of animals resistant to changes in the arts-
rial pressure under the effect of a stress producing factor increases 2.7-fold.

The hunter of adaptable aninals under the conditions of s modulated electromagnetic
field also increases 1.6-fold as a result of an increase in the nuﬁer of rabbits
with a falling arterial pressure during the experimnt. The nutter of rabbits with
hypertensive reactions kept in the nodulated electromagnetic field during stress

is reduced by a factor of 2.5. The total nutter of animls, which died in the no-
dulated electromagnetic field during eeotional stress. provedto be 1.9 was low-

el‘ than under "pure" stress. In other words. the stay of enilnls in a state of

eeotional stress in a modulated electromagnetic field greatly increases the resist-
ance of their cardiovascular functions.

Table l. Nutter of Rabbits of Various Groups Under botional Stress and Strese+
a Hodulated Electromagnetic Field

Type of cardiovascular Emotional Stress+Hodulated
Reaction Beotional Stress Electromagnetic Field
Resistant 3 8
Adaptable:
with lowered arterial presmre lo 12
with elevated arterial pressure 5 2
Predisposed 21 11

The placement of rabbits in a state of emotional stress in the modulated electro-
nagnetic field led to a significant increase in the content of water-soluble pro-
teins in the homogenates of the nodosc ganglion. In the homogenates of the supe-
rior cervical ganglion the content of water-soluble proteins did not differ from
control and in the honogenates of the syepathetic trunk and the stellate ganglion
it was higher. At the sane time, the content of Heterosoluble proteins in the su-
perior cervical and stellate ganglia and the symathetic trunk did not differ sig-
nificantly (table 2).

The fact that these changes slightly differ fron each other in various groups of
rabbits is of great interest. For maple. a decrease in vatersoluble proteins
(figure 1) was observed in rabbits from the group of animals predisposed to the
development of stress. in the homogenates of the nodoaeusensitivenparasympathet-
ic ganglion, whereas in resistant (figure 2) and more adaptable animals there was
an increase in the content of water-soluble proteins as cornered with control
(figure 3).

Significant changes in the arterial pressure and the cardiac rate were not detected
in the inobilized rabbits during 3 hours of observation.

MWWWLY
maomcuwstonu

able 2. Content of Hater-Soluble Proteins in Ganglia of the Autonomous Nervous
System using of new Tissue

 

6 .. .Bspnah m maul u 48 - ‘0 58° 8.33
: 7 Mum rear“ ‘3 50' 3,29 ‘9' M25 Si 1.55
8 Gena-ram unease 83 (1 2.12 A" «.05 88° 3.07
Vanna mad 8% 45 36° 3.63 55‘ L67 00‘ 2.81
‘Iaa-ao anemia ) 11 1 3,26 - ii 5
i.“ 2.7:
Key:
1. Object of investigation 6. Superior cervical ganglion
2. Vivarian control 7. Stellate ganglion
3. Emotional stress 8. Syqathetic trunk
4. Enotional stresemdulated electro- 9. Nodose ganglion
magnetic field 10. Mar of aninls

5. Imbiliutionmdulated electro-
magnetic field

X1 and Xr-conventional units. cosputed and table values at a significance level
of 5 percent.
* Significant difference as compared with control.

In the immobilized rabbits during exposure to the modulated electronsgnetic field
the content of water-soluble proteins increased significantly in all the investi-
gated structures—stellate. superior cervical and nodose ganglia and the synthetic
trunk (table 2).

Intermittent 3-hour stimlation of negative enotion producing zones of the hypo-
thalams under the conditions of a modulated electromgnetic field did not lead to
a disturbance in cardiac activity. Hhereas under stress in the cardiac conductive
systen there was a tendency toward an increase in the activity of fast-moving iso-
enzyne fractions, in the modulated electromagnetic field the spectrum of its iso-
enzymes did not differ from the norn (table 3).

In the modulated electromagnetic field in rabbits in a state of emotional stress
there was a significant change in four lactate dehydrogenase fractions. At the
sane tine. the activity of fractions of lactate dehydrogenases and lactate dehydro-
genase.’ decreased. while lactate dehydrogenase, and lactate dehydrogenase2 increased.
The activity of lactate dehydrogenase increased in the nodose and stellate ganglia.
In control rabbits in the modulated electromagnetic field the activity of lactate
dehydrogenases also decreased significantly in all extramural ganglia. while lac-
tate dehydrogenaae, increased in the superior cervical and atellate ganglia. The
activity of lactate dehydrogenasez increased significantly in the superior cervi-
cal ganglion (table lo). Thus, a significant tendency toward increased aerobic ne-
tabolism in all the investigated ganglia of the autonomous nervous system inaud-
ulated electromagnetic field in aniaale in a state of mtional streesisestablished.

b
momcmusaoutv
summon“

  

1”

W'

  

Figure l. A rabbit from the group of rabbits predisposed to enotional stress. The
value of arterial pressure in n as and the cardiac rate are plotted on Y-axis.
The tine of the merinent in hours, on x-axis. ‘me coluns designate the content
of water-soluble proteins (y/ng): Ansuperior cervical ganglion. B—nodose gan-
glion, Busyqaathetic trunk. l—control, 2-enotiona1 stress.

I“
I“
200

m

 

N a 5‘

Figure 2. A rabbit with stable arterial pressure. The value of arterial pressure
in I- a; and the cardiac rate are plotted on Y-axie. The tine of the experiment
in hours, on x-axie. The cola-1s designate the content of ntensoluble proteins
(y/ng): A—superior cervical ganglion. S-nodose ganglion. Bastellate ganglion.
Pug-pathetic trunk. 1-control. 2~enotional stress.

1. mil; 2. ﬂag

5
mammal“
FOR OFFICIAL [Bl ONLY

(1) (2)
m 7/"

I“
I"

m

m

 

Figure 3. A rabbit ”adapting itealf" to the effect of a atreea producing factor.
The value of arterial preuure in n as and the cardiac rate are plotted on Y-axia.
The tine of the experiment in hours. on xnaxia. The column designate the content
of Hater-soluble proteina (yin); A—auperior cervical ganglion. S-modoae san- .
glion. nuatellate ganglion. Fmtbetic trunk. 1-control, 2—enotional atreu.

l. -33 2. y/m

Table 3. Correlation of the Activity of Lactate Dahydrogenaae Iaoa‘nzynea of the
Cardiac Conductive System of the Rabbit

q.) to. us. ; 8; Mn . “mu. nu
w
8 no I

 

 

 

Jinn 81.1 18.13 2 70. 9741. 1 1.82 67318.3 0.65
g Mr. :8.0211. 55 11 8..1::1 18 0.33 17310.7 0.81
5 Mr. um 18 9.811.! 1.80 13 212.1 0.1
s unr. 1.01 mtt'zz I 1.311» 1.00 2.61113 0.00
5 mr.1..1e¢ou 0.571038 1.71 0.7820,? 1.1
Key:
1. Nuaber of aninala lo. hotional atreaamdulated electrons-
2. Vivarian control netic field
3. Enotional atreaa 5. Lactate dehydrogenaae

fnStudent'a aisnificance criterion.

6
mammal!“
a.»

”.3

0.3

00.9
«.8

0—.8

on.»

.1:

. 90.5

00.8
OK“

“.2
QR

0.3

oi.
«.3

«.2
a. a
5..“
Eu

nJN

 

5E 83
£38:
£5.85
53. 3.3
:55 33

A3

3180.!
98-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to s stress-producing effect in the modulated electromagnetic field increased. In
physiological parameters the basic under of rabbits could be included in the group
of rabbits adaptable to a stress-producing effect. The content of water-soluble
proteins in homogenates of the nodose ganglion of the iuobilised rabbits in the
modulated electromagnetic field increased significantly as compared with control
and with the group of animals in a state of emotional stress. The activity of
fast-loving lactase dehydrogenase fractims of extramural ganglia in them was
slightly elevated, as in rabbits in a state of stress in the modulated electromag-
netic field. It is well known that constant and alternating law-frequency magnetic
fields are used for a contactless change in the functional activity of both the en-
tire brain and the hypothalams. The organism responds to the effect of physical
environmental factors with the develOpment of general adaptive reactions based on
the effect of hypothalamo-hypophysial structures E311!“ effect of the modulated
electromagnetic field on the i-obilized intact animals in our experiments was amn-
ifested in an increased content of water-soluble proteins in all the investigated
cellular formations of the peripheral autonomous nervous system. In other words.
they were not overatilmxlated under these conditions. In all probability. low-fre-
quency modulated electromagnetic fields are weaker as compared with the direct e-
lectric stimulation of the hypothalams with stimuli. As a result of the effect

of the modulated electromagnetic field on animals in a state of emotional stress in
the studied structures of the autonomous nervous system changes assumed the same
nature as during its effect on the imbilized intact rabbits. Possibly. the or-
ganism becomes resistant to the quite large amount of stimlation as a result of
the increase in protective forces ”aroused" by the modulated electromgnetic field.
In other words, under a simltaneous effect of two stimuli the organism responds

to the weaker stimulus. There is reason to believe that this is possible. because
there are great energy expenditures under stress LT] and, if the organism is af-
fected by a stimulus to which it can respond with lesser expenditures. this will
be an easier and, therefore. more acceptable way for the organism. It can be as-
sumed that the effect of the modulated electromagnetic field transfers the orga-
nism to another level of reaction. Cmaring the reaction of rabbits from various
grOups to the modulated electromagnetic field. it can be easily noted that, basic-
ally. it differs in the response of the sensitive (nodose) ganglion of the vagus
nerve. Thus, there is reason to believe that the change in the reactivity of the
nodose ganglion is one of the factors determining the resistance of the cardiovas-
cular system of rabbits under experimental emotional stress. In those predisposed
to its development during stress catabolic processes predominate over anabolic
processes and in adaptable rabbits, conversely. anabolic processes predominate
over catabolic processes.

The modulated electrongnetic field of the used parameters. selectively activating
liwic structures and suppressing the ascending activating effects of the reticular
formation on the cerebral cortex, increases the resistance of animals to emotional
stress and their adaptability in a conflict situation. Under the conditions of an

effect of a modulated electromagnetic field the activity of fast-moving lactate
dehydrogenase isoenzymes increases and the content of water soluble proteins in

extramral ganglia of the autonomous nervous system rises.

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
1.

2.

3.

4e

5e

10.

11.

12.

NR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anokhin. P. IL. Sudakov. K. V. and Anti-oniy, G. I).._"'rezisy Sektsionnykh Do-
hlsdov Hezhdzmarodnogo Biokhinicheskogo Kongressa“ LAbstracts of Section Re-
ports of the International Biochemical Congres_e_7. Moscow. 1972. Vol 4. p 118.

Anti-oniy, G. D.. Bedikov. V. I.. ”31'. A. A.. Krasnov, Ye. A. and Sudakov. S.
K., "Changes in the Reaction of Self-Stimlation in Rats Under the Effect of a

Modulated Electromgnetic Field." BYUL. EKSPBR. 3101.. I MED” 1976. Vol 82. p
1163. '

Bakuredze. A. IL. Dzhugeli. H. S. and Kabakhidzs, Z. V.. "Effect of a Lou-Power
Ultra-High Frequency Electric Field on the Cardiac Activit of the Frog." "Sacr-
nik Trudov Gruzinekogo NII Kurortologii i Fizioterapii" _Collection of Works of
the Georgian Scientific Research Institute of Bealth Resorts and Physiotherapy].
1962. p 129.

nan'kov. V. 1., "Inducing Experimental sleep in Cats Through an Effect of a
Low-Frequency Modulated Electromgnetic Field," BYUL. BKSPBR. 3101.. I 11110.,
1972. Vol 74. No 9. p 14.

Van-der Varden. B. I... "Hatemticheskaya Statistika" ﬁatheutical Statisticg7.
Moscow. Izd-vo Inostr. Liter.. 1960.

Vereshchagins. Ye. N.. "Effect of Ultrasound Oscillations and Energy of Centi-
meter Haves on the Cardiovascular System and Some Aspects of Hetabolisn."
VOPROSY WRORTNOY PIZIO‘I'ERAPII 1 WOY FIZKUL'TURY. 1968, No 1, p 62.

Gerkavi. 1.. m. Kvskina. Ye.__n. and ukolova, H. A.. "Adaptatsionnyye Reakteii
i Rezistentnost' Organism" LAdaptation Reactions and Resistance of the Orga-
nisg7. Rostov-on-Don. Izd-vo Universiteta. 1979.

Gorbunova. A. V., Petrovs. N. V.. Fortugslov. V. V. and Sudakov. s. K.. "Acute
Experimental Emotional Stress in Rabbits: Physiologo-Cytochenical Aspects."
12V. AN SSSR. SR. 3101... 1981, No 1. p 65.

Sudakov. S. IL. "Dyna-ice of Individual Cardiovascular Reactions in Rabbits
Under Conditions of Acute kperinental Fictional Stress," BYUL. EKSP. BIOL. I
14130.. 1980. No 6. p 662.

Unovist. M. N. and Sinev. A. F.. "Method of Investigating the Auriculoventri-
cular Conductive System.” In the book "Voprosy Sovrenennoy Khirurgii" Emb-
lem of Modern Surgerx7. Kiev. 1969. Issue 5. p 3.

Kholodov. Yu. A. and Shiehlo. H. A.. "Blektron itnyye Polya v Neyrofiziolo-
gii" [ilectromgaetic Fields in Nwrophysiolosz . Moscow. 1979.

Shishlo. H. A. and Kubli. s. 101.. "Specificity of Interaction of Constant Nag-
netic Fields With the Living Organisn and Its Manifestations at the wate-
bevel." TRUDY TsNIKiF. 1977. Vol 35. p 29.

9
MWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. Bevin. s. H. and Mey. H. 3.. in "3101. Effects of nectromgneuc Haves." Vol
1, Boulder Colorado, 1976. p 323.

14. Cunitz. R. 8.. Galauay. A. and Bel-gun. S. 11.. "Microwave and Radio Pregnancy
Radiation." Rochester, 1977.

15. Lovry. 0. 11., Rosenbrough. N. J.. Parr. 0. L. and Randall. R. J.. "Protein
Measure-en: 91th P0111: Plunol Reagent." 3101.. 6394.. 1951, Vol 193

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nam", "Izveuiya AN SSSR, oertya biologicheoluya". 1981

11.1039
080: 1860/5

10
FOR OFFICIAL 088 MIN
F!"l(lﬂﬁ(lAl.lEﬂ£(ﬂVLY

UDC: 612.821.6
RAT BEHAVIOR IN 'OPBN FIELD' AFTER EXPOSURE TO MAGNETIC FIELD

Moscow ZHURNAL VYSSBEY NBRNNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI IHENI I. P. PAVLOVA in Russian‘
Vol 32, No l, Jan-Feb 82 (manuscript received 21 Nov 80) pp 72-78

[Article by N. P. Smirnovs, Moscow]

[Text] The study of integral functions of the brain, in particular behavioral
reactions differing in complexity and significance, is of substantial ilportance
to evaluation of the consequences of exposure to strong magnetic fields (Hi).
There is information in the literature concerning the effects of MP on uncon-
ditioned reflexes, on such mandatory components of an integral behavioral act

as motor activity and work capacity, as well as on higher nervous activity [5, 7].
As we know, the "open field" test permits evaluation of an animal's integral
physiological reaction to a new and unusual situation, including elements of
motor, orienting-exploratory, emotional and stereotype behavior [9, 10, ll, 15].

Methods

In our experiments, the "open field" consisted of a Ply“°°d tins 100 cu in
diameter and wall 30 cm high. This ring, which was divided into 32 squares

15x15 cm in size,was arbitrarily divided into three zones: peripheral (16 squares
along the wall), intermediate (12 squares) and central (4 squares). The "field"
was illuminated uniformly by either natural light or a daylight lamp on the
ceiling of the experimental room. Tests were conducted in the "open field" for
three successive days, simultaneously on control rats and rats exposed to HP.

On the day of the experiment, the aninals received feed and water ad lib. He
observed the rats' behavior for 5 min, noting the following parameters every
minute: horizontal travel (number of squares crossed); degree of adjustment to
the "field" (going into the intermediate and central tones); vertical standing
(rising on hind legs with and without use of wall for support); sniffing, direct-
ing the head up or toward the center; total time and number of grooming [washing-
brushing (scratching)] cycles; number of fecal pellets and urinations. In
processing the data, we analyzed the following: structure of rat behavior

during the S—min test; behavior on the first and subsequent days of the experi-
ment; presence of trace reactions-behavior when retested after 1-3 weeks. In
these experiments, we used 160 white aongrel and Wistar rats, mainly males,

with average weight of 200 to 230 g in the different series.

11
INDI.0I1N(1A1.IEIE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The animals were exposed to vertical HF with 0.3 T induction with an SP-lSA
electromagnet or 1.6 T using an SP-57A electromagnet. Both electromagnets
had flat parallel tips: rectangular 6008300 an in size (SP-15A) and in the
form of a circle with a radius of 450 mm (SP-57A), with interpolar distance of
100 mm, and they formed an interpolar space in the central part, in which the
animals were placed (within the 300x200 III or 380 III radius range), a virtually
homogeneous field, with no more than 15% decline of induction at the edge of
the tips, in relation to the center. Unlike the strictly static NT formed
with the SP-S7A electromagnet, the SP-lSA electromagnet generates an MP with
a pulsating component of 100 Hz frequency, the induction of which constitutes
up to 1.81 of the static component of the field.

The animals were exposed for 3-4 h daily for 3 consecutive days.

Results

'Analysis of the experimental material revealed wide individual variations in
reactions to the "open field," in both control rats and those exposed to HP.
The Table lists averaged results of the experiments and, for the sake of sim-
plicity, control data referable to exploratory motor behavior are combined for
the two series. The digital data referable to grooming time and emotionality
differed substantially in the different series, and for this reason they are
listed with their own control.

The mean data enabled us to detect distinctions in the behavior of the rats
both during the S-min test and on subsequent experimental days. On the first
day of testing, the rats manifested the most motor and orienting-exploratory
activity: number of horizontal passages, entrances into the center of the
"field," vertical stances and sniffing was reliably greater than on the next
two days. There were less marked differences between the second and third days.
The level of defecation. which characterizes the autonomic component of emo-
tionality ("fear") remained constant on all 3 experimental days. Parameters
of general motor and exploratory behavior were at a maximum in the 1st min of
the test and decreased gradually or abruptly in the next a min (Figure l).
Grooaing time and number of grooming cycles, which are indicators of stereotype
behavior of rats directed toward "oneself," undergo irregular changes both

in the course of a single test and on different experimental days.

The results of repeated experiments following the same set-up on the same
animals, which were conducted 1-3 weeks after the first one are of some interest.
As compared to the first experiment, on the first day of the second one the

rats presented considerable decrease in number of horizontal passages (P<0.001),
vertical stances (P<0.001), sniffing (P<0.002), with decrease in coefficient

of adjustment to the ”field" and no change in number of fecal pellets. The
rats gained an average of 262 in weight between experiments, which could have
been the cause of diminished motor activity. However, the aggregate of changes
indicated that there was drastic decline of the orienting-exploratory component
of the behavioral reaction in repeated tests. Moreover, unlike the first ex-
periment. in the second one there was leveling off of the difference in magni-
tude of parameters of motor and exploratory behavior between the first and
subsequent testing days. Apparently, the rats remembered the first experiment
and the "open field" situation lost its novelty in the repeated tests. Such
findings were also made by other authors [3. 8, 13, 14].

12
FOI.0FI1C1A1.lEﬂ£(M‘LY
roe OFFICIAL WE ONLY

Influence of repeated exposure to H? on rat behavior in "open field”
(nean data per rat per 5 min) ‘ '

_..——.-

no of = iciant‘l

exper nt

       
   
 

- Motor and orienting-exploratory activity

First Control so 64.9134 9:101 61:08
0.3 T as 10.0:43 ”11120 6291210
LO 1‘ £5 b7.l:t35 8310.9 8,920.2
0nd P>o.l ”<01!"
Sec Control w 44.6221 4.01M 19:20.8
0.3 1' 35 gogfgég 3.63:0.6 15:0.6
1.6 T 45 «.4333 53:05 43:1,:
Third Co c 1 ”>0"
“ r° so 35.6:3J 32:05 2.630.!
0.3 T 35 2|.9:b2£ ¢.0t0.1 ”10.5
P<0.00I P>0.l
1.0 T ‘5 - 43.1145 5.4:05 6.0123
P>0.l P<0.00| P<0.l
0a of new: Number Grooming umber of
exper t of rats time, s fecal pellets
. Stereotype behavior and emotionalitv
First Control as l3.6&3.1 53:05
0.3 T 35 14.1125 5.8105
Second Control 35 9.1::L6 53:05
0.3 T 35 12.11148 53:11.5
'lhird Control 35 [1,433.9 5.5105
0.3 T 35 24.1145 ' 4310.6
First Control 45 27.95.!) 3,210.4
LG 1' 45 265:3] 2.6:0.‘
Second Control 45 303:4.0 2.8203
LG 1' £5 223:3.5 2.63:0.4
Third Control ‘5 22.41:” 42:05
1.6 1' ‘5 21A :‘2 2:23.14
> I

tantrances into center of the field are given a grade of 10 and into
the intermediate zone 1. P is comparison to the control.

There was no appreciable difference from the control in structure of behavior

of rats ex,.)sed to HP Just prior to each test in the course of the 5-min test
and on the 3 successive experiaentsl days. Testing in the "open field," which
was performed imediately after the first exposure to 0.3 ‘l‘ H! (1st day)

failed to demonstrate any differences from control animals. After the second
and third exposure (Id-3d experimental days) there was reliable decrease in
number of horizontal passages and the coefficient of adjustment to the "field"
diminished somewhat, as compared to the control. There was a more drastic
decline of motor activity from the first to subsequent testing days than in
control rats (Figure 2). A decrease in number of horizontal passages (16.6323
on the 3d day versus 25.7:2.8 in the control: P<0.02) was also observed in rats
exposed to an MP of 0.3 'r a second time 1-3 weeks after the first experiment.

13
l-‘OIOIIICIALIBIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l. Dynasics of rat behavior in "open field“ during 5-min test and
' on 3 successive experimental days. Control. Mean data.
Y-axis, number of squares crossed (solid line) and erect
stances (dotted line); x-axia, time, min

a. b, c) let, 2d and 3d days of testing, respectively

1) first experiment
2) second

 

Figure 2.
Changes in horizontal activity on 2d and
3d days of testing in "open field" as
compared to let day. Solid lineucontrol;
dotted line-~exposure to HP. Other desig-
nations are the same as in Figure 1.

Different tendencies were deion-
streted after exposure to 1.6 T

HP. Hhile there were no changes

in number of horizontal passages,
the rate of decline of actor acti-
vity fron the first experimental

day to the next was slower than in
the control, and there were signs

of intensification of exploratory
behavior: on all three experimental _
days the coefficient of assimilation
of the "field" was somewhat higher
and the rats assumed an erect posi-
tion more often (reliably on the

3d day). ”

The parameters of stereotype be-
havior and enotionality showed
virtually no difference fro. the
control with exposure to 0.3 and
1.6 T HP in both series.

Thus, according to the averaged results of all experiments, the lost appreciable
changes in rat behavior in the "open field," in the form of depression of motor
and orienting-exploratory activity, were caused by repeated exposure to H! of
0.3 T. Significant increase in field induction to 1.6‘Tnot only failed to
enhance this effect, but showed a tendency toward activating exploratory behavior.

FIN!(IHH€1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFKJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

Apparently, individual reactions
to the magnetic field can be sore
marked, and they are more often in
different directions. Thus, in 1
out of the 6 experiments involving
exposure to H! of 0.3 T, activity
was greater than in the control.
Hith the use of H! of 1,6 3 there
was prevalence of signs of intensi-
fication of notor and exploratory
activity in 3 out of 4 experiments;
conversely, drastic depression of
activity was observed in 1 of then.
We were unable to relate the dif-
ferences in reactions to the HP to
erperiaentsl conditions (season,
air temperature, atmospheric pres-

sure, sex, weight, strain of ani-

J ’, _ mals). As an illustration, let us
IE I: I! examine the results of 2 experi-
' ments conducted on 28 Peb-2 Mar

(on the left in Figure 3) and 3-5

 

Figure 3.
Differences in behavioral reactions to airtiz7geéon the :283t2132 m:le“P
H! of 1.6 T in 2 experiments on Histar s r a expos s o

with 1.6 T induction. On these
days atmospheric pressure was 750-
760 and 750 mm Hg, respectively,
air temperature ranged from -2 to
a. b, c) lat, 2d and 3d days of testing -8°C and from -2 to -5‘C; ambient

rats. Hhite columns and solid lines-
control; crosshatched columns and dotted
lines-exposure to M?

1) horizontal activity (columns) and temperature in the too. was 23 and
coefficient of adjustment to field 22'C; the rats weighted 239.0:6.2
(lines) 206.513.6 g; horizontal activity

2) vertical activity (number of squares crossed in 5 min)

3) sniffing constituted 75.419.8 and 66.9:7.0

in control rats on the lat testing
day; eaotionality (fecal pellets in 5 min) constituted 2.6:0.7 and 2.4:0.7.
Figure 3 illustrates the parameters of aotor and exploratory behavior. He see
that the two experiments conducted under sinilar seasonal and weather condi-
tions on animals similar in sex, weight, level of activity and emotionslity
denonstrated the possibility of different aanifestations of the behavioral re-
action to exposure to recurrent, intensive Hm: decrease in horizontal activity,
in number of entrances into the center, sniffing and standing erect in one
experiment and increase of these parameters in the other.

Discussion

The differences in nature and degree of behavioral reactions to H? can be attri-
buted not only to individual sensitivity of animals, but difficulty of inter-
preting the results of "open field" tests. Although this test has been in use
for so years, there are still discrepancies in assessing the significance of
different parameters to characterisation of behavior and physiological state of

FOI10FFI££i.USB(HNLY
FOR‘OFFICLAL USIICMNLY

animals. One can evaluate a behavioral reaction properly only by considering
all of its elements.

A high degree of horizontal activity can reflect exploratory behavior and the
level of nonspecific excitability, correlating with vertical activity and
hippocampal theta rhythm. 0n the other hand, since it is correlated with defe-
cation, it is an indicator of the animal's high amotionality ("fear"). The
long cycles of groaning, which are correlated with low horizontal and vertical
activity, reflect a low level of nonspecific excitability [9, 15].

We analyzed the base paychophysiological state of 35 rats in the control group
in the series of experiments with exposure to MP of 0.3 :‘r. In 13 rats of this
group, the 1st day of testing was characterized by high motor activity and

in 13 others by low motor activity, as determined from the significant devia-
tion of number of horizontal passages fron the mean (67.825.2) for the entire
group. In 11 rats, high horizontal activity was combined with frequent verti-
cal stances. sniffing. high coefficient of adjustment to the "field" or short
grooming cycles and low level of defecation. Rats having this combination of
signs can be characterized as animals with high motor and exploratory activity
and low emotionality. In two rats, a large number of horizontal passages was
combined with infrequent erect stances and sniffing, mowement only along the
periphery of the "field," high level of defecation and longer grooming time.
Conversely, ll of the 13 rats with low horizontal activity presented either
infrequent standing, sniffing, entrances into the center, or a high level of
defecation. These rats manifested a passive defense reaction to being placed
in an unusual situation and a high degree of "fear."

A difference in animals' base physiological state could also cause differences
in reactions to Hi, which leads to considerable scatter of data and inadequate
reliability of differences from the control.

The reaction to HP could also depend on intensity of this factor. Differences
were demonstrable in nature of changes in motor activity recorded on mice

by the photoelectric method-activation. depression, biphasic reaction-as a
function of degree of HF induction in the range of 0.05-0.6 T [1].

The absence of enhancement of the inhibitory effect during tests in the "open
field" with considerable increase in intensity of HF could possibly be attri-
buted to the difference in physical characteristics of HF generated by the two
electromagnets that were used. The experiments with 1.6 T induction were
conducted with the SP-S7A electromagnet, which generates a steady homogeneous
magnetic field without pulsation. The-experiments with 0.3 T induction were
conducted with the SP-15A electromagneg which generates a magnetic field
with pulsating component. The opinion is held that variable and gradient HP
have greater biological effectiveness than strictly static ones.

The differences in characteristics and conditions of exposure to HP, as well
as type of behavioral reaction studied, make it difficult to compare our find-
ings to material in the literature. Such comparison can be made to data on
the effects of constant MP on the most coupler forms of behavior related to

FOI1OFFHJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOR 0F1!CIAI.lEﬂE(NVLY

adjustment to-the environment, processes of learning and mory formation. Hith
exposure to MP of 0.2-0.8 'r (induction that is comparable to the level used in
our experiments), the main phenomenon dnonstrated by most authors was inhibi-

tion of development and retention of conditioned reflex reactions of different
modality [2, 6, 6, 12].

Conclusions

1. Exposure to a magnetic field (0.3 and 1.6 1') does not have a significant
effect on the structure of rat behavior in the course of a S—‘min test and on
3 consecutive days of tests in the "open field." H

2. Individual behavioral reactions to' II? are notable for wide variability and
may occur in different directions.

3. According to the mean data, exposure to MP of 0.3 1 (3-10 hlday for 3 days)

leads to depression of motor and orienting-exploratory behavior in the "open
field."

4. Increasing magnetic induction to 1.6 I does not intensify depression of the
behavioral reaction to the "open field,” which is indicative of the greater
effectiveness of a mildly pulsating field, as compared to a static homogeneous
magnetic field.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Andrianova, L. A. and Smirnova, N. P., "Motor Activity of Mice in Magnetic
Fields of Different Intensity," KOSMICB. 3101.. I AVIAKOSMICB. 1130., Vol 11,
No l. 1977, p 514.

2. Asabayev, Ch. and Chernonorchenko, S. 6., "Inhibition of Conditioned Reflex
Activity and Adaptation of Animals to Static Magnetic Fields," in
'Magnitnoye pole v meditsine" [Magnetic Field in Medicine], Frunze, 1974,
p 16.

3. Vinnitskiy, I. M., Leutin, V. P. and Chaplygina, s. 9... "Effect of
Amygdalactomy on Histar Rat Behavior in 'Open Pield'," IZV. 80 AN SSSR,
5311. 3101... No 10, Vyp 2, 1977, p 147.

6. Kozlova, P. N., Rogatykh, A. A. and Sergeyava, L. I... "Effect of Static
Magnetic Field on Conditioned Reflexes of Different Modality," "Hater.
2-go Vses. soveshch. po isucheniyu vliyaniya magnitnykh poley na biol.
ob"ye|tty" [Proceedings of 2d All-Union Conference on the Effects of
Magnetic Fields on Biological Objects], Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR [USSR
Academy of Sciences], 1969, p 117.

5. Nakhil'nitskaya, z. 8., Klimovskaya. L. 0., Smirnovs, II. P. and
Strzhizhovskiy, A. 0., "Magnetic Fields and Vital Functions of Organism,"
"Probleny kosmicheskoy biologii" [Problems of Space Biology], Moscow.
Nauka, Vol 37. 1978, 266 pages.

”MIMONLY
6.

7C

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂKJAl.UEIZONLY

Ryskanov, T. and Abdullina, 2. M., "Effect of Static Magnetic Fields
on Development of Conditioned Reflexes in Mice in Lowlands and Highlands,"
2H. VYSSR. NERVE. DEYAT., V01 29, No 2, 1979, p 610.

Kholodov, Yu. A., “Nervous Syatcn Reaction to Electromagnetic Fields,"
Moscow, Nauka, 1975, 206 pages.

Khonicheva, N. K. and Poppay, H., "change in Congenital Porno of Motor
Activity During Prolonged Hypokinesis," 28. VYSSH. NERVE. DBYAT., Vol 29,
No 5, 1979. p 970.

Denenberg, V. 3., "Open-Field Behavior in the Rat: What Does It Mean?"
ANN. N.Y. ACAD. 581., V01 159, 1969, p 852.

Hall, c. 8., "Emotional Behavior in the Rat. I. Defecation and Urination
as Measures of Individual Differences in Buotionality," J. COMPAR.
PSYCHOL.. Vol 19, 1936, p 385.

Idea, "Emotional Behavior in the Rat. 111. The Relationship Between
Buotionality and Ambulatory Activity," Ibid, Vol 22, 1936, p345.

Kuznann, 8., Pelyhe, J. and Heszaros, J., "Recent Data on the Effect of
Static Magnetic Field on Central Nervous Systen," "Burop. Biophys. Congr.,"
Vienna, Vol 5, 1971, p 273.

Pare, H. P., "Relationship of Various Behavior in the Open-Field Test of
Buotionality," PSYCHOL. REP., Vol 14. 1964, p 19.

Russel, P. A. and Williams, B. J., ”Effects of Repeated Testing on Rat's
Locomotor Acting in the Open Field," ANIH. BEHAV., Vol 21, 1973, p 109.

Walsh, R. N. and Guanine, R. A., "The Open-Field Test: a Critical Review."
PSYCHOL. BULL., Vol 83, 1976, p 682.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Neuka", "Zhurnal vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti", 1982

10,657
CSO: 1840/122

1
FIIICMHHCIRI.IHNB(HULY
FINIfNﬂﬂClAI.USE(NNLY

“DC: 655.39(048)

USE OF THERMAL SH! RADIO-FREQUENCY RADIATIOR 8! HUMAN BODY FOR
MEASUREMENT OF VISCERAL TEMPERATURE: RESULTS AND PROSPECTS

Moscow usmuu nzlcarsxnox mum in Russian Vol 134, No 1, May 81 pp 35-158

[Article by V. S. Troitskiy, A. V. Gustav, I. F. Below, V. H. Plechkov,
V. P. Gorbachev and L. K. Siz'mina}

[Text] The possibility of measuring temperatures within the human and animal
body is very important to biomedical research, as well as medical practice.

It is known that many diseases are associated with local changes in temperature
of involved parts of the body due to inflammatory processes or neoplasms.
Measurement of internal temperature opens up new possibilities in diagnosing
diseases and pinpointing sites thereof in the body.

Until recently, there were no bloodless methods of measuring the temperature

of internal organs. Thermoacopy based on measurement of the body's thermal
infrared radiation provides the real temperature of only the topmost layer of
the skin measurable in fractions of a millimeter. However, it does not reflect
well the subsuperficial deep temperature of a living organism.

In recent times, methods of determining internal temperature began to be
developed in our country and abroad, which are based on measurement of intensity
of thermal radio-frequency radiation penetrating from deep in the body [1, 2).
For such readings. radiometers are used, which have been used for many years

in radioastronomy, and a special probe-antenna that has to be placed on the
human body. Thermal radio-frequency radiation from the human body comes from

a layer, the thickness of which is of the order of depth of penetration of

the corresponding wave. Penetration depth 1 for any human tissue equals appro-
ximately the wavelength in the tested tissue, i.e., Z - X - XOIJE, where he is
wavelength in vacuum and e is the dielectric constant of tissue. For fatty

and bone tissue, e a 6 and l a 0.5 l.; for muscle tissues - SO and l s 0.15 kg.

The resolution on the surface is determined by the dimensions of the probe-
antenna, whose optimum diameter is of the order of the wavelength in the

medium [environment], i.e., D ~ Ao/JE. The Fresnel zone of this antenna in
tissues constitutes an/EYAo 2 210 ’3, i.e., it equals double the depth of

wave penetration. Consequently, accumulation [collection] of radiation pro-
ceeds from a cylinder of tissue which has a base with diameter D and height of
the order of depth of penetration. Hence, we see that the use of lens antennas
that are much larger than ambient wavelength does not focus and increase reso-
lution due to considerable absorption of marginal beams, as compared to

1
F0!!0FFNJ£3.USE(MVLY
I-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

central beans. Only the central part will function, and its dimension equals
the focal distance, which should be of the order of Z - AoIJE.

Radiometry was first used for measurement of internal temperature by Barrett
et a1. [1] (wavelength A. I 10 cm). However, only relative body temperatures
could be neasured with any degree of reliability, and then mainly between
symmetrical points. For this reason, diagnostic studies were made only of
paired organs (mammary glands).

In order to use the method of measuring deep temperature in biomedical research
and medical practice, it is necessary to measure absolute temperatures in any
part of the body surface with accuracy of at least :o.1°c. This requirement is
related to the fact that differences between local temperatures and the mean

of 37'c are usually in the range of t(2-3)'c.

The main difficulty involved in measuring temperature accurately is related to
the existence of a coefficient of radiation reflection on the antenna-body
boundary, which changes markedly, depending on where the antenna is placed on
the body. For example, with do - 30 cm, the coefficient of reflection for
energy'czchanges from 0.0 to 0.25. For this reason, even with an antenna that
involves no loss, it is not the true body temperature TX (in degrees Kelvin)
that is measured, but Tc - Tx(1-G’). In the study mentioned [1], the authors
tried to take reflection into consideration by measuring Ga. However, this-
does not solve the problem, since errors of the order of one degree remain,
and this limits use of the method to relative measurements, when the position
of the antenna on the body does not change. Moreover, there is a substantial
lnterferential error [3].

An error also occurs because the antenna-probe does not pick up all radiation
in principle, that is emitted by the body by virtue of inevitable presence of
posterior lobes of the antenna's pattern.

Our theoretical and experimental study of noise in the input system and operation
of the antenna enabled us to formulate the principles and methods for eliminating
the above errors completely.

In brief, the principle consists of using the properties of a system in thermal
equilibrium when the input part of the radiometer and body examined are placed
in a black chamber and have the same temperature. In this case, the signal
from theantenna equals exactly the temperature of the corresponding part of the
body.

Let us consider a simplified input system, where the antenna is connected to
the radiometer by means of an ideal valve. It can be demonstrated that the
signal coming from the antenna, with consideration of its intrinsic noise,
equals 1% - Tzn (1-62) + T.(l-n)(l-Gz), where n is efficiency of the antenna,
To is the temperature of its material, T; is temperature of the antenna re-
lated to the radiation received. This temperature equals 12 - Tx(l-B) + I¢ﬁ
where B is the coefficient of antenna scattering beyond the half-space
occupied by the body and T is temperature of the black chamber or generally
the radiation temperature to the space around the body.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJMI.[EIZ(MVLY

Thermal radiation of an ideal valve
directed into the antenna has'a tem-
perature of T;. This radiation. being
reflected from the antenna, yields an

. Tracim of signal
—Enw astri Jrfgion

l

   

Mrwate! int“ additional signal 126‘. The complete
signal going to the radiometer equals
1..s. (21 're - [nu-B) + 1.81 x n (l-G") 2.
M r.(1-n)(1-c ) + 1,6. It is not dif-
ficult to see that by establishingther-
«a: nal.equilibrium, when T; - T; - Ta - Tx,
we shall have Tc - Ix, i.e.. an un-
3%: e distorted reading of body temperature.
clho ' ' -
”3‘.F——L-i However. in actuality I; is unknown

and must be measured. Thermodynamic
equilibrium can be only approximately
achieved. For this reason, equilib-

\.Noise _&m~4 rium is established for mean tempera-
ture T of the human body 1, which is
'II II 37'C. Considering 1‘x - T + t where,.

as we have indicated, 0‘Itf‘2, we shall
obtain 1' - 1', - unmade“). The
Figure l. influence of antenna losses, scatter

and reflection are not ruled out, but
diminish to such an extent that, for example, variations of G1 in the range of
O. 0-0.20 do not cause errors exceeding 0.1-0.2‘C.

A radiothermometer for a wave of 32 cm with threshold sensitivity of 0.02'6
(averaged for 4 s) was developed at the Scientific Research Institute of Radio-
physics on the basis of these principles, and it is accurate to t0.l°C in ab-
solute temperature readings. Superficial resolution constitutes about 4 cm at
a depth of probing temperature up to 20 cm. Various test measurements

made with the radiothermometer of human body temperature and equivalents of

its tissues demonstrate a good coincidence with readings taken with traditional
thermometers.

In order to determine that it is indeed deep temperature that is measured, we
took the temperature of the gastric region during intake of cold or hot water.
Figure 1 illustrates a sample of such a tracing, where an immediate ~0.9'0
temperature drop was observed at the time of intake of cold water followed

by gradual equalization. The change in temperature and rate of its equaliza-
tion differ in different patients. Figure 2 illustrates typical tracings

of deep temperature of various organs.

In l979. prelininary studies were conducted of 20 healthy subjects and 80
patients in clinics of Gor'kiy Medical Institute at the Oblast nospital imeni
Semashko. They revealed that both the healthy and the sick had substantially
different internal temperatures in different parts of the body. It was demon-
strated that deep temperature is a function of state of circulation. A study
was also made of elevation of human brain temperature under the influence of
intake of different doses of nicotinic acid. Studies were made of the effects
of various physiotherapeutic procedures on the temperature of some organs.

21
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This study revealed that malignant neoplasms of the stomach caused an 0.5-0.8'6

elevation of temperature, as compared to normal, the maximum scatter of which
is iOJo‘C. Temperature elevation of 0.8-2’6 was observed in the presence of
liver pathology (hepatitis, cholecystitis).

 
 
    
 
  
  

Left hypochondrium

Liver
Bpigastric region

Heart

Right temple

Left temple

“200
Patient v.c.

Figure 2.
Elevation of brain temperature was observed in the presence of tumors and, '
on the contrary, a drop in the presence of hemorrhages.
Thus, the first experience with the developed radiothermometer in medicine is
quite encouraging, and it is indicative of the wide potential of this new
method in biomedical research.
The studies revealed that it is becoming possible to develop a system of
radiothermometera at different wavelengths, which permit measurement of the
distribution of temperature in depth from the surface inward. This makes it
possible to obtain human temperature fields in three readings.
He believe that. in time, radiothermometry will unquestionably become a very
popular method in biomedical research and clinical diagnostication.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Barrett, Myers and Sadowoky, RADIO sctmcz, Vol 12, no 6, 1977, p 167.

22
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
INHIOFFKJAL.US£(MNLY

2. Troitskiy, V. 8., Aranzhereyev, Ye. A., Abra-av, V.I., Belov, I. P.,
Gorbache'w’r, V. P., Gustav, A. V., Denidova, V. 8., Dobryninn, ‘1'. N.,
Plechkov, V. M., Siz'nina, L. K. and Shieleva, A.I., "Preprint No 131,"
Scientific Research Institute of Radiophylico, 1979.

3. Troitskiy, V. 8., ZhTP, Vol 25, 1955, p 1428.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'atvo "Ranks", Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-matenaticheskoy
literatury, "Uspekhi fizicheskikh nauk", 1981

10.657
CSO: 1860/129

2
INDR OFINC1£&.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"DC: 655.39(068)
WWWWODS OFTHERHALSHPANDHF INQUCOLOGY

Moscow USPBKHI FIZICHBSKIKE “All! in Russian Vol 136, lo 1, May 81 pp 158-163

[Article by u. n. Devyatkov. t. A. Gel'vich, I. a. Darydova, v. v. Kirillov,
D. N. Kolmakov, V. N. nazokhin, V. I. Sinyagovskiy and P. I. Chilikin]

[Text] 1. Use of hyperthermia in oncology. Hyperthermia is artificial ele-
vation of human body temperature to above normal levels, and it has gained
considerable use in recent years to enhance the efficacy of treatment of
malignant neoplasms [1, 2, 13].

Use of hyperthermia is based on the fact that overheated cancer cells become
more sensitive to radiation and chemotherapy used to destroy them [1, 3-5, 9].
According to some reports, hyperthermia can also serve as an independent method
of treatment of some diseases [15].

One of the first methods of controlled overheating of tumors was the method
of regional perfusion [3, 12] (heating by means of infusion of heated blood
from an ertracorporeal circulation machine into the involved part of the body)
and the method of total body heating in a water or whirlpool tub [1, 10, 11].
The perfusion method turned out to be ineffective in destruction, of tumors
and, at the same time, it injured healthy surrounding tissues, so that it is
not used at the present time [3].

Hyperthermia obtained by means of electromagnetic energy has several a.1vantages
over most other methods. Electromagnetic heating is not a warming procedure
as, for example, shower, solarium, water, air baths and other methods that
transmit heat via blood flow and heat conductivity of tissues from the skin's
surface to internal regions; rather, it directly heats the entire part of the
body that is the target of hyperthermia. This reduces substantially the time
spent on reaching the required temperature, reduces the heat load on the
patient's skin and, consequently, on the cardiovascular system. Electro-
magnetic hyperthermia permits general heating of the body or localization
thereof in a circumscribed part of the human body; it is relatively easy to
maintain the required temperature level in the heated region and to control
dynamically the force and time of treatment [1, 2, 13].

2. Difference between hyperthermia and microwave and UHF therapy. In spite of
the fact that microwave and UHF therapy is used widely in medical practice,

momazﬁamomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the change to electromagnetic hyperthermia imposes rather rigid and sometimes
difficult requirements. The reason for this is that the intensity of irradi-
ation with electromagnetic therapy is set according to the patient's subjective
sensations; the treatments do not elicit any unpleasant emotions or irritation.
and the modes are far from critical. Yet, the optimum method of electromagnetic
hyperthermia must provide delivery to various tissues (including superficial
and deep tissues, normal and pathologically altered) of very specific tempera-
ture levels that are close to but do not exceed the safety threshold (45'c [2]).
Excessive heat could lead to dangerous and sometimes irreversible consequences:
burns, tissular necrosis, impaired function of the cardiovascular system, etc.

Hence there are rigid requirements of the heating procedure and equipment that
provides it. There must be great flexibility in controlling the heating pro~
cess and proper aonitoring of the patient's condition. Automation of the
heating procedure, automation of maintenance of required irradiation modes,
maintenance of specified distribution of temperature in the part of the body
to be submitted to hyperthermia are mandatory conditions for the design of
such hyperthermia equipment. Of course, the existence of critical heat modes
increases requirements as to accuracy of taking temperatures. The desirable
accuracy of measurement of absolute temperature should constitute at least
20.2 C.

3. Equipment for SHF and HP hyperthermia. Re have developed a number of

pieces of equipment to heat tissues situated at different depths in the human
body for local SH! hyperthermia, and they are being used with success at

the Scientific Research Institute of Oncology and Medical Radiology of the Belo-
russian Ministry of Health, as well as several other institutes in our country.

The Parus-l machine, which operates at a frequency of 2450 ﬂu; is used to heat
subcutaneous tissues, the Plot unit (operating frequency of 915 MHz) serves

to heat deeper tissues. The systems of these machines are identical. In
these units, magnetrons that operate in a two-frequency mode, 2650169 an: and
915:19 MHz, respectively, with output power that is adjustable in the range of
5-200 H [1, 6], serve as generators of SH? waves.

The distinctive design of the magnetrons permits delivery of power directly from
alternating current at the industrial frequency of 50 H: from the secondary
winding of a high-voltage transformer. The power supply circuit of the magne-
trons is analogous to the circuit of a full-wave rectifier circuit-each magne-
tron half generates circuit voltage for part of the half-period.

The output power can be adjusted by two methods: changing the amplitude of
supply voltage or changing the time of generation of SE? energy in each half-
period.

With the second method, there is a change in cut-off angle of anode current of
the magnetrons by means of a thyristor regulator. This is the method used in
the Parus-l and Plot machines for automatic adjustment of output power in
order to obtain the required temperature modes in the target region. There

is automatic feedback from temperature sensors placed in the heated zone.
Copper-constantan thermocouples or special semiconductors serve as the
sensitive elements of the sensors. The accuracy of maintaining temperature

25
son omen. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

level at the unaltered point is no worse than no.5’. The Parus-l and Plot units
have built-in devices for monitoring magnetron operation, indicators of power
in the tract and concordance of emitter with the biological object. as well

as a digital display of duration of hyperthermia session. An apparatus was
developed that operates at frequencies of both 915 and 2650 m2, used for
treatment depending on the depth and size of a tumor, in order to broaden the
potential of using SliP generators for hypertherlia.

Uniformity and speed of heating in the electromagnetic field depend largely on
the structure of tissues, their shape and dimensions, blood supply, heat con-
ductivity and other factors [8, 11].

The experimental Barkas unit was developed for total-body hyperthermia to

deliver high-frequency heat with energy in the meter range of wavelengths. It
has a generator that operates on a frequency of 13.56 MB: with adjustable out-
put power in the range of 100 to 1.3010’ 9. This unit also has different

types of emitters and microclimate device. One can deliver heat for total [over-
all] hyperthermia at the rate of over 1°c/1o ain, depending on t.’ e emitters used.

The required heating rate is obtained by setting the appropriate output power
for the generator.

The set of inductive and capacitive emitters makes it possible to create both
total-body and local hyperthermia in the meter range of wavelengths.

The microclimate device is intended to create and automatically maintain the
set temperature and relative humidity of air in a closed space, as well as to
prevent and compensate for the dehydration effect in the course of a treatment.

In addition, use of microclimate permits reduction of duration of overall
heating to the required temperature, whereas after the HF generator is turned
off it automatically maintains the temperature level reached for a long time.

This unit automatically maintains the temperature in the confined space in the
range of 3H0°C with accuracy to n'c and creates up to 951 relative air
humidity in the confined area.

6. Emitters. The Parus and Plot apparatus contains sets of horn radiators

of the resoaance type differing in diameter, from 30 to 90 - [6. 7]. The op-
timum distance between the radi star and biological object for these emitters
is in the range of 1.5-2 cm.

The radiators consist of a segment of a circular waveguide with smooth, tapered
transition to a coaxial line that ends with a high-frequency coaxial connector.

The end part of the radiator has plates that form a capacitive clearance,
which is the element that emits the electromagnetic field. One of the plates
is connected to a central conductor of the coaxial line by means of a tape
transformer (matching lobe). To widen the bandpass, a dielectric transformer
is built into the coaxial part of the radiator. A drawing of the radiator

26
l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR‘OF'WCJAI.lEﬂE(NNLY

is rendered in Figure l. the minimal dependenceof radiator matching character-
istica on physical parameters of irradiated tissues (shape, t. tan 6) and their
composition (skin, muscle, fat, bone), which is required for reliable radiator
function, is obtained by selection of transformer length, configuration of
capacitive gap plates and distance between then. The overall YeSVn [natural
medium-frequency waves?] of the tract and submerged radiator is in the

range of 1.8-2.0 over the entire band of frequencies generated by the magnetron,
with changes in 6, tan 6, shape and composition of irradiated objects in the
range encountered in clinical practice.

Figure 1.

Diagram of horn radiator

l) born

2) coaxial

3) capacitive gap plates

4) SH? connector

5) matching lobe

6) dielectric transformer

7) protective cap

 

The averaged characteristics of distribution of electronagnetic and therlal
fields of these radiators are illustrated in Figures 2 and 3.

 
 
      
     
    

   
 
   

IIIHIIYI
IIU‘II ‘
mlu llm\
aga-

gal-m

”III/

 

Figure 2.
Averaged characteristics of distribu-
tion of electric component of electro-
magnetic field of horn-type emitter
with diameter D at frequency of 915 an:
Key for both figures:

Figure 3.
Averaged characteristics of distribu-
tion of thermal field within simula-
tor of biological object using horn
emitter with diameter D at frequency
of 915 MHz

1) perpendicularly to capacitive clearance

2) al
RU) reggiive units

the capacitive clearance

FOI<0FFHJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sometimes it is necessary to use cavity emitters. The specifications for
their dimensions and design are determined by the anatomical structure of

the human body (its cavities), as veil as size and shape of tumors encountered
in clinical practice. their location in the cavity.

The cavity emitters we developed in the SH? range are of the shaft type, with
monopolar or dipolar excitation, assembled on a segment of the coaxial cable.
The emitter is placed in a colpostat of the appropriate diameter. which
protects the emitter from mechanical injury and its electric insulation from
tissues.

There is a built-in system of forced water cooling to divert excessive heat
from the walls of cavities and equalize heat in depth of tissues within the
colpostat housing. Figure 5 is a schematic rendition of an emitter with
colpostat.

   

Figure 4.
Drawing of cavity emitter with colpostat »
1) internal and external colpostat Figure 5.
tubes Diagram of inductive radiator
2) bracket for general heating
3) cap
4) input and output cooling tube
5) channels for coolant The radiators contained in the
6) dipole antenna elements Barkas unit. which operate at
7) insulator a frequency of 13.56 ﬁns, are
8) coaxial cable designed for both general and

local hyperthermia. The rather
low operating frequency of radiation, as compared to 5H3, permits heating of
deep-lying regions of the body. Inductive emitters for .genersl heating
are executed in the form of two 500x500 mm or 500X900 mm frames, between
which the biological object to be heated is placed (Figure 5). The distance
between frames is adjusted from 250 to #00 mm (depending on the size of the
biological object) [6]. Each frame has several coils of silver-plated copper
tape connected in parallel. The efficiency of emitters connected to an HP
generator by coaxial cable through a matching device can reach 40-70%. depend-
ing on the size, shape and composition of the biological object. In order to
have a given nonuniformity of temperature distribution in the biological ob-
ject, one must take into consideration the effects of blood flow, heating
time intervals and other factors.

28
FORioffﬂﬂAl.USE(NNLY
FIIICHWNCJAI.USIE(”§LY

Both inductive and capacitive radiator systems are used to obtain local high-
frequency hyperthermis. -

The inductive radiator system consists of three connected resonance circuits.
One of them operates as a matching device, while the other two are situated

on either side of the heated biological object and localize the electronagnetic
field in the space between then. The required localization of inductive
current in body tissues in the plane that is perpendicular to the cannon axis

of the three circuits is obtained by using special S-shaped emitting inductances
(Figure 6).

 

 

Figure 6. Drawing of inductive emitter systel for local high-frequency

heating
1) dielectric covering 4) lst and 2d circuit of system
2) capacitance of 3d circuit 5) high-frequency cable

3) inductance of circuit

The proper heating mode can be selected
by nonitoring the amplitude and phase
of high-frequency current in the
resonance circuits on either side of
the biological object.

The capacitance emitter system

(Figure 7) consists of a high-frequency
condenser made up of two or sore flat
electrodes connected to the generator
by a special matching device. In this
case, specific parts of the body are

heated chiefly by the electric com-

 

Figure 7. ponent of the electromagnetic high-
Drawing of capacitance emitter for frequency field.
high-frequency heating
1) dielectric covering Thus, the existence of various systems
2) condenser plate of generators and emitters provides a

more dynamic approach to local hyper-
thermia depending on the dimensions. shape, electrophysiological paraneters of
tissues, as well as physiological distinctions of the part of the body to be
heated.

29
IKIICHHHCJAI.£EIE(HVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.US£(NVLV

It should be noted that use of methods for scanning emitters over the surface
of biological objects is one of the promising directions of expanding the
functional capabilities of the devices.

5. Temperature measurement. Strict monitoring of temperature in the irradiated
zone and possibility of automatic maintenance of a specified temperature with

a specific degree of accuracy during the entire treatment are necessary for
hyperthermic treatment of a tumor and to prevent the deleterious effects of
heat on adjacent healthy tissues. The conditions for taking temperature are
complicated by the fact that the temperature sensor must operate in high-
frequency or superhigh-frequency fields with energy flux in excess of l U per
square centimeter. At such levels, the metal sheaths heat up, and this leads
to temperature measurement errors, which could lead to internal burns that

are difficult to treat. Moreover, these sheaths and wires have a marked effect
on distribution of the field in the irradiated zone. Repeated insertion of

temperature sensors into tissue (before and during each treatment) is quite un-
pleasant for the patient.

The metal wires connecting heat-sensitive elements to measuring instruments are
hf and SH? receiver antennas, which leads, on the one hand, to heating of ther-
mistor or semiconductor sensors and, on the other hand, generates stray current,
that is difficult to suppress, to the measuring equipment. Unfortunately, the
currently available means of measuring temperature, with thermocouple, thermistor,
thermoresistor and semiconductor sensors, have the above-mentioned flaws.

It is extremely important to provide for reliable temperature measurement during
heating, regardless of orientation of the sensor in the field and frequency of
electromagnetic waves, in order to broaden appreciably the range of application
of the developed equipment. For this reason, it is a rather pressing task

to develop a heat sensor that is insensitive to electromagnetic fields.

6. Results of using equipment for SR? hyperthermia. ‘ A method for’admdnistering
local SHF hyperthermia was developed and has been used at the Minsk Scientific
Research Institute of Oncology and Medical Radiology since 1971. After a
comprehensive investigation and testing of this method on animals, it was used
in clinical practice as one of the elements of treatment for patients with
very advanced and recurrent tumors of the extremities. In a number of cases,
radical surgery can be avoided or a sparing operation can be performed on the
limb as a result of using local SHF hyperthermia in the treatment of such
cases, combined with chemotherapy or radiation therapy. The dosage of chemo-
therapeutic agents wss reduced to half the usual dose, while radiation was
delivered in divided doses. Subsequently, local hyperthermia was used with
success for treatment of breast cancer [4].

Because of the accumulated knowhow and results obtained with such treatment, in

1975 the USSR GUNS [Main Administration of Medical Service?) approved hyper-
thermia as a clinical method for treatment of patients at early stages of

illness in the clinic of the Minsk Scientific Research Institute of Oncology
and Hedical Radiology.

By decision of GUNS, the method of local Sh? hyperthermia was permitted in
1979 for use at the clinics of five other oncological institutes.

FOI1OFFKjﬁi.USE(MVLY
1.

-2.

3.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

Aleksandrov, N. N. et a1., "Use of Myperthermia and Hyperglycemia in the
Treatment of Malignant Nears," Moscow, Meditsina, 1980.

Idem, "Use of Local Electrmgnetic Hyperthernia in Oncology," VOPROSY
ONKOLOGII, Vol 23, 1977, p 3.

Aleksandrov, N. N., Pradkin, 8. Z. and Malinovakiy, I. I., "Use of Heat
in Combined Treatment of Malignant Neoplasm,” Ibid, Vol 19, No lo. 1973, p 78.

Aleksandrov. N. N. et al., "Inediate Results of Local SHP Hypertheraia
in Treatment of Breast Cancer," "Aktual'nyye probleny onkologii i

neditainskoy radiologii" [Pressing Problems of Oncology and Medical
Radiology]. Minsk, Vol 4, 1976, p 136.

Blokhin, N. N., "Combined and Couple: Treatment of Malignant Tuners,”
VOPROSY ONKOLOGII, V01 19, No 1, 1973, p 3.

Devyatkov. N. D. et al., "Equipment for SB? Hypertheraia." ELEKTRONNAYA
PWYSHLENNOST', Vol 9, 1979, p 9.

Pyushner, 6., "Heating Hith SHP Energy," Moscow, Energiya, 1968.

Shtenler, V. M. and Kolesnikov, S. V., "Distinctions of Interaction
Between Electromagnetic Fields and Biological Objects," "Firiologiya
cheloveka i zhivotnykh. Itogi nauki i tekhniki" [Ihnlan and Animal Physio-
logy. Advances in Science and Technology], Moscow, All-Union Institute

of Scientific and Technical Intonation, USSR Academy of Sciences, Vol 22,
1978.

Von Ardenne, M., "Multistep Treatment of Cancer," "Theory of in Vivo
Enzyme Metabolism of Malignant hunts," Berlin, Auslage, Pt II. 2, 1971.

Idea, "Theoretical and Experimental Bases of Multiatep Cancer Therapy,"
Berlin, 1967.

Guy, A. H., "Therapeutic Application of Electra-agnetic Power," PROC.
1533, Vol 62, No 1, 1974, p 55.

Cavaliere, R., "Selective Beat Sensitivity of Cancer Cells. Mechanical
and Clinical Studies," CANCER, Vol 20, No 9, 1967, p 135.

Short, J. 6., ”Physical Myperthernia and Cancer Therapy," PROC. IEEE,
Vol 68, No lo, 1980. p 133.

Sterzer, F., "Microwave Application for the Treatment of Cancer,"
MICROHAVE J., Vol 23, 1980, p 1.

Stohbent, I. 9., "An Invasive Microwave Antenna for Locally Induced Hyper-
thermia for Cancer Therapy," J. MICROWAVE PWER, Vol 16, No 6, 1979, p 339.

Zimmer, P. P., "Selective Electromagnetic Beating of Tutors in Aniaals in
Deep Mypothernia," IEEE TRANS., MIT-19, Vol 2, 1971, p 238.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo “Nauka”, Glavnaya redaktaiya tieiko-natematicheakoy

literatury, "Uspekhi fizicheskikh nauk", 1981

10,657 END
080: 1840/ 129 31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!