FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10196
16 December 1981

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 13/81)

Troop Control In an Offensive

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

ms publications contain informtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere nc processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses . Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGI'I MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP 0P
HATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINAI‘ION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FORiﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY

USSR REPORT
MILITARY AFFAIRS
(T000 13/81)

Taoop CONTROL IN AN OFFENSIVE

Moscow UPRAVLENIYE VOYSKAMI V NASTUPLBNII in Russian 1981 (signed to

press 6 Feb 81) pp 1-223

[Book by Docent, Lt: Gen P.P. 'novstukha and Doctor of Historical Sci-
ences, Col Rm. Portugal'skiy, with supervision by Lt Gen Tank Trps
A.A. Dunin and Maj Gen Yu. v. Yakunin, voyenizdat, 12,000 copies,

223 pages]

Couteurs
Annotation
Foreword . . . .......... . . . . . . . . . . . .-. .‘. . . . . . .
Chapter 1. The Most Important Functions of Control Activities. The Stats
of the Troop Control Systsn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
l. The Essence. Content and Conditions of Troop Control During
the war Year, 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O C 0 O O O O I C O I
2. Control Bodies and Means of Con-unications . . . . . . . . .
3. The Organization of Control Posts . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chapter 2. Characteristic Traits in the Activitiss of Control Bodies in

Preparing for an Offensive . . . . . . .

JPRS L/10196
16 December 1981

1. Methods and Style of Hork of Con-andsrs and Staffs . .

2. The Plan for the Offensive-The Basis of Troop Control

3. Planning Combat Operations . . . . . .
b. The Giving (Issuing) of Conbat Tasks .
S The Organization of Cooperation . .

s

s s

6. The Preparation of Troops and Staffs . .

a
s

a
s
a

assess

s

0““

27

27
37
49
61
65
71

[III - USSR - i 3000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Troop Control in the Course of an Offenaive . . . . . . . . . . . 8‘

1. Organizational and Creative Activities of Cuunandera and Staffe 85

5. Achieving Coordinated Actiona of the Troope in Carrying Out
Conbnt Hiaoiona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105

3. Maintaining Troop Battleworthineaa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
6. Ensuring the Dependable Functioning of the Control Syaten . . 119

Chapter 4. Basic Conclusions from the Experience of Troop Control in the Her
Years and the Most Important "eye for Increasing Ita Efficiency

Under Present-Day Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
1. Characteristic Traits of Troop Control as Evidenced in the

Great Patriotic war . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
2. Hays for Further Increasing Efficiency of Troop Control . . . 1‘6

Conclusion.. ..... ...........................155

Bibliography ..... ............................ 157

l1)R¢0F11C1Al.USEZ(NﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANNOTATION

The military theoretical work examines the most important problems of troop control
which arose during the years of the Great Patriotic Her. It examines the experience
of the commanders, the staffs and other headquarters bodies in preparing and con-
ducting an offensive. The basic areas are brought out for improving troop control,
and the trends and patterns of this process are disclosed. The authors focus the
reader's attention on those questions which are of greatest interest for the activi~
ties of officers under present-day conditions. The book is designed for generals
and officers of the Soviet Army.

FOREWORD

The duty of the USSR Armed Forces to the people is to securely defend the socialist
fatherland and to be in constant combat readiness to guarantee an immediate rebuff
of any aggressor, as states the USSR Constitution.1 For carrying out this task,
the Coummnist Party and the Soviet government, in following the instructions of the
26th CPSU Congress, give constant attention to strengthening the nation's defense
capability. All the necessary conditions are created for equipping the troops with
modern technology and improving the level of their training. Hilitary science is
developing, including that portion of it which solves the problem of achieving high
effectiveness of troop leadership on the battlefield, that is, the science of con-
trol which was aptly styled by L. I. Brezhnev as the science of winning.2

The experience of the past. particularly of Horld Bar II as well as combat-operations
in Southeast Asia and the Near East)prove that troop control as a process of crea:
tive activity by the commanders and bodies under them in the area of directing the
efforts of subordinates at carrying out combat tasks is a most important factor for
success in armed combat. Troop control is rightly considered one of the basic com-

ponents in the combat readiness and capability of the Armed Forces.

The Great Patriotic war is an inexhaustible source of creative knowledge and practi-
cal experience as it was the largest scale, fiercest and bloodiest of all the were
known to mankind. In the course of waging it, Soviet strategy, operational art and
tactics were enriched by new forms and methods of troop operations. A great deal of
attention was given to the search for unusual and unexpected procedures to defeat
enemy groupings. with great skill the massing of men and equipment was carried out
and the problems of firing for effect and maneuvering on the battlefield were solved.
As a result the Soviet troops achieved major successes in an offensive even when
they did not have an overall superiority over the enemy. One of the clear indica-
tors of the high level of troop control was also the ability to achieve uninterrup-
ted cooperation in combined~nrms combat by all the branches of the ground forces

and ﬁheir coordinated operations with aviation and, in a number of instances, the
navy, airborne landimg troops and partisans. The operations carried out required
their thorough preparation. "...Any engagement," emphasised V. I. Lenin, "includes
the abstract possibility of defeat and there it no other means to reduce this possi-
bility than the organized preparation for the engagement."3 This task was success-
fully carried out by conducting measures to organise combat operations, for complete
support and for implementing party political work.

FOI.OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The designated questions comprised the basic content of the work done by the com-
manders. the combined-arms staffs and other control bodies [headquarters bodies] on
the offensive during the years of the Great Patriotic Bar in operating as the basic
condition for achieving victory. This is shown by the combat practices of the past.
There is no doubt that this experience is not only of great cognitive interest but
also to a certain degree has maintained its practical significance for troop and
staff training.

The experience of troop control on the battlefields of the last war has been re-
flected in a number of military history and military theoretical works, in articles
by military journalists and in the memoirs of its active participants. This experi-
ence has been widely used in seeking out forms and methods of work helping to in-
crease the efficiency of troop control in combat. However, up to the present at-
tention still merits being given to the questions of elucidating the ways for at-
taining continuity and stability of troop control and the most effective ways of

organizing and implementing cooperation on the battlefield, preparing the staffs
and the troops for the offensive and maintaining a high level of their battleworthi-
ness in the course of conducting combat operations. An analysis of these questions
on the basis of generalizing the experience of the commanders and the combined-arms
staffs in the preparations for and in the course of an offensive during the years

of the last war comprises the chief contents of this work.

The book has been written mainly from materials of the Central Archives of the USSR
Ministry of Defense and a significant portion is published here for the first time.

we have also used Soviet and foreign military and military history literature.

captured documents and memoirs oi participants in the war. The experience of the
postwar troop and staff exercises has also been used.

The authors have endeavored to focus the reader's attention on those questions

which are of the greatest theoretical and practical interest in carrying out the
tasks of training the command personnel, the staffs and the troops under present
conditions of armed combat. They have made a number of practical recommendations
on the effective organization of work in the combined-arms staffs considering the

increased demands on troop control at present and the necessity of improving this
in the future.

FOOTNOTES

lSee: "Konstitutsiya (Osnovnoy Zakon) $853" [The 835R Constitution (Basic Law)],
Moscow. 1977. Article 31.

7See: L. l. Brezhnev, "Leninskim Kursom" [By the Leninist Course], Speeches and
Articles. Moscow. 1970. Vol 2. p 63.

3v. I. Lenin. sss [Complete Collected works). Vol 6, p 137.

FOR 0F?1(1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1: TEE HOST IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS OF CONTROL ACTIVITIES. THE STATE OF
THE TROOP CONTROL SYSTEM

In defining the role and place of control in the social process, Karl Marx stressed
that the control function "stems from the very nature of joint...labor...."l Conse-
quently, arned combat is also controllable. For this reason, simultaneously with
the rise of armies the necessity arose of solving the problems of troop control. As
the troops became equipped with new weapons and under the influence of the improved
art of their combat employment, the range of activities of the control bodies con-
tinuously broadened and changed. By the start of the Great Patriotic Bar, by troop
control one understood the constant effect of the commanders, staffs and other con-
trol bodies on the organization, course and outcome of combat operations. "To
control combat means to keep the course of events firmly in one's hands and to sub-
ordinate actions to one‘s will and maintain the initiative," was how the control
process was interpreted in the prewar works.2

1. The Essence, Content and Conditions of Troop Control During the Bar Years

The Great Patriotic Her confirmed the prewar views that troop control is a process
related to implementing a range of measures to maintain a high level of troop
battlevorthiness and to prepare and carry out combat operations on all organisation-
al levels, from the inferior tactical one up to the highest operational level. The
achieving of maximum effectiveness tron the employment of the existing resources as
well as the fullest utilization of the conditions of the existing situation were

the basic task of troop control.

The essence of troop control on an offensive, as followed from the experience of
this war, was expressed in the effective activities of the commanders, the staffs,
the political and other control bodies based upon the creative esployment of the
principles of military art, the laws and patterns of armed combat. The basic con-
tent of these activities was the questions of acquiring, studying and analysing the
situational data, decision taking, planning the forthconing actions, the setting
and issuing of combat tasks. the organisation and maintaining of cooperation and
continuous control. the complete support of the operation (engagement), supervision
and the providing of help to the troops. The commander's decision comprised the
basis of troop control. It operated as the result of the unity of the processes of
elucidating the combat task and assessing the situation. It manifested the com-
mander's personal experience, his professional training, mind, will power, deci-
siveness, firmness and other qualities.

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FORiOFFKNAl.USEioNlX

Troop control was curried out both in the preparations of the offensive as well as
in the course of it.

In the preparations for an offensive, the most important measures were related to
maintaining a high political-moral state aaong the troops and their constant combat
readiness, to the continuous collection, processing and analysis of the situational
data, to the planning and organizing of combat operations. A significant place was
held by the work of issuing the combat nissions, coordinating the efforts of the
various branches of forces and to thorough support for the forthcoming engagement
(operation). The combat training of the troops and party political work were also
carried cut. A system of control posts, communications and the commandant service
were organized. Supervision was exercised over the preparation of the troops for

the offensive and this was combined with the providing of practical aid to subordi-
nates.

1n the course of an offensive. along with the designated measures, the commanders,
the combined-arms staffs and other control bodies conducted work to maintain the
battleworthiness of the troops and in accord with the situational conditions make
changes in the adopted decision and combat (operational) plan as well as in the or-
ganizing of the control posts and communications. Measures were taken to promptly
set new tasks and to restore disrupted cooperation.

Experience shows that the most important demands made upon troop control on an of-
fensive were effectiveness, firmness, flexibility, continuity and secrecy. The
basic criterion for assessing effectiveness of the work was the time spent on the
effective carrying out by the commanders and staffs of that range of measures coer
prising the content of the control functions. Pirmness of control was expressed
chiefly by the ability of the commanders to steadily carry out an adopted decision
and under any conditions to maintain control of subordinates in their hands. Plex-
ibility of control consisted in the ability to promptly make changes in the offen-
sive's plan proceeding from the developing situation. By continuity of control one
understood the persistence and survival of the control system, its ability when nec-

essary to rapidly readjust and ensure continuous contact with the troops and the
constant handing on of operational and tactical information for providing the neces-
sary influence on the course of combat operations. The secrecy or concealment of
control was aimed at keeping the enemy uninformed of all measures carried out by

the control bodies to prepare combat operations and direct the troops in an engage-
nent (operation).

The conditions involved in the preparation and execution of an offensive had a sub-
stantial impact on the nature of troop control.

for the first period of the Great Patriotic Her (22 June 1941-18 November 19b2) the
most typical were limited times for preparing combat operations. The army commend-
ers had less than a day to organise the offensive and the formation commanders had
3—5 hours in July 1961 at Smolensk and Yel'nya. The front and army operations were
prepared for in 2 or 3 days and an offensive engagement was organized in 5-6 hours
in the formations and units during the counteroffensive at Moscow (December 1961).
In those instances when up to 5-10 days were assigned to prepare for an offensive,
it was essential to carry out a number of tasks requiring large expenditures of"
time. such as: receiving and readying the drafts of reinforcements, making up new

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formations and organizing the field headquarters of the armies and army groups. In
addition, the control bodies had to at least generally coordinate the formations and
units arriving at the front and provide them with the obtained combat experience.
Such conditions were present in the battles for Rostov and Tikhvin (November-

December 1941) and in the Barvenkovo-Lozovskiy Offensive Operation (January 1962).

The fact that the formations and units often went over to the offensive with a por-
tion of the forces conducting defensive engagements had a substantial influence on
the sequence of work and the scope of the preparatory measures during the first
period of the war. During the summer and autumn of 1951 as well as in the winter of
1961-1942. an offensive in addition was carried out with a lack of an overall super-
iority in resources over the enemy and with a shortage of combat equipment and ammo-
nition. The commanders and staffs did not have sufficient experience in organizing
and conducting an offensive with decisive aims when the enemy was superior in equip-
ment and in the strategic initiative.

The troop control conditions changed significantly in the second period of the war
(19 November l942-December 1943).

The field headquarters of the field forces began to have more time to prepare for
the offensive. For example. the front-level operations were prepared for almost a
month on the eve of the Soviet troops going over to the counteroffensive at Stalin-
grad as well as in breaking the blockade of Leningrad. The Ostrogozhsk-Rossoch',
Orel and Belgorod-Khar‘kov operations were prepared for in from 6 to 15 days. The
formation comnanders were now given 2 or 3 days to organize combat. Combat experi-
ence was gained and this was generalized in the directives and orders of HqSHC and
in the regulation and manuals. The corps level of control in the army was restored
on a new qualitative basis. The designated phenomena had a positive impact on the
work of the commanders and the staffs. At the same time, the conditions of control
in combat became more complex as a consequence of the fact that certain offensive
operations (the Voronezh-Kostornoye, in the Khar'kov sector in February 1943, and in
the course of the battle for the Dnepr) were carried out without lulls in operations,
and as successive ones.

Substantial changes also occurred in enemy tactics. The Nazi command in the winter
of 1942-1963 issued the Instructions "0n Creating a Particularly Strong Defense by
Improving Positions in Engineer Terms."3 Defenses became trenched. The depth of

the main area by the summer of 1963 had risen to 4-6 km (in 1951-1962 it was 2-4 km),
while that of the tactical zone had increased from 8-10 to 12-15 km and more. The
operational defensive zone began to include the area which had been prepared 16-

25 km behind the forward edge. The rear defensive zone was prepared 50-80 km back.
At it were concentrated 2 or 3 infantry divisions and sometimes tank divisions.

As can be seen from the data in Table 1, the densities of the troops and combat
equipment increased. More attention was given to all types of man-made obstacles
and to building various structures. The strength of enemy defenses rose. The de-
fense become more active and an example of this would be the numerous counterstrikes
in the course of the defensive operations conducted by the Soviet troops. There was

also a desire to deceive our troops by first pulling back the units and formations
to positions and lines deep in the defenses. Sometimes the main enemy forces were

disengaged in the middle of the night. as was the case in the Donets Basin in

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

‘l'ab ls 1

Density of Nazi Troops on the Defensive

  
    
 
   
 

Number per Kilometer

   

Kilometers per Division

19341-19102
1943

September 19143. In the course of defensive operations the enemy frequently employed
operational defensive centers ("hedgehogs") in the aim of tieing down and splitting
the advancing groupings and to gain time before the bringing of its deep reserves.
This was the case in the area of Poltava in the autumn of 1963. This was done to
prevent the Soviet troops from reaching the Dnepr River.“

In s majority of instances, the offensive by the Soviet troops started with the
breaking through of enemy defenses. This necessitated a decisive messing of re-
sources and led to the necessity of carrying out a large scale undetected regrouping
of the troops end the skillful organising of their camouflage. The choice of the
direction of the main thrust assumed particular significance. This, in turn, placed
increased demands on all types of intelligence and on the organizing of the work
done by the comanders and the staffs on the spot. In the course of the break-
through. the troops encountered strong enemy reserves. As a result, the commanders
had to show a quick response to changes in the situation. the combined-arms staffs
had to carry out effective work in collecting and analysing the data. while the
troops needed great maneuverability and skill in actions on the battlefield. In or-
ganizing pursuit. the control bodies, in addition, were responsible for preparing
the forward detachments as well as the nighttime actions of the troops. The great
depth of the offensive and the significant losses in personnel and combat equipment
forced the coo-sanders and the staffs to be fully concerned with solving the problem
of restoring the battleworthineas of the troops.

In the third period of the war (January 1960-8 Hay 1965), as is seen from the data
of Table 2, more significant time was allocated to prepare for the first offensive
operations. The comnders of rifle formations began to have up to 7 days to organ-
ize conbat while army commanders had up to 20. As a whole, this had a favorable
influence on improving the quality of offensive preparations. However, it is essen-
tial to bear in mind that the commanders and staffs of armored and mechanized forma-
tions had. as a rule. from 1 to 3 or 6 hours to organise combat, particularly in the
course of an offensive. This predetermined a number of particular features in their
work.

The cosmanders, staffs and other control bodies were also confronted by other prob-
lems. One of them was the organizing of an offensive with the crossing of a number
of intermediate defensive lines. For exasple. in the Vistula-Oder and ﬂeet Prussian
operations, the forsations and units broke through from 5 to 8 reinforced lines.

The cosbat operations in addition were conducted on territory abounding in water

FOR OFFICIAI.1EI5(NdLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

Time Allocated for the Preparation of an Offensive

Fronts and Combined-Arms
Groups of Fronts Armies (in days)

  
   
    
  
 
 

  
  

    

Period of War (in days)

   
    
    

 
       

 

 
   
   

 

First 2-7 days 1-6 Prom 3 hrs to
a day
Second 2-3 months From 1-2 1-5 days
to 11
Third To 3.5 months Prom 1-2 to To 5-7 days
8-10 and

more

obstacles. population points which had been prepared for all-round defense and for-
tified areas. Large amounts of diverse equip-ant was employed. All of this sig-
nificantly broadened the scope of measures comprising the content of control activi-
ties. particularly from the viewpoint of organizing cooperation among the different
branches of troops.

The enemy continued to improve the organisation of defenses. Their high level was
manifested primarily in the form of counterstrikes (particularly in the Vistula-Oder
and Berlin operations) and sometimes by a counteroffensive (for example, at Lake
Balaton in 1965). The command of the Nazi troops skillfully maneuvered its re-
sources both along the front and from the interior. Often ambushes were organised
for the purpose of cutting off and encircling individual advancing groups as was the
case in the tone of the 28th Army in the Belorussian Offensive (June 194‘). Man-
made obstacles and destruction of all aorta were widely used. Cities were turned
into fortresses. In the operational depth, resistance was organized along lines
which were built at different distances apart (from 3-6 to 20-25 km) with the pull-
ing back of the troops after the advancing troops had deployed opposite the next
one.

The enemy was still rather strong. By the beginning of 196‘, on the Soviet-German
Front, it possessed a grouping which numbered more than a million men, $4,570 guns
and mortars. 5,b00 tanks and assault guns and 3,073 sircraft.5

Thus, during all the Great Patriotic Her, the conditions under which the commanders
and their subordinate control bodies worked in preparing for and in the course of an
offensive were characterized by an ever-increasing scale of combat operations. by a
situational complexity. by a great volume of tasks, by great demands upon the effec-
tiveness and quality of control and by the decisive significance of the time factor.
The combat tasks and the nature of conbined-arms battle required a creative approach
to the employment of the resources, the search for effective methods to defeat the
enemy and a choice of the proper methods and forms of work for the commanders and
the staffs. The effectiveness of resolving the designated problems on an offensive
depended upon many factors. including upon the state of the control bodies and the
aeans of troop control and upon the professional preparation of the command person-
nel.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

2. Control Bodies and Means of Communications

The structure of the control bodies on the operational and tactical levels on the
eve of the war were determined by the 108 approved in September 1960 and April-May
1961.

At the head of a front (army) stood the military council. the chairman of which was
the commander. Under him was the staff and a number of directorates (sections):

for political propaganda, artillery. motor vehicle and tank, air forces. air defense,
engineer, signal, intendant, chemical warfare troops, the airborne service (on a
front). military training, personnel, fuel supply. medical, veterinary, financial as
well as the military tribunal and judge advocate's office. As a total a field head-
quarters of a front included eight directorates and ten independent sections (925
men). An army field headquarters included 15 sections (391 men).6 A special place
was held by the combined-arms staff which included such sections (departments) as
operations, intelligence, military lines of cmmnnucations. the organisation of the
rear, supply and road services. manning. the organization and service of the troops.
the military topographic service, cipher (in an army the cipher department was part
of the operations section). and the administrative-housekeeping. The number of
staff personnel was 333 men on a front and 182 men in an army.

Under the commanders of the rifle corps and divisions were staffs consisting of sec-
tions (departments) as follows: operations, intelligence, rear, drill and personnel.
special (cipher), administrative-housekeeping as well as the chief of artillery, the
corps (divisional) engineer. the signals chief and the chief of the chemical service.
The deputy commander for political affairs directed the political propaganda section
(department). In the formations of the armored and mechanized troops (mechanized
corps and tank divisions) there was a repair and supply service headed by the assist-
ant commander for technical affairs.

The commander of a rifle (tank) regiment controlled his subordinates through a staff
consisting of a chief of staff. his assistants for intelligence, for logistical
service. for rear services and communications. as well as through the artillery
chief. the regimental engineer and the chemical service chief. Also under him were
the senior physician, the veterinarian and a number of service chiefs. The deputv
regimental conmandcr for political affairs directed the activities of the secre-
taries for the primary party and Komsomol organizations and the instructor propagan-
dist.

Under the commander of a rifle (tank) battalion were a deputy for personnel and sup-
ply records and a deputy for political affairs as well as an adjutant who performed
the functions of a battalion chief of staff.

As a whole the organizational structure of the control bodies on the eve of the war
considered the demands which were then made on troop control in combined-arms combat
and an operation with the massed use of tanks. artillery, aviation and other combat
equipment. However it also embodied the traits inherited from the past of cumber-
sameness. immobility and an excessive overload of personnel. The delimitation of
functions and tasks between the corresponding structural elements was also not com-
pletely clear in the interests of increasing effective troop leadership in the
course of conducting fluid combat operations. This was particularly characteristic
for the combined-arms staffs as there was a desire to make them an all-encompassing

FOR‘OFFHJAI.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizational center for the entire control system, from carrying out operational

tasks to performing functions in the area of organizing logistical support for troop
combat operations.

From the very first days of the Great Patriotic War, the question arose of the need
to improve the structure of the control bodies. Changes were made in the T03 of the
field headquarters of a front (army) and the headquarters of rifle divisions.7 llere
consideration was given to the new demands made on troop control, primarily from the
viewpoint of eliminating the scattering of efforts by the staffs in the simltaneous
performing of functions which differed in their content as well as for increasing
the effectiveness of the work done by the control bodies.

By December 1951. the number of personnel at the field headquarters had been reduced,
mainly due to the service personnel, by almost 2-fold. including by 2.1-fold on a
front Staff and by more than 3~fold on an army staff. The main change in the struc-
ture of the staffs was that they had removed from them the sections in charge of the
organization of the rear, supply and road service as well as the sections of mili-
tary lines of comunicntions. Thus. the staffs were freed from performing tasks not
Inherent to them. Now their efforts could be focused on carrying out the operation-
:11 functions of troop control. For the leadership of the rear services an independ-
ent body was created, the headquarters for the rear services of the front (army).

In the formations and units (Diagram 1), the position of deputy Commander was intro-
duced. The operations department of a division was somewhat strengthened. In a
regiment there were two positions of assistant chief of staff and the position of
translator was also introduced. The questions of logistical support were concen-
trated in the hands of the deputy divisional commander for the rear. All rear serv-
ices were qnder him.

Experience showed that the adopted structure of the control bodies was effective and
viable. It existed with certain changes over the entire war. But the necessity of
alterations was caused by a number of objective factors. the most important ones be-
ing: the mass delivery of military equipment and weapons to the troops; the crea-
tion of new formations and. as a consequence, the growth of the fighting strength of
the fronts and armies; the constantly increasing number of diverse resources involved
in conducting the operations and the related increase in the range of measures in
planning their combat operations, organising cooperation between them and providing
continuous control in the course of the offensive; the significant increase in the
scope of the conducted operations; the increased maneuverability, rapidity and con-
tinuity of troop combat operations. To an enormous degree all of this influenced
not only the volume but also the content of the work carried out by the control
bodies. In turn. this required a clearer delimitation of functions between the lead-
ing control levels and an improvement in work methods. For these reasons the TOP: of
the front and army-level field headquarters were revised in March—April 19102 and in
June-July 1945.9

The amendments incorporated in the structure of the control bodies had a great im-
pact upon further raising their viability, flexibility and effectiveness in carry-
ing out control tasks with the increased spatial scope, continuity and dynanicness
of operations.

Particular attention was given to the combined-arms staffs as the basic troop con-
trol bodies.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘l-‘K‘IM. USE ONLY

1. Rifle Corps (division) 2. leak (nechanised) corps

    

epsrments

sections (departments) '
section's

 

Diagram 1. Structure of Control Bodies in Pomtions
on Eve of and During the Years of the "at

Key: a--Collaander; b--Chief of Staff; c—Deputy Conander; duCo-aisasr
(1941-1962) and Deputy for Political Affairs (1942-1965); s-Deputy
for the Rear (from August 1961); f—Deputy for the Rear (froa
Septenber 19b2): s--Deputy for Technical Affairs; h—Stsff Conissar
(19141-1942) and Deputy for Political Affairs (1942-19155); i—Political
section; j--0perations; knlntelligence; Lukear; n—Signals;
n--Records and personnel; o—Special; p—Adminiatrative-Bousekeeping;
q--‘l‘opographic; runrtillery Cot-lander; s—Bngineer; t--Cheatica1
Service Chief ; u--Organizational—planning; w-Intendant. supply;

u—-Ration and forage supply; x-ﬂiliury-technical supply; y—Corps
Engineer; z--Chief of artillery supply.

Their leading directorates (sections) were reinforced with personnel. According to
the 191.4 TOE. the personnel of an operational directorate on a front had increased
by 2-2.6-fold in comparison with the 1941 ma,’ while the operations section of an
army had increased by L’s-fold. Cipher and topographic departments had been incor-
porated in it. By an order of the People's Conisssriat of Defense [180] of

16 April 1943, the chief of the intelligence section of a front (army or corps) and
the intelligence department of a division assused the rank of chief of intelligence
or deputy chief of staff for intelligence. The nueber of personnel on the intelli-
gence sections (departaents) was increased by 10-20 percent, and by 1945, this had
more than doubled on a front and increased by l.3-fold in an army. As a result, the
intelligence departments were able to inplenent measures more effectively and '

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

directly in the area of planning and organizing all types of intelligence, to direct
the activities of the subordinate intelligence units (subunits), to promptly secure,
study and generalize the intelligence data and to prepare the calculations and pro-
posals needed for adopting sound decisions for the operation and conducting combat
operations in the course of carrying out the operation.

A service of signals officers was created on the army staffs. Its personnel was
set as follows: five men in a combined-arms staff and seven men on a tank staff.‘0
The position of military topographer was introduced on a divisional staff. The
records and personnel departments were strengthened with two officers. In the
autumn of 1962, on a number of fronts (Karelian, Leningrad, Volkhov and others),
positions of non-T/O topographers were introduced in the rifle regiments. Their
duties included the obtaining. reading. drawing up and issuing of maps and the con-
ducting of exercises on military topography. They supported troop operations using
nan-made markers and made terrain mock-ups.

Considering the particular importance and, at the same time, the exceptional complex-
ity of prompt and uninterrupted troop support for all types of materiel, great atten-
tion was given to further improving the rear control bodies.

For the purposes of increasing the level of rear support for the troops as well as
[or more precise centralization of the work done by the various services, in 1962 a
decision was taken to transform the planning and organisational sections of the rear
directorates of the front and army into the corresponding rear staffs. In the area
of improving the work of the rear bodies an important role was played by incorporat-
ing as a member of the front and army military councils the positions of military
council member for the rear. In addition, for strengthening political work in the
rear bodies and units, in August 1961, rear political sections were organized. All
of this contributed to the effective and prompt solution to the questions of rear
troop support on an offensive, it significantly increased coordination in the work
of all the rear services, it systematizsd troop supply for ammunition, fuel, food
and other logistical means and made it possible to have the most rational utiliza-
tion of all types of transport.

In the course of the war there was a continuous rise in the technical equipping end
an increase in the combat capabilities of the formations and units of the Armed
Services. branches of troops and special troops. This increased the scope of the
tasks to be carried out and strengthened the role of their commanders in planning,
preparing and controlling combat operations.

For centralizing leadership of aviation in the interests of its massed employment,
in 1942, 17 air armies of the frontal [tactical] aviation were organized and in 1944,
the long-range sir army. In line with this, the air force directorates of the fronts
were transformed into air army directorates. In the same year the chiefs of artil-
lery and motor vehicle-tank troops became, respectively. the commanders of the ar-
tillery and tank and mechanized troops. Moreover, they, like the chief of the en-
gineer troops, were raised to the rank of deputy commanders of the fronts (armies).
In their directorates staffs were set up which were entrusted with the functions of
planning and preparing the necessary calculations and proposals on the combat em-

ployment of the resources, for exercising control over their correct use, for organ-
izing cooperation. technical support and a number of others.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most essential changes occurred in the structure of the artillery control
bodies. In line with the organization of a significant number of antiaircrsft ar-
tillery units, it was advisable to put them under the artillery commanders of the
front (army). Successively there were introduced the positions of deputy artillery
cummsnders for antiaircraft artillery and rocket units as well as an assistant sig-
nals commander. By the summer of 1963, the directorate for headquarters of the ar-
tillery commander included a staff (operations and intelligence departments), sec-
tions for antiaircraft artillery, manning and artillery supply, and by the start of
the second half of 1946. in addition to this, sections for signals and the opera-
tional use of the rocket launcher units. In 1946. the number of officers on the
artillery staff had increased by almost 6-fold in comparison with 1961.

Additional positions were introduced in the signals directorate (section) of a front
(army). and in particular the position of duty officer at a communications center,
deputy radio signals chief and others. As a result there was an improvement in con-
trol over the transmitting and receiving of operational-tactical information, the
handling times were reduced and reliability increased. The TOE for officers in the
section of the chief of engineer troops almost doubled. in the directorate (section)
of the chief of the chemical troops a department was introduced for the use of flame-
throwing and incendiary devices.

The increased amount of artillery and direct infantry support (NP?) tanks in the
rifle corps (divisions) led to a situation where changes were also made in the struc-
ture of the formation control bodies. An artillery staff was set up. A section for
armored and mechanized trocps (B? 1 IV) was introduced in the corps staff.

With the increased effective fighting strength of the fronts and armies as well as
with the increased number of officials directly under the troops commanders, the
latter began to experience great difficulties in exercising command and control.
Thus, a front commander had to set tasks for at least seven or eight directly sub-
ordinate officials and control six-ten field forces (formations). An army commander
was in an even more complicated situation as in a number of instances he had under
him up to 20 divisions, brigades. separate regiments and battalions. Because of
this the problem arose of releasing the commanders from the excessive number of
directly subordinate officials so that he would be able to focus efforts on solving
the main questions of his activity. For this purpose on the T02 of the front and
army field headquarters they incorporated two deputy commanders. The air defense
equipment was taken away from his direct control. In the tank armies the motor
vehicle section which previously was under the commander was transferred to the
chief of the rear. By the summer of 1963, the process of restoring the corps level

of control was virtually completed.

During the war years great attention was given to the questions of increasing the
quality of operational and combat training. Here an important role was played by
the increased number of higher military schools and advanced training courses as
well as by the effective work in the area of studying and generalizing the troop
combat experience. One might merely point out that in 1943-1945, military personnel
for the Soviet Army was being trained by 31 higher schools, 220 military schools and
over 200 various training and retraining courses for the leadership.11 The positive
solution to the personnel question helped to improve the work style of the control
bodies.

12

F08!0FFKJAI.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The combat experience of the troops and the control bodies was studied and general-
ized from the very outset of the war. In accord with the Directive of the General
Staff of 9 November 1941 and the order of the RID of 11 December 1941, sections
(departments) for studying the experience of the war were organized on the staffs of
the fronts and the armies. At that time in the formations the position of senior
assistant chief of the operations department for studying and generalizing the ex-
perience of combat operations was introduced. Somewhat later such departments were
organized on the staffs of the artillery commander and the chief of the rear of a
front and in the corresponding army-level bodies. A TO! officer position was intro-
duced in the signals directorate (section) of a front (army) for this work. Thus,
the staffs of the field forces and formations, under the direct leadership of their
commanders. became the basic center for generalizing experience and disseminating it
in the troops.

The combat training sections of the fronts and armies carried out the important task
of increasing the combat readiness and capability of the troops and the staffs, pri-
marily the arriving draft of recruits. By the autumn of 1942, there had been a sig-
nificant broadening of the system of assistant commanders in charge of them. Train-
ing centers for the various branches of troops were set up on the fronts and in cer-
tain armies. This made it possible to also improve the planning and organization of
combat training and to raise the level of working out the questions of troop cooper-
ation for carrying out complex combat tasks in the course of the conducted opera-
tions. In the formations. units and subunits the tasks of directly organizing troop
combat training were entrusted to the deputy commander and staff as well as to the
chiefs of the branches of troops (special troops).

Over the entire war the military councils played a leading role in the control of

a front or army. In their activities the military councils employed a consulting
form of collectivism which presupposed a collective discussion of the fundamental
questions and the collective elaboration of recommendations on them. But the final
decision was taken by the individual commander. He had the right also to personally
command all the subordinate troops.

The military councils were directly and fully responsible for carrying out the im-
portant and complex tasks to the party's Central Committee and the Soviet govern-
ment. A commander was the chairman of the military council. The first member of
the military council'2 was concerned with operational questions, training and all-
round support of the troops. In addition. he was entrusted with the duties of
directly leading the work of the front's political directorate (the army's political
section). to supervise the activities of the judge advocate's office and military
tribunal as well as carry out other tasks. The second member of the military coun-
cil. the position of which was introduced to the TOE in November 1961 was in charge
of the rear services. By the spring of 1946, the membership of the front military
councils also included the commanders of the air army and artillery of the front.

As a result the military councils were highly skilled military leadership bodies
with a precise delimitation of functions and duties among each of the officials com-
prising them. Hith the enormous amount of work and the complexity of the tasks
carried out, the principle of collectiveness combined with one-man responsibility,
ensured the use of the knowledge and experience of all its members and unity of ac-
tion. At the same time it prevented any arbitrariness, subjectivism and lack of re-
sponsibility in the process of taking decisions and implementing them. This most

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Important Leninist principle in the activities of the military control bodies demon-
strated its irrefutable vital force.

The political bodies played an exceptionally important role in improving the activi-
ties of the control bodies during the war and in raising their combat cohesiveness,
responsibility end efficiency. In considering the enormous importance of their work,
by a decision of the Politburo of the VXP(b) [All-Union Communist Petty (BolsheVik)]
Central Committee and the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet of 16 July 1941, the
political propaganda directorates (sections) of the fronts (armies) were turned into
political directorates and sections. At the very outset of the war the institution
of military commissars was introduced on all levels of directorstes and staffs (it
was abolished in October 1952). At that time political sections were organized for
strengthening political work among the personnel of the special units of a front
(army). In addition, sections (departments) for working with the local population
were introduced in the political bodies and this made it possible to carry out ex-
planatory work on the territories liberated from the enemy about the great libera-
tion mission of the Soviet Army and the aims and tasks of fighting against the enemy.

Thus, during the war years there was a process of a continuous improvement in the
control bodies and the adaptation of their structure to the tasks which had to be
carried out on an offensive. From the very first days of the attack by Nazi Germany
on our nation, the troop control bodies envisaged by the prewar TOE began to func-
tion. Their structure was based on such principles as one-man leadership (personal
responsibility and the right of a commander to take a final decision), collectivism
expressed in the presence of military councils in the operational field forces, the
identicalness of the control structure on the operational and tactical levels and
the conformity of the skill level of officials and the specialization of leadership

bodies to the nature of the controlled tasks under the specific conditions of con-
ducting combined-arms combat.

Experience shows that the most important changes during the war years in the struc-
ture of the control bodies occurred in the interests of clearly delimiting functions
between the different sections (services), for strengthening the role of the com-
combined-arms staff, for centralizing rear support, for broadening the opportuni-
ties to control subordinates by the chiefs of the branches of troops (special troops)
and for a certain freeing of the commanders from solving secondary problems. The
basic trend in the change in the role and functions of the various control bodies
became a rise in the centralized influence of the superior levels on the activities
of subordinate control bodies. Consequently, relatively favorable conditions were
created for carrying out the complex process of preparing and conducting an opera-
tion and an engagement. The positive solution to the personnel question contributed
to all of this.

Radio, wire (telephone and telegraph), mobile and signal equipment was employed from
the very first days of the war for controlling the troops on an offensive. In organ-

izational terms this equipment was in the signal units and subunits of the field
forces, formations and units.

In the fronts and armies there were: a separate signals regiment, a line cable bat-
talion, and a number of construction and operational signals companies. In addition,
the front possessed a liaison air squadron and an army had a liaison air flight (in
an air army, two squadrons of 12-15 aircraft each).

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The menus of communications of the rifle corps and divisions, the mechanized corps
and tank divisions were in a separate signals battalion. According to the TO! this
was to have from 8 (in a division) to 10 (in s corps) radios,13 273 km of cable,
around 30 telephone sets, 6-8 motor vehicles (armored vehicles) and 10-12 motor-
cycles. The signals companies of the rifle (tank) regiments and the signals pla-
toons of battalions had low-power radios (6 in e signals company). telephones and
bibycles as well as the regulation signals equipment.

The war disclosed a number of substantial drawbacks in the logistical base of

troop control as well as in the principles of organizing communications. In its
initial period the signal troops were virtually unable to provide dependable con-
trol over troop combat activity. The reliance of wire communications on overhead
lines made it easy for the enemy aviation to knock it out by bombing. The lack of
line and operational signals unit did not make it possible to quickly restore the
destroyed lines. The organizing of the statewide wire network following the radial
principle whereby the communications centers were concentrated in large administra-
tive centers and the absence of alternative centers and bypasses and underground
cable lines reduced communications reliability on the operational levels. The sig-
nificant losses of communications equipment as a result of the forced retreat of the
troops and difficulties in their production forced a sharp reduction in the supply
standards of the signals subunits and a certain reorganization of them. In a divi-
sion, a signals company was organized in the place of a battalion, and a platoon in
a regiment. The number of radios in them was reduced by 6-fold.

In the aim of centralizing the leadership of communications. the separate leadership
of military and civilian communications was eliminated. This created better condi-

tions for effectively solving the questions of organizing control.

New signals units were organized, including: reconstruction-operational battalions,
construction columns and others. Mobile communications centers equipped with high
frequency gear were created for the staffs of a front.

in December 1941, the troops began receiving the RAF-KV-3 and 123? radios, the 586,
586-2 and Ural receivers. and in February 1962, the REM and Sever radios. They all
had better tactical and technical performance, particularly in terms of range of com-
munications and operating indicators. At that time the staffs of the armies and
divisions began receiving the first examples of the BA-66 light armored vehicles
equipped with a machine gun and bullet-proof armor. In 1961, an order of the “K0
was issued which pointed out that unsatisfactory troop control to a significant de-
gree was the result of the poor organization of communications and above all the ig-
noring of radio communications. It was demanded that the commanders and staff offi-
cers themselves learn and teach their subordinates the art of operating a radio. In
May 1942, personal radios were introduced for the commanders of fronts, armies and
formations.

in the second period of the war, further organizational changes were carried out in
the signals unite and subunits.

0n the fronts separate telephone and telegraph companies were organized for rebuild-
ing and providing maintenance on the permanent centers and relay points, the signals
trains and truck-mounted communications centers. As a reserve of HqSHC, separate

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

line and operating companies and battalions were organized as well as units of spe-
cial troops equipped with high-frequency communications gear. These reinforced the
fronts operating in the main sector. There was a process of restoring the signal

battalions of the rifle divisions and corps. A tank (mechanized) corps received a
signal: battalion instead of a headquarters company.

In 1942-1943. new equipment was designed for the telegraph and telephone exchanges.
Thus, in the place of the 230-26 duplex telegraph equipment there was the ZBDA-63
set. A reduction in weight of 3.5-fold and a lowering of the time for setting up
and establishing contact by 5-6-fold increased the nobility of the communications
centers and raised the capacity of the telegraph exchanges. In 1963, there was a
decision to employ a unified magneto call system in the troops. The TAI-43 tele-
phone (magneto) was adopted in the place of a phonic one. The improved operation
of the industrial enterprises helped to increase the deliveries of communications
equipment to the troops. In 1943, in comparison with 19‘2, they increased by 192
percent for radios of the KAT type, by 188 percent for the RB type. by 210 percent
for anode batteries and by 250-300 percent for the Baudot and ST-3S equipment.1“
Possibilities were also increased for establishing radio contact in the armored
troops as from the outset of 1943, 100 percent of the heavy tanks began to be
equipped with radios, 50 percent of the medium tanks and 30 percent of the light
tanks while the tanks of commanders had two radios.

By the beginning of l96é. a new organization was set for the signals units of field
forces (Diagram 2). The signals regiments were designed for equipping and servicing
the basic communications centers and the signals battalions were used for the for-
ward and auxiliary ones. The rear and alternative communications centers were man-
ned by a separate radio company and radios were issued to officers being sent into
the troops. The line communications battalion was given the mission of constructing.
rebuilding and servicing the permanent overhead lines. Analogous tasks were carried
out by the separate construction and operating companies. At the same time signals
battalions were organized for the artillery commanders and dignals companies for the
commanders of the armored and mechanized troops and the chief of the front rears.

The signals subunits on the tactical control level also assumed a new organization.
By the middle of 1944. a liaison air flight (three P0-2 liaison aircraft) was in-
cluded on the TOE of the rifle. tank and mechanized corps. The rifle divisions now
had 123 radios. including 10 in a signals battalion,15 8 in each of the signals com-
panies of the regiments. l in each of the signals platoons of the battalions, 55 in
the artillery units and 25 in the remaining subunits. The commanders and staffs
down to the battalion inclusively thus gained an opportunity to control their sub-
ordinates in combat by radio. In truth. the tactical and technical performance of
the radio equipment still did not meet the conditions of conducting combat opera-
tions, particularly in terms of the range of communications.

By the beginning of 1965, the staffs of the field forces had received the modernized
RAF-KV-S radios with the Karbit printer. The rifle and artillery units were receiv-
ing the A-78 and A-7A USN radios. This made it possible to increase the capacity of
the radio nets and links. to increase the concealment of data transmission and free
the shortwave band. The communications centers began using the LVK-ZO/lZ telegraph
switchboards and the DTA-AS translators which increased the range of telegraph con-

munications. For the first time the signals battalions of the corps and divisions

16

lN)Ri0F11(JAI.lﬂ§EI(MVLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USB(MVLY

P R O l T

signals chief

   
    

20-30 0-2

graph sets (yo-2) R3
5 RAT G RAF
8 RSB 8 an
2 RUK
2 RAF 2 BA!
11 receivers 2 383
an:

C O H B I N B D - A R,M S A R H I E 8

 
 
     

,-

signala line
eginent signals
. battalion

30 tele-

  
     
 
 
 
   
   
   

telep-one
construc-

  

graph sets VPU signals
2 RAT & RAP battalion
8 853 5 RB l9bl-l9b2
RUK

6 receivers

T A N K A R H Y

  
  

     
 

signals
re;inent
30 telegraph sets 32 0-2 (PO-2)
5 NAT 8 RAP
10 kSB 8 KB
2 «K '
22 receivers

    

telegraph
laying

battalion

Diagram 2. Signals Units (Subunits) of Formations in War Years

17

FOR OFFIC1A1.UGIICMVLY
FOR 0F1WCJAI.US£IDNLY

began receiving the Horse telegraph equipment. The number of telephones in them in-
creased by l.S-fold. The quality of the power sources was improved. Equipment was
introduced for the remote control of radios. New repair shops were developed for
repairing the communications equipment and these had improved productivity.

Table 3

Equipment of Signals Units in Army Yield Forces
by Bar's End

  

Amount of Equipment in Army

   
      
 

Communications Equipment Combined-arms

RAT. RAF. RSHAK

  

Sever 5
RB, REM, R58 24
Receivers 12

13

Telegraph sets

As a whole, as can be seen from the data of Table 3, the quantity of radio equipment
in the signals units of field forces over the last 2 years of the war increased by
2-2.5-fold, and telegraph sets rose by 1.5-2-fold. Changes also occurred in the
formations: A tank (mechanized) corps in 1965 had 189 radios and receivers and a
rifle corps had around 600. The setureting of the troops with radio equipment in-
creased sharply. For example. in the formations of the llth Guards Army in June
1964 (the Belorussian Operation). per km of front in the sector of the main thrust
there were 326 radios. while in the counteroffensivs at Stalingrad (November 1962)

there were around 20 of them.

As a result of this the commanders and staffs had vastly different opportunities to
achieve steady troop control on an offensive. Hhile in l9él-l9b2 the limited number
of radios made it possible to create only the minimally necessary number of radio
networks and links, by the end of the war a portion of the radio equipment was as-
signed to the reserves as well as to officers being sent into the troops. Duplicate
positions of radio equipment and intermediate relay points were created. To a
greater degree than before radio communications were provided for the chiefs of the
branches of troops, special troops and rear services.

Consequently. the conditions of combat operations required and the increased eco-
nomic opportunities made it possible during the war years to solve a number of tasks
in improving the technical base of control. The organisational structure of the
signals subunits (units) was developed by specialising them in terms of types of
communications. The tactical and technical performance of the communications equip-
ment was improved. primarily the radios and receivers, and the degree of their

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USE(IVLY

saturation of the units, formations and field forces increased. Changes in the
technical base of control created conditions for achieving qualitatively new indi-
cators for effectiveness, reliability and concealment of information handling and
for a creative search for rational procedures to organise the communications system.
The realization of these opportunities to a significant degree depended upon the or-
ganization of control, including the posts from which leadership was exercised over
troop combat activities.

3. The Organization of Control Posts

According to the views which had developed by the end of the 1930's, troop control
on an offensive was to be carried out from a single control post located in the
sector of the main thrust. Its distance from the first echelon subunits was to be:
3-5 km from the division, 15-20 from the corps, 50-80 from the army and 100-150 km
from the front. The experience of the Soviet-Finnish Her of 1939-1950 showed the
need to set up observation posts as well which were to be deployed 2-5 km away.
However on the eve of the Great Patriotic Her no practical measures had been under-
taken to reinforce the gained experience.

In the summer and autumn of 1941 there were two extremes in the approach to solving
the question. The commanders and staffs of the field forces (fronts and armies)
were located a significant distance away from the troops, some 80-150 km. This was
necessitated by a number of factors, including the cumbersomeness of the control
posts which were set out as a single whole, without dividing into echelons.

At the same time the tactical-level commanders often controlled the troops by per-
sonal example. The commander of the Reserve Front, for example, in an order of

3 August emphasised that the commanders and commissars were personally to lead the
personnel into the attack. An analogous demand was made by the commander-in-chief
of the western Sector.16 As a result, the casualties of command personnel reached
35-60 percent per engagement. The commanders were deprived of the opportunity to
observe enemy actions in the entire zone of the offensive as well as their subordi-
nates and adjacent units and, consequently, to respond promptly to the situation.

The complexity of control was aggravated also by a number of other circumstances.
The enemy by sabotage or by air raids had knocked out the wire communications lines
(up to 60 percent in the zone of the Northwestern Front). The troops were advanc-
ing on a broad front. The supply rate of the signals units and subunits with

radios was just 30-35 percent. In addition, as was noted in the report of 1 August
1941 by the chief of staff of the Western Front, "the troops operate the radio ex-
ceptionally clearly...control using a cipher is torture and the staffs are unable to
use radio signals.”17 On 24 August the chief of staff of the Southwestern Sector
stated that "the use of radios by all levels of staffs is as yet a haphazard phenom-

enon...."‘8

Under the designated conditions it was essential to sharply improve the organization
of control. Here they pursued the main aim of creating optimum opportunities for a

pronqa and effective response by the cannander to the situation.

The search for a solution to the designated problem was apparent primarily in the
fact that the control posts during the offensive began to be echeloned, that is,
along with the command post temporary (auxiliary) and command-observation posts

19

FOR OFEKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL Us}: ONLY

(VPU and KN?) began to be organized. In the Yel'nya Operation a northern, central
and southern m functioned (in keeping with the nunber of assault groupings). At
the beginning of the counteroffenaive at Rostov, control was carried out from the
front's observation post set up near the ecu-and post of the 37th Army which was
fighting in the sector of the main thrust. An attempt was also made to nan a con-
nand post of a snall size (five or six officers) headed by a col-sander, for example,
in the offensive in August 1941 on the Smolensk axis. By the autun of 19101, on
the front. arey and divisional levels, the practice had been established of dividing
the control post into a caused and rear control post.

The creation of auxiliary control posts in the winter of 19101-1942 became a typical
phenomenon as a consequence of the fact that the troops were advancing along axes
while the comaunications equipment, particularly radios, was in short supply. The
control posts, in addition, were brought closer to the troops conducting combat op-
erations. The cal-sand post of the Southwestern Front in December 1941 was 4-6 in
from the comnd posts of the assault grouping formations. while the divisional com-
nand posts were 2-3 kn free the forward edge of the eneay defenses. The col-land
posts of the Western and Kalinin fronts (Decenber Biol-January 19102) were located
10-12 kn behind the first echelon subunits. The observation post of the Volkhov
Front in conducting the Lyuban' Operation (the co-ander spent 40-50 percent of the
tine at it) was set up 1 or 2 lua fro: the comand post of the 2d Assault Army. The
divisional observation posts were 1 km from the forward edge.

In organizing control in operations during the smer and autumn campaign of 1943.
temporary control posts continued to operate on operational levels. This was ex-
plained chiefly by the absence of a corps control element and by the presence of a
large number of formations (up to 10-15) in the troop assault groupings. The coe-
nander's place in combat had been defined. The NKD in the Order No 306 demanded
"the squad coumander is to be directly in the extended line.... The platoon, coe-
pany and battalion col-sander is to be behind the battle formation of his subunit

in a place from which each of then could observe the course of combat both of his
own subunit as well as on the flanks of the adjacent units and the enemy.... A regi-
mental or divisional comender should be at the conned post (observation post) where
he can more conveniently control conbat...." This demand was reinforced by the pro-
visions of the 19102 Infantry Field Manual.

in organizing troop control on the offensive in the winter of 1962-1963. a new fea-
ture was the practice of centralizing leadership over those formations which were
fighting to destroy a surrounded eneny grouping (a "Ring" operation). For this a
unified comnd post was set up and free it they controlled the troops fighting
around the encirclcment perineter. The desire to echelon control posts began to be
more apparent. Thus. in preparing for the Ostrogorhsk-Bossosh' Operation for the
period of the offensive there were provisions to have a cot-land post in the front,
an alternative comand post and a second control echelon. Due to the significant
distance of the front col-tend post from the couand poet of the 3d Tank Army an
auxiliary control post was set up. The front's comand post had an operational air
army group, and under the staffs of the 60th and 3d Tank armies and the XVIII Rifle
Corps auxiliary control posts of the air groups were created. The army comand

posts were brought up 11-17 km from the troops. the divisional ones to 2-10 km and
the regiaental ones to 1-2 km.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The setting up of control posts in an operation and engage-sot in l9b6-1945 was car—
ried out consldorlny, the previous positive experience.

In preparing the offensive in the summer of 1966 in Belorussis, in the First Baltic
Front the field headquarters was split into three positions. The conand post of
the front was deployed 50 km behind the troops one the second control echelon was
20 km behind it. An auxiliary control post was set up consisting of 20 officers
ready to leave for the observation post. This was set up 4 km behind the forward
edge. The army command posts were located 7-18 km from the line of attack, those
of the corps were 3-7 km, those of the divisions were 2-4 while the observation

posts were 1.5 km.

 
 
  

{ﬁn-PW "[3 - _..

, AW! nos-Own W up)“ ’0

p .l-N -Mlcsdpnsl ops-'7 I I I. '
"'A 3 2- "“17“ 8 WM. 9
. 1 Arm: "(ﬂjAj __ ' .

. ’ L":
Amwalfj “ ”,9” "mmzzf‘ltf

  
   

 

Diagram 3. Placement of Basic Control Posts of Units, Formations

and Field Forces in the Jumping-Off Position
(Vistnin-Uder Operation. January 1945)

, Key: n--(‘.omposition of army control posts; b—Command post; c--0bservation
post; d—-Second control echelon; e-0fficers and soldiers; f--Motor
vehicles: g--Radios; h--0ccupied ares;
l--0bservntion post of rifle division commander; 2--0bservation post
of army commander; 3--Second control echelon; lo--Observation post of
rifle corps commder; S--Army command post; 6—Second control
echelon; 7--Auxilinry control post of air army; 8--0perational
group of air corps; 9--Auxiliary control post of front; lO—-Coslland
post of tank (mechanized) corps; 11--0bservation and signals post
of tank corps (mechanized corps); l2--Note. Distances of control
post given in kilometers.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An extensive network of control posts (Diagram 3) was set up also in the Vistula-
Oder Operation. The air army VPU was located near the command posts of the armies
(combined-arms and tank) while those of the air corps were at the command posts of
the tank (mechanized) corps. The staffs of the tank formations set up observation
and signals points (PNS) consisting of officers from the operations section, techni-
cal service. 2 or 3 spotters and messengers. Aviation guidance officers were sent
to the brigades of the first echelon. Artillery unit commanders were also located
at the brigade command posts. The commanders of the regimental artillery groups
were located at the command (observation) posts of the rifle regiment commanders.

A number of particular features in organizing control can be traced in the Berlin
Operation. particularly in conducting combat operations in the capital of Nazi
Germany. The network of command (observation) posts was more extensive both on the
tactical and operational levels. They were located in direct proximity to the
troops conducting combat operations and sometimes even in their battle formations
in the aim of increasing the directness of control and proceeding from the need to
observe the battlefield. The air representatives were at the command posts of the
rifle and tank formations while artillery spotters were in the rifle (tank) bat-
talions and companies.

During the third period of the war, a special role was assigned to the operations
groups (06) made up from the personnel of the command post. The practice of organ-
izing them became most widely spread in the armored formations. The formation of
operations groups was caused by the increased possibilities of the communications
equipment. by the necessity of bringing leadership closer to the troops as well as
by the fact that the command post fell behind the troops which advanced at rela-
tively high rates.

Table 4

Composition of Operations Groups of Formations in
Armored and Mechanized Troops

 
    
 
 

  
 

Name of Formations

 
 
  

of personnel

Tank (mechanized) corps
Tank (mechanized) brigade

The operations groups. as is seen from the data of Table b, were small in size. At
the same time they possessed a significant number of radios and transport. This
was, consequently, a workable and rather mobile organ for directing combat actions
in a dynamic situation. It played an important role in troop control, particularly
when they went over to pursuit. In addition, the viability of the system of control
posts as a whole was increased. The creation of the operations groups, in truth.
had its negative aspects. The communications equipment was scattered. The basic
staff personnel was separated from the commander and to a definite degree was turned

22

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.uu we :2— 32—03626 can coda-nu 3900.33: ouvoh a van alma—

nac can .523 .52 .873 30588 3- 82.8 5.735: .35..

ac vac 3333030.. .uousu

econ $00.."qu gunman .900.“qu mogul—"=03: .uoowuuo nauuqu—o Cacao-loo hung—av av ouoowwuo
unaduloounu venue-.5 luau-«3% 1a. anuoo .suﬂul Hui Gnu «a 2—50..» Incuuuuono 2:.

.358» 3338358 uooa 63:33.5:th “anon

. 302
.3530 arduous—3V 33:55:13

300m vac-Boo caucﬂuoudcnlz 330500 Houunoo 3.000713. 3.2. cowuuaoanoIanu mung Houuaou

$33.5...“ 3.2. Balcouuﬂ “883.3 922 33.335 éusnuﬁ

"30.3.3.3 0.3.2::

«30352005 Mack’s unsung—Ila 3.2!.» Sign; «Eqnvonwaloolo museum «only. «3.30 we;
“again manta «ABC 3.3.5.6 33300 any: Scum manqunualou unsung—.30: 3.0: no acouozomnnu “>8.

I I I I I I 2|» owls
sIa Sls «To. SIS 8. a: BIS SIR Blow
. _ «I. «I. 2|.» «I»; «J3 ”In
I I I I 21. 2|» ole 21»
«I. «.4 h «In E Sln 2|» SI...“
.3: mo v3.5.— Pun—F
I I I I I _I I SIS
cl» 2|... BI“. 81... 8. ed Slum 91.8 SIB
«I. «I. «I. «I. I . I «J... ml»
.I I I I £13 I Elk 8|».
«In nla I «I». BIS 8|! ﬁle. 31....
ya: no v3.3.— 3805
I I I I I I a...» SIR
2|." 8...... I I I 8:8 ﬁls 8I8
I «I. nl. «In I ol... «I... . “In
I I I I . I I ﬁle SIR
«I... oIn “I... Elm I 8I2 8|». .IS

:3 no v3.5.— 3:...

5...? «1.3.3.3.. 2.33:: n.—
go—Janh .8de- Egnaon
:25... 52......

caiﬁp-BG-IM 2.
2.3232...» .5... .—
alive-3.8390 Mad
5.3.? clans-a3— na

.13.: 5.8
315.88....

E»: clung-:8 caucus-n z

Ila-3E 83!. a Mon
.23» 3.3:...

page alto-£38.33.— an
nun-.33...» u...»-

Qligaou . 0....
8:5. Sauna-Io MM.—

.323.

38:10:03.

5.... gas—43.6.. quay-5n Wm.“

c.3232...» .355. .865
83...: aliases-I mu

It:
.835... 5:93 3.528388 3.—
5.5. clans-ac: A:

 

8.0V .
'13n3
”141e
f
’3 1 D1 0.

)0 uswimsn
e 9 £5
316.53 lde
019C 02“?
006600 80 V-
ff biog... l—
e .8168].
Div 0388 N
9n anhl O
“4.12 CAPE
I’D
7 .uuvxum m
ylz
r. 3.16“ I. 3
tu3ft Ru 2.“
a '
.180 .8918.“ 0
031039358“
1h19h2 ho
H8068 98!
f3 0“ I
e I 2 I1 9
bl... 6101...“- R
£26 .8019
v £2 a m
.12th c
01911.! .1:
1e 10V1n
at..." I‘lanfo

89 6.1 r.

V I 9 I 95..
13 .29... 99 .
hid]. 7e670)
C1 012315d
r7215h25 c
A 11 8 hr.

.10 o 0 can
lvffv nivhu
an n6lnt0
[.1 02.1201 C
t 62 f e
“0:”...90.” IOoMm
c2033103le
[2463f13l\w
Ooawo tabs

9

.1 . 192.1...“
MIV .179.er
SOhSOlhOOi
Tfilfssfft
*
H”! (WI-N1“ USE ONLY

into an information-collecting body. The splitting of the tonand post in two with
a limited amount of conunications equipment often led to a delay in collecting
datn and assigning tasks according to the existing situation. This was explained
by the fact that the comander was forced to make an urgent trip to a count! post
or report a decision to a chief of staff who was there. Only from there could the
taslts be assigned or issued to subordinates. In considering this, in a number of
instances, in 1945, up to 15-25 percent of the radios were assigned to support con-
trol as part of the 06. Often the chief of staff went there with a group of offi-

cers, particularly with abrupt changes in the situation and with the need to take a
new decision.

The data of Table 5 also show that there was a further process of bringing the con-
trol posts closer to the troops conducting combat operations. This was particularly
characteristic again for the armored troops formations. Hhile a contend post ‘of a
mechanized corps, according to the prewar views, was to be 7-10 km away, during the
second period of the war (from the experience of the 9 corps in the Orel and
Belgorod-Khar'kov operations) the distance was 3-6 km and in the third period of the
war the cornnand posts of the 12 corps fighting in the Belorussian and Vistula-Oder
operations were 3-5 km from the brigade cot-sand posts while those of 6 corps were
even 1 or 2 Ln from the contend posts of the brigades advancing in the main sector.
The designated trend was also characteristic of the rifle formations and units. The
rule formulated in one of the orders of the troop cos-under of the First Ukrainian
Front had become a canon requirement: “To establish a procedure whereby the com-
manders...during the day direct combat from the observation posts where they can see
the battlefield. their troops and the enemy grouping.... The co-sander is to have
with him the operations group of the staff, the artillery chief, the signals chief,
the intelligence officer and a group of officers or sergeants as delegates and with-
out fail a direct link with the observation posts of subordinate contenders. The
army connanders...are to have their observation posts in the army's Iain sector. By
the end of the day the army comander is to return to the staff, sum up the results
of battle, give orders...for the next day and report the operational plan to me."19

Thus, the war posed a number of difficult problems in the organization of control
posts. The main ones were the following: the creation of a small number of mobile
control posts capable of moving behind the advancing troops as well as their posi-
tioning in areas and in such zones where the cos-lander could view the battlefield or
at least that portion of it where the troops were carrying out the main tasks. It
was essential to have a positioning of the control posts of cooperating troops that
would ensure the rapid and effective response to all changes in the situation.

Their costined placement became one of the ways for solving this problem.

The characteristics of the control bodies and control equipment as well as the
principles of organizing control posts during the years of the past war makes it
possible to conclude that the improving of control system, both under present-day
conditions and in the future, is possible by the further specialising of the con-
trol bodies and by the bringing of them as well as the tactical and technical data
of the com-unications equipment into accord with the nature of the tasks being car-
ried out. The war's experience leads the couanders and the staffs to a creative
approach to considering the apparent trends in the organizing of the control posts
proceeding from the positive examples provided by the war as well as the negative
ones which had a restraining influence on effective troop control in combat.

2’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll ()H-‘lf‘lAI. USE ONLY

During the war years. the greatest bottlenecks in the material and technical base of
control were evident. These were: the limited aaount of equipment making it possi-
ble to effectively and directly solve the task of collecting and processing situa-

tional data and the poor indicators of communications equipment, particularly radios.
All of this makes it possible to feel that under present-day conditions the most im-

portant areas for the development of control equipment should be: the bold use of
the results of the attained scientific and technical progress, the transition to in-
tegrating individual types of office equip-eat and utilizing standard automated com-
plexes and broadening the area of use of control equipment in the activities of the
commanders, staffs and other control bodies.

Combat practice has shown that an effective organisation of troop control is a lost
inportant factor ensuring success in an operation and engagement. This question
should be settled considering the specific situational conditions, the capabilities
of the communications equipment, the developlsnt prospects of events and the neces-
sity of achieving coordinated actions by all the branches of troops (special troops)
in combined-arms combat. Only in such an instance can one count on achieving stabil-
ity, effectiveness and concealment of troop control on an offensive.

FOOTNOTES

1K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [works]. 2d Edition, Vol 23, p 3&6.

aSluehba Obshchevoyskovykh Shatsbov" [Service of Combined-Area Staffs], Moscow,
1940, p 11.

35. V. Manstein, "Verlorene Siege." Bonn. 1955, p 476.

“See: A. D. Bagreyev, "Voyennoye Iskusstvo Kapitalististicheskikh Gosuderstv.
1939-1945 gg." [Military Art of the Capitalist States. 1939-1945], Moscow. 1960,
pp 90-91; E. Middeldorf. "Taktiks v Russkoy Kanpenii" [Tactics in the Russian
Canpsign], translated from the German, Moscow, 1958, pp 192-210.

55cc: "istoriys Vtoroy Mirovoy Voyny" [History of World War 11], Moscow. 1977,
Vol 8, p 45.

GSec: VOYHNNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 8, 1978, p 33.
7TsAM0 [Central Archives of the Ministry of Defense], folio 22, inv. 159, file 21:

sheet 13: folio 200, inv. 36, file 18, sheet 228; folio 382, inv. 8447, file 16,
sheet 17; folio 357, inv. 5973, file 6, sheet 11.

8!bld., folio 217. inv. 1224, file 10, sheets 11-12.

91bid., folio 38, inv. 11353, file 981. sheets 4-8.

’olbid.. folio 323, inv. 5766, file 11, sheet a.

nSee: “Istoriya Vclikoy Otechestvennoy Voyny Sovetskogo Soyusa 1941-1965" [History

of the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union of 1961-1965], Moscow, 1965. Vol 6,
p 126.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOItOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

'2Thc qualitative composition of the military council seahers was characterized by
the following data: virtually all of then had a higher Iilitary-political, party
or general education, and sore than one-half of the. possessed experience in party
political work under the Civil War conditions. Along the 40 first Iilitary coun-
cil members of the fronts were 3 aenbers of the Politburo, 10 members of the
party Central Committee and 26 military council neabera were full-tine political
workers. all the military council neabera of the tank araies had a special aili-
tary education (aee: WIS? voowzamm $11., No 16, 1978, p 27).

'3Aa a total a rifle division had 63 radios, a tank division had 102 and a methane
izcd corps around 400.

1"See: "Voyennyye Svyaziaty v Dni Voyny i Mira” [Signal Troops in Days of Her and
Peace], Moscow. 1968, pp 175-182.

15A signals battalion of a corps and division by that time consisted of radio and
telephone cable companies and a aobile liaison platoon.

16‘l‘sAHO, folio 816. inv. 3120. file 1, sheet 22; folio 208, inv. 2454, file 32,
sheet 263.

'7Ihid., folio 208. inv. 3039, file 36, sheet 35.
”than, folio 251, inv. 6883, file 2, sheets a-s.

19Ibid., folio 236. inv. 2673, fi1e 2538, sheets 105. 106.

26

IYJR 0W1“(1AI.[EHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 2: CHARACTERISTIC IRAIIS IN THE ACTIVITIES OF CONTROL BODIES IN PREPARING
FOR AN OFFEﬂSIVE

The conditions which influenced troop control during the years of the Great Patri-
otic Hat predetermined the content of activities carried out by the commanders and
the staffs, the methods and style of their work in preparing for the offensive as
well as the scope of the measures carried out. In each specific instance the pro-
cedure and forms (methods) of carrying out one or another task had their particular
features. At the sane time there was much in col-on in the work of the bodies pro-
viding troop control on an offensive.

1. Methods and Style of Work of Col-anders and Staffs

Characteristic of the basic offensive operations in the Great Patriotic Her was
their preparation successively on the front and army levels and then in the forma-
tions and units. A positive aspect of such a method was the fact that on each level
there was (of course. under the condition of providing sufficient time) the high
quality carrying out of the preparatory measures. Moreover, secrecy of the prepar-
ations was achieved as the subordinate staffs learned of the pending tasks only at
the designated time. Experience shows that under the designated conditions the
following sequence of work was most characteristic for the commander and the
combined-arms staff.

Having received a task. the commander of a front studied it. For assessing the sit-
uation he called in his closest assistants, the members of the military council, in-
cluding the chief of staff, the artillery commander as well as the chief of the
operations directorate (section). Often this work involved the chief of the rear,
the chief of intelligence and the chief of the engineer troops. As a result the
commander made the decisions for the operation. The staff drew it up on a map.
Under the commander's leadership the involved officials worked out a plan for the
forthcoming operations. Then the decision was successively detailed, encompassing
an ever-broader range of questions. It was thoroughly worked through in exercises,
military games and reconnoiterings. At the same time measures were carried out for
military and political training, for the supplying of the troops and for rear sup-
port. As the date for the start of the offensive grew nearer, the chiefs of the
branches of troops were called in for making the plan more concrete and then the
tasks were given to the army commanders.

Some 5-10 days before the start of combat operations, on the basis of the decision,
the plan was worked out for the forthcondng offensive in an army. During this same

27

FOR OIIICJAI.USElNNLY
FOR 0FFKHA|.USE¢DNLY

time the corps staffs became involved in the planning of combat operations (most
often on the basis of the oral receiving of tasks) while the division staffs began
to work 3-6 days before. During this period great attention was given to the organ-
ization of cooperation, including on the spot. In a number of instances the deci-
sions of subordinates were heard at military council sessions. work was carried out
in this sequence at the field headquarters and formations of the Volkhov Front in
August 1962 (the Sinyavino Operation), the Southwestern and Stalingrad fronts in the
autumn of 1952 (the "Uran" Operation). the Central Front in July 1943 (the Orel Oper-
ation), the Second Belorussian Front in June 1956 (the Hogilev Operation), in tank
armies in preparing for such operations as the Vistula-Oder and Berlin as well as in
the combined-arms armies in preparing for a majority of the operations carried out
by them in 1963-1945.

As an example (Diagram 4) we have shown the work of the field headquarters of the
First Belorussian Front. the 2d Guards Tank and 8th Guards Armies as well as their
formations in preparing for the Vistula-Oder Operation. Pros the graph'a data. it
follows that with 47 days to prepare for the front operation, for 64 percent of the
time n lunited group of persons at the front field headquarters was concerned with
the operational portion of preparations (taking the decision, planning and so forth)
In the following 19 days, the questions were solved in an analogous manner in the
armies. Some 5-6 days before the start of the offensive. specific tasks were issued
to the corps comnanders and 2-3 days before to the divisional commanders. Conse-
quently, only 20-25 percent of the available time was spent on preparing the opera-
tion and organizing combat operations in parallel in the field forces and formations.

The task was carried out in approximately the same manner in preparing the Lwow-
Sandomierz Operation (July 1956). when the army commanders gave the tasks to the
corps commanders 11 days before the start of the operation and the latter gave the
missions to the division (brigade) commanders 5 days before the start. Such an al-
location of tine was asde chiefly for achieving concealment of the operation.

As a whole the successive preparation of Operations made it possible for the control
bodies to encompass the planning question: sufficiently fully, profoundly en’ in de-
tail. to achieve effective coordination of the efforts of the involved sen and equip-
ment and to thoroughly support troop combat operations.

Frequently the preparations for an offensive were carried out virtually in parallel
(that is. with a certain time lead for the superior levels) by carrying out the
measures in the front and in the arsies. successively involving the formation com-
manders and staffs in this work. This was done in the course of preparing the
troops of the First Baltic Front for the Vitebsk-Orsha Operation (Diagram 5). A
number of frontal operations were prepared in such a manner in the second stage of
the strategic offensive in Belorussia in July-August 1946. With the obtaining of
the mission for the offensive, the front commander studied it. First of all. he
determined the content and times for carrying out the combat tasks and the amount of
necessary information for taking the decision, and at the sane time through the of—
ficers of the sections (directorates) issued the preliminary orders to the troops.
During this tine the chief of staff provided background information for the basic
officials at the field headquarters and on the basis of this they began to prepare
proposals for the commander and to issue instructions to subordinates. In the fol-
lowing stage the connsnder worked out the decision for the operation. The staff

IN)! OEWHCJAl.lﬂ5EZCHULY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI". ONLY

P
a;
E
is
g?
3%
3

Cocmmcnnu
ennui

 

0133:;- 4, Sequence of work by Control Bodies in Preparing
for Vistula—Oder Operation

Key: a--Pront (army); b--November 1965; co-Deceuber l94h; d--January 1945;
e--Pirst Belorussian Front; f--Second Guards Tank Arny; g--Bighth

Guards Army; h--Arny formations; i--Receivin3 of directive from uqsuc
“0 220275 and its study; j--Staff training; k-?lanning of operation;
£--Rear staff exercise; n-Giving of tasks by directives; n-Carrying
out neasures to support operation, providing of control and aid;
o--Hilitary gain (8th Army, 69th Army. 5th Assault Army and 1st and
2d Guards Tank Armies); p-—Horking out operational training assignb
went; q—-Map military game; r--Coalumd-headquarters exercises with
corps counander; s—-Denonstration tactical exercise; t-Plannin3 of
operation; u—-Givins of tasks to corps connander; v-Radio training;
w—-Carrying out neasures to support exercise; x-Troop exercises
with assigned arny units; y--Providing control and aid; s-Prepared-
ness briefing; aa-—Start of operation; bb-«Conducting exericses for
military and political training; cc-—Regrouping of troops; ddo-ke-
ceiving of tasks by division commander; ee-0rganization of conbat
operations. Bringing up troops to jumping—off position.

when necessary they worked cut a reconnaissance plan and summoned the officers in-
volved in the task to the command post or to a designated area. With the obtaining

of the initial data. work was organized in an analogous nanner in the subordinate
levels. The designated sequence of work use particularly typical for tank arny

field headquarters.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omnu. USE ONLY

an I; 55 53 15 I16 ‘ NJ 218 21a“

llmuupmnmn d' ”mediums we no 3 m

C "mum-u odccscm «mam w may
lose mm aqﬂuv do
mun mum am ‘

  
  
 

 

 

_ _ - __—.-. _ ~———_——————_—_

o
udonmudcnud
OWN

f 0cm“ nos-m, anemic Mun

’l-dnp
onspouuu

dim.” ' d ”modem Arman-Id no 062cm»

prmenmv : WWW

______ ————5

Ilsa-wuss enemas | i Mock-Is KIN

III-(MMIG dot-aux 30- l . ..
aw worm» amuse”: Otymecnsnslus Winona-as mu
manna-m |

s-
l 43mranuun

Cusvsso

y-o
Cocduueuus
opuuu

Diagram 5. Sequence of Hort by Control Bodies in Preparing
for the Vitebsk—Orshs Operation

Key: a--Pirst Baltic Front; b~-Issuing plan to headquarters officials and
army connmnder; c--Planning of operation; issuing tasks to army
commander; d--Carrying out measures to support operations; e-Issuing
rear order; f—-Providing control and aid; g-Adopting of decision;
h-P1anning of operation; giving of combat tasks by particular combat
orders; i--Conducting command-staff games; j—-Issuing conbat planning
table; k-63d Army; 19-Army formations; m--Exercises for conbat and
political training; n-Regrouping of troops; o-Adopting of decisions
by corps commander; p-Adopting of decisions by divisional commanders;
q--Planning and organization of combat operation; r-Bringing up
troops into jump-off position; s-—Stsrt of operation.

Thus. in the preparations of the 4th Tank Army for the Orel Operation (July 1963),
the army's coriander 3.5 hours after receiving the mission fron the staff gave pre-
liminary instructions to the troops for the offensive. 0n the basis of these the
formations began to organize combat operations. During the following 2 hours, the
commander conducted reconnaissance involving the basic officials of the army field
headquarters and the corps cosmmnders. Here the operation order was given. The
formation commanders and staffs began to organize combat operations. Consequently,
of the available 23 hours (from 1100 hours on 25 July to 1000 hours on 26 July), al-
most 20 hours. that is. 86 percent of the time, were used to simultaneously carry
out the tasks of preparing for combat operations in the army and its formations.

In a number of instances a high level of parallel work was also inherent to the
field headquarters of the combined-arms armies and to the staffs of rifle forma-
tions.

30

FOR 0FFK]AI.USE(M¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the 10th Army (December 1961), under the conditions when the military council had
only 25 hours to prepare the operation, its co-ander within an hour worked out his

decision on a map. Since the offensive was to be carried out along three axes. two
operations groups (Maj Gena V. A. hishulin and X. S. Kalganov) were organized from
the personnel of the command post for more rationally organizing combat operations
and for stable control. The tasks for the generals heading the operations groups
were set by the army consander. Then they traveled to the formations for carrying
out the required range of work to prepare for the offensive. The army cal-sander,
having ordered the chief of staff to supervise the bringing up of the units to the
jump-off position, began to organize the coﬁat operations of the central troop
group. Characteristicelly the co-anders of the rifle divisions and regiments were
smoned to the comand post of the assault grouping for the issuing of tasks.
After giving the combat aissions to them, the cemender then gave instructions for
cooperation.

Form the given examples it can be seen that parallel work in preparing an offensive
during the war years was achieved mainly by the fact that in the armies. formations
and units the same type of work (a decision was taken, cooperation was organized
and so forth) simultaneously (with a certain lead for the superior levels). It is
important to emphasize that under these conditions the colander focused his atten-
lion on carrying out only the main tasks. in providing extensive initiative to sub-
mdinate cor-renders. All of this made it possible to prepare an offensive in a

:- ‘latively short time and this was a strong point of such a method in organizing an
offensive. The drawback was that certain questions involved in the organization of
combat operations were issued to subordinates piecemeal (the decision, then the
principles of cooperation followed by the questions of support. the organization of
control and so forth). Subsequently these were made more concrete and detailed. As
a consequence of this the initial data needed for complete combat operations plan-
ning was lacking in the lower levels up to a certain time.

During the years of the Great Patriotic Var there also were instances when an offen-
sive was prepared for on the basis of sequentially issued instructions to carry out
preparatory measures (regrouping. the march to the jumping-off area for the offen-
sive and the creation of materiel stocks) and then the instructions were issued with
the setting of the combat missions. This method was successfully employed, for ex-
ample, in preparing the Prague Operation. Thus, the conmander of the lath Guards
Tank Army received the regrouping mission at 1630 hours on 2 Hay 1945. Having made
his decision, in 20-40 minutes through the army staff he issued preliminary instruc-
tions to the troops. By 2200 hours. the combat orders for the regrouping had been
sent out to the formations, and by 0200 hours on 3 May, that is. by the start of the
march. copies of the regrouping plan and orders according to the types of support.
The commander received the mission for the offensive on the morning of S May. The
combat orders for reaching the jumping-off area were sent out to the formations by
1100 hours and the tasks were forwarded through the staff by 1600 hours of the same
day. The operation order was received in the formations by 01.00 hours on 6 May.
Consequently, of the existing 10 hours for organizing the regrouping. the army com-
mander spent up to 1.5 hours on the work. that is, 6-7 percent of the time. In or-
ganizing the offensive which consenced at 1400 hours on 6 May, of the available 32
hours the army field headquarters spent 3-10 hours (10-11 percent of the time) on
work. after which the formations began to carry out the tasks confronting them in
organizing combat operations.

31
FOI_0F11C1AL.USEGDNLY

Since in similar conditions the time factor assumed dominant significance. the com—
mander first of all formulated the tasks for those formations which were to be the
first into battle. As the situation became clearer and as the basic planning docu—
ments were worked out, subordinates received the combat planning tables (copies of
the cooperation plan) and orders for the types of support. For example, in the 19th
Army, in committing to an engagement (the East Pomeranian Operation), the commander
with a group of officers and the formation commanders even before the arrival of the
forward units traveled out to the area from which the army was to start its opera-
tion. By this time the division commanders had received preliminary orders for mov-
ing up and general data on the enemy which were concretized on the spot. "Here, on
the spot," commented K. K. Rokossovskiy, "we worked out the tasks and coordinated
the cooperation of the infantry with the III Tank Corps and the reinforcement
units." Having studied the received tasks, the formation commanders left to meet
the advancing troops. As the plan of the operation was clarified and made more de-
tailed by the army staff, the formations received instructions on the allocating of
reinforcements and on the organization of combat and logistical support.

Thus, the choice of the work methods (from the viewpoint of the sequence of this
work) in preparing an offensive during the years of the Great Patriotic Her was de-
termined by a number of conditions. chiefly by the availability of time and by the
necessity of concealing the plan of the operation. Even then those methods origin-
ated which in the postwar years were termed the method of successive work (on the
basis of the complete planning of the operation (engagement) in the superior levels
and then in the subordinate ones), the method of parallel work (on the basis of plan-
ning simultaneously on two or more levels) and the by-order method. Characteristi-
cally. during the war years the sequence of carrying out the necessary measures was
most often a combination of the designated methods. This is quite natural since
each of them had its positive and negative features.

One must point out a whole series of particular features in preparing an offensive
in the work of the commanders and staffs of formations and units.

During virtually the entire first period of the war, combat was organized within
times limited to several hours and more rarely days. Under the designated condi-
tions the basic work method was the parallel execution of preparatory measures for
the offensive in the formations, units and subunits. This was characteristic for
the work of the commanders and staffs from the divisions of the 24th Army in August
1951 as well as the 10th Army in December 1941. In the preparation of the 37th Army
formations for the counteroffensive at Rostov, the method of issuing a series of se-
quential orders was employed. As a consequence of the complexity of the situation,
the exrremely limited initial information and the little experience of the command-
ers and staffs in organizing reconnaissance, the task was given only in very general
outlines while the situation was assessed without terrain reconnaissance. For ex-
ample. this was the case in 15 out of the 18 formations of the 3d and bth Assault
armies in preparing for the Toropets-Kholm Operation (January 1962).

During the second period of the war, a division commander assessed the situation,
including on the spot. during the period of conducting reconnaissance, usually study-
ing the task on the basis of the obtained operation order and often speaking person-
ally with the corps commander. Then the decision was taken. Its individual ques-
tions were adjusted and tried out in command-staff and troop exercises. An example
of such a sequence was the work done by the commander of the b7th Rifle Division on

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the eve of the counteroffcnsive at Stalingrad. In a number of instances the work
was organized somewhat differently. The commander of the 14th Guards Rifle Divi-
slon made his decision for combat using a map as he was well acquainted with the
terrain and on 16 Nbvember 1942 gave the tasks to the regimental commuﬂers. 0n the
same day he conducted reconnaissance. The tasks were adjusted, the start lines were

set, markers and signals were established and the procedure indicated for supporting
the boundary area with the adjacent h7th Guards Rifle Division. After this the
staff began to work out the combat planning table. In preparation for the Orel
Operation (July 1943). the commander of the llth Guards Rifle Division, having re-
ceived the task and studied it, heard proposals on the employment of the branches

of troops from his deputies and the chiefs of the branches of troops (special troops)
at the conference held. A number of questions was clarified in reconnaissance and
worked through in a command-staff game, at a demonstration regimental exercise and
battalion and company exercises with field firing. Only after this was the decision
finally formulated and issued to subordinates.

During the third period of the war, the acquired skills made it possible to skill-
fully combine the diverse methods of organizing combat and to achieve an effective
solution to the problems of preparations even in times restricted to l or 2 days.
This was achieved by the planned nature of the work as well as by the improved con-
tent of the information and the better organizational activities through the issuing
of preliminary orders and the precise allocation of functional duties on the staffs.
The various sources of information were more skillfully used, chiefly in assessing
the situation, including air and radio reconnaissance, as was the case in the 86th,
125th and 63d Guards Rifle divisions of the Leningrad Front in January 1966. The
role of the observation post service increased sharply. From the data of reports
from the formations of the 43d Army, on the eve of the Belorussian Operation they
detected up to 70 percent of all the targets located in the first enemy position.

or greatest interest for today's conditions is the experience of the commanders and
staffs from the formations of the armored and mechanized troops.

The particular features of their activities were determined, in the first place, by
the specific nature of the tasks to be carried out. that is, by the completing of
the breakthrough of defenses. by pursuit of the enemy at a rapid pace and by opera-
tions along separate axes; second.y. by the composition of the formations (the pres-
ence of a significant number of tanks, SAD [self-propelled artillery mount] and
motor vehicles); thirdly by their positioning sequentially in the concentration.
waiting and jump-off areas. that is. out of contact with the enemy; fourthly, by the
times of preparing for the offensive (this was limited to hours). It must also be
considered that with the receiving of a task, the commander of a tank (mechanized)
corps had to determine or clarify on the spot the jumping-off area. the rautes for
reaching the start line, while the staff and the chiefs of the branches of troops
had to organize a commandant service [traffic control service] and ensure the en-
gineer preparations of the routes and areas, check the condition of the materiel and
the availability of ammunition and fuel, evacuation and repair equipment. Moreover,
it was essential to coordinate a number of questions with the rifle formations, in-
cluding becoming free of the rifle troops. and often for the preparation of routes
by these troops with the start of combat operations.

Proceeding from what has been stated, in maintaining the sequence of work character-
istic of the rifle formations, the commander of a tank (mechanized) corps (brigade)

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

devoted great attention to assessing the terrain from the standpoint of its pass~
ability and to studying the tasks to be carried out by the rifle troops. Having
taken a preliminary decision on the map and having issued instructions to the staff
as well as to the chiefs of the branches of troops and services, he, together with
the comanders of the brigades (battalions) and reinforcenent units, traveled along
the routes of advance to the forward edge and for this all the officers put on com-
mon troop uniforms. During this time the corps staff through the staffs of the
combined-arms formations assembled intelligence data on the enemy in the area of
the breakthrough (it was prohibited for a corps to carry out intelligence work) and
made the calculations for the move-up. Sometimes an operations group headed by the
deputy corps consnder was assigned from the personnel of a col-and post to organize
traffic control on the by-pass routes and the crossing areas. This was the case,
in particular, in preparing to comit the IV Guards Mechanized Corps to the engage-
ment in the Nikopoi'-Krivoy Rog Operation in January 1966.

There was the important feature that the combat decision taken for reconnaissance
was approximate. it had to be concretized proceeding from the situation which de-
veloped in the course of breaking through the enemy defenses by the rifle forms-
tions. The decision, or more accurately its individual questions (the direction of
the main thrust, the tasks of the foraations and so forth), was clarified as the
tank formations were brought up to the start line. For this reason the basic method
of issuing tasks with the start of an offensive, even in the first period of the
war, on the corps-brigade levels, and in following years on inferior levels, was the
giving of orders by the cousnder to subordinates circularly (that is, simultaneous-
ly) by radio. This also established the bases of cooperation in combat, as each of
the brigade cormsnders heard and understood not only his own tasks but also those
of the adjacent units. Orders on the types of support were most often given verbal-
ly.

As a whole, the work methods of the contenders and staffs during the war years were
continuously improved. The activities of lquﬂc had a significant influence on this
process as it directly generalized and analyzed in detail the combat experience, in
formulating the basic demands on the work of the comanders and staffs in preparing
for the offensive.

As a result there was the widespread practice of carrying out the preparatory meas-
ures in strict accord with the calendar plans worked out by the military councils
of the fronts and armies. These plans defined the scope of the work, the time and
executors. This provided planned and long-range preparations of the troops and
staffs for forthcoming operations. The problem of the placement of forces was
solved more effectively. Duplication of implemented control was almost excluded.

Greater effectiveness and quality of work were also furthered by the practice of

conducting operational and reconnaissance orientations for the formation leadership.
in the first instance the general goal of the forthcoming operation and the role and
place of the field forces and formations in it were defined. In the second, sub-

ordinates were informed of the composition and condition of the enemy grouping, the
possible nature of operations and the engineer preparations of enemy defenses. The
involvement of the chiefs of the branches of troops and services raised the role of

the latter in planning the use of the resources and created better opportunities
for their effective work.

34

ton omcm'. use ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

with difficult preparatory conditions (restricted time and a large amount of diverse
tasks) there was the extensive practice of setting up special bodies (like opera-
tions groups) for directing the planning of an offensive (the counteroffensive at
Tikhvin and the Yelets Operation), in providing camouflage (the Sinyevino and
Smolensk operations), in the regrouping of troops (the Ostrogoshsk-Rossoch' Opere-
tion) and in organizing the commendant service and rear support (the Lower Silesisn
and other operations). In a number of instances they also set up work groups for
shift work at a cmmsand post. All of this made it possible on a centralized and ef-
fective basis to control the troops and involve the most skilled command personnel
in carrying out the tasks. For this reason the designated experience merits atten-
tion at present.

The work style of the commanders and staffs, that is, the aggregate of the pro-
cedures and forms of their activities, was improved.

The experience of the war shows that the enormous amount of work with diverse func-
tions could be carried out only if the work was well organized. The collective form
of work was an essential condition for rationally organized labor. For precisely
this reason the collective form was found on all levels of the military hierarchy in
the person of the military councils of the fronts and armies as well as in the form
of the diverse system of staff services. The effectiveness of the work carried cut
by this complex organism depended upon many factors, including upon the skill of the
co-workers as well as upon how coordinated were the actions of the various control
bodies which performed what could not be done by a single person. Certainly "in
order to provide the commander with the opportunity...to lead...the troops entrusted
to him," commented F. Engels, "...a special service has been set up consisting ex-
clusively of officers and called a staff."2

During the war years, the specific work carried out by a staff demanded from the
officers profound analytical thought, industriousneas, patience and the ability to
spot a development trend in one or another event and foresee to what this develop-
ment could lead. All of this required special attention in manning the staffs and

a consideration of not only the professional qualities of the officers but also per-
sonal character traits and their inclinations. For this reason it is worth noting
the approach to allocating work in a staff proceeding from the psychological feat
tures of the individual as described by the former chief of staff of the 8th Guards
Army. Maj Gen V. A. Belyavskiy: "...Lt Col S. l. Hartsenko, a calm and cool-headed
officer, was basically concerned with painstaking work of compiling calculations and
plan tables. The operator, Maj K. P. Petrov, a person of great erudition and a
sharp mind, was irreplacahle on questions requiring an immediate response. We were
repeatedly aided by the pedantic efficiency and sound work...of Maj P. F. Zheltov.
When it was a question of drawing up documents, first violin was played by the eas-
ter of clear and terse formulations and the superior graphic artist Haj I. A. Ivash—
chenko."3 As a result, the persons who differed in terms of the type of character
complimented one another and comprised that close-knit collective without which ef—
fective work by all the elements is inconceivable.

or great importance for a commander was his ability to work with the men. Here the
main thing was the combination of a respectable attitude toward subordinates with

strict exactingness for them, a desire for collective thinking and a profound be-
lief in the possibilities of the collective. As K. G. Telegin (a member of the

35

IN3R OFFICIAL USEZCH‘LY
FOR (WI-1‘ 'l N. US}? 0le

military council of the First Belorussian Front) recalls, during the preparations

of the Belorussian Operation "the meahers of the military council spent several

days and nights together at the operations section of the front's ataff...they
thought, calculated. clarified, voiced doubts and fears, they made proposals and
scught advice from the army commanders and the commanders of tank corps."“ Here is
how K. K. Rokossovskiy describes the work of preparing for the Vistula-Oder Opera-
tion: "The offensive was prepared by collective efforts.... A staff headquarters,
as we called it, was created where together we thought out the plans. took decisions,
heard information from the representative officers, discussed all sorts of propos-
als and exchanged opinions on the employment of the various branches of troops and
on organizing cooperation between them."5 One of his co-workers, Arm Gen P. I.
Batov, drew attention to the fact that "he (Rokossovskiy) did not like to be alone
and endeavored to be closer to the activities of his staff.... This created a sur-
prisingly pleasant working atmosphere...one felt neither constrained nor any fear of
voicing one's opinion which might differ from the opinions of the superior."6 A
profound understanding of the scope of the tasks, professionalism, trust in the
persons around coupled with such character traits as tact and amiability ensured

the success of collective effort.

Such an approach to carrying out the tasks did not exclude. however, great organi-
zational activities by the commanders. It has been pointed out, in particular, that
G. K. Zhukov prepared an operation with painstaking care. He delved into all ques-
tions, he worked them out in detail, he made calculations, he checked possible vari-
ations of actions and played them out with subordinates on maps and three-dimensional
dimensional charts. It is worth noting that the desire to increase the probability
of a successful outcome of an operation by playing through variations of the actions
was characteristic of G. K. Zhukov over the entire war, even under the extremely
difficult conditions of preparing the offensive in the Hestern Sector in August-
September 1961 (the Yel'nya Operation). Georgiy Konstantinovich [Zhukov] always en-
deavored to work, as witnesses have noted, not only with the army commanders, but
also with the formation couumnders in order to personally become acquainted with the
state of affairs, particularly in the breakthrough areas.7

The erudition of a military leader (commander), his experience, his sense of re-
sponsibility for the assigned job, practical boldness and volitional qualities con-
tributed to the shaping of such a trait of style of activity as providing constant
practical aid to subordinates in troop leadership. For precisely this reason, as
Arm Gen A. S. Zhadov has pointed out, I. s. Konev, in assigning tasks, analysed
their sense and contents in detail, he endeavored to make certain that the command-
ers clearly understood the role and place of the armies in achieving the aim of the
front operation and was always ready to help them.

The style of leadership over troop combat activities was, consequently, an active
aspect in achieving effective troop control. Its formation depended largely upon
the personal qualities of the military leader (commander or staff officer). Among
the main once one must put the aggregate of political-ideological, professional,
organizational and moral-psychological character traits, as a leader, in the words
of V. l. Lenin, must combine "loxalty to socialism with the ability...to establish
strong and close joint work...."

36

FINICNHWCLAL.USE¢NHLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expuricm'u show that the work style of contenders to the greatest degree was appar-
unt in their relations with the collective and in the ability to find the main ele-
ment in solving various questions. An important criterion for assessing this was a
clear defining of the goals and specific tasks in the activities of subordinates and
the organizing of their labor considering the abilities and inclinations of each.

Here of great significance was the leader's authority based upon professional know-
ledge. experience as well as his ideology and moral qualities. The development of a
rational work style among the comnders and staffs was largely aided by the struc-
ture of the control bodies which came into being during the war years (the presence
of military councils and the institution of military comissars or deputy commanders
for political affairs), by the stability of the leadership and cal-sand personnel as
well as by the skillfully carried out line of the personnel bodies in the area of

the selection of comnders. military council members, chiefs of staff and other

officials considering their personal qualities, skills, combat experience and the
nature of the forthcoming actions.

2. The Plan for the 0ffensive--‘i‘he Basis of Troop Control

A most important control function in the preparation of an offensive was the com-
mander's adoption of a plan or decision on the basis of which the combined-arms
staff, together with the other control bodies, planned the forthcoming operations.
This plan determined the resources and the methods of carrying out the combat tasks.
This was a complex creative process based upon the individual experience of the com-
mander and his intuition and mainly on a profound and thorough analysis of the situ-
ational data and on the accuracy of the calculations.

The general concept of the combat operations was the basis of the plan. It provided
an answer to the questions of: what enemy was to be defeated and in what sequence,
where the basic troop efforts were to be Concentrated. what operational configura-
tion (battle formation) should be chosen and what maneuver should be planned for the
involved resources for achieving the set goals. In addition. the plan formulated

the combat tasks for the subordinate troops and provided for the procedure of co-
operation and the organization of troop control (Diagram 6).

Experience shows that during the years of the Great Patriotic "at there was an ac-
tive search for the most national use of available resources for achieving the goals
of the offensive. This was the basic problem confronting the con-lander, the staff
and other control bodies. Here the central place in solving it was held by the
questions of choosing the one of the main thrust (the sectors, the concentration of
basic efforts on the offensive), its support with men and equipment, as well as the

questions of defining the proper operational configuration (battle formation) of the
troops under the specific situations.1 conditions.

The short times and difficult conditions for preparing an offensive during the first
period of the war, in being carried out most often in the course of defensive engage-
ments, had a substantial impact on the choice of the method for defeating the enemy.

During the winter of 1941-1962, a majority of the Western Front armies (the Moscow
counteroffensive) made frontal strikes along a broad front virtually in the same

grouping as was used for the defensive tasks. The troops fought analogously on the
Kai inin Front. advancing in two sectors. The divisions carried out combat opera-
tions in a zone up to [0 km and this predetermined virtually the equal distribution

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
      

A. lump
harrcmui
A! urn-unmi-

s-umw
mnvwnc-su

Diagram 6. Content of the Commander's Combat Plan
(from the experience of the war)

Key: a--Comhat plan; b--0verall concept of actions; c-Combat tasks for
formations (units); d--Order of troop cooperation; e-0rganization
of troop control; f--Organization of support for combat operations;
g--Axis of main thrust; h--Nature of actions in auxiliary sector;
i--Configurstion of battle formation; j--0f combat echelons; k-
Reserve; l--Artillery groups; m-Supporting aviation; n--Air de-
fense; o--Coordinsting efforts for; p-Periods of combat; q-0b-
jective; r--Linea; s--Dstea; t-Placs and time for deploying control
posts; u--Direction for moving command post; v-Time for submitting
reports; wb-Deputies; x-Intelligence; y-Security; z-Air defense;
aa-Antitank defense; bb-Antichemical warfare defense; cc-Camou-
flsging

of resources. However even then there was a noticeable desire for the massing of
men and equipment. In a letter to K. A. Heretskov of 29 December 1961 (on the eve
of the Lyuban' Operation), the Supreme Commander-in-Chief stressed: "I would want
that the forthcoming offensive...not be broken up into small clashes but rather de-
velop into a unified powerful bloc against the enemy."9 In holding direct talks in
December 1961 with the chief of staff of the Kalinin Front, A. H. Vasilevskiy, in
expressing the opinion of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief. pointed out that "the
conducted offensive along the entire sector of the front in five separate axes...
is ineffective. It is essential...to concentrate efforts on one of them in order
to undertake a decisive offensive for the purpose of destroying the opposing

enemy."‘°

38

FOR‘OFIIC1A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The further development of the art of massing men and equipment was reflected in the
directive letter from HqSHC of 10 January 1962. It formulated the demand that the
"assault group of a front consist not of several divisions but of several srmies....
An offensive can produce the proper effect only in the instance that we create in
one of the front's sectors a great superiority of forces over the enemy forces...."11
The instructions of HqSHC to a certain degree was realized by the commanders and
staffs in the general offensive on the central sector in January 1962. The North-
western Pront made the main thrust with two armies. the western and Kalinin fronts
each with two armies and a cavalry corps. In the Barvenkovo-Lozovskiy Operation al-
ready up to 50 percent of the rifle divisions, 70 percent of the cavalry divisions
and 75 percent of the tank brigades were concentrated in the sector of the main
thrust. A number of divisions advanced in a zone of 3-h km. with an overall equal-
ity of forces this made it possible in the commanders' plans to have a 2- or 3-fold
superiority in the breakthrough sectors.‘2

Certain new aspects from the standpoint of the massing of men and equipment can be
noticed in the plans of the commanders for the offensive in the summer of 1942. The
strategy for the operation on the Khar'kov sector (Hay 1962) envisaged the creation
of two assault groupings: on the northern wing of the Southwestern Front consisting
of three armies (a breakthrough sector of 55 km) and on the Southern with the 6th
Army and the group of Maj Gen I. P. Bobkin (a breakthrough sector of 36 km) with an
overall zone of advance of 390 km. In the armies of the assault groupings, mobile
groups were organized ahead of time: in the 28th Army one consisting of a rein-
forced cavalry corps and in the 6th Army two tank corps. Breakthrough areas were
assigned to the divisions and units. According to the plan of the Western Front
commander, on the Zubtsov-thev and Sychevo sectors (August 1942), the enemy defens-
es were to be broken through in a zone of 16 km by the forces of two armies brought
up secretly to the jump-off position. The massing of up to 70 percent of the rifle
troops, 100 percent of the tanks and 80 percent of the artillery in the breakthrough
sector made it possible to create a superiority over the enemy of 4-fold for person-
nel, more than 7-fold for tanks and 6-fold for guns and mortars. Mobile groups were
organized in the armies and on the front and forward detachments in the formations.13

in selecting the sector of the main thrust during the second period of the war the
principle was maintained established in the previous years, that is, the main thrust
was to be made against a weak point in the enemy defenses with the subsequent emerg-
ing in the enemy flanks and rear. A new feature was that consideration was given

to the moral—combat qualities of the enemy troops in the various sectors of the
front in determining the sector of the main thrust in the counteroffensive at Lenin-
grad and in the Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh' and Voronezh-Kastornoye operations. In the
plan of the offensive proposed to HqSHC by the military council of the Southwestern
Front for attacking the formations of the fourth Royal Romanian Army it was empha-
sized that "the benefits of this sector are obvious.... He will destroy the weaker
enemy units and this is of great moral significance for our troops. It will inspire
them.... The success will thereby influence the rate of advance of the 21st Army....
ln coming out on the main lines of communications and the crossings over the Don...
we will deprive the enemy of the main thing, that is, the maneuvering of its mobile
tank and motorized forces operating in Stalingrad."‘“

Particular attention was given to the massing of men and equipment on the chosen
sector of the main thrust in the form of concentrating the efforts of two or three

39

FOI.OFFKJAI.USE(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

armies (divisions) and a larger portion of the front (any) resources. As a result,
even with a relative equality of forces (in the counteroffensive et Stalingrad end
in the Ostrogozhsk—Rossosh' Operation) in the breakthrough areas a 3- or 10-fold
superiority over the enemy was achieved. Characteristically the weapons were nassed
first. In breaking through the Leningrad blockade (January 1943) according to the
plans of the commanders, 45-60 percent of the personnel, 90 percent of the artil-
lery and 100 percent of the aviation were messed in the breakthrough sectors of the
fronts coaprising around 10 percent of the sons of advance. In this operation may
formation (unit) contenders and their staffs showed a good deal of creativity in

selecting the sector of the main thrust and in solving the question of the alloca-
tion of resources in the offensive.

Thus, the commander of the 372d Rifle Division, in proceeding from the set task and
the nature of enemy defenses (in the zone of the forthcoaing offensive a reinforced
battalion from the 227th Infantry Division was defending Horker Settlement No 8
which had a developed system of pillboxes), decided to asks the main thrust with
the forces of the 1,238th Rifle Regiment toward this strongpoint and simultaneously
break the defenses to the north and south of it. The concentration of basic efforts
against the strongest place in enemy defenses was necessitated by the blockading of
a well-prepared strongpoint to create better conditions for the flank units in car-
rying out the subsequent task. Cheracteristically the 1,238th Rifle Regiment was
reinforced by a machine gun battalion, by artillery and mortar regiments as well as
by a combat engineer battalion. These comprised up to 70 percent of the division's
resources. Two assault detachments were organized in the regiment. Each of them
included an engineer and chemical reconnaissance group (19-20 men), a clearing
group (25—28 men) and an assault group (rifle and conbat engineer platoons, squads
of subnachine gunners, antitank weapons and mediun nachine guns as well as a crew of
a 55-min gun).

The carrying out of the tasks of the massed enployaent of sen and equipment on an

offensive to break through deeply echeloned enemy defenses can be traced also in
other examples in this period of the war.

Thus, the comnder of the Voronezh Front. in determining the concept for the
Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh' Operation. decided to make three strikes against the enemy
grouping, to break its defenses and. in developing the offensive along converging
axes to encircle and destroy the enemy formations. The strikes by the 40th Army
and the 3d Tank Army were to be made against the snowy grouping's flanks where for-
mat ions or the 2d Hungarian Army were defending. These troops possessed relatively
low bnttlcworthiness.”

The choice of the sector of the main thrust was predetermined for the cor-sander of
the 40th Arny by the presence of a guard bridgehead and by the necessity of rapidly
linking up with the 3d 'i‘ank Army. For this reason he decided to make the thrust in
the area between the enemy 20th and 7th Infantry divisions in a sector 10 km wide
(11 percent of the total area), having regrouped here up to 88 percent of the rifle
troops and 95-100 percent of the artillery and tanks. The remaining 75-h: front
was held by the forces of a rifle regiment, three training battalions and a separ-
ate nachine gun battalion. A high breakthrough rate was to be achieved by using
brigades of the IV Tank Corps for joint actions with the rifle formations. Subse-
quently the efforts were to be increased by the second echelon. The troop regroup-
ing carried out secretly from the enemy made it possible to alter the ratio of

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISII‘. ONLY

resources and in the sector of the main thrust a 2- or 3-fold superiority over the
enemy was achieved.

 

       
   

    

   
 

  
  

- humans. k
> - use-u,”
- h
: '( t“.‘2“ swung-as, 5:! .
. 49 f;- u I 2 I a nun- ’bhl'
. g uspss :
‘8nc ’1

4 ram
1.389.

CH
O

  
 

 

Diagram 7. Plan of the Colmandar of the llth Guards Army
for Masaing Men and Equipnent in the Orel Operation (July 1943)

Key: a--Zone (kn); b--Men and equipment; c-Rifle division; d--Tank corps;
e--Tank brigade (regiment); f--Artillery regiment; g-Rstio; h—-for
personnel; i--for tanks; j-for artillery; k-Sector of main thrust;
(--llth Guards Army; n—-217th Rifle Division; n-XVI Guards Rifle
Corps; o-—VIIl Guards Rifle Corps; p-Artillery group; q-I Tank
Corps; r--V Guards Tank Corps; s-XXXVI Guards Rifle Corps; t--Arny
Corps.

An analysis of the plan adopted by the commander of the llth Guards Army in July
1943 (the Orel Operation). for example, shows that in choosing the sector of the
main thrust (Diagram 7). the commander proceeded primarily from the fact that the
enemy possessed a deeply echeloned defense which was well equipped in engineer
terms. The army was operating in the sector of concentration of the basic forces
of the front. In its zone, for exploiting the success, they planned to commit two
tank corps. The selected sector of the main thrust in terms of terrain conditions
was acceptable {or the use of large masses of tanks. The most vulnerable point in
the enemy defenses was the boundary area of the LIII and LV Army corps free the 2d
Tank Army of Nazi Germany. Considering the nature of the enemy defenses, the army
connmnder concentrated the army's basic efforts (80-90 percent of the resources) in
a sector 14 km wide. At the center of the assault grouping advanced the V111 Guards
Rifle Corps. It was assigned a breakthrough area of 3.5 km (25 percent of the army
one). It received up to 40 percent of the army artillery and tanks for reinforce-
ments. The arny's reserve. a rifle division, was located in the same sector.

k1

FOR 0F1WCJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently, the chosen sector of the main thrust was supported by a decisive
massing of resources and in this manner possibilities were crested for rapidly
breaking through the enemy defenses.‘6

In determining the plan for the Nevel' Offensive Operation (October 1963), the com-
mander of the 3d Assault Army proceeded from the task received of advancing on the
first day to a depth of 30-35 km as well as from the ratio of men and equipment (in
the zone 100 km wide this was 1.5 in favor of the Soviet troops). For this reason
he concentrated up to 90 percent of the available resources in a breakthrough sector
of 4 km. On the remaining extent of the front, the tasks were to be carried out by
the least manned division, by two reinforced areas and an army reserve regiment. As
a result. a superiority over the enemy was created which ensured the successful
breakthroggh of the deeply echeloned enemy defenses during the first day of the op-
station.

The art of choosing the sector of the main thrust during the operations of the third
period of the war was manifested in a thorough analysis of all the component indi-
cators of the operational and tactical situation while the massing of men and equip-
ment was apparent in the increased degree of their concentration, and primarily
weapons. This is seen from the data of Table 6 compiled from the experience of more
than 20 army operations.

0n the eve of the offensive in Belorussia (June 1964), the formations of the 65th
Army. for example, occupied defenses in s forested area with numerous broad rivers,
with floodplains, canals and swamps. The areas were exceptionally difficult for
maneuvering. The Nazi command used these particular features. creating a deeply
echeloned defense in the sectors exposed for the use of large masses of military
equipment. In adopting the plan for the defensive, the front commander and the army
commander thoroughly assessed the nature of the terrain on which combat operations
were to be conducted. The most enticing was the Parichi sector since all branches
of troops could operate here. At the same time it was impossible to expect rapid
advance, since the enemy controlled all the prevailing heights. The density of
enemy weapons was high. A detailed study of enemy defenses and the terrain argued
in favor of choosing the sector of the main thrust across the swamps and bogs. In
this instance an opportunity was created for the assault grouping to come out in the
enemy rear and to defeat the enemy quickly and with fewer casualties. This, how-
ever. necessitated carrying out such measures as the building of corduroy roads,
log trackways and adaptations for the crossing of tanks. This was done in strict
secrecy from the enemy. Having concentrated up to 90 percent of the artillery in
the area of the main thrust, the army commander took the decision to carry out
artillery softening up for 125 minutes. During this time the combat engineers put
together the tank planking. The course of the operation demonstrated the correct-
ness of the adopted plan.

In the Iasi-Kishinev Operation, the commander of the Second Ukrainian Front selected
the sector of the main thrust in the most vulnerable point in the operational con-
figuration of the enemy troops in the border area between the 4th Royal Romanian
Army and the 8th Nazi Army. It led by the shortest route to the crossings over the
Prut River, that is, into the rear of the enemy grouping. In comparison with other
operations, the problem of the massing of men and equipment was solved by the un-
even distribution of men and equipment not only along the front but also in depth.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080051-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EOHuﬂhun—Uuﬂcu HO ddhdd‘ Us: dice—I pi. ...—¢ﬂ.—. vac idnuvbld at 5.32.12: tl....(< (A... (It!

              
   

  

o. o .2 E a
u o o 2 3
.8 o u 2 .8 o .
8. s v 2 .3 33.3.2.8 u
8 a . o z s». .
a . N m a
R n a 8 P. 0 585010633 0
8 .o a E 8
so a o a s»
a , n a m
«M M a «a «a cog-59:39.8.“ u
2. s o 9 . 8 .
8 m o 8 8 .
e... v v «a 2 germs:
«a o n 3 .9. n 613-93983: a
N m. M N we .3803...qu n
z. o M M» uMov
a
a v 8 3 :38-
so a 3 S .3535ix a
u

and n

33:32 no 933.208 039.0qu >5 5 .338 53.8
no anon—3:3. van :02 95:07. mo 03qu «5 9.3239328 9323qu 3mm:

o 0.33.

(03

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000400080051-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There was to be a deep operational configuration of the field forces and battle
formation of the formations. Thus a possibility was provided of attaining a rapid
breakthrough rate for the tactical defensive zone and for exploiting the success to
a great depth by increasing the efforts in the course of the operation. Character-
isticaily according to the commander's plan. the breakthrough of the entire tactical
enemy defensive zone was entrusted to the 27th Army. This was done to create rela-
tively favorable conditions for the 6th Guards Tank Army which was the mobile group
of the front with a momentum of advance of 50-80 km. The combined-arms army was
assigned a breakthrough area of 8 km where around 90 percent of the artillery, 100
percent of the tanks and 90 percent of the engineer troop subunits were concentrated.

The commanders showed a good deal of creativity in settling the question of determin-
ing the proper battle order (operational configuration) of the troops under the spe-
cific situational conditions.

The Soviet Army entered the Great Patriotic War with views on the configuration of
troop battle formations in offensive combat which had been based upon the theory of
an engagement (operation) in depth as well as on the assumption of the need to cross
strong and deep enemy defenses. According to these views there had to be a deep
echeloning of the battle formations of our troops.

At the outset of the war, there were different conditions which determined the con-
figuration of the battle formations. The defenses of the Nazi Army had a focal
nature. For breaking through the defenses a deep configuration of the battle forma-
tions was required. Along with this, the Soviet Army units and formations, in being
below strength in men and military equipment, were forced to carry out combat opera-
tions in broad zones. Regardless of this, the battle formations of the rifle troops
during the first period of the war were organized by the commanders as still being
echeloned in depth. On all levels second echelons were created and these ordinarily
included up to one-third of the troops. This was the ease. for example, in the 33d
Army of the western Front in the Moscow counteroffensive. Its 110th and 338th Rifle
divisions which were advancing in the main sector had double-echelon battle forms-
tions. The rifle division had just 8 percent of the companies out of 27 in the
first line while the remaining 19 companies were positioned in depth. The battle
formation of the companies and battalions was too spread out and difficult to con-
trol.

in the winter offensive operations of 19101-19102, certain division conanders began
to establish a single—echelon battle formation and with such a configuration
achieved the more successful execution of combat missions. The battle formation of
the 8th Cuards Rifle Division was organized in this manner in the offensive against
Kryukovo in December 1961 and also for the 269th Rifle Division of the 4th Assault
Army in the offensive against Peno in January 1962. But these still were only indi-
vidual instances. As a rule. the divisions, regiments and battalions continued to
be organized at that time in two-echelon battle formations.

Tue combat experience of the first period of the war demonstrated that the battle
formations employed at that time by the Soviet troops did not meet the demands posed
by the new situational conditions. A deep configuration of the battle formations
did not ensure the making of an effective initial thrust. The second echelons of
the subunits. units and formations even before engaging in battle suffered signifi-
cant and unjustified casualties from enemy artillery, mortar and air fire. It was

66

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difficult to control the deeply echeloned battle formation which was deployed over
a significant area. All of this had a negative effect upon the successful carrying
out of offensive combat.

0n the basis of generalizing combat experience, special instructions were issued to
the troops and these were reflected in the Order of the NKD No 306. These were
later incorporated in the Red Army Infantry Field Manual. The manual fundamentally
altered the configuration of the battle formations in an offensive. The basic de-
mand came down to having the battle formations ensure the simultaneous and active
involvement of the infantry and all its weapons in combat from the beginning to and.
With a shortage of artillery, mortars and tanks, the firing of all infantry weapons
was of great importance. At the same time this could be carried out only with a
single-echelon configuration of the troop battle formations. For this reason it
was pointed out that the battle formations down to a rifle division, inclusively,
were to be formed up in a single echelon with the allocating of r rves of not more
than one-tenth of the effective combat strength. Here the extends line of riflemen
was restored with intervals of six-eight steps between the men.

Such a configuration of the rifle troops made it possible to have maximum use of the

fire from rifle weapons, it facilitated control, it strengthened the force of the
initial thrust and at the same time, under the specific conditions of that period of

the war, ensured a reduction in casualties from enemy fire.

From 19A). as a consequence of improved enemy defenses, there was still a need to
echelon the forces of the advancing troops. Indicative in this regard is the ex-
ample of the operational configuration of the fronts and armies in the Belgorod-
Khar'kov Offensive Operation. In considering that the attack was to be made against
a strong enemy grouping and in assessing the strength of the troops in the Voronezh
Front, the commander, Arm Gen N. F. Vatutin, put four combined-arms armies in the
first echelon and three of them had mobile groups. There were to be two armies in
the front's reserve. The front's mobile group consisted of two tank armies. Thus,
around 25 percent of the rifle troops and up to 90 percent of the tanks were concen-
trated in depth. In the 53d Army of the Steppe Front, the cmmmander's plan envis-
aged having more than 80 percent of the tanks in the second echelon and as part of
the mobile group. Such an operational configuration made it possible to effectively
carry out the tasks of increasing the effort in the course of the operation.

The designated trend can also be traced on the tactical levels. Thus, in adopting
the plan to break through enemy defenses in crossing the Neva River (January 1963),
the commander of the 136th Rifle Division set the battle formation in a single eche-
lon. However he put in the reserve one battalion from each of the 269th and 362d
Rifle regiments and the 569th Separate Tank Battalion. In the regiments a reserve
was created consisting of a rifle company, a company of submachine gunners (or a
Jachlnc gun platoo 1nd a PTR [anti-tank rifle] platoon. In the battalions assault

groups were formed for capturing bridgeheads on the eastern bank of the river. These
usually included: 5 or 6 combat engineers, 8-10 submachine gunners. 2 chemical war-

fare men and 2 or 3 flamethrower operators. The group was issued cog boots and had
a or S explosive charges, lOblZ antitank grenades, 30-40 hand grenades and 2-5 smoke
charges. in each rifle company, in addition, a mine clearing group was trained con-
sisting or S or 6 combat engineers, 8-10 riflemen with a mine detector, 6 probes,

3 charges, 2 hooks with ropes and shears.la

45

FORIMHHCJAI.USE(NNLY
FORGDFFKJA1.UEEZONL¥

in the summer of 1943, many formation and unit commanders, in considering the exist-
ing structure of enemy defenses. in their plans began to adopt a battle order of not
only one but sometimes two and even three echelons. The certain narrowing of the
zones of advance contributed to this as well as the changes which had occurred in
the organization of rifle formations. Thus, by a decision of the commander of the
VIII Guards Rifle Corps of the 11th Guards Army (Orel Operation) the 11th and 83d
Guards Rifle divisions were to be in the first echelon and the 26th Guards Rifle
Division in the second (Diagram 7). Two long-range artillery groups were set up.

A tank and antitank artillery reserve were assigned as well as a mobile obstacle
construction detachment. With the organizing of a division's battle formation in

a single echelon, the rifle regiments, as a rule, had a two- or even three-echelon
configuration. Such a configuration of the battle formation in the regiments and
divisions ensured the breaking through of the enemy's positional defenses by a suc-
cessch increasing of the force of the strike from behind. Here extensive use was
made of support for the first echelons by artillery and mortar fire from the second
echelons of the rifle regiments and divisions before they were committed to battle.

The experience of breaking through the enemy positional defenses during the summer
and autumn of 1943 confirmed the advisability of forming deep battle formations (an
operational configuration) for the troops. The changes which occurred in subsequent
years in the effective fighting strength of the army field forces contributed to a
situation where the double-echelon configuration of armies in 1944 was planned for
20 percent of the operations. and in 1945, 33 percent. In a number of instances
they even had three echelons such as the 57th Army in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation,
the 49th Army in the East Prussian Operation and the 3d Guards Army in the Vistula—
Oder Operation. Usually such a configuration existed in the formations which were
operating on the flank of the front's assault grouping. The tendency to echelon
the resources in depth during the 3d period of the war can be traced also in the
fronts. in 1945, 40 percent of the frontal operations were carried out with a
double-echelon configuration (5 percent in 1963-1946). Here one or two armies were
assigned to the second echelon. Then 65 percent of the fronts had mobile groups
such as tank armies and horse-mechanized groups (in l963~l964, from 18 to 35 per-
cent). while in 41 percent of the armies there were tank (mechanized) corps (in
1963-1964, from 20 to 38 percent).

New elements of the battle formation (operational configuration) were also created.

Characteristic in this regard is the example of the plan adopted by the commander of
the xxx Rifle Corps (Vyborg Operation). The main thrust was to be made on the right
flank in the direction of Beloostrov and Haynila. The main enemy defensive zone

was to be broken through in a sector 5 km wide (the zone of advance was 6.5 km), the
Beioostrov Heights were to be captured and by the end of the day the troops were to
advance 9-10 kn. Subsequently. in committing the second echelon to combat and hav~
ing focused the basic efforts in the sector of the Alakyul' Heights. the enemy
grouping defending them was to be defeated, the Sestra River was to be crossed and
by the end of the l6th day the troops were to advance 15 km. Fighting in the first
echelon were the 63d (breakthrough area of 2 km) and 65th (breakthrough area of 3 km)
Guards Rifle divisions, and in the second, the 64th Guards Rifle Division. An artil-
lery group was organized in the corps, and in the divisions there were artillery
close combat groups (SO-mm and 82-mm mortars) direct laying gun groups (regimental
and antitank artillery) as well as infantry support groups figuring a battalion per

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first—echelon battalion (an artillery battalion regiment and a mortar regiment of
the suc Reserve). Artillery antitank reserves and mobile obstacle construction de-
tachments were organized in the corps and divisions. Forward detachments were pre-
pared from the divisions.19

As we can see. during the years of the Great Patriotic war, the development of the
battle formations (operational configuration) occurred along the lines of increas-
ing the depth of their configuration, the creation of new elements and a change in
their qualitative composition. The art of the commanders and staffs was chiefly
apparent in the fact that this question was settled proceeding from the specific
situation and the combat tasks. the capabilities of our troops and the enemy's
methods of combat operations.

The plan was always adopted personally by the commander. However the forms of his
work varied.

In a number of instances this was done after an exchange of opinions with a limited
group of persons (the chief of staff, the first military council members and the
artillery commander) or on the basis of data known to the commander. Often the
adopting of a plan was preceded by the detailed hearing of reports (proposals) from
the chiefs of the branches of troops (special troops). The difference in the ap-
proach was explained chiefly by the situational conditions and by the work style.
Also of important significance was the demand of uqsac to take every possible meas—
ure to prevent the leaking of information.

In examining the procedure for adopting the plan, it must be particularly emphasized
that. beginning in the autumn of 1942, significant attention began to be devoted to
work on the spot, and not only by the subunit. unit and formation commanders. as was
envisaged in the prewar views. but also by the field force co-anders. One of the
directives of HqSHC (September 1942) pointed out that "the commander, on the basis

of a careful study of the situation, should adopt a preliminary plan using the map...
and issue the necessary orders. The adopted plan is to be worked out on the terrain,
after which the final plan is adopted and the operation order given."2° 0n the ter-
rain a study was made of the enemy. the nature of its defenses, the precise configur-
ation of the forward edge, the fire plan and the system of man-made obstacles. Thus
an opportunity was created to have more effective fire neutralization. The weak
points in enemy defenses were established. This made it possible to clarify the
direction of the main and other thrusts and the content of the combat tasks for sub-
ordinates. Conditions were analyzed for employing the branches of troops. primarily
from the viewpoint of the passability of the terrain and the effectiveness of opera-
tions. Here also the bases of cooperation were determined and this was done in
greatest detail during the period of breaking through the enemy's tactical defensive
zone.

Consequently, work on the spot contributed to the soundness of the adopted plans.
The desire to utilize the slightest opportunity. even under the most complicated
situational conditions, to work on the spot. as a rule, provided good results.

The work procedure of the commanders in adopting a plan for an offensive can be
traced in greatest detail from a number of examples.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}? ON! \'

At the end of May 1944, the co-ander of the First Belorussian Front. Arm Gen K. K.
Rokossovskiy. summoned the army comanders to Gomel' to a session of the froat's
military council, he announced his plan to them and gave combat tasks.

The 65th Army was fighting in the Bobruysk sector. It had been in contact with

the enemy for almost 6 months and for this reason its cos-lander and staff knew in
detail the nature of enemy defenses and the grouping of men and equipment. The for-
mation and unit comanders had studied the terrain features well. In the course of
commands: training (even before receiving the combat task). several military genes
and a conand-headquarters exercise had been held. Such preliminary work made it
possible for the army comander. without spending much time, to understand the ob-
tained task, to grasp the role and place of the army in the front's operation and
to adopt a preliminary plan. He then ordered the chief of staff to draw up the
necessary calculations and infatuation. 0n the following day the army cal-sander,
with the chief of staff. the artillery conander and the chief of the engineer
troops. carried out reconnaissance where they clarified the sector of the main
thrust. the breakthrough area, the areas for deploying the troops in the jump-off
position and the artillery firing positions. After returning to the staff, having
heard the information and proposals from the chief of staff, the army comander
adopted the plan for the offensive which was then reported to the front cousndeir.21

The characteristic work traits in adopting the plan on the tactical level can be
seen from the experience of the 37th Guards Rifle Division of the XVIII Rifle Corps
which was fighting in the sector of the main thrust of the 65th Army.

The division's comander had received the task for the offensive verbally 2 days be-
fore the start of the operation. Having arrived at the division's cot-sand post (the
divisiun was in the concentration area and was involved with combat training), he
summoned his deputies. the chiefs of the branches of troops and services. They were
given the division's combat task and told the amount of data which was essential for
preparing the report to the coriander. The combined-arms staff began to work out
the preliminary orders for the units and the plan for forthcoming reconnaissance
while the officials began to prepare the necessary calculations. The division's
comander along with the chief of staff, the chief of the operations department and
the chief of intelligence, during that time studied the task, assessed (proceeding
from the existing data) the situation and adopted a plan. This was plotted on a
working chart. 0n the following day, in accord with the staff's plan, reconnais-
sance was carried out. In it the division's comander on the spot clarified the
sector of the main thrust, the boundary lines. the objects of the attack, the pro-
cedure for the relief of troops and the questions of cooperation and the organiza-
tion of control. His plan in a final form was issued to the corps cor-sander 12
hours after the receiving of the combat task. Around 36 hours were assigned for
organizing combat operations in the units and subunits.

The uniqueness of the situation predetermined a somewhat different work sequence
for the commander of the 28th Army and the co-aanders of its formations in adopting
a plan in April 1945. The problem was that after the elimination of the enemy to
the northeast of Konlgsberg. the army had been put into the reserves of HqSiiC and
on [8 April was transferred to the First Ukrainian Front for participating in the
Berlin Operation. During the night of 21 April, the front‘s cot-lander, liar $11 I. s.
Koncv, issued the order to comait it to battle. The army counndar with the opera-
tions group traveled to the attack line. In conducting reconnaissance for 2 hours,

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1AL USIitrVLY

he adopted a plan for the offensive on a map and set the task for the recently ar-
rived commander of the CXXVIII Rifle Corps. The formation and unit commanders also
adopted their plan using a map. The objects of the attack, the axes of the advance
and the boundary lines were clarified on the spot as they reached the attack line.22

Consequently. depending upon the situational conditions, mainly proceeding from the
availability of time. during the war years the plan of an offensive was adopted by
the commander using a map with the subsequent clarification of individual questions
by reconnaissance or only using a map. The adopting of a plan was always preceded
by work to clarify the combat task and assess the situation. This was done person-
ally by the commander or with the involvement of the headquarters officials. The
past wnr determined the basic directions for improving the commander's work in
adopting the plan for the offensive. The first was a thorough analysis of the
situational conditions and all its component elements. The second was the use of
various forms of work proceeding from the time allocated to organise combat. As a
result an opportunity was created to successfully solve the problem of the effective
employment of the available resources in an operation and engagement.

3. Planning Combat Operations

0n the basis of the adopted plan. the forthcoming combat operations were planned,
that is, the sequence, times and methods for carrying out the set tasks were deter-
mined and the procedure for employing the troops and the basis of their cooperation
were established. Measures were also worked out for political work, the complete
support of the offensive and troop control. The results of this work in field
forces were embodied in the operation plan. It most often included an operations
part, plans for the types of support, a plan of party political work and a plan for
organizing control in the offensive.

In the preparation of a majority of frontal operations, planning was carried out in
two stages. InitiallyI upon the request of thHC or upon personal initiative by the
military council, the plan was worked out in the form of proposals for the forthcom-
ing offensive. This was done in one copy in writing by the commander or the chief
of staff. The plan was forwarded to aqSHC (the General Staff). The following plan-
ning stage commenced with the receiving of the directive of uqSHC for the offensive
or from the moment of the plan's approval (the receipt of notification from the Gen-
eral Staff on its approval). A similar sequence was employed in planning army oper-
ations when they were carried out on a separate sector, as was the case in the win-
ter of l963-l94k in Belorussia. If they were a component part of a frontal opera-
tion. usually the planning of the offensive on the army level started after the re-
ceiving of a directive from the front‘ s military council or a verbal order from the
commander.

In the formations and units. coebat operations were planned by the commanders and
staffs on a basis of the verbal issuing of combat tasks and sometimes with the re-
ceiving of the operation order for the offensive. Planning, as a rule, was carried
out on a map with an explanatory note (legend). The staff worked out the combat
planning table or the cooperation table and the operation order (sometimes also the
order of the artillery commander and the chief of the rear). Starting with the
second period of the war, the plan for breaking through the enemy tactical defensive
zone and the plan for the crossing of a water obstacle were drawn up in writing with

69

FORiOFFKJAl.U§IIONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

the appending of a map. The employment of the units (subunits) of the branches of
troops and special troops was carried out, in addition, on the work maps of the

chiefs of the branches of troops.

Characteristic of the planning of an offensive over the entire war was a high degree
of its centralization and most often on the level of Hqsuc and a front. This was a
natural phenomenon as it was essential to carry out the task of breaking through the
deeply echeloned enemy defenses, surrounding the enemy groupings, making counter-
strikes as well as ensuring the commitment of mobile groups to battle. All of this
necessitated coordinated actions by several field forces. In addition, such an ap-
proach made it possible to mass the weapons (aviation and artillery) and the re—
serves as well as most effectively carry out measures for operational camouflage.

The operations part of the plan gave an assessment of the enemy. the goal of the of-
fensive, the men and equipment to be used, the overall plan and the tasks of the
troops. The bases of cooperation. the organization of control and rear support were
defined. The most important stages of the offensive were also outlined and in indi-
vidual instances, the tasks for individual days.

In generalizing the planning experience during the summer-autumn campaign of 1961,
HqSHC pointed to the shortcoming of those times that the plans often did not indi-
cate the dates for carrying out combat tasks. Such a situation reduced the respon-
sibility of the con-anders and their staffs and complicated the organizing of coop-
eration, particularly with aviation. The control bodies were deprived of an oppor-
tunity to exercise effective control over the course of combat operations. The
practice of determining the tasks for the armies for 5-10 and more days also at a
number of negative aspects. For this reason. the Chief of the General Staff, in a
directive of 13 December 1951 demanded: "...Tasks on a front scale are to be given
to armies for a period not exceeding 3 days and in setting the ismediste tasks each
day a line is to be set which should be achieved by the army's formations by the and

end of the day...."23

In subsequent years. as conditions improved and combat experience was gained, the
content of the operations portion of plans for frontal operations changed. A larger
portion of then began to define the goal and stages of the operation. the first
stage in days and the subsequent ones for 5 or 6 days each. A series of operations
conducted to a shallow depth were planned not by stages but rather by days (the
Belogorod-Khar'kov and Bobruysk operations and others). Indicators were also set
for the scope of the operations. The degree of the computational soundness of the
plans was increased, in particular for the involved man and equipment, the dates for
being ready and the arrival of the troops at certain lines and for the spatial scope
of the forthcoming operations.

For the staffs of the combined-arms armies. the most typical was planning of tasks
by stages. The first stage was the breaking through of enemy defenses (1 or 2 days),
the second was the defeat of the operational reserves (2 or 3 days) and the third
was pursuit of the enemy (5-8 days). Very often the content of the first stage was
measures to prepare for the operation, including the regrouping of the troops and
the taking up of the jump-off position for the offensive. Often the first day of an
operagion was made into a separate stage and planned with a greater degree of de-
tail.

50

FOIIOFF1C1AI.USEiMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the plans for offensive operations by the tank armies from the autumn of 1963, a
significant place began to be given over to the questions of operational camouflage
and radio countermeasures. The composition, tasks and methods of combat operations
were also defined for the forward detacllnents. the traffic support detachaents and
the mobile obstacle construction detachments. A new feature in planning in 1964-
1945 was that in a number of instances two or three variations were provided for
committing the army formations to an engagement. Different sectors were planned
for the attack or several attack lines in the same sector depending upon the out-
come of the breakthrough of enemy defenses by the combined-arms armies. Thus an op-
portunity was created to think out ahead of time the cooperation procedure under
various situational conditions as well as carry out certain measures for the engi-

neer equipping of the routes of advance and for the artillery support for the entry
into battle.

The questions of the employment of the branches of troops (special troops). the
armed services as well as the partisan formations were reflected in more detail in
planning documents for the forthcoming operations which were worked out specially
by the field headquarters of the fronts and armies.

The plans for the employment of artillery were worked out by the directorate of the
artillery consider on the basis of the front (army) comender's plan. A number of
questions were coordinated with the operations directorate of the staff, with the
rear directorate. with the engineer troops and signals sections as well as with
other bodies of the field headquarters. The basic content of planning in 1941-1962
was the elaboration of a schedule for artillery softening up (duration. configura-
tion and the content of its periods). The ammunition consumption rates were also
set for the days of the operation. In the last two periods of the war, an artil-
lery offensive was planned and the essence of this consisted in continuous support
for troop operations by artillery and mortar fire during the entire battle (opera-
tion). written instructions also began to be worked out to ensure the comitting
of front mobile groups to the engagement and artillery operations for the period of
conducting a reconnaissance in force.

The planning of an artillery offensive in the combined-arms armies was usually car-
ried out on a centralized basis. It consisted in defining the artillery tasks, the
areas for deploying the guns and mortars, the procedure for regrouping the artillery
units. the organization of target reconnaissance. ranging and the procedure for an-
munition supply. The plan was compiled in the form of a table with the indicating
of the artillery grouping, the tasks of the artillery groups. the procedure of their
change of subordination and sequence of movements. Diagrams of targets were worked
out with particular care for the artillery softening up period. As a result the ef-
fectiveness of firing against the enemy was sharply increased.

In the tank areies. in working out the artillery combat employment plans. the artil-
lery was to be used in breaking through the intermediate defensive lines on a cen-
tralized basis. and in the comitment to battle and the pursuit of the enemy, on a
decentralized basis. This expressed the specific use of artillery proceeding from
the nature of the combat operations of the tank field forces. For example, in the
Vistuln-Oder Operation no to 30 percent of the army artillery and 60-70 percent of

the corps artillery. with the going over to pursuit, was to be turned over to the
forward detach-ents as reinforcements.25 Also noted was the particular effectiveness

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

of supporting tank formation operations by rocket fire which was marked by compara-
tively greater maneuverability and hit effectiveness.

The plans for the employment of the armored and mechanized troops were worked out

by the staff of a front (army) together with the directorate of the coemander of the
armored and mechanized troops. The questions of utilizing the armored field forces
(formations) were usually shown in the operations portion of the plan while the use
of the direct infantry support (NP?) tanks was shun in the combat planning table of
the formations.

The combat employment of aviation up to the autun of 1962 was planned in the armies
(for army aviation) and fronts (for frontal aviation) by the combined-arms staffs
together with the air force consanders of the field forces.

The experience of the first period of the war showed the discrepancy between the or-
ganizational forms of aviation and the requirements of its combat employment. As a
result of the scattering of aviation over the armies, under the conditions of the
limited number of combat aircraft, the possibilities were reduced for massing avia-
tion in the main sector. The creation of temporary air force groups in the fronts
during January-October 1942 played a positive role but did not ultimately solve the
problem. The heterogeneity of their composition complicated the use of aviation,
its basing and air field servicing. The organizational measures carried out in
191.2, the main one of which was the creation of air armies in the fronts, created
better conditions for the cot-sanders and staffs to seek out the most effective var-
lations for the combat employment of aviation in an offensive.

There was a greater degree of the massing of aviation in the sector where the basic
efforts of the' fronts were concentrated (from 36 percent in the "Uran" Operation,

60 percent in the Battle of Kursk, up to 90 percent in the Berlin Operation). For
the period of air softening up, the strikes began to be planned not only against
centers of resistance but also against enemy artillery, col-sand posts and cot-uni-
cations centers, in being coordinated in greater detail with artillery fire for the
various targets. The duration of air softening up increased by 2- or 3-fold while
the density of bomb strikes rose from 16 tons per km (1961-19102) up to 50-100 tons
and more (19105). The period of air support became ever-longer. There was a transi-
tion from the planning of episodic air strikes by small aircraft groups to the or-
ganizing of continuous, concentrated and echeloned strikes by large air groups in
close cooperation with the ground forces. The scope of the tasks to be carried out
by aviation was also broadened. Aviation was planned for implementing an air block-
ade (the "Ring" Operation), for destroying surrounded enemy groupings (the Bobruysk
Operation) and for delivering materiel (the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy, Belorussian
operations and others). An ever-larger amount of aviation was assigned to ensure
the connitting and subsequent operations of the frontal and army mobile groups, in-
cluding up to 70 percent of the forces in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, up to 80
percent in the Lwow-Ssndomierz and 75 percent in the Berlin Operation.

During the first two periods of the war, a plan for the combat employment of an air
army was most often worked out not for the entire offensive operation but for the

last 3 or lo days of its preparatory stage and for the first 3 or ’0 days of the of-
fensive. Consequently, air operations were planned ahead of time only for the per-
iod that the troops broke through the enemy defenses and for the cosmitting of the

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! 0F11€JAI.IEHE(MVLY

mobile group (second echelon) to the engagement. Such a practice led to a situation
where the allocated flying time was used extremely unevenly. Considering this, the
staffs of the air armies (the first in the Belorussian Operation and the second in
the Berlin Operation), in working out the aviation combat employment plan, began to
make long-range operational calculations which made it possible to determine the
possible flying time and the consumption of materiel for each day of the entire op-
eration. Here the initial data for these were the available composition of the
army, the load factor for the crew, the assigned limit of materiel, the probable
losses, the consumption of fuel and ammunition on each sortie. The employment of
aviation began to be planned for two or three variations depending both upon the
weather conditions (in the 6th Air Army, February 1965) as well as upon the rate of
breaking through enemy defenses (in the 16th Air Army on the eve of the Berlin 0psr~
ation).

with the abolishing of the aviation in an army, the use of aviation in the plans

of army operations was reflected only from the viewpoint of allocating flying time
by days of the offensive. From the middle of 1964, due to the fact that the air
formations began to be put under operational subordination to the armies, and pri-
marily the tank armies, a plan was worked out for using aviation in the form of a
separate document (in the let Guards Tank Army, the Proskurovsko-Chernovtsy Opera-
tion) or in the form of a cooperation table with the appending of control, identi-
fication and target designation signals (in a majority of operations). Planning
consisted in determining the tasks of aviation and the methods of carrying them out
as well as the procedure for organizing control.

In the operations of the first period there were a number of shortcomings in plan-
ning the combat employment of air defense weapons (aviation, antiaircraft artil-
lery, the VNOS [aircraft warning service] subdivisions and so forth). From the ex-
perience of the counteroffensive at Moscow, Tikhvin and Rostov, the air defense re-
sources were virtually not massed, the staffs of the fronts organized cooperation
between the aviation and antiaircraft artillery unsatisfactorily and the firing of
firearms was used only episodically.

In the subsequent years, there was an improvement in the air cover of the troops and
installations from a duty status at the airfields combined with the previously em-
ployed patrolling over the battlefield. The aviation was stacked. There was a
transition from visual methods of guidance to instrument ones and this made it pos-
sible to intercept the aircraft at the distant approaches. The formation of air de-
fense army regiments and the sntiaircraft artillery divisions of the RICK [SHC Re-
serve] made it possible to change over to the planning of the massed use of anti-
aircraft artillery and its centralized control. For this front and army antiair-
craft artillery groups (2A6) were organized. From the middle of 1944, the national
air defense resources began to be employed in the interests of a front (by 1 October,
up to 34 percent of the fighter aviation and up to 54 percent of the antiaircraft
guns). This made it possible to plan and carry out not only a cover for individual
installations but also areas (the positions of the assault troop groupings, mobile
groups and so forth).

By the vet's end, the basic planning document for front air defense was a plan
worked out by the directorate of the artillery commander. In a number of opera-

tions air defense for rear installations was planned separately.26 In the armies

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their staffs compiled an antiaircraft artillery cover plan. The chief content of
the planning documents was the questions of determining the air defense target and
the tasks carried out by different means as well as the maintaining of cooperation
between them.

During the winter of 191.2 and in the Mitt-In of 1943, by a decision of uqsnc, air-
borne troops [VDV] began to be used in a nuaber of front offensive operations. In
these instances the staff of a front, on the basis of the cm-ander's plan, together
with the operations group of the VIN directorate and the representatives of the
frontal and military transport aviation, worked out a landing plan. As a rule, it
gave the men and equipment of the landing party, the air transport to be used, the
jump-off areas and the drop (landing) areas, the air cover procedures, the target
designat ion. control and recognition signals as well as camouflage questions. The
basic content of this document was a computation of the men and equipment by landing
stages. The use of airborne troops was shown on the comander's map and in the text
portion of the plan of the front's operation (the goal, the tasks of the paratroop-
ers. the time of their employment and the nature of operations).

In planning an offensive on a maritime (lake) sector, the plan of the operation pro-
vided for the emloyment of the navy (naval flotillas) and these operated under the
front commanders. They carried outs number of missions: they provided artillery
support (Krasnoye Selo-Ropsha Operation), they covered the troops with naval avia-
tion (the Crimean and Petsamo-Kirkenes operations), they supported the landing of
amphibious troops (Novorossiysk, Hoonaund and Budapest operations) and the regroup-
ing of troops (Vyborg Operation). The staffs of the front and the fleet (flotilla)
worked out a joint operation plan. It defined the sequence for carrying out the
tasks by the troops of the front on the coast and the resulting tasks of the naval
(flotilla) forces, the cooperation procedure, the organization of comaunications and
questions of operational and rear support. The landing plan, from the experience of
the Kerch'-Feodosiya and Novorossiysk operations, showed the composition of the
landing force (by waves), the transport, the regions and time of the landing, the
tasks of the troops as well as the connand structure, the control signals and the
comunications system.“

In a number of frontal operations of 1962-1964, plans were made to use the partisan
formations operating in the enemy rear. For example, on the eve of the Rshev-Sychev
Operation (August 1942), the Kalinin partisan movement staff, together with the op-
erations section of the front's staff, worked out a "Operations Plan for Combat Op-
erations of Partisan Detachmentl." It defined the tasks for the partisan detach-
ments, the redeployment areas and established the bases for cooperation with the op-
erational army. The partisan movement staff in the Western Front in line with the
operation being prepared for the troops on the left wing of the front in the Bryansk
Sector, in the middle of February 1943 worked out a “Plan for Conducting an Opera-
tion to Defeat the Rears of the Bryansk-Kirov Enemy Grouping." This formulated the
tasks of the brigades and detachments and reflected the questions of organising com-
munications and logistical support. Partisan actions were planned in approximately
the same manner in the preparations for the Smolensk Operation (August-October 1963)
and in the battle for the Dnepr (August-December 1943). On the eve of the Belorus-
sian Operation (the smnmer of 19%), a plan for joint operations with the partisans
was worked out by the operations group of the staff from the First Baltic Front.

5!;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I1)R CHﬂﬂCJAl.IJSEZ(NVLY

The employment of resources for all-round support of the offensive was planned by
the directorates (sections) of the chiefs of the branches of troops together with
the combined-arms staff. The content of the basic documents for the organisation
of reconnaissance and camouflage, for securing the boundary areas and flanks and
for employing the engineer, smoke and flamethrower-incendiary subunits (units) ac-
cording to the experience of the war is shown in Table 7.

0n the basis of the plan by the rear commander, under the leadership of the deputy
commander for the rear, a plan was worked out for material support of an offensive.
Diagrams were drawn up for the organization of the rear and its deployment. Calcu-
lations of the required materiel were used as an appendix to the plan. The sec-
tions of the planning documents included: questions for organizing transport, med-
ical evacuation measures, defense and protection of the rear and road support. Pro-
ceeding from the scope of the forthcoming operation, the dates, standards and pro-
cedure for echeloning material supplies were set. In line with the increased size
of the field forces (formations), the greater technical equipping of the troops and
the higher intensity of combat operations in the offensive operations of 1944-1945.
the troops had a greater need for materiel end the scope of work carried out by the
rear increased. For this reason, in planning material support for operations in the
third period of the war. consideration was also given to reflecting the questions of
determining the procedure for allocating the rear units (subunits), for utilising
captured materiel, for redistributing the standards for certain types of supply at
the expense of others. and the providing of crating for equipment. Antiepidemic and
sanitary-hygiene measures began to hold an important place.

The planning of technical support for an offensive was carried out by the commander
of the armored and mechanized troops of a front (combined-arms army) as well as by
the assistant tank army commander for technical affairs. The subordinate director-
ates (sections) worked out a plan for the days of an operation, indicating the de-
ployment areas. the procedure for deployment and movement of the equipment, the or-
ganization of technical repairs and maintenance as well as the work involved in re-
building the equipment and supplying spare parts. The plan was worked out in writ-
ing ot graphically. It depicted the questions of the use of repair and evacuation
facilities, the organization of the supply of armored equipment and the control of
the repair and evacuation service. From the autumn of 1962, great attention was
given to detailed calculations of possible losses, the assumed amount of repairs,
the requirements for spare parts, repair materials and so forth. In preparing for
the 1965 operations, there was a transition to unified planning of logistical sup-
port as well as the reflecting of technical support questions in the rear order. 8

The planning of party political work was carried out by the political directorate
(section) most often separately for the preparatory period and for the first 3-5
days of the offensive. The basic document was the plan for the work of the politi-
cal directorate (section). It was worked out on the basis of the orders of the
military council and the guiding documents of the VKP(b) Central Committee and the
Soviet government, considering the conditions of the forthcoming operations. The
basic tasks defined in the plan were: the indoctrination of the men in a spirit of
Soviet patriotism, love for the metherland and total dedication to the Communist
Partv; the unnasking of fascism as the most evil enemy of mankind and the fanning
of a sacred hate for it; the greatest possible propagandizing of the requirements of
military discipline and a readiness at any price to carry out the commander's order;
ensuring that the commanders, political workers, communists and Komsomol members
set a personal example in combat.

55

FIN!(NHH(JAI.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

noaoauqﬂu0u
guy oucuoaouu unwouv
than .oouaou-m nudvuusa
.xuoa aqua-Ono .ndouu
muoin:5n no newuouua
noun .uonuouuacuouou mo
acuuquuauano .Auoalha
adv canon» causal no
333 3 9.3338 w
ouo>uu mo Nana-090 hem
uuoaano .xuos data»;
a moon .Aunouu uouv
nouannul «manuaoiqu

cauuanOuawowv
a ahooov ha anon»
vaouuuﬂ cu .ocOHu
canon w «coauo- noon»
Havocoo cu nouaouoz
auov vu>uooou
no auu>uuco can ouav mo
cauuuouuoo .uauu sauce
can“ museum .couou no
ncuvcom .ouaanauacnooou
hue .uquu an condo
nounncouou .oosnanao
.uozuuaoo .:o«ua>hoa
use we couuuawcauuo

aouaoaua
voccaaa no mucoucoo

.uuoaman noouuucu

uou «sun» noon? .ousul
Inocuov uuoambo owuunuu
a ao«uu:uuo:oo vacuu-
nno nuance .o>uooou
nooawwcu no nouuuooa
«loo .Houuuoo mo clhou
a duo: usuuonmloo

uou noun: .xuuu Juno
uao huuao cu unianusvu
a can no aaouuaﬁ
cauﬁuo .oumas noununad
no axoauuthlha so an

.oaouuql

Inca o.u:ouu wauuuou

sauna uou unannuaoo

a cal no ﬂo«ucnso

Inca .unoansa noonauau
mo luaauucouu u an

.oao«uoauuouu uduuoam
.Houuaoo «o aluom

a «vogue: .vOu: an

on oaousonoz .oua«wcoa

noon acoauua and nouuv
.nuoua .nxaau .l«<

.uuov
vucowanauucw mcuuuwﬂpao
new ouavuuoua .uOuucou
mo cauuauwcawuo .ucul
nauaoo a caQ- mo o>uaq
no: .uucowvuaoucu no
soon. a nouov .uvoguoi
.uauoa .oouu0u .nxwaﬁ

nucoasoov
uuuwp mo mucoucoo

deduce.
oncouu

hooadnaﬂ
coauouo

oaoouu
noouunuﬁ
.AaOAuoouv
ouQuOuouuuv
acouuauomo

coauoou
oocouuuuoucu

udam
unchan-
nooaaunﬂ

Auoauuauuo
luau uuvuo

unauuaoauo

coda
«unow«AHOu=H

uncansa
uncounaﬂ

Baum
smegmaoauo

aqua
oonuwuuaounu

Ea

cw aucuasuov “saccuu. canon

yucca:-
uoouaunu

owauusolao
goons

modem
nannoucu

accuuauamo o>uu:0uuo cu uuoaaam panaou mo mouse ouwam uOu muauanuon ”succuam no announce

u wanna

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080051-3

NI! 05-1-10“. USE ONLY

               

                   
                           

                

        

    

    

        

        

                           
      

             

    

     

    

0:30
.3380? 3
000u5000u no u¢>50nul Icahn-an on uadlnuavo
«o 0.300: 50.5.30! 00083.30 mad—0.3000 c.3300...“ 0
000-5380 >083 .009 .530 now a :0.- 000090000 uoaounwwauw
nae-co 08 nail—«.50 0.30009:— .ui«:¢0 ma 00: new we “no won—0a:
a a0.- uo cash—30.8 a 60.- uo .3300qu 3030:0005 03 E
A303 9—8.3 a 0030353
3258 an 0053.00 sausage you 000:
you 303000000033 0.— 00 0:083:00 a :0:
2:00.50 no 25 a an Jeannine 030$ 53.:
you "00.25: 0:00.50 000.5009:— 630000008
2.0003 .0359... >03. .35.: 0 03.3352. 830: a 0 an: a
.3300: «0 030003 no 02.000.35.30.— waun 00306569 x .5 35C 0
IH< .Iuoonuao Ouuuan no laudmho how 00uavooouh Acouuu00v uuunmuau “Maunwnamu 00uuavsaon
:0» .0050. a: .3303 0 00:00.83 08 009300002. 0
comm—“HP unamauosvcwo 00006300 0.33.5000: 3830025 330000005 03 an: no 0023.6

  

      

    
  

%%

5 00:03:08 ”5.30.". 303

    

00:03:02.
3009 no 00:00:00

00090.08
005.03 no 00:00:00

OHOUBOOKN

 
  

A0056.“ HGOOV h 0~D¢P

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000400000051-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The combat planning table (the cooperation table) of the rifle formations (the
armored and mechanized troop formations), in being the basic document worked out

in a corps and division in organizing an offensive, took up the questions of the
employment of men and equipment to the depth of the immediate task (in the first
period of the war) and the tasks of a day or 2 or 3 days of the offensive (in the
subsequent periods of the war). More often the combat planning table was an appen-
dix to the operation order (in 131 divisions out of the 160 participating in the
Belorussian Operation). Excerpts of it were forwarded to the subordinate units,
including attached units and units arriving as reinforcements.

Thus, in organizing the offensive in the Sinyavin sector in breaking through the
blockade of Leningrad (January 1963), the combined-arms staff of the 372d Rifle
Division, on the basis of the division commander's plan, elaborated a combat plan-
ning tab1e for the first 2 days of combat operations (an appendix to the operation
order of 8 January 1963). It indicated the tasks for the rifle units, the artil-
lery. the NPP tanks, the engineer and chemical troop subunits as well as for the
assault detachments and nobile obstacle construction detachments. Their actions
were planned by periods: preparations for the attack and the bringing up of the
infantry to the jump-off line. artillery softening up for the attack, the attack on
the forward edge and the capturing of the first position, combat in depth and the
capturing of the second position, and pursuit of the enemy.29 In a number of in-
stances a combat planning table separately designated the tasks for the forward
detachments. For example, for the six divisions out of the ten in the 8th Guards
Army in the preparations for the Vistula-Oder Operation (January 1945) as well as
for the subunits to be used for conducting reconnaissance in force (in the forma-
tions of the 5th Assault Army, the Berlin Operation of April 1945).

On the tactical levels. the questions of planning the combat employment of the ar-
tillery and NP? tanks were most worked out.

The experience of the first 2 years of the war indicated that the creation of an
artillery grouping in the rifle corps and divisions, in accord with the prewar
views. that is. long-range (DD) and infantry support (PP) groups, had led to a situ-
ation where the rifle regiments and the subunits comprising them actually operated
without effective artillery fire support, since the system for calling in fire re-
quired a great amount of time. It was essential to seek out new methods for eaploy-
ing the artillery. A successful solution to the problem was aided by the increased
number of guns and mortars in the rifle divisions and corps as well as by the ac-
quired skills of controlling the artillery on the battlefield.

In the second period of the war, in particular in the Kursk counteroffensive. ac-
cording to the commanders' plans, in 30-35 percent of the divisions regimental artil-
lery groups were to be organized and they would be under the commanders of the rifle
regiments. Divisional artillery groups also began to be organized. The artillery
was decisively masked in the breakthrough sector. For example, up to 85 percent in
the first echelon rifle divisions during the Stalingrad counteroffensive and up to
100 percent in the divisions of the llth Guards Arny in the Orel Operation. The
duration of artillery softening up also increased. In 14 out of the 18 divisions of
the Southwestern Front in November 1962. this lasted 70-90 minutes and in the first
echelon divisions of the Voronezh and Steppe fronts in the Battle of Kursk, 165-175
minutes. As a result there was a sharp increase in effective fire neutralization

58

FOIIOFT1C1A1.USEGDNLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the enemy and this evidenced an increased skill of the commanders and staffs in
troop control.

During the third period of the war, the improved tactical and technical performance
of the guns and mortars, the bringing of the artillery firing positions closer to
the forward edge as well as the increased possibility of ammunition consumption made
it possible to plan fire during the artillery softening up period to a depth of

4-7 km. Artillery support began to be planned not only using the successive concen-
tration of fire (P80) method but also by a rolling barage, including a double one.

There was also improved planning of artillery fire control by the combined-arms com-
manders and staffs also due to the fact that the targets impeding the advance of the
infantry and tanks were more accurately pointed out. The results of firing for ef-
fect against the enemy were increased not only in the tactical but also the opera-
tional depth. in crossing rivers, in conducting operations in a city. that is, under
conditions when great independence was demanded from the formations and units. The
degree of artillery masses in the sector of the main thrust was further increased.
In the commanders' plans. with a certain reduction in the length of artillery soften-
ing up, there was a sharp increase in the time assigned to concentrated fire: fro-
3-5 minutes in 1961, 10-20 minutes at the end of 1962 up to 65 minutes in 1945. The
proportional amount of this firing averaged 40-60 percent. In a number of instances.
for example in the XXIX Rifle Corps of the 8th Guards Army in the Vistula-Oder Oper-
ation, it reached 100 percent. To avoid routine in the artillery offensive plans,

a differing procedure was envisaged for carrying out artillery softening up, follow-
ing two variations depending upon the outcome of the combat operations of the for-
ward battalions (Berlin Operation) as well as with the false shifting of fire (in
the 3d Guards Rifle Division on the Perekop' Isthmus in April 1954).

Experience taught that the unique situational conditions predetermined the specific
employment of the resources. For precisely this reason, a number of particular
features in the planning of fire for effect against the enemy can be traced in the
armored troops formations. These were determined by the nature of their operations,
by the composition (in a tank and mechanized corps there were half the amount of guns
and mortars than in a division and 5-fold less than in a rifle corps) as well as by
the necessity of supporting highly fluid combat operations. The specific features
were expressed in the fact that it was most often planned that the artillery would
employ regular artillery units. Some 60-70 percent of the artillery according to
the commanders' plane was assigned to the forward detachments of the corps and bri-
gades as reinforcements for supporting tank operations with brief concentrated fire.
For this reason the corps con-under determined only the tactical tasks while the bri-
gade commander set the fire tasks. The questions of employing the artillery in the
brigades were reflected in the operation order, on the working maps of the officials
and in the combat planning table. The plan was compiled in those instances when the
corps artillery was to be used for supporting (for example, in the VI Tank and III
Mechanized corps in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation) the committing of the forma-
tions to the engagement in the battle for the tactical defensive zone.

During the first months of the war, the NPP tanks received as reinforcements in a
di"ision were to be turned over to the first echelon regiments. A portion of than

was held in reserve. The even distribution of the NP? tanks along the front, their
limiteo number (at best from 10 to 20 tanks were assigned to a division) as well as

59

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FCH!(”NWCJAI.USE¢DNLY

the broad zones of advance (up to 10 kn) led to a situation where the HP? tank den-
sities were very low. Infantry fought with weak tank support. In addition, the
lack of experience among the rifle unit and subunit cos-anders in organizing
combined-arms coebat frequently led to uncoordinated actions between the infantry.

tanks. artillery. aviation and engineer troops.

Subsequently there was a transition to rigid centralization in planning tank use.
This was required by the order of thBc of 22 January and the order of the “KO of

16 October 1962, No 325. Great attention was given to organizing combined-ares con-
bat. In particular. it was prohibited to commit tanks to combat without prelimin-
ary reconnaissance and reconnoitering by the consanders of the infantry and artil-
lery and the tank chiefs. Views were changed on the deep echeloning of the NP? tank
battle orders as with low tank densities this led to a weakening of the force of the
initial thrust. it caused a large gap between the first tank echelon and the infan-
try (up to 600-900 n) and disrupted cooperation.

During the second period of the war. as experience was acquired and in line with
changes in eneny defenses. the NP? tanks began to be planned also for "destroying
enemy infantry, gun and nortar crews."30 In the Stalingrad counteroffensiva, in
10-15 percent of the divisions. the con-anders' plans provided for the allocating

of tank close support guns. For this same purpose, in 19b3, the use of the SAD was
planned. From brief halts they destroyed enemy antitank weapons. tanks and assault
guns. In those instances when the infantry operated without the NP? tanks, the SA”
were in its battle formations or advanced directly behind the extended line of in-
fantry. In the battle for the Dnepr (in the 37th Guards and 60th Rifle divisions of
the 65th Army and in the 167th and 180th Rifle divisions of the 38th Army), upon the
instructions of the stay armored and mechanized troop cannanders, the division
staffs provided for the creation on the eve of the operation of forward detachments
from the NPP tanks. With the breaking through of the ens-y defenses, the tanks with
the SAU moved up into the concentration area designated by the division cosmsnder.
here the tank units (formations) were reinforced by rifle and coabat engineer sub-
units as well as by artillery. After this. as forward detachments, they began to
carry out the tasks of pursuing the retreating enemy. As a result the noeentun of

advance rose.

Particular attention was paid to supporting the consitting of the tanks to battle.
One of the directives of HqShc from the second period of the war enphasised that
"their operations should be bold and daring, and along with this the attack can be
made only after sufficient artillery and air softening up of the ens-y defensive
zone." Tne bringing up of the tanks to the jump-off positions began to be planned
more carefully. While in 1941-1962 this was more often done the night prior to the
offensive. subsequently a more rational solution to the question was found. They

were brought up during the period of the artillery and air softening up. In the
preparations for the Vistula-Oder Operation the staffs of-seven out of the eight

armies of the First Belorussian Front planned tank operations in this manner.

In the course of the third period of the war. a portion of the tank subunits was
assigned to rifle regiaents. This was done in divisions operating in the sectors

of the main thrusts in the Belorussian. Lwow-Sendomier: and other operations.
Sonetines control of the NPP tanks was entrusted to battalion comaanders (in the
Vistula-Oder Operation) and even company commanders. as was the case in the Berlin

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI 0FFKJAL.US£(MNLY

Operation. In the operations to liberate Beloruaaia and in the Lwow-Sandomiera
Operation, tanks were also assigned to the forward battalions. This was not only
a consequence of the increased number of tanks and the narrowing of the zones of
advance for the rifle divisions to 2-3 km, but also a result of the increased skill
of the unit and subunit commanders and also their staffs in organising cooperation.

A new feature in 1945 was the fact that in a number of instances. for example in
the 96th Guards Bifle Division in the East Prussian Operation.in the 67th Guards
Rifle Division in the Berlin Operation, they planned ahead of time to strengthen
the regiments not only of the first echelon of the division but also its second.
This made it possible to more effectively increase the effort and raise the momen-
tum of advance. Moreover, after breaking through the main enemy defensive zone
they planned to unite the NPP tanks into forward detachments of the formations for
capturing the second zone without a halt and after the breaking through of the
tactical enemy defensive zone to combine them into army forward detachments (in
the 27th Army in the preparations for the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation and in
the 5th Assault Army for the Vistula-Oder Operation). In the spring of 1945, the
first experience was also acquired in planning the combat employment of regular
SAD battalions of rifle divisions. In the first echelon divisions these were most
often used for direct infantry support and in the second echelons as a reserve.

As a whole, during the war years the role of the division commander and staff in
planning the combat employment of artillery and NP? tanks increased sharply. The
division commander became the immediate organiser of their use both in breaking
through eneny defenses as well as in conducting enemy pursuit proceeding from the
situational conditions and on the basis of the principle of massing men and equip-
ment in combined-arms combat and the coordinating of fire, attack and maneuver.

4. The Giving (Issuing) of Combat Tasks

In the prewar years, demands were worked out which acted as guides for control
bodies in the setting of combat tasks. These demands were: directness and secrecy
of their issuing. clarity. completeness and lucidity of writing. Every measure

was to be undertaken so that the inferior levels had the necessary time to organ-
ize combat operations and that the subordinate commanders and staffs could make
optimum use of the initial data for adopting plans within the tasks entrusted to
them considering the situational conditions.

During the years of the Great Patriotic War. combat tasks were given by a commander
verbally or with the aid of communications. They were issued by his deputies and
by staff officers.

Over the entire period of the war the issuing of combat tasks personally by the
commander was inherent to tactical levels, that is, to the subunits, units and for-
mations. This was often done also by commanders of field forces. The experience
of the war showed the rationality of this method. Hith the personal assigning of

a task, the commander had an opportunity to make certain that it was correctly
understood by subordinates. to resolve all unclear questions as well as provide
tactical aid in organizing combat operations. Also of positive significance in
this regard was the reduction in the number of formations under an army commander
by the start of the second period of the war as a result of the restoring of the

61

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corps level of cos-mad by the summer of 1943 as well as the increased amount of
time to prepare for operations.

The commander of a front (army) set the combat tasks at the command post in the
presence of all or a larger portion of the army (formation) commanders when there
was sufficient time to prepare for the offensive. For example. the tasks were car-
ried out in this manner by the commander of the 28th Army in the preparations for
the Bobruysk Operation. Having adopted the plan and having clarified individual
questions of cooperation on the terrain with the subordinate commanders, at the
army couand post he set the combat tasks for the corps cal-antlers using a map and
in the presence of their chiefs of staff. Here also the army chief of staff had
the corps commanders sign for the operation order which had been worked out by that
time.31 work was organized in a similar manner when subordinates were directly
near the command post. This was characteristic for the tank armies and the tank
(mechanized) corps when they were located in a concentration area (jump-off area).
In the designated variation following the experience of two tank armies and 12
corps in June l9bb (the Belorussian Operation). the time spent was within the
limits of from h to 6 hours, figuring: 1-2 hours to issue the operation order and
additional instructions and 3-h hours for the move.

Starting with the second period of the war. frequently tasks were given in recon-
naissance or at the end of conducted military games (conmand-staff exercises), as
was done in preparing for the Gumbinnen Operation (a portion of the East Prussian
Operation) in January 1965 by the commander of the lltb Guards Army. At dawn of
12 January. he, together with the army chief of staff, the deputy commander of the
lat Air Army, the artillery commander, the armored and mechanized troop commander,
the chief of the engineer troops and the chief of the intelligence section, travel-
ed out on reconnaissance. The corps commanders also showed up here. The army
chief of staff acquainted those present with the overall concept of the offensive.
Then the artillery commander and the ernored and mechanized troop commander gave
instructions on the employment of the branches of troops. "...For each corps com-
mander on the spot." recalled K. N. Galitskiy, "1 indicated the breakthrough area
in the corps' zone of advance and the direction of the main thrust. I set the
battle formation and clarified the inmediste task...."32

The setting of combat tasks for subordinates in conducting reconnaissance became
particularly typical from the autumn of 1902 for the unit and subunit commanders.

In the field the enemy grouping. the nature of its defenses. the objects of the
attack. the direction of the further offensive and the boundary lines were pointed
out and the operational procedure was set with the arrival of the NP? tanks at the
forward edge of the enemy defenses and with the start of artillery support and
close support. Here also they checked the correct understanding of the received
task and listened to the plan. For all this work, from the experience of organis-
ing combat operations in the third period of the war in preparing for an offensive
in Belorussia (June l9bb), in Poland (January 1945) and in East Prussia (February
1965). a regimental commander spend up to 6-6 hours of time and a battalion com-
mander up to 2 or 3 hours.

A commander drove (flew) to the formations usually when it was not advisable to
remove subordinates from troop control. In these instances a front cammander re-
quired at least a day for successively setting the tasks for subordinates while an

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

army commander required from 8 to 12 hours. From the experience of the commander
of lhr 372d Rifle Division in preparing the offensive in the Sinyavin sector (Jan-
uary lvhl). it required around 6 hours to give the tasks by this method. Along
with the giving of a combat task, one of the aims of the travel was to become
familiar with the state of affairs in the formations. For this reason often even
with limited time a commander traveled to those formations (units) which had at-
riVed as part of a front (army) on the eve of an operation. This was the case in
the preparations of the 4th Tank Army for the Orel Operation, when its commander
traVeled to the command post of the XXV Tank Corps where he issued the task to its
commander. considering that the corps had arrived in the army during the night
prior to the start of the operation. If the commander's time was limited, then
he traveled only to the field forces (formations) which were to fight in the main
sector. Sometimes the tasks were issued to the troops simultaneously by the com-
mander and his deputies.

with the aid of communications equipment a commander usually set the tasks for
subordinates if he did not have time to assemble them. For this wire communica-
Lions were used and. as an exception. radio. Up to an hour was spent on the tele-
phvnr for setting the tasks successively for all the army (formation) commanders
.nu :- or 5-fold more time by radio. It must be emphasized that for the commander
or a front or combined-arms army such a form of setting the tasks in preparing an
oifwnslve was a rather rare phenomenon basically due to the danger of enemy inter-
ception of the calls. The directive of HqSBC of 25 August 1941 demanded "refrain-
ing irom telephone calls in the aim of maintaining the secrecy of preparations for
operations...and to set tasks for executors verbally."3“ For this reason the set-
ting of combat tasks using equipment was most often practiced just for clarifying
individual questions of a plan in the event of changes in the situation and direct-
ly bifure the start of going over to the offensive. The formation and unit com~
wanders used wire communications for transmitting the established signals.

the combined-arms staff and the other control bodies played an important role in
issuing tasks to subordinates.

The staff officers issued general and particular operation orders,35 as well as
written and oral instructions. Often the tasks were issued in an order map
(through the signals officers). The transmitting of operation orders by staff
olllivrs using communications equipment was carried out over the entire war when
th organization of combat was carried out by the by-order procedure as well as in
pr.erInr for an ullcnsch in limited time. Conmancatiuns eQuipment was used

p rzicularly often by the commanders and staffs of tank (mechanized) corps and
brigades with the start of moving up to the attack line. This was also done by
the commanders of riilc formations. for example. bv Lhr commander of the 63d
Cunrdn Rifle Division in organiring combat for Mount Vurnn'yn on 17 January 1944
(lhv Krasnoye Selu-Rupsha Operation).

The staff issued individual nffwuslvc planning documents. copies of the planning
tabio unJ C00?Qratlnn table, th upeiatiun order and iLiLruCtIODS. Thus, the

staff oi the l3hlh Riiie Division, during the algal prior to the attack (the break—
ing of th blockade oi Leningrad. January 1943) issued the legimental commanders
excerpts irum the combat planning table. planning cards for the cooperation of the
group: of branches nf troops comprising the assault detachments. a radio signals
table and on order Our chemical warfare deftnsc. In the morning of 11 January,

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

the regimental staffs received an order from the division chief of staff which gave
the signals for linking up with the troops of the Volkhov Front and recognizing
friendly troops.36

Consequently, the methods of issuing tasks to troops in preparing for an offensive
assumed different forms depending upon the situation. Experience shows that in
terms of time, the most economic wss the setting of tasks personally by the communal-

er and their simultaneous issuing by the staff in written combat documents. This
form was employed particularly widely in the formations and units.

Experience also taught that the completeness of combat tasks depended primarily upon
the form of their setting (issuing).

In personal contacts the commander had an opportunity to concretize and detail indi-
vidual questions of his plan, and not only on a map but also in the field, as well
as‘to issue the necessary instructions to support combat operations and organize co-
operation.

In issuing combat tasks in an operation order (directive)37 they gave conclusions
from the assessment of the enemy grouping and the nature of its actions, the goal
and overall concept of the offensive, the combat tasks for subordinates (composi-
tion. reinforcements, the content of combat tasks, the tasks of adjacent units, and
boundary lines with them), the tasks for aviation and artillery, the composition

of reserves, the deployment areas of the command (sometimes also observation) point
and the dates for submitting the combat operations plan by subordinates. From the
middle of 1944, an operation order also gave the procedure and times for issuing
the tasks to various levels and the time for reporting that the troops were ready
for forthcoming operations.

The written combat instructions more often contained brief information on the enemy
(if this information was not known to subordinates), the combat task of the field
force (formation, unit) and the time for being ready for the offensive. The pre-
liminary instructions usually gave instructions on measures which had to be carried
out by the troops for the purposes of preparing for the forthcoming offensive and

sometimes also gave the time and methods for issuing a combat task.

Practice showed that the degree of detailing the questions in the operation orders
and instructions depended upon many factors, including upon how skillfully the
combined-arms staffs had organized their work of informing the inferior levels of
the operational-tactical situation.

From the middle of 1942, the front, and from 196‘, the army as well. began to more
regularly forward operational-tactical information to subordinates. The staffs of
the Southwestern and Don Fronts. during the period from 10 November 1962 through

3 February 1963, each week worked out and forwarded to the troops, down to the divi-
sion conmander inclusively, the so-callsd situational background studies. In
November l9é2 alone, the staff of the Southwestern Front five times assembled the
army conmanders and chiefs of staff for issuing information on the situation in

the southern wing of the Soviet-German Front. The commander of the 5th Army, 1
month before the receiving of the task for the offensive in the Belorussian Oper-
ation, three times issued to the formation commanders generalised data on the enemy

66

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLV
FOR Ol-‘FIUAL l'Sl-l ONLY

-.-.. ant- zone of the Third Belorussian Front. The task was carried out in a similar
..;n..n~r in the llth (:nnrds, 31st and 39th armies. Such a practice made it possible
:.-r ”4' tor'nation (unit) commanders and staffs. even before receiving a specific
trim-Dal task, to understand the Situation and think through the nature of the coming
operations. A comander subsequently could be given a task in a briefer form. For
Prc‘c-au]y this reason the volume of the operation orders in the third period of the
w.” |-.-:--.n:ncd as before and often even declined. regardless of the sharp increase

in tne questions taken up in them. The issuing of various instructions. memoran-
tllilua .md orders to subordinate staffs on the eve of preparing for an offensive also
Leigh: large iy in reducing the volume of the operation orders. These disclosed the
rant-m- of enemy defenses and its fire plan. they described the engineer works and
“.m- recomcnduiions on the working procedures of the control bodies. Thus, the
stuff on the cut Rifle Corps (Vyborg Operation. June 1944). in organizing combat to
break through the second enemy defensive zone. issued the comanders of the 72d
and .'.n(wth iiii'lc divisions a detailed diagram plan of the enemy defenses at the

‘.crc)lly_g:uiui3 of Kutersel'ka and Tirikolla as well as instructions on the actions of
the assault groups.

‘CCIL'i ,7 in the transmitting of isaued instructions was achieved by an aggregate of
"rt-.IS'chﬁ. including bv dependable security for officers (liaison delegates) travel-
.n.,_ '. - the troops. The combined-arms staff notified the chief of staff of the sub-
- rein..te troops of the dispatching of combat documents, indicating when, by whom
.md u, what means the document had been dispatched. The chief of staff, having re-
t'eLVt-d notification, organized the meeting with the liaison officers. For ensuring
tzunp mntroi secrecy (SUV) in an offensive. the combined-arms staffs worked out
nul :‘S'lL’d to Subordinate staffs signals tables, reference maps and procedure
tabled. Moreover. the SUV instructions contained pseudonyms for the commanders, the
-n;'lxt.rry council members, the chiefs of staffs. the comanders (chiefs) of the
'lr.i;\\|lL‘$ of troops (special troops) as well as the formation commanders. A new

I. .ume during the third period of the war was that a division staff often drew up
. 5153.118 table and procedure table for each day of combat. This was the case, for
.->.:umpie. in the formations of the 8th Guards Army (Vistula-Oder Operation).

"he aggregate of measures carried out by the commanders and staffs to increase the
t-fict-tiveness and secrecy of issuing coaba: tasks and to improve the quality of in-
°'orr.tu inn issued helped in the successful carrying out of troop combat operations
.nnd l‘h: achieving of .1 unity of goals in an offensive.

'\. 'R'Zn Organization of Cooperation

i‘nu‘fm', tin.- years of the Great Patriotic War. there was a significant rise in the
.mmunt nf questions related to coordinating the efforts of the various branches of
war-pa in .r.. omens-1v... This was explained by the few. that cooperation began to
---.- « n'ricd out to an ever-greater depth, at . more rapzu pet-o and in a number of
lnS.J:l-'-'S rngether with the navy (t'iotillas) and in co-u‘vlaJUn with paratroopers

.:!_\-.' ;-..I'Ll ..:.>.. The number n. ri-ments in rue operation.“ configuration (battle for-
-..:-.i '2) :::.-n:.:-rud. :tncm downses .11 :u |‘i'|-'":.‘_"'.'. "hr-7 i» ulLJ‘ more echeloned and
.i.n;..;l'l'-.‘d with weapons. Z'iu-a retrain; detauen ",rfcnarnt'mnn :or solving the fire
in 1%.. 1:. .neaktng 1h: ninth tiu- detonses. Z-‘r .124 .3. .-.u cushion, it was necessary

.i- .N-‘I‘IL‘ l‘ic questions a" ens-u for the mounting of Lorre masses of tanks to an
ex.;-.n:.-_.--...e::t. the crossing at large water obs: tries and the carrying out of a series

.--. mct-cssivc olfensivo operations. .1».- e. .‘1-ulc, thc coordinating of the efforts

()5

FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of all the armed services and branches of troops on the battlefield became the basic
content in the work of the cal-sanders and staffs to organize cooperation in an of-
fensive.

The essence of operational cooperation between the ground forces and aviation con-
sisted in coordinating their efforts in terms of tasks, location and time. The
air forces supported the ground forces in suppressing enemy weapons and in destroy-
ing enemy personnel and equipment. They conducted air reconnaissance in the in-
terests of combat operations of the ground forces and provided cover for them. The
ground forces, in turn, in the aim of ensuring prompt air force maneuvers, captured
enemy airfields, provided help in equipping the airfield bases and covered them
against enemy troop actions.

During the first months of the war the designated questions were not always satis-
factorily solved. One of the reasons for this was the lack of sufficient combat ex-
perience. Moreover, there was not enough co-unicstions equipment, particularly
radios. In fearing to hit our own troops, aviation attacked targets which were far-
distant from the front line. The choice of the objects of air operations often did
not correspond to the conditions developing on the ground.

In the following periods of the war, the staffs of the fronts (armies) and air
field forces jointly worked out cooperation plans to the entire depth of the opera-
tion. These defined the methods for coordinating actions, they set the procedure
for calling in aviation to the battlefield, they established the recognition and
target designation signals and calculated the number of aircraft sorties to be as-
signed for the support of the ground forces and their cover. Uniform procedure
tables and coded maps were worked out. Markings which were clearly visible from the
air were applied to the tanks and SAU. Air guidance officers were assigned to the
tank (mechanized and rifle) corps, the tank brigades and the forward detachments of
the combined-arms armies (rifle corps).

The bases for cooperation between the ground forces, frontal aviation and the navy
(flotillas) were established in planning the operation. The questions were de-
tailed in the course of jointly conducted exercises and military games by clarify-
ing the combat tasks and the methods of carrying them out, the fire tasks of the
artillery, the troops and navy, the aviation of the front and the fleet and the op-
erational procedure for amphibious landings. In addition to the planning documents,
the staff of a front frequently worked out combat instructions which defined the
procedure for utilizing the diverse men and equipment.

In the planning documents for coordinating the efforts of the combined-arms field
forces (formations) with parstroopers (in the zone of the Western and Kalinin
fronts in the winter of 1941-1962 and the Voroneah Front in the autumn of 1963),
chief attention was paid to establishing the encounter lines and times as well as
the identification signals. In planning the use of an airborne force by the First
Baltic Front in the region of Polotsk (November 1943), a great deal of attention
was devoted to coordinating operations with the partisan brigades. For this a spe-
cia1 operations group was set up including representatives from the airborne corps
' and the staff of the Belorussian partisan movement.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The significant amount of tasks to be carried out by joint efforts by the armed
services and the branches of the ground troops in an offensive required a search
for the most effective methods and forms of work by the commanders and staffs.

During the first period of the war, the commanders, as a rule, limited themselves
to just general instructions on coordinating troop efforts. Most often this was
done on a map in setting combat tasks to the depth of breaking through the tactical
enemy defensive zone. Such an approach corresponded to our prewar views on the
role of the operations level. Often the efforts of the formations were coordinated
by a deputy commander (the Demyansk and Barvenkovo-Lozovaya operations) or by the
chief of staff who, as was pointed out in the "Manual for Staff Field Service"
(1935), "personally organizes the ensures troop cooperation." This was often done
hurriedly and without considering the terrain conditions and their influence on

the use of the branches of troops, as was pointed out in one of the directives of
HqSHC (September 1961).

As combat experience was gained, the coordinating of troop efforts in the field was
required for all levels of commanders. This work was carried out in reconnaissance.
The commander coordinated the procedure for arriving at the jump-off position, for
crossing destruction and obstacles in front of the forward edge of enemy defenses
and the actions of all the branches of troops with the start of artillery softening
up and in the course of the attack. All these questions could be settled only with-
in the viewable area of terrain, that is, as a rule, to a shallow depth. The ex-
perience of the war showed the advisability of continuing the organisation of co-
operation on terrain mock-ups. These were made by the topographic sections and the
engineer troop sections from sketches of the operations directorates (sections).

The officers from the intelligence section took a most active part as with their
help the enemy grouping, its weapons and other objects to be hit were reproduced.
Terrain mock-ups were worked out with particular care to a depth of the immediate
task; there were also plans of the major administrative centers.39

The method of working through situational inputs underlay the exercises conducted
in the field and the terrain mock-ups. This made it possible to work out uniform
views on the employment of the resources in an offensive. The officers learned to
control subordinates and experience was acquired in analyzing the situation. Thor-
ough consideration was given to the data. The best plans were found and the comp
manders and staffs were able to adjust the model of the forthcoming actions. An
opportunity arose to check out and resolve disputed provisions and to coordinate
efforts net only for the period of breaking through the enemy defenses, as was done
in the preparation of operations in 1941-1962, but also to a greater depth. Cooper-
ation began to be organized considering the possible nature of enemy operations.

As a whole the practice of modeling, in the understanding in which it arose during
the war years, proved effective. Such a method of a commander's work is applic-
able at present, as it makes it possible to bring out in detail the content of the
troop combat tasks and to coordinate the methods of their actions in terms of lines
and time. Experience has also shown that with the highly skilled training of a com-
mander and staff, the organization of cooperation by playing through variations of
joint operations required small time outlays (3-5 hours) and produced a significant
effect. Thus, the commanders of the 63d Guards and 72d Rifle divisions carried out
this task (the Vyborg Operation, June 1966) in 6 hours, while the commander of the
65th Guards Rifle Division on 13 June 1964, organized cooperation in the field,
spending less than 2 hours.“°

67

FKHl(HﬂﬂCLAl.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Characteristically, on the tactical level, during the first months of the war, the
commanders and staffs, as a consequence of the short time to prepare combat opera-
tions and insufficient experience, organized cooperation usually just between the
regiments, artillery, tanks and adjacent units using a map and to the depth of the
hmnediate task. From the materials of reports from more than 12 divisions partici-
pating in the Moscow counteroffensive, only in two cases was an attempt noted to
organize cooperation by playing through variations of actions. Consequently, at
this time the issuing of instructions was the basic form for coordinating efforts.
Such a practice was also observed in the general offensive at Moscow (January 1942).
HqSHC endeavored to undertake every possible measure to improve the methods and
forms of organizing cooperation and demanded that the commanders along with the ar-
tillery and tank commanders clarify the directions and objectives of the attack as
well as t‘eir neutralization and destruction. The chief of the General Staff in
instructions of 24 October 1942 ordered that "cooperation on all levels be worked
out carefully directly in the field." The draft of the 1963 Field Manual set the
necessity of "issuing all instructions for a breakthrough in such a manner that
prior to the start of the offensive at least one day remains so as to provide the

commanders of the divisions (brigades) with at least 12 hours of daylight and the
battalion commanders with at least 3 hours."

During the second period of the war, cooperation began to be planned to the depth of
breaking through the first enemy defensive zone. This was sore often organized .
within the range of visibility in the field and later on a map or mock-ups. For ex-
ample, this is how the questions were resolved in the 83d Guards Rifle Division of
the 11th Guards Army during the summer of 1943 in advancing in the Volkhov sector
(Orel Operation), when the division commander decided to carry out the basic work of
organizing cooperation at three points. Included in the reconnaissance group were
the cosmanders of the regiments which had been attached to and were supporting the
units (subunits). Having listened to the reports of his subordinates, the division
commander indicated the sequence for.the troops to take up the jump-off position,
the goal and the methods of actions of the subunits to be involved in conducting

the reconnaissance in force, he brought out the questions of coordinating infantry
efforts with the NPP tanks and clarified the schedule for artillery softening up
and the procedure for supporting the attack. After this at each of the points he
played through with the commanders the possible variations for the actions of

friendly and enemy troops to the depth of the day's task and listened to their situ-
ational plans. 0n 9 July exercises were conducted for the rifle battalions and tank
companies. In them they worked on the passage of the tanks through the battle for-
mations, the building of passageways through minefields, the repelling of possible
counterattacks and cooperation with aviation. On 10 July. that is, 2 days before
going over to the offensive, the combat planning table was approved and issued to
subordinates."l '

In the third period of the war, the divisions began to work out a combat plan
(breakthrough plan) the purpose of which was to provide a detailed organization of

first two positions. This plan was approved by the corps commander. Cooperation
began to be worked out to the depth of the day's task. This was the case in a
majority of formations in the preparations for the Belorussian, Iasi-Kishinev and
other operations. Battle drill exercises, exercises with field firing and bombing,
command-staff exercises and radio drill for staff officers held an ever-larger

68

FOR4OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

place in improving combat skill. in shaping up the units and in coordinating the ef-
forts of the troops. This was particularly characteristic for the formations of the
37th Army in the preparations for the Iasi-Kishinev Operation, for the 8th Guards
Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation and the 65th Army for the Berlin Operation. In
them, in accord with the plane worked out by the staffs and made as close as pos-

sible to a combat situation, the unit and subunit commanders gained experience in
organizing and maintaining cooperation in combat.

The work of coordinating efforts in the armored forces formations had specific fea-
tures since the corps and brigade contenders, even in preparing for the offensive,
were interested primarily in the questions of cooperation in entering battle, that
is, in the depth of the ens-y defenses, chiefly with the infantry which had reached
the deployment line, with the artillery and aviation which were supporting the at-
-tack and with the engineer units which had equipped the routes. A large portion of
these questions in organizing combat was solved during a visit by the commanders
with a group of officers to the formations with which they were to operate jointly.
The tank commanders and drivers were called in to study the routes from the jump-
off position to the forward edge of our defenses. A new feature froa the autumn of

l9b2 was the practice of having air representatives in the tank Onschanized) corps
and artillery observers in the brigades.

The contents of the work to coordinate troop efforts can be traced in greater detail

from certain examples from the experience of preparing an offensive during the third
period of the war.

In preparing to go over to the offensive in the Iaei sector during the summer of
1944, the staff of the 37th Army, for example, upon instructions from the commander
to organize cooperation, planned for 8 days. Four days were allocated for the
corps and division commanders, 1 day for the regiments and battalions and 2 days for
the company commanders. Prior to traveling to the field, the staff operations sec-
tion drew up a draft planning table for cooperation as well as an orientation dia-
gram and a table of cooperation signals. 0n 9 August reconnaissance conducted for
the purposes of working out the questions of joint actions of the infantry, tanks,
artillery, engineer troops and aviation for the stages of the operation was attended
by the commanders and chiefs of staff of the corps and divisions, the chiefs of the
branches of troops of the army, the commander and chief of staff of the VII Mechan-
ized Corps, the chief of staff of the 17th Air Army and the commander of the 1x Com-
bined Air Corps. The work started with a clarification of the enemy grouping, its
defenses and the organization of the fire plan. Then the chief of staff acquainted
those present with the task of the army and the methods for carrying it out during
the first stage (the breaking through of the tactical enemy defensive zone) and he
informed the formation commanders about the tasks of the adjacent units. The com-
mander clarified the combat tasks for the corps.

Basic attention was given to coordinating infantry operations with the NPP tanks and
the artillery. According to the commander's plan, two army artillery subgroups were
to be organized for supporting the offensive of the rifle corps. The howitzer,

mortar and light artillery brigades which were part of the group were given the mis-

sion of supporting the first echelon rifle divisions of the corps while the cannon
brigades would be used to suppress and destroy the enemy artillery batteries. The
rocket launcher regiments and brigades existing in the army were reduced to an army

69

FOR OFHKJAI.USE1MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rocket group. The high level of centralization on the army scale of artillery fire
control created better opportunities for its massing and power fire effect. At

that time the formation commanders were given instructions that all the tanks and
SA” were to be used in the breakthrough areas of only those rifle regiments which
would advance in the sector of the main thrust. Here a number of lines were set

for coordinating the efforts and for them their actions were planned jointly with
the infantry and the combat engineer subunits.

0n the next day the commander conducted a military game in the sandbox with the
corps commanders and the commanders (chiefs) of the branches of troops. By playing
through the actions of the troops following the surprise inputs. they worked out

the questions of engineer support and the prompt freeing of the routes of advance
by the rifle formations leading to the attack lines of the VI! Mechanized Corps
considering two possible variations.

It was planned that the first echelon divisions of the corps, having carried out
their immediate tasks ("H”+S), should free the routes of combat equipment and all
types of transport as these routes would be used by the brigades of the mechanized
corps for moving up to the attack line. Prom "H"+S to "B"+7, the rifle divisions
should move up to the attack line. During this time the engineer troops had the
task of making passages through the enemy obstacles. The army 1rtillery was to
shift to supporting the engagement and combat operations of the V11 Mechanized
Corps. The fire of the five artillery brigades was planned in terms of four lines.
For fire correction. one or two officers with communications equipment were sent
from each brigade to the corps.

On 13 August. that is. 5 days before the offensive. the commander approved the co-
operation planning table and excerpts of this were sent out to the formations. In
the following days. exercises were organized in the formations and units of the
army. The commander conducted a demonstration exercise with one of the regiments
from the 28th Guards Rifle Division. This was attended by all the commanders of
the corps, divisions and regiments as well as by the artillery formation commanders.
Then there was an exercise with the 195th Rifle Division reinforced by tanks and
artillery and supported by ground-attack aviation with live bombing.“

Cooperation was organized under unique conditions in the 65th Army in April 1965,
on the eve of the Berlin Operation. The army field headquarters had 3 days to pre-
pare the operation. The troops carried out a regrouping using the combined method
over a distance of 250-300 km. They were to break through the enemy defenses in
crossing the mouth of the Oder River.

Proceeding from the situation, the commander started work by traveling to the jump-
off area for the offensive with the corps commanders and a group of generals. Here
formations of the 61st Army were on the defensive ready to give up the area. a.
conducted reconnaissance. adopted a plan and gave tasks to the corps chrs and
the commanders (chiefs) of the branches of troops and he also indicated the basic
stages of cooperation. having given the corps commanders an opportunity to work
with their subordinates. the commander with a group of officers traveled to the
command posts of the adjacent 2d Assault and 70th armies and coordinated with their
commanders the questions of securing the boundaries and flanks. By this time the
deputy commander of the 4th Air Army had arrived at the army's command post to

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coordinate the tasks to be carried out in the forthcoming air offensive in the
interests of the formations of the 65th Army. These tasks were clarified with par-
tiCular care for the first day of the operation. During this time the army staff
drew up and issued two subordinates a combat planning table to a depth of the imme-
diate task. This reflected the tasks to be carried out by the rifle corps, avia-
tion, artillery and the special troops as well as the control signals. A coopera-
tion plan in crossing the Oder River was worked out as a separate document.

During the remaining 2 days before going over to the offensive (18 and 19 April),
cooperation in the field was organised in the formations, units and subunits both
by the issuing of instructions as well as in the form of playing through variations
of joint operations. Particular attention was given by the commanders of the 354th
and 37th Guards Rifle divisions to organizing cooperation in the regiments assigned
as forward detachments which were to operate along the Retzowsfelde--Kolbitzow
Autobahn. A command-staff exercise and a battle drill exercise were conducted with
the comnanders of these units as well as of the reinforcement units of the forward
detachments. As a consequence of the limited time, the questions of coordinating
efforts in the formations were reflected in the working maps of their commanders
and the chiefs of staff.“3

Experience shows that the work carried out to organize cooperation on all levels of
command contributed decisively to the achieving of the set aims in the offensive.
It provided the best effect in coordinating efforts in the field in the most active
form, that is. by playing through the possible variations of actions. Unity in
combined-arms combat was ensured by the careful preparation of the troops and the
staffs for the offensive.

6. The Preparation of Troops and Staffs

The start of going over to an offensive was preceded by extensive work by all con-
trol bodies in the area of organizing the combat training of the troops and the
staffs, in generalizing and issuing combat experience to the troops and in carrying
out party political measures.

During the first period of the war. when the draft of recruits arrived at the front
after 2 or 3 weeks of training in the rear and up to 60 percent of the officers had
been called up from the reserves. troop training was particularly essential. "The
bitter experience." commented K. A. Heretskov, "...taught us much. Even then we
made it a rule that no matter how great the need for troops. the arriving recruits
and the newly arrived units passed through the training centers before battle or
were acquainted with the particular features of conducting combat directly in the
formations...."““ In the autumn of 1941, the work of the commanders and staffs in
organizing troop combat training picked up sharply. In rail movements, the basic
form of training was speeches by frontline veterans and the reading of pamphlets
and instructions; in marches there were battle drill exercises in the areas of day-
time rest. Hith the arrival of the troops in the concentration area. planned ex-
ercises were organized. In the formations and units of the 37th Army of the South-
ern Front these were conducted for 3 days and in the 54th Army of the Leningrad
Front for 2 days. In training the basic emphasis was put on the actual working out
of the questions of moving up to the attack line, rapid deployment into the battle
formation. the attack on the forward edge and an engagement to take a strongpoint.

71

FOR OFFTCIAI.USEGDNLY
INJR 0F11C1AL USEZCMQLY

In no less than 50 percent of the formations of the 52d Army (the counteroffensive
at Tikhvin), in addition the troops underwent exercises in having tanks pass over
them. The subunits were also trained in salvo firing at enemy aircraft.

The troops were carefully prepared for the Moscow counteroffensive. In drawing at-
tention to this, A. H. Vasilevskiy transmitted to the commander of the Kalinin
Front the demand of I. V. Stalin "to provide an opportunity for Haslennikov's
formations (the 29th Army) which had not come under fire to get the feel of the
front's situation for at least 2 days.““5 On the basis of these instructions, ex-
ercises were conducted in the army's units in studying the weapons, operating
equipment under wintertime conditions, shooting and grenade throwing. Daytime and
nighttime tactical exercises were conducted in the companies, and firing of anti-
tank rifles were held in a number of subunits. Captured tanks were used as targets.
In the divisions of the first Assault and 16th armies of this front, demonstration
exercises were organized for the contenders of platoons, companies and battalions
in troop control in combat. with the personnel the actions were worked through in
attacking the forward edge of enemy defenses. There was extensive popularizing of
the experience of soldiers and sergeants who had excelled in previous battles in
the press. leaflets as well as in talks.

Combat training was improved qualitatively before an offensive in the second period
of the war. By this time there had been a certain increase in the system of the
deputy front (army) commander for combat training. The work assumed a centralized,
planned and effective nature. The front's commander determined the goal. the tasks,
the time to be allocated for combat training as well as the procedure and sequence
for organizing training. The army staff and sections planned the subjects, they
issued instructions to the army commander on organizing training and provided super-
vision. In the formations and units exercise plans were drawn up for a certain time
interval (month or 10-day period) and in the subunits there were exercise schedules.

0n the eve of the Stalingrad offensive (November 1942), in the formations of the
21st Army,for example, 240 hours were allocated for troop training. By 26 October,
individual training of the arrived recruits had been completed. The units began to
develop coordination among the squads (crews and teams) and the platoons. During
the first days of November, battle drill exercises were conducted for the companies

and battalions. 0n 3 November, the army's cmmmander conducted a demonstration regi-
mental tactical exercise. In command-staff exercises and radio drills the division

and regiment staffs worked out the questions of troop control in combat.

In preparing to break through the Leningrad blockade (January l9k3), the nature of
the forthcoming troop operations was the basis of the combat training. In units of
the 86th, 136th and 168th Rifle divisions of the Leningrad Front, under the leader-
ship of their deputy commanders. in specially equipped training fields 25-30 km from
from the forward edge, around 10 battle drill exercises were conducted on crossing
water obstacles under wintertime conditions with the subsequent attack of enemy
strongpoints (the troops were to cross the have River). Training ended with bat-
talion exercises and field firing.“ In the 128th, 372d and 327th Rifle divisions
of the Volkhov Front, particular attention was given to training the assault de-
tachments in taking population points which had been prepared by the enemy for all-
round defense. The officer personnel trained in moving through the woods using
compasses, including under conditions of limited visibility. The tank troops of ﬂu
122d. 16th, 98th and 185th Tank brigades trained in driving tanks through the forest
and across swamps.“7

72

FOR 0FF1C1A1.USEIDNLY
INJRGJFFKJA1.USEGDNLY

A specific approach was particularly apparent in training the troops for actions
under special situational conditions, in particular for landing operations. For
example, in the region of Gelendshik, in the autumn of 1943, on the eve of the
Novorosskiysk Operation. fortifications were specially made similar in type to the
enemy defenses. For a week and a half the landing units prepared to break through
strongly reinforced enemy positions. The subunits which were to participate in

the landing trained along with the ships of the Black Sea Fleet. Each night the
lnfantrymen worked out precise and rapid actions involved in loading into the ships
and landing on the shore. Great attention was given to the engineer training of
the troops. All the formations had mine-clearing detachments and detachments for
reinforcing captured lines wnile the breakthrough units and subunits had assault
groups. In the rifle subunits they worked through the questions of detecting and
deactivating mines and crossing man-made obstacles. Each lending group had assault
foot bridges, hooks and special light bridges for quickly crossing the shore forti-
fications and minefields. Due to the fact that the operation was to start at night,

the participants in the landing spent more than 50 percent of the training time
working under conditions of limited visibility.

in the following years of the war significant experience was gained by all levels
of staffs in organizing troop combat training.

In preparing for the Belorussian Operation, the staffs from the formations of the
First Baltic Front planned 20 days of combat training (from the let through the

20th of June l9b4). The units and subunits which were on the defensive were pulled
back into the second echelon and trained in a 5-day program while those which had
completed the regrouping trained for 10 days in the concentration areas. At the
same time the armies held 2- or 3-day assemblies for the division and regiment com-
manders and chiefs of staffs, in the corps there were assemblies for the battalion
commanders and in the divisions for the company (battery) commanders. Command-staff
exercises were conducted in the commander training system. Specialists were trained
in assemblies in the units. The former commander of the 63d Army remembered that
"officers were sent to each division from the army to help the troops in preparing
for the operation.... Exercises were conducted with the staffs of the rifle corps,
divisions and regiments...and forms were sought for cooperation which conformed

most to the conditions of combat in forested, swampy terrain”... The exercises
ended by a demonstration of practical actions by the rifle battalions....""8

Significant attention was given to the troop combat training in the units and forms-
tions of the 3d Belorussian Front. This was extremely essential as the archival
documents show that of the arriving recruits only 33-35 percent of the soldiers,
sergeants and officers had combat experience. For this reason, according to the
cmnmander training plan, on the army-regiment level, a number of subjects relating
to troop control in combined-arms combat were gone through on the maps, using sand-
boxes and in the field. The subunits and units worked through a program for indi-
vidual training and the coordinating of the squads (crews, teams), platoons, com-
panies and battalions.

In the First Belorussian Front the basic form of exercises for command personnel was
the playing through of different variations of the forthcoming operations on maps

and terrain mock-ups. As 6. K. Zhukov pointed out, "on 14 and 15 June the commander
of the First Belorussian Front held exercises to play through the forthcoming

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lXﬂlOFfﬂ1ALlE$ZONtV

operation In the 65th and 28th armies.... Present at the playthrough were the
corps commanders. the division commanders, the artillery commanders and the chiefs
of the branches of troops from the armies. In the course of these exercises they
worked out in detail the tasks of the rifle and tank formations as well as the plan
of the artillery offensive and cooperation with the air. Basic attention was
focused on a careful study of the particular features of the terrain in the area of
the forthcoming troop operations and the organization of enemy defenses.... Dur
the following 3 days similar exercises were held in the 3d, 68th and b9th armies.”“

In preparing the troops to conduct the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation (July 1940) the
commanders, staffs and other control bodies carried out the tasks in an unique man-
ner. This was explained by the fact that in the rifle subunits, from 60 to 90 per-
cent of the personnel was made up by soldiers who had been inducted from territory
liberated from the enemy and who previously had not served in the army. These men
for an extended time had been isolated from Soviet reality and had experienced the
pernicious influence of Nazi and bourgeois nationalistic propaganda. 0n the one
hand, it was essential to organize more intensive combat training (the exercises
were held for 12-14 hours) and on the other, to skillfully conduct explanatory work
and for this special agitation groups were set up in the formations. In particular
in the 13th and 58th Guards Rifle divisions, they widely used such a form of work
as meeting with former soldiers. The instructions and combat leaflets provided
great help in improving the combat skills of the personnel. In a popular form they
told about the combat capabilities of the basic types of weapons and explained the
provisions of the field manuals. In the units for the arrived recruits they demon-
strated the weapons showing the tactical and technical capabilities of the guns,
tanks and SAU.

In preparing for the East Prussian Operation. the commander of the 11th Guards Army
conducted exercises with the division and corps commanders. the chiefs of staff,
the commanders of the branches of troops and the chiefs of services to organize the
committing of the second echelons to battle. The commander of the I Tank Corps and
the deputy commander of the first Air Army were also called in as leaders. A staff
exercise was conducted in the field using communications equipment. For this the
staffs of the army, the corps and the divisions were pulled back into the rear some
60-80 km from the forward edge. The army exercise was conducted against the back-
ground of the specific operational situation. This helped clarify the procedure
for employing the men and equipment on the offensive, in carrying out cooperation
and logistical support and to work out the methods of troop control. In addition.
week-long assemblies following an 86-hour program were held for the specialist offi-
cers from the branches of troops.

0n the eve of the Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations. command-staff exercises
(games) became the basic form of staff training. These were conducted in the
fronts. armies and formations. At the staff of the First Belorussian Front, at the
end of December 1966. for 3 days a military game was conducted on maps. In addi-

tion to the front's command, participating in it were all the army cammanders. the
artillery commanders and chiefs of staff from the armies and commanders of individu-
al corps. 0n the first day. the army commanders provided briefings on the tasks

and the overall concept of the operation. the procedure for utilizing tanks and
organizing cooperation with the tank armies and the plan of the artillery offensive.
In the second day. in following unannounced inputs, they played through the

7b

FOR OFIWCLAL.US£GDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

breakthrough of the stationary defenses with the subsequent exploitation of the
success. In the third day, they worked through the questions of organizing troop
control. Cooperation among the subunits and units was provided in troop exercises.
Here special attention was given to training the forward battalions which were to
be used for conducting reconnaissance in force and the assault detachments. Prior
to the start of the Berlin Operation up to ten exercises were conducted with them
using the attached and supporting resources and in a number of instances aviation
as well.

Considering the particular features of the theater of military operations, much at-
tention was given to the special training of the troops and staffs in July-August
1945 in the Far East and the Transbaykal Area. In the 300th Rifle Division of the
let Red Banner Army, for example, its commander conducted a command-staff exercise
with the unit commanders on the organising of combat operations under the condi-
tions of a mountain tayga terrain. Several radio drills were conducted by the
chief of staff for the staff officers. The subunits and units using a schedule
worked out by the staff learned to make extended marches over roadless terrain with
the laying of column tracks. The regiment and battalion officers trained in con-
trolling their subordinates at night, including following a compass. At specially
equipped training fields the assault groups set up in the rifle companies were
given further trainingut’6

A certain uniqueness was characteristic of the organization of combat training in
the tank (mechanized) corps and tank armies. This was determined, in the first
place, by the position (a tank army was usually in a concentration area 40-50 km
away from the forward edge), secondly by the tasks which they had to carry out and
thirdly by the composition (tank and mechanized formations comprise the basis of the
army). Finally, in preparing for a majority of operations in 1944-1945. the tank
armies had from 15 to 40 days to carry out combat training. This made it possible
to prepare training fields and plan the consecutive training of the men and the de-
velopment of cooperation between the subunits, unite and control bodies.

Thus. in the preparation of the 2d Guards Tank Army for the Vistula-Oder Operation,
30 days were assigned for the training of the troops and staffs. On 25 November
1944, the army commander issued an order which set the dates, tasks and forms of'
instruction as well as the subjects of the troop and commend-staff exercises. The
commanders (chiefs) of the branches of troops had to work out detailed instructions
on the combat training of subordinate units, while the corps commanders had to sub-
mit by 30 November a combat training plan for December and a summary schedule of
exercises for the units and officer personnel for the first 10-day period.51 The
army staff together with the political section and the staffs of the commanders
(chiefs) of the branches of troops (special troops), worked out a combat training
calendar plan and a subject plan. Around 70 percent of the time was allocated for
improving the field skills and marksmanship of the men while the remaining training
hours were allocated between such subjects as political. drill, engineer, chemical
and technical training and topography. Two- or three-day assemblies were set for
the specialists. Command-staff exercises were planned using communications equip-
ment. including 50 percent at night, as well as daily 2-h0ur staff training for the
purposes of the individual training of staff officers in their activities.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu OFF“ IN. US". ()NIX

An analysis of the calendar plan and other planning documents makes it possible to
note certain combat training planning principles in the army: ensuring constant
combat readiness of the troops. a successive rise in knowledge, the subordination
of all training subjects to tactical training, the organization of training both
during the day and at night, and the maintaining of the organisational compositioa
of the subunits and units in the course of training. One of the important planning
principles was the instructing of the officers and sergeants ahead of the subject
to be studied by the subordinate subunits.

Different forms of instruction were employed proceeding from the conditions. aims
and tasks. It must be particularly emphasized that here extensive use was made of
the assault training areas. tank driving ranges and training fields set up in the
rear. As a whole the organizational role of the commander. staffs and other control
bodies in carrying out troop training was manifested primarily in their personal in-
volvement in all the conducted measures as well as in all-round control over the
course of combat training in the formations, units and subunits.

In the course of troop combat training, the military councils of the fronts and
armies and the political sections of the formations devoted a great deal of atten-
tion to the question of maintaining a high political—moral state and an offensive
zeal among the men. This was a natural phenomenon as there is the universal law of
armed combat formulated by V. I. Lenin that "in any war, victory ultimately is de-
termined by the morale of those masses who are shedding their blood on the battle-
field."52 The experience of the war demonstrated that a high level of the political
and moral state of the troops. as an important criterion in their battleworthiness,
did not develop spontaneously. It depended upon the activities of the commanders,
political bodies and the party and Komsomol organizations in carrying out the pay-
chological and moral-political training of the troops.

or primary importance in carrying out these tasks was the strengthening of the in-
ferior party and Komsomol organizations by admitting the best soldiers to the party
and the Komsomol as well as by redistributing the group of couunists and Komsomol
members within the formations and units. The necessity of this arose as a conse-
quence of the fact that a large number of communists and Komsomol members who fought
courageously had been put out of action. In the units of the Second Belorussian
Front alone. in 1944 25.000 party members and candidate members were killed. During
this period more than 87.000 communists were wounded. While by the start of the
Belorussian Operation the 59th Army had 1,228 company or equal party organizations.
after a month of the offensive battles only 661 remained. In July 1943, “ore than
76,000 communist soldiers from the units and formations of the Voronesh, Steppe and
Southwestern fronts were out of commission while l3l.&30 soldiers and officers were
admitted to the party. In September 1943. the party organisations from the units

of the Voronerh Front admitted 11,781 soldiers and officers to their ranks, and in
the First Belorussian Front 90,000 men were admitted in the preparations for the
Belorussian Operation.

The work in the troops of informing and explaining the combat tasks and carrying out
party organizational measures produced a significant effect.

In preparing for the Moscow counteroffensive the political directorate of the Heat-
ern Front set up operations groups which traveled to the formations which were to

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

be part of the assault groupings. There they organized party and Komsomol confer-
ences, meetings. political information sessions and readings of summaries of
SoVInFormburo [Soviet information Bureau]. The Political Directorate of the
Volkhov Front on the eve of breaking through the Leningrad blockade sent 75 polit-
ical officers to the troops of the 2d Assault Army. At the same time A. A.
Zhdanov. A. A. Kuzneteov, Ya. F. Kapustin, P. S. Popkov and other leaders of the
Leningrad party organization spoke at conferences. meetings and talks in the 67th
ArmV.’

An important place was held by the work conducted with the party aktiv. From the
autumn of l942. special subunits were operating in the front and army courses.
where they trained regimental-level party organizers. The training of party organ-
izers for the company party organizations was carried out under the political sec-
tions of the formations usually in assemblies. These were most often conducted for
8-10 days or once a week for 24 hours, as was done in the second Belorussian Front
in the winter of 1945. Experience shows that instruction sessions, meetings and
conferences. There was also the practice of issuing instructions. leaflets and
various sorts of procedural literature. Upon the instructions of the chief of the
raiitlcal Directorate of the First Ukrainian Front. for example, the editors of the
ir)nL newspaper 2A CHEST' RODINY [For the Honor of the Motherland], in September-
October 19o} alone published up to 20 articles under the heading "Party Life."

in the second period of the war. the Main Political Directorate introduced a unified
training system for the communists. Under the political sections of the fronts,
ﬁcheolﬂ were organized for the party aktiv. and under the political sections of the
arnic;. courses for the training of party and Komsomol organizers. In the troops of
the second Ukrainian Front alone. in the autumn of 1944, there were 58 daytime divi-
Sinnul schools. 20 affiliates and 7h groups. These trained around 2,000 communists
of alumnuver 600 men were party organizers of the primary party organizations. In
aadztlon. iJS evening divisional party schools, 27 affiliates and 162 groups were
get up. ?hese trained around 3.000 communists and Komsomo! members. including 36
party organizers of the primary organizations. 901 company party and Komsomol organ-
izers and 453 members of party bureaus.

During the preparations for the Vistula-Oder Operation the party organizers (of the
companies) in the First Ukrainian Front underwent 2-month training. They studied
the experience of party political work (159 hours). tactics (70 hours), weapon (56
hours), drill (24 hours) and antithemical (6 hours) training. the regulations and
tnpopraphy.5“ During the tactical exercises and drills wnitn were often conducted
with field firing. the student party organizers studied the organization of party
political work in the subunits.

Attention should also be given to the experience of organizing party political work
for the purposes of highly effective troop control by ostablioning close contacts of
the political dirertorntes (political sections) with the stalls and other control
bodies.

Thur iointly solved the questions of maintaining the secrecy of the operation's plan
and misleading the enemy. as well as the allovntinp, ..‘.' cnmuunists and Kousomol Inela-
ber; to the units and subunits. Heasures were planned to inform the personnel of
the contents of the combat tasks. Forms were chosen for generalizing combat experi-
ence and the means to be used for disseminating it. Measures were discussed for

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFNHAL.US£ZONLY

maintaining military discipline in the troops and their logistical support. Along
with the staffs. the political bodies organized the uninterrupted delivery of

periodicals and letters to the personnel.

Fruitful work was carried out by the political section. the staffs and the various
directorates (sections) in military technical propaganda, the working out of in-
structions and leaflets, the holding of conferences and the putting out of techni-
cal information bulletins. Recommendations were worked out on the methods of con-
ducting combat operations under special conditions, as follows: in countering
bazookas and conducting street battles in the Berlin Operation and for operating
equipment in roadless. muddy conditions in the Uman'-Botosani Operation. In the
69th Army in January 1945. in considering the unusual conditions of the forthcoming
operations. the military council approved instructions on "Troop Actions in a
Forested Swampy Terrain." In preparing to storm Berlin, the political section of
the same army together with the deputy commander for technical affairs, on 10 April
held a technical conference for military repairman. It sin-ed up the results of
their labor. Here also decorations were presented for courage and for the ability
to rebuild combat vehicles under difficult conditions.

In party political work an important place was given over to organizing checks on

the readiness of the units to carry out combat missions and their material support.
Individual work with the personnel was the basic form of holding checks. Taking an

active part in it were the command and political personnel, the communists and Kon-
somol members. This brought about a lively contact with the men and a close tie
with the subunits.

Significant work was carried out by the political bodies to break down the spirit

of the enemy troops in carrying out the task of reducing their battleworthiness.

The putting out of leaflets was a most important form. In addition, widely used,
particularly from 1946 on, were broadcasts over loudspeakers using prisoners of war
and active members of the Free Germany Organization. As a result of the work done
in the area of the Third Belorussian Front, for example, of the 230,000 prisoners of
war (January-Hay 19‘5). 105.560 soldiers and officers had surrendered.ss

The enormous amount and diverse content of the joint work carried out by the com-
mand, the political bodies. the party and Komsomol organizations ensured a high
level of troop morale on an offensive, in acting as a major factor for victory over
a strong and experienced enemy under the complex conditions of armed combat and
simultaneously for achieving effective troop control in combat.

During the years of the Great Patriotic war great attention was given to general-
izing combat experience and also to promptly informing the troops and staffs of
this. This largely contributed to a better organization of combat and troop con-
trol in the course of an offensive.

During the first months of the war, the basic form for carrying out this task was
the publishing of directives by the HqSHC, the General Staff. the central director-
ates of the NKO and the military councils of the fronts. An important role in the
dissemination of combat experience was played by the following: the directive 1st-
ter of ﬂqShC on improving troop organization (July 1951); the order from head-

quarters of 6 July on measures to improve the countering of enemy tanks: the

78

FOR 0F1ﬂ(]AI.US£10NlV
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

lil'.I-I'|.I.-l'tt'rs directive of ll July on surprise nighttime operations and improving air
st! i;-..-:~ a,-,.1inst enemy tank groupings; the order of HqSHC of 28 November on improving
1"!(1i1‘a'k'r support for combat, as well as a mnuber of other documents. In July-
Soptmrer 1941, the military council of the Western Front sent to the troops more
thin ten directives generalizing the experience of combat operations during the
llrs‘l weeks of the war. including on the use of tanks. artillery and the other

hr :1}: :Il:.‘ of troops.“

En Inc autumn of 1942, sections (departments) for studying the experience of the war
were set up in the fronts and armies. In the fomations the position of senior as-
si atan: chief of the operations section (department) war. created. His duties in-
rtuled organizing the collection and analysis of materials on troop comnat opera-
15mm. The awaited-arms staff under the direct leadership of the comander became
the center tor generalizing experience and issuing it to the troops. Its efforts
m-rc .Iimv-i at disclosing the positive aspects 3f troop activities and their short-
('un!.l115 as well as new methods employed by the enemy in conducting combat opera-
tims. It was important to promptly give up the obsolete and unusable and to syn-
:‘-nu..z.- the most useful and instructive aspects of combat experience. In the order
! " ‘r‘ebruarv 19414. the Supreme Commander-in—Chief demanded that "combat experience
.m! m.- achievements _of the advanced units (formations) in the Red Army become
.x..;i nl~lt- to all the forces so that the entire Red Army, all its fighters and offi-
.-.-n~. learn to defeat the enemy using all the rules oi modern science."
irips by officers to the troops were the basic method of studying combat experience.
llze results of combat operations were shown in a special log and in r. report chart.
Inch: was also an analysis of the combat documents, reports and summaries in gen-
--r:.li:in_e. the combat experience of the staffs and other control bodies. The intel-
:i.;:.:.-t- sections (departments) drew up information statements. They described the
.u. r inns of the enemy troops in previous operations, they drew conclusions and de-
'i:n-.e practical recomendatlons.

The generalized experience was presented in verbal instructions by the contenders,
in reports on the results of conJucted exercises, by written directives and orders
.-n-I in i'rnducted exercises. Very frequently the results of this work were given
in instructions and memorandums. Thus. in "February 1944, the directorate of the
monomer of armored and mechanized troops of the 51st Army issued a Memorandum to
tho ’Inmn'mder of a Rifle Battalion on Joint Operations with Tanks. It gave the
treks of the tan‘ts in combat and the duties of the rifle. bactalion commander in
wntrolling his subordinates and provided specific recommendations on the use of

:.-rrain_:onditions, the organization of cooperation and the pursuit of the

.‘Il\"?Il-‘. "’ In the course of the Lower Silesian Operation (February 1965), the staff
f the 6th Army on the basis of the experience Studied in previous engagements
...‘:-',.--l not the lnstrucrions on Conducting Street Battles. These were sent out to
:l-.- units and subunits. providing, substantial aid to the troops in carry ing out
Hw uni-s of destroying the enemy in Breslau.5e Enemy equipment and the bases of

:t- itit use were studied at specie. conferences organized in the formations and
snru-i : --«-:. in file divisions. Conferences on the generalizing of experience held by
tiu- «mural directorates also proved effective.

:-.ith the start of 2944.. field trips in the sites of engagements were organized, as
am. June in the 3d Guards Tank Army in September 1941: for the results of the Lwow-
sandnmierz Operation. Also greatly effect 1w- were conferences (meetings) of

79

FOR 05.- -(1AI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

command personnel on the level of a front (in the First Ukrainian Front, 6-8 June
1964) and the army level (in the lat Guards and 2d Tank armies in October 1966,

in the 1st Guards Army in June 1944 and in the 3d Guards Tank army in May 1966).
In a number of fronts and armies, collections were put out on generalizing experi-
ence (in the 3d Guards Tank Army in April 1964).

A significant contribution to generalizing and making available experience to the
troops was made by the publishing in 1956-1965 of the manuals, regulations and
orders of aqsuc on the employment of the branches of troops as well as by the send-
ing to the troops of materials from military-scientific conferences held by mili-
tary academies and of reports on the results of stays by academy instructors in
the operational army. Thus, in July 1963, a group of instructors from the Armored
and Mechanized Troops Academy was with the staff of the XXIII Tank Corps. From
the results of the trip a report was presented which was then sent out to the
troops for detailed study. 0n the basis of the generalized materials, memorandums
and special instructions were published on operations under special conditions (at
night, in cities and so forth).

In the formations and units the generalized experience was made available to the
personnel at demonstration exercises and drills, in leaflets and conducted talks.
In the tank and mechanized corps, in preparing for the Lwow-Sandomeriz Operation,
for example, technical conferences for driver personnel were conducted to increase
the combat capability of the units. Here the best drivers shared their experience.
Army staff officers gave reports to the commanders of the rifle subunits. Confer-
ences were also held in the artillery units. Dork was organized in an analogous
manner in the preparations for other operations of the third period of the war.

An analysis of the work done by the commanders and staffs in preparing for an of-
fenslve during the years of the Great Patriotic war provides grounds to draw cer-
tain generalizations and conclusions.

The experience shows primarily that the main aim of all activities carried out by
control bodies at this stage was to achieve the most effective employment of the
men and equipment and to carefully organize the forthcoming operations at the es-
tablished times. The basic act in preparations was the adopting of a plan and the
planning of the offensive on the basis of the thorough analysis of the situation,
the calculations made std the skillful use of the principles of military art. The
organizational activities of all the control bodies under the leadership of the
commander and the ccmbined-arms staff were aimed at carrying out this plan. The
basic content of these activities was the giving (issuing) of tasks, the providing
of cooperation and the preparation of the troops and staffs for the forthcoming
operations.

Experience teaches tint the basic ways by which the art of troop control can be is-
proved in our times an! in the future are: a rise in the soundness of the plans,
the employment of diverse methods of work considering the specific preparatory con-
ditions and the improving of the style of activities. The trends apparent in the
war years of the centralizing of control and the wide use of the forms of the per-
sonal involvement of commanders in planning and organizing combat operations, in-
cluding in the field and using mockpups, having showed their effectiveness, can and
should be creatively applied in the training practices of the troops and staffs.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT1CJAI.US£1MVLY

FOOTNOTES

‘1. K. nokossovakiy, "Soldatskly 0613“ [A Soldier's Duty], Moscow. 1972. pp 324-
325.

2x. Marx and r. Engels, "Soch.," 26 Edition. Vol 16. p 67.

3V. A. Belyavskiy, "Strely Skreatilis' na Shpree" [Shots Crossed on the Spree],
Hoacov, 1973, pp 83-8‘.

“"Oavobozhdeniye Belorussii. 19Gb" [The Liberation of Belorussia. 1944], Moscow,
1970, p 270.

5x. K. nokossovsk1y. "Soldatakiy 061;." p 301.

69. 1. Batov, "v Pokhodakh 1 Boyakh" [In Cs-ps1gns and Battles], Moscow, 1962. p a.
7See: Osvobozhdeniye Belorussli. 194k." pp 138, 252. 363, 557-558. 605.

8v. I. Lenin. PSS, v61 36. p 193.

91a the book: H. Tsunts. "V Ogne Chetyrekh Voyn" [In the Flames of Four Hers],
Moscow, 1972. p 47.

loTsAMO. folio 213, inv. 2002. file 21, sheet 66.
llrsano. £6116 132. 1nv. 2662. £116 «1. sheet 76.
lzrsano. 16116 251. 1nv. 646. £11s 47. sheet 16.
i3rsano. 16116 208. 1nv. 2511. £11. 1087. sheet 70.
l“TsAHD, folio 48, 1nv. 1161, file 6. sheets 259-260.

1SSee: Huller-Hillcbrand, "Sukhoputnaya Arniya Ger-anii" [The Ger-an Ground Army],
translated from the German. Moscow, 1976, Vol 3, pp 76. 86, 127, 167.

lsrsano. 16116 358. 1nv. 12808. (11¢ 4. sheets 25-27.

17T9AHO, 16116 316. 1nv. 6306. £11: 158. sheet 11.

leTsAHO. 16116 626. 1nv. 15898. £11s 26, sheets 2-3.

19TsAHO, £6116 217. 1nv. 3006. £11. 3. sheets 51-52.

2°TsAuo. 16116 208. 1nv. 2511. £11e 2511. sheet 12; 5118 1163. sheet 93.
ersAno. (6116 233. inv. 2356. £11e 1. sheet 58.

ZZTsAno. 16116 382. lnv. 2665, file 205. sheets 3-5.

81

FOR OFFICLAI,USE(NVLV
FOR<OF1NC1AL USE:(MWLY

23r00no. £0110 00A. inv. 1550. £110 92. 0000: 171.

2“See: "Obshchevoyskovaya Arniya v Nestuplenii" [Combined-Arms Army on the Offen-
sive]. ﬂoscow, Voyenizdat. 1968, pp 62-45.

25rsmo, £0110 233. inv. 2372. £110 275. 0h00c as.
zeTsAHO. 10v. 2323, £110 90, sheets 10, 30-36.

27TsAH0, £0110 209. inv. 1185. £110 1. 0h00:0 17-18; £0110 48A. inv. 1166, £110 12.
sheets 52-48.

zaTsAHO, £0110 332, inv. 0960. £110 53. 0h0000 16-20; £0110 233, inv. 2356, £110
531. sheets 84-85: folio 23S, inv. 2096. file 64, sheets 15-20.

ngsAHO. £0110 1693, inv. 1. £110 8. sheet 8.

3°"Polev0y Ustav Krasnoy Armii. Proyekt (PU-b3)" [Red Army Field Manual. Draft
(PM-43)], Moscow. 1943. Article 53.

3‘r00no, £0110 233. inv. 2356. £110 1, 0h0000 04-06.

32K. N. Galitskiy, "V Boyakh za Vostochnuyu Prussiyu" [In the Battles for East
Prussia]. Moscow. 1970. p 33.

33TsAH0, £0110 1693. inv. 1. £110 a, sheet 66.
3“rsnno. £0110 299. inv. 3074, £110 147. 000000 16-17.

35A particular operation order (war-years terminology) was given to only one of the
field forces (formations). Its volume was 350-000 words. that is, it was 3-6-fold
less than the volume of an operation order.

35rsAMo, £0110 309. inv. 4073. £110 172, 0000£0 14-18.

37The operations directives were worked by the front'e staff. An operation order
was drawn up in the armies and formations. It was issued to subordinate command-

ers in full text or excerpts from it were sent out.

39r00no. £0110 217, inv. 3006, £110 3. 0000: so.

39A terrain mock-up. that is, a three-dimensional model of it, was most often node
with a size of 3x l.5x0.2 m. Washed s‘nd was the material. The models depicting
terrain markers and tactical objects were made from wood, wire, tape and other
materials. Use was also made of moss. branches, glass end colored paper. The
mock-up was prepared using a large-scale map (not smaller than 1:10.000). In
preparing for the storm of Konigsberg (April 1945), the mockrup was made on a
scale of 1:3,000 (see: I. Kh. Bagramyan. "Tek Shli Hy k Pobede" [So He Hatched
To Victory], Moscow. 1977. p 525).

82

FIMICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR Ol-T‘ICIAL USE ONLY

“0104n0, 10110 217. inv. 3006, £110 4. 0000: 57.
“'TsAno. 10110 358. 10v. 264714, 1110 1. 000000 21-25.
“erano. 10110 381, inv. 8378, 1110 303. 000000 2-6.
“3IsAH0, sheet 3.

l"‘K. A. Heretskov, "Na Sluzhbe Narodu" [In Service of the People], Moscow, 1971,
p 237.

“sTsAHO, 10110 213. inv. 2002. £110 21, 0000: 76.
"GrsAno. 10110 424, 10v. 15898, file 26. 000000 4-5.
“7rsAM0. 10110 309. inv. 4073, £110 171, 0000:. 18-20.
"8"Osvobnzhdeniye Belorussii. 1946," p 309.

“90. K. Zhukov. "Voaponinaniye i annyshleniya" [Beucnbtences and Reflections].
Moscow, 1969. pp 559-560.

50101010, £0110 1005. inv. 1. (11¢ s. Iheet 18.

5‘TsAM0, folio 307, lnv. #148. file 191, sheets 181-185.
52v. I. 10010, Pss. Vol 41. p 121.

53T8AM0. 10110 32. inv. 440031, £110 10. 0000: 320.
5“TsAM0, 10110 32. inv. 22152, 1110 3, 0000: 142.
sstsAMO. 10110 32. inv. 64603. 1110 70, 0000: 212.

56T0AH0. folio 208. inv. 2454. file 32. oheet 112; folio 246, inv. 12928. file 2,
sheets 86-89; folio 208, inv. 33783. file 1, sheets 51-60.

57TsAH0, 10110 407, inv. 51681. 1110 2, 000000 54-57.

5810400, r0110 334, inv. 5252. 1110 564, 0000:- 67-70.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3: TROOP CONTROL IN THE COURSE OF AN OFFENSIVE

The measures conducted by the commanders, the “I?“ and the other control bodies in
the preparations for an offensive created the prerequisites for successfully carry-
ing out the tasks in the course of conducting combat in carrying out the missions of

breaking through enemy defenses. routing opposing enemy groupings as well as exploit-
ing the success.

The breakthmugh, as the first and most complicated stage of an offensive, was aimed
at crushing the solid engineer-equipped enemy defensive front by creating a breach
in it for subsequent maneuvering in depth and toward the flanks. Under these condi-
tions the troops had to carry out a number of tasks and the control bodies had to
ensure their fulfillment. The most important of them were: dependable firing for
effect against the defending enemy and breaking through the main and second tactical
zones and the tactical defenses as a whole occupied by the enemy divisions of the
first and second echelons of an army corps to a depth up to 20-25 in.

In the course of conducting operations in the operational depth, all levels of con-
trol bodies were confronted with the tasks of organising the pursuit of the enemy,
the breaking through of intermediate defensive lines. the crossing of water obsta-
cles. the repelling of counterattacks and counterstrikss and the conducting of meet-
ing encounters and engagements. Here the extremely diverse nature of enemy actions
was taken into account. The enemy often intentionally pulled back its troops in con-
ducting holding operations. This was the case in the spring and sewer of 1953 in
the region of thev and Demyansk. in the Northern Caucasus and the Oral Operation.
More often the advancing troops had to successively cross several enemy defensive
lines. In the Vistula-Oder and East Prussian operations there were seven or eight

such lines. A portion of them represented a system of fortified areas and fortress
cities.

Consequently. in t' t- ecurse of an offensive the commanders, the combined arms staffs
and other control bodies were confronted with the necessity of organizing troop
operations under the most diverse conditions as well as respond promptly to all
changes in it. This required the effective collection and profound analysis of

the situational data, the constant adjustment of the accepted plan and the making of
corrections in the combat missions given to subordinates. An important place was
also held by the questions of maintaining cooperation with the men and equipment
involved in the offensive, restoring the battlewortbiness of the troops and achiev-
ing a dependable functioning of the control systems on the battlefield.

FOR OfﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR<OFI1C1AI.USEGDNLY

1. Organizational and Creative Activities of Commanders and Staffs

The great dynamicness of the occurring events, the complexity of the combat tasks
and the necessity of a direct and effective impact on the sitcome of an offensive
predetermined the methods and forms of work by the commanders and staffs in the
course of conducting combat operations during the years of the Crest Patriotic Bar.
This experience merits the closest attention in our days, as it gives the commander
an opportunity in modern combat to more thoroughly understand the scope and con-

success in combat.

As is known the relieving of the troops fighting in front, as a rule, preceded the
going over of the troops to the offensive in the war years. For example, in the
formations of the 21st Army of the Leningrad Front (Vyborg Operation, June l94b),
this task was carried out in accord with the schedule elaborated by the army staff
in the following sequence. The artillery took up the readied firing positions 6 or
7 days prior to the offensive. The first echelon rifle battalions during the night
of 8-9 June moved one company into the first two trenches and up to 60 percent of
the medium machine guns. antitank rifles. mortars and guns designed for direct lay-
ing. During the night of 10 June, the remaining subunits moved up. The tanks took
up the jump-off areas during the artillery softening up. The commanders of the
divisions. units and subunits from 9 June were located at the observation posts. in
controlling subordinates by using both wire and mobile communications equipment.

Up to 70 percent of the staff officers were in the first echelon units and subunits.
The advisability for such an organisation of troop control during the period of
troop relief can be seen from the fact that the task was carried out in a similar
manner in all the formations of the assault grouping of the 60th Army in relieving
the units of the 370th Rifle Division on the eve of going over to the offensive in
January 1945 (Vistula-Oder Operation). Characteristically. an operations group
consisting of six officers was assigned from the army staff for quality control
over the precise fulfillment of the troop relief schedule and the moving of the
assault grouping up into the jump-off position for the attack.l The question was

resolved in an analogous manner in the other seven armies of the First Belorussian
Front.

During the night prior to the offensive. the commander of the front (army) visited
the observation post of the front (army). Here he heard a brief report by the in—
telligence chief on the enemy's condition and grouping as well as the changes which
had occurred in the situation over the last 24 hours. The necessity of such a trip
was obvious. Her 50 I. S. Konev pointed out: "In addition to a natural desire to
see the start of the offensive with my own eyes, I went...in order to take the
necessary decisions on the spot in the event that the actions of the forward bat-
talions indicated that the enemy had retreated.... In a word. a situation might
arise whereby I, as the commander of the front, would have to take immediate deci-

sions. desirably by checking in the field, in order to give the appropriate instruc-
tions without error."7

At the observation post of the front (army) the artillery commander. the commander
of the armored and mechanized troops and the chiefs of the branches of troops

(special troops) reported on the condition of their subordinate formations and
units. Then the commander of the front (army) checked the readiness of his

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11f1kl lEﬂEfﬂVLY

subordinates to conduct combat operations. This was done most often by telephone.
The army commanders spoke in sequence with the corps, division and even the regi-
ment commanders who were at their observation posts. The obtained data were gener-
alized and reported to the front commander. All this work was carried out by a
relatively small group of generals and officers. '

Thus, on the eve of the Kiev Offensive Operation (November 1943) traveling along
with the front coammnder to the observation post which was located 2-3 km from the
observation post of the 38th and 3d Guards Tank armies which were operating in the
sector of the main thrust were the military council members, the artillery com-mad-
er, the air army commander. the chief of the rocket units with a group of officers.
the deputy chief of staff with the staff workers and the deputy air defense artil-
lery commander. At the observation post of the 3d Guards Tank Army were the com-
nander of the armored and mechanized troops of the front and his deputy. the army
commander with a group of officers (a total of 15 men) and at the observation post
of the 38th Army were the front's deputy commander and the army commander with the
operations group consisting of ten officers. At the observation posts of the rifle
corps. divisions and regiments, working along with the commanders were the chiefs
of staff. the chiefs of the branches of troops (special troops) and a group of staff
officers (a total of six-eight men). Here also were located the commanders of the
commanders of the tank corps (brigades) which were to be committed to battle.

The breakthrough of the main enemy defensive zone was entrusted chiefly to the
combined-arms armies and for this reason the work of their field headquarters bodies.

primarily the coamanders and the combined-arms staffs, is of the greatest practical
interest.

At this stage of the offensive, the army commanders every 30-40 minutes personally
or sometimes through staff officers heard reports from the formation commanders.
they clarified individual combat details and reported to the front commander on the
state of affairs. In the event of a slowdown in the pace of the breakthrough, imme-
diate measures were undertaken.

Thus, with the start of the Gumbinnen Operation, during the first 3 hours of combat,
the formations of the 11th Guards Army had advanced only 1.5-2 km. The developing
situation worried the commander. Hith a group of staff officers he traveled to the
observation post of the V111 Guards Rifle Corps and from there to the 5th Guards
Rifle Division (it was fighting in the sector of the main thrust). Here he learned
that the units which had captured the first position had been halted by massed enemy
artillery fire and by tank counterattacks. having heard the report of the division
commander, the army commander ordered that the useless attacks be called off and a
stronger grouping created on the left flank from the division's second echelon.

From the corps commander he demanded a careful analysis of the enemy's forces and
the reporting on a system of targets. The deputy co-ander of the lat Air Army who
was present was given the mission of making an air strike. Some 20-30 minutes
later, around 70 aircraft bombed the enemy artillery batteries and tank concentra-
tions. Then followed concentrated artillery fire against the enemy's second posi-
tion and its strongpoints in the hmmediate depth. Infantry with tanks rushed into
the attack behind the rolling barrage. Enemy resistance was crushed.3

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In approaching the second zone. the advancing troops very often had to repel strong
enemy counterstrikes (counterattacks). Under these conditions the army commander
through the staffs of the artillery commander adjusted primarily the tasks for the
fire weapons, that is. the artillery and the supporting aviation. The army command-
er traveled frequently to the observation posts of the formations which were repel—
ling counterstrikes (counterattacks). Sometimes a temporary control post was set up
where the deputy army commander with a group of officers (six-seven men) remained a
rather long time in carrying out the commander's plan and in providing help to the
formation commanders in repelling the enemy counterattacks. This was the case. for

example, in the 39th Army during the first 2 days of the Vitebsk Offensive Operation
(June 1944).

The formation commanders during this stage of the offensive controlled their subord-
inates from their observation posts in employing radio, wire and mobile means of
communications. The combined-arms staffs carried out the main task of collecting v
and analyzing the situational data working for the direct and accurate receipt of
information.. with justification the commander of the 372d Rifle Division in an
operation order of 1b January 19‘3. that is, on the second day of the offensive to
break through the blockade of Leningrad. emphasized: "...I draw the attention of
regiment commanders and staffs to the punctuality and correctness of reports.““ 8x-
perience showed that the successful carrying out of the tasks involved in collecting
the situational data was aided by the practice of constant observance of the course
of battle by the commander as well as by the sending of staff officers to the sub.
ordinate units as was done in the morning of the offensive's third day upon the com-
mander's order in all the formations of the 2d Assault Aray.

The prompt increasing of troop efforts in the sector of the planned success was a
special concern for the commanders and staffs in an offensive.

In the Nevel' Operation (September 1943). in the 3d Assault Army. for example, suc-
cess seemed imminent in the area of the 28th Rifle Division. It had been rather
quick to break through the first enemy position. The army commander at 0900 hours
on 21 September decided to commit the 21st Rifle Division and the 78th Tank Brigade
to the engagement in its area [of the 28th Rifle Division] for increasing the semen-
tum of advance. Their commanders were given combat tasks by radio. The staff offi-
cers traveled to the attack line from whence they reported to the army commander on
the course of carrying out the set tasks. At 1230 hours the army artillery and as-
signed aviation (fighter and ground attack air divisions) were switched to their
support. The enemy began to retreat. The forward detachments created in the rifle
divisions and tank brigade began pursuit.

In the exploitation of a tactical success into an operational one, an important role
was played by the front and army mobile groups. Naturally under these conditions

the questions of organizing Support for the committing of the mobile groups to the
engagement and close cooperation among the men and equipment involved in this com-
prised a significant place in the work of the front and army commanders and also

their staffs. For this reason. having taken the decision to commit the troops. a

front commander almost always personally gave the tasks to the tank army commander
(mobile group commander). to the artillery commander, to the chief of the engineer
troops and to the air army commander (representative). Since the questions of sup-
po:t of the committing to battle had been worked out ahead of time in planning the

87

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0F11C1AL.US£¢ONLN

offensive, in the course of conducting it usually only the line and the time for
reaching it were adjusted and instructions were issued to the commanders of the
combined-arms armies and the rifle formation commanders to free the routes. Staff
officers were sent to the formations where a mobile group was to be committed to
battle in order to provide control and help. The tasks were carried out in an anal-
ogous manner in committing the army mobile groups to an engagement.

For increasing the stability of troop control. the commander of a front directed the
committing of mobile groups to battle more often from the front's observation post.
This was the case in all the fronts participating in the Belorussian, Vistula-Oder
and Berlin operations. The commander of a combined-arms army traveled to the previ-
ously prepared army observation post or to the command post of one of the divisions.
The commander of the tank army to be committed to the engagement or the commander of
a tank or mechanized corps were close to the attack line, heading the operations
group assigned from the command post. Sometimes he remained at the observation post
of the commander of the combined-arms army or the commanders of a rifle corps or
division where the comaitting to battle was to be made.

Thus, 1t 1300 hours on 24 June 1966, the commander of the 65th Army, having assessed
the situation, decided to commit the I Guards Tank Corps to the engagement. Be sum-
moned its commander to the army observation post and set the combat mission for him.
Here he also gave instructions to the artillery commander and the chief of the en-
ginccr troops to support the committing to battle. Then the army commander spoke
with the commander of the 16th Air Army on the procedure of support for the mobile
group and traveled to the observation post of the 37th Guards Rifle Division from
whence In directed the further actions of the troops. The army chief of staff drew
up the task for the committing to battle in an operation instruction and sent out
officers from the operations department with radios connected to the network of the
tank corps staff to the routes of advance. The organized committing of the mobile
group ensured the rapid advance of the army troops.5

A definite understanding of the content and forms of work carried out by the control
bodies can be gained also from the experience of committing the mobile group of the
69th Army consisting of the XI Tank Corps in the Vistula-Oder Operation and made in
the sector of the main thrust during the first day of the offensive. Support for
the committing to battle was carried out by the men and equipment of the army ac-
cording to a plan elaborated previously by the staff. Artillery support was to be
provided during the attack and to the immediate depth, antiaircraft artillery on

the line of attack and engineer support on the routes of advance and on the attack

line. Air support was organized under a plan of the front's commander by the 3d
Guards Ground Attack Air Division which had been put under the corps commander as
well as by the 287th Fighter Air Division. Raving assessed the situation from the
map and having heard the proposals of the chief of staff. the corps commander de-
cidtd to bring up the brigades along two routes in an area of 8-9 km. keeping re-
vunnnissnncc groups. the traffic support detachments and the forward detachments
ahead and on the flanks. The depth of the columns of the main forces reached 20-
22 km. The questions of cooperation with the commanders of the first echelon rifle
corps were taken up previously on the day preceding the going over to the offensive.
At that timu a reconnaissance of the routes of advance was also conducted with the
brigade commanders. The personnel of a motorcycle battalion was used to organise

a commendant [traffic control] service and for this an operations group was assigned

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the staff consisting of three officers from the operations section and two
officers from the signals section. Hith the start of the offensive the corps com-

mundvr with a group of officers moved to the observation post of the 69th Army, and
with the receiving of the signal for the attack. to the observation post of the
commander of the CXI Rifle Corps where the committing to battle was to be made.
Dependable fire neutralization of the enemy. the prompt freeing of the routes by
the army formations. the proper configuration of the approach march and battle for-

mation as well as effective work by the corps staff ensured its prompt committing
to battle and successful operations in the offensive. During the following 20 days

the corps fought its way over 650 km.

Approximately the same picture can be seen in the work of the commander in commit-
ting the second echelons and reserves to an engagement (battle). Experience showed
that the effective carrying out of the tasks to a significant degree depended upon
how carefully these actions were planned for during the preparatory period of the
offensive.

Considering this, the plan of the front'a staff for committing the 11th Guards Army
lo the engagement in the lnsterburg-Konigsberg Operation (January 1945) envisaged
two possible variations for carrying out the task, without a halt, that is. directly
from the starting positions (12-20 km from the forward edge) or after relieving the
first echelon formations on the front at the attack line. This made it possible in
the course of the engagement to rather quickly organize the committing of the
front's second echelon. Having received the task at the front's command post in
the morning of 19 January. the army commander for a period of 3 hour; conducted a
reconnaissance of the intended attack line with the corps and division commanders.
At 1600 hours, the forward detachments of the first echelon divisions went into the
attack and the main forces at 2000 hours.6

In the course of the lasi-Kishinev Operation (August 1944), in committing the second
echelon of the 37th Army to the engagement, the commander gave the task to the com-
mander of the CXXXII Rifle Corps by radio, after which, having moved to the attack
line. he clarified it in the field. Here also he issued instructions to coordinate
efforts with the first echelon formations and the army artillery group. The commit-
ting to battle was carried out in the center of the army's operational configuration
in the space between the CXVI and VI Guards Corps after a 15-minute heavy artillery
shelling and a bomb strike against the enemy strongpoints. The army staff had or-
ganized a commandant service. As the divisions reached the attack line. under the
cover of the forward detachments consisting of reinforced rifle battalions, the
corps commander on the spot clarified the combat tasks for the formation commanders.
Herc also he issued instructions on cooperation. As a result of the organized com-
mitting to battle the units of the divisions successfully crossed the enemy defen-
sive line without a halt. advancing up to 25 km in 26 hours.

In a number of instances the commanders of second echelon formations perceived tasks

for commitment to battle at an army command post. In the Sinyavin Operation (October
[962), for example, the commander of the IV Guards Rifle Corps received the task to
enter battle at the command post of the 8th Army. This was a consequence of the
difficult situation in the zone of advance and the business of the army commander

in solving other, equally important problems. The corps commander was close to the
army command post and it did not take him much time to arrive.

89

FOR OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Often deputy contenders were involved in giving tasks and they traveled to the sub-
ordinate formations, as was done in the course of the VistulasOder Operation in the
13th Army.7

in the issuing of tasks, in controlling the accurate execution of the issued orders
and in providing help to the troops a primary role was assigned to the combined-arms
staff as well as to the control bodies of the chiefs of the branches of troops (spe-
cial troops). A front staff drew up a plan for col-itment to battle usually as an
operations directive and an army staff as an operations order. A cooperation table
was worked out and issued to subordinates, a conendant service and traffic control
service were organized and groups of officers with radios were sent out to the
routes and line of attack.

The second echelons of the fronts (the armies arriving from the RVGK), under the
plans of the contenders, were connitted to battle for broadening the zone of advance
toward one of the flanks (the llth Army in the Orel Operation), for repelling enemy
counterstrikcs (the 4th Guards Army in the Belgorod-Ihar'khov Operation), for
crossing a water obstacle and capturing a bridgehead (the 37th Army in the battle
for the Dnepr), for cutting off a maritime enemy grouping from the nain forces (the
51st Army in the operation to liberate the Soviet Baltic) and for surrounding and
destroying the enemy (the 28th and 3d armies in the Berlin Operation).

The comitting of the second echelons of the combined-arms armies was carried out to
increase the efforts in the struggle for the main enemy defensive area or for break-
ing through an army area without a halt. This was characteristic for operations in
the third period of the war. At times the task of reinforcing the success of a
mobile group was carried out by them. The second echelons of tank armies were used
for the purposes of the more rapid shifting of the basic efforts of an army to a nu
sector (the ll Mechanized Corps of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Orel Operation)
and for increasing the rate of pursuing the enemy and repelling its counterstrikes
(the XVIII Tank Corps of the 5th Guards Tank Army in the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy
Operation).

The reserves of the fronts and the armies were employed by the comanders for carry-
ing out suddenly arising tasks such as destroying an enemy grouping which had been
left in the rear of the advancing troops. eliminating enemy units which had broken
out of an encirclement and a number of others.

The second echelons of the rifle corps. divisions and regiments were most often con-
nitted to battle for increasing efforts in breaking through the tactical eneny de-
fensive zone. Such a solution was determined primarily by the nature of the enemy
defenses (particularly from the sinner of 1963). Often a division cor-sander cot-lit-
ted the second echelon for the purposes of increasing the pace of pursuing the
eneny. Reserves were most often employed for repelling enemy counterattacke. For
example, the reserve (a reinforced rifle battalion) was employed in this manner by
the comander of the 72d Rifle Division on 15 June 1944 (the Vyborg Operation) in
an enemy counterattack by the forces of a tank battalion from the Lagus Armored
Division in the region of Laykol (in the second defensive zone).

The experience of the war teaches that the emitting of the second echelons and
reserves provided an opportunity to significantly alter the situation and create

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

favorable conditions for the further development of the offensive. This task was
carried out by the ctxmnanders and staffs depending upon the situational conditions
using various means.

During the first period of the war. the second echelons (few in number) were most
often comitted successively or piecemeal by the couander's plan. Subsequently
there was a tendency for the massed use of men and equipment in the second echelons.
This made it possible to make a strong attack against the enemy which was endeavor-
ing to alter the situation in its favor. Here dependable fire support for the com-
mitting to battle was achieved. In the 1904 operations. in carrying out the design-
nated task. for example. in comparison with 1941, artillery densities had increased
by more than 5-fold.

In the third period of the war the massing principle became typical in the employ-
ment of reserves. Characteristic in this regard was the decision of the commander
of the First Ukrainian Front in the course of the Lwow-Ssndomierz Operation. For
repelling an enemy counterstrike made between the 38th and 60th armies, he used the
following: the reserve of the 3d Guards Tank Army, the artillery and antitank re-
serVes of the 60th Army and the XV Rifle Corps. the army mobile obstacle construc-
tion detachment. a portion of the front's reserve (a rifle division) and a portion
of the aviation from the 2d Air Army.

The tasks of promptly increasing the efforts in the chosen sector very often. par-
ticularly from the middle of 1963, were carried out by the commanders in maneuvering
the field forces (formations or units) into the area of combat operations where a
favorable situation had developed for achieving the goal of the offensive or where
there was a crisis situation.

Thus. in the second half of August 1943, considering that the 10-day battles in the
center of the zone of advance of the Hestern Front had not produced tangible re-
suits, the commander decided to focus basic efforts on the right wing. For this the
10th Army had to be regrouped over a distance of 100-120 km. and it was not possible
to conceal this from the enemy. Then the front's commander began to search for a
new plan which would bring success. This was found. In less than 2 days. the 10th
Army. in observing camouflage measures. carried out a new regrouping. According to
a plan specially worked out by the staff of the front's artillery commander, seven
rocket regiments and five artillery regiments were to be concentrated in its zone.
The surprise attack made on 7 September ensured the implementation of the plan. For
increasing the effort. the ii Guards Cavalry Corps was committed to the breach. The
enemy began to retreat. The front's troops crossed the Sozh River by 2 October,
precisely on the date set by the directive of HqSHC.

The task of increasing the efforts in the sector where success was hmninent was suc-
rcssfully carried out in this manner by the regrouping and committing to battle of
'tho Slst Army in the Crimean Operation. by the 11th Guards Army in the Vitebsk—Oraha
Upcfullon and by the 5d Army in the Bobruysk Operation. The shifting of efforts was
successfully carried nut in the Orel, Comel'-Rechitsa. Kirovograd. Belorussian and
ulhur operations. In the Viatula-Oder Operation a good result was achieved by the
regrouping of troops on the right wing of the First Belorussian Front to seize the

Warsaw enemy grouping and by the troops on the left front of the First Ukrainian
Frnnl to envelop the 17th Nazi Army. By the maneuvering of troops on the adjacent
wings of these fronts, the Ostrowiec enemy grouping was enveloped.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OF}K1AJ.FSEZONIJ

The experience of the conducted operations showed the great importance of conceal-
ing troop maneuvers. In this regard it is wise to recall the course of events in
the Kalinin and Western fronts during the first period of the Smolensk Offensive
Operation in August 1943, when the absence of proper camouflage discipline and the
unsatisfactory organization of troop control in the regrouping of large masses of
troops made it possible for the enemy to learn the area where the efforts of these
fronts were to be concentrated. As a result the Nazi command regrouped three divi-
sions from the Orel sector by 6 August 19b3 and another ten divisions. including six
tank ones. by 20 August. As a result, in being deprived of the element of surprise,
our command did not ensure good conditions for itself to conduct the offensive.

The task was carried out much more effectively by the staff of the Leningrad Front
in the interests of ensuring the secret regrouping in the course of the Vyborg 0p-
eration (June 1964). when after the breaking through of the first defensive zone.
the commander of the Leningrad Front adopted the plan to shift the basic efforts to
the maritime sector. By organizing the committing of the Lx Rifle Corps to the en-
gagcment and by regrouping during the night the artillery breakthrough corps as well
as more than ten large-caliber artillery battalions. effective fire neutralization
of the enemy was achieved in breaking through the second enemy defensive zone.

We should also note the examples showing the flexibility of control in an offensive
in shifting efforts with the simultaneous achieving of surprise of actions in the
Korsun'Shevchenkovskiy, Uman'-Rotosani and Hemel' operations. In the last of the
designated operations. in a short period of time (from 26 September through 6 0c-
tober). the 4th Assault, the 43d. 51st. 6th Guards and 5th Guards tank armies. two
tank and one mechanized corps and all the artillery reinforcements were regrouped
to the area of Shaulyay. As a consequence of organizing careful camouflage by the
staff of the First Baltic Front and by its carrying out of a whole range of dia-
information measures. the enemy did not promptly detect the shift of efforts by the
Soviet troops.a

Equally effective was the maneuver executed upon the decisions of the formation and
unit counsnders.

Thus. in the course of the Krasnoye Sela-Ropsha Operation (January 1964). the forma-
tions of the XXX Guards Rifle Corps reached Krasnoye Selo. Simultaneously battles
commenced for Haunt Voron'yn [Crow] (elev. 172.3). a strong enemy center of resist-
ance. which. according to intelligence data. was defended by the enemy 13th Infantry
Regiment of the i70th infantry Division supported by two artillery battalions.
Pillboxes had been built on the heights and their slopes. All the approaches to
them had been mined. The population points of Gorskaya and Hurilovo had been pre-
pared for all-round defense. The steep. densely-forested Mount Voron'ya dominated
all the terrain around for several-score kilometers. Here the Nazis had set up the
command post of the 170th infantry Division and a network of observation posts and
had pulled heavy guns firing on Leningrad up onto the mountain. Only by capturing
Mount Voron'ya could one secure Krasnoye Selo and thereby carry out the task of en-
circling the Petergor-Strel'nya enemy grouping.

The offensive by the 63d Guards Division against Haunt Voron'ya during the day of

18 January was unsuccessful. Then the division commander decided to tie down the
enemy on the front by bringing up in darkness the 190th Guards Rifle Regiment and

with two regiments (the 192d and 188th) to shirt the elevation on the northwest and

92

FOR OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

southeast. In carrying out this plan, the company of suhmachine gunners led by
Capt V. C. Hassal'skiy (who was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union)
particularly distinguished itself. At night, in complete darkness it made its way
across a swamp through cold water into the enemy rear, it sealed off a pillbox on
elev. 172.3 and thereby ensured the subsequent success. At dawn, 30 bombers at-
tacked the enemy strongpoints. The artillery carried out a 20-minute heavy shell-
ing. The regiments began to store the heights. Particularly effective were the
actions of the assault groups (a reinforced rifle company) from the directions of
Pikkola and Murilovo and which attacked the enemy with fire support from direct
laying guns. The combat engineers also provided substantial help to the rifle sub-
units. By the morning of 19 January, the enemy garrison of Mount Voron'ya was sur-
rounded and was destroyed by attacks from the front and rear.

Aviation played an important role in achieving the goal of promptly increasing
troop effor ta. An example of its able maneuvering in a situation where it was im-
possible to use ground troops for this was the plan of the comander of the First
Belorussian Front for the 16th Air Army on 27 June 1964 to make a raid to destroy
the surrounded Bobruysk enemy grouping. Pour air corps participated in eliminating
the Brody enemy grouping (Lwow-Sandomierz Operation) upon the decision of the com-
mander of the First Ukrainian Front. For defeating the enemy grouping in the
Shaulyay sector (August l9-'-" , the 3d and let air armies were called in. The task
was carried out in a similar manner in making a series of attacks by six air corps
(more than 1,000 aircraft) against the Frankfurt-Cubes enemy grouping in the Berlin
Operation. Aviation was used very effectively in the course of defeating the enemy
counterstrike groupings in the wa-Sandomierz (15 July 1964), Berlin (20-21 April
1945) and other operations.9

A decisive massing of artillery and its fire was also achieved by maneuvers carried
out under the plans of the cmanders of the fronts and armies. In the course of
the Belorussian Operation. there was the noteworthy maneuver of the IV Artillery
Breakthrough Corps and a number of separate units carried out from the right to the
left wing in accord with the order of the cor-lander of the First Belorussian Front
(over a distance of 600—660 km in 8 days) and in the course of the Berlin Operation
the maneuver of the artillery from the First Ukrainian Front to the Teltow Canal

(8 distance of 100-180 km in 15-25 hours).

The field force and formation co-anders used the maneuvering of antitank artillery
particularly widely for repelling eneny counterstrikes (counterattacks). In the
Belgorod—Khar'kov Operation to the south of Bogodukhov, this task was carried out
by the forces of two brigades, to the west of Akhtyrka by nine brigades. in the
Lwow-Sandomierz Operation to the west of Zborow by four brigades and in the East
Prussian Operation to the west of Heilsberg by up to five brigades. In the course
of the Vyburg Offensive Operation (June 19“). for repelling a counterstrike by the
Lagus Armored Division under a decision by the comander of the LIX Rifle Corps,

up to 90 percent of all the antitank artillery was regrouped into the area of the
72d Rifle Division. The regrouping of large senses of artillery made it possible to
sharply increase the force of firing for effect against the enemy, often making
fundamental changes in the situation and creating a turning point in an operation
and engagement.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI Y

Thus, experience teaches that the increasing of efforts in the course of an offen-
sive by regrouping the units, formations and field forces of the different branches
of troops was very effective. In the absence (expenditure) of reserves, such a
method was often the only one making it possible to change the balance of forces in
the selected sectors. Under these conditions. the control bodies and primarily the
combined-arms staff was confronted with the need to carry out a number of tasks. in-
cluding the organization of shipments. a commandant service, the working out and
execution of measures for operations camouflage as well as for other types of sup-
port and the organization of control.

In carrying out the tasks of maintaining a high rate of advance and the continuity
of troop combat operations (chiefly for control bodies in the course of an offen-

sive), a particular role was assigned to organizing nighttime operations, to the
crossing of water obstacles without a halt and to the operations of the forward de-
- tachmcnts.

The most effective were the actions of the forward detachments assigned from the
field forces and formations of the armored and mechanized troops. In actuality,
from the experience of 30 offensive operations conducted by the tank armies in 1963-
1965, the forward detachments carried out the most diverse tasks. They supported
the committing of the main forces to an engagement (the 1st Tank Army in the
Beigorod-Khar'kov Operation), they broke through the enemy intermediate defensive
lines (the 3d Tank Army in the Ostrogozhak-Rossosh' Operation). they rapidly reached
a river and crossed it (the 3d Guards Tank Army in the battle for the Dnepr), they
captured major road junctions (the lat Tank Army. the Proskurovsko-Chernovtsy Opera-
tion), they repelled enemy counterattacks (the lat Tank Army on 7 August 1963 in the
Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation) and carried out an offensive with a fuel shortage for
the main forces of an army (the Vistula-Oder Operation). Equally diverse tasks were
carried out by the forward detachments of the tank (mechanized) corps.

The continuity of their combat operations was aided by their rather strong composi-
tion including a tank brigade reinforced by artillery, engineer subunits and anti-
aircraft weapons as well as by the practice which became widespread in the opera-
tions of 1965 of periodically relieving the forward detachments for bringing up to
strength, rest and the rebuilding of damaged equipment. In the Vietula—Oder Opera-
tion, 90 percent of the forward detachments was relieved every 1-6 days. As a re-
sult, as are shown by the data on combat operations of 28 tank and mechanized corps
in 1966-1965 (Table 8), the average rates of advance were 12-60 km a day while the
rate of pursuit reached up to 50-55 km.

Considering the high results of combat operations by the forward detachments, the
commanders and staffs for ensuring their independent operations away from the main
forces, took every measure to reinforce them with weapons, to establish dependable
communications, primarily by radio. as well as organize the prompt delivery of fuel
and ammunition.

In the combined-arms armies the forward detachments were assigned. as a rule, from
the rifle formations. Their composition considering the attached equipment (tank
and artillery subunits) during the various periods of the war is shown in Table 9.
They successfully carried out the tasks of capturing strongpoints in the second
enemy defensive zone (the 27th Army in the Iasi-Kiahinev Operation). of pursuing

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8

Basic Indicators for Conbat Operations in Operational Depth
of Tank (Hechsuised) Corps in 1964-1965

 
 
  

Average Rate (km/day)

  
  

   

lluaber of
Counted Corps

  
  

Rene of Operation

 
  
   
  
  

of advance

Proskurovsko--

Chernovtsy 12-15
Belorussian 13-210
Ias i-Kish inev 30-60
Vis rule-Oder 22-35
Berlin 12-17

the eneny after breaking through its tactical defensive zone (in a najority of
operations in 1966-1945) as well as capturing and holding crossings, bridges and
bridgehesds. From the suller of 1963, a rather widespread phenomenon was the as-
signing of two or three forward detachnents from each rifle corps. This was the
case in the corps of the 65th Arny in crossing the Deans River (September 1963).

Table 9

Conposition of l'orward Detect-eats fron Rifle Tornations

Rifle Corps

  
 
       
   
   
     

Period of War Rifle Divisions

First Rifle battalion (horse detach-

ment, ski battalion)

Second Tank battalion, nounted rifle Tank battalion, nountsd rifle
battalion, antitank battery, battalion, antitank battery,
conbat engineer colpany combat engineer company

Third Tank brigade, mounted rifle Tank battalion (up to tank

battalion. artillery battalion.
combat engineer company, rocket

battery

brigade). nedical battalion,
artillery battalion, combat
engineer company, antiaircraft
battery

The formation of the forward detachments was planned on the eve of an offensive and
sonetines in the course of it.

The army conander deternined the conposition, tasks and the readiness deadline.
The general task was set for 3-5 days. This was concretiud for the individual days

with the setting of the lines (objectives) to be taken. The staff issued the tasks

95

FORWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and carried out the specific preparations of the forward detachments as well as con-
trol of them in the course of the offensive. In a number of operations the staff
representatives carried out the duties of the chief of staff of the detachment

while officers from the political section acted as deputy commanders for political
affairs. In individual instances a detachment was headed by an army deputy chief of
staff. for example. in the 3d Guards Tank Army in the course of the Prague Operation.

The formation commanders designated the assembly areas. the reinforcements, the
jump-off lines, the routes of advance, the methods of operations. the support meas-
ures and the procedure for organizing control. Their staffs acted in the role of
the immediate organizers for readying the forward detachments for the forthcoming
operations. This was done in the first period of the war most often after or in the
course of breaking through the tactical defensive zone (in the counteroffensive at
Moscow and in the Toropets-Kholm Operation) and in the subsequent periods of the war,
in the very preparations for the offensive. For example, the order of the commander
of the 8th Army (October 1963) emphasized that "in the divisions there should be
specially prepared forward detachments which, as soon as the enemy retreat is spot-
ted. should immediately move forward."10 In the preparations for the east Prussian
Operation (December 1946). in the divisions of the llth Guards Army an exercise and
battle drill exercises were conducted with the forward detachments with the rein-
forcements involved as well. The rifle subunits trained in the rapid deployment and
reorganization of the battle formation. the tank troops worked on firing underway
and from brief halts while the artillery troops practiced quickly taking up firing
positions and opening aimed fire.

In the interests of achieving a continuous offensive, great attention was given by

the commanders, staffs and other control bodies to the organising of troop nighttime
operatiOns.

During the first period of the war, these operations had a very limited nature and
this was employed by the enemy for the regrouping of its troops. In particular.
this is how it carried out the tasks in the area of the Kalinin Front in December
l9él and on the Western Front in January l9h2. Subsequently the commanders and.
staffs began to provide ahead of time for an organized transition from daylight
troop operations to nighttime ones. The formations of the combined-arms armies un-
der the conditions of limited visibility broke through the intermediate defensive
lines (the 3d Guards Army in the Zaporozh'ye Operation of lb December 1943). they
crossed water obstacles (the 8th Guards Army in the Bereznigovato-Snigirevka Opera-
tion of 7 March 1944) and pursued the enemy (the rifle divisions of the 5th Army in
the Crimean Operation of 13 April 196‘).

Experience shows that the night contributed to the surprise factor of combat opera-
tions. At the same time the night complicated troop control as there were poorer
conditions for the maintaining of cooperation, orientation and recognition. The
amount of work carried out by all levels of staffs increased as the need arose to
carry out additional measures for the all-round support of nighttime combat opera- '
tions. while any type of combat required the most careful preparations, prepara-
tions were all the more essential in organizing nighttime combat.

A particular feature of determining the tasks for the formations in their nighttime
operations was the fact that the plan of the operations became simpler to carry out.

96

IWJR OIWWCIAL USIICMULY
FORIHHHCIALI£HEONL¥

The conmanders to a greater degree considered the nature of the terrain from the
viewpoint of its passability and the presence of markers. For this reason the zones
of advance were designated proceeding from the presence of roads which were the
shortest route to the designated objectives. A more significant reserve was also
created. In conducting nighttime combat with the formations of the 5th Guards Tank
Army in the area of Tanneberg (East Prussian Operation), the reserve was one-half

of the men and equipment. Particular attention was paid by the staffs to organis-
ing the commandant service and particularly to designating difficult or dangerous
areas from the jump-off line to the attack line.

The staffs of the formations and field forces organized light support for nighttime
combat. In the course of the Budapest Offensive Operation, with the going over to
nighttime operations, the directorate of the artillery commander from the 6th
Guards Tank Army and the staffs of the air divisions worked out a terrain illuminat-
ing plan. The plan provided for the procedure of illuminating the objects of at-
tack and the placing of shields. Measures were also planned to blind the enemy ob-
servation posts and gun crews. The direction of the attacks was traced and marked
with stakes with white arrows which were clearly visible at night. The mounted
troops were assigned to tanks. For better recognition the tanks and SAD had signs
in white paint on their hatches and sides. Artillery officers were with the com-
manders of the tank subunits to correct artillery fire. The forward edge of the
ground troops was designated by a series of different colored rockets for the avia-
tion. Starting with the evening, bombers dropped illuminating flares over the des-
ignated points every 25-30 minutes.

Experience shows that organizing a transition from night operations to daytime ones
was a complicated task confronting the control bodies. The staffs of the armies,
corps and divisions conducted additional measures to strengthen reconnaissance
(groups were assigned from the intelligence reserve, air tasks were set and so
forth) as well as for raising the directness and reliability of the data collected
on the situation and position of the formations (including by sending officers with
radios to the troops and tapping the networks of subordinate levels).

The commanders of formations devoted a great deal of attention to securing the
flanks and naintaining cooperation as well as supplying the units with ammunition,
fuel and other supplies. The evacuation of sick and wounded was organized during
the night. In the aim of increasing the effort and achieving continuous combat op-
erations the second echelons and reserves were committed to battle at dawn.

Very instructive was the example of organising a nighttime offensive by the forma-
tions of the 8th Guards Army which were carrying out a task in cooperation with the
I Hechanized Corps as well as by the formations of the 3d Guards Army together with
the XXIII Tank Corps in the course of the Zaporozh'ye Operation on 13 October 1943.
The comaanders of the rifle and tank formations, in having around 5 hours of day-
light and 2 hours of darkness, made their plan using the map, they set the tasks
for subordinates by summoning them to the connand posts and organized cooperation.
The staffs worked out procedure charts. The unit commanders on the spot establish-
ed comnon markers with the tank battalions. The direction of the attack by the
tank subunits and rifle units was designated by stakes with white arrows. In each
tank company a column leader was assigned from among the officers of the rifle
battalions. The reaching of the designated line by the tanks was marked by stop

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SI-T ONI.\'

signals and by the brief flashing of lights under way. The forward edge of the
ground troops was designated for the aviation by a series of different colored

rockets. The successful troop operations were the result of this diverse and ex-
tensive work.

A significant amount of work in the area of troop control was carried out by the
commanders and staffs in organising and implementing the crossing of water obstacles.

The most characteristic traits can be traced from the experience of the crossing
of the Dnepr, Svir', Vistula and Oder rivers.

After the liberation of the city of Khar'kov, the troops of the 7th Guards Army of
the Steppe Front went over to pursuing the retreating formations of the 8th Nazi
Army. By the end of 23 September 1963, their forward units had reached the Dnepr
River. After reconnaissance with the corps commanders conducted in the morning of
24 September in the sin of determining the crossing conditions and areas and for
locating the crossing points, the points for concentrating the crossing equipment
and the junp-off position for the troops, the army con-ander took the decision to
cross the Dnepr River on a broad front, having a single-echelon operational config-
uration. At 2300 hours an operation order was issued to the army comaand posts and
according to this the troops during the night of 25 September were to cross the
river with their forward detachments, to capture the nameless islands and at the
sane time send out reconnaissance groups to the population points on the western

bank. The main forces were ordered to execute the crossing during the night of
26 September.

The crossing procedure on each of the three areas was outlined in the planning
table worked out by the army staff together with the chief of the engineer troops.
The organization of s commendant service was entrusted to the formation staffs.

The measures carried out contributed to a situation where during the night of

25 September the forward detachments of the rifle divisions consisting of from a
company to a battalion. basically on fishing boats, crossed the Dnepr River, seized
the islands and small bridgeheads. The combat engineer units which were brought up
began to organize the crossing. With the onset of darkness, in employing smoke-
screens in individual areas, the main forces of the army crossed the river.

The task of crossing water obstacles was carried out in an unique manner in another
sector of the Soviet-German Front.

Proceeding from the plan of the comaander of the Karelian Front, the formations of
the 7th Army were to cross the Svir' River,tobreak through the enemy defenses of
the Olonets group and subsequently advance toward Petrozavodsk. In adopting the
plan, the army commander took into account the presence in the zone of advance of a

deeply echeloned and well-equipped eneny defense along the water line. Por this
reason he set three stages in achieving the designated goal. In accord with the
plan worked out by the staff. the first stage was to start with artillery and air
softening up and would end with the launching of the crossing equipment. The second
stage included the crossing of the unit by the forward units and the capturing of
bridgeheads. The third provided for the crossing of the subsequent waves and the
going over to the offensive on the opposite bank.

In the morning of 21 June 1946, the main forces of the army went over to the offen-
sive. The aviation and artillery attacked the enemy strongpoints on the northern

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first echelon units on amphibious vehicles, landing craft and tenders. ‘l'he battles
started up for the bridgeheads. The units were controlled by radio from the obser-
vation posts by the giving of combat instructions. In the interests of a code com-
mand system. procedure tables drawn up by the division staffs were esployed. The
combat engineers began to erect the crossings and by 1300 hours 11 ferry crossings
were already in operation and by the end of the day 12 of then. During the first
day of the offensive, the army assault grouping crossed the Svir' River and broke
through the main defensive zone, advancing 6-8 kn in depth. By the end of the
second day of combat, the bridgehead had been widened to 50-60 km along the front
and 12-15 km in depth. Here was located the W0 [auxiliary control post] headed by
the deputy army contender.

In preparing to cross the Vistula River. the connender of the 8th Guards Army de-
voted particular attention to organizing recomuissance. This was carried out from
five working points at three places where. in the staff's opinion. it would be ad-
visable to deploy the divisional crossing points. The reconnaissance group included
the army chief of staff. the artillery couander with the chief of staff . the chief
of the engineer troops with two assistants, the chief of the operations section with
the corps representative officers. the chief of intelligence with two officers, the
signals chief as well as the cot-sanders of the three rifle corps with the chiefs of
staff.

At each of the points. for 60-50 minutes. the areas in the field were determined for
the rifle corps. the crossing areas and the areas for erecting the crossing points.
the approach routes to the river. the artillery firing positions. the areas for de-
ploying the control posts and the tasks for capturing bridgeheads on the western
bank. Rot more than 8 hours was spent on all this work. ”After the reconnais-
sance." recalled Col Gen V. A. Belyavskiy, the foraer army chief of staff, ”everyone
assembled in the forest which was at the center of the any's zone of advance for
hearing the plan of the army co-Iander.... By the morning of 31 July, the crossing
plan had been fully worked out. ...‘l'he intelligence section compiled an intelli-
gence plan.... The signals chief...together with the co-ander of the 91st Signals
Regiment...conducted special reconnaissance in the course of which the locations of
elements for the contend post, the comunications center and the support point were
determined."“ The conducted measures aade it possible to successfully carry out

Also instructive was the experience of the cox-sanders and staffs in organizing the
crossing of a major water obstacle by the formations of the 13th Army in the
Vistula-Q'er Ope'at ion. Having commenced the offensive from the bridgehead on the
Vistula River in the middle of January 1965, by 24 January the forward units had
drawn close to the Oder River. a major obstacle on the path to the vital centers
of Germany. Some 30-50 km remained to the river. By this time, the army staff, on
the basis of the directive received from the front and the preliminary plan of the
army comander, together with the section of the chief of the engineer troops. had
worked out a crossing plan. It designated the tasks of the corps, it gave an ap-
proxisste calculation of the reinforcements and set the time the troops were to
reach the jump-off position for the crossing. Intelligence data showed that the

99

m omcm. use: ONLY
FOR Ob’h‘iﬂAI. USE ONLY

enemy had succeeded in occupying not more than 30 percent of the permanent struc-
tures with its troops. The arrival of enemy reserves was expected in 2 or 3 days.
Having assessed the developing situation and considering the successful operations
by the adjacent unit on the left, the 4th Tank Army, the commander took a decision
to make a crossing with the forward detachments which had been sent out in s some
50-70 km from the rifle divisions for the purposes of achieving surprise and captur-
ing the enemy unaware. Having set the missions on the map. he issued them through
the liaison officers in written instructions. In the evening of 24 January. the

member of the army's military council visited the first-echelon formations for aid-
ing the troops.

In the morning of 25 January, the forward detachments. each consisting of a rifle
battalion, a tank killing artillery regiment (battalion), up to a company of tanks
(SAD) and a combat engineer company, began to carry out the set missions. The re-
connaissance groups were operating in front. Control over the forward detachments
was carried out by the chief of staff. Moreover, a mobile forward engineer detach-
ment had been sent out from the army (a company of the 281a: Combat Engineer Bat-
talion with bridging pontoons and a company of tne 282d Combat Engineer Battalion
with four vehicles). In moring in columns, in the evening the forward detachments
reached the river and under the cover of darkness began the crossing. In the
northern sector this was carried out on boats and ferries and in the southern over
the ice which had been reinforced with planking. The success of the forward de-
tachments was reinforced by the main forces of the army. In the course of the of-
fensive, the forward detachments frequently captured in-tact bridges without halting.

Attention should also be paid to the actions of the forward detachment from the XXVI
Tank Corps under the command of Lt Col 0. N. Pilippov in the course of the Stalin-
grad counteroffensive in November 1962. In maneuvering skillfully, the forward de-
tachment outflanked the enemy strongpoints and at dawn of 22 November reached the
bridge over the Don River at Berezovskiy Farm. The detachment's commander decided
to advance with the vehicle and tank headlights on in order to catch the vigilance
of the German security off guard. The trick worked. The Nazis took the column of
the forward detachment as one of its own and did not put up any resistance. In a
short period of time the enemy subunits on the bridge were destroyed. The detach-
ment's commander organized all-round defense of the bridge. In fighting surrounded

by superior Nazi forces, the forward detachment held on to the captured bridge from
0600 to 1600 hours on 22 November, that is, until the arrival of the main forces of
the corps.

Also effective were the actions of the 61st Guards Tank Brigade from the X Tank
Corps in capturing a bridge on the "arts River in January 1965. In using surprise,
the battalion's commander, Capt V. G. Skryn'ko, adopted a plan, in cooperating with
a group of submachine gunners and combat engineers. to cross the bridge at a high
speed. to destroy the security and deactivate the explosives on the bridge. The

plan worked. As a result the arriving main forces of the brigade, having crossed
the river over the bridge rapidly attacked the enemy and completely destroyed it
in the town of Brushenin.

In a number of instances, when reconnaissance and the forward detachments did not

succeed in capturing crossings prior to the arrival of the main forces of the corps,
their commanders undertook measures to cross the water obstacle along a broad front,

frequently by fording. Thus, the commander of the XI Tank Corps in the course of

100

l13R¢0F11CJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY
Hill OFI’K'IM. “SF. ()Nl.\

the Lublin—Brest Operation during the night of 20 July 1964. organized the crossing
of the western Bug River in a zone 18 miles wide across five fords. The improved
organizing activities of the commanders and staffs were expressed in the fact that
the water obstacles were frequently crossed by the tanks along the bottom. The
first such experience was acquired on the Deena River in October 1963, when over

60 tanks. including 50 T-36. from the V Guards Tank Corps successfully carried out
this task. The crossing of the Southern Bug River in March 1946 by the 25th Tank
Regiment was another example of such actions. The crossing of the rivers along the
bottom required the carrying out of a significant amount of preparatory work. The
hatches and louvres of the tanks were plugged with oakum with solidol and tarred
canvas mate. The route was marked with poles. An evacuation and rescue service

was organized. Repair and operating groups were manned. Engineer works were car-
ried out on the crossings (the building of ramps, the digging of shelters and so
forth). The staffs organized a commendant service. security and the defense of
the jump-off areas and crossings.

The commanders and staffs made maximum use of the surprise factor in achieving suc-
cess in a crossing. For these purposes the rivers were often crossed at night, in
bad weather. often without artillery softening up. Troop actions were marked by
decisiveness. For example, when the 93d Rifle Division of the 57th Army (April
1966) reached the Dnestr River, reconnaissance had established that there was no
enemy on the opposite bank. The commander of the 266th Rifle Regiment sent out a
reinforced rifle company which crossed to the western bank on boats. In a popula-
tion point (1 km from the bank), the company which had deployed into an extended
line destroyed the enemy battle outposts. The effectiveness of surprise actions is
also demonstrated by the example when during the night of 25 June 1946, the forward
detachment of the XCII Rifle Corps, having deceived the enemy by feints in a spuri-
ous sector, broke through the enemy battle formations, crossed the Dnepr River 20 km
to the north of Hogilev and captured a bridgehead up to 3 km along the front and in
depth. A pontoon bridge battalion was immediately sent here. Four hours later it
had put up a 30-ton bridge. The main forces of three corps of the 69th Army crossed
over it.

As we can see. the specific activities of the commanders and staffs in directing the
combat activities of troops crossing water obstacles were expressed chiefly in the
fact that the plan for the crossing was adopted stage-by-stage, that is, initially
with the receiving of the task and finally with the approach of the troops to the
river. The plan of actions was worked out on a map and clarified in reconnaissance.
For working out the crossing plan the situation required close contacts between the
combined-arms staffs and the chiefs of the engineer and chemical troops. Holding a
significant place in the work was the question of organizing all types of reconnais-
sance. in the plans adopted by the commanders for crossing water obstacles one can
clearly trace the skillful use of the conditions of the developing situation and in

troop actions. skill. boldness and mass heroism.

in examining the methods of the work of the oamnanders and staff? in the course of
an offensive under various situational conditions, it is essential to emphasize
that during the war they were continuously improved. A number of directions in

this process became apparent.

101

FOR‘OFF"JA1.USE(NNLY
ﬁOR¢Nﬂﬁf1AI.USE(NNLY

Thus. while in 1951, control in the course of the conducted operations was carried
out mainly by written instructions, in the subsequent years there was the wider
practice of holding direct talks between the commander and subordinates over the

communications equipment. As a result the directness, stability and truthfulness of
the information were increased.

In the work of the commanders and his subordinate control bodies an important place
was given to organizing the carrying out of the tasks set by the plan. for this

visited the formations (units) or sent their deputies there. This was the case in
the course of the Uman'-Botosani Operation. when the commander of the First Ukrain-

ian Front. I. S. Konev. during a period of 5 days (from 10 through 14 March l9b6)
flew two or three times to each of the command posts of the 5th Guards Tank

the 6th Guards Army. the 27th. 52d and 53d armies for clarifying individual ques-
tions of the plan on the spot. In October 1944, the commander of the 5th Guards

grouping visited the threatened sector. Here he directed combat operations. The
military council member of the lat Guards Tank Army in the Lwow~$andomiers Opera-
tion. upon instructions of the commander, headed the crossing of the San River by
the first echelon of the army. In the East Prussian Operation, when the Hiawe enemy
fortified area had been surrounded and sealed off by the troops of the 5th Guards
Tank Army by the evening of 18 January 1945, the success of the attack depended
largely upon the coordinated actions of the x Tank Corps and the rifle formations

of the 48th Army. This task was entrusted to an operations group headed by Gen

operations directorate (section) of the combined-arms staff was the center for col-
lecting incoming information on the situation. The officers of the intelligence
section, from the staff of the directorate of the artillery commander and the en-
gineer troops informed the chief of the operations directorate (section) on new
information. In order to increase the directness of staff information on the ques-
tions of rear support, one of the officers from the operations section kept a map
for the positions of the army. corps and divisional rear units (facilities) as well
as accounting of logistical support. He also compiled the necessary reports. In-
formation on the situation was plotted on the map of the chief of the operations

tained from various sources (Diagram 8) and the conclusions from them as wall as

proposals on the plan stemming from the situation. At the end of the briefing the
prepared orders, reports or corresponding operation instructions to the troops
were appended for the commander's signature.

The experience of the conducted offensive operations disclosed the important place
or control exercised by the commander and the combined-arms staff. Most often this
was carried out by a tour of the commander. For this purpose staff officers were

also involved. A careful analysis was also run on information obtained by the
staff.

102

FOI(HﬂﬁC1Al.USE(NVLY
Key:

FOR OFFICIAL "SI". ONI.\'

    
 

IONVO

Diagran 8. Organization of the Collection of Situational Date on an Offensive

l--Counander; staff (intelligence section); 2--Staffs of adjacent field forces
and formations and of those fighting in front; 3--Superior staff; b-Political
section; 5-0perations section; 6--Artillery commander; 7-Conlandsr of an-
gineer troops; 8--Chief of signal troops; 9—-Chief of chemical troops; 10—-
Chief of rear: ll--Chief of Iedical service; lZ--Chief of topographic service;
l3--Staffa of subordinate formations; 16-Staffs of subordinate units; 15-
Obtained data; 16--0n the enemy; l7-On own troops; 18-On the terrain; l9-0n
adjacent units; 20--0n hydroneteorological conditions. season and rise of day;
21-—0n the economic state of the area of combat operations; 22-Eneny docu-
ments; 23-Sanples of enemy weapons, military equipment and supply; 24--Refu-
gees. natives; 25--Prisoners of var; 26-Specia1 intelligence; 27--Artillery
reccnnaiasance and observation; 28--Radio and radar reconnaissance; 29--Re-

connniasance by agents; 30--8ubunite conducting reconnaissance in force;
[continued on following page]

103

FOR¢OFFM3AI.USE(NNLY
FOR 0FF“1A[.US£(NVLY

(continuation of Key for Diagram 8 on preceding page]

31-Suhunits conducting searches and ambushes; 32-Reconnaissance parties,
detachments and patrols; 33-Reconnaissance groups; 36-Deep reconnaissance
groups; 35-Air reconnaissance up to 300 km; 36ﬁ-Topographic maps, descrip-
tions. references and documents; 37-Peraonal observation:

a--Report from the air; b—-Information; c-lriefinge; d-Study; e-leports;
f-- Interrogation; gnlntelligence bodies.

At times the situation required the taking of emergency measures. This was the case
in the Lyuhan' Operation (January 1942). when the commander, the military council

member, the artillery commander and the commander of the armored and mechanized

tive combat operations. The army cannander and chief of staff were summoned to the
front's military council. The military council substantiated a lack of coordina-

tion in the work of the army field headquarters and. as a consequence. the absence
of firm troop leadership. The chief of staff and the chief of the operations sec-

Starting in 1963, a majority of the commanders began to make it a practice to have
a daily sumry of the operation (engagement) calling upon the staff officers and

gave instructions on the methods of operations. Subordinate commanders were also
present here. Brief reports were heard by the chief of staff, the chief of the rear
and the artillery commander. As I. S. Konev recalls, ”toward the end of each day...
each commander. as a rule, personally reported the situation to me and we jointly
outlined the plans of operations for the next day. Then the front's staff dupli-

a command post. after clarifying the plan and drawing it up on a map, the commander
visited his subordinates with a small group of officers. Hhen the formations of
the 37th Army had reached the Southern Bug River in March 1946, for example. after
a session of the military council. the army co-snder and chief of staff visited
FORGMHHCIALlﬁiZONLV

The questions were solved analogously in the formations.

Thus, during the first day of combat in breaking through the blockade of Leningrad.
the 136th Rifle Division did not carry out its set task. Its advance was 1.5 kn
(on the left flank) and 3.5 kn (on the right flank) instead of the planned 6-5 km.
The basic reason for the slow advance of the advancing units was that support from
the NPP tanks was lacking (they had been held up in a crossing). This greatly re-
stricted the strike capacity of the division. There was also an acute need to se-
cure the exposed flanks of the division and this deaanded that the reginent cos-
manders each put one company in the reserve. These companies were given the task
of repelling possible enemy counterattacks. At 2300 hours. the division commander,
having sunnoned the unit commanders to the com-and post (the area of Har'ino), sum-
med up the results of the first day and clarified the tasks for the following 26
hours. He ordered the colmander of the 270th Rifle heginent during the night to
capture the strongpoint on elev. 20.6 and in the norning of 13 January to advance
in the direction of the worker Settlement No 5. The 269th Rifle Regieant was re-
inforced by two conpanies fro- the 568 h Separate Tank Battalion. Here the divi-
sion chief of staff handed over the operation order to the regiment commanders.

The division commander. his deputies ani the artillery chief visited the subordin-
ate units to provide help.‘3

The practice of troop control during the Great Patriotic Her shows that the organ-
izational and creative activities of the col-anders and staffs in the course of an
offensive had a diverse nature. The main questions in the work of the commanders
of all levels were those of a prompt and effective response to a change in the sit-
nation. This necessitated a profound analysis of it. For this reason the ca-umd-
ers endeavored to get closer to the troops conducting combat operations. The
combined-arms staff had the job of collecting the necessary operational-tactical
infornation. Experience shows that under the complex conditions of a highly dynam-
ic situation the coenanders and staffs had to carry out sany tasks, including:
making corrections in previously adopted plans considering changes in the situation,
the issuing of coebat tasks, providing control and help in carrying out the plan.
An important role was given to achieving coordination in terns of target. the place
and tine of operations for the men and equipment involved in the offensive.

2. Achieving Coordinated Actions of the Troops in Carrying Out Conbat Missions

The forms of work by the commanders and staffs in maintaining coordination during
an offensive varied. They were determined by the available time. by the nature of
the tasks to be carried out and by the other factors, aiming chiefly at attaining
a unity of actions in carrying out the combat task.

Very often the conmanders and staffs had to coordinate efforts of the basic group-
ing with newly arrived formations and units (subunits). for example. in the course
of the Berlin Operation. during the night of 22 April 1945, the x Artillery Break-
through Corps and the 25thArtillery and 48th Guards Rifle divisions were sent as
reinforcements to the commander of the 3d Guards Tank Army. The staff of the front
in issuing tasks to these formations detersined also the bases of cooperation. that
is: with whom efforts were to be coordinated, at what time and for what purpose.
The staff of the tank arny provided then with a combat planning table and establish-
ed connunications. The instructions issued gave the routes and the time for arriv-
ing at the designated areas. Officers were sent out to meet the arriving units.

105

IIMICMWWCIAI.U§E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a rifle division the actions of its units with the arrival of reinforcements
(support) in the course of an offensive were most often coordinated by operation
instructions, by the commander or upon his authorization by staff officers. Often
this was done in the field. The commander of the 372d Rifle Division during the
second day of the offensive of 16 January 1963 in an operation instruction indi-
cated the bases of cooperation between the 1238th and lZéOth Rifle regiments as
well as with the ski battalion which had arrived from the reserve of the army con-

mander. The task of coordinating efforts in the field was entrusted to the chief
of the operations department of the division staff.1“

Very frequently the formation commanders and staffs had to coordinate the actions
of subordinate units with the tank formations (subunits) operating in front of the
rifle troops. This was particularly characteristic in breaking through intermedi-
ate defensive lines, in capturing population points and in crossing water obstacles.
The task was carried out, as a rule, by a personal meeting of the commanders and
sometimes by clarifying the tasks over the radio or through staff officers. The
formations of the 5th Guards and lst Tank armies operated in this manner during the
Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation in defeating the enemy in Tomarovka, Borisovka and
other centers of resistance. In the course of the Vyborg Operation, in organising
combat for the strongpoint of Heynil, the commander of the 63d Guards Rifle Diviskm
during the night of 22 June 1944, coordinated the efforts of his subordinate units
with the subunits of the 31st Guards Tank Regiment in the field and this ensured
the successful carrying out of the combat task.

when the field forces (formations, units) were given new tasks, the commander co-
ordinated the efforts of his subordinates most often on the tap and only sometimes
in the field. Because of the speed of events, cooperation was organised different-
ly than during the breakthrough preparatory period, that is. not by playing out
probable actions but rather by giving cooperation instructions. These reflected
primarily the methods of troop actions in the joint carrying out of a specific
combat task, signals and the reciprocal information procedures. Often officers
with operation instructions were sent to the formations (units). This method was,
as experience shows, very effective in achieving uniform goals by different men and
equipment with a limited time for organizing troop combat operations.

For organizing cooperation with adjacent units or for restoring it in the event of
disruption, the deputy commander was often sent to the area of combat operations.
This was done in the course of the Proskurovsko-Chernovtsy Operation for coordinat-
ing the actions of the 6th Tank and 60th armies. Sometimes these functions were
assumed by the commander personally. The connander of the First Baltic Front in
the course of the Belorussian Operation, in order to coordinate the actions of the
foraations from the 6th Guards and 6th Assault armies advancing on Polotsk, with an
operations group gravcled to the positions of the XXII Rifle Corps. Having in-
spected the eastern and southeastern approaches to the city, in the field he con-
cretized the tasks and gave cooperation instructions. For coordinating the ques-
tions of joint operations. in the course of the Belorussian Operation the commander
of the 5th Guards Tank Army traveled three times to the con-and post of the 63d
Army while the chief of staff of the 3d Guards Tank Army repeatedly went to the
staff of the 28th Army in the course of the Belin Operation.

Cooperation was also maintained by the exchanging of reciprocal information. The
colnander of the First Belorussian Front in the summer of 1966, in summing up the

106

FOﬂ O‘TNCIAL USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

results of the Belorussian Operation, noted that a unique feature in cooperation
with the Third Belorussian Front in encircling the Minsk enemy grouping was that
the assault groupings were separated by the Second Belorussian Front and they had
to act across it. Representatives from the adjacent fronts were sent to the staff
of the Third Belorussian Front for the purposes of providing better information.

The task was carried out approximately in the same manner on the tactical levels.
In destroying the Shlissel'burg-Sinyavin enemy grouping, for example, staff offi-
cers were sent from the 372d Rifle Division to the neighboring 128th Rifle Division
and the 123d Rifle Brigade which was moving toward them. They were given the task
of providing information on the state of affairs every hour of combat.15 The pres-
ence of radios for these officers made it possible to successfully carry out the
task of coordinating the efforts.

Experience shows that the questions of maintaining cooperation between the ground
forces and the aviation were the most difficult to solve in the course of an offen-
sive. This can be seen from the experience of the carrying out of these tasks by
the cosmumders and staffs in the Moscow counteroffensive, when one of the main
reasons for a lack of coordination was that the air control posts were a significant
distance away from the battlefield. The aviation representatives in a majority of
instances merely carried out the function of informing their conanders about the
ground and air situation.

Conditions changed in the autumn of 1962. In the Stalingrad counteroffensive, the
air army con-anders began to set up temporary control posts [VPU] near the front
comand posts. The air representatives in the combined-arms and tank armies (in

8 out of the 11 participating in the "Urea" Operation), in having direct co-unica-
tions with the air army VPU. not only provided information about the situation but
also requested air operations. Moreover, a mixed air corps was operationally sub-
ordinate to the V Tank Army and the corps cot-sander was at the army's colaand post.
Operations groups (two-three officers) headed by the chiefs of staff of the air
formations were sent to all the mechanized (tank) corps. They had one or two
radios. They were given the right to sin-son from the airfields those sir units
which were operationally subordinate to the corps mandate for operating over the
battlefield.

llow cooperation was achieved between the ground attack aviation and the ground
troops in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation in August 1963 has been described by the
formr comander of the l Guards Ground Attack Air Corps, Lt Gen Avn V. G. Ryasanov:
"The rapidly changing situation over the battlefield required extremely flexible
leadership of operations by the ground attack planes from the ground. From our own
experience we were convinced that close cooperation with the troops could be en-
sured only with a clear system of aircraft guidance to ground targets which could
check the advance of the infantry and tanks. For precisely this reason the com-
nand post of our corps was moved up to the observation post of the co-ssnder of the
53d Army the troops of which were supported by us. The comander had an opportunity
to constantly see the battlefield in front of his, to know the ground situation down
to the last detail. together with the corn-and of the ground troops to select the
most important targets and to determine the moment of attacking the eneay. To a
significant degree this determined the nature of the use and the effectiveness of
operations by the ground attack aviation. Its efforts, as a rule, were focused
precisely at that point and at that time which the situation required."16

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Importance of coordinated operations by the formations and units with aviation
can be seen from the example of the storming of the heavily fortified center of re-
sistance at Kutersel'ka by units of the 72d Rifle Division in the course of the
Vyborg Operation, when the division's commander decided to break through the eneuy
defenses, having the 133d and 187th Rifle regiments in the first echelon and the
lloth Rifle Regiment in the second. For sealing off the strongpoints, a previously
prepared assault detachnent (a reinforced rifle battalion) was sent out fro. the
133d Rifle Regiment. By dawn of lb June, the units had taken up the junp-off posi-
tion for the attack. The aviation made a diveboabing attack. Chief Mar Avn A. A.
Novikov recalled: ". ..0ver Kutersel'ka the skies began to runble and the 11-2 dove
toward the prevailing height which was the key position of the fortified area. The
lls case into the attack head-on, with their wings almost touching the tops of the
pines and spruces. There was no other possibility as the low clouds and poor visi-
bility held the aircraft down to the very peak of the hills and the pilots bombed
the enemy positions using a very risky maneuver. that is, in pulling out of the
dive. Only in this eanner could they avoid being hit by their own boobs and
rockets.... For 6 hours running the ground attack planes pulverized Kutersel'ka.
For 6 hours running the pilots did not leave their cockpits. There were neither
pauses nor breaks. As soon as the aircraft had landed it was again refueled, load-
ed with bows and rockets and sent out on a combat mission. One wave of 11-2 re-
placed another. The only things remaining on the ground was a bullet-scarred air-
craft which could not fly and the wounded."17

During the third period of the war there was an active search for the most effective
organization of air control, particularly in the tank forastions and field forces
(Diagram 9).

    

  

“Immense-sockeye...“
MspM.W~
unusually-Idol .

  
    
 
      

Diagram 9. Schematic Diagrae of Air Control in a Tank Amy

Key: l--Porward detaclnsent (a reinforced tank battalion); 2--Conand post (opera-
tions group) of tank (mechanized) corps; 3—0perations group of air division;
low-Air guidance post: officer of air division with radio, cos-ander's tank of
tank brigade; S--Counand post of tank army; Hound post (operations group)
of air corps (division); 7-Auailiary observation post.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

in the Vitebsk-Orsha Operation of the Third Belorussian Front, the air guidance

officers18 were assigned to the rifle corps (divisions) and to the tank (mechanized)
brigades while in the Budapest Operation even two battalions. In this manner great
flexibility of control and more coordinated actions by diverse forces were achieved

situation, guiding the fighters and warning of the approach of Nazi aviation. Two
control and check points (KPPI the northern and eastern (main one), were organized
for air control. The air formations, units, groups and individual crews were oblig-
ed to establish contact with the K2? chief and to attack objectives in Berlin only
with his permission. Air spotters were on the roofs of houses and by radio and

In making a nighttime raid, for the purposes of supporting the advancing troops in
breaking through the Oder-Neisse defensive line. a single starting point of the
route, the light beacon in the area of Poznan. was established for all the air
corps. From it the aircraft traveled to the combat deployment point and then the
crews independently made their way to the objectives of the attack.19

In coordinating the efforts of the ground troops with the navy (flotillas), partic-
ular attention was given to organizing Joint control posts. In the Novorossiysk
Landing Operation (September 1963), the command posts of the commander of the Black
Sea Fleet who was directing the operation, the conmander of the 18th Army and the

were located in the immediate proximity of the command post of the commander of the
8th Army. In the Belgrad Operation, control over the actions of the Danube Flotilla
was organized considering leadership over the formations, units and ships carrying
out the tasks of assisting the ground troops. An auxiliary post with an operations
group from the staff was organized near the areas of combat operations of the ship
brigades, the field forces and formations of the ground troops. This created an

The coordinating of the actions of the various branches of the ground troops with
the aviation and fleet provided a positive result in carrying out the combat tasks
of the advancing troops. Precisely this explains the attention which was given by
all levels of staffs to organizing cooperation in combat and an operation.

3. Maintaining Troop Battleworthiness

In the work of the commanders and staffs. in the course of an offensive, an impor-
tant piece was given to the questions of naintaining troop battleworthiness,

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that is. their ability to conduct combat operations and achieve the set goals in
accord with their operational-tactical purpose. The closest attention was paid to
replenishing the losses of personnel and military equipment as well as to carrying
out organizational measures to bring troop structure into accord with their combat
capabilities. The tasks were also carried out of achieving high political morale
among the troops as well as prompt and complete logistical support.

The most complex situation for resolving the problem of manning the units and for-
mations was in the first period of the war. This was the consequence of a number
of factors, the main one being that the forced. not always organized retreat of the
troops led to a loss of their battleworthiness.20 As a result, by August 19b1, a
majority of the rifle divisions were less than 50 percent of the full strength.

The actual numerical strength of the rifle divisions by the start of a majority of
operations conducted in 1962 was also low: some 3.7 percent of the formations had
from 1,000 to 3,000 while 26.7 percent had over 7,000. By the end of the offensive
in 1943. the divisions often had 500-700 men and less (the Donets Basin Operation
and the crossing of the Dnepr).

in the second and third periods of the war, casualties declined somewhat. In the
divisions of the 42d Army in January 1944 (the Krasnoye Selo-Ropshs Operation) they
were 3-6 percent on a daily basis, and in the divisions of the 69th Army in January
19‘s (the Vistula-Oder Operation), less than 4 percent. From the experience of the
formations of the tank armies involved in 21 operations of 1964-1955, personnel
casualties numbered from 10 to 30 percent of the initial strength. and in the
combined-arms armies went up to 20-60 percent.21

A great unevenness in personnel losses could be observed in the individual days of
an offensive.

Thus, in the corps of the 2d Tank Army from 14 July through 10 August 1943 (Oral
Operation), the average daily casualties were 160 soldiers and officers. However
in just one day, on l7 July. they reached 282 men.22 On this day the army repelled
a counterstrike made by the forces of the enemy 10th Motorized and 292d Infantry
divisions. Eneny aviation in two groups of 50 aircraft each bombed the troop
battle formations while our aviation was virtually idle as it was being rebased to
new airfields. The army's formations suffered even higher casualties (over 650
men) on 22 July when independently, without support from the infantry of the
combined-arms armies, they broke through deeply echelonsd enemy defenses. In
breaking through the Leningrad blockade (January l9b3) in the 128th and 256th
Rifle divisions of the 2d Assault Army and in the 86th and 136th Rifle divisions
of the 67th Army during the first 2 days of the offensive (the breaking through

of the defenses and the crossing of the Neva River), casualties were up to 40 ger-
cent of the initial number and in the following days declined to 5-7 percent.3

Particularly significant were the casualties in breaking through the enemy forti-
fied areas and in conducting combat operations in cities. The 63d Rifle Division
of the 21st Army, in breaking through the second defensive zone (the former hanner~
helm Line. the Vyborg Operation) lost up to 35 percent of the personnel. In the
Berlin Operation. the formations of the let Guards Tank Army had average daily
casualties of 590 men. On 19 April, when the battles developed to capture the
major enemy defensive center of Muchenberg, and on 20 April, in breaking through
the third defensive line, casualties rose up to 800 men, that is. by l.5-fold.

110

INJR‘OFiﬂCIAI.USEZCHNLY
IN)! 0FF1C1AI.USEZC”ULY

Statistics show that the proportional amount of irrecoversble casualties varied
from 10-20 to 30 percent. In the rifle divisions and motorized rifle brigades, 70
percent of the casualties were medical, that is, the soldiers out of commission
required treatment. while in the tank units the figure was 70-80 percent. wounds
in terms of severity were distributed approximately in the following manner: 32
percentzﬁevere wounds, 37 percent average wounds and around 60 percent light
wounds.

Consequently, losses in personnel during the wet years depended upon the missions
being carried out, the dependable fire neutralization and the nature of using the
formations in the offensive. The rifle (motorized rifle) formations suffered the
highest casualties. In a number of instances they were very significant. This de-
manded that the control bodwes take all of the possible measures to immediately re-
store the battleworthiness of the troops.

In the first period of the war the draft of recruits were the basic source of re-
plenishing losses and these troops usually arrived as companies and battalions after
brief training in the interior of the nation or in the reserve units of the fronts
and armies. From the spring of 19‘2, as a result of changes in the situation,

there was a changeover to a new system of making up losses. This began to be car-
ried out by putting the fornations which had lost their battleworthineas in the re-
serves for bringing up to strength (for reforming). The Directive of BqSHC of

16 March 1962 demanded the reorganization of the formations "without bringing then
to a point of complete exhaustion." The experience of following years showed the
wisdom of such an approach to solving the question.

Another source of replenishing losses was the returning of sick and wounded to
battle after their treatment in hospitals as well as the shifting of a portion of
personnel from the rear units (subunits) to line ones. Characteristic in this re-
gard was the fact that in December 1962, of the 11,000 men sent to the 5th Tank
Army, more than 6,500 were wounded returning to battle.25 In the formations of the
Kalinin Front, from 13 August through 30 September 1943. 23,800 wounded soldiers
and officers were returned to service, 7,700 were taken from the rear units and
4.300 arrived from the draft of recruits, that is, only ll percent of the total
number of personnel making up for losses. In the troops of the First Baltic and
Belorussian fronts during the winter of 1943-1944, the draft of recruits covered
just 10-15 percent of the needs.26

A very significant percentage of losses was made up by inducting citizens from the
liberated oblasts and former partisans. The problem was solved in this manner in
the Proskurovako—Chernovtsy, Belorussian, Lwow-Sandomierz and a number of other
operations. There were also instances when the replenishment was carried out from
the Soviet soldiers who had been taken prisoner and were liberated in the course
of battles. Internal resources were also used. For example, according to the de-
cision of the Western Front military council, in July 1941, the soldiers and ser-
geants who had served in the rear units were sent to the rifle troops. Around 800
signal troops were transferred from the front's air forces here. The regiments of

the 29th Guards Rifle Division of the 5th Army in May 1962 were brought up to
strength from the rear subunits.

111

FOR OFFICJAI.IEHE(HQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was more difficult to solve the question of replenishing losses in specialist
personnel, including in the tank formations and units and, in particular, the driv-
ers, gunners and radio operators. Such a phenomenon was a consequence of the fact
that the tanks received for bringing up to strength very rarely had trained crews.
Actually this was an exception to the general rule and was done only in those in-
stances when tank columns arrived which had been made up from the rear servicemen.
The basic source of replacements was the reserve army battalion where drivers, gun-
ners. signal troops as well as soldiers and sergeants of other specialties under-
went training. Moreover. a certain reserve of drivers was created in the forma-
tions. From 1966, the solution to the problem was somewhat eased due to the fact
that the subunits and units more and sore often made it a practice for the crews
(teams) to master related specialties and to learn their actions in combat with a
reduced crew.

Also requiring a solution was the question of providing officer personnel for the
formations. units and subunits in the course of an offensive. How great was the
demand for then can be seen from the fact that in 1962, around 36,000 commanders
and political workers were needed to cover the shortage and 136,000 for new forma-
tions. From the report of the staff of the Voronerh Front on 20 September 1962. it
can be seen that more than 300 officers were lacking in the army field headquar-
ters.27 In the formations of the 39th Army (Belorussian Operation) on the 10th day
of the offensive the shortage of platoon and company connanders was 38 percent and
for battalion commanders 33 percent.

The problem was basically solved by using officers from the front reserve regiments
(battalions) and officers from the army reserve battalions and also courses. 8 In
truth, in a regiment (battalion) there were only officers of the tactical level

and they could not effectively make up the losses in the control bodies of the
superior command and staff levels. Moreover. they did not always realize the pre-
assignment of officers to take over vacant positions. They rarely had experience
in their direct job. This told on the quality of the work done by the officers
when they assumed positions in the course of an offensive.

The control bodies of the fronts and armies, under the leadership of the combined-
arns staff, carried out a significant amount of work for the purposes of promptly
and effectively replacing the personnel losses. Two main tasks were carried out.
The first was to prepare the necessary calculations and proposals for the adopting
of the commander's plan. The second was to carry out the organisational activities
in implementing it. The staff through the sensing section detersined the need to
replace losses in the operating groups and branches of troops as well as the most
rational ways for solving the questions. The necessary instructions were given and
control exercised over their fulfillment. Practical aid was given to the troops.
The personnel department on the eve of an operation drew up a plan for bringing the
formations up to strength in terns of officer personnel as well as an order to the
chief of the reserve (the cunnander of the reserve regiment) proceeding from the
calculation of assused casualties. The representative of the personnel section, in
being constantly in the reserve, monitored the selection and dispatching of offi-
cers to the formations. Sometimes special transport was assigned to the chief of
reserves for accelerating their delivery, as was the case in the summer of 1962 on
the western Front and in the winter of 1943 on the Southwestern Front.

112

FOR 0FT1CLA1.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

The experience of the war showed the advisability of setting up temporary operations
groups consisting of officers from the various directorates (sections) headed by the
deputy commander. These in a skilled and immediate manner solved the problems of
replacing the losses. This was done most often when the numerical strength of the
formations had declined to 60-60 percent and lower.

Thus. upon receiving instructions from the Western Front staff to receive recruits
at the end of July l9b3, the commander of the 11th Guards Army ordered that an op-
erations group be set up consisting of the deputy chief of staff with three offi-
cers. the chiefs of the manning and personnel sections with officers from the sec-
tion as well as representatives from the directorates (sections) of the commanders
(chiefs) of the branches of troops and services. This group, in numbering 18 offi-
cers, immediately set to work. It clarified the data on the need of the formations
for personnel and made targets for the allocation of the arriving replacements con-
sidering the importance of the tasks being carried out by each of the rifle corps
and divisions. 0n the basis of the calculations made, an order was drawn up. It
designated the areas where the representatives of the formations should be for the
replacements, a time was designated, the principles for bringing up to strength
were pointed out as well as the minimum of questions which must be worked through
with the replacements to train them. The order signed by the commander was issued
by the officers from the operations group which visited the formations. The deputy
chief of staff with the chiefs of the sections and their officers traveled to the
arrival area of the replacements. The army staff issued instructions for organiz-
ing a commendant service using the forces of the division in reserve.

As a whole the personnel policy carried out by the Communist Party and the Soviet
government and the ably organized work in the training and retraining of officer
personnel in the fronts, armies and divisions made it possible to successfully
solve the personnel question. Even by the middle of 1943, an officer reserve of
almost 100,000 men had been created in the operational army.29

In the course of an offensive the battleworthiness of a formation was frequently
maintained by the creation of temporary formations such as operations groups of
troops and composite detachments. This solved the problem of bringing the troop
organizational structure into conformity with their combat capabilities under the
conditions of significant losses. An analysis of the combat experience of 1941-
1962 shows that in defensive operations, when the troops went over to offensive
operations in one of the sectors, the troop operations groups were most often or-
ganized on an army scale, as was done in July l9hl in the region of Smolensk in the
30th Army. Operations groups were organized under approximately the same condi-
tions at the end of November 1961 in the region of Serebrysnyye Prudy (near Moscow»
in December 1961 to the southwest of Moscow. and then in the 10th Army from the
divisions advancing on the flanks of its assault grouping. In the 20th Army (Jen-
uary 1962), in an offensive along a broad front, three operations groups were even
organized (each consisting of two or three divisions). In the course of the
counteroffensive at Tikhvin, northern, southern and eastern groups were formed in
the 6th Army. In May 1962, an operations group was created to relieve the sur-
rounded troops of the 6th Army. It was under the command of Gen 6. l. Sherstyuk
and consisted of a rifle division and the remnants of three tank brigades.3°

113

FORl0F1NC1AL USEGJNLY
FOR 0FTIC1AL.US£IDNLY

As a whole. in a situation where the army commmnder had to lead troops which had
taken up the offensive as well as formations which were on the offensive (and they,
together with the individual units, numbered from 10 to 26). in the absence of a
corps element of control and a limited number of communications, the formation of
such troop groups was a compulsory phenomenon. It helped to bring control closer
to the troops and to raise their operational-tactical independence.

In the following years. the troop operations groups were also employed on the front
level: on the Voronezh Front by Maj Gen D. T. Kozlov, on the Kalinin Front by

Maj Gen V. Ya. Kolpakchi. on the Southern Front by Lt Gen F. V. Komkov. on the
Southwestern front by Lt Gen H. H. Popov and on the Third Baltic Front (the area of
Tartu) by Maj Gen A. A. Rechkin. The purpose of these formations was to unify the
efforts of a portion of the troops in one of the sectors and to achieve a more ra-
tional organization of combat operations under special conditions (in the muddy
season, in forested swampy terrain, in mountains and in storming cities). Often
they brought together reserve units for increasing the efforts in one of the sec-
tors (the Berlin and other operations). In a number of cases the troop grOups were
organized for the purposes of carrying out a suddenly arising task. In particular,
for developing the offensive toward Bryansk in the course of the Orel Operation
(July 1943). the group of Maj Gen V. V. Kryukov was organized consisting of the

XVI Guards Rifle, the II Guards Cavalry and the I Tank corps.

The operations groups were headed,as a rule, by deputy commanders with a small num-
ber of officers from the various sections of the field headquarters. They were as-
signed two or three radios. The control bodies were formed using this principle in
organizing and carrying out the counteroffensive at Rostov and Tikhvin. In a number
of operations (in the 10th Army. the counteroffensive at Moscow, and in the 63d Army
on its right flank in the Vitebsk Operation). control of subordinates was exercised
through the staff of one of the formations.

It is right to feel that along with the positive aspects in the creation of impro-
vised control bodies (the bringing of leadership closer to the troops and the in-
volvement of more skilled personnel) there were also negative aspects as the hur-
riedly created leadership bodies did not have sufficient equipment for controlling
the subordinates. Moreover, they restricted the possibility of utilizing communica-
tions by subordinate levels which were of a limited number in 1941-1942. The basic
strength of the staff was weakened. At the same time, such an approach was advis-
able under the designated conditions.

Composite detachments were organized for carrying out tactical tasks. Table 10
shows the indicators which to a definite degree describe the conditions under which
the composite detachments were made up. Common to all of them was the fact that
the combat units (formations) of an army had a relatively low manning strength with
private and sergeant personnel (from 7-10 to 60-50 percent). officer personnel (25-
50 percent) as well as armored equipment (from 66 up to 372 tanks and SAD avail-
able). In a number of instances, for example. in the lat Tank Army in the Zhitomir-
Berdichev Operation. such formations were organised to carry out suddenly arising
tasks. in particular. for repelling enemy counterstrikes and maneuvering to a new
sector in the absence of reserves and second echelons. In the 2d Guards Tank Army
(Vistula-Oder Operation) and in the 6th Guards Tank Army (Khingan-Mukden Operation).
the composite detachments were created as a consequence of interruptions in fuel
deliveries.

116

FORIONHK]AI.USE(N¥LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.3 noon—a .@ Oman .QNQMH .2..." .onu

ownou «unis no.3. Jam 0.36 £33. .21“ Ken onou 3N 900:. .H 0a.: .svHHnH .3..." .ONN 3.3m
“contend 0002—. .n Guam 63¢ .23 Jan canon “MBNINRN 0000:- .0 0.13 $3000 .3 .MNN O«H0u .28..

0119!:— vougo’nupﬁ' «033.5 0.3”..— voawgoolluna “0...»qu 3:333» 3930 00399—02.
uni “sauce ﬂaunt—u “cog 3" value 38.3033 332.30 no 93339-271» manna-£030..

cud-0950 2: union cyan!- Ed «0 ocean-0300:;

Xx a3 .363 .3330 39$ no 595...:

Huonoﬂafo «Sundown. mg. no N :3 00.3.3 5 3.25 uaaloo no raucouuuduuauo-Bclnn «Qua-Ba
3:3 3" :3 van 3—5 gaggle mood-Eu maﬁa—Sumac“. 303'.” «Quad savanna Hannah—uncut— ">08

MAN

02 :3 3 .Eln oz
.3» <3 .23.... on
a: «3 mo

9:... £3 Rain on
a» n

Iona an» O’UIN oz
yuan—«nun 93

E. .3» 3!.” oz

nap—sol

n 3.5» .n «8! n
“5-! o.—

.unu «MN «ﬂu an
up!-

o 3.3» NH." 3—9 o

nee—«a .3» ma
.3» .8.— 333.03
now Ea 03009-3

G...- H a S»
n a»? :33
a.» 3 a n
«1.36.8
$3.39 :1 n
3.2.2.-
615» a.» an
“Tunnel
.nauunu 3.» o

”iniuunco

author—sol
Julia 31 n
31:33
nlunu 3—» 2
“.7330!
Minna» .xu on

.1! n tau an a an

Ill-Ill a

:4 '40'4

A 33>»
E3
onto... Onto:

0.—

MI n

.8ION

mu 0
w an ONINH

amine

x! m
.onImN

«3 ON

a 2" cans

«NM

.3."

£9.95»
5—3.3 broad

OHS—EH0 OH.

coal:
ova-aw w w c

.3 no 3.3!

Iaoauov noun:
Juan .3 Eda
0393.. OH

3m 3 >08.u3§
89$ mica»
30.3 :92»
o» E .326

gm we :38 onus-G

.3: 32:3.

33 Juan. an 2.03825
0328qu «o 03.60 of 5 3:05.038 3.30930 no «353: 2—» you 333qu nun!—

ASS 38-53
3. hicks—«£256

g 3.56qu
<9 A92 38
u: .325 8 25.5
<8

:33 was
.325 o» 05.5

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHOM. USE 0\1.\'

Composite detachments were widely used when created in rifle divisions in the

course of the offensive on the southwestern strategic sector in February-March 1943

when the rifle battalions and artillery regiments were 12-20 percent of their numer-
ical strength. The question was solved in an analogous manner in many divisions of

the 67th Army in breaking through the Leningrad blockade in January l9b3.

Thus. during the night of 18 January, the cousander of the 372d Rifle Division
issued the order: "All the personnel of the rifle battalions from the 1238th
Rifle Regiment is to be transferred to the 1236th Rifle Regiment, having first
formed a composite detachment. The organization is to be carried out prior to 0600

hours on 18 January."31 By this sane order a ski battalion was reformed into a com-
pany and put under the commander of the lZéOth Rifle Regiment, where two composite
detachments (battalions) were organized.

In each specific instance the comaanders and staffs employed those methods of man-
ning the composite detachments which met the situational conditions and the combat
tasks confronting them.

In August-October 1943, in the 5th Tank Army, proceeding from the nature of the
task (the pursuit of the enemy in a zone of 10-12 km) and the availability of a
limited number of tanks, in each corps composite brigades were created consisting
of two or three tank battalions and one motorized rifle battalion. These were com-
bined into an army detachment. In the 1st Tank Army the formations of which were
to fight as forward detachments (tank groups, using the terminology of those times)
of the three combined-arms armies, corps composite detachments were created. In
the corps the number of brigades was reduced and a portion of them was transferred

to a lower TOE basis, that is, they were temporarily reformed into battalions.

In February 1966 (the Korsun’-Shevchenkovakiy Operation). in the 2d Tank Army, as a
consequence of the crisis situation and due to the fact that its units and forma-
tions were arriving successively by rail in the concentration area, several detach-
ments were organized with the putting of the unloaded subunits, units and formations
under a unified command. There was an analogous approach in the first Tank Army in
the course of the Zhitomir-Berdichev Operation.

In the 2d and 6th Guards Tank armies (Vistula-Oder and Khingan-Hukden operations),
temporary formations were set up on the basis of one of the tank brigades, the
tanks of which received all the fuel of the other formations. These composite de-
tachments were reinforced by artillery. motorized infantry and combat engineers.

In the rifle formations, the composite detachments (sometimes they were called
combat groups) were most often created in the course of an offensive by forming

one or two regiments in the divisions or one or two battalions in regiments in-
stead of the regulation three. Often the remaining personnel of the battalions was
reduced to one or two companies. In the same manner composite detachments were or-
ganized in the artillery units and the subunits of the special branches of troops.

Various methods were employed to restore the battleworthineas of control bodies.

In the 5th Guards Tank Army the formation of the basic control body of a composite
army detachment was carried out on the basis of the staff of the V Mechanized Corps
which had the greatest numerical strength. It received two high-powered radios and

116

FORiOFFKJAl.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three medium-powered ones from the XVIII and XXIX Tank corps. The operations and
intelligence sections were reinforced by officers from the appropriate sections of
the army staff. The control bodies of the composite brigades were created by uni-
fying several staffs which htd lost a significant portion of their men and equip-
ment. For example. the commander of the 25th Guards Tank Brigade headed the com-
posite brigade of the XXIX Tank Corps. Its staff had been formed from the staff
officers of two other brigades. The operations and intelligence sections had been
transferred from the staff of the XXIX Tank Corps to the staff of the composite de-

tachment. Engineer support was directed by the chief of the engineer troops from
this corps.32

In the lat Tank Army. proceeding from the purpose of the composite detachments, the
corps headquarters were maintained and reinforced from officers of the army field
headquarters. The surviving brigade control bodies were temporarily reduced to the
staff of one brigade. A portion of the officer personnel from the brigade staffs
went to bring the battalion control bodies up to strength.

In the 2d Tank Army in 1944, the staffs of the formations which had received the
army and corps units were strengthened by officers from the army field headquarters
and corps.33 The army SAU regiment and a number of other.units were shifted to the
command of the llth Tank Brigade. A similar principle was employed for improving
control in the 66th and 65th as well as in other armies of the Southwestern Front
in the "Utah" Operation, where, in the aim of rapid maneuver and messing of fire,
the artillery regiments of the rifle divisions which were not part of the army ar-
tillery groups were united into temporary tactical formations for carrying out par-
ticular tasks. The staff of one of the artillery regiments carried out the role

of the basic control body. In the East Prussian Operation, in the storming of
Konigsberg, a rather frequent phenomenon was the subordinating of the rifle regi-
ments which had suffered high casualties to those regiments which had a relatively
high numerical strength.

The extensive amount of work carried out for the purposes of creating battleworthy
composite detachments. as a rule, was carried out in the following sequence. The
commander, on the basis of data prepared by the staff on the condition of the
troops and proceeding from the pending task, adopted a plan in which he determined
the composition. organizational structure and the manning procedures for the sum-
mary detachments and the organizing of control. The operations section (depertmenﬂ
prepared an order which stated what formations (units or subunits) and what equip-
ment were to be turned over to whom and by what date and who was responsible for
the organizing of the composite detachments. A list of officials for the director-
ates to be set up served as an appendix to the order.

The staff set to work to carry out the plan. It sent officers to the areas where
the detachments were to be organized and here they provided help and carried out
control and inspections of the created formations for their readiness for combat
operations. In the 5th Guards Tank Army these officers temporarily headed the
staffs of the composite detachments. A portion of the army field headquarters at
the same time solved the tasks of receiving the replacements and organizing the
return of damaged equipment to combat. For example, in the 1st Tank Army under
these conditions an operations group was organized consisting of the basic army
sections. staffs and directorates.

117

FOR OFFKJA1.USE¢DNLY
FOR 0&11C1Al.lwﬂilrUlY

The importance of the measures carried out to replace the losses of military equip-
ment was determined primarily by the fact that its quantitative and qualitative in-
dicators comprise the basis of the fire. strike and maneuvering capabilities of the
troops. This question was particularly acute in the tank and mechanized corps (bri-
gades) where tank losses during an operation comprised up to 90 percent of their
initial number. including 25-30 percent irreparable losses.3“ This also predeter-
mined the nature of activities carried out by all control bodies to rebuild the
military equipment.

In the course of an offensive, the use procedure and the working methods of various
repair and evacuation elements called upon to carry out the task of repairing com-
bat equipment were determined by the particular features of the operation carried
out, its scope and pace as well as by the composition and technical state of the
tank fleet. In 1952-1943, the repair facilities of the tank armies during the
first days of operations, as a rule, were not deployed but rather performed the
functions of a technical maintenance echelon. Subsequently they rebuilt the tanks
requiring chiefly a medium overhaul. In the committing of the tank armies to an
engagement and during their operations in the operational depth. all the repair
facilities drew closer to the troops and with the arrival of the units at assembly
areas to carry out the day's task they were often with them. This was possible
only with a pace of advance of 15-20 km a day. But a sharp increase in the momen-
tum of troop advance, characteristic for the offensive operations during the con-
cluding period of the war, demanded that the control bodies revise the adopted or-
ganization for troop technical support. Due to the lag of the rear bodies, includ-

ing the repair units (subunits), the established procedure for utilising the repair
facilities did not produce good results.

In the course of the offensive in January-February 1965, in the 1st Guards Tank
Army, for example, by a decision of the commander all medium repairs on tanks and
SAU were entrusted to the army units. The corps repair facilities were put under
the army directorate for tank repairs and supply and these carried out routine re-
pairs. The battalion and brigade facilities were concerned with maintenance. The
assembly points for faulty vehicles were deployed in the basic sectors of the offen-
sive of the corps some 40-50 km apart. Moving in short jumps, they could be up to
6-9 days at one place, that is, until completing all the repair work on the tanks
assembled here. Such a method for using the repair facilities made it possible in
the course of combat operations to repair and return to combat all the armored
equipment which was to be repaired in the troops. The centralised leadership of
the work carried out by the corps repair bases also simplified the organised re-
turn of the repaired vehicles to combat. In groups of 5-10 units, after receiving
skilled technical aid and maintenance, they were returned to their units. As a
result, on_l February 1945, of the 758 listed tanks and SAU, 577 (76 percent) were
righting.35

The control bodies carried out a number of organizational measures which helped to
return the equipment to combat. For example. in the 2d Guards Tank Army, from the
suaner of 1944. additional means were sought to increase the number of repair and
evacuation subunits. Evacuation platoons were set up using written-off tanks and
captured tractors under the mobile tank repair bases of the corps. The technical

training of the personnel was improved. By the start of the Lublin-Brest Operation,
in the formations of this same army. 425 drivers were awarded various skill

118

FORiOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

categories. By the commander's decision in the course of the offensive personnel
from the rifle subunits were assigned to maintain the equipment.

Consequently, an analysis of certain aspect in the activities of control bodies in
maintaining the battleworthiness of the troops during an offensive in the years of
the Great Patriotic Har shows that this task was carried out by implementing a range
of measures. The purpose was to create conditions whereby the existing troop capa-
bilities would be fully utilized.

4. Ensuring the Dependable Functioning of the Control System

During the entire war, the enemy endeavored to effect the control system of the
Soviet troops for the purposes of disorgaaiaing it. In June 19b1, its aviation
knocked out up to 40 percent of the communications centers and lines. Enemy sabo-
tage operations were also characteristic for the initial period of the war. Massed
raids against control posts were made by enemy aviation in the Orel, Zhitomir-
aerdichev, LublinOBrest and Iasi-Kishinev operations. Instances of direction find-
ing and artillery shelling of communications centers were noted in the Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy Operation. Attempts were made to attack control posts in the course
of the Lwow-Sandomierz. Berlin and other operations.

The enemy also actively monitored the operational-tactical information that was

passed back and forth. For decoding and processing the intercepted radio messages
even in 1939, Nazi Germany had set up a special body, the Scientific Research Direc-

torate. According to information of the Amsterdam State Military Doculentation In-
stitute, "it (that is. the directorate) each day succeeded in decoding 20,000 of the
100,000 radiograms which were exchanged between the Russian High Command, the com-
mands of the fronts, armies. corps and divisions as well as the commanders of small-
er subunits."36 The Chief of the General Staff of the Ground Troops of the Nazi
Army, Gen F. Halder, emphasized that "the decoding of enemy radio broadcasts was of
exceptional value and for this reason required a serious approach." Approximately
the same assessment of signals intelligence was given in his evidence by Col Gen
Jodi and in the memoirs published in the Rest by Col Gen (not) L. Rendulich.37

In the aim of effectively carrying out the signals intelligence tasks, a Nazi field
(tank) army was assigned one or two signals intelligence companies with ten direc-
tion finders each. Their task was to monitor the work of the ground and air com-
munications and intercept operational-tactical information. "Monitoring," commented
Gen I. N. Artem'yev, "was possible for the enemy both on lines with a normal sound
frequency as well as those equipped with high frequency devices...."3° Moreover,
from the middle of l9hh, on the Soviet-German Front there were six special-purpose
regiments each of which consisted of two stationary signals intelligence groups and
a company or distant and close intelligence. The direction-finding tasks were en-
trusted to artillery reconnaissance and observation (AIR) subunits. Uhile on

22 June 1941 there were 36 AIR battalions. 12 stationary and 10 mobile monitoring
stations, in 1964, each enemy corps (division) had an AIR battalion, while the corps
and armies had special intercept and jamming subunits. In a signals battalion of a
division there was an intelligence platoon (3 radios, 6 receivers and equipment for
monitoring wire calls).39

The condition of the communications equipment and the composition and equipping of
the control posts also influenced the functioning of the troop control systems.

119

FIHICMHNCIAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the outset of the war, the existing control equipment in terms of its tactical
and technical performance did not fully meet the denands nade. The capability of
radios in operating on the move. for example. were restricted to 10-20 kn. More-
over there was a great shortage of this equipment. In the formations of the West-
ern and Southwestern fronts, there was not more than 30 percent of the regulation.
The speed of laying wire lines during the entire war did not exceed 25-35 km a day.
But the momentum of advance of the tank troops was 40-50 km and more in 1943-1965.

At the control posts there was a large number of personnel with a limited number

of means of transport. Thus, there were up to 400 soldiers and officers at an army
command post. They were supported by 15-20 cars and transports. There were even
fewer vehicles at the rear control post where the number of personnel was twice as
much. The vehicles. and particularly those carrying high- and medium-power radios,
possessed poor cross-country capability. As a result the mobility of control posts
was very limited.

The designated phenomena forced the staffs of all levels to pay more attention to
improving the system or control posts and demanded a creative approach to determin-
ing the communications system and composition, to the placenent and movement of the
control posts and to the organization of security, defense and their protection.-
During the first period of the war this problem was definitely underestimated. The
measures were poorly carried out. This was the reason that the Main Signals Direc-
torate of the Red Army in the Directive of 26 June 1952 pointed out that "the con-
trol posts are not echeloned in depth.... Their security and defense are not organ-
ized. There is clearly unsatisfactory camouflaging of the communications, particu-
larly radios."“° Subsequently, for maintaining the stable functioning of control
systems the commanders and staffs adopted a number of neasures to eliminate the
designated shortcomings.

A more effective approach was worked out for the deployment of control posts.

For the purposes of less vulnerability, a command post began to be dispersed in
several areas. The control group was made up of the military council members, the
chiefs and officers from the leading sections of the field headquarters and the
commanders (representatives) of the air formations. The officers from the sections
of the engineer troops, chemical. personnel and political and the operations group
of the rear directorate and technical services were located a certain distance from
the control group. The communications center and the report gathering point were
located separately. Areas for liaison aircraft were built a distance of 3-5 km
away. This was done so that the take-off and landing of the liaison aircraft did
not give away the position of the command post. For the sane purpose the high-

and medium-powered radio transmitters were moved 2-3 km away from it. The support
and service subunits were located separately.

A variation of the placement of a divisional command post is shown in Diagram 10.
The experience of the war disclosed the need to locate a control post outside of
population points. predominantly in a forest with convenient accesses and exits to
the sector of the planned nova. Its location was known only by those officials who

had to know this for carrying out their official duties. No markings or signs were
permitted.

120

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Diagram 10. Placement of Elements of Control Posts of a Rifle Division
in Combat

Key: a--0bservation post; b--VNOS post; c—Chief of artillery; d—Commander of
tank brigade (tank regiment, tank battalion); eubeputy chief of operations
department, signals chief; f--Lisison officers; guCOI-and post; h-Chief
of political section; i--Group of lisiaon officers; j--0fficers of special
department; kuStaff comndant; insignsla squad, signals subunits; In—
Service subunits of administrative unit; n--I.anding strip; o--Rear control
post, chief of rear; p-Deputy cousnder for technical affairs; q—Chief
of artillery supply; r--Records department; personnel department; so-Iiili-
tnry tribunal, judge advocate's office; t-Support and service subunits;
u--0fficers of operations and intelligence sections.

In the achieving of steady troop control, one of the central places was held by the
question of the security and defense of control posts. This problem was solved by
locating them in areas with natural screens and covered by obstacles which were in-
accessible for enemy tanks, with prompt detection and destruction of enemy sabotage
and reconnaissance groups as well as enemy troops remaining in the rear and with
the organizing of defense against surprise attacks by enemy tanks and aviation.

The chiefs of staff provided specific tasks for the personnel at each control post.
The necessary men and equipment were assigned and warning signals were set in the
event of an enemy attack. The actions of the personnel were designated for these
signals and measures were also outlined to combat fires if the control posts were

located in a forest.

The direct security and defense of control posts were provided basically by the sub-
units under the staff (for the rear control posts by the rear subunits). Training

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

units were also involved, as was done in the 372d Rifle Division in January 1943.
Sometimes there were also combat subunits, usually from the second echelons and re-
serves. Officers from headquarters also participated in the defense as well as the
crews of command, staff and other vehicles. At the end of April l9b5 (Berlin Opera-
tion), for example, a large enemy group under the cover of darkness broke through to
the staff of the loth Guards Tank Army. Upon the alert, all the officers of the
field headquarters took up arms. Combat operations were directed by the army com-
mander, Gen D. D. Lelyushenko, and by the chief of staff, Gen X. I. Upman. The ar-
riving 7th Guards Motorcycle Regiment (the army reserve) and other units routed the
enemy grouping and took prisoners.n

The plans for the security and defense of comand posts in the field forces and for-
mations were worked out by the operations sections (departments) and in units by the
deputy chief of staff with the involvement of the staff couendant, usually in the
form of a diagram or on a map with a scale of 1:25.000. It gave the locations of
the control group, the cocmnunications center and the service group, the approaches
and exits from the location of the control post, the parking areas for vehicles er-
riving at the control post, the location of man-made shelters, the positions of
fixed and the routes of mobile battle outposts, their composition, tasks and pro-
cedure of relief. Also given were the warning signals, the actions of the person-
nel. the comosition and tasks of the air defense resources assigned for cover as
well as other means used to repel the ground enemy and measures to camouflage the
control posts. Experience showed that the designated measures provided a positive

result. For precisely this reason it can be considered in the work of the cos-rand-
ers (staffs) even now.

The protection against jamming for radios located at control posts was achieved by
carrying out a number of organizational and technical measures.

Control over the operation of radios was strengthened. Sabotage and reconnaissance
groups for destroying enemy radio jumpers were sent out as was done in the forma-
tions of the 4th Tank Army in the course of the Proskurovsko-Chernovtsy Operation.
Active tasks were set for the troops, the aviation and artillery. in the directive
of the contender of the Southwestern Front of 19 November 19b2, the co-ander of
the 5th Tank Army was required "for disorganising enemy control to create detach-
sents which should capture its col-sand posts, staffs. destroy conunications
lines..., having trained ahead of time groups of bold soldiers and cos-andere.

With the first opportunity they should be mounted on vehicles.“2

The choice and equipping of the locations of conunications centers were made con-
sidering the screening properties of the terrain. Directional antennas were used.
There was also the practice of maneuvering transmitter capacity. 0f inortant sig-
nificance was the observance of airwaves discipline, and for this reason under cer-
tain situational conditions the operation of radios was limited, even to the point
of complete radio silence. Often for comunicetions over a separate radio link,
one call number was used or the work was carried out without the call ntashers by
using an authentication signal. Permanent pole co—unications lines were built be-
tween tho receiving and transmitting centers which were organized a distance of

3-4 to 8-10 km apart.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ISIS ONLY

Experience showed the great effectiveness of countering enemy signals intelligence
by using various wave systems, by the functioning of reserve (duty) networks, by
periodically changing the code designation of signals, and by excluding work in the
so-called clear (in semi-coded text). Radio deception was used to confuse the
enemy. False data were also broadcast. At the end of 1962. our radio operators,

in acting as the radio called by the staff of the 6th Nari Army, established contact
with it and for 26 hours received 16 radio messages from it totaling over 1,500 '
groups. Signals security and deception were carried out in the Barenkovo-Lozovaya,
thev-Sychev, Belgorod-Khar'kov, Korsun'-Shevchenkovsk1y and a number of other op-

erations. As a whole the enemy recognized the high effectiveness of our signals
intelligence.“3

The stable functioning of control systems was also influenced by an effective pro-
cedure for moving the control posts.

During the first periods of the war, as experience shows, up to 80 percent of the
interruptions in the operations of communications was a consequence of failures in
solving this question. In the course of the Kalinin Operation, the attempt by the
front's commander to respond effectively to the situation on 9 December 1961 was not
crowned with success as the changing of the command post of the 29th Army had start-
ed, the new area of its location was not known at the front's staff and it was im-
possible to establish contact by radio. As a result it took up to 5 hours to issue
orders by transport. Analogous cases occurred in the area of the Hestern Front in
January 1962, in particular in the 10th Army.

The statistical data on 20 front and more than 50 army operations provide justifica-

tion to note that the command post of a front during the first two periods of the
war moved most often two or three times in the operation every 5-7 days and for the
combined-arms armies it was every 2 or 6 days. In 1966-1965, the staff of a front
moved an average of 80-120 in and an army staff 60-60 km. The duration of the stay
at one place was 3-5 days for a front and 1-3 days for an army. From the experience
of 25 offensive operations by tank armies, with an average duration of continuous
combat operations of 12-13 days, the command post changed its position 10-12 times,

that is, almost daily, the 06 2 or 3 times a day, and the second control echelon
every 2 or 3 days.

Consequently, while the frequent changing of positions was a rather rare phenomenon
for the front and combined-arms armies, it was characteristic for the tank armies.
With a momentum of advance of 60-80 km and more, the command post was forced to move
at least twice a day and this required spending up to 68-50 percent of the time of
the day. In this instance control had to be carried out on the move and the per-
formance of the communications equipment did not fully conform to this. The stabil-
ity of control dropped sharply.

The way out of the situation was found in creating two positions for communications
equipment in the tank armies from the summer of 1966 onwards. This was done in

order to exclude the time losses on setting up and taking down the control posts
from the total time of their move. Time was also reduced by ferrying the basic
officials on P0-2 to the new area to a previously set up control post. This ques-
tion was carried out in this manner during the night of 20-21 July 1966 in the 3d
Guards Tank Army in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation (July 1966), in the 20th Army in

123

FXMI(HﬂHCJAI.lEli(NVLY
FINI(NWHC1AL.USE|DNLY

the course of the thev-Sychev Operation (August 1962) and in the 8th Guards Army
in the Nikopol'-Krivoy Rog Operation (September 1963). However, the shortage of
aviation in the army and the insignificant carrying capacity of the existing air-
craft did not make it possible to utilise the advantages of this type of transport

fully and systematically.

The changing of position of control posts during the war years was carried out by
various methods. In l9hl-l942, this was most often done in a single echelon as a
consequence of the limited amount of co-unications and in the third period of the
war by two echelons by assigning a portion of the communications to the new posi-
tion. Frequently the control posts changed locations by leap-frogging. that is.
the command post to the place of the 06 across one position and the second control
echelon to the place of the command also across one position (typical for tank
armies). The change was also made by alternating the location of the army command
post to the place of one of the first echelon corps. This was more typical for the
combined-arms armies. Experience taught that the most effective from the viewpoint
of stable control were the methods of moving the control posts by leap-frogging and
in two echelons. During the war years the demand was worked out that the regions
be changed with permission from the superior staff and, as a rule, at night, during
the least intense periods of combat operations. The subordinates and staffs of
adjacent field forces (formations) were informed of the time and the route of the
move. From the middle of 1944. a specially promulgated directive of uqsnc estab-
lished the practice of working out a special plan (diagram) for the movement of the
basic control posts on the eve of the offensive. A group of officers headed by the
deputy chief of staff with the forward communications group were sent ahead of time
to the new locations.

The control posts of the armored formations were made in large jumps (15-30 km) and
the areas of the command posts were changed most often simultaneously on several
levels. The existing communications restricted the number of command post moves to
not more than two or three a day. A corps operations group was more mobile (Dis-
gram ll). Its move did not involve the time of changing the location of the col-sand
post. Thus, the operations group of the IX Tank Corps in the Vistula-Oder Operation
halted for 20-30 minutes every 1.5 hours of movement.

The speed of deploying and taking down the control posts depended largely upon the

teamwork of the staffs and the prompt preparation of the equipment and communica-
tions. The practice of setting up control posts according to a previously elabor-

ated scheme proved effective. In this instance, 15-30 minutes were spent in a bri-
gade and 40-60 minutes in a corps.

In organising control. consideration was also given to the specific combat opera-
tions of troops under different conditions, the particular features of the theater

of military operations and the weather.

with the going over to pursuit, the moving of all control posts in the direction of
the planned success became characteristic. The commander. as a rule. controlled
the troops while being part of the operations groups. In a number of operations.
temporary control posts were also created. In the Prague Offensive Operation an
auxiliary troop control post was organized in the 6th Guards Tank Army in the area
of Jihlava (Hay 1945) because of the rapid advance of the troops. It was entrusted
with collecting reports, receiving data on the situation and transmitting them to

the front's staff.

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I. res-sass.“- synapse "possum unwashed-.594“

 

  
   
  

K Ai’lc’l-yum nann- b
Dun a «ass;
L ' 1 1.. 4
2. “can Ill! nauseous (asraumpsum)
"N!“ atoms snaps-sand qysnu (0f)

1’”: [l’asla:;0_ '11 Ian ruse ‘70,.- glass-n mm (.mmm) “MP”

 

-———-v——'-—- - - -— . J
'-—_-.....,,r-~ ..'.‘:.~,;-.-:-.~+-.z-.~.mz~-.<:Kﬁ~ éﬂaéow-p.-
a. u mean. oar-n (as. class daun- apples-nos On I I' I ' l I I I l
.:'"":..-"'...... racist)... scream; k' z. .! . In o
h mas-“soars salsa -an “CI” Input "a spur war"! I". I m tum‘t’zg'i
«cue-u sp- x- cu- sous-muscﬁn asu- MWI L“ | “u I I 5.. ..-1
..».;'...,.. misrmjmml ~—-~~—«-— -—»-'
.k, "n. F". f. Winn. toast: 2;. 0‘s”;-

u use. any [Gauss-s run reap- passed“ l P .' “rm ”3"“ an"
spas s-Ouss

an. s-laa (Isa [was I I

 

Diagram ll. Organization of Control Points in the Formations of Armored
and Mechanized Troops

l--Plscenent of control points of tank brigade; 2-Composition of command
post of tank (mechanized) corps; 3--Composition of operations group (06)
of tank (mechanized) corps; s--Operations group (06); b--PNS (observation
and communications post); c--Pirst tank brigade; d--Control group;
e--Hedium-pouer radio transmitters; f--Service group; g--Command post;
h-Resr control post; i-Control group. consisting of: corps commander,
deputy commander, deputy for political affairs, chief of staff, operations
section. intelligence section; artillery commander with his staff; chiefs
of services; signals section; special signals section; manning and person-
nel section; political section (without party records); ii--Comnunicstions
center. consisting of: radio center uniting all the radios of command ,
post; report collection post (PSD); sir signal post (ASD); military tele-
graph and telephone exchanges; reserve of communications resources; air
liaison flight; j--Service group. consisting of: staff equipment for rec-
reation; equipment for preparation of food; subunits for security of
command post and organization of commendant service; combat engineer sub-
unit; reconnaissance reserve; k--Security subunit; £-Car; m--deio cars;
n--Hotorcyclc; o-Truck; p--Comnander, deputy for political affairs, chiefs
of operations and intelligence section; q-Artillery commander; r--Deputy
signals chief; s--Llaison officers.

in the crossing of rivers, control posts were most often brought somewhat closer to
tie troops and the command post was also echeloned. That is. along with the opera-
tions group. a temporary control post was created both for organizing the crossing
(in the foraations of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Orel and Berlin operations)

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as well as for controlling combat operations on the opposite bank (in a majority of
the rifle divisions in the battle for the Dnepr). Moreover, there was a developed

network of control posts of the crossing commendants as well as forward artillery
observation posts.

The echeloning and dispersion of control posts and the bringing of them as close as
possible to the troops were the main principles in organizing the control posts in
conducting combat operations in mountains. It was also necessary to more frequent-
ly assign forward, side and alternate observation posts. These were created in the
approach of the 6th Guards Tank Army to the Transylvanian Alps, when its formations
were up to 40-60 km apart along the front. The presence of a VPU (seven officers,

two medium- and high-powered radior)u in one of the sectors improved control, in

helping to maintain its centralization and at the same time to increase the survival
of the system.

in those instances when the control posts because of terrain conditions could not
directly follow the troops, a well-thought-out system for organizing operations
groups assumed particular significance. In the Khingan-Mukden Operation, the oper-
ations group assumed basic leadership of the troops, in following behind the first
echelon of the 6th Guards Tank Army. In the dropping of a landing force in Hukden,
in the VII Mechanized Corps an operations group was set up and this was assigned a
group of aircraft with radios to relay signals. For the purpose of increasing the
mobility of the control posts and communications centers virtually all the radios
were transferred to motor vehicles which possessed better cross-country capability.

The control posts were brought as close as possible to the troops in conducting
combat operations in major administrative centers. From the experience of the
battles in Berlin, the army command post was 4-10 km away. that of a corps up to

2 km and that of a division up to 1 km. The army operations group was 1-2 km from
the troops while the division observation post was often in their battle formations.
A more diverse network of temporary control posts was set up. Here it was con-
sidered that in conducting battles in a city, the use of communications equipment
became more complicated. The absence of landing strips virtually excluded the use
of liaison aircraft. The use of local communications lines was difficult as a re-
sult of their destruction.

The carrying out of control was complicated by the spring muddy season, for example.
in conducting combat operations in the Uman'-Botosani Operation (March-April 1946).
when motor transport was completely halted or advanced at an extremely slow speed.
There were instances when the staffs left almost 100 percent of the radios on the
roads. This was the case in the formations of the 5th Guards Tank Army as it ap-
proached the Bug River. As a result communications by air remained virtually the
sole means of control. Under these conditions a particular feature of the organiza-
tion of control was that the operations groups moved along with the tanks, having
two or three radios. A large portion of them was mounted on tank chassis. In
order to prevent the falling behind of staff vehicles with radios. they were as-
signed ahead of time to certain tanks and it was their task to ensure their unob-
structed movement over the roads which had been washed out by the spring waters.

The organization of ca-unications during the years of the war was determined by
the aim of the operation (engagement). by the scope of the offensive, by the

126

FINICHNHCJAI.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.Y

sequence of carrying out the tasks. by the effective fighting strength, by the oper-
ational configuration (battle formation) as well as by the state of the means of
communications.

0n the eve of the war, preference had been given to wire and mobile means of commu-
nications, particularly on the operational level. The transmitting of orders by
radio was permitted only if it was fully impossible to use other means. Particular
attention was paid to achieving covert troop control (SUV) and secret instructions

could be transmitted only orally, and in an extreme case, using equipment of guaran-
teed security and in cipher.

During the first offensive operations, with an average momentum of advance for the
formations and units of 3-5 km and a maximum of 8-20 km a day, considering the
availability of the limited amount of radios. wire communications was the basic
means of control. Transport was also widely used. According to information from

the staff of the western Front, the average daily exchange of correspondence han-
dled by the liaison officers in September 1961 increased by more than double in

comparison with July.

The increase in the momentum of advance in 1943 (in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation
up to 10-30 km per day, in the Kiev Operation up to 15-60 and in the Krivoy Rog
Operation up to 35-60) required a revision of the existing principles. At the same
time. the insufficient number of radios and the limited experience in organizing
radio communications made it possible to give preference to the radio only as of
the middle of 1964 and then only in the armored formations. This can be seen from
the data of reports filed by the signals directorate of the First Belorussian Front.
In the Belorussian Operation 1-2 percent of the information was handled over the
radio channels of the combined-arms armies. up to 1 percent in the Vistula-Oder,
and 0.5-1 percent in the Berlin Operation, while from 2-3 to 10-15 percent was
handled over the radio channels of the tank armies and up to 35-60 percent in the
tank (mechanized) corps.“s

For the purpose of more widely using radio commu'icatioas, HqSHC under certain con-
ditions permitted radio traffic "in the clear," and for this the army staffs worked
out a unified coded map and code table. At the same time, such an approach to
transmitting information somewhat reduced the degree of SUV, as the enemy rather
quickly figured out the simple system of semi-secret calls as the formations of the
Nazi Army had special manuals which made it possible to decode the text rather
quickly.

The measures carried out made it possible in 1943-1966 to change over to a compre-
hensive use of all types of communications.

Radio communications quickly made it possible to establish contact with the control
posts which were moving or a significant distance apart, thereby passing data over
impassable obstacles as well as across enemy-occupied territory.

The largest number of radios was at the command posts and this made it possible to
organize communications not only in the radio networks but also for the radio links,
and from 1943, to have duplicate (alternate and emergency) channels which provided
communications over a distance from 30 to 600 km. The operations groups had basi-
calky medium-power radios. These ensured an exchange of information over 15-20 km,

127

FOR|0FHKJA1.USE(N¥LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

providing radio communications over 2-5 radio networks and 1-3 radio links, that is,
in an army with the first echelon formations. The presence of one or two high—
powcred radios in the second control echelon ensured communications with the super-
ior level and the command post while two or three medium-power radios created an
opportunity to contact the rear units (subunits) over two or three nets.

Hire communications were provided in the dispositions of an army in preparing oper-
ations, in the course of an offensive with a momentum of less than 3 km per hour
and inside the control posts.

Transport was employed in all stages of an operation, and from 1963, not only along
a circular route but also along axes. This sped up the delivery of documents to
the addressees and increased the reliability of communications. Some 15-20 minutes
were spent on a trip of a liaison aircraft. Using motor vehicles and motorcycles
information could be delivered in 20-60 minutes. Moreover. transport was virtually
the sole means of control for a number of chiefs of the special troops.

The experience of offensive operations disclosed the important role of the effec-
tive handling of information.

Statistics show that the army staffs each day handled from 80 to 150 different docu-
ments. Average daily exchange on the army-front and army--subordinate formations
level was: over wires, 110-115 telegrams of 70-80 groups each and by radio, 160-
170 radio messages with a volume of 60-65 groups. The staffs of the combined-arms
armies. moreover. in collecting information about the enemy, were in a very diffi-
cult situation as they possessed only close reconnaissance equipment. The tank
army staffs were under somewhat better conditions as they had an opportunity to ob-
tain data from the more mobile means of ground and sometimes air reconnaissance.
The staff of a front received the fullest information on the enemy which was in the
operational depth. The men and equipment of ground, air, agent and radar recon-
naissance were available to it.

Thus. the significant flow of information. on the one hand, and its shortage, on
the other (particularly from the viewpoint of the receipt of information on the
enemy. and chiefly on the army level) demanded a creative approach to the organis-
ing of communications on the part of the commanders and the staffs.

An analysis of the time indicators for the handling of basic data shows that an
average of up to 60 percent of the time was spent on receiving and transmission,
up to 20 percent on encoding and decoding and up to 40 percent on delivering the
documents. This means that the improvement in the organization of the information
process and control and the use of promising means of communication could lead to
very tangible results.

in actuality, as was reported on 1 August 1941 by the signals chief of the Western
Front, "the communications centers are loaded down with numerous coded messages...
in one day, 31 July. 50,000 words were transmitted by telegraph with a normal load
of 20.000-25,000...there are continuous extended calls over the wires."

The signals chief of the Northwestern Front in a report of 26 July emphasized that
"radio messages are sent out with 100 and more groups...the service of liaison

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

officers in the field works sporadially...."'°6 The commander of the 19th Rifle
Division in December 1961 gave the chief of staff the task of "checking why the
operation Order No 11 of 10 December was received by the units only at 1430 hours
on 11 December. that is, only an hour before the attack."“7

in the course of an offensive in l943—l9b5, the front commanders talked directly
with the army commanders using high frequents communications equipment. This he-
came an important form of exchanging information. The advantage of this form of
communications was that in a majority of instances from 10 to 30 minutes were
spent. 0f the 120 calls made by the signals directorate of the Stalingrad Front
in November-December 1942, 70 percent was not more than 20 minutes, 20 percent was
not more than 30 minutes. and 10 percent was around 45 minutes.“8

Starting with the second period of the war. the organizational level of information
processing increased. The orders of commanders prohibited the transmitting of in-
formation by radio of more than 50 groups. Information of a report nature began to
be transmitted basically by courier service. Procedure charts (code names) were
introduced for control. For regulating the work of communications centers and the
duty shifts, the signals directorates (sections) worked out tables for the standard
time to be spent on receiving and transmitting documents (information) over communi-
cations equipment. In 1945, to a greater degree than before, the compiling of

graphic documents such as order maps. diagrams. graphs and tables began to be prac-
ticed.

Functional duties were more clearly allocated. 0n the front and army staffs. groups
of officers were created in terms of their specific purpose, including: the collec-
tion and processing of information, with representatives from the operations and in-
telligence sections and staffs of the branches of troops. As a result the work be-
gan to have a more skilled and organized nature. Duplication was excluded. The
effective handling of the data was increased.

For the purposes of organizing the more effective handling of information. as pary
of an operations directorate (section) in 1943-1965, groups of representative offi-
cers were set up. Their functions included the constant study of the situation in
the area of one or another field force (formation), the supervising of the prompt
receipt of operation orders and their execution and the reporting of their consider-
ations on the employment of the troops in the given sector as well as their needs.
Such an allocating of workers from the leading staff section made it possible to ac-
celerate an analysis of data for decision taking as well as the preparation and
sending out of preliminary and operation instructions.

With the introduction in the spring of 1953 of a TOE position of duty officer at
the communications center, control over the handling of information was improved.

The responsibility of officials for the promptness of reports was increased as in

a number of operations this has been one of the reasons for a delay in information.
For example, in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation. due to the lack of discipline on the
part of individual staff officers from the corps of the 1st Tank Army, in a number
of instances situational information had been received for transmission to the army
staff some 12-13 hours after the events occurred. The inept use of the diverse
communications equipment also contributed to this. From the experience of the same
operation. the lack of wire communications in individual stages of the offensive
was responsible for the fact that up to 42 percent of the documents received at the

129

FTMICHHWCIAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEioNLY

communications center had been transmitted 3-6 hours later than the established

deadline. Up to 20 percent of the documents arrived 1-2 hours late as a result of
static in the airwaves.“9

The changes which occurred in the organization of communications on an offensive
also contributed to the solving of information problems. These became possible due

to the improved technical performance of the communications equipment. to the
greater availability for the control bodies and to the acquired experience.

There was an increase in the number of radio networks: in an army, from b-S during

the first period up to 12-16 in the third. Radio links began to be more widely used
and in 1965 from 3 to 6 of them were established from an army command post. A sys-

the 35 in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations. In the tank armies, from the
middle of 1944, the idea arose of transmitting information down and up two levels.
This was realized by the creation of commander radio centers.

ln the different stages of an operation. preference began to be given to the types
of communications which were marked by greater reliability: to wire and transport
in the jump-off position, to radios with going over to pursuit and in crossing
rivers. to radios and wire in conducting combat operations on the opposite bank,
and to transport in the battle for a city. Of important significance was the es-
signing of a portion of the communications as a reserve as this guaranteed the

ln organizing communications in 1946-1945, in particular in the course of the offen-
sive in Belorussia. one can clearly see the desire to mass the couumications re—

tions.5° In the Berlin Operation, at the command post of the First Belorussian
Front. a special radio exchange was set up making it possible to simultaneously
have calls with three users and receive any transmitter of the front's radio center
by a main distribution frame. In the same operation a system of a ring line around
Berlin was created and this made it possible to quickly organize wire communica-
tions with the moving staffs.

The designated measures made it possible in the offensive operations of 1964-1945,
in comparison with 1963, to somewhat increase the continuity and reliability of
communications. This can be seen from the following data: the stability of commun-
ications from the experience of 15 front offensive operations reached 82-99 percent
by wife (that is. communications interruptions did not exceed 11-18 percent of the
total time), and 75-100 percent by radio; according to the experience of 20 offen-
sive operations by tank armies the rate was 81-82 percent by radio in l9h3 and 94-
97 percent in 1965. Such indicators were achieved by the effective use of all

types of communications, by the high level of organizational activities carried out
by the control bodies and by the creative approach to the organization of

130

FOR OFIWCJAL USEiﬂNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mmunimtions under the various situational conditions considering the nature of
the tasks being carried out by the troops and the theater of war.

A number of particular features can be traced in the organizing of radio co-unica-
tions on the tactical control level.

In a rifle corps, comunicationa with an army was maintained in the army net as well
as by links (with the cat-sander and sometimes with the staff). A co-anders' net-
work also functioned. In 1966-1945, a radio net was also organized for the artil-
lery comander and radio links with the tank formation (unit) and the divisions
carrying out the main tasks. Using a receiver data were collected from an aircraft.
For ensuring more dependable radio comunications with aviation, starting from 1965.
at the comand post. in addition to the 1183 [a type of radio] which operated on the
wavelength of the aviation in the air, an additional receiver was provided tuned to
the wavelength of the airfield net. In conducting combat operations during the
third period of the war. conunications with the staffs of adjacent formations were
now maintained over several channels.

In a rifle division. 3 command radio net and a cooperation radio net were usually
organized. In organizing control with the observation post, in addition to the
comander's personal radio, a receiver was provided tuned to the wavelength of the
division's radio net. In these instances the division's commander had an opportun-
ity to talk with the regiment co-anders, in switching for this time the receiver
to the net of the personal radios of the corps co-snder (army couander). For com-
munications with the cot-sander of a tank brigade and for receiving signals from the
regiments, in the division's staff a radio was assigned operating on the wavelength
of the tank net. Often the radio of a tank brigade connected to the division's net
was used as a second conunications channel. In the Belorussian and Vistula-Oder
operations there was also the practice of assigning a liaison officer on a radio
tank to the division's colander. Comunications with ground reconnaissance bodies
sent out by the division's staff were provided usually by radio links. Connoiss-
tions were also organized with a division of an adjacent army (on the boundary of
armies). In the Iasi-Kishinev Operation in the formations of the 27th Army and in
the Berlin Operation in the 8th Guards Army, a separate radio link was provided
even with the rifle (tank) battalions carrying out the most important tasks, in-
cluding with the 'orward and assault detachments.“

It has already been pointed out that during the years of the war there was a sharp
rise in the possibility of establishing radio contact in the tank (mechanized)
corps and brigades. This made it possible to make substantial changes in the or-
ganization of col-unications in the armored troops.

Thus, in the Belgorod-Khnr'kov Operation (August 1963) in the formations of the let
Tank Army, connunications on the corpsnarly level were provided over a radio link
and a radio net and cooperation connunications over a separate net. It handled all
intelligence inforsation. Communications between the corps staffs and the brigade

staffs were provided over a radio net. The cos-and and cooperation nets were or-
ganized in the brigades, battalions and companies. The aviation representatives in

the brigades had radio comunications over the air formation net.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FT1C1AL.USE|)NLY

In the formations of the 2d Tank Army in the Lublin-Brest Operation (August l96b),
an additional one or two nets of brigade commanders and a link with the army were
organized fron the command post of the corps commanders. At the command and obser-
vation posts of the brigade commanders there were radio nets with the battalion
commanders and a link with the corps commander. All the commanders of the for-e-
tions and the chiefs of staff in addition had radio communications over the net of
personal radios. Such a diverse net of radio communications ensured the dependable
and immediate handling of operational and tactical information on an offensive.

Communications on the tactical level using wire communications were established us—
ing a main artery and links.

Experience has shown that with a momentum of advance up to 15-20 km per day, there
was a real opportunity to have an extensive network of wire commnucations with two
poSts. the coanand post and the observation post. In the jump-off position the in-
dividual communications lines were organized in each formation (unit) of the first
and second echelons of a corps and division by building separate cable-pole or sur-
rogate lines according to the links. With the going over to the offensive, the

communications main artery and lines for the links were built along the routes that
the command posts were to move.

During the first period of the war the greatest difficulties arose in the establish-
ing contact with newly arrived units (formations) as the limited supply of communi-
cations equipment did not make it possible to solve this problem directly and effec-
tively. There were also difficulties in rebuilding the communications lines which
had been destroyed by the enemy by air strikes. artillery fire and the actions of
sabotage groups. In organizing communications in the operations of the second and
third periods of the war (the battle for the Dnepr, the Belorussian Operation and
others), there was the practice in the divisions and corps of setting up non-T/O
teams and groups with the job of rebuilding the wire communications lines. Combat
practice showed that the greater survival of wire communications lines depended
largely upon how skillfully they were laid (the digging of the holes, the correct
reinforcing. the building of bypass lines and so forth).

In an offensive a very crucial role was assigned to communications transport.

In addition to the regulation equipment. that is. motorcycles and armored vehicles.
mounted and foot messengers were used. particularly on the lower tactical levels
(battalions, companies). and in the winter skiiers. In the first and second peri-
ods of the war, for the dispatching and receiving of correspondence in the forma-
tions they usually organized two report collection posts (PSD) at the command post
and the second control echelon. A new feature in 195% was the fact that a PSD was
frequently organized also at the observation post of a division (corps) commander.
Communications by transport more often was carried-out along routes. As a result,
its stability as well as the efficient transmitting of information were increased.

Thus, in the course of the war one can note a number of trends in carrying out the
tasks of ensuring the continuous functioning of control systems.

In the location of control posts there was a desire to spread out the component
elements and bring them closer to the troops. In the moving of control bodies there

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
bat and so forth), in the organisation of co-nnications there was a push to fully
utilize all equipment, primarily the radio. with the essential considering of the
particular features of the combat tasks and nature of operations. In troop con-
trol there was a sharp rise in the role of the combined-ares staffs and the chiefs
of the branches of troops (special troops). Functions began to be more clearly de-
fined in the staffs and sections (directorates) in the collection, analysis and
generalization of the situational data. in assigning combat tasks and in organizing
support for cottat operations. All of this helped to achieve continuity and effi-
ciency of troop control on an offensive. In the offensive operations of the Great
Patriotic war the ro-sanders and their subordinate control bodies had to carry out
a whole series of very complex tasks. and primarily the breaking through of may
defenses as well as the achieving of continuous combat operations. The pro-pt
adopting of a plan and the adjusting of tasks for the troops and the cooperation
procedures under a changing situation were the basic content of the work carried
out by the couandera and staffs on an offensive.

Experience shows that no matter how complex the situation was, in a critical situa-
tion any co-ander must endeavor to see the battle (the most important stage of an
engagement) in its crucial sector (axis). This helps to respond quickly to all the
changes in the situation and has a moral and psychological impact on subordinates.
Greater reliability and efficiency in the handling of situational data were achieved
by better work in the staffs, by a clear defining of functional duties between the
officials of control bodies, by making up teaporary specific-purpose groups, by
carrying out organizational and technical neesures to rationally utilise the means

of comunicationa as well as by the more effective working out of data-eats both in
terms of their content and form.

organizational structure of the troops into conformity with their combat capabili-
ties in an offensive along a broad front, along axes and under conditions of sig-
nificant losses. The choice of the moat acceptable forms for organizing control

placement and moving of control posts, their echeloning along the front and in
depth, and the ensuring of defense, security and protection. The invulnerability
of the control posts was increased by their dispersed and concealed placement, by
engineer work on the positions. by organized moves and a well-thought-out conuni-
cations system.

Combat practice, thus, shows that an inprovement in troop control in the course of
an offensive can be achieved by the more careful assessment of the situation, by

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the organization of work on the staffs (directorstes, sections) end by seeking out
a sore effective organization of the control and connunicatione posts. The experi-
ence of the Great Patriotic Her tesches that the designated areas for improving
troop control on an offensive can provide suhstantisl aid to the col-anders in
achieving victory in an operation and cosbat, s victory which. as the USSR Minister
of Defense, Her 50 D. F. Ustinov. has pointed out, depends primarily "upon the
ability of the colnsnders to skillfully lend their aubordinstes..., upon the far-
sightedness of their operational end tactical forecasts, the realisticness of con-

cepts and plans. and upon the ability to flexibly and nobly maneuver the sen and
equipment."52

roorsorss

'TsAHO, folio 233. inv. 2356, file ‘27, sheet 20.

21. s. Konev. “Sorok Pystyy" [Forty-Five], Moscow, 1966. pp 18-19.
3TsAN0. folio 241. inv. 2593, £11. 687, sheet 124.

“TsAMO, folio 1693, inv. 1, file 8, sheet 27.

5TsAH0, folio 422. inv. 213277. file 15, sheets 80-81.

GTSAHO, folio 358. inv. 2593. £11. 752, sheet 77.

’rsano, folio 361, inv. 71761, file 1. sheets 4-5.

8Sec V. A. Mstsulcnko, "Operativnsya Hsskirovka Voysk" [Operational Cenouflsse of
Troops], Moscow, 1975, pp 134-135.

9See: 1. V. Tinokhovich. "Operativnoye Iskusstvo Sovetskikh VVS v Velikoy
Otechestvennoy Voyne" [Operational Art of the Soviet Air Force in the Crest
Patriotic Her], Moscow. 1976, pp 132-171.

IOTeAHO, folio 345. inv. 9430. file 15. sheet 5.

llvovauuo-Isronrcaasxrv ZHURNAL. No 9, 1977. pp 57, 59, 60.
‘21. S. Konev. “Sorok Pyntyy," pp 138-139.

l3‘l‘sAMO, folio 102b, inv. 15898, file 26, sheet 16.

'“TsAHO, folio 1693. inv. 1. file 7, sheet 50.

‘STsAHO, folio 308, inv. 4073, file 171, sheets 8-9.

16srALINsxtv soxot, 28 September 1943.

'7A. A. Novikov. "V Nebe Leningrads" [In the Skies of Leningrad], Moscow, 1970,
p 296.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The Instructions on Cooperation of Aviation with the Ground 'l‘roops issued by the

staff of the lat Air Amy indicate the tasks entrusted to the air guidance offi-
cer:

a) To follow the ground and air situation and promptly inform the air army's
staff about all changes in it;

b) To help the combined-arms comanders in correctly using aviation;

c) To inform the ground comanders of the air situation ahead of the front and

in the enemy's operational depth. obtaining this information free the air
staffs;

d) To obtain the tasks from the ground cal-lenders and trans-it thu to the air
commanders. and when necessary, upon the request of the combined-ares comand-

er, to call aviation to the battlefield directly from the airfields ("Shornik
Boyevykh Dokunentov" [Collection of Combat Docmnts], No 7, 1963, p 79).
”TsAHO, folio 299, m. 3070. £113 712, sheets 14-13.

2"See: "Istoriya Vtoroy Hirovoy Voyny 1939-1965" [history of World War II of
1939-1945], Vol lo, p 358.

“voyauuo—xsroucutsxtv ZlIJRNAL, No 3, 1976, p 15; No 11, 1978, p 29.

2"’See: N. F. Krasitskiy, "2-ya Tankovaya Arniya v Orlovskoy Nastupatel'noy
Operatsii" ['lhe 2d Tank Army in the Orel Offensive Operation], Hoscow, 1967, p 13.

ul‘sAHO, £6116 309. tnv. (.073, file 172, sheets 28-31.

1"'See: A. I. deziyevskiy, "‘l‘ankovyy Udar" [Tank Strike], Moscow, 1977, pp 262-243.
“See: vovmm-Isromcussm mum, No 11, 1978. p 30.

2"mm, £0116 32. inv. 1.756, £11. 36, sheet 12.

27TsAH0, £0116 203. inv. 2851, file 3, sheet 125.

2"In 1941. courses for junior lieutenants (platoon couranders) were organized in
the armies, and in 1962, front courses.

“See: "Istoriya Vtoroy Hirovoy Voyny 1939-1965," Vol 6, p 192.

30See: K. S. Moskalenko, "Na Yugo-Zapadno- Napravlenii" [In the Southwestern
Sector], Moscow, 1960, pp 206, 210.

“tamo. r0116 1693, inv. 1. file 8. sheet 61.

"rsmo, (one 223, inv. 5066!», £11: 9, sheet 273.
”TsAHO, folio 307. inv. ma. file 209, sheets 30-31.
3"3ee: VOYBNNO-IS‘I‘ORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 3, 1976. p 16.

351mm, £0116 47. in. 352785, £11. 76, sheet 26.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3“Louis de Jong. “Nemetskaya Pyataya Kolonna vo Vtoroy Hirovoy Voyne" [The Gem
Fifth Colusn in world Bar II], translated from the English, Hoscov, 1958, p 6211.

3"See: "Strategiya Fashistskoy Gernmii v Voyne Protiv 8883" [The Stretagy of llazi
Germany in the Har Against the USSR], Moscow, 1967, p 29: L. Rendulich,
"Upravleniye Voyskani" [Troop Control]. translated fro: the German, Koscov, 1976,
p 166.

381. N. Artes'yev. "V Bfire Partisany" [Partisans on the Airwaves], Moscow, 1971,
p 89.

398cc: Huller-Hillebrand, "Sukhoputnaya Arniya Germnii 1933-1965," translated fro-
thc German, Hoscov. 1958, Vol 2, pp 182, 195, 218, 216; "Voyna na Dva Fronts" [Bar
on Two Fronts], translated from the German, Hoacov, 1977; K. Teppelskirk, "Istoriya
Vtoroy Hirovoy Voyny" [The History of World War II], translated from the German,
Moscow, 1956, p 317.

“oTsAHO, 16110 208, inv. 2617, file 10. sheet 239.

I“See: K. V. Kraynyukov, "Oruzhiye Osobogo Roda" [A Special Type of Heapon], Moscow,
1977. p 201.

“ernno, 10116 229, inv. 596, £11; 10, sheet 27.

”See: H. Guderian,'"Tsnkianeredl" [Tanks Forward”, translated fro- the Gerua,
Moscow, 1957, p 173; L. Rendulich, "Upravleniye Voyskani." p 132.

““raAMo. folio 617, inv. 663739, file 1, sheet 7.
“srsAMo. 16116 71, inv. 12191. £11. 70, sheets 19-26. 226-261.

"sTsAHO, folio 208, inv. 2454, file 33, sheet 306; folio 71. inv. 296521, file 28,
sheet 63.

“7mm, folio 1986, inv. 12670. file 2. sheet 227.
“sumo. folio 220, inv. 651, file 166. sheets 13-17.
"9731010, folio 299, inv. 3074, file 147, sheets (1-7.
“Tame, 16116 71, inv. 12191, £11. 70. sheet 226.

“memo, 10110 233. inv. 2372, file 62, sheets 6-12; folio 236, inv. 2706, file 258,
sheets 190-201.

520. F. Ustinov, "Izbrannyye Rechi i Stat'i" [Selected Speeches and Articles],
Moscow, 1979, pp 395-396.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 4: BASIC CONCIBSIONS FROM THE EXPERIENCE OF T300? CONTROL IN THE RAE YEARS
AND THE MOST IMPORTANT HAYS FOE INCREASIM ITS EFFICIEICY “DEE
PRESENT-DAY CONDITIONS

The Great Patriotic War was marked by a large number of engagements and encounters.
The Soviet troops conducted 51 strategic operations, including 35 offensive ones,l
more than 100 offensive operations by fronts. several hundred by armies'iid'iﬁoiiinda
of engagements. In the counteroffensive at Moscow, the myth of the invincihility of
the fascist army was dispelled. The fiercest blow not only against the aggressor's
military might but also its entire sociopolitical system was dealt to the enemy at
Leningrad. in a battle the scale and intensity of which have no equal in military
history. The Soviet troops went over to a counteroffensive at Kursk, having crushed
the deeply encheloned enemy defenses, they crossed the Dnepr, having accomplished a
fundamental change in the war and thereby bringing closer the inevitable defeat of
Nazi Germany and the entire bloc of fascist states. The year 1966 was marked by a
broad offensive along the entire Soviet-German Front. The concluding operations of
1965 in Europe brought the world liberation from hated fascism.

The Soviet commend successfully carried out the task of achieving highly effectivp
troop control on the offensive. The mastery of the commanders and the staffs was
honed under the complex conditions of the situation and in unequal battles against
the enemy.

1. Characteristic Traits of Troop Control as Bvidenced in the Great Patriotic Her

An analysis of the activities carried out by the commanders and their subordinate
control bodies in preparing and conducting combat operations makes it possible to
point to the most characteristic traits of troop control in an offensive engagement
and operation as evidenced during the years of the last war.

The principle of centralized control was fundamental in the structuring of troop
control and the functioning of the bodies which directed military activities.

The designated principle derived from the nature of the socialist society which
develops on a planned basis as outlined and directed by the Communist Party.. This
was realized in the creation at the very outset of the war of the headquarters

Supreme High Command [Hq sac]. the unified center of strategic leadership, as well
as in a precise allocating of functions between the central executive bodies in

terms of the types of their work with the strictest centralization in each of the
areas of activity. Also vital was the Leninist thesis that "irresponsibility
covered up by references to collectivism...in military affairs leads inevitably to

137

F!"l()FF1C]AI.lﬂSEI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a catastrophe. to chaos. panic. multiple centers of power and defeat."2 V. l. Lenin
also emphasized the necessity of "unconditional and strictest unity of will...the
unswerving obedience of the masses to the unified will of the leaders...J

The experience of the war shows that democratic centralism on the operational

levels evidenced its rationality in the form of activity carried out by the military
councils of the fronts and armies. This made it possible to harmoniously combine
the demands of collectivism and one-man leadership. At one time the famous military
theoretician A. H. Zayonchkovskiy emphasized that a military leader has nothing to
fear from military meetings, but on the contrary, should resort to them as often as
possible but under the condition that he is an able master of them who knows why he
has assembled them and not the dilitant who is looking for some idea to latch on to.

The centralization of control was expressed in the fact that although a significant
number of officials, as a rule. participated in the preparation of initial data for
the adoption of a plan, the right to approve it belonged only to one person, the
commander of the front (army).

0n the tactical level, the solely responsible commander (from October 19‘2) was the
representative of the Communist Party and the Soviet government, their authorized
representative, combining in himself all the power and responsibility to them.

Experience teaches that the control bodies, as a component part of the troop control
system, in terms of their composition should conform to the nature and scope of the
combat tasks to be carried out. This situation required a reorganization which the
control bodies of various levels underwent during all the war years. Those that
were unnecessary were abolished. New ones were created, for example. the central-
ized leadership bodies for rear support. The composition of the control bodies was
broadened and on them rested the basic burden in planning and organizing the use of
the resources on the battlefields as well as all-round support for the combat opera-
tions of the troops. Practice suggested the necessity of a differentiated approach
to determining the TOE of the field headquarters of the fronts depending upon the
number of army formations comprising them both in terms of structure and in terms

of the number of personnel in the various sections. headquarters and staffs. They
also realized the demand of considering the specific tasks and the nature of combat

operations carried out by the tank armies and the tank (mechanized) corps in rela-
tion to the combined-arms armies and the rifle corps.

During the war years there was a special need to clearly delimit the functions of
the headquarters bodies which were on the various levels of the hierarchical ladder
of the system as a whole. This ensured a high degree of centralization and at the

same time the more rational use of the skills of the command personnel and their
competence.

At the same time there was a revision of the prewar views on the role of the various
levels in carrying out the tasks of preparing for an offensive. The commanders of
the fronts and armies and not only the commanders of the formations and units began
to act in the role of the immediate organizers in the area of breaking through enemy
defenses as well as during the individual stages of an offensive in the operational
depth. They were given the functions of coordinating the efforts of the various
branches of troops (special troops) with the aviation and navy.

138

INJR<0F1NCJA1.USE(NVLY
DORiOFFICIAl.lEﬂE(MVLY

In increasing the efficiency of control during the war years a positive role was
played by the specializing of the control bodies both on the operational and tacti-
cal level. that is. the establishing of the responsibility of a group of persons on
the staff (headquarters or section) for a strictly determined area of work on the
basis of the necessity of performing operational and support functions. This was
manifested in the assigning of autonomous rear control bodies from the personnel of
the combined-arms staff, in setting up groups of officers for the planning of forth-
coming operations and conducting informational work as well as in the organizing of
camouflage. troop regrouping and the coamandant {provost} service. All of this
helped to increase the efficiency and flexibility of troop control and the more
rational organization of the labor of the officials.

Even in the prewar years there was a tendency for a greater role to be played by

the combined-arms staff in troop control. The experience of the war showed that the
combined-arms staff is the basic body by which the commander adopts and carries out
the plan which is the basis of troop control in an operation and combat. The staffs
(sections) of the branches of troops, special troops, various services and the rear
worked under the leadership of the corresponding chiefs, in simultaneously carrying
out all the instructions of the combined-arms staff. Coordination in their work
was achieved by providing reciprocal information on the situation, by the joint
elaboration of the most important documents related to the organization and support
of combat operations. by the prampt providing of information on the situation and
the actions of one's troops and the enemy groupings, and by organizing control over
the carrying out of orders (instructions) as well as providing aid to the troops
under the plan worked out by the combined-arms staff.

As the troops gained combat experience. evermore attention was paid to the activi-
ties of the combined-arms staff. The best trained officers with a broad background
who had proven themselves under combat conditions were selected for staff work. The
special training of staff officers was also of important significance. Incompetence
by officers never causes as much harm as it does on staff service," emphasized the
great expert of military affairs. P. Engels.“ The war confirmed these words. The
precise service of the staffs largely determined the success of an offensive. It

is no accident that virtually all authors of memoirs had high regard for the role of
the staffs during the Great Patriotic Uar. The staff could be likened to the human
central nervous system as was the conclusion of the chief of staff of a number of
field forces during those years, Mar 80 S. S. Biryuzov.

During the war years it was judged advisable to have identically functioning control
bodies on the various coemand and staff levels. Such a situation contributed to the
systematizing of the information process, to the efficient and high quality carrying
out of organizational activities and to the achieving of clear cooperation between
the staffs (the other control bodies) of all levels and the adjacent field forces
(formations). It was easier to solve the problem of the interchangeability of the
control bodies and the officials inside them. The designated necessity was realized
in the creation of a functionally uniform structure of control bodies both on the
operational and tactical level (down to the regiment inclusively). The difference
was only in the amount of personnel of the corresponding staffs. headquarters, sec-
tions, departments and services and this was determined by the scale of their work.

139

FOR OFFICIAI.USEIJNLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The effective functioning of the troop control system was substantially influenced
also by the object of control, that is, by the subordinate troops. primarily from
the viewpoint of the conformity of the commander's Opportunities (in terms of the
scope of events) to control a definite number of troop organisms directly subordin-
ate to him (the inferior control bodies). The violating of this principle (and this
was characteristic for the first period of the war) led to the loss of control sta-
bility and to a sharp decline in the effective response to the situation. The opti-
mum were the conditions when the officials directsd four or five subordinate field
forces (formations, units. elements of the operational configuration or battle for-
mation). This guaranteed the collecting of data and an analysis of the situation
within the area of each of the field forces (formations) with a periodicity of one
or two hours. '

The experience of the war provided much that was new in the effective solving of
problems relating to the organisation, placement and movement of control posts.

It became a widespread practice to set up a system of control posts with the divid—
ing of the basic field headquarters bodies into the first and second echelons (the
command and rear control posts) as well as to establish auxiliary (temporary)
control posts and operational groups (observation posts).

The control posts were located primarily in the sector of the main thrust close to
those field forces (formations) which they had been organized to control. As a
rule. at them were located only those officials which directly led the troops or
supported their control. Careful csmouflaging. the organization of the areas where
the control posts were deployed in engineer terms, the protection of them against an
airborne enemy. reliable security and defense, dispersion and mobility were those
major demands without which a high degree of control stability was inconceivable.

Also valid was the rule which had appeared even in prewar years that the commander
should personally observe the course of combat in the sector of the main thrust or
where the most important tasks were being carried out at the given moment. This

made it possible to organize the combat operations of the troops, particularly the
breakthrough of enemy defenses, considering the terrain conditions and in the course
of an offensive to respond quickly to changes in the situation and to have the neces-
sary moral and psychological effect on one's subordinates. The practice of the con-
stant traveling by the commander to the troops in the course of an offensive had,
however, negative consequences as well. During the war years the chief of staff of

a number of fronts, Arm Gen H. I. Kazakov. on this question emphasized that very fre-
quently "being totally occupied with the affairs of one army. we (that is, the com-
mand of the front) overlooked the needs and possiblities of the front as a whole."5
The commander of many army and front field forces, Mar 50 K. K. Rokossovskiy. repeat-
edly pointed to the necessity of adhering to one rule: "...The place of the command-
er is where it is more convenient and best to,control the troops.... Any trips to
the troops in such a complex and rapidly changing situation for a certain time could
distract the commander from the overall picture of the engagement and as a result he
would be unable to correctly maneuver the forces and this could mean defeat.... The
presence of a commander in the troops is of enormous significance. But everything
depends upon the time and the situation."6

140

FOR OFTWCJAI.US£|MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Combat practice disclosed a need in organizing the control posts to consider the
specific features of conducting an offensive under the various conditions of the
theater of war, the season, the time of day and the weather. In particular there
was a need to bring the control posts closer to the troops in conducting combat in
a city, at night, under the conditions of the spring thaw or significant echeloning
along the front and in depth with combat operations in the mountains.

A series of requirements were also set for the moving of control posts. Here one
would put first of all the moving of the locations following a unified plan, conceal-
meat from the enemy, rapid and organized movement. at the least intense moment of '
combat, only with permission from the senior chief with the immediate informing of

adjacent units on the move made and only when the new region was prepared in communi-
cations terms. The failure to observe these sharply reduced troop control stability.

The experience of the war showed that control functions, that is, that work which is
performed by the commander and his personnel, hold the dktermining place in the
proaess of control.

 

The adoption of a plan is the chief element in control activity. A knowledge of the
basic principles of military art, that is, the corresponding of the aim set for the
offensch to the conditions of the situation, the concentrating of the basic efforts
on the selected sector of the main thrust, high combat activeness and the achieving
of surprise, as well as the skillful use of these principles to a significant degree
guaranteed the effectiveness of the plan adopted by the commander and helped ascer-
tain what was necessary and possible to undertake for successful troop actions.

This was the main conclusion from the practice of organizing an offensive during the
Great Patriotic Her. The plan was based on consideration of permanent factors al-
thOugh it could not exclude a degree of risk as experience taught.

The choice of the direction of the main thrust was one of the basic questions in the
plan for the offensive. The most typical was a desire to select it where the enemy
defenses were the most vulnerable, that is. less prepared in engineer terms and oc-
cupied by troops which possessed poorer moral and combat qualities. Consideration
was also given to the possibility of the troops coming out at the operational depth
at the flanks and in the rear of the basic enemy grouping. However, it was also
possible to attack against the strongest enemy grouping. This was done with a suf-
ficient amount of resources available and, as a rule, in a situation when it was in-
possible or ill-advised to regroup the troops.

The selected direction of the main thrust was always secured by the massing of re-
sources. as a result of which in the breakthrough sectors a substantial (by an aver-
age of 3-5-fold) superiority over the enemy was achieved. For precisely this reason
In 93~9S percent of the front operations of 1964-1945. up to 65-70 percent of the
Infantry. up to 90-95 percent of the tanks and artillery and up to 100 percent of
the aviation were massed in the sectors of the main thrusts which comprised an aver-
age of 5-10 percent of the zone of advance. Experience taught that the resources
could be massed by various methods: by concentrating them in a narrow zone (in the
breakthrough sector). by echeloning in depth, by making the main thrust with the ad-
jacent flanks of the formations and by the broad use of forward detachments, assault
detachments and groups.

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the war years the weapons for causing fire damage to the enemy (aviation and
artillery) were the most concentrated. This provides reason to feel that under
present-day conditions of armed combat, it is essential first of all to mass the
weapons capable of carrying out the task of destroying the strongest enemy groupings.

The question of increasing the efforts of the troops held an important place in the
work of the commanders in troop control during an offensive. This espressed the es-
sence of their influence on the development of the offensive et a high pace. here

three basic principles were crucial.

The first was to increase the efforts primarily in the sector of the main thrust or
where success was likely. It was essential to mass the men and equipment committed
to the engagement and to use then as a surprise for the enemy.

The second was in selecting the best time for committing fresh troops. The prema-
ture committing of second echelons and mobile groups led to the wasting of forces
while a delay in doing this was one of the reasons for a decline in the troop momen-
tum of advance. It was advisable to increase the efforts following the previously
planned variations. This made it easier to coordinate the efforts of the troops in
critical and dynamic situations. The essence of the third principle was a demand

to dependably support the committing of second echelons and mobile groups as well as
the maintaining of close cooperation with the first echelon troops in the sector

where the new troops were to be committed.

During the war years an offensive was planned, as a rule, on the front level under
the leadership of hq sac (often through its representatives) and the General Staff.
This made it possible to utilize the men and equipment in the most organized and
maximally effective way for achieving the objectives of the operations carried out
to a great depth and at a high pace in breaking through the deeply echeloned enemy
trench defenses. As was emphasized at one time by N. H. Tukhachevskiy, "conscious
leading of the troops, the assessment and prediction of the development of opera-
tions necessitate firm and precise troop leadership. There is no room for any plans
of independence for the junior chiefs. Without knowing the overall situation. the
junior chiefs could always take decisions which do not conform to it and this could
lead to a catastrophe...."7 For this reason. the commanders of field forces often
set the tasks to one or two levels below. with great detailing and concretization,
particularly in the first stage of an offensive involving the breakthrough of the
enemy defenses when there had to be a high degree of weapons concentration and co-
ordinated actions in a relatively narrow zone. In this manner the best opportuni-
ties were created for the long-range planning of forthcoming operations as well as
for maintaining the overall plan of the offensive a secret.

Experience has shown that one of the demands made on the plan, the basic planning
document. was its elaboration on a basis of the commander's decision and a thorough
consideration of the specific situation proceeding from careful calculations of the
combat capabilities and the balance of forces of the sides as well as a detailed

study of the terrain conditions. In this regard of interest is the opinion of
Mar SU c. K. Zhukov who felt that “most often failures befell those commanders who

were not personally present in the area where the forthcoming troop operations were
to happen but limited themselves to studying this from the nap...."a

162

FIMRCNWHCJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rate manner to analyze the situational data and to carry out various calculations

Including the expected result of employing the men and equipment, their required
amount for achieving the set result of the actions, for optimizing the plan and for

or indirectly influenced the plan. that is, the composition and capabilities of the
enemy, the nature of its actions. the consequences of the combat operations of one's
own troops, the hydrometeorological and other conditions. The desire if possible to

avoid unexpected and undesirable situations was the objective of the forecasting.
For this it was necessary to consider the essential variations for the development

of the situation. The planning of combat operations without consideration of the
changes in the situation most often led to undesirable consequences. It is valid to

their individual stages. in particular the committing of the mobile groups and
second echelons to the engagement, the use of aviation and the carrying out of ar-
tillery softening up. Only in this instance was it possible to objectively assess

to what degree one or another variation of the actions was adequate for the various
ambiguities of the situation.

Combat practice shows that in setting the tasks it was important to have terseness
and clarity in the orders and instructions given. At the same time the last war
repudiated mere routine, rote decisions and sketchiness in setting combat missions.

gates. Preliminary orientation of subordinates on the nature of the forthcoming
tasks also was effective. This made it possible to more rationally use the time

for organizing combat operations and simplified subsequent work. A definite psycho-
logical effect was achieved in troop control as subordinates felt the continuity of
leadershin by the superior level and endeaVored to work more effectively.

During the years of the last war there was an active search for a way to optimize
the information process. The necessity of this was determined by the fact that year
after year the scale of an offensive grew. It was characterised by a great spatial

Armed combat was carried out against an experienced and perfidious enemy. All of
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(excluding contradictoriness) operational-tactical information at the needed time
and on the necessary level. Both an insufficiency as well as redundancy of infor-
mation had a negative effect on the quality and directness of troop control. This
affirmed Lenin's thesis that only objective, true, complete and prompt information
can ensure the taking of a correct decision and determine the effective measures for
implementing it. A reduction in the amount of information circulating in the troop
control system was achieved by selecting the most essential and at the same time
sufficient for taking a sound decision as well as the detailing of it in terms of
the level of each command and staff group.

To choose one or another method of work means to settle the question in what se-
quence, by what methods and in what form the objects of control are to be effected,
that is. to control subordinates in the preparations for and in the course of the
offensive. The combining of control methods and their correct choice is a real art
for a commander and the key for ensuring success in carrying out the combat tasks.

Depending upon the time available during the war years they made it a practice to
combine the methods of successive and simultaneous (according to modern terminology,
parallel) work from the top to the bottom. The latter method was particularly
characteristic for the work of the control bodies of tank field forces and forms-
tions. This achieved a high level of labor intensity and an opportunity appeared
for solving the arising tasks in a short period of time. Combat practice showed
that a mastery of the parallel work method by the commanders and staffs made it
possible to increase the teamwork and work efficiency of the control bodies. How-
ever, experience also disclosed negative aspects of the designated method. The
desire to accelerate events often led to a situation where the subordinates, in es-
sence, were given working versions of the plans which subsequently were adjusted
'and sometimes fundamentally changed. As a result the work of subordinates was in
vain and there was no expected gain in time.

In terms of content the work methods expressed the aggregate of one-man leadership
and collective forms of activity. This ensured thoroughness of assessing the situ-
ation and the taking of an effective decision. Control assumed a clearly expressed
collective nature. Here there was a desire to clearly define the scope of work and
the duties for each of the officials (control bodies) within the limits of their
competence. There was the well-proven rule that the commander settled the main
questions while the staff, the deputy commanders and the chiefs of the branches of
troops detailed them.

The experience of offensive operations in the Great Patriotic Her showed the ever-
increasing significance of the tasks of the control bodies in maintaining a high
level of combat capability among the formations. The contents of these tasks in-
Volved a range of measures which differed in form but were united by a common objec-
tive and the most important of them were related to the moral-psychological and com-

bat training of the troops, to the prompt manning of the troOp formations and the
high-quality logistical support for combat operations.

Moral and psychological training was carried out considering the primary solution to
the tasks In the political area, communist ideological and party loyalty and the
close link of ideological indoctrination with the life and specific tasks of the
troops. This was carried out by the political bodies. the commanders. the commu-

nists and Komsomol members and was characterised by purposefulness, efficiency, con-
tinuity nnd truthfulness.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The organization and implementation of troop combat training and staff operational
training during the war years disclosed the particularly important significance of
teaching the troops and staffs what was essential under the combat conditions and
considering the new means and methods of combat which appeared on the battlefields.
Exercises on terrain analogous to where combat operations were to be carried out be-
came the basic forms of troop training. Starting with the autun of 1942, troop
exercises, battle drill and special tactical exercises, commend-staff exercises and
military gains, field trips and various conferences and courses began to hold an
important place in troop practices.

During the war years there was an abandoning of the system for receiving recruits
which existed in 19bl-l942 in the form of draft formations, most often consisting
of companies. A transition was made to a manning (manning up) principle for the
field forces with formations (units) which had been trained in the rear of the
nation or a front (army). The demand of maintaining military traditions necessi-
tated the disengaging of the formations (field forces) as they partially lost their
battleworthiness, moving them to the second echelon (reserve) for bringing into
order and up to strength. From 1963, it also became a rule to send the officers,
sergeants and soldiers back to their units (formations) after being treated in hos-
pitals. In the course of an offensive losses were replaced also by the redistribu-
tion of personnel, in particular by shifting soldiers and officers from the rear
units (subunits) to the line ones.

As one of the ways for solving the problem of conducting combat operations under the
conditions of significant losses, the experience of the war brought forward the or-
ganizing of operational troop groups and composite detachments.

Operational groups were set up for solving operational tasks by reducing several
formations to a unified command of a temporary staff.

The composite detachments were organized on the tactical levels on a basis of for-
nations (units) and subunits which had better battlsworthinesa, with the maintaining
of the organizational integrity and structure for those which had suffered the least
losses. They included units (subunits) for combat and logistical support, including
resources of a senior chief, in contributing to the autonomy of the formations in
carrying out their combat tasks. They were also set up by reducing the number of

previous units (subunits) with the shifting of some of them to a lower level or by

a fundamental reorganization in the organisational basis of the units (formations)
by reducing several subunits (units or formations) to one for carrying out the aris-
ing tasks.

The battlcworthiness of troop control bodies was usually restored by uniting several
staffs which had lost a significant portion of the personnel into one as well as by
turning over the control functions to an inferior command-staff level or by the
direct subordination of certain control bodies which had suffered high losses to
others which at least were equal in terms of their place in the structure of initial
subordination. The task of making up losses in the officials of field headquarters
was solved by manning them with officers from the superior control bodies.

Supervision was an important organizational function of all bodies exercising troop
leadership. "To check people and to check the actual carrying out of a task-this,

145

FOR‘OFTWCJAL,USE‘0NLJ
FOR 0F?WC1AI.[EH§(MULY

again this and only this...is the crux of all the work...," taught V. I. Lenia.9
Supervision brought the greatest benefit when it was characterized by purposeful-
ness. planning. by continuity, by publicity and was directed primarily at checking
those questions which played the crucial role in achieving the aim of an operation
(combat). Violation of the designated principles led to a decline in the results
of troop combat operations.

Supervision was carried out by the combinedoarls staff together with the other con-
trol bodies. The forms of check varied and the most effective form was the personal
involvement of the commanders in a check or the conducting of this work by a skilled
group of officials upon the orders of the commanders. In this instance an opportun-
ity was created to gain the most correct idea of how subordinates understood and
were carrying out the given order or instruction. This did not exclude a check on
various questions during talks over communications equipment as well as an analysis
of the submitted report documents.

A demand made on supervision was that it be combined with the giving of practical
aid and with the prompt generalizing of the experience and making it available to the
troops. The war also showed that supervision should not he turned into interference
with subordinates. impede their initiative and independence in carrying out the set
tasks or divert the leadership for an extended time from the troops. The effective-
ness of supervision. in addition. depended largely upon the skills of those offi-
cers who carried this out. Under these conditions supervision ensured a constant
knowledge of a true state of affairs in the subordinate units and subunits and in-
culcated in subordinates such qualities as efficiency. organisation and a sense of
responsibility for the assigned job.

2. Rays for Further Increasing Efficiency of Troop Control

At present troop control on the battlefield has assumed the significance of a factor
which is of crucial importance in achieving victory over the enemy. This is ex-
plained by the broad introduction of modern weapons and military equipment into the
troops. There has been an increase in the value of time as well as the commanders'
responsibility for the decision taken. As a result we have begun to reassess the
demands made upon troop control. primarily from the viewpoint of its continuity.
firmness, efficiency and flexibility.

The qdantitative and qualitative changes caused by the scientific and technical rev-
olution in the means and methods of conducting warfare have also posed the basic
task of improving the quality and efThotiveness of troop control. that is. the abil-
ity of the control systems to ensure that the troops will carry out their given com-
bat tasks at the designated time and with the least expenditure of resources. The

degree of control effectiveness ultimately is determined by the quality of carrying
out all the tasks and measures which comprise the contents of the process. The
higher the quality of each control job the more efficient troop control and the re-
sults of troop operations. Consequently. effectiveness operates as a qualitative
characteristic of the troop control process indicating the relationship of the
achieved result and the expenditure of resources and determining the degree of con-
formity of this result to the interests of achieving the designated aim. The art
of a commander is most fully reflected in the effectiveness of control.

146

'”‘FORi0FWKJAl.USE(MVLY
FIMICNWHCJAI.USE(NULY

The experience of the Great Patriotic War as well as the local wars and conducted
exercises makes it possible to determine certain ways for resolving the task of
achieving high effectiveness of troop control. The first is an improvement in the
structure of the bodies, the equipment and organisation of troop control. The
second is the optimizing of the work methods in carrying out the range of measures
related to control activities. The third is increasing the ideological-theoretical,
military-technical and operational-tactical training of the officer personnel and
improving the work style of the commanders and staffs.

The question of improving the structure of the control bodies has recently been at
the center of attention of military thought. including foreign. It is considered
advisable to seek out ways for a maximum sinplification of the control body struc-
ture and the achieving of high nobility for these bodies.

As a variation it has been proposed that similar types of activities be unified for
the two basic functions of operations and support. Each of the groups is formed
from the officials in the appropriate work area and is headed by a chief who is sub-
ordinate directly to the formstion's commander. In the foreign presslo an opinion
has been stated on this issue of creating single-tiered special problem collectives
which uould be directly subordinate to the chief of staff (Table 11). Such an or-
ganization based upon the principle of a functional division. in the opinion of
specialists. could help to isprove the quality of control activity.

Table 11

Allocation of Officers in Control Groups
(variation)

  

Officers from Staff Sections
and services

    
      

  

Planning Planning combat

operations

Operations department, chiefs of
artillery and air defense.
organisational-planning department

Collection, processing Operations and reconnaissance
and reporting of informe- departments, engineer and rear
tion services

Preparation of data for Operations and reconnaissance
decisions, transmission departments. communications, chief
of orders and instructions of artillery, rear

    
 
  

Intelligence-
information

    
     

Control (subgroups
of basic and alter-
native command

  
   
 

   
   
  
 

  

posts)
Duty operations Keeping of situational Operations department, communica-
service map. exercising of super- tions
vision
Auxiliary Organisation of comman- Operations department, communica-

dant service. carrying tions

out of other tasks

    

167

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At a number of experimental troop exercises conducted by foreign armies, the ques-
tion was also worked out of the functional synchronising of the specialized elements
of conmmnd for the branches of troops and rear services in a direction of a closer
combination of their structure with the structure of the combined-arms staff. Here
the aim was better coordination of efforts and greater efficiency in the work of.the
interdependent bodies which control the troops in combat.

There is also the practice, including in the 0.5. Army, of setting up operational-
tactical centers (control centers) with the dividing of them into a number of groups:
operations-intelligence, fire coordination, tactical air control. communications,
chemical. biological and radiological defense.

To make the control bodies high mobile is a demand which, in the opinion of foreign
researchers. can be carried out, on the one hand, by "purging” the staffs of a large
amount of equipment and motor vehicles used for administrative purposes, with the
simultaneous standardization of the equipping of the staffs, and on the other. by
minimizing the subunits which provide the service facilities for the staffs. In
solving this question a significant place should also be assigned to the ability of
the commanders and staffs to control from armored vehicles using brief halts and

on the move. to the simplifying of staff paperwork and to the use of high frequency

communications equipment.

One of the main ways for increasing the efficiency and reliability of troop control
on an offensive is to equip the control bodies with modern control equipment, in-
cluding automation and mechanization as well as communications. Under the condi-
tions of rapid scientific and technical progress, such an opinion is completely ob-
jective. The necessity of this is determined by many factors. One of them is the
overloading of the control bodies with operational-tactical information. According
to the data of foreign specialists, up to 60-70 percent of the time is spent on
processing and assessing the incoming situational data, and up to 25 percent on mak-
ing operational and tactical calculations.12 It has been pointed out that the exist-
ing equipment (the classification of it is shown in Table 12) makes it possible to
significantly accelerate these processes and improve their accuracy. A combination

of human logic with the operation of veriOus automated devices thus leads to a max-
imum effect.

Close attention should be paid to the question of organising the control posts and
the communications system. The experience of such exercises as "Dnepr," "Dvina,"
"Yug" and others shows the positive results from the echeloning of control posts.13
in this manner the problem is solved of dispersing the control posts and providing
an opportunity for the commander to observe the battlefield at the most critical
moments and in that sector where the success of the operation (engagement) is being
determined. Many staffs. proceeding from the experience of the war, have establish-
ed the practice of working out ahead of time the scheme for moving control posts on
two or three levels.

Hays are also being sought to achieve flexibility and reliability of control under

the conditions of high casualties by turning it over to the subordinate staffs, by
bringing the control bodies up to full strength or by creating new ones by reducing

several staffs to one. In the unified system of measures to improve troop control,
an important place should be given to developing the work methods of the commanders

1‘8

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uuuanusvo

naduauncouu
oadnoul owls»

Iona unwouom .m

:uuou on can
:oHu aunt a mo
.uouOHCHGQ clan
ozu «caucuuﬂol
you uaulnaauo
.ooou>ue an“
luouauoa ouuuooao
.uouoaao .ouuvuou
Ian Onluv anal
nuance «caucuugol
can unquuu: .c

oouaoooua
donuuco uo
cowuquuso Adam
hon uuoaaunvm .n

coausuqa
Aaoou aouuuouv
Hqﬁuoam .N

nocunu ;
muouulvaaasoo .H

Hm.
ucolaaacm noguo

Jun: gunman» can
uuwunoada use and
Iauuno you uaolnusoe
.noaoaaauuua .w

Azuu0u

on can oven .nxcuna
vouaudlhOuv saucy
uadﬂsuov unavaaum .n

«nauseoun
new uuwunuaan .o

agenda on.
Quechua .ozcnaudn .n

uuoﬂnuavo
amouoluozh .c

nucunoo .n

«hogan:
uoasu ouaouuuouo
vac vuuvcwum .~

ucolauavu
”naouooun vaaom .a

mag

ucoaaaavu xaamoaa
van coauwucoasuon

uuoanaaco

uqaaunuqn van ocoauao
nunaalou aaauouuu .o

ucoanusao

unannusro cocoonuacuooou ocnoa

unwoaoooun
uuoasuon .o

nauuaniou

«0 uamzu osouuu>
.oiauuoaoa vsa
usuauw .ooanou
.uoaauovuam .m

unauaaloa
oanouuu< .c

uaoﬂnuauo
vudu zuanm .n

nocuzuua
canouuooau

couﬂauauoam .N

Aouaosmaoo «sauna
Iaauu can maquI
«agony «you-Asa

lane cuoonzux .H

mm.
unoauuavu

acuusnaoo van
wauouuuoum and:

 

can unansuuuun .a

ucua
nausea acuuouu>az .5

name
nausea wouuuucu .0

ounces .n

uncanoHAko unenuaa mo
young one «ouocavuoou
madman you sue-com .e

aucoasuuuca canon
Iauuccooou woodman
launuuoan new «so
-aaogo .coauagoax .n

wucuasuumcw
coauu>hoano .N

Ghowﬂﬂn v0u§u3< .H

.N.

can: manuaoom
hem ucuanusvm

 

Ammoum :w«0u0u no auoo cu mauvuouuuv
Houucou queue: mo coauuuumanOIHo

ucoaauavm

Anyhow on and woupau
Hucuqo .oovoo vac

«noggin .uaoanuauo and”

unique» ugosaoHOu can

ﬁniquHOU .QGOuuio«=:l

uaou houosvouu caddy
couoowaucuuu snow and

uvooco new ace-mason .5

Annuaopzouwsu van

ucoanasuo neuxoaauuual
.nucaaa uozon oauuuoao
.ouoauunaau .auou sauna
nosuu can «cogaoaou wag
svaaocav uuoanusua ma“
nzuuuxb can oucusuuu .o

aoou>ov acuuqcuum .n

Auuauuuaa coauaua v:-
auounoouau: announce

.ouounoouaoz wcuuauucuv

unnanasuo causal .c
ucuamuauo on“: .n

acou—
Iauavo aaaou oavdﬁ .N

nuo>wouou can «cavam .H

.H.
uaoﬂnasvm

wcuuaauuow cowoaalaaauh
wuoa vca accudau«:aaaou

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

and the staffs and to achieving teamwork among the control bodies. This task pre-

determines the necessity of rationalizing the traditional forms of work and ewloy-
ing qualitatively new ones.

The parallel work method has become one of the canon methods which has recently he-
come widespread. It is applicable primarily with limited time available to prepare
for combat operations and this is characteristic for modern conditions. Its mastery
by the commanders and staffs can provide a significant effect. The particular con-
trol methods, that is, those inherent to the carrying out of each of the control
tasks. also need continuous upgrading.

The working out of the methods for the co-sander's adoption of the battle plan re-
quires particular attention. The practice of working out several variations of the
plan has proven effective, and here the cot-sander mentally compares them, he dis-
cards the clearly disadvantageous ones, he compares the remaining ones with combat
experience, he verifies them by calculation, he selects the most effective variation
and draws up the plan. with the designated procedure the commander's thoughts are
aimed at the shortest way of choosing the best variation of the plan, as a conse-
quence of which he spends less time on making it. At the same time such an approach
requires constant knowledge of the situation and the ability to anticipate possible
changes in it. The adopting of a plan, as is known, is the result of the cos-land-
er's creativity. It combines his intuition on the basis of previous experience, con-
clusions from the observed phenomena, including as a result of work on the terrain,

and professional knowledge. At the same time scientific soundness relying on mathe-
mticsl calculations is assuming an ever-greater place."

During the years of the Great Patriotic War, a tendency could be noticed to work
through the course of the future operation (engagement) with the leadership of the
formations (field forces) in command-staff exercises on a map or on the terrain (on
mock-ups). These were the first attempts to clarify the model of forthcosing contat
operations. The practice of modeling using mathematical methods should rightly be
employed at present and in the future, as it makes it possible to anticipate pos-
sible plans considering enemy operations and to make the best use of the available
resources on the battlefield.

The diversity of information sources, its enormous value and the increased demands
on eff iciency. completeness and reliability of the information have necessitated a
search for the rational methods to organize the collection and processing of situa-
tional data. For this reason, in the conducted exercises they have begun to central-
ize the designated processes. A periodicity is established for the receipt of data
considering their importance. This problem is often solved by the staffs of forms-
tions and units by working out a schedule for the transmission of data to the other
services. A real opportunity has appeared to reduce the information circulating in
the control systems by 15-30 percent by selecting that portion which is extremely
necessary and at the same time sufficient for adopting the plan. The flow of infor-
mation is reduced by at least 25-30 percent with the extensive use of formalized
documents. The designated and a number of other measures make it possible, in
addition, to avoid data duplication, to reduce the time on various types of coordi-
nation and to exclude the practice of requesting information, in other words, the
"forcing out" of information.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is no doubt that under present-day conditions troop control has assumed a
clearly expressed collective nature. A large collective of officers is involved

in performing a majority of the control tasks. Success in the work depends largely
upon how smoothly this collective works and how efficiently it responds to the re-
quests and demands of the commander. Consequently. ever-greater attention should
be given to the psychological aspects of control work as during it definite rela-
tionships arise between the subjects and objects of control and these ties are com-
plex relationships of individual persons and entire collectives.

Proceeding from this, recently recognition has been given to the well tested prac-
tice from the years of the Great Patriotic "at of dividing the labor and specializ-
ing the officers from the various control bodies, in combining this with their in-
terchangeability as well as the organizing of shift work. A shortening of time re-
quired to carry out the range of measures to organise combat is achieved also by
regulating this time using network schedules. The experience of exercises shows
that in this instance an opportunity appears to disclose and mobilize a concealed
reserve of time and to improve the quality of the work with a clear allocation of
responsibility between the commanders of different levels and their staffs. The
system of network planning and control forces the commander to focus his attention
and efforts on those areas which at the given moment put in jeopardy the final time
for carrying out one or another task.

There must be a careful study of the question of determining the quantity, volume,
content and procedure for working out documents and the replacement of some of them
by less labor-intensive and easier to use. For example. in the 0.8. Army this prob-
lem has been settled by working out first just one document. the battle order, and
indicating only the new (unknown) information. Subsequently (with time available)

the subogdinates are sent other documents of a concretizing and complementary
nature.

With the greater complexity of control, one of the essential demands placed upon the
officers is a rise in their staff skills which reflect the specific nature of the
professional training for command personnel in the area of troop control and include
profound and complete military-theoretical knowledge and practical skills. organiza-
tion. the ability to rapidly analyze and generalize the situational data, to clearly
report conclusions from an assessment of it, to prepare various operational and tac-
tical calculations. to skillfully work out combat documents, to independently oper-

ate the control equipment and to give the troops the combat tasks set by the com-
mander without delay.

Very important indicators of high staff skills include the ability of the officers
to plot the situation on a working map quickly and correctly. to dictate the con-
tents of any combat document directly in using the map, and to correctly orient him-
self in the terrain in a difficult operational-tactical situation. But the main
thing in staff skills is all the creative and organizational activities of an offi-
cer in the process of troop control. It is rightly felt that the basic factors
which determine this are the higher education and overall culture of officer person-

nel, the constant study of the new military equipment, the control equipment and
military art and the continuous improving of work methods.

151

FIHRCHﬂﬂC1Al,USElDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A correct work style by the commanders and staffs significantly helps to improve the
efficiency of troop control. The timeliness of working out the question of improving
the style of troop leadership at present is obvious. It is determined by the in-

creased scale and complexity of the tasks, by the revolution in military affairs and

by the necessity of raising the combat readiness of all the branches of troops and
Armed Services.

An imperative task is a profound generalization. study, dissemination and introduc-
tion into the troops of advanced troop control experience of the best officers, gen-
erals and staffs in the course of tactical exercises and maneuvers as well as the
mastery of the experience of famous military leaders of the past and the outstand-

ing Soviet military leaders from the period of the Great Patriotic Hat considering
present-day requirements.

Bach exercise should provide the staffs with material for elaborating recommenda-
tions and conclusions on the basis of which it would be possible subsequently to im-
prove staff work and better troop control. Here of important significance is the
collection and accumulation of statistical material making it possible to provide
an objective assessment of the effectiveness of the work (actions) of certain con-
trol systems and devices. as well as of the staff and individual officials. Such
material can be the numerical data on the data handling time, the duration for car-
rying out various measures. the time for working out documents and so forth.

Special scientific research groups should be set up for collecting and processing
these data.

Proceeding from the experience acquired by the troops, it is advisable to isolate

a number of interrelated elements in the organization of staff preparations in the
formations and units.

in the first place. the clear definition and establishing of the goal of the prep-
arations and training, the optimum volume and content of the training material and
the most acceptable forms and methods of instruction.

Secondly, the creation of the necessary material facilities and situation corres-
ponding to the actual working conditions of the staff.

Thirdly. a skillful combination of individual and integrated training in the system
of commander exercises in conducting various drills. special courses and exercisesa

As practice has shown. the best result comes from the independent work by an officer
under the condition of a specific task and obligatory supervision of its execution,
separate and joint staff training, operational-tactical quizzes and staff and
command-staff exercises in the field. Recently technical training has begun to hold

an ever-greater place.

The socialist competition also plays an important role in staff training. It is or-
ganized by the chief of staff in defining the areas of the individual socialist ob-
ligations for the officers in such a Ianner that the contents of each obligation as
fully as possible corresponds to the tasks of the officer's further growth and a
rise in the training level of the entire staff. The effectiveness of such a coupe-
tition is achieved primarily by publicity and a systematic check on the course of
carrying out the adopted obligations.

152

FOR‘OFHK]AI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁnch historical agc creates its can type of military leader (commander) with his in-
herent definite qualities. These qualities are decisively shaped by the specific
sociopolitical conditions, the nature of a war and the methods of waging it. The
experience of the last var shows that a military leader from the army of a socialist
state is a loyal son of his people and the proponent of CPSU ideology and policy in
the troops. Among his personal qualities we must put military erudition, a de-
veloped intellect, a flexibility of thought, the capacity for prediction, organiza-
tional abilities. firmness of will. courage, decisiveness, reasonable risk and so
forth. A Soviet nilitary leader is also marked by such moral qualities as ideologi-
cal conviction, political maturity, justnass, honesty and humility.

In a concentrated form the demands placed on the cadres in the present stage of de-
velopment of our society have been given in the party documents: "A modern leader
should organically combine party loyalty with profound competence. discipline with
initiative and a creative approach to the job. At the same time in any area a

leader should also consider the sociopolitical and indoctrinational aspects, be re-

sponsive to people. to their needs and requests, and serve as an example in work and
everyday life." 5

FOOTNOTES
ISee: "Partiys i Arniya" [The Party and the Army], Moscow, 1977, p 186.
2V. I. Lenin, PSS [Complete Collected works], Vol 39, p 46.
3Ihid., Vol 36. p 200.
”K. Marx and F. Engels. ”Soch." [works], 2d Edition, Vol 11, p 456.

in. I. Kazakov, "Ned Kartoy Bylykh Sraaheniy” [Over the Map of Past Engagements],
Moscow, 1971, p 87.

6x. K. Rokossovnkiy, "Soldatskiy 0013" [A Soldier's Duty], p 223.

7M. N. Tukhachevskiy, "Isbrannyye Proisvedeniya" [Selected Horks], ﬂoscow, 1966,
Vol 1, p 196.

8G. K. Zhukov, "Vosponinaniya i Razmyshleniya" [Remembrances and Reflections],
Moscow, 1976. Vol 1, pp 390-391.

9v. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 45, p 16.
”See: msu. umsuam, No a, 1971, p 8.
”Sec: KANPl-‘TRUPPI-ZN, No 2, 1975.

”See: Mtumuesau, No 8, 1975.

0
”See: VAYBNNO-ISTORICHESKIY zmnML, No 12, 1978, p 65; musrzanon 0302113111111,
No 8, 1976, p 55, and others.

153

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”0R OFFICIAL "SI“. ONLY

1"For the methods of carrying out various aorta of calculations. see the book:
A. Ya. Vayner. "Takticheskiye Raochety" [Tactical Calculations], Moscow, 1977.

15See umswzex, 5 November 1976.

16"Matceualy XXV S"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress], Noacov. 1976,
p 70.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUSION

During the period of the establishment of the Soviet state, V. I. Lenin elaborated
the underlying principles for the leadership of social production and armed combat.
He devoted particular attention to the necessity of mastering scientific control
principles. Proceeding from this. the CPS“ and the Soviet government have always
devoted great attention to continuously improving control in all areas of social
life, including leadership over the Armed Forces. This problem was posed very
sharply by the 26th CPSU Congress. The party documents outline the basic ways for
solving it.

Under the conditions of the existing threat of a new war, the commanders of the
Soviet Army are confronted with difficult tasks. The search for a rational approach
to troop control in an operation and combat and for improving its efficiency is a
primary task. as the solution to it helps to maximize the existing combat capabili-
ties of the troops and their moral-combat qualities.

Control in modern combat and an operation is one of the most difficult areas in the
organized activity of people. The problem is that the content of control activity
presupposes the necessity of carrying out an entire range of measures at a stipu-
lated time and the scope of these measures has been continuously rising. The
nature of armed combat has also become more complex. Consequently, the need has
arisen for improving both the quality as well as the efficiency of leadership in
their unity, for improving the style of activities carried out by the officials and
thereby carrying out the tasks outlined by the USSR Minister of Defense in the area
of eliminating the shortcomings which exist in this area and bringing control into
full conformity with modern demands.

Troop control is the art of employing men and equipment on the battlefield. In be-
ing concerned with the problems of the effect on subordinate troops and the inter-
action of the latter with the control bodies, troop control is inseparable from
military art. An improvement in it is possible only under the condition of a com-
prehensive approach to solving the problems considering the political and technical,
economic and organizational. social and psychological aspects.

In achieving the designated goals. substantial help can be gained from the experi-
ence of the past, primarily the experience of the Great Patriotic War where mass
armies equipped with advanced equipment were employed on the battlefields. This
experience is valuable primarily in the fact that it makes it possible to conceive
of the entire complexity and scope of activity. the role and place of the commander

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

in combat, and as well his subordinate control bodies. It provides an opportunity
to disclose patterns and trends which appeared in combat activities, being simultan-
eously a basis for reflection. critical analysis and for thinking out possible ways
for solving analogous problem in the future.

The experience teaches one main thing. the necessity of a cousnder’s creativity.
It cautions against routine, in convincing one that only 3 profound understanding
of the situation, knowledge and professional skill, and the ability to apply the
principles of military art under concrete conditions lead to victory. In the. course
of the war the most effective nethoda and procedures were found for solving many
complex questions. Among them we must put the breaking through of deeply echelonsd
enemy defenses, the development of the success in the operational depth, the defeat
of the enemy under the conditions of a relative equality of forces and a whole
series of others. A knowledge of the ways to achieve success in an operation and
combat to a significant degree broadens the overall and professional viewpoint of
those who must carry out the task of securely defending the socialist fatherland as
defined by the USSR Constitution. "Re petceive the pest," emphasised 1.. I. Brezh-
nev. "as .1 very rich reservoir of experience, as material for reflection and for a
critical analysis of our own decisions and actions. We draw from the past inspira-
tion for our present und future concerns."l

FOOTNOTE

Ipmwm, 22 Harch 1977.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

7.

8.

lo.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Engels. F.. "Generals-~Volunteers," Marx, K., Engels, F., "Soch." [Hbrks],
2d Edition, Vol 15.

Lenin. V. 1., "The Socialist Fatherland in Danger," FSS [Co-plate Collected
works], Vol 35.

Brezhnev, L. L, ”Leninskim Kurson" [By the Leninist Course], Speeches and
Articles, Vols 1, 2, Moscow, 1970.

Uetinov, D. F., "Izbrannyye Rechi i Stet'i" [Selected Speeches and Articles],
Moscow, 1979.

Igz¥evoy Ustsv Pekhoty (SUP-42)" [Infantry Field Manual (IFM-42)l, Moscow,

"Vrenennyy Polevoy Uetav RKIA (PU-36)" [Provisional Field Manual of the
worker-Peasant Red Army (FM-36)], Moscow, 1937.

"Polevoy Ustsv Krasnoy Arnii. Proyeht" [Red Arny Field Manual. Draft],
Moscow, 1939-1941.

"Polevoy Ustav Krasnoy Arnii (PU-43)" [Red Army Field Manual (FM-43)], Moscow,
1943.

"Vremennoye Naetavleniye po Polevoy Sluzhbe Shtebov" [Provisional Regulation
on Staff Field Service], Moscow. 1941.

"Nastavleniye no Polevoy Slushbe Shtabov" [Regulation on Staff Field Service],
Moscow, 1942.

"Naetavleniye po Sovnestnyn Deyetviyaa Sukhoputnykh Voysk s VMF i Rechnyni
Flotilliyoai" [Regulation on Joint Operations of Ground Forces with Navy and
River Flotillns]. Moscow, 1943.

"Sluzhba Obshrhcvoyskovykh Shtabov v Boyu" [Service of Conbined-Arne Staffs in
Combat], Mosuww, 1940.

157

FOR OFIICJAL.USE(MNLY
13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

31.

INHROFFKTALIEEZONLY

"Shornik Boyevykh Dokunentov Velikoy Otecheotvennoy Voyny" [Collection of Con-
bat Doculenta iron the Great Patriotic Hat], No 19, Moscow, 1956.

"Arneyskiye Operatsii" [Army Operations], Moscow, 1977.

Belyavnkiy. V. A., ""Strely Skreotilis' na Shpreye” [The Rifle-en Here Baptized
on the Spree], Moscow, 1973.

Blazhey, A. K.. ”V Arneyakon Shtahe" [0n the Arty Staff], Mouton, 1968.

Vasilevakiy, A. H.. "Dela Vaey Zhizni" [A Cause of Ono's Entire Life], Moscow,
1978.

"Voyennyye Svyaziaty v Dni Voyny i Mira" [Signal Troops During the Days of
war and Peace]. Moscow. 1968.

Zhukov, G. K.. "Voaponinaniya i Razlynhleniyn" [Relenbranceo and Reflections],
Hoscou, 1969.

Ivanov. S. P.. "0 Nauchnykh Oonovakh Upravleniya Voyakani" [0n the Scientific
Principles of Troop Control], Moscow, 1975.

Ivanov. D. A. et a1., "Oanovy Upravleniyn Voyokaai" [Principles of Troop Con-
trol], Moscow. 1978.

"Istoriya Vtoroy Hirovoy Voyny 1939-1955" [History of World "at 11 of 1939-
1945], V01; 6-11. Moscow, 1975-1980.

Katyshkin, I. s., "Sluzhili Hy v Shtabe Arneynkoa" [He Served on the Arny
Staff], Moscow. 1979.

Konev, I. 5.. "Sorok Pyatyy" [Forty-Five], Moscow, 1966.

Kurochkin, P. H., "Pozyvnyye Pronta" [The Call Signals of the Front]. Moscow,
1979.

Lobodn, V. P.. "Konandnyye Kadry" [Co-nand Personnel], Moscow. 1960.
Nadyaev, G. 8.. "Na Slnzhbe Shtabnoy" [0n Staff Service], Moscow. 1976.

Pereaypkin, I. T., "Svyaz' v Cody Voyny" [Communications in the ﬂat Years],
Moscow. 1976. '

Popel', N. N. et al., "Upravleniye Voyokani v Gody anikoy Otecheatvennoy
Voyny" [Troop Control During the Years of the Great Patriotic Har], Hoacow,
1974.

Prokof‘yev, A. V., "Sredatva Hethanirntaii i Avtoaatizatoii Raboty v Shtnbakh"
[Hechanization and Auto-ntion Equip-eat for Staff work]. Hoacoo. 1969.

Radziyevnkiy, A. 1.; "Tankovyy Udnr" [Tank Attack], Moscow, 1976.

158

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(N9LY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

32. Rendulich, L., "Uprsvleniye Voysksni" [Troop Control], Translated fro- the
Ger-an. Moscow, 1974.

33. Rokouovokiy, K. K., "Soldstskiy 0013" [A Soldier's Duty], Moscow, 1972.

36. Savkin, V. Ye.. "Osnovnyye Printoipy Operativnogo Iskusstvs i Ioktiki" [Basic
Principles of Operational Art and Tactics]. Moscow. 1972.

3S. Sidorenko. A. A., "Nastupleniye" [The Offensive]. Moscow, 1970.

36. “Sovetsksys Voyennoys Entsiklopediys" [Soviet Military Encyclopedia], Vols 1-8,
Moscow. 1976-1980.

37. Shranchenko, A. P., ”Voprosy Poikhologii v Uprsvlenii Voyoksli" [Questions of
Psychology in Troop Control]. Moscow, 1973.

38. Shtelcnko, s. H.. "General'nyy Shtsb v Cody Voyny" [The General Staff in the
Bar Years]. Hoscou, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

10272
CSO: 81“]1591

159

FOR OFFEJA1.USEGMVLY