FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10112

10 November 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 52/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cics, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGFI LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(POUO 52/8 1)

CONTENTS
ASIA
INDIA
Cotnbsto Addict Rehabilitation Center Urged
(THE HORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY, 18 Oct 81).......................... 1
INDONESIA
Outsiders Pay Farmers To Grow Harihuana
(KMAS, 12 Aug 81)....00000‘D.0.00......OOIOOIOOOOIODOOOODOOO... 2
Briefs
Drug Involvement Declining lo
PAKISTAN

'mo Gangs of Arms Smugglers Busted -
(WNINC NW5, 9 Oct 81)sososoooeocoseoosuosososoosoossuooocoeoos 5

Briefs
Course on Drug Intelligence
Opium, PAK Currency Seized
Opium Seizure in Quetta
Snuggled Goods
Liquor. (horas Seized
1V0 (hares Smugglers Arrested
Heroin Smugglers Arrested
Smuggler Jailed, Fined
Peddlers Arrested in lbsque
'Notorious' Opium Smuggler Arrested

NNNNNNNO‘OC‘

- a - [III - WW - 138 POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHILIPPINES

Fight Against Drug Traffickera Getting Tougher
(DAILY EXPRESS, 12 Oct 81)....0-0...I..0.OOOIOOOOOQOQIOOOOOOOOO 8

Harihuana Plantation Raided
(BMTIN mDAY’ 17 oct 81)....000DOto0.0.0.00000.00.000.000000 9

Reporting Large Harihuana Haul in Mid
(BULLETIN TODAY, 20 Oct 81)....ooaouoooooooooooooooooooeoooco-o 10

SR1 UNKA
Brief:
(:31 Announces Heroin Seizure ll
CANADA
Briefs
Jail for LSD Trafficker 12
LATIN AMERICA
BAHAMAS
Briefs
Cocaine Seizure 13
BARBADOS
Briefs
Drugs in Air Cargo 1!.
BERMUDA

Program To Attack Rising Drug Use Among School 0111an
(THE ROY“; GAZETTE, 25, 26 sep 81)..0000000....000.000.00.000... 15
Government Plans
Involvement of Youngsters
Education Departmnt Probe
BRAZIL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pbderal Police Crack Down on Cocaine Traffickers
(Various sources, various dates)...............................

Film Personalities Traffic Drugs
Cocaine Sold to Students
Paraguayan Drugs Seized
Businessman Arrested Hith (bcaine

Police Superintendent Fired for Protecting Cocaine Traffickers
(0 ESTADO D8 SAD PAULO, 29 SEP 81)esossooeeeoseseossoesosseoeee

Harihuana, Arms, Amunition Trafficking Ring Disbanded
(wmlo BMZILIENSE, 11 sep 81)....0..00...OOCOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOO

Carbines, Harihusna Seized, Arrests Made in Encmtsdo
(JomLmBmIL. 20 sep 81)..CIOOOOOOIOOODICI00.000.00.300...

Cocaine, Harihuana Distribution Point Uncovered in Pavels
(JOBNAL DO BRASIL, 18 Sep 81)..................................

Briefs
Cocaine Smugglers [he Plane

Trafficking Doctor Spotted

JAMAICA

PE RU

F. CY Pl‘

IRAN

Brie fs
Msrihusna Plane

Heroin on Tourists

Brie fs
Drug Traffickers Arrested
Coca Growers

NEAR EAST AND uonm AFRICA

Briefs
Heroin, Opium Snuggl ing

Briefs
Drug, Arm Arrests
Fasa Opium Haul

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY

Torbat Jam Heroin
Eafarayen Drug Haul
Gonabad Drug Haul
Khoraaan Opiun Haul
Shiraz Opium Haul
Shiraz Opium Haul
Torbat Opium Haul
Neyahabur Opium Haul
Neyshabur Heroin Haul
Mashhad Opium Haul
Narcotics Diacoveriea
Opium Discovery in Shiraz
Opium Find in Torbat
Mashhad Opium Discovery

SUB-SHAW AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA

Police Feel Unable To Eradicate Cocaine Market
(Gnerhard Pieterae. Geoffrey Allen; SINDAY TIES, 11 Oct 81).....

Police Launch Crackdown on Handrax Trade
(Emielia Jaroachek; RAND DAILY HAIL, 5 Oct 81)...................

Opposition Calls for Probe Into Drug Abuse Problem
(G‘ris Olckers; RAND DAILY MAIL, 3 0C: 81).IIOOIOODOOOIIOOOOOOIOO

India-SA Handrax Connection Investigated
(Emielia Jaroschek; RAND DAILY HAIL, 2 Oct 81)...................

SWAZILAND

Zambian Fined for Handrax Haul
(m5 Tlms 0F SWAZILAND, 27 0C! 81)....00ooooalooooooooooaaoooooo

[PPER VOLTA

Harihuana Trafficking Organization Broken Up
(Vierax F. Sanou; L'OBSBRVATBUR. 5 Oct 81).......................

WEST EUROPE

MSTRIA

Briefs
Heroin Dealers

- d -
FOR OFFICIAL use (”LY

34
34

3b
34

35
35
35
35
35
35

35

36

37

38

39

a;

62

Mo
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[ENHARK

GREEG

ITALY

SWEDEN

TURKEY

Briefs
Hashish Seized at Airport
Drug Profits Lav Proposed

3 Hats
Zaire Students Arrested

Health Minister Issues Report on Drug Problem
(”‘13 Re Calderon1;L'mITA’ 1 Oct 81).seoooooooooooooooooeoooo

Ton of Hashish Seized; 8 Arrests in Milan
(L‘WITA, 29 sep 81)to.so.nosesoooooosssooooaosoooosoesooooooooo

Problems Pacing Drug Treatlnnt Centers
(Gianpiero Borella, Valeria Gsndus; PANORAHA, 12 Oct 81)........

Briefs
Heroin Haul in Naples

New Cannabis Smuggling Traced From India Through Poland
(Leif Dublin; DAGBNS NYHETBR, 9 Oct 81)........................

Report on Stockholm Drug Trends Finds Increue in Awhetsnines
(Rolf Stengard; DAQNS METER. 10 0c: 81)....00000000000000000

Noted Entertainers Arrested for Hashish
(HURRIYET’ 19 sep 81).0.0D...0.0.00.00....OOOOOOOOOOOOOIOUUOOOO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

65
105

46

107

51

S6

57

62
COTABATO ADDICT REHABILITATION CENTER URGED
Rangoon THE HORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 18 Oct 81 p 7

[Text] Cotabato City--The establishment of a rehabilitation center in this city
for drug addicts is being pressed by several concerned citizens here.

"Definitely, the jail is not the right place for those arrested for violations
of the anti-drug abuse law, Sgt. Manual Fernandez, city jail warden, said.

"For a fact, they should be regarded not as criminals but as victims of persons
who, for selfish ends, take advantage of the youths' curiosity," cited another
police officer.

'Ve are not helping these youths if we put then side by side with the connon
criminals. The most we can do is find a respectable place where they can be
treated and rehabilitated decently until that center is realized," con-mated
another government doctor.

'Me become too overjoyed with our accomplishments against drug abuse by arresting
so many youths suspected of conducting pot sessions, taking dangerous drugs and
the like when we cannot even give them a proper shelter like the DARE in Tagaytay
City nor provide them with man's basic necessity-ofood," said another concerned
citizen.

These varied reactions followed the arrest of fifteen youths, most of than high
school students with ages ranging from 16 to 21, suspected of taking marijuana
and using dangerous drugs. They were arrested by the Constabulary Anti-Narcotics
Unit (CANU) in separate occasions and places during the week.

C80: 5300/6908
OTTSIDERS PAY FARMERS TO GROW HARIHEANA
Jakarta KONPAS in Indonesian 12 Aug 81 pp 1. 12

[Article: "Harihuana Crops in West Java; Unwitting Parners Are Ordered to Plant
Them"!

[Excerpts] Police of the District Command VIII/Langlangbuana, West Java, called
attention to the continuing marihuana traffic in the West Java region, particularly
in Bandung. This was supported by the evidence of thousands of nsrihusna plants
found in the Garut and Msjalengka areas by local police at the end of last week.

On Tuesday [11 August] in Bandung, Lt Col (Police) Dre Soswardjono, chief of the
Information Service of the Langlangbuana Police Command. noted to KOHPAS that a
number of persons who planted the banned crop told police that certain individuals
had ordered then to plant the marihusna and those involved had offered then the
seeds. Some who planted tie seeds did not know what they were planting.

Generally marihuana gardens are found in remote villages. on the urintain slopes
where few people live. Harihuana is planted along with other crops. for instance,
with "katuncar" (coriander). which looks like marihuana plants, Soewardjono
remarked.

He said efforts continue to eradicate the banned crops from the West Java region.
At the end of last week Sector Command police of the Haja Subdistrict, Hajalengk.
Regency. confiscated thousands of marihuana plants averaging l neeer in height.
The planter. AJ (41 years old), a resident of the Passmggrahan Village. Hajs
Subdistrict. was arrested by the responsible authorities and made to account for
his activities.

According to preliminary estimates, narihuana plants confiscated from AJ were
valued at tens of millions of rupiah. Therefore, the police judged AJ obtained
capital from someone outside the area to plant the crop. A similar judgment was
made in the case of the illegal marihuana crop which was destroyed by the local
police some time ago.

Drs Soewardjono said plantings were also discovered some time ago in the South
Cinnjur area. South Bandung, Garut, and in Kuningan. In general outsiders ordered
and paid the local people to plant the marihuans.
'I‘wu UL‘l'kS ago in Uurul the pol In: mom! :1 mar ihuana crop in the Sukemuunh Vintage.
Halangbong Subdistrict. It was planted by two local youths who have been arrested
by the police for further investigation. Thousands of plants were seized. about

4 months old and 15 centimeters high. A few plants had attained a height of 1.85
meters.

The two youths confessed that the marihnana seeds had been obtained from soneone
in Bandung and that some time ago they had traded a large amount of narihuana in
that city.

6805
C50: 5300/8303
BRIEFS

GREG INVOLVEMENT DECLININc--As of the end of 1980 about 10,000 persons in Indonesia
were recorded as having been involved with drug abuse. The total is dropping due

to government security activities concerned with these dangerous drugs. Police

Maj Sriyono, from Regional Cormand 096/Yogyakarta. addressed this matter in providing
information on narcotics and dangerous drugs Thursday afternoon [20 August] to

72 provincial druggists in the special region of Yogyakarta. The victims of drug
abuse generally are young people. adolescents, and children who are in good physical
condition but who are psychologically unstable for some reason or because of
numerous disappointments. Maj Sriyono presented data for the Yogyakarta Special
Region for 1979-80 which showed three persons, narcotics dealers, were involved.

In the following year, there were ll drug abuse cases and one person dealt in

drugs. In 1981-82 there are thus far six drug abuse cases and three sought profit
from narcotics. From 1979 through June 1981, 24 persons were tried for narcotics,
seven were motivated to seek profit from drugs while the amount of evidence

seized totaled 338 envelops and 2 kilograms of dry marihuana, 1,8 kilograms of
procssed opium. and a marihuana cigarette. At the end of his lecture Haj Sriyono
proposed that heavier sentences be levied on those guilty of criminal activities

connected with narcotics. [Excerpts] [Jakarta PELITA in Indonesian 22 Aug 81
pp 1. 7] 6804

C80: 5300/8303
THO GANGS 0F ARMS SMUGCLERS BUSTED
Karachi MORNING NEHS in English 9 Oct 81 p 8

[Text] Attack, Oct 8: Attack Police have smashed two inter-provincial gangs
of arms smugglers during a campaign against anti-social elements last month.

This was disclosed by the Superintendent of Police Attack Hr Tanveer Hameed,
while talking to local newsmen here.

He said the members of the gangs were allegedly smuggling arms from NHPP to other
parts of the country on false licences. As many as 12 members of both the gangs
have been arrested and cases under Arms and Forgery Act have also been regis-
tered in Talagang and Attack Khurd Police Station and post. The SP said that
seven persons have been arrested from Talagang and five from Attack Khurd.

The Superintendent of Police said that to curb crimes ll five-member Crime
Control Committees, comprising elected councillors, citizens of the areas and
journalists. will be set up at Police Station level in the district. He said
the Station House Officers ($80) will be bound to accept the finding of those
committees in disputed matters and the committee members will pinpoint the anti-
soriul elements of their respective areas. He said the system of chowkidars is
being reorganised. In this connection the particulars of all the chowkidars
working in the district will be kept in all the police stations for the infor-
mution of the police and general public. He said that awards will be given to
dutiful chawkidars (watchmen) in the shape of arms licences.

Showing the illicit arms hauled by the Attack police, the SP said that during
the two weeks of last month police recovered three stenguns. eight guns. 16
revolvers and pistols, two guns of 303. 12 big knifes, one barchi. one rifle

of 7 mm and many cartridges, which is a record recovery in the Punjab province.

He said during the last month more than 404 vehicles were booked on the charge
of traffic violation and Rs “2000 realised as fine.

He said the police also recovered 8966 grams of charas and 66k0 grams of opium
during the same period.

use: 3300/4527
BRIEFS

COURSE 0N DRUG INTELLIGENCE-~1slamabad: A two-week course on intelligence analy-
sis and record development concluded at the Advance Narcotics Law Enforcenent
School in Islanabad on Thursday. A team of highly qualified American specialists
on this subject imparted training in the courses to the officials of Pakistan Nar-
cotics Control Board. It was first of its kind held in Pakistan in which the
participants were imparted training on development of drug intelligence, record
maintenance and analysis of an infatuation. The course was arranged with the col-
laboration and assistance of drug enforcement adninistration of United States of
Anerice.--APP. [Text] [Karachi MORNING ms in English 24 Oct 81 p 3]

OPIUM, PAK CURRENCY SEIZEm-The staff of the Directorate of Customs Intelligence
foiled an attempt to smuggle out Pakistani currency amounting to Rs. 89,000 and
arrested a Dubai-bound passenger from the Karachi airport on Sunday. The passen-
ger, Abdul Aziz Halik was apprehended before his boarding the Dubai-bound British
Airways flight PA-lloG. A search resulted in the recovery of Pakistani currency.
Aziz was arrested and booked under the Custom—Laws. The Customs Intelligence
staff in Peshawar also seized three kg of opium powder. On a tip, the Intelli-
gence staff kept a watch on Peshawar Road for many days and ultimately case
across a Toyota Mark I (CR1) 135) heading towards the city. ﬂwever, the car
driver, Jan Khan further pressed the accelerator when signalled to stop. He was
later caught after a hot chase. The Custons Intelligence staff impounded the car
and Opium powder and sent the accused for trial. The value of the contraband

goes into lakhs of rupees in underground narcotic world abroad.--APP. [Text]
[Karachi MORNING NEWS in English 20 Oct 81 p 5]

OPIUM SEIZURE m QUETTA—Nr G. A. Jahangir. Hester CBR (Gusto-s) who arrived here
from Islamabad on a 5-day visit to organise the working of Port Qasin and Gadani
Customs Houses, last evening, said that mobile squad of Quetta Customs nabbed two
persons with 3.390 tolas of opium worth Rs. 67.8 million in the international

market yesterday. He said the news was given to him while he was emplaning that
the squad after a hot cheat on Sib -Dalnsndi route have intercepted two trucks

before they could cross over to Iran border. The trucks were coming fron tribal

area via D. I. Khan, Sukkur and had crossed Naukundi outpost when the seizure
took place. [Textl [Karachi DAWN in English 22 Oct 81 p 8]
snuchun ununs—-ruklslnu Coast Cunrds have undertaken a survey or local mmrkrtu

to assess the quantum of smuggled goods in Karachi and surrounding areas. Accord-
ing to a Press release the Coast Guards have taken steps to enforce long ranging
anti-smuggling measures through enhanced vigilance and surveillance. The coast
line (excluding the ports of entries which fall outside the jurisdiction of the
Ccast Guards) is being effectively covered by ground. air and sea patrolling,

the release added. [Text] [Karachi DAHN in English 7 Oct 81 p S]

LIQUOR, CHARAS SEIZED--Gujranwa1a, Oct 6--Foreign liquor 'charss' and opium
worth lakhs have been recovered in a raid at an unspecified place from two
females. The females, Tahira Bibi and Kalsum Begum, according to the police,

are in the pay cf the owner of the den. Ashraf, who managed to get away. Tahira,
kalaum and Ashraf have been booked alongwith Fszal and Tariq who were nabbed

when they arrived to buy liquor and opium. [Text] [Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES
in English 7 Oct 81 p 7]

THO CHARAS SMvchERs ARRESTED--Hyderabad, 27 0ct-The excise and taxation
inspector (intelligence branch), Hyderabad, Mr Noor Nabi Pathan, arrested two
allegedly notorious charas smugglers-Aurangzeb and Yahya--and recovered

from their possession 201 kg of contraband charas worth R820 million in
foreign market yesterday. According to the excise police, Aurangzeb belongs
to a gang of international narcotics smugglers which has chosen Badin as its
center of activities. [GFOlOSlO Karachi DANN in English 28 Oct 81 p 4 GP]

HEKOIN SMUGGLERS ARRESTED--The airport customs foiled an attempt to smuggle
out over 4 kg of fine quality of heroin worth R840 million in international
market and arrested two Paris-bound passengers a few minutes before their
departure on Tuesday night. The accused were identified as 17-year-old

Miss Josette Erik Hawrzinek, German national and Mr Mohammad Reta, an Iranian
student of Berlin University. The heroin was recovered from two suitcases.
Both accused are suspected to be members of international gang of narcotic
smuggling. They have been remanded in customs custody till 4 November for
interrogation. [GF011333 Karachi DAWN in English 29 Oct 81 p 8 GP]

SMUGGLER JAiLED, FINED—-Narowal, Oct. lO--Narcotics smuggler Mohammad Aalam of
Multan who was arrested last year on the Narowal-lahore Road with over a mound
of opium and 'charas' in the car he was driving, has been sentenced by a local

magistrate to a year's R.I. and a fine of Rs. 1 lakh. The snuggler's car was
confiscated. [Taxt] [Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES in English 11 Oct 81 p 6]

wunnuss ARRESTED 1N HDSQUE--Even mosques are not being spared by drug pedlara now.
One such incident was detected on Tuesday when police on complaints from tho
Eidgah mosque Pesh Imam arrested six persons with 25 tablets of mandrix and 7

pawas of charas from within the mosque premises. The accused have been identi-
fied as Hameed Abdul Hadood Sultan, Khadim Hussein, Haleemullah and Abdul

Hussain. Police have registered a separate case against Abdul Hadood under
Arms Ordinance on charge of possessing an unlicensed dagger. Meanwhile Kalakot

police have arrested a person Mohammad Asian and recovered from him 200 grams
of charas. Police have registered the cases against the accused persons and
are investigating further. [Text] [Karachi MORNING NEWS in English 15 Oct 81 p 5]

‘ ‘ - dacoit Mazar
'NOTORIOUS' OPlUM SHUGCLER ARRESTED- A notorious smuggler and ,
Hussein, son of Khair Mohammad, was arrested dramatically by Pakistan Coast

he case of 39
24 October 53 s an official handout. He was wanted in t
323:2: :2 charas and’é mzunds of opium hauled recently and is believed to be one

of the key figures in a gang which deals in illegal business of narcotics.
(«#301010 Karachi DAMN in English 26 Oct 81 p 5]

050: 5300/4529 7
FIGHT AGAINST DRUG TRAFFICKERS GETI'ING TOUGHER

Manila DAILY EXPRESS in English 12 Oct 81 p 3

[Text]

CONTAINER ships.- mail and
pleasure yachts are among new
methods devised by moneyed
international drug syndicates to beat
a continuing and intensifying
crackdown by narcotics agents.

Agents say they have been making
gradual inroads into what they
describe as the world‘s most lucrative
but illegal business but adrrtit the
MI is getting more tough.

With heroin worth some $3.000
an ounce wholesale in the L'nited
States. the picking are big in a
multi-biiion dollar business that
respects no frontiers.

ONE BRIGHT note is tne
increasing cooperation among natio-
nal enforcement agencies to hear
these dealers. but agents admit the
syndicates are changing their

‘methods of shtpment and distribu-

tion.

They say that a courier. carrying
marijuana. raw opium. or heroin
might have once taken an aircraft
from Bangkok. Singapore or
Hondtong direct to a city in North
America or Western Europe.

But now he takes more devious
and circuitous routes. aware that
arrivals from these areas are prime
suspects for customs ofﬁcers and

agents.
coo

AGWIS SAY they nave
continuously been discussing how to
speed up and pass on information
about suspects spotted at different
airports and to shah lists of people
known to malte regular but
unexpected travels.

Thus. with the increasing airport
searches. unugglers are shifting to
what they feel are safer methods.

Each day, dozens of container
ships leave Asian ports with hundreds
of pleasure yachts. which are hardly
searched by customs men. making
connections at sea with other vessels.

Drugs are said to have arrived
from Southeast Asia in New Zealand

and Australia in this manner.
0 O O

A FEW YEARS ago. over 100
small boats were seized off the
United States after authorities
discovered that large vessels were
coming up from Colombia and
transferring their illicit cargoes to
them off the Florida Coast.

But while Burma and Thailand are'
beginning to malte a tremendous
impact on the trade in opium and
heroin from the so-ealled “golden
triangle " area they din withhos.
new areas are cornhg up.
HARIIlUANA PLANTATION RAIDED

Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 17 Oct 81 p 36

[Text 1

C50:

liawmm raided a ma-
rijuanl plantation being
cultivated for dissidents.
attested tom plank-ts
and seize-1 full-310nm
marijuana plants worth
7260.000 in sitlo menu,
Imanaay Hacienda.
Haggao, Cngayan Iwo
tlays ago.

A belated teport

ﬂashed yesterday to sclzed

Defense Minister. Juan
Pom: Entllc by Col.
Tomas Mmalmgat, tle-
puty commands! of Re-
gion ll, identiﬁed the
[amt alleged planters as:

Marvin Tomas. 2‘5.
0! Blncng. La Tﬁnidnd.
Banana: Lito Licdan y
Antonio. 23'. Roque Lo.
pe y Balanben. l9. 0!
Villa Norma. Snn Jo-
se. Nucva Eclia: and

5300/0907

Roynaldo Anibm y Nt-
mol. 20. of Bit-ac. Ha~
clenda. Bagged.

Aside (mm the ma-
rijuana plants. the
welders composed 0
Intelligence operatlves
of Region U, the PC
anti-narrouca unlt
integrated clvlllan home
defense Hacienda.
thtee kilos ot
dtied muljoana plants.

Tomas. encoding to
the maiden. was being
suspected of having
Connectlons with marl-

the raiders. was beta;
wanted 01 Min:
connections with marl-
]unna plantas In Ben~
not. He also supplies
ried marlluena plants

(ty

__.—

in the Metro Manila
area ,lhnough an “tn-
ﬂuentlal" bulk wrdta-
aer in San Banolonle.
Novellches. Quezon cl-

lllanglongat nld the
{out suspects haVc been

and demoed pending the

min; of appropriate
charges against them
tn coutt.

ﬁle main bulk of the
uprooted prohibited

3: was butan on
t spot. with only a
portlon kept by the
raiders a: court evi-
dence. Manslonpt told
Emile.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070027-1

REPORTING BRGE MARIHUANA HAUL IN RAID

Manila BULLET R TODAY in English 20 Oct 81 p 28

[Text]

CSO:

5300/0908

Coneubulary antl-
narcoucs operatives up-
moxed yesterday 77.500
marijuana plum. and
“Wills: and arrested
two or three suspected
cultivetou in one of
the biggest operations
ever conducted in ﬂu-
s_ao and the Mt. Pro-
vmce.

‘me raids on four
planswons in the two
Provmcec also conﬁrm-
ed (mowexlzmnée of the
SC-CI 93 d .
Rania-Mt. Proving-
Benguet-Hugao connec.
honﬁn the sale and
trufﬂe of marijuana
wind: was reveded by

two arrested cumu-
tors. .

1-- Felix. CANU com-
mdmc general end
715k Force Boson; au-
hay command“. tepor-
ted 11m close to 75.000
mime plants and
”Nuns: were uptooted
Ind destroyed in Main.
Honsdura. "mo and
accounted for me his.
cat single haul In tho
government’s intend.
"ed Intl~drug open.

.1100: in Region 1.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070027-1
BRIEFS

CBI ANNOUNCES HBROIN SEIZURE-Nev Delhi, 16 Oct-o‘l‘he Indian Central Bureau of
Investigation (631) said today it had aeized two kilogram” (four pounds) of
heroin worth about 10 nillion dollars on the international mrket from an

Afghan national. The CBI said narcotics agents arrested the Inn in a Delhi
hotel yesterday. The Afghani said during interrogation that he had bought the
first-grade heroin from what he called a flourishing drug market operating on
the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and snuggled it into Delhi, the CBI said.
NAB/Renter [Text] [Rangoon run wonxtuc PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 18 Oct 81 p 7]

cso:‘ 5300/4908

11
BRIEFS

JAIL FOR LSD TRAPPICKEBr-A Toronto nan who admitted being part of a conspiracy to
traffic in LSD was sentenced Monday to two years less a day in reforntory. Daniel
McKee, 29, was arrested near London last April 13 after RCMP officers, who were
watching other suspects. saw hi- lake contact and apparently buy the drugs. Court
was told the tipoff on a drug deal cane fro. telephone wiretaps. Eben HcKee was

stopped, officers found a package containing 1,600 "hits" of LSD under the dash-
board of his car. Court was told HcKee's criminal record, which dates back 10

years, included several previous drug-related convictions. Three other Inn, all
facing charges arising out of the some investigation, are scheduled for a prelim-

inary hearing in February. [Text] [Windsor THE WINDSOR STAR in English 20 Oct 81
P 10]

CSO: 5320/006

12
BRIEFS

COCAINE SEIZURE--The largest drug hold in the Bahamas found on Norman's Cay over
the weekend has been estimated at $63 million. The 1017 lbs of cocaine were found
aboard a plane at the cay on Saturday. The tvo Colombians aboard that plane have

been charged. [Text] ”1132208 Nassau Domestic Service in English 1700 GMT
13 Oct 81]

080: 5300/2043

13
BRIEFS

DRUGS [N AIR CARco--The cargo department at Grantley Adams airport is exper-
ienclng more problems with drug trafficking now than the Customs Department,
a Customs official has said. The official said that since the methods of drug
detection at the airport had been improved and officers were exercising rigid
security measures, that drug smuggling was being conducted more often through
the cargo department. In the past, people smuggling drugs usually brought
them in on their person. or as part of their luggage. Drugs sent to the car~
go section can be concealed in paints and other items and are therefore not

as easily detectable. The official said that flights from areas known to

have big trades in drug trafficking are scrutinised very thoroughly. [Text]
lBridgetoun ADVOCATE-NEHS in English 23 Sep 81 p 2]

650: 5300/7510

14
PRUHRAN T0 ATTACK RISING DRUG USE AMONG SCHOOL CHILDREN
Government Plans
Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZETTE in English 25 Sep 81 pp 1. 2

[Text] New measures to combat drug abuse among schoolchildren were announced
by Dr the hon. Clarence James. Minister of health and Social Services.

Following up recommendations made by the Advisory Board on the Misuse of Drugs
a year ago, Dr James said that a consultant would be appointed next month to
help develop a programme tailor-made for Bermuda schools.

He also said that the methadone clinic for heroin addicts would remain at St.
Brendan's Hospital. despite the Board's proposal that it should be relocated.
Dr James promised that the clinic would be "strengthened" and hoped that it
would soon be able to take new admissions.

The new $100,000 moves were announced at a press conference only hours after
the Commissioner of Police. Mr Frederick Bean said that some schoolgirls have
hccorw prostltutcs to raise money for drugs. (See separate story) They also
follow Dr James' admission last week that methadone programme had "failed
over the last year." has stopped taking new patients since July and is now
only treating four addicts.

Dr James was joined at the conference by the hon. Ernest Vesey Minister of
Education and the Minister's Permanent Secretary Mr Mansfield Brock. They
claimed they had not heard the Commissioner's statement and that their under-
standing from him was that drug abuse in schools was a small but serious
prohzvm.

Said Mr Vosey: "Any drug abuse is serious. But I think it tends to happen
outside school hours and at weekend rather than in the school itself." Mr
Brock added that the Ministry did not know which schools were hit by the drug
problem.

Dr James. outlining the new school-based drug prevention programme, said pro-
posals had resulted from discussions between both the Education and Health and
Snrinl Services Ministries. "They agreed that young people with behavioural
r-oblcms have much in common whether they use or abuse drugs," he said. "It

15
would he artificial, uneconomic and potentially counter-productive to develop
programmes solely for those involved with drugs. Instead it was suggested

that it would be more appropriate to develop an additional programme for young
people with behavioural problems as part of the arbools' family life and health
education programe which already includes a section on drugs and drug abuse.
Further counselling should be an extension and under the supervision of the
home visiting service which is the responsibility of the school psychologist."

The new consultant's post is now being advertised and should be filled by mid-
October. The successful applicant will be expected to help the two Ministries
develop proposals. and infona teachers, home visitors and guidance counsellors
about the signs and symptoms of drug abuse.

"In-service training will also be provided for teachers so they will be more
knowledgeable and better able to teach students about drugs and drug abuse,"

Dr James went on. He said that Government had decided to stress prevention

for the time being and he was not prepared to support the Advisory Board's pro-
posals for a new community-based drug treatment centre.

The Board's suggestions for extra specialist staff, including a sessionai psy—
chiatrist, three fulltime social workers and a fulltime secretary, had also
been turned down. Dr James said: "instead I will he recommending that the
methadone clinic remain at St Brendan's but be strengthened so that the present
staffing difficulties are overcome. l have asked the Medical Director, Dr

Michael Radford, to recommend to me what improvements he considers are essen-
tial."

Involvement of Youngsters
Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZETTE in English 25 Sep 81 pp 1, 3

[cherptl An outbreak of child prostitution and hard drug taking by youngsters
was revealed yesterday by Police Commissioner Frederick “can.

-Chlldren as young as ten years old are experimenting with heroin and cocaine.
And young girls are being encouraged to sell their bodies to enable pimps to
buy drugs.

The Police Chief said this was causing concern and distress. "We must come to
grips with the situation now before our lovely Island is turned into a jungle,"
he said.

Cormissioner Dean said the information had come from usually reliable sources
such as criminals, informants and the business commuuxy in the back of town
area. There was no evidence to suggest that an organised ring was involved.

Mr Bean would not identify schools hit by the problem, but said more than one
was affected. Both boys and girls aged from ten to 14 are thought to be using
hard drugs.

"in addition, it had been reported that voung girls are being encouraged to

engage in sexual acts for money which is then passed on to older men to pur-
chase drugs with," he said.

16
Education Department Probe
Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZETTE in English 26 Sep 81 p 1

[Text] The Education Department is to probe the Police Commissioner's
claims that prostitution and drug taking has become rife in schools.

Police Chief Frederick Bean revealed on Thursday that children as young as
10 years old were using heroin and cocaine and young girls were selling sex
to enable pimps to buy drugs.

His statement took Government by surprise as it had received no reports on
the disturbing problem. But an Education spokeswoman said yesterday that
Police had now been contacted to obtain further details.

In the meantime Permanent Secretary, Mr Mansfield Brock has ordered an inquiry
to assess the extent of the illicit sex and drug-taking.

The spokeswoman said it was not known whether a formal report would be pre-
pared. "At this stage I cannot say how the assessment is being carried out,"
she said. "We hope more details will be forthcoming from the Police."

Commissioner Bean did not identify schooIs concerned, but said “usually reli—
able sources" had informed him that boys and girls aged 10 and 16 were using
hard drugs.

C50: 5300/7509
BRIEFS

SATIDECAL AﬁTIDRlJG CAMPAIGN-4n accordance with instructions received from the armed
forces government, the National Council for Struggle Against Drug Trafficking has
provided a complete report on the Alfredo Gutierrez Vaca Die: case. The council says
that Gutierrez has appeared before officials and that contacts have been made with
U.S. officials in order to clarify the terns of an accusation made against his. The
council has announced that the government wishes all those who have been accused by
0.8. courts to appear before Bolivian officials. The director of the council as-
serted that Bolivian citizen Alfredo Guiterrea Vaca Die: has no charges against his
in Bolivia and that (?charges) pending in 0.8. courts will be clarified within the
next few hours. [Excerpts] [PY131113 La Paz Radio lllinani Network in Spanish 0100
GMT 13 Oct 81]

COCAINB TRAFFICKERS ARREST-4a Paz, 13 Oct (AFN—Capt Javier Guerrero, chairman of
the national dangerous drugs department, revealed today that 38 persons who are
involved in cocaine trafficking have been arrested in the last 15 days in Bolivia.
Capt Guerrero said that seat of the arrested traffickers are foreigners. This shows,
he added, that Bolivia is the victin of an inoral and mean drug trafficking activ-
ity based abroad. He reported that traffickers have changed their aethod for pro-
ducing cocaine. Now they use small mobile laboratories which are easy to move in
order to escape from the authorities. It was recalled that in recent years Bolivia
has become the min producer of raw materials (coca leaves) for the preparation of
cocaine and that such production reportedly yields about $2 billion in Bolivia.
ircxt] [PY1316/u‘o Paris APP in Spanish 1502 GMT 13 Oct 81]

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--As a result of operations carried during the past few
hours by members of the Santa Cruz office for control of dangerous drugs seven
persons were arrested in Santa Cruz when they were found trying to snuggle 10 kg of
cocaine sulphate through customs. ("232206 la Paz Radio Illinani Network in Span-
ish 1130 GMT 22 Oct 81]

NEW NARCOTICS DIVISION Hum-«a5 Manuel Hurtado Araoz was sworn in as chief of the
Santa Cruz narcotics division to replace Haj (Emilio Villarroel). [“232206 La
Paz Radio Tllimeni Network in Spanish 1130 Off 22 Oct 81]

(:30: 5300/ 2034

18
FEDERAL POLICE CRACK DONN 0N COCAINE TRAFFICKERS
Film Personalities Traffic Drugs
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 26 Sep 81 p 14

[Text] Yesterday. the Federal Police in Sao Paulo informed the press that Roberto
Bianchi Reis, technical director of the film, "They Do Not Hear Black Ties," and
Jurandir Mendes Craveiro Junior, correspondent for the BRASILIENSE publishing
house. were arrested on 25 August while in possession of 5 kg of marihuana and

0.5 kg of cocaine. According to the police. the two are receivers and sellers and
are part of a trafficking gang whose suppliers are Eli Ribeiro da Rocha. his wife,
Tova Cohn, and Edmilson Lucas da Silva. all still at large. They were bringing
the drugs from Bolivia and dividing them between Roberto and Jurandir who then
sold them in Sao Paulo.

The police give their assurance that they now have a list of all persons involved
in this trafficking and of purchasers in Sao Paulo. the latter having been iden-
tified through a memorandum book found in possession of the traffickers.

Cocaine Sold to Students
Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 29 Sep 81 p 12

[Text] Nilton Ferreira de Souza, aged 39. was arrested yesterday afternoon at the
gate of P10 x School at Rua Serra Negra s/n, Largo do Tanque. Jacarepagua, with a
plastic bag containing cocaine in his possession.

upon being arrested, he told Sergeant Cortes of the 18th BPH [Military Police Bat-
talion] that the drug was to be sold to students. The trafficker was booked at
the 32d Precinct.

Paraguayan Drugs Seized
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 1 Oct 81 p 18

[Text] The Federal Police seized more than 2,600 Provigil tablets coming from
Paraguay when they arrested traffickers Carlos Roberto Santana, Jose Perreirs
Silva Filho and Adair Horgilli; the first two reside in Sao Jose do Rio Preto and
the third in Catanduva; all three were operating in the area. Although Provigil

l9
is not on the list of medicines considered toxic, the police made tests which re-
vealed that this product produces an effect comparable to cocaine, procaine and
tetrocaine.

Businessman Ar-‘e -‘ ed With Locaine
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 23 Sep 81 p 20

[Text] Narcotics Bureau agents arrestr‘d business-an Sergio Velasques Cunha, aged
29, bachelor and part owner of Vendaval oar and Restaurant in Piratininga; he had
two packets of cocaine on his person when arrested. During the investigation of
the abduction of Hisaque Jose Marques and Luis Carlos Jatuba, he was on the list
of suspects for having broken into the home of Aniz Abraao sti. or Anisio de
Nilopol is.

Together with Sergio, the police arrested Jose Alberto Barros Santos. also in pos-
session of two small packets of cocaine. They said they had purchased the drug at
a distribution point located at the Veterans' Residential Complex near the Favela
do Jacarczinho in Rio.

8568
C50: 5 300/2019

20
POLICE SUPERINTENDENT FIRED FOR PROTECTING COCAINE TRAFFICKERS
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 29 Sep 81 p 19

[Text] Manaus--Removed from office after being accused of protecting cocaine
traffickers from whom he allegedly received about 18 million cruzeiros to reduce
their involvement with the law and facilitate their release from the state‘s cen-
tral penitentiary. Federal Police Superintendent Iva Americana has been held in-
communicado at his residence since last Thursday where he is waiting to be heard
by the committee of inquiry which is investigating a series of irregularities-
corruption, preferential treatment and torture among the prisoners-in his admin-
istration in the Amazon River region. Accusations of Ivo Americano's involvement
with drug traffickers and gold smugglers were made a few months ago by Colombian
Benito Tavares, leader of an organized gang which was selling cocaine in Hanaus
and was disbanded by the Federal Police in July 1980.

Arrested together with 32 other foreign traffickers who were found by the Federal
Police to be in possession of 18 kg of distilled cocaine, precision equipment for
converting drug paste into powder and a few thousand dollars, bonito Tavares. upon
fleeing from the state penitentiary where he was serving a 10-year sentence, sent
a letter to the Federal Police authorities in Brasilia accusing Iva Americana of
having received 18 million cruzeiros from the cocaine mafia to soften the police
investigation of the gang's activities. Benito Tavares also says that the former
superintendent received "much gold and money" from smugglers. In the letter,
which is being distributed at the uniVersity and among various federal organiza-
tions. the trafficker says that lva Americana obtained a motorcycle and a launch
which the Federal Police confiscated from Jase Basilio. or Padeirinho; Basilio is
at large together with Arlindo Tevares, appointed as leader of the gang, who was
inexplicably released by the Federal Police.

The committee of inquiry. chaired by Deputy Nelson Harabuto of the Federal Police
Department's Department of Political and Social Order in Brasilia and coordinated
by Deputies Paula Natunabe and Hugo Pavoa. scheduled a confrontation tomorrow be-
tween lva Americana and various traffickers and other persons involved with drug

trafficking in the area.

lvo Americana is accused of having a number of properties, such as a house, farm
and plane. The plane is thought to have gone down in the Xapuri River in Alta

Rio Negro with 600 kg of cocaine in powder form.

8:68
C50: 5300/2019

21
MARIHUANA, ARMS, AMMUNITION TRAFFICKING RING DISBANDED
Brasilia CORREIO BRAZILIENSE in Portuguese 11 Sep 81 p 12

[Text] An organized gang of drug traffickers, which has a branch in Goiania and
has been operating for months in Brasilia selling arms, drugs, aummnition, elec-
tronic equipment and imported whiskey, was put out of circulation yesterday by
agents of the Bureau for the Suppression of Drugs [DRE] of the Federal Police
Regional Superintendency (SRPFI in the DP (Federal District]. In an operation
shared by several police teams, the following individuals were caught in the act
and arrested: Novacap employee Paulo George Antonio Martins Bogea, better known
in the criminal underworld as "Louro"; Pedro Juventino, or "Pedro Ladrao"; and
Paulo Roberto Ferreira dos Reis, or "Paulo Haconha." With the seizure of the
gang, the DPF [Federal Police Department] also confiscated 10 kg of marihuana
valued at 500,000 cruzeiros.

The leader of the gang, Hanoel Humberto Claudino, known as "Hanoelzinho" and
"Manex," was intercepted at Block 705 North but managed to break through the ring
of fire and escape without leaving a trace. In his haste he abandoned his Galaxy,
license plate AT-7356-DF, in which the police found 2 kg of marihuana.

Contraband

Residing at QNA 51, Lot 9. Taguatinga Norte, "Pedro Ladrao," aged “4, was the one
who hid most of the contraband. The Federal Police found 6 kg of marihuana at
his home, intended for the DP’s clandestine drug market. A large quantity of
other material was also confiscated: two 38-caliber Taurus revolvers; a 32-
caliber Smith a Wesson revolver; a 22-caliber Beretta pistol; a number of 45-
caliber shells intended for the exclusive use of the armed forces; a quantity of
942-caliber rifle shells; and a large quantity of 38, 32 and 22-caliber ammmni-
tlon.

The police also confiscated 1 Sharp minicomputer. 4 electronic calculators, 5
cameras, 2 portable tape recorders, l Super-8 movie camera, 1 Orion sound pro-
jector, 2 walkie-talkies, 2 automobile tape players, more than 10 wrist watches
and 2 rifles of domestic manufacture.

"Pedro Ladrao" was apprehended while driving a Corcel, license plate AT-ZlZS-DF,

containing false flooring exclusively for concealing marihuana purchased in Para-
guay. The federal agents were astonished to find three identification emblems

22

belonging to the DP? among the smuggled items, ready to be counterfeited by members
of the gang.

The falsified DPF identifications were to facilitate the gang's movements through
the barriers of the Federal Highway Police. when approached, the traffickers were
to identify themselves as federal agents and thus easily manage to transport the
marihuana purchased in Paraguay. The ammunition and arms were for the use of the
traffickers and the black market. And the comnmnications equipment was to be used
to facilitate the exchange of messages among members of the gang.

Sophistication

After the arrest of "Pedro Ladrao" at his home, the DRE agents discovered a farm
house owned by the trafficker in the vicinity of Taguatinga and went there to
search for more marihuana. Meanwhile. the police officers were astonished to find
a large quantity of gasoline for refueling the traffickers' cars on weekends.

"Pedro Ladrao" is a native of Marilia, Sao Paulo, and had already had several run-
ins with the DPF as a marihuana trafficker. However, before that time he had
operated with unknown underworld criminals.

Ten Kg of Harihuana

Residing at QNL 10, Complex H, House 16, Taguatinga, Paulo Roberto Perreira dos
Reis, or "Paulo Haconha," aged 24, was born in Campos Altos, Mines, and was on
probation. He had been sentenced for theft in accordance with Article 155 of the
Penal Code but did not mend his ways. After several run-ins with the DP? for
marihuana trafficking. "Paulo Maconha" finally arrived at the point of cultivat-
ing the plant. Approximately 1 kg of seeds was found at his home. The marihuana
was to be marketed in Taguatinga.

Novacap employee George Antonio Martins Bogea, or "Louro," aged 33, was arrested
at Plano Piloto upon being denounced by his subordinates. More than 1 kg of mari-
huana was seized at his home at 01 3. Complex 2, Lot 26, Lago Sul. The Federal
Police were astonished at the involvement of the Novacap employee in the traffick-
ing gang, particularly since he lives in a Lego Sul mansion.

Addicts themselves. the traffickers were smoking marihuana in a metal pipe import-
ed from India, and this was also confiscated. The 10 kg of marihuana was com—
pressed into a brick. of the "mango rosa" brand, the marihuana is a type pre-
ferred by addicts as it is the best quality produced in Paraguay.

Branch Operation

Simultaneously with the investigations made in Brasilia, DPF agents in Goiania ar-
rested several traffickers in that city connected with the drug ring disbanded in
the DF. Federal agents in Brasilia believe that Hanoel Humberto Claudino, or
"Hanoelzinho" or "Hanex" was not acting alone as leader of the gang, since, less
than a year ago, the criminal had little experience in drug trafficking.

24
Paulo Roberto, or
Maconha,” one of
arrested

 

    

Sophisticated Indian pipe confiscated with marihuana
"Manex" is 26 years old and resides at QB 17, Complex L, House 37. His capture is
nuninent, even though the Federal Police believe that the trafficker has fled from
Brasilia. The DRE advised that steps are being taken to catch up with "Hanex" and
others implicated in the gang.

Investigations being made to break up the "Hanex" gang will enable the federal
police to arrest a number of traffickers who had been operating in Plano Piloto

and neighboring cities.

8568
CSO: 5300/2019

26
9 BRAZIL

CARBINES, HARIHUANA SBIZED, ARRESTS MADE IN BNCANTADO
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL D0 BRASIL in Portuguese 20 Sep 81 p 36

[Text] Two carbines used by security guards, four revolvers, an antique carbine
and marihuana cigarettes were seized early yesterday morning at the Horro do Urubu
in Tomas Coelho by agents of the 24th Precinct in Encantado after an exchange of
gunfire with traffickers belonging to a gang led by Nei Barbuda.

The gang is responsible for the death Tuesday morning of watchman Antonio Francisco
de Souza and of his son, Antonio Harcio, aged 11, and the serious wounding of Rita
de Cassia, aged 13, Antonio Francisco's daughter. The criminals broke into the
watchman's hoase at the top of has Frei Camila, in Tomas Coelho, to evict him and
his family and convert the home into a drug sales outlet.

Friday, the police arrested Antonio Araujo dos Santos, or "Cara Preta," Adilson
Mendes, or "Totinha" and Cosme Ribeiro da Silva, or "Himinha" who, in addition to
confessing their participation in the double homicide, furnished Deputy Vanderley
Jose da Silveira the names of the other criminals. They are 2e Vigia, “em and Mel
Barbuda, who are at large and yesterday morning exchanged gunfire with the police.

The weapons and marihuana were found in the roof of a shack which served as the
gang's hiding place. Inspector Nelson Duarte, who is heading the investigations,
knew that more than 20 criminals were involved in the gang's operations in this
shantytown and that they are controlling the sale of drugs in the shantytowns of
Uruhu, Cnvalcante, Caixa Dagua and Engenho da Rainha.

with regard to the watchmnn's death, the traffickers said that when they broke
into the house they intended to kill him inasmuch as he had threatened to report
them to the police on a number of occasions. Nei Barbuda was accused of having
fired the shots which killed the watchman and the boy. At the decision of Deputy
Hamilton Cigante, Antonio Francisco's residence-~which was abandoned when the
family fled in terror--is being kept under strict surveillance to prevent other
members of the gang from setting up a drug sales outlet at that spot.

At the questioning the criminals confessed having stolen equipment from the
Inhauma-Iraja section of the preliminary subway project and having subsequently
sold it to fences at the Metro do Jursmento and in Coelho Neto. "Cara Preta"
said that a fence known as "Haluco" killed another fence in Estrada Vicente de
Carvalho over some of the stolen property.

8568
C80: 5300/2019

27
COCAINE, MARIHUANA DISTRIBUTION POINT UNOOVERED IN FAVEIA
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 18 Sep 81 p 20

[Text] Yesterday at Varginha Favela in Hanguinhos, police of the 16th BPH [Mili-
tary Police Battalion] broke up a narihuana and cocaine distribution point at
shack 106 of Beta da Amizade and seized 109 kg of the drug compressed with honey
and 2,080 tablets. Eight persons were arrested-~the head man and seven go-
betweens, those responsible for delivering orders for drugs to traffickers.

According to the police, the distribution point belongs to a trsfficker known as
Giison Vovo, who managed to escape when the shooting began. At the shanty the
police also confiscated two precision scales, two calculators, two 32-caliber
Taurus revolvers, a can of powdered milk containing ammunition for the two weapons,
scissors and knives used in preparing the drug for sale.

Surrounded

The area had been under observation for several days, since the police already
knew that a large quantity of cocaine was to be delivered there yesterday after-
noon. Since early Wednesday morning secret service agents of that battalion had
hidden in the favela with instructions to make the most noise possible at the
moment of the raid so that the traffickers would run to the point in question
where a number of uniformed soldiers would be waiting.

The plan was successful: when the traffickers and addicts ran to escape from the
agents, they were apprehended by a group led by Sergeant Bartolomeu consisting of
himself, Corporal Pelizon and Privates Trindade and Egito.

Taken to the 21st Precinct, those arrested were identified as Hilson Arimateia
Fonseca, the point's head man, and his associates, Jose Santos Cruz, Jose Luis de
Souza Comes, Nilo Roberto da Silva, Jorge Eugenio Ribeiro, Rafael da Silva and
Joao Americo da Silva. Paulo Luis Ramos and Joao Scares de Lima were the go-
betweens responsible for delivering the orders to the small marihuana outlets as

instructed by the traffickers.

Sergeant Bartolomeu, who arrested the eight fellows, was chosen last month as the
most effective police officer in the 16th 3PM, and yesterday morning he was eulo-
gized by Col Nilton Verqueirs, comander general of the Military Police. As an
award, he will now travel with his family to Pribourg to spend 8 days in that
city with all expenses paid by the 16th RPM.

8568
C80: 5300/2019 28
BRIEFS

COCAINE SHUGGLERE USE PLANE-~Rio de Janeiro—-Twin engine plane ZO-POS, stolen in
Mate Crosso do Sul and found in Harica, Norte Pluminense, was said to have been
carrying 80 kg of cocaine in past form, which was to be distilled and transformed
into powder and subsequently taken to the United States. The Niteroi Federal
Police Division, the Rio and Niteroi narcotics bureaus and the 82d Precinct in
Harica are becoming increasingly convinced of this version offered to various
newspapers through anonymous telephone tips and partially confirmed by officers
working on the case. Plastic surgeon Osmani Ramos, proprietor of a clinic in
Copacabana. his brother, a pilot and an English friend involved in the affair are
still missing. The first three were released last Wednesday through a writ of
habeas corpus. The Englishman, Anthony David Link, was apprehended with a 1981
Mercedes Benz, no documents and counterfeit dollars but was released through the
intervention of the doctor. According to the police who are investigating the
case of the stolen plane, the cocaine has recently been coming from Bolivia in
paste form and has then been distilled in the country. The reason for this is
that, in Bolivia, ether and acetone, essential for converting the cocaine into
powder, are in short supply and, therefore, very expensive. It was also known
that the plane was to be flown to the United States-it had a flight plan to
Niami--by pilot Peter Ramos Bernhardt, of the Sao Paulo Aeroclub. Peter said he
did not know the purpose of the flight but thought it was to change the craft's
call letters, since the twin engine was in Brazil illegally. [Text] [Sao Paulo
0 ESTADO DE SAD PAULO in Portuguese 29 Sep 81 p 18] 8568 '

TRAFFICKING DOCTOR SPOTTED-~Plastic surgeon Osmani Rance, accused of having
stolen a twin engine plane in ﬂats Crosso do Sul and taken 80 kg of cocaine to
Rio in the craft, was seen embarking in a plane, call letters PT-KDH, in Sorocaba.
That information was contained in a communique the Dourados deputy sent yesterday
from Rio to Sao Paula's Secretariat of Security. Dourados Deputy Cid Araujo said
that the plane in which the doctor had embarked would probably land in Itapetin-
inga. The deputy said he already has a warrant, sent by a Dourados judge, for
the arrest of Dr Osmani Ramos, his brother, Jainesio Ramos, and a civilian con-
mander, all involved not only in the theft of the plane but also in cocaine traf-
ficking and, probably, in the death of the plane's pilot, Carlos Alberto Lobo,
who has not been seen for 10 days, ever since the plane was stolen. Yesterday,
the Dourados deputy sent requests for help to the secretaries of security of Rio
and Sao Paulo to help solve the case and arrest those involved. The three were
arrested and held at the Marica precinct shortly after the stolen plane landed,

29
but, through a series of concessions by the police. they ended up obtaining a writ
of habeas corpus and were released. The inquiry initiated by the Harica police

to solve the case will be held at court tomorrow, but Judge Jose Bustaquio will
haVe to delay it for further investigation or request preventive custody of the
doctor who has not appeared at his clinic in Copacabana for seVeral days nor at
his apartnent in Avenida Atlantica. Up to now, at least officially, no trace has
been obtained by the police to locate the pilot. The Civilian Police of Dourados
and the Federal Police are making further investigations but believe that only
the arrest of the doctor will help solve the case, since only he knows the where-
abouts of the pilot. [Text] [Sao Pach 0 ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 1 Oct
81 p 18] 8568

cso: 5300/2019
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA PLANE--A twin-engined aircraft, registration number N 9516 2,
crashed in bushes near the Braco airstrip in St. Mary at about noon yesterday.
A police report said that the pilot of the craft disappeared from the scene
and was now being sought. Twenty-eight package, containing 90 pounds of ganja
were found beside the wrecked aircraft. [Text] [Kingston THE DAILY CLEANER

in English 22 Sep 81 p 1]

HEROIN 0N TOURISTS--Nine pounds of heroin was seized on Tuesday at the Sangster
International Airport and two tourists Eros Thailand arrested. The police
report said that Vichein Bunsong, 43, merchant, and Vichai Thongtawee, 31,

both of Bangkok, Thailand, were arrested by the Narcotics police and charged
with possession of heroin and importing the drug into the island. The drug is
valued at $4 million on the us market. The men came in on an Air Florida
flight from Miami and a search by the police at the airport revealed the drug
in two and a half ounce packages strapped to their bodies, the report said.
[Text] [Kingston THE DAILY CLEANER in English 24 Sep 81 p 1]

C50: 5300/7510

31
BRIEFS

DRUG TKAFFICKERS ARRESTED--A gang of drug traffickers has been dismantled in
Collique. The police have arrested the following traffickers: Pedro Padilla
Velasquez, Gloria Flores Navarro. Damian Ramos Carrasco and Dina Hendieta
Huarcaya. [Lima XPRESO in Spanish 21 Sep 81 p 6 PY]

COCA GROU£R5--Lima, 20 Oct (AFP)—-lt was learned in this capital today that the
coca producers of Tlngo Maria. Iotated on the edge of the jungle in central
Peru. yesterday, Monday occupied the streets and airport of this city, on the
occasion of the visit of Agriculture Minister Nils Ericcson. The demonstration
had the object of demonstrating against a government project, supported by the
United States, which intends to replace the production of coca, from which
cocaine is produced, with other agricultural products. According to official
charges, that whole region is one of the most important supply sources of the
drug traffickers. against whom the authorities are carrying out a large-scale
fight. Pickets of the Coca Producers Union [Sindicato de Cocaleros] obliged
businessmen and other people to close their establishments in support of their
demands that the project not be implemented. Due to the blockade of the
airport. with sticks and stones, the plane that was to have taken Minister
Ericcson back to Lima could not land and he had to remain the night under police
protertion. [Text] [PYZlOZOG Paris AF? in Spanish 1822 GMT 20 Oct 81]

cm; 5300/ 2033

32
BRIEFS

HEROIN. OPIUH SMUGGLING—-Drug enforcement officers in the Ministry of Interior
foiled an attempt to smuggle a large quantity of heroin and opuum. valued at half
a million pounds, into the county via the Cairo airport. The attempt was made by
a watchmsker arriving from Yemen. The attempt was thwarted after information was
received by Maj Gen Semi As'ad Faraj. director general of the drug enforcement
office. The information reported that Semir Sa'id Hanna, a watch merchant. had
rtarted dealing in drugs, and that he was traveling a lot to countries famous for
growing drugs to bring these drugs into Egypt. Based on that information, Deputy
Director Major General Hamduh Salim Zaki asked the two colonals, Director of
Operations Muhammad 'Abbaa Hansur and Chief Administrator at the Cairo airport
branch Ahmad Nadda to place the merchant under close observation. Investigations
by Col Sayyid Ghayth and majors Hustafa el-Kashif, Shafiq al-‘Ushri and Tariq Abu
Zayd confirmed that the merchant had rented a luxury apartment in al-Duqqi which
was disproportionate to his income. and that he intended to bring a large quantity
of drugs. particularly heroin. into Cairo in preparation for smuggling it to Europe.
Investigations revealed that he was bringing the drugs in aboard Yemen Airlines
arriving from Sana'a via Damascus. Permission was requested from Counselor
Muhammad Yahya, attorney general for the drug agency. The drug enforcement officers
at the airport set a trap for the merchant. when the airplane arrived, he was
arrested. Upon searching his luggage. they found half a kilo of heroin, valued

at $150,000, and 7 kilograms of opium, valued at more than 250,000 pounds. The
suspect was referred to the public prosecutor's office which sentenced him to jail.
(Text) [Cairo AL-AHRAH in Arabic 29 Sep 81 p 10] 9655

33
BRIEFS

DRUG. ARMS ARRESTSuAccording to a central news unit report from Mashhad. in the
course of an armed clash between the narcotic branch of the Islamic revolution pro-
secutor office of Mashhad. with a number of smugglers [words indistinct] one
smuggler was killed and another arrested. Twenty-one kilos of heroin and 66 kilos of
opium. 10 firearms with 120 bullets. 2 6-3 machineguns with 60 rounds, 1 Colt and
and one camera were seized from the smugglers. [Text] [13260640 Tehran Domestic
Service in Persian 1630 GMT 26 Oct 81]

FASA OPIUH IIAUL--'Iwo drug traffickers with long criminal records were arrested by
Pass revolution guards while carrying 2 kg of opium, a handgun and 1,100 rounds of
ammunit ion. [CF281830 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 28 Oct 81)

TORBAT JAN HEROIN--A construction worker digging in an area in Torbat Jam has dis-
covered 4.11 kg of heroin. A file has been opened on the find. [1.0260640 Mashhad
Domestic Service in Persian 11.30 GMT 28 Oct 81]

ESFARAYEN DRUG HAUL--In the past Iranian month, the Esfarayen revolution guard corps
confiscated 30 weapons and over 25 kg of opium belonging to a large narcotics gang.

The gang members have been arrested. [LD2606lo0 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian
1430 GMT 28 Oct 81]

GONABAD DRUG HAUL-~Seven drug offenders and traffickers were sentenced to between

3 and 10 years in jail and payment of fines in Gonabad today for possession of 10.29
kg of opium. 26 grams of heroin and 15 grams of burned opium and for addiction to
narcotics. [LDZ60660 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1630 M28 Oct 81]

KHORASAN OPIUH llAUL--Birjand drug squad personnel have discovered 5' kg of opium on
Afzal 'Abdollahi and .5 kg of heroin on Nurzehi, son of Mohamed, an Afghan citi-
zen. They have been arrested and delivered to judicial authorities. [LD260640
Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 Off 27 Oct 81]

SHIRAZ OPIUH Milk-Shiraz revolution guards discovered 1050 grams of opium on two
passengers on the Shiraz-Beyza bus. They have been arrested. [10260640 Shiraz
Domestic Service in Persian 1500 941‘ 27 Oct 81]
SHIRAZ OPIUM MAUL--Shlraz drug squad personnel discovered 450 grams of opium during
the past ueek. lGF292002 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 29 Oct 81]

TORBAT OPIUM HAUL-Torbat Heydariyeh drug squad personnel have discovered 570

grams of opium on two bus passengers. They have been arrested. [GF292002
Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 29 Oct 81]

NEYSHABUR OPIUM MAUL--The Neyshabur Islamic Revolution Guard Corps and antidrug
squad have clashed with smugglers and seized 35 kg of opium. The smugglers have
been arrested and handed over to the authorities. [GF010444 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1430 GMT 31 Oct 81]

NEYSHABUR HEROIN MAUL--The Neyshabur Islamic Revolution Guard Crops and antidrug
squad have recovered two bernos and 1.5 kg of heroin from three persons in
Neyshabur. They have been handed over to the Neyshabur Islamic Revolution Court.
(GF010444 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 31 Oct 81]

MASHHAD OPIUM HAUL--The antidrug squad of the Mashhad police department has seized
[.64 kg of opium from two persons. They have been arrested and handed over to the
authorities. [CF010444 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 31 Oct 81]

NARCOTICS DISCOVERIES--The Public Relations Office of the Antinarcotics Prosecutor's
Office announced that it has seized 893 kg of opium. 8 kilos of heroin, 14 ig of
hashish and 2 kilos of opium dross from 22 September to 22 October. In addition,
members of several smuggling gangs were arrested and handed over to this office.
Guards of the antinarcotics squad seized 5.450 kg of opium residue in Ramadan
yesterday. The smugglers were handed over to the relevant authorities. [Text]
[LDOlO310 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 0730 GMT 31 Oct 81]

OPIUM DISCOVERY IN SHIRAZ--During the past Iranian month [23 Sep-22 Oct] the
Shiraz police department has discovered a total of 2.369 kg of heroin and 7.053
kg of opium. [CF011635 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 1 Nov 81]

OPIUM FIND IN TORBAT--Torbat Jam Gendarnerie has discovered 4 kg of opium on two
Afghan nationals. who have been arrested for possession of the opium. [GF011635
Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 1 Nov 81]

MASHHAD OPIUM DISCOVERY-~Mashhad police have discovered 58 kg of opium in one house
in the city. In another part of the city police have discovered 1.5 kg of opium.
The Chenaran Revolution Guards have also announced the discovery of several kilo-
grams of opium that was buried in the ground. [GF011635 Mashhad Domestic Service
in Persian 1430 GMT 1 Nov 81]

(:50: 5300/5318

35
POLICE FEEL UNABLE TO ERADICATE COCAINE MARKET
Johannesburg SUNDAY TIMES in English 11 Oct 81 p 29

[Article by Gherhard Pieteree and Geoffrey Allen:
Fear Police")

"Cocaine Has Come To Stay,

. "Lift sa so much co- Courters are then used to lnnneaaarecentlyln Johan-t
[Text] cainei; ‘V-‘glablein South amawettacronthehorders. l nea'erg police tound that a
A! . ‘ha “i f One complicating tactor for! rnananuaewaaall hut
- nca _1 L “9" eat the lice concerns evudence. internally by thedrug. .
e Wt no a e o t e rugrsnow ngrnanu-: ens led tera --
th ll t be bl t tha a on it handout a!
eradicate it. lactured synthetically. - ing with police otricers and $4
At best. thev um" "I" The cocauie problem waa toaoothe the itching in his non.
. .. l . l . highlighted with the errata trila rlhhtnghianoaeagatnst
“0 000““ "10‘1""! ept- weekagootliveyoungmenaaid the olthepoticecnr

dentin ol cocaine-shilling
sweeping the upper echelons
of South African society.

In the month A? people
have heenpg'eated tn Johannes-
burg and Cape Town on charged
oi dealing in the drug.

lmeattgatiooa over a tortmht
have revealed that cocainesntll.
;ng is the :n-Ihtng at topolat:
parties in Johannesburg: north-
ern auhtu’hd. and large quantum
ol the expensive drug are report-
ed to have been 'oumped ‘ on :hc
loco; market

Became it is more dillicult to
smume into South Alma. Local

trees are la: higher than :n the ,

'ntted State:

In New York lg com only-

it». while in Johannesbur
once- ranne between ltzzo an
m depending on quality

it it understood that young-
sters are beginning to pool their
money to buy a (ram .1! a time

Water 31 van ltucyen. head oi
the Johannesburg branch at the
South Alncan Narcotics Dureau
sud. ”There are :arge quantitie-
or cocaine in circulauon.

"The more we can hope for is
that we are able to contain its.
usage." '

Policemen uv the "cocaine!
run" slam in Colombia. South
America and ll corned ria Eu-
rope to states burnt-nae South
A.rtca.

S 300/ 56010

tohaeehadthedrugtntheir

M.

two weeks ago police held a
Johannesburg tycoon [or [our
day! tor questioning about
cocauie.
Describing town as the
“drainr-thench“. the head or
the pe‘l‘own narcotic: bureau.
Captain Barry Uyteribogaart.
said the drug busineaa was a
"gnowing 1mm.

lie and that three drug:
used mainly by yet-setters were
cocaine. hem and LSD.
Police sag that. recently. there
has been a rge quantity 0! had-
ly "cut‘ trruaed) "coite‘ on the
market.

Oil cocaine to rz‘laeduaith a
dangerous variety to ncea
includ born and heroin.

Accor ngtoooeolSoutbhl.
rtca'a lorernoat drug authorittea.
Dr Sylvaln de Miranda. there ta a
lot ol 'had stull" doing the
rounds which could came symp-
torn: aundar to those ol a heart
attack _

"One o: :he serious medical
on o using mums post-
hie mm arrest" Dr de Mir-
and: say;

Another rna)or medical prob-
lem u that cocaine camea a
breakdown oi the mucous mem-
brane mauea in the once and con-
aunt users ollen have to have
their noses wretcallv “rebuilt'

36

Cocaine can also cause hallo.
ctnatlona alter continual

lead to the gradual disinte -
tlon ol many body organe‘ru'i-
cludtngtheeye:

O‘lhis week two Johannes.

hurgmenwereaenteocedtoaia
mouths‘ tail lor Mon or
coca

too.

The rnen. Gary trace. :6. and
Eric Rowan. 2:. aded guilty to
Ming tag 0 the drug

The sentences were upended
(or live years

Arguing in mitigation. Mr M
Rodeo. repreaentmg macs. said
that his client has ng
psychiatric treatment re-
quired long-term therapy on a
re hula

Petey Yutar.apbea tor
Rowan. said hiaclmthamena
munherotarock handand had
this been exposed to undesirable
elem

The magistrate. Mr D J du
Plants. and that the lan- stipu-
lated a rnuurnutn myear aeo-
tence lor the Mon of co-
caine and he thought the
men had got oll lightly.
POLICE LAUNCH CRACIOOWN 0N HARDRAX TRADE

Johannesburg RAND DAILY HAIL in English 5 Oct: 81 p 3

[Article by man Jaroschek]

THE non-stop effort by South Africa's police to bring down the
“Mandrax mandarins" is starting to pay off.

[Ten 1

C50:

Blocking the mum-million rand )landrax pipe!
meant not only guarding South Alrica's airports. but

lne from lndla to South Africa has
dozens of trips to neighbouring

and overseas countries. international phone calls and liaison between the head of

the Drug Squad Colonel Basie Smit. and the intern

Vtenna.

And .n Dellu. :he re;eated
pressure and complatsta nave
not gone unnotuced

Thu week. ‘.r..‘.ta s :::ector-
general 0! Health and Drug Con-
trol. Dr S S Gotnosltar. sale :th
alter meettng Cu Sam at an |§'
ternattonal mg :onlerence :n
Geneva. be had come to realise
the extent at South Mnca a Man-
on: problem

"We keep gettu complaznta
from South .llrtca So were I:
obwcusly a market.‘ Dr Gomor-
itar and.

It :a repeated :eatertng and
complamtng by S-‘Nlh .llrzca
that nae largely led to a recent
move by lndtan nealtb autnon-
ttea to look mm the potatbtltty ot
bannlng mﬂhacuoilne - :ne 5:-
sxc Ingredlent ol the tarmac
ptila.

A ban would ﬁnally end all

legal llandrax prodmuon m
Indra.

Crushing blow

But. says Col Smtt. there Kl“
remains t:e problem of produc-
tton unclandeauu :eboratonea
In Bombay and utter cum.

"(he bannmg, :owever. may
lead to the arrest at antone

S 300 I 5606

caught poaaeutng Mandrat
there. Thus would naturally deal
enuntng blows to dealers and
runner! “

Dr Sylvain de Shanda. dlree-
tor ol the South Mrtcen Nauonal
Cooper! on Alcoboltsm and Drug
Abuse. baa meantime warned
that tboee met dream! wet: to

one by Manon: could last
(orever

Manon: la a tumour glee
lng tablet “kn depresses
Vtul centre: at the central ner-

mmu'rw' 15" " ~'
I l

’5

upgrade
hue-«Mature.

"l'lth. be we meet drug rob-
leme. reacted South rlen
about t: was later.

atlonal Commlsslon on Drugs in

INDIA-SA W CONNECTION INVESTIGATED

Johannesburg RAND DAILY HAIL in English 2 Oct. 81 p 13

[Article by Enielin Jaroschelt:

[Text I

"The Handy Mandarin")

FOR'I‘Y years ago in a small labor-glory in Lucknow,
India. a doculr trying to ﬁnd a malaria cure spotted
the hypnotic and drowsy eflccl his new drug had on

It was a genesis: for lmmniacs a new mediclnc. for many
south African youths a drugged hell; for the Mandrax Mnndarlns.
millions ol rands each year.

That drn is a limo while lnhlel. banned but ever-ml. lhe
name ma rax derived lmrn mclhaqnolone.

Ten days ago I new lo India. m rln - one plll tell: ln
how at lhe mendru luhlﬂ. lo Son Mr (or helm-Mend

lrm lie moi: nl Snell Nun's m1

maln are; pmhlm

Mnha -‘ a llama; hello
comal Iy. «~va mlh m;
o! 20-year-nlul dulxn. "In;
buildup and narrow sum-In
smelting with Innnnlly.

Mmonrnllhelwnrillrsinlhe
"ml where mandva: In mll
gnaw-«l - last Flt low lac
hum woduml 5.5 Inn at
nmhaqmm

In lhv dirly lm-ly Mm.
mamlrn uhlm can he Irrol
nought (mm «new «I lbe 90
um driven (or Ir alrvady
(our times lbe «mud-Ila:
BM

lunle lbm pan on law: lo
humus Ry m lie 9'er has
‘m-hml" lo a men 9 ml:

lllll ch91 lat lhr "hm-Inm-
ru" who on or III-Ila lmn var-
lmn Multan sum-s Krill-a.
Swuilaul. Mamum. and r
mum to [nu-k up the tllls lrnrn
dulersordudmlsml lhrvlghl
(mutt:

TIM-y In" llllle lo {Par ln
drnlmg u- manrlru la lndu.
nhr-n- drug laws are In. no“! lie
rml prams m I Mr lnvedmml

On a visit In may: ﬂannel
l nhnaraluln. a antenna lold
n e Illa! mandrel was not mane-
l.‘ lured lur upon and mm
rmlrol was heln; kept on
pl v «ﬁlm.

"In name wholesalers. not-
lngto mate I Iul heck. let large
mum sllp through We!
were qnlcluy «um um
lie laduy's mulled odv'mt. Dr

llBKIMu.nld
"Amines-1m um ven
lo medoul n I: "u no
(«land nozﬂalatled mm.“
lhrm In “W!“ all ”n.
pllnx lo mnllral null-nu”

' llr Kali-um uul n I» dun-

cnll l0 «madame methan-

lo-e la dude-lube lulu bee-m
Svt'ﬂal mm we: needet
'Mel ls I mt in»
neck- Ml stalle- showed um Ks
hypnolir riled mil be ex-
Iendrd ll ltphmlne (be.
m» was I "
lunar“ rental-s boll: l
ol the and 5|
lelvdnmlne
«pt-tat: “'qu plush hotels. a" gun" to Swath

‘ tltutt to tax! am m
1' arm ula «32.: gt» ml}; «gamut 5“,u'm£',’;'.'.',’°'“- " "
m l x cud. .
Theloﬂttuh to: mu ‘1". g . "”10,th ' "y “M Wm tutu ables set:

. want. at auto 9th
ml: at mutt. nuts IN tum Runaway: undeven m ‘
mat. and 00.1w]. «cu ttt the tote! swung du- rmtmw “334':
I’M vat ttm to {m a at: 01$“de calls 0 Sum

sultan tit-contra with “own: mm mm “WWW

Indu- tms o! god: I“... u 'ce.
"c tum Me In- tett I: tum A u; “4"“. ""73“”. “a Gaborone

nun-mtg ”.urc smart Mt when mutt «ta. to whet; rum"; ta Sena-tutu alone: l0.“
ht‘ maul :l , mm 5:". and mm to «gut (80M: um m m (hm
"At (tm l taut-bud. Mm ate nub let-mvtt but never ud7xomlmtttlw Idler.
taught" lot 2 lung ton: unu- I am with the ttttnt In her. in in :- .Wltabwl hotel.
lelt :th. . .t'-J a: t :ntrn l but: up am the ﬁrm
tt - R

ictt mp: [gum up. tat-amt mutu- u mutt as S B Miami-l. lit“ in
but? turn uptuiuvett. mama; ttzoolltu MOW tut- uttputttn. mouth detectives Md M
L0 “Shiva "“5 30'“! down “angle masts-um. madman adapts II "at;
otwu _ A free!!! cum! tum-m at :3 Mt Maw l W
manta: 3: ml a; m; 4 now- ublrht wont? slam m. «5.me m7!!! hut
atmg pnotcm tn Indu- The Mr mtﬂtutt which was demoed to: nu mutton it: South Amt-at.
kls have lllllr value out!» hat tt- Smut. Man was to tune A law tarts ago an? mm!
mm, at ttnutbtty ant lit-Du ttttsmtt tn the "er3 port: mum Walnut 0 5”!-
ll.nhutt_ data) and ganja .m- brluu‘ at In: Mun-turd taut-L1
u ut-In' mull-u am a hut arm-r tun: ht: “TI! “‘90“ W” "I"? "’
ttut ttu: uhlrtx am- lhm‘ “If "man-g .t uutuahh- luk- rested ltrrlusc the ill -
Sun-u! tau dun-rs tn ﬂutt- lmr lunar“ lulu: tit-alts “Vt" nacwmyan ed. 0::
m and ”MM carol." M- 11.:- tabk-ts an: “aunt tn the nun" utter! the outlet (‘0 -
""1th In me "If, rut MID Mutt? 11‘0”?“ “Ma and then mm [hen-tun“; ”Sign”
chum mm mm a. mm". on tu . In A nut ncvrr pttcbu up. t mat

_ But “that! police an no! ul- :4
totMuﬂﬂWtquw Wang‘ﬂumlﬁchw am" ”We "any” to trace the

It .
tn nunuums Nahum tn ﬂu: ,
math. tn sultan-.1. the captt-d. 1"“ 3"“ 5!"- .
azxrhmzﬁ‘nl‘g“; 2:"; mxnnut Iitl tt'tt Ind and the.
tutu-s (Ir) em along «tut .t (’35:: " tn 1:"; 3w ““-
sutall Mutt ol hobbit lot ltvc "m lat-“I'm! by MN MW
mil}. m 1" "We In "UN“, ‘ .
"MN: hoax-Mir vtu'tcd “Ir n,.'"":',' '1‘“ 3;} “fun '9-
atm tu buy taut-ts such as “m“: 5f“ 3‘" can "ﬁt
Nan-mu U '"Mﬂmlltm such as the
And rm t-matut'nte mt» Y"'"""""“ "MW "mm
but rm: ts l to get them unto (‘“"""'“‘°" on ‘M_W “9

Swath A I‘D: to map the utur- .tiﬁ‘1ﬁagogww two 3
mum pﬂll ‘.' . .
Thu-nuttdru stnttuhng tuutr warm” down W ‘k "5'“,

tux ttutthkd tts admins m the
2 mull“ Wm «tut? ’

can am I tkuu mt» 'tult

Muir]: ﬁn taut-MIMI“ MIII- l rublcm

m" "Wm "“" "'“""""" m t'ntmaltuul mum at

-. tnrtLatquoItr Is «and by the

( $0.9th tart that h: "mama; mn-

tat-tm-tt than out ltc taut lot

”tutu-d and smut“! utth legal [llr’nﬂu. sawdust: lo 0

dam-I “ “'1“- . "WWW" . thrmwaltbclm Dt'vbtonttl
Int-mm an a "wim- ptw" “mom, ”a n, .

"‘“NW‘K‘II‘R Vi"! 1" W" Last mt no turn at undu-

1M1!!!“- |03W~IN ‘5'" I‘MI'UGL" catch-d the "mud

ullt at atum- Na't': tut tut-gal the Ila-rm

In l'ﬂ‘ﬂ‘h‘ﬂmﬂll'" "1‘" «my Nﬂc tom were “unlu-

lf'tt “WW! and "MW" '5" turd In: 19' l dammit- pu-

pmm. rm!” M lone

Smut Mum's m I:
D: 5300/5606 or Mm-tuuddmn HIS-at be
turd ‘
ZAMBIAN FINED POR MANDRAX HAUL
Mbabane THE TIMES OF SHAZILAND in English 27 Oct 81 p 1

[Text] Zambia Airways financial controller, Mr Lithebele Humphrey Nyunbu, has
been found guilty by Hanzini Magistrate's Court for possession of a huge quantity
of Mandrax tablets.

Nyumbu, who was earlier this year found with 12,000 Handrax tablets, was fined
E70 days' imprisonment in default.

He was arrested by police in the VIP lounge at the Hatsapa Airport soon after
his arrival in May this year.

He pleaded not guilty and, in defence, told the court that he was given package
containing the tablets by an acquaintance of his in Lusaka. He said he had been
directed to deliver it to a doctor in Swaziland, but denied that he knew what
was in the package.

Nyumbu is the tenth person accused of possession of the drug in Swaziland this
year.

Two South Africans who were found with 80,000 tablets have since been convicted.
A Swazi medical practitioner and two others arrested for possession of 2,000
tablets were found not guilty and acquitted by Mbabane Senior Magistrate, Hr
J.A.l. Khumalo. The case of two Swazi citizens and a South African allegedly
found in possession of 72,000 tablets has been postponed until tomorrow.

Mandrax is big business--cach tablet costing £10 in the South African black
market.

The crown in Nyumbu's case was represented by Mr Patrick Errol Flynn while Hrs
Q. Hlnnze appeared on behalf of the accused.

(30: 5300/5605

‘1
NARlﬁﬁAﬂL TRAFPI(KING ORGANIZATION BROKEN UP
Ouagadougou L'OBSERVATEUR in French 5 Oct 81 pp 6-5

.lArticle by Vierax F. Sanou]

[Text] The National Police have just saved 7,530 youths by blocking the
distribution of 7.530 grams of marihuana which were brought into the country
through the Ghana-Upper Volta drug channel. This fine bit of police work which
weakened the network without completely dismantling it was done by Commissioner
Mathias of the Bobo-Dioulasso Judicial Police Mobile Brigade (BHPJ) and his men.
Drug trafficking is carried out by a secret organization with very complex
channels. This is the way in which the channel that has just been "put out of
action" operated:

0n 7 September, Inspector You! Anedee, acting on a hunch, stopped Sory Adana.
When he was searched, the police found a l-gran bag of narihuana wrapped in a
craft paper package on the suspect. Sory Adana was. therefore, released.

At a time when he least expected it, Sory Adama was put under surveillance
by Inspector Youl, trainee Peace Officer Dominique Nignan and Peace Officer
Abduulaye Ouedraogo.

On 11 September, however. and for unknown reasons, but certainly to lose an
accomplice and while covering himself by a forthright action, Sory Adana left his
large shop in the Dioulasso-Ba district in Bobo. Of his own free will he went to
the RMPJ with a 1.3-kilogrnm package of narihuana which he said he had received
from a Ghanian named Yousaif Ouuarou, who was born in 1952 in Kumassi. in the
Republic of Ghana. After having spent the period 1975-1977 in Bobo-Dioulasso.
Youssif Ounarou got into drug trafficking there (narihuana was his particular
speciality). Arrested by the police, Youssif Oumarou confirmed the facts and
stated In substance that he had sold Sory Adana seven packets instead of one for
10,000 francs per packet. Sory Adana was, therefore, arrested again by the
y)lice. Forty-eight hours later he confessed. He acknowledged receipt of the
seven packets but had stupidly entrusted then to his roommate, Alessane Toure,
who in turn entrusted then to his mother, Salimata Toure. As a good mother eager
to do the right thing and to assure her son’s fortune, she hid the packets in
Sonsoribougou. an outlying district of Bobo-Dioulasso. although she and her

50H lived in the DiOulassu-Bn district in the center of the city. "I waited

42
until night to take the box somewhere to get rid of it once and for all." she
said. Obviously. the police did not buy that story, particularly since the box
had been placed carefully under Salimata's bed.

Three persons, therefore. have just been removed from Ghanian Youssif Oomarou's
network. Did Oumarou really sell only the seven packets? No, because the eighth
packet had been bought by Salif Kanazoe, alias "Capi," for his personal use and
certainly also for possible use by his friends in Club "Hallucinogens." However,
it should be emphasized that Salif Kanazoe is a habitual offender having spent

4 months in prison after sentencing by the Correctional Tribunal. He was turned
over to the Civil Prison in Soho where he is awaiting trial.

So long as there is profit. trafficking will not cease, no matter what the
objective of the trafficking may be. It is proper. however, for the people to
know that it is the duty of every good citizen to report any trafficking in toxic
products such as drugs in all their forms. The 7,530 grams represented 7,530
doses in craft paper-wrapped packets at 50 francs per bag. Some 7.530 young
persons were going to buy these bags at that price which would have caused them
no pain. and 7.530 young persons would have mortally drugged themselves. It

is high time to put a rein on all these youths who are prematurely losing their
minds by abusing smoked. injected or ingested drugs.

8143
C80: 5300/5601

43
BRIEFS

HEROIN DEALERS--On 14 October detectives of the narcotics department arrested at

Schuechat Airport 34-year-old Egyptian engineer (Ahmed Batavy Doves) who carried
on his person 100 grams of pure heroin. A second Egyptian, 35-year-old (Coma
Muhammad Ahmed Talkhan). was arrested in (Dowes') Vienna Hotel room while

portioning heroin. (Doves) lives in Sofia, (Talkhan) in Bucharest. [Vienna
KURIER in German 17 Oct 81 p 21 AU]

(:50: 5300/2062

44
BRIEFS

HASHISH SEIZED A'l‘ AlRPORT--Hashish worth 30 million kroner has been smuggled into
Denmark in recent months through the air freight office in Kastrup. This has
been revealed by preliminary investigations by the narcotics lice after the re-
cent find of 216 kilograms of hashish addressed to the B 5. ll Burmeister & Iain]
Shipyard. A review of freight papers showed that at least 750 kg of hashish had
come in with the same method used in the "B & H" case. And only the 216 kg,
which came into the wrong hands due to an error by the smugglers. could be con-
fiscated by the police. in all the police check in the last few weeks revealed
that the Pakistanis behind this have sent freight five times to firms in Copen-
hagen, including B 6. H. That these contained hashish as in the B & ‘1 case can be
shown by the consignment papers which in decisive ways readable the papers that
came with the shipment of the 216 kg. The consignment papers listed that shipment
as "ship parts." As far as we could find out last night the other four shipments
did not arrive at the fictitious addresses on them but must have been removed by
accomplices either at the airport or working for a transportation company. [Text]
[Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDBNDE in Danish 7 Oct 81 p 10] 6578

DRUG PROFITS LA" PROPOSED--An amendment in the penal code will be proposed to
make it a clear violation to receive money resulting from a narcotics violation.
Justice Minister Ole Espersen will present a bill on such "narcotics receivership"
to improve the chances of getting at narcotics dealers. [Text] [Copenhagen
BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 7 Oct 81 p 11] 6578

C50: 5300/2025

105
BRIEFS

ZAIRE STUDENTS ARRESTED-~Three Zaire students were arrested at 1930 [1730 GMT] to-
day by customs drug squad officials at Ellinikon airport when 77 kilos of hashiah
were discovered in special hiding places in four suitcases. me hashish was dis-
covered during a check of the student's luggage. The students will be charged to-
morrow. [Text] [Nc282256 Athens Domestic Service in Creek 2200 Off 28 Oct 81]

CSO: 5300/5317

lob
HEALTH MINISTER LSbUBS REPORT ON DRUG PROBLEM
Rome L'UNITA in Italian 1 Oct 81 p 5

[Article by Maria R. Calderoni: "Chilling Data Furnished by the Government:
'Heroin Makes Up 90 Percent of the Drug Market In Our Country'"]

[Text] The situation denounced in the Aniasi report. Drug dealers younger than
25 years of age. More and more young people are dying: minors are also victims.
The Middle East, the source.

Rome--The drug addict is young, 18 to 25 years of age, most often a male, with

a junior or senior high school education. to a great extent unemployed or in search
of a first job. This is the identity kit of our country's drug addict. His
description, a moving one in spite of the dryness of the bureaucratic language, is
sketched in the "Report on the State of the Phenomenon of Drug Addiction,"
presented to parliament this past 25 June by Aniasi, the then Minister of Health,
and was published only yesterday.

In the identity kit, with its connotation of death, there is a word that stands
nut. heroin: it now is the drug that is most consumed by our young people; in
fact. one might say, the only one. The figures are chilling. The terrible powder
represented 85.2] percent of drug consumption in Italy in 1979; in 1980, 86.10
percent. The geographic portrayal of self-destruction is subdivided as follows:
89.27 prrcent in the north; 73.69 in the central part; 96.48 in the south and
islands.

Thus. as moreover our party has denounced on several occasions and in official
detuments. a complete triumph with extremely rapid escalation for the hard drug,
can that has conquered the Italian market in less than 6 to 7 years. The other
drugs are outdistanced by far: morphine is at the 2.3 percent level; opium, 0.30;
amphetamines, 2.07; cocaine, 0.36; marihuana and hashish, between 5 and 6 percent.

Along this trail there are increasingly closer crosses, young people cut off by an
overdose or by badly cut powder-poor dead people, with burst lungs and eyes out of
their heads: 62 in 1978; 129 in 1979; 208 in 1980. And these are only the "heroin"
deaths of which the police authorities are aware.

b7
As for geographic location, more die in Lombardy, in Lazio, and then, in decreasing
order in the Veneto, Emilia-Romagna, Tuscany, and Caaoania, Piedmont, Liguria, and
Trentino-Alto Adige. Heroin victims include 26 women. The age groups of heroin
victims include 143 persons from 18 to 25 years of age; 51 from 26 to 1.0; 3 over
40; 9 minors.

The other chilling data: minors are beginning to die: 9 in 1980; 6 in 1979; and
next? The report does not give their age. but it is easy to guess: between 110 and
17 years, a dreadful age to die from drugs.

More. Drug peddlers are on the increase: 7,783 persons were denounced for drug
trafficking (6,403 of them under arrest) in 1980; that is, 1.8.46 percent more than
the previous year. Dope peddlers, too, unfortunately are young: at good 6,740

are the same age as their victims, between 18 and 25 years old, and constitute
60.90 percent of the total. Whereas foreigners represent 9.72 percent (barely
757), no less than 43.97 percent of the drugs intercepted in Italy was seized from
then. This proves the truth of another charge made by our party, that Italy is
one of the most extensive of the international drug trafficking markets.

"th He Drug Ourselves. The Monkey in the Body": This is the title of a volume
that the Ministry of Defense published especially for its conscripted soldiers.
As a matter of fact, dope is present in the army, too: 2,135 cases in 1980 alone.

Then there are the amounts and places of origin of the new scourge. "In 1980
197.128 kg of heroin were seized, an increase of 130.87 percent over 1979." These
are the verbatim words of the ministerial report-~chilling in their starkness. And
it continues: "Completely complementary to the above mentioned figures on the
seizures of heroin is the one concerning the interception of basic morphine:
267.787 kg in 1980 compared with 76.382 kg in 1979. This substance in large part
was intended for conversion into heroin in the secret laboratories that have been
discovered in Italy."

As for the places of origin. 96.63 percent of the heroin that has been seized came
from the Middle East (Turkey, in particular) and the rest from Southeast Asia
(especially Thailand), whereas in 1979 alone 70 percent came from the Middle East.
Plainly speaking, this is an extremely serious situation.

Finally. there are the jails, this explosive area also from the point of View of
the drug addicts who are "confined" there. There are a great many: a good 8.41
percent of the entire prison population in 1980-2,SSS of the 30,353 prisoners. In
addition, the report states that there is a frightful lack of assistance and of
intervention. "The first fact to be pointed out is that of nonhomogeneity in the
national territory; the carrying out of the 1975 law and of the subsequent Aniasi
decrees has been quite intermittent and fragmentary; and the commitment of some
regions (Piedmont, Liguria. hilia-Romagna, Tuscany, Lazio) has not been matched

by a comitment from the other regions." In fact, a drug addict is completely
abandoned in prison.

68
Because of the seriousness and escalation of the drug problem described in the
report, the report may be viewed also as a real boomerang, an indictment that
retorts on the government, on the appointed organs. on the various authorities.

8255
080: 5300/2027

49
TON 0P HASHISH 831230; 8 ARRESTS IN MILAN
Rome L'UNITA in Italian 29 Sep 81 p S

[Excerpts] Hashish valued at 6 billion hidden among tomatoes. Eight arrests. The
merchandise arrived from Lebanon via Catania. Heroin valued at 2 billion in a
house in Cinisello Balsamo.

Milan—-Eleven quintals of hashish seized; 8 persons arrested. This is the balance
sheet of an operation that the mobile squad concluded today in Buccinasco, near
Milan, where it found dope in a vehicle. The dope is valued at 6 billion lire,
retail.

The following were arrested: 32-yearold Giuseppe Benedetto, of Potenza; 50-year old
lgnazio Havilla, of Catania; 60-year old Mario de Cristofaro, of Catania; 22-year
old Cosimo Litrico, of Messina; 35-year old Francesco Vitale, of Monte; 32-year
old Pietro Longo, of Catania; 38-year old Carmelo Ferlito, of Catania; 35-year old
Gaetano Ferrara, also of Catania and the only one without a record.

All were charged with criminal association, possession of dope, and dope peddling.

In the Buccinasco vehicle. the hashish was hidden in 25 bags, each weighing 40
kilograms. The merchandise was hidden among boxes of tomatoes, fruit, and vege-
tables that were loaded onto a truck. the property of Francs Henardo, wife of
Ignazio Malvilla who is a vegetable vendor. It was ascertained that the merchan-
dise came from Catania and was transported to Milan by Cosimo Litrico and Mario

De Cristofaro.

Also seized was a can containing 25 kilograms of hashish oil, valued at about

10 million lire a kilo, wholesale. A detail indicates that the merchandise arrived
from Lebanon. In fact, the picture of a cow is printed on the bags and below, in
Arabic characters, is written: "Cattle Feed Canter. Coop. factory for Middle
East Feed Company, Lim.,Beirut. Prepared especially for the Ailos Company for
international trade - Beirut (Lebanon).”

Domenico Ciampa, 43 years old, a Kodak messenger, was arrested in Cinisello
Balsa-o. He is a native of Andali (Catanzaro), is married and has a 15-year old
daughter. Heroin valued at 2 billion was found in his residence. The police are
also searching for his brother, Gabriele Clamps.

8255
C80: 5300/2027 50
PK”%ELHS FACING DLbC TREATMENT CENTERS
Milan PANURAHA in italian 12 Oct 81 pp 103-113
iAr'icie by Gianplero Borella and Valeria Gandus: "This Is How They Help Them"]

[Text3 Lay or religious, public or private, open or closed. Following is a

-iptlen of the Italian drug treatment centers and of the philosophy that
motivates their various types of intervention.

There is a widespread opinion that Italy has done "little or nothing" to counter
L": drxg r.oblem. Berlinguer, PCI secretary, stressed this sentiment in the Turin
hz-mnnrhlg. NUOVA SOCIETA. this past week. And a capillary analysis conducted

by tnhOkAMA in some Italian regions only confirms it.

thh a family finds itself in the throes of a son on drugs, it begins to run from
one ccnter to another, from a community to a hospital, following the contorted
messages of an underground tom-tom consisting of rumors, telephone calls, newspaper

clippings, meetings with friends, experts, or persons who have, or who already
have had, the same pathetic problem.

Generally. the first step is toward public entities: a municipal center or a hospi-
tal for detoxification treatment. The first bitter disappointment: the few public
centers are overcrowded and have very long waiting lists. And, above all, they are
substantially unprepared to deal with the problems of drug addicts.

Tuscany (with an estimated 2,000 drug addicts, 1,000 of them in Florence alone) for
some time has been issuing personal cards-~to be renewed daily--to permit young
people to obtain morphine or methadon from pharmacies (for maintenance or with-
drawal therapy). it boasts of no less than 32 services for drug addicts. But

results are poor. In Florence, in 5 years. out of 700 young people who were treated,
only 60 have been officially declared free of drugs.

Also, inthe few other regions having drug treatment facilities, things are not
going any better. In Campania (with an estimated 4,000 cases) there are 30 hospital

cvnivrs that distribute methadon (to the 65 percent of the more than 2,000 who have
been admitted) and morphine, but there is a complete lack of prevention and

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

recovery structures. And Lombardy, Lazio, Veneto, Priuli-Venezia Giulia, and
Emilia are also at the end of their rope. In the South, apart from Campania,
there is practically nothing.

Piedmont can boast of a numerically unique experience: "When we started 3 years
ago, we had the choice of providing very good treatment to very few persons or to
reach out to the greatest number of drug :ddicts. We chose the second path," says
Nanni Pepino, in charge of the service. There are an estimated 8,000 drug addicts
in the Piedmont region, no less than 3,000 of them in theraphy (500-600 resort to
methadon each month). Here, too, however, public territorial prevention and
recovery structures are still only on paper.

The only fortunate oasis that may at times emerge from the tom-tom of despair is
Villa Haraini of Rome-not only because since 1976 it has conducted a therapeutic
community financed also by the Lazio region and competently directed by Massimo
Barre, but also because Eugenia Tamburrino, a specialist in the therapy of the
crisis of abstinence, works there.

Perhaps Eugenia Tamburrino, who is paid 150,000 - 200,000 lire for each young
person in trouble, really does succeed in causing an addict to overcome diarrhea
and vomiting, and in causing his pains to be bearable for 26 hours. But her
refusal to allow other doctors to repeat and to objectively check the therapy of
nose and ear microinjections certainly is not usual in scientific practice.

The next step is the family's search for someone-~1sy or religious, according to
personal persuasion-who may be able to deal with the ever increasingly acute
problems of a young person who has been rejected by institutions. If the family
is a lay family, it can, for example. turn to the Siebenthal couple who, in their
private mental illness clinic in Genzsno (Rome) also take no more than 16 already
detoxicated persons at a time and keep them there for a year, alternating treat-
ment that includes swimming in a pool, courses in horseback riding or conversa-
tional English, and small jobs that are paid for on a piecework basis. But the
family risks going from the frying pan into the fire. The van Siebenthals, as in
the case of many other private "mental clinics," do not furnish data on recovery
or specific information on costs.

Or else the family may run across some voluntary-type community, like Fratello Sole
in Santa Marinella (a seaside spot, 6 kilometers from Civitavecchia), the
Cooperativa Hagliana, or the Trappers of Centocelle. Or even individual persons.
For example, Eugenio Villa, former IBM employee, who 5 years ago moved to a dairy
farm in Almenno San Salvatore (Bergamo), or Ermas Poggi, a former baker in Bologna,
father of a son who died at the end of this past year from an overdose. After
selling his shop, Poggi equipped his country home to house and to give work training
to some drug addicts.

The family will have more of a chance if it succeeds in arriving at CAD [expansion
unknown] in Milan, which has been in existence for 10 years and which now includes

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-'FN 'I \I I'SF "Ni."

doctors, students,and psychologists in its organization (opiates are not used here;
the lute-ventlon is of an ambulatory type; and last year some hundreds of young
people wnrx treated). And, perhaps the family can be almost certain of again
having a healthy young person who will be motivated to live, if it succeeds in
having the young person accepted by Vincenzo Huccioli, a sanguine person from
komagnn who has established a multiform community on the grounds of his property at
Sun Patrignano,in the Rimini hinterland.

Nucctuii is a very controversial person, but he does not worry about this. Last

year hr x13 arrested, along with 14 of his collaborators, as a result of a denun-
tiazaow by a young girl who was frightened by the community's methods ("affectionate,"
but in certain inflexible situations). He does not hide the fact that he has influ-
ential friends. For example, Gian Marco Horatti (son of the deceased oil producer,
Angelo), spendsnnny weekends at San Patrignano.

The approximately 200 young persons who live in San Patrignano work in the stable
(30 milch cows). at carpentry, furriery, and photolithography, and are making a
loom for weaving and a ceramics laboratory. "My son has been there for a year

and has again become a person," says actor Enrico Maria Salerno, father of 25-year
old Nicola,whoums on drugs for 10 years.

ﬂowever,thegrestest anti-drug work up to now has been carried out by priests. In
the short list of those who have tried to counter the chemical poisoning of a
couple of generations, there are many "dons": don Gino Rigoldi, in Milan; don
Giacomo Stinghi, in Florence; don Sergio Pighi, in Verona; don Luigi Ciotti, in
Turin; don Mario Picchi and don Pierino Germini, in Rome; don Mario Vatta, in
Trieste; just to mention the most well known.

But in mentioning priests, one does not mean that there is a unity of methods and
of aims. The approaches to the drug problem by all of these religious persons in
fact are very different. and could be rOughly divided into three categories: the
can:rist (don Picchi and the other communities of the CEIs-ltalian Solidarity
Lenter); the progressive (don Rigoldi's New Community, don Ciotti's Abele Group,
don U':mini's Incontro, don Vatta's San Martino a1 Campo); and finally the tradi-
tionalist (for example, the Caseina Verde in Milan or the Cozzo Lomellina Castle
of famous Father Eligio).

The last category, which exercises extreme, or absolute, secrecy, operates with

verv strict rules and rejects outside controls and is now anachronistic and isolated.
tn courrast, the other two have expanded notably. First of all, the centrists.

what ducS centrist mean? It means, in practice, methods that are quite rigorous,
directly derived from those employed in the American Daytop Villages.

According to information supplied by don Picchi, in the United States there is a
92 percent rate of recovery and rehabilitation of drug addicts. The CEIS does not
supply figures regarding the five communities (Florence, Naples. Rome, Lucca,
Gradara) that implement these same methods in Italy. But the strict hierarchy,

a life that is almost like that of cloistered monks, very plain, with precise

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN "Fl-“1“. IISF ()NI."

schedules and discipline," asstatedby don Picchi, seem to produce very encouraging

results on the drug addicts who, after a rigid selection, succeed in entering the
communities.

"The key to recovery," says don Stinghi, founder of the Florence community, where
of the 191 young persons who have been admitted so far 60 have been declared

cured, "is inside the community, not on .he outside." That is. anyone who does not
accept the rules, must pack his things and leave."

This type of intervention concentrates on the principle that the drug addict is a
"child who has grown only physically, without a strong personality, determination,
self-confidence." And therefore, in order to be re-educated, he must undergo a
kind of voluntary brain washing. However, in the opinion of don Rigoldi and other
priests engaged in the more progressive aspect of the Christian communities, this
position succeeds in Culing many young people, but returns to society persons who
have gone from drug dependence to community dependency.

This is why don Rigoldi tries not to completely isolate the young people (800 in

1 year) who turn to the 8 centers of the New Community (a flower in the buttonhole)
but, whenever possible, to integrate the drug addicts (not the "extreme cases")

and young people who have other problems. Of course there is the risk that the
drug addict may contaminate one who is not an addict but, according to the Milanese
priest, if the group is well-assorted and strong, this will not happen.

All together, then, the young people keep in very close contact with that same
society which, as a result of drugs or other reasons. caused them to be on the
sidelines. This is translated, whenever possible. into work by day and group life
in the evening and during free time in the lodging-communities. "For the more
serious cases, there must be stricter control" admits don Rigoldi "for a certain
period, even in closed communities, but these must never be monastic or police-like."

This more or less is the thinking of the Abele Group of Turin (which works in close
liaison with the municipality and which operates an important agricultural community)
and the lneontro of Rome.

With their 14,000 telephone requests a year for treatment, 2,600 conversations, 720
young people who have stayed there for only 1 night and 60 who remained there for
an entire year (only 3 have returned to drugs) the Incontro, which also has 3
agricultural centers in Umbria. has drawn on disposability. willingness, and
flexibility as their strong points.

Somewhat as in the case of d0n Vatta's community. "In the past we were more drastic
in San Martino in Campo. Before accepting someone, we required a desire to stop,
the observance of many rules," explains 21-year old Fulvia Rossi, a professional
social worker who works in the community. "Then experience taught us that very
often the persons whom we encountered were too weak to be able to achieve results

in a short period of time."

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Today this is practically all that is available in Italy to a family that discovers
that there is a young person in its hone who is ”hooked" on drugs. Not much, in

truth. And thus an ever-increasing umber of fanilies have turned to a last resort:
foreign centers. Perhaps with good results for the young people, but very bad

ones for the parents who, in order to pay for the costs (2-3 nillion a month) have
of ten gone into debt and have become destitute. Hitheut any compensation, not even
a partial one.

I Note:] Following is a list of contributors:

Carmen Bertolazzi, Francesco Canoaa, Vito Paenza, Anna Jannello, Cesare Martinetti,
Dada Rosso, Eliana Sabbioni. Luciano Santin, Antonella Valentini.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Hondadori Bditore S.P.A. Hilano

8255
CSO: 5300/2028

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(MNLY

ITAEY

BRIEF

HEROIN HAUL IN NAPLEs--Naples-Tuo kg of heroin were seized in Naples by the police
in a residence in the Traiano district, in the suburban area of Puorigrotta. This
is the biggest amount of a heavy drug discovered in Naples. The heroin was in the
residence of a person with a record, who succeeded in escaping. The police arrested
his wife and another woman: the wife, 26-year old Patrizia Casanova, b3 Traiano —-
Avenue; and 24-year old Vincenza Alterio, b Ronolo e Reno Street. The latter has

no previous record and is a friend of the Casanova woman. [Text] [Turin LA STAMWA
in Italian 8 Oct 81 p 11] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editrice LA STAHPA s.p.A.] 8255

CSO: 5300/2028

56
NEW CANNABIS SMUGGLING TRACED PROM INDIA THROUGB POLAND
Stockholm DACENS NYHI’Z‘I‘ER in Swedish 9 Oct 01 p S
éhrticle by Leif Dahlin: "Smugglers of Humans Bribe Customs and Police Personnel:7

éText7 Commerce in human beings of a kind which is seldom encountered has been uncovered
in Sweden. A skillfully-run organization with ramifications in eastern Europe and West
Germany has smuggled at least 60 people from India into Sweden. Those who had no money
had to pay for their trip by smuggling in large quantities of cannabis.

DAGENS NYHETER has learned that a well—placed Indian who is suspected of being the
brains behind the smuggling of people and narcotics has "disappeared" in Moscow.

The gang has made millions of kronor from its operations. According to information
which has become available to DAGENS NYHBTER, it has succeeded in bribing customs and
police personnel in New Delhi and Bombay in India.

The police, in cooperation with the customs service, are intensifying their search
for Indians who are living here in Sweden and remaining concealed.

1wonty "Tourists"

in the early part of the summer, the British customs authorities sounded the alarm,
:hrough their international information instrument, to Interpol in Paris regarding an
.rcrease in tourist traffic from India to Great Britain and, by way of tendon, to the
ram: of Western Europe. There were confiscations of narcotics in the possession of
many travelers and the Swedish customs authorities intensified their surveillance in
..1ru 4nd at airports as a result of the alarming reports.

.2 supremter, some 20 Indian "tourists" were caught by customs personnel in Arlanda

In email grrmps and a total of about 30 kilograms of cannabis in bags with double
bottoms were confiscated. The narcotics agents of the National Criminal Police,
working with the Foreigners Division of the Stockholm Criminal Police, quickly
succeeded in establishing that what was involved was smuggling of human beings and
narcotics into Sweden of a type that is seldom encountered. Some 60 Indian citizens
were discovered who had come here illegally. There are about 30 in the Stockholm

area, and 10 of them are in custody in conformity with the provisions of the Foreigners
law, 11 are under arrest on suspicion of serious smuggling of commodities and narcotics
crin:s. Ten of them have already been ordered to leave the country.

57
Get a Woman Pregnant

According to Criminal Police Inspector Harry Nyman of the Foreigners Division, a

travel agency in New Delhi which was involved with foreign narcotics interests sent

out representatives to villages in the province of Punjab, on the Indian-Pakistani

border, among other places. Peasants and farmers who live in extremely dire circumstances

and have never been near a densely-populated area were offered a new life in the big
paradise of Sweden.

Most of these thoroughly deluded people said everything they owned. pawned property
and borrowed from relatives to get money for airline tickets and the $500 deposit
they were required to make to be able to travel to Sweden.

Those who did not have proper passports were assisted with forgeries. Before they
left, the English-speaking group leader gave the travelers detailed instructions on
how they should behave toward the Swedish authorities when they had crossed the border.

In one case, the men were urged to look up some good friend or fellow-countryman in
Sweden who had been designated for the purpose as quickly as possible and then try to
establish contact with a woman. The sooner she became pregnant the better their
chances would be of getting the Swedish authorities to let them remain.

Legal Brothel

Among those who were taken into custody in accordance with the Foreigners Law were a
woman and her two female friends. They had paid much more than 15,000 kronor to try
to make a future for themselves in Sweden. The group leader had told the woman that
what she made working in a brothel in her haneland was much less than the incomes that
were available in Sweden. The woman said that she had imagined that working in a
brothel was entirely legal in Sweden.

On 28 September. a group of 15 Indians came to Arlanda, all of them fro the province
of Punjab. The passports of most of them were in order. However, two of them had
dope in bags with double bottoms. and they were arrested by the Narcotics Police. The
group had come from Warsaw in an ordinary Polski bot aircraft. Two other Indiana came
to Arlanda by way of Copenhagen that same day.

Their passports were in order and each of them also had approximately $500 in travel
money. The customs detectives let the men pass. Outside the airport, they were
followed. The customs personnel wanted to see whether anyone was waiting for them.
Almost 10 kilograms of hashish were found in the bag of one of them.

Only a week later a group of 6 people came to Arlanda from India by way of Warsaw.
Customs confiscated 20 kilograms of dope that time.

New Cargo of Human Beings
None of the individuals in custody in the Drugs Section is making any admissions. Host

of them only speak Punjabi dialect and are entirely desperate. They feel that they have
been exploited.

S8
however, it was learned during the interrogation that the group leader, who accompanied
them to Sweden, saw to it, as a rule, that the travelers' papers were in order and
that they had money.

When they were going through controls, the group leader stepped
1".

Hr: picked up the bags containing narcotics, the mandatory $500 deposits and the
ticxets for the return trip to New Delhi.

r . .
red.

Then he waited until the proper time and
‘ed a new cargo of human beings.

The bags containing narcotics were turned over to persons in the vicinity of Arlanda
who are unknown to the police. An address in the southwestern part of Stockholm has
been under observation for some time. Ten of the Indians who had cone to Stockholm

illegally had moved into the Columbus youth hotel on 'i'jarhovsgatan.

They had lived in the hotel for a week without any contact with the outside world.
The Foreigners Police went there on Tuesday.

The Indians were completely frightened
out of their senses and could not com-unicate.

Quant i t ies of Cannabis

The police came at the right malent.

”By chance," there were two nicely-dressed
Indians there who were living in this country as traveling automobile dealers.

One of them is in custody, and the possibility cannot be excluded that he, too, is
involved in the drug dealings.

is spokesman for the customs detectives in Stockholm has told DAGENS Hymn that.
before the British custans authorities gave the alarm in regard to the drug dealings
being described here, 100 Indians certainly had managed to get into Sweden illegally,
and that large quantities of cannabis had also been smuggled in almg with them. The
Narcotics Commission of the National Criminal Police, which already is burdened with
a number of "heavy" cases which involve searching for individuals, nevertheless has

..-.~t.‘.ilcd a large number of its personnel to try to track down a couple of Swedish drug
bur-vs who are thought to be implicated in this gang's activities.

Some Indians who have come here are to be passed along to other countries, including
i “rice and England.

Chief prosecutor bennart Nilsson, in Sollentuna, says that 10 Indians have been
invited for attempting to comit serious actuality-smuggling crimes and two have
'.--I-r- nr rested on suspicion of having omitted serious narcotics offenses.

urt'wl‘morc, he has called for the arrest of a 29-year-old Indian agricultural worker

:tho trip leader) for breaking the Foreigners Law. lie was questioned in his mother
tongue, Punjabi.

He testified that he helped the travel agency in New Delhi but he
denim: that he has done anything criminal.

CilC: L 300/2023

59
REPORT ON STOCKHOLM DRUG TRENDS FINDS INCREASE IN AMPHETAMINES
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETEK in Swedish 10 Oct 81 p 33

{Article by Rolf Stengard: "Abuse of Amphetamines Increases Sharply:7

[Text7 Abuse of amphetamines is increasing in Stockholm. There also is a good deal
of hashish. Abuse of it is extensive and the age of addicts is gradually creeping
lower and lower. But the abuse of heroin seems to have stagnated.

That appears from the recent reports from the county council, the local government
administrations and the police.

Hashish and amphetamines are big problems just now. Information to the same effect
from the police, the county council, the Medical Administration, the Social Admin-
istration and the Recreational Administration indicates that the age of hashish addicts
has moved downward and that sales of amphetamines have undergone a striking increase.

Maria's clinic for acute cases states that hashish is being abused by 16 and 17-year-
olds to a much greater extent.

From the reports which have recently been presented to the parliamentary consultation
body of the county council and the Stockholm District, it is apparent that 'it has
been a quiet summer‘--the quietest for some years--but activity among addicts has
increased this fall.

After a discussion with its field assistants, the Recreation Administration writes that
extensive dealing in cannabis and amphetamines i8 OOH going on.

The School AJministration regularly carries out investigations of the students' nar-
cotics and alcohol-consuming habits. The most recent public investigation indicated
that about 20 percent of the lS-year-olds have tried hashish and 6 percent use it
regularly. Lars Cernerud, the senior physician for the schools, says that the figures
from 1978 are still applicable today.

"The big rise in hashish in 1980 has not continued. Certainly the abuse of hashish
has increased, but not distressingly just at present,“ Cernerud says.

"But the danger that the use of dope can shoot up again at any time is lurking just
around the corner,“ he says.

60
“A Pipe Before a Meal“

In recent times, even well-established adults have begun to use hashish instead of
the usual drink on Fridays, for example. On this, the Recreation Administration
writes as follows in its report:

"It is not unusual to have 'a pipe before a meal' even among ordinary citizens who
do not abuse drugs or alcohol in any other way. There are adults who are beginning
to accept hashish and marijuana as something socially acceptable and just as good as
wine and liquor.“

The :enool Administration has made the same discovery, and is concerned about it.

The selling of hashish takes place in all the districts of Stockholm, the social
Administration points out--both in the inner city and the suburbs. No district is
"innocent" of hashish. But the southern suburbs have a bigger problem than the northern
ones.

The Maria youth clinic says the same thing--Soderort, with Huddinge, ﬂagersten, Parsta,
Ragsved and Botkyria, is under a heavier burden than Norrort. It is the Medical Admin-
istration which asked all four clinics for acute addiction cases about their

patients.

In all. there are 52 locations for acute cases of narcotics abuse in the entire
Stockholm area--in addition to Maria, they are also located at the Danderyd hospital
and the Buddinge hospital-~but, at the same time, there are more than 2,000 drug
addicts.

9266
C50: 5300/2023

61
NOTED ENTERTAINZRS ARRESTED FOR WISH
Istanbul HURRIYEI‘ in Turkish 19 Sep 81 pp 1,11

[Excerpt] IsniruSecret investigations carried out over a period of tile
in Izmir, which has been invaded by musicians and stage perforners because
of the fair, resulted in an operation conducted yesterday during which
Ibrahim ‘l'atlises, Perihan Savaa, and 22 as: players were arrested. In-
formed that vocalists working at the fair were using hashish and heroin
before going on stage, Izmir police and narcotics squads began to follow
the performers step by step. At the end of the investigations and searches
made in the middle of the night, the teens yesterday tool: ‘I'atliaas and his
close friend, Savas, into custody. It is being asserted that Pardi
Tayfur's sax players are also being held. In the neantine, it is clained,
narcotics police are cooperating with Istanbul police, and the hashish
operation against the entertainers will spread to Istanbul.

It was learned that three separate squads took part in the operation deal-
ing with Tatlises, whose name headed the list prepared by the Isnir police
after receiving a tip. After lengthy preparations, towards norning yester-
day, the tens raided, one by one, the residences that had been ascertained
and began to conduct searches.

In the first operation, the hone located on Hithatpasa Avenue of ‘l'ayfur,

a noted none in arebesque music, was raided. 'l'ayfur, who was confronted
by police towards morning in the house that he rented forthe duration of
the fair, was seen to be extremely agitated. After giving a brief explana-
tion, the police began to search various quarters of the residence. how-
ever, they were unable to uncover any hashish on the fsnous artist or in
his home.

The same squad that was unsuccessful in its initial raid then went to the
hotel at which ‘l‘ayfur's as: players were staying. 'i'he narcotics police
entered the rooms of the musicians and took the. outside. They discovered
hashish in the shape of plates under the beds and in the inside pockets
and linings of jackets. In the "operation of the year," all of the as:
players were arrested and taken to the narcotics departnent.

62
One of the raids in the "entertainers Operation" took place at the hotel
of the sex players of Tatlises, who became famous for his folk song,
"Ayaginda Kundura." The police, who entered the hotel rooms at the same
moment, told the so: players that they were making 5 search in order to
assess information they had received and showed them the search warrant
issued by the court. The special team found powder and ashes from smoked
hashish when they inspected places that could be used to hide contraband.
Upon discovery of hashish, which is reported to be of top-quality, the
sex players were placed under arrest and taken to prison.

Narcotics police, who apprehended a total of 22 see players for the crime
of "possessing and smoking hashish," then raided Tatlises' home. A spe-
cial team entered the house and was forced to subdue Ibrahim Acar, a nephew
of Iatlises, who sought to interfere. when the police found powdered
hashish in clothes under a bed, Acar claimed, "All of it belongs to my
uncle. He smokes it from time to time." thereupon, the police were com- _
pelled to draw up a new plan of action.

The police planned in secrecy to catch Tatlises in the act and left Izmir
to go to the vacation village on Kusadasi at which the noted musician was
staying. The special team arrived at the village in the afternoon and
took Tatlises and his girlfriend, Saves, into custody in a raid made there.
During the raid, Saves became ill and cried, "I have done nothing wrong."
Saves was calmed down with difficulty and was taken to Izmir with her boy-
friend, Tatlises, by the same squad in a special car.

It was asserted that a smallamount of hashishwasconfiscated from the room
in the vacation village that Ietlises went to visit for the day.

"First, Second" Handlers Sought

with the success of the third part of the initial plan, narcotics police
speeded up their investigation for the purpose of determining the first
and secoad handlers of the drugs. Narcotics bureau officials, who are
working to uncover the dealers who furnish the musicians with hashish in
Izmir and Istanbul, said, "The identities of those who supply hashish will
come out. This investigation extends to Istanbul. It is probable that
even more famous names will be uncovered in this part of the investigation.
The operation and investigation will continue for at least 3 more days.
One team will work in Izmir; another, in the surrounding vacation areas;
and a third, in Istanbul. Evidence that is in our possession and state-
ments that are being taken are being evaluated.”

Officials said that suspects can be turned over to the public prosecutor
only after the investigation is completed. They stated that they cannot
give detailed information as to the "amount of hashish found," because
"this figure could increase at any moment."

63
What Do Associates Say?

It was not possible to obtain the views of noted artist Tatlises since
anir Security Directorate officials refused to permit this, saying that
the investigation is continuing. However, associates of Tatlisea claimed
that some slanderous statements have been made about bin, and ”the identi-
ties of the slanderers are being kept secret” in order to give the ap-
pearance that the situation is nuch worse than it is.

what Do Club Owners Say?

while the operation, which was begun with 2 days of the fair remaining,
continues, the appearance of Tatlises and his girlfriend, Savas, were can-
celed last night. Tayfur, however, went on stage.

Talat Over, owner of the Puar Bkici Over Club, answered questions of a

Hurriyet News Agency reporter. he said that there were no problems in
the program whatsoever. he continued:

"Tayfur has no interest in smoking or possessing hashish. the fact that a
portion of the as: players have been accused of the same crime and have
been taken into custody has no bearing on us. rayfur's as: players have
been replaced with other artists."

1n the meantime, Necdet Tepegos, one of the owners of the Henolya Club, at
which Tatlises, who was arrested for the use and possession of hashiah,
appeared, could not be located despite an extensive search. According to
information obtained from associates, the investigation of ratliaes and
the subsequent change in the club's program affected Tepegos to a great
extent, and Tepegoz has left lanir.

Tatlises' manager was stunned by the operation conducted last night.

aanager Hasan Bora also disappeared when ratlises, who hecane an instant
star in Turkish folk music, was arrested by police.

11673
CSO: 5300/5306 END

64