FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY

JPRS L/10521

17 May 1982

Translation

FAITHFUL TO THE IDEAS OF THE PARTY
By

A.A. Yeplshev

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

ma OFFIGAL US: ONLY
JPIB publications contain tutor-tion prinrily tron foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also fro- neos agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those tron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the inﬂor-
-tion was smrized or extracted.

Unfaailiar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion aark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical no’ces within the body of an
iten originate with the source. lines within itens are as

given by source .

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vievs or attitudes of the 0.8. Goveruent. '

OOPYRIG‘I' MUS AND WHOM WING mmsnn 0P
mmms ”PRODUCED HEREIN ”(NIKE rm DISSEHINATIM
OF THIS PUILICIJ'IW BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL I! ORLY.
FAITHFUL TO THE IDEAS OF THE PARTY

Moscow IDBYAH emu WY in_Russian 1981 (signed to press 18 Aug 81)
pp 1-95

[Translation of book 'Paithfnl to the Ideas of the Party' by Aleksey

Alekseyevich Yepishev, Voyenisdat, 100,000 copies. 95 pages: published
in the series: “replanting the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress:
passages enclosed in slantlines printed in boldface: passages enclosed
in slantlines followed by (it.) printed in italics]

__—.‘

_.__._.

comm Pafe
Annotation
Introduction 1
Chapter One. Tried and Tested Vanguard of the Soviet People 7
1. Leading the Great Building Process 8
2. Decisive Source of the ﬂight of the stay and llavy l6
3. Powerful Heapon of the Perry 22
Chapter No. Parsing Indonitable lbxale in Service-en . 3‘
I. Marxian-Lenin“. - theoretical Foundation of Ideological Work 36
2. Conditions and Features of Ideological work at the Cont-porary
Stage 38
3. Principal Directions of Ideological Hort. Rays to Increase Its '
Effectiveness ‘1
lo. Guarantee of Success -- A Codiined Approach 1.6
Chapter Three. School of Life, School of. Indoctrination 55
1. Objective Patton of Indoctrination 56
2. Indoctrinational Role of Military labor 60
3. Discipline as a Factor of Indoctrination ' 6!.
Conclusion - 69
-a- [II-USSR-I’OUO]

[III - USSR - 4 - POW]
FOIOFFIOALIJSEONLY
ANNOTATIGI

[Text] This book discusses the historic significance of the 26th CPSU Congress
and reveals the tasks and nethods of ideological and political-indoctrination
work in the army and navy in light of the congress deannds for further increas-
ing the combat readiness of the IBSR Armed Forces. It is intended for a broad
readership.

INTRODUCTION

The 26th Congress of our Leninist party gave the Soviet people a nighty in-
fusion of prod! :tive energy. "wavering confidence in the trimh of Con-
nunist ideals and the atnosphere of businesslike efficiency and de-andingness
which characterized the proceedings of our party's highest foru- presently
deter-nine the feelings, thoughts and deeds of Soviet citizens, including lili-
tary personnel.

The congress convincingly de-nstrated the indissoluble unity of party and
people, the monolithic cohesion of workers, kolkhos far-era, intelligentsia,
stay and navy personnel behind the party, which is unswervingly following a
Leninist course toward co-unisn. in his closing speech at the 26th CPSU
Congress, Central Co-aittee General Secretary Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev noted that
since that tine when the great Lenin founded our party, "it has been con-
fidently advancing along the path of building socialise and co-unisn, a path
specified by Lenin.“

The 26th Congress is a land-ark in the history of the Co-unist Party of the
Soviet Union and the Soviet society. The congress constituted persuasive
evidence of the fact that our party is continuing and developing the cause of
the Great October Revolution, is consistently inlenenting the bud
Leninist ideals, and is carrying out in a worthy mer the role of political
leader of the worker class and revolutionary vanguard of the entire Soviet
people.

The congress of Soviet Oo-unists will go down in history as a graphic denon-
stration of conprehensive strengthening of the principles of nature socialis-
in the econonic, political and spiritual resins of the affairs of the Soviet
people and the ever increasing influence of the party on the process of
strengthening the econonic and defense night of our state, on preserving and
strengthening world peace. The Central Omittee Accountability Report to
the 26th CPSU Congress, presented by CPSU Cental Co-ittee General Secretary
Conrade L. I. Brezhnev, as well as other congress proceedings are exerting
enornous influence on the ninds of hundreds of nillions of people throughout
the world and are serving as an inortant stimulus in the struggle by
progressive forces for peace, social reforns and socialise.

mammalian“
FIJI mmw. 055 0le

The 26th Congress graphically demonstrated the mvering faithfulness of the
CPSU to Leninist ideals as well as the nonolithic unity and cohesion of its
ranks.

The body of congress delegates constituted living ciaodinent of the collective
uisdoe of the party, its will and energy. (Io—mists sent to the congress the
finest sons and daughters of the party. The alaost 5000 delegates represented
all classes, social strata and groups within the population, all nationalities
and ethnic groups in the 1188!. Our country's finest people, the cre. of our
society csae together. All delegates have been recipients of USSR nedals and
decorations for neritorious services to the honeland, while 57 delegates bear
the title Hero of the Soviet Union, and 670 —- Hero of Socialist labor.

Delegates case to the party congress fro. every corner of our great honeland.
A total of 1370 delegates, mre than at previous congresses, represented
workers of socialist industry. They included persons who are producing the
east nodern aachinery and equip-ant, who are turning out consuner goods, who
are building housing and working on this country's Iain transportation ar-
teries.

Agricultural worker delegates taking part in the work of the congress in-
cluded chiefly far- aachinery operators, codained production teaa leaders, and
specialists in charge of brigades and depart-eats. Alnost one third of these
are employed in livestock raising.

Congress delegates also included Co-unist Isabers of the Arned Forces -
narshals, general officers and flag officers, co-issioned officers. and
warrant officers. Many of then fought heroically against the enuies of the
socialist honelsnd during the years of the Great Patriotic War. a: all any
and navy Co-unists, they are dedicating their energy and knowledge to con-
tinuous inrovenent of the coast proficiency and political training of ser-
vicesen, inrovuent in the coabat readiness of the Araed Forces, which are
reliably guarding the peaceful labor of Soviet citizens and the achievenents
of socialise.

The congress took place under the lofty banner of proletarian internationalisl.
A total of 123 delegations of Co-unist, worker, national denocratic and

other parties and organisations free 109 countries took part in the congress
proceedings. This is the broadest international representation in the entire
history of CPS]! congresses.

The outstanding significance of the 26th CPS!) Congress lies in the fact that
it enriched with new theses the theory and practice of building min.

The central event at the congress was Conrade 1.. I. Breshnev's "CPSU Central
Co-ittee Accountability Report to the 26th Congress of the 00-min Party of
the Soviet Union and Present Party Tasha in the Area of Domestic and Foreign
Policy.” This outstanding docuent of innovative Marxian-Lennie- presents

a profound scientific analysis of party donestic and foreign policy. our
country's econo-ic and social develop-ant, root problsls of the conteqorary
era, and elaborates party strategy and tactics at the next successive stage of
building co-inisn.

“mason“
The congress also comprehensively eaanined the principal directions of CPSU
activities pertaining to further strengthening the position of world socialism,
deepening the world revolutionary process, and strengthening peace and the

security of peoples. The Peace Progran specified at preceding CPS]! congresses
was further developed.

The congress adopted with great enthusiasm and unanimusly the resolution on
the CPSU Central Col-ittee Accountability Report, voiced full approval of the
Leninist course of policy and practical activities of the party Central Con-
aittee, and instructed all party organizations to be guided in their work by
the points and tasks specified in the report submitted by Comrade L. l.
Brezhnev. The congress unanimously ratified the Basic Directions of National
Econoaic and Social Developnent, esphasizing that implementation of an exten-
sive program of constructive work in the new five-year plan constitutes a nest
important economic-political task of all party, soviet, trade union, Konsonol
and economic organizations.

The congress adopted a decision to introduce changes and addition in the
present CPSU Progran. Noting that on the whole the current Progran correctly
defined the patterns and nechanisms of world social development, the goals and
principal tasks of the struggle by the party and the Soviet people for con-
nunisn, the 26th CPSU Congress instructed the party Central Comaittee to draft
a new version of the Progran. reflecting changes in the life and affairs of
our society, the nest inportant tasks pertaining to building co-inism, and
changes in world societal development.

The congress elected a new CPS“ Central Co-ittee neahership as well as other
party central agencies. Top-level-party agencies -- the CPS" Central Com-
mittee Politburo and Secretariat — were formed at the CPS“ Central Co-ittee
Plenun held following the congress. Comrade Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev, eminent
continuer of the cause of V. I. Lenin and consistent fighter for peace and the
happiness of peoples, was unanimously reelected general secretary of the CPS!)
Central Co-ittee. Soviet citizens link with his name all achievements in in-
creasing the econonic and defense might of the homeland and the growth of its
influence and prestige throughout the world.

The 26th CPSU Congress was held at the juncture of the 1970's and 1980's.
Achievenents in the last decade in all areas of Our development were inressive-
iy deaonstrated at the congress; existing reserve potential and possibilities
were revealed. and effective measures were specified for their fullest and

most efficient utilization.

Sui-arising the acconplislments of the party and people, the 26th CPSU Congress
at the same tine comprehensively analyzed difficulties and shortcomings which
hinder econonic growth and concentrated attention on ways and means of cor-
recting them. The main thing is to increase densndingness and to learn to
work and manage nore efficiently. "This lesson is not easily learned," stated
Comrade 1.. I. Brezhnev at the congress. "But we Col-mine are persistent and
purposeful people. Re have set out on this road and shall not turn fron it."2

POIOFFICIALIBEONLY
FUR‘DFFNJAI.U$EIH\LY

The congress emined current econonic probleas of the 1980's and the llth Five-
Year Plan. It strongly enphasized that the nost inportant of these, which en-
conpasses literally all areas of the economy, is the problen of coupleting the
transition to a predoninantly intensive path of develop-ent.

within the franework of the principal directions and features of econonic
policy, the congress specified and analyzed a nunber of concrete problens which
are of fundanentsl significance both for the llth Five-Year Plan and for this
new decade as a whole. A prinry task is to utilize production potential lore
fully and efficiently. Our country is the world leader in my types of
resources utilized in production. But at the sane tine there should be con-
stantly present a feeling of responsibility for achieving full and economical
utilisation of these resources. facts presented at the congress indicate that
considerably nore end products can be obtained fron existing resources than is
presently the case with are efficient and econonioal resource utilization.

The next problen is to ensure that all branches and sectors of the econony ad-
vance to the leading edge of science and technology. The party proceeds fro-

the position that it is simly inconceivable to build a new society without
science.

The congress noted that the task of improving supply of foodstuffs as well as
consuer durables to the public is advancing to the forefront. In order to
achieve a radical solution to this problu, it was acknowledged essential to ,
elaborate a special food progru, inplenntation of which will nake it possible
to acconplish on a tighter tinetsble the task of uninterrupted supply of food-
stuffs to the population.

The conclusions of the party congress on social processes in the Soviet so-
ciety constitute an outstanding contribution to the theory and practice of
building comisn. The leading trend in these processes is expressed in
further rapprochenent along all classes and social groups within the Soviet so-
ciety. This is an objective process, an inortant role in which is played by
the social policy of the party and state.

Questions connected with the develop-eat of socialist nations, strengthming
internationalization, sequential drawing together of all Soviet peoples, and
undeviating strengthening of their fraternal friendship were conprehensively
examined at the party congress. The Leninist course of policy in this area
ensures an increase in the naterial and intellectual potential of each
brother republic, and at the sane tine its nonin- utilization for harnenious
developnent of the entire country.

This highest form of the Leninist purty devoted considerable attention to
natters pertaining to improving the political systa of our society, nation-
hood, broadening and deepening of denocracy. Adoption of the new USSR Gon-
stitutiun has ensured even nore active participation by working people in the
affairs of state, and a conbination of genuine individual righs and freedons
with civic responsibility.

”MUSEONLY
The 26th CPSU Congress was a aost inortant event in international affairs.
The wisest and met authoritative voice of our time - the voice of the great

party of Lenin -- rang out to the entire world with mighty force froa the
congress I‘OBtl'u.

The congress specified the content and principal directions of CPSU foreign
policy, which is based pri-arily on ensuring for the Soviet people the req-
uisite conditions for accomplishing the tasks of construction which have been
assigned to then. Primary attention was focused on develop-eat of the world
socialist systea. Agenda items fostering deepening and broadening of economic
integration of the Soviet Union and the other nations of the socialist con-
nunity as well as their cooperation in the political realm were elaborated.

Theory and practice of socialist internationalisa becaae enriched with new
points and conclusions.

Questions pertaining to development of our relations with liberated
countries were comprehensively examined at the congress. The Soviet Union
always has been and will continue to be on the side of the forces of national
liberation, fighters for national independence, against inerialisa and
reaction. It resolutely opposes relapses of colonialism and neocolonialisn.

Our party's policy regarding the world Min and worker movement is a
truly class, internationalist policy. The 26th CPSU Congress analyzed current
problems of the world (Io-mist aovement. articulated the position of Soviet
Conunists on the soot inortant questions of the contenorary era, and em-

phasized our party's mowerving faithfulness to the principles of proletarian
internationalisn.

Growth of the world revolutionary process is organically linked with intensifi-
cation of the cawaign for world peace ad international security. A decisive
contribution to this struggle is being made by the Soviet Union and the other
brother socialist countries. They are firaly and consistently pursuing a
policy of peaceful coexistence between nations of differing social systems and
a policy of holding the arms race in check.

In conditions where tension in the international arena has increased con-
siderably at the beginning of the 1980's through the fault of inerialist
forces, the Soviet Union is persistently continuing the struggle to end the
threat of war, to preserve and deepen détente, and to hold the area race in
check. No other country in the world has presented in recent years, as the
Soviet Union has done. such a broad spectn- of concrete and realistic ini-
tiatives and proposals on major international probleas. particularly on
matters pertaining to limiting the eras race and achieving arms reduction.

This congress of Soviet Connists displayed, in contrast to irresponsible and
provocational stateaents by representatives of U.S. ruling circles, a genuinely
wise, composed and considered aprpoach. It was once again eaphasized that we
do not seek nilitary superiority over the other side. That is not our policy.
Nor will we allow others to establish military superiority over us. Such

attenpts, just as atteapts to tall: to us fron a position of strength, are
absolutely without prospect.

MWWMY
MIR Utt'SLML wt 05].!

The 26th Congress of the Leninist party signified a nu stage in the persistent
and consistent c-paip by the Soviet Union to deepen detente, to hold the

arse race in check, and to strengthen peace., Conrade 1.. I. Brezhnev advanced
at the congress a nunber of new proposals and initiatives, which constitute an
organic continuation and further develop-est of the Peace Progra- applicahle to
the rust vital, critical problems of international affairs today. They encou-
pass a broad range of questions: the situation in Europe, in the Near, Middle,
and Far Bast, in Africa, neasures both of a political and ailitary character.
The new Soviet proposals pursue a single, unified goal - to do everything pos-
sible to preserve world peace and to elininate the threat of nuclear var.

The new initiatives and proposals advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress aroused
keen interest and enthusiastic approval on the part of progressive ninded
people and on the part of nillions of ordinary people in various countries
throughout the world. Innovatively enriching the Peace Progran. the. congress
raised even higher the prestige of the Soviet Union as a great cha-pion of
peace and cooperation along people and nade a large contribution to the cause
of unification and activation of all peace-seeking forces. As Conrade Fidel
Castro stated fron the speaker's stand, in a situation where the danger of war
is arising once again, the Soviet Union and its glorious Col-mist Party once
again embody the hope of peace.

The Leninist Party, waging a persistent canaign to achieve detente in the
world arena and to hold the sun race in check, constantly naintains its
attention focus on natters pertaining to reliable security of the Soviet
Union. A unity of desire for peace and readiness to offer a decisive rebuff
to any and all sggressors vaa bequeathed to us by the great Lenin and con-
prises the foundation stone of our nilitary policy and Soviet lilitary
doctrine. It was aphasized at the 21st CPSU Congress: "In the period under
review the party and state have not for a single day lost sight of questions
pertain/ring to [strengthening this country's defense night and its Arned
Forces ."

The naterials and resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress further developed and
concretised the Leninist teaching on the party and on grovth of its role in the
affairs of Soviet society, including at the stage of developed socialise. Pros
this proceed the necessity of further inroving the nethoda of party leadership,
intraparty affairs, ideological and political indoctrination vork.

The service-en of the Soviet Arned forces express filial gratitude and thanks
to the Mist Party for everything it is doing to strengthen the econonic
and defense night of our honeland. Soviet service-en assure the party that

they will continue in the future to be faithful to its great ideals and will

selflesay serve their people and party.

W35

1. "Haterialy XXVI s"yesds KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
Hoscow, 1981, page 219.

2. Ibid., page 37. '

3. lbid., page 66.

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WISCONLY

Chapter One. mm Al!) rasno VANGUARD 0? I'll SOVIET norm

The Mist Party of the Soviet Union, founded by the great Lenin, has
traveled a glorious road of heroic sccoqlisbents.

The successes of the Soviet people in building eta-miss are inseparable fron
the titanic activities of the CPS“. ”The 26th Congress has once again shown.”
stated CPS!) Central Co-ittee General Secretary Conrade 1.. I. Breslnev, "that
the Comist Party of the Soviet Union is a nighty, healthy, nture collective.
Co-unists are the truly unbending core of our society its living soul. They
are a genuinely revolutionary vanguard of the people."

The CPS!) is a party of scientific co-unian. Arned by Hersist-Leninist
teaching. it defines the general develop-ant prospects of society, the USSR
course of dosestic and foreign policy, and guides the productive activities
of the Soviet people, giving a planned, scientifically substantiated
character to the struggle for the trim of co-Inisn.

Innovatively developing the all-conquering revolutionary teaching, the CPS“
skillfully applies it in accouplishing the practical task of building con-
nunise in this country. The party itself is constantly growing and gaining in
strength. In light of the achievenents of developed socialise, the well-known
Lenin hula "The party is the nind, honor and conscience of our era” takes on
particularly vivid and profound resonance.

The 26th CPS” Congress coqrehensively embed the vital questions pertaining
to further developnent and inrovenent of party activities. At the present
tine it contains nore than 17 nillion persons in its ranks. It is e asoothly
operating, constantly developing sociopolitical organise, headed by the lenin-
ist Central Co-ittee. It has united aromd itself the entire Soviet people
and is confidently leading then tomrd s cm bright goal - the building of
a Co-unist society.

By its very nature the CPSU has been and reneins the party of the worker class,
which continues to occupy a leading position in all real-s of life and affairs
of the socialist state. Having secured the victory of socialise, it retains
and is building on its inherent qualities of e creator-class and the decisive
force of societal progress.

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is quite natural that within the party workers occupy a position in con-
sonance with the position of the worker class in our society and its
progressive econoaic and sociopolitical role. During the period between the
25th and 26th CPSU colgresses, nore than one and a half lillion of the finest
representatives of the worker class joined the ranks of the party. that is,
59 percent of total new party nenhers. Today workers conprise 63.5 percent
of the party's entire nenhership.

Our Leninist party is enlisting the progressive sepent of the kolkhoz
peasantry. Today kolkhos far-ers conprise 12.8 percent of all this country's
(Io-mists. The party takes into consideration the growing social role of
the people's intelligentsia in developnent of the scientific and technological
revolution, in an upsurge in the intellectual and spiritual standards of the
people, and in accorplishing all the tasks of building co-unisa. At the
present tine 63.8 percent of CPS“ neahers are workers in science. technology,
the arts, education. health services. culture, nanagenent and adninistration.
and military personnel.

There is a continuous influx of youth into party ranks. Clearly reflected in
this fact is the succession of generations of Co-unists -- custodians of the
revolutionary spirit and glorious traditions of the heninist party. Alnost
three-fourths of new party nenhers in the last five years are products of
Kouonol, who have experienced in Konsonol a school of political and noral
conditioning.

1n conditions of developed socialise, where the Soviet people mrise a
historically new social and international co-unity of people, the lost in-
portant characteristics of the party's qualitative ooaposition are the
ideological conviction of (to-mists, their labor and civic activeness,
professional skill and aoral mturity.

The Commist Party of the Soviet Union is honorably carrying out its lofty
historical mission as specified by V. I. Lenin — "to guide and organize the
new systen, to he teacher. guide, and leader to all working people." Con-
stituting the nucleus of our society's political systen, the CPSU has con-
stituted and continues to constitute its guiding and directing force.

1. Leading the Great Building Process

The for-s of party guidance of all aspects of life of the developed socialist
society are continuomly inroving and hecoaing enriched. Today there is no
area of political, econonic, cultural or ailitary activity to which the
party's guiding and organizing influence does not extend. Ihhodying the col-
lective intelligence and creative will of our people. the CPSU organises sc-
comlishnent of the diversified econo-ic and social tasks of building con-
aunisa. indoctrination of the new sea, and constant i-provenent of the
political systen of the Soviet society.

But the role of leading force of society does not cone autonatically. ”This

role," noted oonrads L. I. Brezhnev in his closing speech at the 26th CPSU
Congress. "is earned and won in the course of a constant, unending struggle for

MOFI'ICMLIBEONLY
the interests of the working people. And this role is strengthened by the fact
that the party is constantly deepening its ties with the masses and is deeply
comitted to their needs and concerns."2

The solid unity of the people behind the CPSU is a fundamental trait of the
life of Soviet society. working people, placing boundless trust in the party,
turn to it with an open heart on the most diversified matters, share their
concerns with it, and criticize existing shortcomings. Quite logical is the
fact that, together with the congress delegates, who totally and fully ratified
the Leninist course of policy and practical activities of the CPSU Central Com-
nittee, headed by Comrade 1.. l. Brezhnev. this course of policy is approved by
all Soviet citizens. The indissoluble unity of party and people and the

people's boundless confidence in the party have been demnstrated to the world
with renewed force.

The thousands of reports and nessages of greeting pouring in to the congress
were noving documents which vividly reflected this confidence, the feeling of
gratitude on the part of Soviet citizens to the party for its tireless con-
cern for the working man. People of the not widely diversified ages and oc-
cupations wrote about their pride in the successes of our socialist homeland
and their joy in productive labor in the use of co-Iunism. as well as their
willingness to fight vigorously to achieve the'targets of the new five-year
plan. Soviet service-en sent my neseages of greeting and reports to this
highest forum of the Leninist party. They stressed the pride of the defenders
of the honeland in their party and their willingness to dedicate all their
energies and knowledge to successful execution of its plans.

The following words from the Central Co-ittee Accountability Report to the
26th CPSU today resound in the languages and dialects of our nultinational
fanily of fraternal peoples, as an expression of the dedication of Soviet
citizens to (Io-mist ideals: "...He are optimists because we believe in our
party and know that the path which it is pointing out to us is the only cor-
rect path!"3

Enhancement of the guiding and directing role of the CPSU in Soviet society
at the state of developed socialist is a logical and objectively necessary
process. It is dictated first and fore-oat by the unprecedented growr.h of
the scale of tasks connected with building the material and technological
foundation for co-aunisa; by the changes taking place in our society in its
social structure and by inprovement in societal relations; by changes in the
political organization of this country; by development of socialist
democracy, enhance-eat of the role of public participation in managing the
affairs of state and production, and by an upsurge in the productive activity
of working people; by the necessity of intensifying Co-unist indoctrination
of Soviet citizens; by a vital need of further creative develop-eat of
Marxisn-Leninisn; finally, by the complexity of solving acute international
problens and ensuring conditions of peace for building co-misn.

/Direction of the economy is the main area of CPSU revolutionary-transforming

activity.l It is here, in the real.- of the economy. that is laid down the

foundation for accomplishing social tasks, strengthening the nation's
defense capability, and a vigorous foreign policy.

9

FOIOWICIALUSONLY
EU“ W'ILIAL use UNI-l

1n the last decade the Soviet people, under party guidance, have made sub-
stantial forward progress in all areas of building the material and tech-
nological foundation of co-unisn. The USSR produces one-fifth of the world's
industrial output. We produce more pig iron, steel, petroleum (including gas
condensate), iron and manganese ore, as well as other raw materials than any
other country. Agriculture has achieved high performance levels.

This country's productive forces have risen to a qualitatively new level. The
scientific and technological revolution is expanding deeper and broader,
changing the countenance of production and entire branches and sectors of

the economy. Such modern industries as nuclear machine building, space tech-
nology, electronics and microelectronics, microbiology, laser equipment,
manufacture of synthetic dim-ands, as well as manufacture of other new

synthetic materials have experienced further development or have been newly
created.

Large changes have taken place in the distribution of productive resources.
Gigantic combined programs which are transforming vast territories are being
successfully carried out. They include development programs for Russia's Non-
Chernozem zone, as well as co-ercial exploitation of the natural resources of
Siberia and the Far East.

Housing construction has continued to advance at a rapid pace, and large-scale
measures have been carried out in the area of boosting wages, pensions,
benefits, etc. Consmer goods production almost doubled in the 1970's. This
is persuasive evidence of the fact that the course of policy specified by the
party is being unswervingly implemented.

At the same time the CPSU brought forth for discussion at the 26th Congress
existing difficulties and bottlenecks. He did not succeed in achieving all
stated goals, and not all ministries and enterprises achieved their plan
targets. We have not yet fully overcome the inertia, traditions and custons
which became established in that period when the quantitative rather than the
qualitative aspect of things was advanced to the forefront. Today growth of
the economy is inseparable from inroving the quality of work performed and
more efficient management.

Our society today possesses a powerful socialist industry and developed agri-
culture, which enables the party to formlate and accomplish tasks which our
country could not have accomplished in the past. The party advanced and com-
prehensively substantiated a complex of measures ensuring in the 11th Five-Year
Plan aid the following period expansion of possibilities for harmonious
satisfaction of the material and spiritual needs of Soviet working people. Con-
ditions will be inroved for comprehensive development of the individual, for
highly productive labor, for improving the health, rest and recreation condi-
tions for citizens, development of education, science and culture — all that
which comprises the socialist way of life.

The "Basic Directions of Econonic and Social Development of the 0558 for 1981-
1985 and the Period up to 1990," drawn up by the CPSU Central Conittee and
ratified by the 26th Congress, edoody continuity of the party's Leninist

10

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
course of policy and the firmness of its points of strategy. /”‘l'he main task
of the llth Five-Year Plan consists in ensuring a further improvement in the
prosperity of Soviet citizens on the basis of a steady, forward development of
the economy, acceleration of scientific and technology progress, and transition
by the economy to an intensive path of development, more efficient utilization
of this country's production potential, all-out economizing in all types of
resources and improvement in the quality of work performed/."4

The party links successful accomplishnent of this task with further development
of the base branches of heavy industry and improvement of ratios within the
economy. In the interests of increasing the manufacture of consumer goods,

the current five-year plan specifies an acceleration in the rate of growth of
branches of group B in comparison with those of group A. At the sane time
there will be an increase in the contribution of heavy industry to the manu-
facture of consumer durables.

Produce more. faster, cheaper. and better -- the 26th CPSU Congress also ex-
pressed this genersl call of the times in the concrete tasks assigned to all
components of the agroindustrial complex. lts development. which is to im-
plement the extensive foodstuffs program drawn up by the party, is an important
element of today's CPSU agrarian policy. A distinctive feature of this policy
is that principal efforts are concentrated on growth in productivity of agri-
cultural production and on increasing return on capital investment in agricul-
ture. Livestock raising is becoming a shock-work front on the farm.

It is planned to increase average annual agricultural production by 12-14 per-
cent during this five-year period. All branches of agriculture will ex-
perience substantial development. Growth in production of grain and livestock
feed as well as improvement in their quality will make it possible to in-
crease the quantity of meat. milk, and other valuable food products.

As in the past. capital construction will be a focal area of special attention
and concern by the party. It has been decided to channel capital spending,
the volume of which is to be increased by 12-15 percent. first and foremost
into the renovation and technical retooling of enterprises and into completion
of previously-started construction projects. heavy industry will occupy a
priority position in the area of construction, and particularly development of
our fuel-energy base, ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy and transportation.

Considerable concern has been focused on further improving territorial-produc-
tion complexes, especially in the eastern regions. The enormous potential of
our socialist economy makes it possible rapidly to carry out such large-scale
programs as development of the Kansk-Achinsk, Bratsk-Ust'-llimsk, Pavlodar-
Ekibastuz, Western Siberian, Sayan, and other territorial-production complexes.

The party is continuing its long-range policy of achieving a steady, comprehen-
sive rise in the living standards of Soviet citizens. It is providing a com-
bined approach to solving important socioeconomic problems of the developed
socialist society. which affect all aspects of people's work, daily life and
activities. A system of measures is to be carried out, aimed at creating the
most favorable conditions for highly-productive labor, at intensifying the

11

FOI‘OFFIJA1.USEGNVLY
I'UK UIII'ILML use ONLY

creative character of labor, and at achieving an all-out reduction of the area
of application of unskilled manual and heavy physical labor, in which millions
of persons are presently engaged in this country.

CPSU activities are totally subordinated to the interests of the social
development of this country and the individual Soviet citizen. Increasing the
capabilities of the economy, ilproving societal relations, and a steady rise
in living standards are all focused on inlementation of the progran slogan
"Everything for the sake of man, for the good of nan." The party is ad-
vancing an extensive progran for the 11th five-Year Plan and the 1980's as a
whole, providing for inrovement of all aspects of the lives of the Soviet
citizens -- conditions on the job and in the home, constnption and housing,
culture and recreation. The percentage share of the consumption fund in na-
tional income is targeted to rise from 75.3 percent in 1980 to 77.3 percent
in 1985.

of course nothing comes free. Any inrovement in living conditions can be
achieved only through hard work by the Soviet people themselves. Mature so-
cialism offers the most extensive opportunities for developing the abilities
of each and every citizen. The point is to realize this potential. This is
why the 26th CPSU Congress stressed that an important reserve potential in
this regard is presented by a further upsurge in the labor sctiveness and
initiative of the assess, development of socialist competition, and prompt
dissemination and adoption of advanced know—how. Hora efficient utilization
of this reserve potential will make it possible to implement the core congress
guidelines in the area of party economic and social policy -— to achieve
savings everywhere and in all things, a thrifty attitude toward public proper-
ty, full and efficient utilization of everything we possess, everything whi‘ h
has been created by the hands and intellect of Soviet man.

"An econony should be economical - this is a demand of the times."5 Stressing
this idea at the 26th CPSU Congress, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev expressed firm
confidence that the plans specified at the congress will not only be fulfilled
htoverfulfilled as well. Everybody is capable of free, conscientious labor,
labor for oneself and for one's people.

Effective measures. have been specified for inplementing the high-principled and
concrete guidelines of the congress in the area of our country's economic
development, measures directed toward improving management of the economy. The
task consists first and foremost in increasing discipline and the personal
responsibility of managerial personnel at all levels of management and ad-
ministration for meeting state plans and targets. Associations and enterprises
will become more independent on the basis of optimization of the organisational
structures of mags-est, and economic executives will be given broader
authorities and greater responsibility.

Special attention was focused on improving the style of direction of the
economy. As comrade I... I. Brezhnev noted, "the point is to develop a work
style which organically combines efficiency and discipline with bold initiative
and enterprise. practicality and businesslike efficiency with striving toward
lofty goals, a critical attitude toward shoftcomings with firm confidence in
the historical advantages of the path we have elected."6

12

POIOFFIGALIISEONLY
[In conditions of nature socialise the interlinlt between econonic advance and
developnent of the social-class structure of society and interethnic relations
becones increasingly nore intinateJ CPSU secial policy 5*. conditions of
developed socialise actively pronotes effacenent of the considerable class
differences, differences between city and village, intellectual and physical
labor, and fosters oowrehensive develop-ant and drawing together of all
nationalities and ethnic groups in the 0883. Our goal is to build a society
in which people will not be divided into classes. And we can state quite
definitely that we are slowly but surely advancing toward this goal. Drawing
together of all classes and social groups in our society continued in

the 1970's.

The worker class is playing an increasingly nore pan-amt role. Year by year
its nuﬂ>ers are growing, as is its ideological-political naturity and labor ac-
tiveness. The worker class today totals approxinately 80 nillion persons -
two thirds of the gainfully uployed population.‘ The general educational

level of Soviet workers and their level of occupational training are rising.
The worker's labor is increasingly beenning filled with intellectual content.

Differences between the worker class and the kolkhos peasantry, caused by the
existence in this country of two for-s of socialist ownership - ownership by
the entire people, and cooperative -- are gradually disappearing as productive
resources continue to grow. The nudrer of aachinery operators and other
workers involved with advanced technology is continuing to rise in our rural
areas. The nuﬁer of kolkhoz far-ere with secondary (cowlete and partial)
and higher education increased fron 39 to sore than 60 percent in the lest
decade.

Rapid growth of the intelligentsia is one of the nest inportant social changes
in our society. Today one out of every four employed persons is involved
prinarily with intellectua‘ labor. Not only in science, education, and cul-
ture, but in naterial production as well the intelligentsia is playing an in-
creasingly sore significant role. It is inortant to eqhasize this factor.
for it shows that favorable conditions have been created in 'this cauntry for
acconplishing one note of the vital tasks specified at the 26th CPS" Congress -
to boost all branches and sectors of the scone-y to the cutting edge of sci-
ence and technology. It is a denand of the tines to secure a close integration
between science and production, to incorporate the latest scientific ideas in

equipnent and technology within the shortest period of tile and at the least
cost.

The resolutions of the 26th CPS!) Congress contain a profound analysis of the
processes which characterize the develop-eat of ethnic relations in our

country. The unity of Soviet nationalities and ethnic groups is stronger

today than ever before. Their develop-ant and drawing together are accelerat-
ing in the conditions of nature socialise. The Leninist party’s course of
policv in this area ensures growth of the naterial and intellectual potential
of each republic and, at the sane time, their main utilization for harmonious
developnent of the entire country. Resources are being brought into circula—
tion in a planned nanner, efficient specialization and cowrehensive developnsnt
of the econonies of the republics are being ensured. and there is occurring a

13

”MEMONIX
PW WOILIAL UM URI-U

deepening exchange of the latest scientific and technological advances and
advanced know-how.

This does not signify, however, that all problems have been resolved in the
area of ethnic relations. The dynamics of development of such a large multi-
national state as the USSR engenders many problems which require attention.
The party opposes tendencies toward artificially doing away with specific
ethnic features, but it considers artificial exaggeration of these features
equally intolerable. the CPSU sees as its duty the indoctrination of working
people in a spirit of Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism, a
proud feeling of belonging to the great. unified Soviet homeland.

The congress resolutions deeply and comprehensively examine questions pertain-
ing to strengthening the material and spiritual foundations of the socialist
way of life and formation of the new man. During the period of developed
socialism there is occurring completion of reorganization of all societal
relations on the collectivist basis which is internally characteristic of the

new system. This reorganisation encompasses the material and spiritual realms,
our entire tenor of life.

The 26th CPSU Congress comprehensively analyzed the question of improving
distributive relations in conditions of developed socialism. It stated the
aim of achieving consistent implementation of the principle of conformity
between quantity and quality of labor and consumption, as well as active, pur-
poseful forming of the interests and reasonable needs of the individual.

[The 26th CPSU Congress stated tasks in the area of further improvement of

the political system./ The activities of the highest agencies of authority -
the USSR Supreme Soviet and the supreme soviets of the republics -— became
appreciably stepped up with adoption of the new USSR Constitution. Much of
interest appeared in the activities of local [soviets of people's deputies]
lit.].

Now the goal is to link more closely improving legislation, management and
verification. Three areas are advanced as primary: administration of the
nation's economy, implementation of the constitutional rights of citizens and
public organizations, and completion of promulgation of national consolidated
statutes.

The congress focused lpublic oversight/ lit.) [narodnogo kontrolya] agencies
toward more vigorous, more aggressive activities, as this is an essential
component part of oar Soviet democracy. Attention was focused on the neces-
-sity of continuing to enhance the role of the most mass public organization,
the Soviet [trade unions] [it.]. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stated in his
report at the 26th CPSU Congress that the party.views them ”as its reliable
support in the masses, a powerful means of development of democracy and in-
volvement of working people in building communism."7

The activities of [Lenin Komsomol/ [it.] were highly praised by the congress.
At the same time Komsomol was assigned the task of even more effectively
promoting the formation in the younger Soviet generations of political

16

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
activeness, love of labor, and willingness to defend one's homeland. In the
area of correcting deficiencies in the work of Kamaomol organizations, primary
emphasis is placed on intensification of the labor, moral and ideological-
political indoctrination of young boys and girls.

The 26th CPSU Congress stipulates consistent implementation of the party's
guiding and directing role and successful accumplishment of tasks in the area
of this country‘s economic and social development by means of further
organizational and ideological unification of party ranks and more vigorOus
party work in all areas of building communism. A close tie between central
party agencies and its lowest-level components. support of creative initiative
on the part of party organizations, and attention toward local experience --
the party follows Lenin's behests in all these areas. The richer and more
diversified local experience is. the more fruitful are party activities as s
"holes

Comrade L. I. Brezhuzv's report especially emphasised the need of continuing
in the future to enhance the role of republic. kray, oblast, district. city
and rayon party organisations and their responsibility for carrying out the
concrete and high-principled congress guidelines. Energetic and competent
party direction of the economic and societal affairs of the kray. oblast, city
and rayon is of decisive significance in achieving stated goals.

A paramount role should be played by primary party organizations. which

carry out the party's direct link with the party-unaffiliated masses. There
are a total of 616,000 primary and 657,000 shop party organisations, as well
as more than 618,000 party groups -- that reliable system through which the

party Central Committee mobilizes all working people for carrying out the
grandiose-scale tasks of building communism. Therefore one congress demand is
maximal activation of the work of these lowbechelon CPS" entities.

Party cadre policy serves as a powerful means of increasing the aggressiveness
of party organizations. Much has been done to improve the qualitative composi-
tion and placement of executive cadres. At the same time Comr’de L. I.
Breshnev's report contained clear-cut guidelines for local party agencies to
achieve further improvement of work in this area. It is necessary to improve
the political training of young cadres coming into the party edifice fro-
production. He also pointed to the necessity of promoting to party executive
jobs those comrades who know from personal experience the needs, requirements
and interests of workers. peasants. and intellectuals.

Party cadres are focused on Leninist businesslike efficiency in their daily
work. The Accountability Report to the 26th CPSU Congress plainly states that
the skill of leadership consists in ensuring strict implementation of adopted
decisions within the specified timetable. Systematic and efficient oversight,
exercised simultaneously from above and below, and verification of execution
should help establish businesslike efficiency and eliminate the bureaucratic
style of leadership.

As was emphasized at the congress. leadership style and methods are a matter
of importance to the entire party and the entire people. And resolution of

15

FIN!(INWC141.[EHE(H'LY
FOR OFFICJM. USE ONLY

this problen is to be found in rigorous observance of Leninist standards of
party affairs. De-ocratic centralise should ensure the closest bond between
party executive agencies and the party nasses. The flow of intraparty inforla-
tion should becone even lore effective, and working people should be sore
fully infor-ed on party affairs, which is an effective neans of strengthening
ties between the CPSU and the easses. There is also to be further develop-sot
of criticise end self-criticise and all-out establish-en: of a spirit of self-
criticise and inplacability toward shortcomings in all party organisations.

Fulfill-cut of the denands iqosed by the 26th CPS" Congress on the work style
and netth of Co-unists along the worker nasses and on organization of intra-
party affairs will objectively pronote a further increase in the party's
prestige anong our people. Today nore and nore people are desirous of joining
its ranks. The CPS", however, is not forcibly pushing its nunerical growth.
The approach to new candidates for party “ership is demanding in a Leninist
sonnet. The political, professional and noral qualities of each individual
who has node the decision to link his future with that of the Co-mist van-

guard of the Soviet people are thoroughly unlined during the ter- of
probationary neeberhsip.

The necessity of increasing demandingnees on each and every Co-unist was
once again stressed at the congress. The party is inplacable toward those who
violate the CPS“ Rules and party soral standards. The party fervently
protects the purity of its ranks in a Leninist manner md nukes no concessions
whatsoever in regard to its honor and prestige. Honolithically cohesive, arsed
by the all-conquering teaching of Marxian-Lenin“, and united by indiseoluble
bonds with the entire people. the Commist Party of the Soviet Union
nobilizes Soviet citizens for the accomlishnent of great feats, for carrying
out the responsible and complex task of large-scale building.

2. Decisive Source of the ﬂight of the Amy and Navy-

Uhile concentrating efforts on the problem of building miss, the party
does not lose sight of natters pertaining to strengthening the nation's
defense night, the fighting efficiency and conbat readiness of our Armd
Forces. It is obliged to do so by the present international situation, a sci-
entific analysis and class appraisal of which were presented with extreee
clarity by the 26th CPSU Congress. The Soviet people need peace in order to
build co-Inisn and for productive labor. Expressing the interests of the
broadest mm of working people, the 26th CPS!) Congress exanined ways to
ensure world peace. 0f exceptional inportance are the realistic proposals
advanced in the report of Conrado 1.. l. Brezhnev, which include sessions to
strengthen trmt in the ailitary area, to liait and reduce strategic arms.

The new Soviet proposals are particularly inportant in present-day conditions
when. through the fault of the aggressive forces of inerialisn, particularly
0.8. iaperial in. clouds have gathered thickly on the international horizon.
The 26th CPSU Congress revealed the deep-lying reasons for the increased

aggressiveness of inerialisn. One of these is further aggravation of the
general crisis of capitalise. Inflation has assuned an unprecedented scale

16

“WISEONLY
in the world of capital. production is diainiahing, and uneaploynent is
growing. Social refer-a. with the aid of which ruling circles would seek to
cool the temerature of the class struggle, are failing.

The growing econosic social difficulties are asking the policies of the in-
perislist nations increasingly sore reactionary and aggressive. The mat
nilitant isperialist circles are endeavoring to resolve their conflicts by
scans of adventuriss, by preparing for war, by willingness to ganble the vital
interests of mankind for the sake of selfish sins.

varo nilitary bloc leaders. headed by Hashington strategists, are undertaking
unceasing efforts to tilt the present world nilitary balance in their own
favor. Under pressure exerted by the Uhite House and the Pentagon, decisions
were adopted in the M10 comtries additionally to increase annual nilitary
expenditures. In the United States, the leaders of which are once again
laying clais to world dosination, s silitary progr- has been drvan up which
specifies a substantial increase in the co-bat capabilities of the arsed
forces. The "new conception of defense of western Europe" is also an aggres-
sive doctrine. It fans the basis of the NATO decision to deploy in the
cmntriesofwestern Europe 0.8. intersediste-range nuclear nissile weapons.

Under the screen of a propaganda c-paign around the myth of ”Soviet nilitary
threat." isperialist forces are stepping up their policy of gross inter-
ference in the internal affairs of other countries -- in the Near and Middle
East. in the Indian Ocean region. in Southeast Asia and Latin Anerica.
Militant politicians in the 0.8. are declaring entire regions, rich in raw
saterial resources, to be a zone of 0.8. “vital interests." For “protection"
of these regions they are expanding the network of silitary bases, are seeking
to establish new aggressive blocs, and are forning "rapid deploynent forces”
endowed with gendarne functions.

with the sin of diverting the attention of the world eo-aunity away free 0.8.
silitary preparations, the 0.8. Governnent has esbarked upon a hypocritical,
slanderous canpaignof sccmim the Soviet Union of coqlicity in ”international
terrorisn." a label which it provocationally attaches to all present-day
revolutionary-liberation sovesents. Hashington seeks to discredit the peace-
seeking policy of the USSR and to distort the essence of national liberation
novenents. Under the pretext of cosbsting "Harriet terrorists” which they
themselves have invented. the isperialists seek to untie their hands for
intervention in the internal affairs of other nations. '

The unitary-political rapprocheaent of the United States, Japan. and China on
an anti-Soviet foundation is seeming an increasingly dangerous character for
the fate of the world. Taking part in this crininal conspiracy, the present
Beijing leaders seek to carry out their great~power chauvinist scheaes, as is
attested by their intrigues directed against neighboring countries. Japanese
nilitarisn is resting its head.

while consistently defending the cause of peace, that is, carrying out today's
sost iqwrtant international task. the CPSU saintains constant vigilance in

respect to the intentions and actions of nilitant reaction. Thanks to the
solicituda of the party and the entire people. the Soviet Any and Navy possess

17

“WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

everything they need for reliable defense of the homeland and the achievements
of socialism. "A solid fusion of a high level of technical equipment. mili-
tary expertise and indomitable morale." stated Comrade 1.. I. Brezhnev at the
congress, "constitute the combat potential of the Soviet Araed Forces.”8

working persistently to carry out Lenin's behests on defense of the socialist
homeland, the party is exercising a leadership role in military organizational
development and is specifying the basic guidelines which the state is following
in defense policy. Party activities pertaining to direction of the Soviet
Armed Forces enemass a broad range of problems. They include elaboration of
the theoretical foundations of Soviet military organizational development, in-
cluding military doctrine, an aggregate of measures pertaining to

technical equipment of the army and navy, training, placement and efficient
utilization of col-and, political and engineer-technician cadres, performance
of party-political work. development of the basic principles of organization
of troop combat training, and improvement of the system of preparing military-
trained reserves. The CPSU Central Conittee and its Politburo, headed by

Comrade L. l. Brezhnev, are tirelessly concerned with further increasing the
combat potential of army and navy.

/The most important direction of enphssis in impluenting CPSU military
policy is further development and strengthening of the material-technological
foundation of the defense capability of the Soviet State and the combat

power of its Armed Forces./ Scientific leadership by the party ensures op~
timal utilization toward these ends of the capabilities of the socialist so-
cietal system, the socialist economic system. and the achievements of the
present scientific and technological revolution.

This is persuasively attested by the proceedings and resolutions of the 26th
CPSU Congress. A high rate of development of the key branches and sectors of
our economy in the llth Five-Year Plan is a guarantee of further increase in
the economic might of the homeland. increased prosperity of the working people,
and a guarantee that the army and navy will continue to meet today's demands
in regard to furnishing with codaat equipment and weapons.

The CPSU also proceeds in its activities pertaining to strengthening this
country's economic potential from the necessity of reliably securing the
defense capability of the Soviet State. Our defense expenditures are induced
by the danger proceeding from the imperialists and are a forced response to
ﬂair silitary preparations. We spend on defense as much as is necessary for
defending peace and socialism against our enemies.

Banks to the growing capabilities of the socialist economy, advances in

Soviet science and technology, and the selfless labor of the people. the army
and navy receive everything they need in order to maintain a continuous state
of combat readiness. Peeling legitiaate pride in the technical equipment of
the Armed Forces, Soviet servicemen: give due credit to the labor of our workers,
kolkhoz farmers, scientists, designers, and engineers. It is precisely their
intellect and hands which have built first-class rockets, tanks, aircraft, and
warships, which today enable us reliably to defend Our country and. if it
becomes necessary, to launch swift and devastating response attacks against an
aggressor.

l8

"WISEONLY
In connection with deepening of the scientific and technological revolution,
which also affects military affairs, the unitary-technical aspect of the
party's defense policy is seaming an increasingly lore independent character.
Science is beconing transforned into a direct factor of Arned Forces conbat
power, and utilization of scientific and technological advances for strengthen-
ing nation's defense capability is ensuing vital ilportance.

The party concentrates its efforts on accelerating the developnent of basic
and applied science, on satisfying long-range and current requirements of
technology, prompt and priority inplensntation of scientific advances by scans
of their practical incorporation. with this stateaent of the question by the
26th CPSU Congress, work in those areas of scientific and technological ad-

vance which meet the needs of national defense naturally will also experience
adequate acceleration.

One object of constant party concern is develop-cut of Soviet ailitary science
which, together with practical ailitary activities, deter-nines the paths of im-
provement of weaponry, the fares and modes of conduct of warfare. Hilitary-sci-
entific cadres are focused by the party on further deep cognition of the
character of today's war, if iaperialism unleashes a war, modes of conduct of

combat operations, and principles of eqloynent of the various uniforned
services and combat arls.

[Together with developnent of this country's econoaic and scientific-technologi-
cal potential. the party also takes into consideration that enoraous role which
is played by the sociopolitical capabilities of our society in strengthening
the defense night of the hoeelandJ Haturity of societal relations, the ever
increasing drawing together of classes and social grOups, nationalities and
ethnic groups, vigorous consolidation in the nasses of Co-Ilnist ideology, so-
cialist patriotisn and internationalism, and a feeling of overall national

pride on the part of Soviet citizens - all these processes directly affect
strengthening of the defense night of the Soviet State. Theylcause internal

cohesion of labor and ailitary collectives and conradely interrelationships
amng military personnel.

Inprovement of sociopolitical relations leads to further strengthening of the
social base of providing the Arned Forces with replace-en's personnel. A
beneficent effect is exerted on this process by growth of the worker class and
an increase in its percentage share in the country's overall population. At
the present the lore than two thirds of nilitary personnel in active service
were enployed in industry, transportation, construction and agriculture

prior to induction into the ailitary; the renainder were white-collar teoyees
and students.

The increase in representation of the worker class in the army and navy is
accoqanied by a strengthening of organisation and order in nilitary units and
on naval ships, an 'iqrovensnt in the mrale and cohesion of servicemen. A

transition to compulsory universal secondary education and inpleaentation of
CPS!) decisions in the area of specialised education are helping furnish the

Arned Forces with conscripts possessing a higher level of ideological-political
conditioning, intellectual and physical develop-ant. Today it is difficult in

19

“MINOR!”
we (DH-MAI. USE ONLY

any military collective to distinguish representatives of the worker class,
the kolltho: peasantry and the intelligentsia on the basis of general educa-
tional and cultural level.

The social policy specified by the 26th CPSU Congress for the llth Five-Year
Plan and beyond will ensure further strengthening of the unity of any and
people.

[The solid ideological-political unity of society is a soar inortant source
of the growth of the coebat night of the Arled torcesJ lndoctrinated by the
party, Soviet citizens are ardent patriots and internationalists. A new.
socialist type of individual has for-ed in this comtry during the years of
building connnisn, a person who co-bines (to-mist ideological conviction and
enornous vital energy. cultural sophistication and knowledge, and the ability
to apply then.

These qualities of the Soviet citizen also ennoble the countenance of the
Soviet servicm. a full-fledged citizen of this country, vho is responsible
for the fate of the hoeeland and socialist achieve-eats. Duty and calling.
rights and obligations. the lofty qualities of patriot and internationalist
have nerged in his consciOusness into a unified whole.

Under the influence of our socialist realities and active ideological work by
the party. there is for-ed in service-en the ability to see in their daily
duties great national significance. a striving to inprove coehat skill day by
day, to carry out skillfully and with honor the lofty civic obligations of the
defender of the hoeeland and the brother socialist countries.

Rigorous observance of Leninist principles of leadership constitutes a
guarantee of successful inplenentation of the coqlu aggregate of itens per-
taining to strengthening this nation's defense. which proceed free the
resolutions and proceedings of the 26th CPSO Congress. The nost important
of these is [unity of political and nilitary leadership of the Armed Forces./

The (to-mist Party is innovatively developing this principle. This finds
vivid expression in the activities of the USSR Defense Concil, headed by
CPSU Central Co-ittee General Secretary Mar SI! Conrade 1.. I. Brezhnev,
chsiraen of the Presidiu- of the USSR Supra-e Soviet.

The principle of mity of political and nilitary leadership presupposes
harnonious, cooperative vork in nilitary units by eo-anders, political
workers. party and Koasonol organisations, as well as a unity of their
ideological and organizational activities. Indissolubility of word and deed
is a lav governing the activities of every leadership-echelon nilitary of-
ficial. The co-ander is a coebat leader and indoctrinator of his sea. The
political worker in turn is an organiser of service-en in the area of
acconplishing tasks of political training, mastering equip-sat, and
strengthening observance of regulations and nilitary discipline.

20

WNW”)
The party strictly adheres to the principle of /scientific character] in

Arned Forces leadership. It ares cadres with beninist aethodology of cognizing
and solving probleas of defending the achieve-unto of sedan. and teaches one
to analyze the entire aggregate of phenonena characterizing the correlation of
class forces in the world, the interrelationship between war and politics,

and the interdependence of factors which ensure a decisive defeat of any
aggressor.

The level of scientific character of Iilitary leadership is Ianifested at all
echelons of our nilitary organization. At the level of the unit. warship. and
subunit, we are dealing with the ability of officer personnel innovatively

to approach detenination of the nest correct ways of teaching and indoctrinat-
ing service-en. taking into account new trends in develop-eat of military
affairs. As proceeds from the materials of the 26th crsu Congress, today

creativity and innovation is the standard of activity of co-anders and
political workers.

[Centralisa/ is an iaportant principle of Con-list Party leadership of the
Arned Forces. The army is a special agency of the state, the strength of
which lies first and fore-oat in fire organization and in the strictest sub-
ordination of many individuals to the will of one person. In present-day
conditions an arny's ability to withstand and win will depend in large
neasure on how quickly troops execute coebat orders.

The strictest subordination of lower-echelon any and navy control agencies to
higher-echelon agencies, of subordinates to superiors, and mrving inns-en-
tation of one-nan cor-and is a lost inortant principle of leadership in the
Arned Forces. Only on the basis of centralized leadership can one achieve
unity both in understanding nilitary tasks and in their practical execution.
Centralisa in leadership ensures fullest utilization of the capabilities of
the socialist syste- for concentrating the country's unpower and resources

for arsed defense of socialise.

The Soviet one-nan co-ander is a representative of the party and state and
bearer of their policy in the Arned Forces. lie bears personal responsibility
to the Commist Party and Soviet Govern-eat for the continuous co-bat and
nobilization readiness of the troops entrusted to his care. for combat and
political training, indoctrination. eilitary discipline and the political-noral
state of personnel, for the condition of weapons and cedar equip-eat.
whatever position a conander holds, the lost i-portant thing in his activities
is ilplenentation of party policy. herein lies the essence of the party
principle of Soviet one-Ian eel-land. Ideological and sore]. naturity, co.-
petency. a high degree of responsibility to society and the collective, unity
of denandingness and sensitivity toward others. and concern for one's subor-

dinates - these qualities of our co-anders ensure constant strengthening of
one-nan col-and.

All factors which as an aggregate ensure a high degree of Arned Forces coahat
power, ensure that they are furnished with nodern weapons and co-bat equip-ant,
ensure increased political awareness. field, sea and air proficiency of per-
sonnel, and level of troop control and control of naval forces are inroved on

21

summon“
we ("NLIAL 03¢. UNI.)

the basis of CPSU policy and decisions in the area of strengthening the defense
of the state.

Unity of material and spiritual factors in war was always of decisive sig-
nificance. Not one of these factors can be diminished without detriment to
the combat potential of the Armed Porces. This potential comprises not a
simple sum of technical equipment, military expertise, and indomitable morale,
but a solid fusion of these factors. Thus indoctrination and training of
servicemen is placed alongside furnishing units and warships with aodern
weapons and codaat equipment. This stresses the increased responsibility of
co-anders, political agencies, party and Komsomol organizations for maintain-
ing excellent morale in the army and navy.

when we speak of high morale, we have in mind primarily the aggressive, "ac-
tive" aspect of the spiritual resources of the army and navy. that is. con-
centrated expression of the mobilizing role of people's Co-unist ideology
and morality, their patriotism and internationaliu, heroism and courage,
discipline and couradeship. He are dealing in the final analysis with the

degree of strength of fighting spirit of the Armed Forces in conditions of
peace and war.

In the practical realities of life troop morale is correctly equated with
the political-”rel state of troops, which eqhasizes the decisive role of
political ideas, knowledge, oral feelings and attitudes in the spiritual
resources of the army and navy. During the war years the Soviet cousand
authorities, as we know, always took into consideration the political-moral
state of personnel and assigned the mat critical combat uissinns to the
staunchest units and combined units, which possessed particularly high
fighting spirit.

Thorough assimilation of lenin's ideas on defense of the socialist homeland,
CPSU policy aims and tasks, and an understanding of the objective necessity
of continuous Armed Forces combat readiness are most important spiritual
stimuli for improving coaprehensive personnel proficiency, vigilance, dis-
cipline and organisation of troops and naval forces.

Successful troop leadership presupposes consideration of all components of
the moral factor, which includes both socioideological and sociopsychological
elements. The former nost fully reflect the political goals and tasks of
building and defending co-unisa and theoretical views, while the latter most
fully reflect public opinion, traditions, habits and conceptions which form
under the direct influence of conditions of service and combat activities.
Therefore of importance in improving persomel morale is regular nonitoring
both of the ideological training of servicemen and the attitude of the col-
lective, which makes it possible to saintain troop morale at a high level,
ensuring accouplishment of anyari all combat tasks.

3. Powerful Weapon of the Party

in light of the resolutions of the 26th CPS!) Congress, increased denands are
being placed on party-political work in the army and navy. It comprises a

22

”WWWLY
most important direction of the diversified CPSU activities pertaining to leader-
ship of the Armed Forces.

Party-political work comprises scientifically substantiated ideological and
party-organizer activities on the part of military councils, coamanders, politi-
cal agencies, and party organizations pertaining to implementing Leninist

party policy in the Armed Forces, indoctrination of the personnel of units and
naval ships in the ideas of Harxismrleninism, and their mobilization for ac-
complishing the tasks assigned to the armed defenders of the homeland. It in-
cludes a broad range of items pertaining to all aspects of training and
performance of duty, the daily activities of Soviet servicemen, their moral-
political and psychological training. Calling upon the men to carry out party
demands in the area of defending the socialist achievements of the people, army
and navy Communists firmly follow V. I. Lenin's statement that preparation of
our country for defense demands not a burst of enthusiasm but "protracted,
intense, persistent and disciplined work on a mass scale."9

The content and principal directions of party-political work in the army and
navy are today entirely determined by the tasks assigned to the Armed Forces
by the 26th CPSU Congress. The main attention of commanders, political
agencies. party and Komsomol organizations, and all personnel is presently
concentrated on study and implementation of the congress resolutions, the
points and conclusions contained in the CPSU Central Committee Accountability
Report to the congress.

Inherent in party-political vork are mechanisms proceeding from the general
patterns of development and activity of the Communist Party, its tasks, and
improvement of general party organizational development. They are an ex-
pressron of the substantial, firm links between the phenomena and processes
characterizing the development of army and navy affairs, activities of com-
manders, political agencies, party organisations, and service activities of
personnel. The 26th CPSU Congress, at which Leninist teaching on the party
experienced further innovative development, armed us with scientific
methodology of political influence on accomplishment of the tasks of combat
training, strengthening discipline, indoctrination and training of personnel.

/The principles of party-political work/ are most important elements of this
methodology.‘ They include a class approach to appraisal of events and
phenomena of societal affairs and party-mindedness of training and indoctrina-
tion of personnel; unity of ideological, political-indoctrination and orga-
nizational activities; a close link with the practical building of comrwnisn,
vith affairs of party and nation, and with the missions of the Armed Forces;

a harmonious combination of public, class, group and personal interests; in-
ternationalism; the ability to concentrate main efforts on carrying out the
principal task; concreteness and purposefulness, continuity and efficiency;
activeness.

[Communist party-mindedness,l as s leading principle of party-political work,
enables one to determine with scientific precision and rigorous objectiveness

the principal goals and tasks of indoctrination of Armed Forces personnel and
to give it a correct ideological orientation, deep ideological content, and

23

IIII(MHHCIA1.USE(NULY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

sharp political thrust. This principle requires that one proceed at all
times and in all things, when evaluating facts, events, phenomena and
processes taking place in societal affairs and the military, from the in-
terests of Soviet people and the tasks of building communism, from considera-
tion of the acute class, ideological struggle in the international arena,
"that we conduct [our own/ [it.] policx and cowat [the entire policy line/
lit.) of hostile forces and classes.“

From the very first days of existence of the Soviet Any and Navy, party-
political work in the military has been conducted from the position of the
worker class -- our society's progressive, leading force. Today, in condi-
tions of developed socialism, it is being carried out in conformity with the
interests of the entire Soviet people. The entire content of party-political
work is constructed in precise conformity with the resolutions of Leninist
party congresses and decrees of the party's Central Co-ittee, which express
the interests of all classes and social groups in our society and the in-
terests of the entire people.

Proceeding from the resolutions of the 26th CPS!) Congress are demands of
further increase in the effectiveness of party-political work in the army and
navy and strengthening of its link with the affairs of our nation and the
tasks being performed by personnel. The strength of our military organization
lies in the fact that it is guarding the interests of the people, is closely
hound to the people, and that the successes of the army are inseparable fro-
the successes of the people. The servicemen should he deeply cognizant that
cousunism is both his public and vital personal cause, which he serves and
which he is obliged to defend; it is also a material expression of his
faithfulness to the ideals of the party.

[Concreteness and purposefulnessl of party-political work give it an ag-
greasive character and impel one to approach the phenomena of societal af-
fairs comprehensively and to conduct work in the masses in a skillful manner.
“...Party slogans and programs live in the activities of the masses,“1
Comrade I... I. Brezhnev stressed at the congress.

Today constructing party-political work concretely and purposefully means,
first of all, to proceed from the tasks assigned by the 26th CPSU Congress.
Secondly, it means taking into account the international military-political
situation and the tasks which proceed from it. Third, it means taking into
consideration the specific features of the present stage in development of the
Arncd forces and the changes which are taking place in their technical .
equipment, personnel, system of training and indoctrination, and seeking to
ensure conformity between the content of party-political work and the tasks
of comprehensive training of troops and naval forces.

The party teaches us to conduct party-political work [continuously and
flexibly,/ skillfully to choose and emloy means, forms, and methods of in-

f luencing the consciousness of personnel, skillfully to organise and mobilize
them for accomplishing the tasks of combat readiness of subunits, units, and
warships. Party-political work is conducted in any and all situations. The
more complex, intensive and dangerous the situation is, the stronger should be
political influence on the servicemen masses.

26

ms omcm. [SE ONLY
The experience of political work during the years of the Great Patriotic War
is instructive. Continuity and a high degree of flexibility of political in-
fluence on military personnel were achieved at that time by prompt formulation
by comanders and political agencies of the tasks of political work in or-
ganizing for combat and in the course of combat operations; by correct deter-
mination of work forms and methods and by their skillful combination and in-
novative application in conformity with the developing situation and combat
missions being performed; by maintaining constant co-Iunication between
political agencies and the political edifice of units with headquarters and
mutual flow of information; by correct placement of Mine, by prompt
replacement of disabled party-political workers, and by continuous strengthen-
ing of party and Komsomol organizations; by continuous organisational activity
on the part of col-sanders, political workers, and party activists among the
military personnel masses, and by a personal maple of courage and bravery in

combat; by a prompt, continuous and reliable flow of political information in
both directions.

Demands on continuity and efficiency of party-political work are increasing in
present-day conditions. Practicalness and businesslike efficiency, coupled
with a striving toward lofty goals -- the congress assigned this task to party
workers. In a situation of ideological struggle in the world arena, with ex-
tenaive development of the mass information media, it is important vigorously
to respond to changes which are taking place in international affairs. to
tasks arising for the Armed Forces, and to cover each and every servicemen
with political influence.

Experience shows that in most cases party-political work is being conducted
continuously and ubiquitOusly - in the field, on sea cruises, in the air,
during exercises, during alert duty, and during performance of various combat
training missions. This is also fostered by a high degree of efficiency in
placing party and Komsomol personnel in decisive areas, in organizing
monitoring and verification of execution, and in skilled and flexible
utilization of diversified means, forms and methods of political influence.

One essential condition for continuity, efficiency and flexibility of party-
political work is, as V. I. Lenin taught, the ability "to determine unerringly
for each question and at any moment the attitude of the masses, their actual
needs. aspirations, and thoughts....” But [complete and truthful information/
is necessary for this.

Objective, purposeful political information is a powerful instrument of
ideological-political leadership and an indispensable source of knowledge of
life. Political agencies continuOusly and efficiently inform activists and
military cadres on the most important decisions of the CPSU Central Co—ittee
and Soviet Government, on evens in international and domestic affairs. At the
same time information flows upward on the state of affairs in given areas, on
people's attitudes, needs, and requests. It enables one to respond efficiently
to the state of indoctrination work, military discipline, combat and political
training, and to take effective measures to correct deficiencies, to synthesize
and disseminate advanced know-how. This is why it is required of commanders
and political workers today as never before to possess considerable ability

25

“WISEONLY
PW UI'COLMI. U3& Ul‘b!

not only to see a given phenomenon, to reveal a given fact, but also to
evaluate them correctly and in a party manner, and to draw the necessary con-
clu .ons fron then. People expect, as was stated at the party congress, not
only a correct and timely presentation of facts but also a profound analysis
of these facts and profound syntheses.

Leninist principles of party-political work comprise the methodological
foundation of organization and control of processes taking place in the Armed
Forces, coordination, on the basis of these principles, of the efforts of
comanders, political agencies, and party organizations in accomplishing cur-
rent tasks of preparing the Armed Forces, training and indoctrinating military
personnel. This is achieved better and more completely where leader cadres
and all Commists more deeply perceive that i-utable truth that persuasion
and indoctrination of personnel constitutes the basis of organizational work,
and an integral part of party-political work is mobilisation of servicenen for
implementation of CPSU policy in the area of military organisational develop-
nent and execution of the demands of orders issued by the USSR minister of
defense. Party influence in each area where combat readiness tasks are being
accomplished makes it possible to attach deep political meaning to questions

pertaining to nastering combat skill, weapons and equipment, and strengthening
military discipline.

Principles of party-political work in the Soviet Armed Forces are the founda-
tion of innovative search for the most efficient forms and methods of political
influence on the masses. Knowledge of these principles helps everybody who
works with personnel to save effort and time in the search for optinnl tech-
niques of the indoctrination process. To be able to apply a general thesis in
a concrete situation is an art. V. 1. Main, speaking about the correlation
between general principles and their embodiment, stated: "It is foolishness to
fornulate a prescription or general rule... which would apply to all cases.

It is necessary to be able to think intelligently in order to be able to
analyze and understand in each individual case.” 2

The principles of party-political work in the Armed Forces, occurring in a
dialectical unity, express the party's demands in the area of strengthening
national defense. It clearly follows from the proceedings of the 26th CPSU
Congress that all efforts in party-political work should continue to focus on
accomplishing such a responsible and complex task as all-out increase in the
combat potential of the Arned Forces, maintaining army and navy combat readi—
ness at a high level. hilitary councils, co-anders, political agencies and
party organizations are called upon in their daily activities to proceed from
the position that ninutes and seconds, in which the time required to bring
weapons and equipment into action is measured, are today assuming an
enornous social significance. A high degree of continuous readiness on the
part of Soviet aervicenen to come to the defense of their homeland and the
achievements of socialise is in its historical significance a vitally inpor-
tant factor in ensuring favorable conditions for implementing our plans of
building col-mien.

Combat readiness of units and warships presupposes resolution of an entire ag-
gregate of questions of a military-technical, political and oral-psychological

26

MWLIISEONLV
order. High-quality maste'; of weapons and combat equipment, field, sea and
air proficiency, ideological conditioning, the moral-political and psychologi-
cal preparedness of servicemen for combat operations, firm discipline and a
high degree of organization -- each of these constituents of troop combat
readiness and fighting efficiency demands constant and close attention on the

part of military councils, commanders, political agencies, party organizations,
and all army and navy Communists.

In light of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress, the task consists in,
while continuously improving methods of political approach to ensuring a

high degree of combat readiness of subunits, units, and warships, directing
party-political work toward high-quality fulfillment of combat readiness plans,
toward achieving higher indices in training, especially in mastering new
equipment, improving party principlednees in evaluating the results of gunnery
activities, aissile firings, exercises, cruises, flight operations activities,
and creation in military collectives of an atmosphere of implacability toward
violations of discipline and toward the slightest manifestations of unneces-
sary simplification and unnecessary relaxation of demands in training personneL

Coabat readiness is to a significant degree the end result of party-political
work and a principal indicator of its effectiveness. Political influence on
all elements of combat readiness for the purpose of improving them has the
greatest effect wherever innovativeness is manifested, where dynamics and
quality of party-political work are combined with dynamics and quality of
field, sea and flight training, the entire process of training of military
personnel. And as the 26th CPSU Congress demands, commanders, political
agencies, and party organizations should be particularly self-critical in
this area. That which yesterday was considered an achievement, today can no
longer meet the tasks assigned the army and navy.

A decisive role in increasing the effectiveness of party-political work in the
Armed Forces should be played by political agencies, which are guiding party
agencies in the army and navy.

Employing their characteristic work forms and methods, political agencies are
called upon to direct their efforts toward radically solving the problems of
training troops and naval forces: complete and high-quality accomplishment of
the tasks of combat readiness, indoctrination of servicemen in a spirit of
Soviet patriotism and socialist internationaliam, a high degree of vigilance,
and development of excellent moral-political qualities in the armed defenders
of the homeland. In the final analysis the activities of political agencies
are concentrated on ensuring that regardless of how events evolve, there is no
chance that we could be taken by surprise.

Improvement in the work of political agencies presupposes persistent mastery

of methods of [scientific analysis] of the process of training and indoctrinat-
ing Armed Forces personnel. Greater attention is demanded by socialist com-
petition, strengthening of discipline in the units and on naval ships, and
cohesion of military collectives.

27

ltﬂlflﬂﬂCIAl.lEl!(H§lY
l-OR (”TRIAL USE ONLY

The increasing coapleaity of training and indoctrinating service-en dictates
the necessity of further intensification of the training process. precision
organization of personnel perfornance of duty, and fir- observance of regula-
tions. Col-sanders. political agencies and staffs are called upon to give
training a rigorous rhyth- of pace and to ensure precise execution of training
curricula and progress, with precise observance of training activity schedules.
It is iaportant in each and every nilitary subunit to create an atmosphere of
intolerance toward instances of inefficient expenditure of tine and toward in-
stances of "unnecessary sinplifications and diainished denandingness during
training activities in the field, at sea, and in the air.

Arny and navy political agencies have the task of nore closely analysing or-
ganization of conbat and political training as a whole and of deternining

whether everything is being done to ensure that each and every training hour
is utilized efficiently, and whether there is not excessive attention devoted

and indoctrination of service-en. Unfortunately, in acne units and at none
silitary educational institutions servicenen are excessively diverted to
housekeeping activities, apparently forgetting that the problea of quality of
training is also a problen of efficient utilization of the tine allocated for
training.

Political agencies and party organizations possess considerable capabilities
in the campaign for [efficient expenditure of training tine./ Concerned with
this point. they concentrate their attention on work in coapanies, batteries,
and coﬂat departnents, on weapon, equipment and vehicle crews.

One cannot help but note that there is smetines observed a certain gap between
what are generally correct and content-filled neasurea, which are carried out
at the level of the unit. and work in subunits. where the tasks of codwat
readiness, strengthening of discipline, and cohesion of nilitary collectives
are directly accoaplished. Inproving the level of indoctrination neasures
carried out in the conpany and battalion is one of those areas of reserve
potential which lake it possible to boost the efficiency of coabat training and
to achieve further strengthening of nilitary discipline and increased con-
scientiousness on the part of ailitary personnel. The 26th CPSU Congress
couples the camaign for efficiency of political work in the nasses with
further mastery of la Leninist style of leadership/ and the Leninist science of
nanagenent. This obliges political agencies to work daily to influence the
forning of such a style in each leader.

A great deal is spoken about this at neetings and conferences in units and on
naval ships, but in practice there still frequently occur deficiencies in the
work of individual conrades, an inability to rely on scientific data and to
select the east expedient techniques of indoctrinating personnel directly
where the tasks of increasing conbat readiness and strengthening observance
of regulations are being carried out.

Continuously to develop in oneself traits of a leader of the Leninist type
neans to proceed in all one's practical activities fron the tasks assigned by
the party congress and to be able to see the Iain direction and principal

28

”WIMONLY
elements in work ained at ensuring a high level of troop conbat readiness. A
Leninist style in the work of military cadres is, to state it concisely, an
aggregate of scientific aethods of leadership, with the assistance of which
one can mobilize service-en for conscientious fulfillment of the demands of
the party and government pertaining to increasing the coabat power of the army
and navy. It is inportant to develop in officers, general officers and flag
officers the ability to organize performance of service and training of per-
sonnel in precise conformity with the provisions of regulations and orders,
and to ensure a precise reginen in the daily work and activities of military
collectives. Always essential is a feeling of realisticness. which sakes it
possible to train and indoctrinate serviceuen with the greatest benefit for
performance of service. innovatively to interpret vital processes and
phenomena, to draw conclusions. to lake well substantiated decisions and to
ensure their absolute execution according to the specified timetable. As was
stressed by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev at the 26th crsu Congress, the genuine art
of leadership consists not in producing and disseminating directive instruc-

tions at every pretext. but rather in persistently and fully carrying out
already adopted decisions.

Genuine [businesslike efficiency] has nothing in common with bare practicality
to the neglect of theory and a narrow-tinded utilitarian attitude. It lain-
tains a close bond with foresight and the ability efficiently to utilize the
knowledge and skills of individuals and the capabilities of groups. It is
precisely these qualities which today distinguish progressive officers who,
with the assistance of party organizations, always endeavor to concentrate
people's attention on the main thing, who work with an eye to the future, who
seek to ensure that each individual does his own job. It is important to
continue working persistently to achieve practical incorporation of one of the
most inportant scientific demands: a highly-skilled specialist should not waste
time on work which can be performed by a specialist with a lower level of
qualifications. Sharp criticise should be leveled at those individuals who
have not yet overcome a tendency toward bureaucratic bustling, who cannot
refrain fron petty oversight, who attaspt to do everything themselves. who

do not entrust even a sinple task to their subordinates and who as a result
lose valuable tine on secondary matters.

Businesslike efficiency as a trait of the Leniniat style presupposes a snoothly
operating system of verification of execution of decisions, orders and
directives issued by higher agencies, as well as plans, which. as was noted
at the 26th CPSU Congress. renains a weak point in the work of a substantial
number of party organizations. In the line units as well the status of verifi-
cation of execution should constantly occupy the center of attention of
political agencies. It is necessary to ensure that execution is evaluated
primarily on the basis of practical acconplishnent of the tasks assigned the
unit and naval ship, with all new and progressive elesents synthesized, and
also with causes of deficiencies revealed and corrected.

In connection with this we should stress the necessity of more effective
instillnent of personal [responsibility/ of conmanders and political workers

for the state of combat and political training of personnel. He know that
errors of onission in training and indoctrination of personnel and gaps in

29

FOIiOFFKJAl.USE(HNLY
run WPILMI. m UNIJ

organisation of perfornance of duty turn on specific individuals, including
leaders of nilitary collectives. This factor met coupel us to ponder the fol-
lowing question: are we doing everything to emure that the responsibility

of co-anders and political workers corresponds to the tasks of the day? Are
such instn-ents as on-the-spot inspections and well organised party preventive
seasures being utilized in full neasure here? this provides food for thought
for nilitary councils and political agencies, in order to increase party in-
fluence on indoctrination of our cadres and on establisbent of a Leninist
style in their work.

Practical realities and the canaign for cowlete and precise execution of per-
sonnel coebat and political training plans show how inportant it is that
leadership positions be occupied by persons possessing a well-developed [sense
of the new/ and for every worker to be fully aware of his responsibility to
the party and state and to inject organization into every assigned task.

Our training and retraining of cadres is being carried out taking these
desands into account; in the course of this training everything is done to en-
sure that individuals inrove their ideological-theoretical level, deepen
their nilitsry knowledge, and naster scientific and technological advances.
Important in this regard is further inprovenent of the curricular process at
nilitary educational institutions and inrovenent in the level of training of
ideologically conditioned, nilitarily and technically knowledgeable co-enders
and political workers.

An essentially innovative Leninist style in all donains of activity, including
the nilitary. is continuously developing in confornity with changing conditions.
Today an innovative approach to problens of conbat readiness, asstering new
equip-cut, training and indoctrination of servicenen is especially essential.

Leadership stylesndnethods are a latter of exceptional inortance for party-
political work. It was enphasised at the 26th CPSIJ Congress that it is the
direct obligation of every party leader to be guided by Leninist standards
every day and in all things.

Our party organisations are working on the front lines of the mpaign for
further increasing any and navy codaat readiness. Examining the principal
areas of their activity in light of the congress resolutions, one can note
with satisfaction that party influence has appreciably increased on the course
of training and indoctrination of personnel.

Questions pertaining to conbat readiness. consu-ate nestery of weapons and
nilitary equip-ent, the field, see and air proficiency of personnel. the
ideological conditioning and discipline of service-en occupy the center of
attention of any and navy party organisations.

The specific features of the nisaions perforned by the branches of service and
coebat ares are reflected in the diversified activities of srny and navy

party organizations. But there is a principal, core elenent in all the
diversity of this work. It is the great responsibility to the party and people
for nintaining cosbat readiness at that level which is essential in order
resolutely and devastatingly to nip in the bud any aggression against our
country and our brother nations.

30

summon“
Party organizations are rightly called the guiding political nucleus of mili-
tary collectives. This function of these organizations is are vividly
manifested when Co-unists perforn nore harmoniously and energetically as
pioneers in socialist competition to improve the efficiency and quality of con-
hat and political training. as propagandists and organisers of a thrifty at-
titude toward every hour of training and service time. as champions of
adoption of everything which is new and progressive, and as genuine fighters

against that which inedes inprovement of the training and indoctrination
process.

A most inortant direction of the influence of party organizations on per-
sonnel is [secure-ant of the vanguard role of party namhers/ in training,
performance of duty. and conduct. It follows free the proceedings of the
26th CPSU Congress that the personal emple of Mists. reliance on the
masses, and the ability to see the future and use it to generate enthusiasm 1*.
one's fellow servicenen - all this enhances the prestige of the party or-
ganization and strengthens its influence on the nilitary collective.

when one speaks of the vanguard role of Connists in conbat training and
discipline, one frequently has in mind only those who are serving in s subunit
or on a weapon, equipment or vehicle crew. unquestionably the responsibility
of party nsmhers, the eerlariness of when is detenined first and foremost
by personal performance results in weapon, tactical and special training, is
quite great. But even greater demands should be nade of those (Jo-mists to
whon is entrusted the job of leading military collectives. of handling a given
work sector. of training and indoctrinating personnel. The demands of the 26th
CPSU Congress on further inprovement of cadre quality, place-ant and qualifica-
tions apply in full neasure to military cadres.

In light of the congress resolutions, particular attention nust be focused on
enhancing the vanguard role of staff and directorate Co-anists. Staff party
organizations are centers for dissemination of scientific nethods of leader-
ship, are unique generators of innovative thinking. synthesis and adoption of
advanced know-how. The success of all work. in units and on naval ships
depends to a considerable degree on excellence of nanagenent and organisation.

As was pointed out at the 26th 6280 Congress, prerequisites for success in
increasing the effectiveness of the work of party organisations lie in the
ability to determine primary tasks. to concentrate the efforts of Co-rnists
on these tasks. and in regular verification of the state of affairs in given
areas. These prerequisites consist in ensuring that the activities of each
and every Cos-unist are focused on a concrete and excellent end result. on
unconditional. atteimaent of the stated goals.

The congress advanced fundamental guidelines pertaining to further strengthening
party ranks. improving selection and indoctrination of cadres, development of
criticise and self-criticism, and other inortant matters pertaining to intre-
party affairs. It is a most important duty and obligation of party agencies.
party organisations, and all any and navy (Io-mists successfully to im-
plelsent these guidelines, to build upon amassed experience and know-how, and to
correct existing deficiencies. to quote 1.. I. BreeImev. they are called upon
firmly to implement the party line.

31

mommtuseonu
I'm W'ILML 03'. UNLI

An indulgent attitude toward those who violate party and nilitary discipline,
who forget their party obligations, and who fail to observe party standards is
intolerable. Party influence on the course of conhat and political training
depends entirely on an atnosphere of businesslike efficiency and dsaandingness
in our party organisations. of particular significance thereby, as is noted
in the CPS!) Central Co-ittee decree entitled "0n Further Inprovenent of
Oversight and Verification of hecution in Light of the Resolutions of the
26th CPSU Congress,” dated 16 August 1981, is inroveaent of "oversight and

verification of useution as a lost iqortant. coaponent part of party organiza-
tional work."

In light of the tasks advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress, an analytical ap-
proach is required to placenent of nsnpower of party organizations in the Iain
areas of activity and to the practical business of distributing party as-
signments. Here too such depends on how purposefully and systenatically
political agencies work on indoctrination of party activists, whose
rankscontain spproxinately one-third of the any and navy Co-unius.

It is inportant to develop in co-anders the ability to perforn party work and
to direct the activities of the party organisation. The officer-leader is
called upon constantly to be at the heart of the party nasaes, to listen to
the voice of Co-Inists, and to direct then in a pro-pt and timely nanner
toward resolving daily problens. By personal exaaple he should foster the
creation of conditions and an ataosphere in the collective whereby the
creative abilities of party neabers will develop in full neasure, so that each
individual's feeling of personal responsiblity for the state of affairs in
the subunit, unit, and naval ship will hecoaa even stronger.

Greater attention should be focused on party leadership of llousoaol organiza-
tions./ in his report at the congress, Conrade 1.. I. Brezhnev e-phasissd that
the soot iaportant thing, the nain thing in the work of Koasonol is "to foster
the forning of a generation of politically active individuals who know their
job, who love labor and kng how to work, who are prepared at all tines to
defend their honeland....” Directly proceeding fron this thesis is the
essence of party direction of Koasosol work in the stand forces. It consists
first of all in stepping up attention toward Co-unist indoctrination of
servicenen and forning in then a scientific-Harrist-uninist philosophical
outlook and dedication to the ideals and goals of the (is-mist Party.

One of the inortant form of party direction of Konsoaol organizations is the
direct work of Co-nnists in elective Konsoaol bodies. Strengthening of the
party nucleus in Konsonol has been and ruains an iaportant task. One aust
hear in aind thereby in one's daily work that Mists in moo-o1 are as a
rule yesterday's Kano-oi nenbers. The asjority do not i-ediately acquire
new organiser skills and political know-how; they lust be taught a great deal.

Indoctrination of youth is a vitally inortant and responsible party task. Of
course political agencies and party organisations cannot shift it off exclusive-
ly on (Io-mists elected to top-echelon [moo-o1 bodies. All Co-unista
participate in it, and of course prinarily one-nan co-nders, political

agency officials, secretaries and were of party co-ittees and bureaus,
deputy conanders for political affairs, plus others.

32

mammomv
Concrete direction of lonsolol organizations lakes it possible to ensure that
every louse-oi organization - coepeny. battalion, regi-ental, or ship -- en-
gages in a full range of activities. works at full force, ensures exeaplari-
noes on the part of all its neabers in training, perforlance of duty, and dia-

cip1ine, and antes its own growing contribution to the colbat ilprovenent of
units and varships.

Bork with Koasoeol cadres, their selection, place-ant and training are of ex-
ceptional importance.

The Leninist party deter-into the teska of military organizational develop-eat
end the content of party-political work in the breed lbrces. lts leadership.

strengthening of the role and influence of party organisations in the arly and

navy co-prise the basic foundation of Soviet eiiitary organizational develop-
eent.

1. "Haterialy XXVI e”yezda xrss" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress].
page 218.

2. lhid.. pp 218-219.

3. Ihid.. page 80.

b. Ihid.. page 139.

s. Ihid. , page 52.

6. Ihid., page 51.

7. lhid., page 66.

8. Ihid.

9. V. I. Lenin, ”Poln. Sohr. Soch."'[Cbeplete Sorts]. Vol 36, page 325.
10. 1hid., Vol 18, page 366.

11. ”Haterialy....' op. cit., page 51.
12. Lenin, op. cit.. Vbl ‘1, page 52.

13. "Heteriely...,” op. cit., page 67.

33

lﬂllilﬂﬂtlAI.USl(l'LY
me OFFICIAL USEONLY

Chapter M. W 11001113318 mm IN SERVICE!!!

In its nultifaceted activities pertaining to guiding the building of mine.
the Leninist party devotee enornom attention to building up the spiritual
resources of our society. the political indoctrination of Soviet citieena and
their nastery of haisn-Leninisn. The greatest schievenent of developed
socialist is the birth of Soviet nan. an active fighter and builder who is
wholeheartedly dedicated to the ideals of co-Inian. _ In his report at the
26th CPS" Congress, Conrade 1.. l. Brezhnev stressed: "Soviet nan is a con-
scientious worker. a nan of high political standards. a patriot and interna-
tionalist. Be has been indoctrinated by the party, by the heroic history of
our comtry. by our entire systen. Be is living the full-fledged life of
builder of a new world."1

At the a. tine the turning of the new nan continues to occupy the center of
the party's attention. lie possess today great nterial and spiritual capabili-
ties for increasingly fuller develop-at of the individual, for increasing the
spiritual" potential of society. the patriotic and intonation-list indoctrina-
tion of Soviet service-an.

l. Hernia-unmis- - Theoretical Vomdation of Ideological Work

The party is building the entire business of Win indoctrination on the
solid foundation of Heraist-Leninist theory. laithfully reflecting actual so-
cietal processes, this revolutionary theory enables the worker nasses con-
sciously to build a new society and to defend its achievenenta against any and
all encroachente by the ensnies of socialise. "The larxist-heniniat party can-
not carry out its role,” stated Carade L. I. Brezhnev at the congress, “if it
does not devote adequate attention to interpretation of everything which is
taking place. to synthesis of the new pheno-ena of life. and [to innovative
develop-ant of Haraiat-Leninist theory/2

Marxisteuninist science provides the Mist Party with the possibility of
proqtly tor-ulating and correctly resolving questions advanced by the
realities of life. It is supported in its developnent by practical revolu-
tionary achieve-ants and gives fighters for eta-nia- a powerful weapon of
social foresight, which enables then to deter-ins the concrete paths and
nethods of creating the neterial and technological foundation of co-unian.
inprovenent of societal relations, and indoctrination of the new nan.

3b

lawman“
Marxist-Leninist teaching on war and the any equips working people and nili-
tary personnel with an understanding of the objective necessity of defending
socialist schievenents against potential aggression by inperialist forces.

The note profound and the greater the scale of transfornstions, the broader
their scope, the note intensively party [theoretical] work is conducted. New
theoretical points on the developnent of socialise and the prospects of build-
ing connunisn. which have enriched Marxist-Leninist science. were fornulated
in many party doct-ents. These include the proceedings and resolutions of

the 24th. 25th. and 26th CPS" congresses. the decisions of Central Co-ittee
plenuns, docunents dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Great October So-
cialist Revolution. the 100th and 110th anniversaries of the birth of V. I.
Lenin, the writings and speeches of Conrado L. I. Brezhnev and other party and
governnent leaders. At the sane tine the party continued investigation and
theoretical interpretation of new phenonena and processes in the conteqorary
capitalist society as well. its econony. ideology and politics. and clarifies-
tion of questions which arise in connection with the aggressive essence of in-
perialisn and the nilitary danger it engenders. The party is also interested
in a broad range of questions pertaining to the affairs and prospects of
developing countries.

The conception of a developed socialist society is a truly outstanding achieve-
nent of creative Harsisn. The party has convincingly denonstrated that nature,
developed aocialisn is the nest dynanic society in history. It possesses
enornous capabilities not only for achieving the strategic ains of the CPSU in
the area of the econony, sociopolitical and spiritual developnent, but also
for acconplishing a broad range of foreign policy taslts and for further
strengthening this country's defense night and the conbat potential of the
Arned Forces.

Deepening of the conception of developed socielisn in the proceedings of the
26th CPSU Congress was expressed in clearly fornulated points on enhancenent
of the role of the subjective factor in direction of the nation's econony and
in the fact that, as is noted in the CPS!) Central Co-ittee Accountability
Report. ”the estahlishnent of a clueless structure of society will talus place
basically and prinsrily within the historical franeworh of nature aocialian."3

The congress concretised and supplenented the conception of nature socialisn
fron the standpoint of further devebpmt d the Soviet people as a new social

and international co-unity. It was shown that the intensive econonicai social
developnent of each of our republics speeds up the process of their con-
prehensive drawing together and leads to the flourishing and lutual enricl-snt
of the national cultures and at the sans tine to the forning of a culture of a
united Soviet people. In indoctrination of personnel one should take into
account the problens stated by the congress connected with the specific
features of contenporary sociabdenogrsphic developnent in this country. with
intensification of nigration processes in our society, and with further in-
provenent of ethnic relations at the contqorary stage.

The conception of the socialist way of life experienced further developnent
in the docunente of the 26th CPSU Congress. Attention was focused on the

35

summon“
MIR UFMLIAI. USE ONLY

inortance of aqhaaising in this coqlex phenolenon both naterial and
spiritual funds-entals. The growing role of literature and art in fmdemw

nan was shown. Pointing by the congress to the significance of aan's self-
indoctrination, the for-ling of Ian's intelligent nude and interests, and in-
creasing his awareness, initiative, and discipline was an inportant elenent.

Probleas dealing with the world revolutionary process, the socialist co-uni-
ty, and relations between the ussa and the brother socialist countries on the
one hand and liberated countries and nations of socialist orientation on the
other experienced further scientific elaboration at the congress.

The congress deeply analyzed the develop-ant of the world Wt nova-eat.
It reeaphasized the diversity of for-s, nethods, and paths of socialist revolu-
tion dictated by the correlation of class forces, the ethnic structure in a
given country, and the external situation. The congress expressed resolute -
opposition to "criticisn" which distorts socialist reality, departs fro. the
general aechaniana of the socialist revolution and the building of socialism,
and renders service to the class ens-y.

The analysis of the probleas of war and peace and the reasons for the in-
creased aggressiveneas of inerialial presented at the congress constituted an
iaportant contribution to liarxist-Leninist teaching on war and the arny. Once
again the paramount importance of consolidating peace, preserving and deepening
detente. and holding the eras race in check was noted; the increased
capabilities of the world's progressive forces in their campaign to eliainate
the threat of war were shown. '

The Leninist conception of a socialist arsy was further developed at the
congress. 0f enormm significance for practical training and indoctrination
of nilitary personnel is the thesis on the historical role of the Soviet Arned
Forces: reliably to guard the peaceful, productive labor of the Soviet people,
to defend peace, and to aid victins of aggression. The congress expanded the
scientific conception of the factors which sunrise the conhat potential of

the Araed Forces and demnstrated the interrelationship and interpenetration
of these factors as a strong fusion of technical equip-eat, nilitary expertise,
and indonitable ”tale.

A law and pattern of developed socialis- - [enhance-cot of the role of the
ideological factor in building a new society] - was further substantiated in
the proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress. Our novenent forward deaands of
each individual a deeper understanding of the unity of the public and the
individual. the prinacy of the general weal as a condition for fuller satis-
faction of the needs of the individual. Stressing the necessity of reorganiz-
ing nany areas and do-ains of ideological work. Conrade L. l. Brezhnev noted

at the congress: "He lust ensure that its content becones sore current, and

that its fans correspond to the present desires and needs of Soviet citizens."

Ideological work is essentially the chain of the science of nan. Its effective-
ness and quality are nanifested first of all in the degree of influence on
people's consciousness, views. and convictions and, secondly, in their ac-
tions. Consciousness of the individual finds expression in such indicators

summon“
as volume of assimilated knowledge, degree of knowledgeability, and conviction.
The indicators of the actions of the individual are measured in turn by the
level of one's labor and sociopolitical activeness and by the nature of one's
conduct on the job, during performance of duty, and during off-duty hours.

The entire system of party ideological-indoctrination work seeks to ensure that
Harxist-Leninist ideas become stable personal convictions on the part of each
and every Soviet citizen, determining their actions and deeds. There is a
single core line here — development in all leaders of society of a high
degree of political consciousness and instill-eat of an active attitude toward
life, a conscientious attitude toward civic duty, a unity of word and deed.
demandingness on oneself and others, and strict observance of Co-nnist
morality. Thus ideological work becomes a continuously operating front of the
campaign for co-unism and increasing the defense might of the homeland.

Taking into consideration the ever increasing significance of ideological work,
the party devotes mabating attention to its improvement. In the period
between the 25th and 26th CPS" Congresses, approximately loo Central Co-ittee
decrees were adopted on ideological questions, encompassing all the basic
elements of Commnist indoctrination and reflecting new trends of societal
development characteristic of mature socialism. A special place among these
documents is occupied by the 26 April 1979 CPS“ Central Co-Iittee decree en-
titled "On Further improvement of Ideological and Political Indoctrination
work" which, as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stressed at the 26th CPSU Congress, is
a document of long-term effect.

The proceedings of the 26th C’PSU Congress are of enormous ideological-
theoretical and practical significance in ideological work. Thorough study
and dissemination of these documents as one of the most important conditions
for increasing the social activeness of working people, army and navy per-
sonnel, and successful ilplementation of the party-elaborated program of
building co-uniam has become its content for an extended period of time.

Thus we have at our disposal a well-structured system of theoretical theses

of Harxism-Leninism and political guidelines. which express the Columnist
Party's approach to ideological work and indoctrination of Soviet citizens,
including military personnel. Grounded on the Leninist ideological-theoretical
legacy, these theses make it possible to exert ideological influence on all
aspects of army and navy activities. In army and navy affairs there are no
purely technical problem or organizational measures which contain no
ideological significance. Combat and political training, mastery of weapons,
organization of socialist competition, and military exercises - in short, all
aspects of personnel activities -- are directly dependent on the quality of
propaganda and agitation, their scope and depth of influence. It is therefore
an important that co-anders, political workers and engineers, when determining
the concrete tasks of personnel cowat and political training, always see

their ideological aspect and be able to give a correct political appraisal of
phenomena and possess the capability of holding our class position firm in any
and all conditions.

37

POROII'FICIALUSEONLY
I'UI Ul‘fﬂJAL U33. UﬁLI

2. Conditions and Features of Ideological Bork at the Contemporary Stage

All the successes of the people in building communism are directly linked with
the triumph of the ideology of scientific socialism, permeated with genuine
humanism and historical optimism. Marxist-Leninist ideology, revealing the
objective mechanisms of social development and continuously reflecting its
dynamics, is at the same time evolving together with society. This
dialectical interrelationship must always be borne in mind, particularly by
those persons who organize and conduct ideological work among the masses.
Effectiveness of ideological-political influence on working people and Armed
Forces personnel is directly dependent on coordination between ideological ac-
tivity and the conditions in which we live and work. And they have changed
significantly in recent years.

As was noted in the CPSU Central Committee Accountability Report to the 26th
CPSU Congress, "the Soviet citizen has changed. His knowledge has become en-
riched, his erudition increased, and his spiritual and intellectual require-
ments have increased substantially."5 A rise in the general educational

level of working people (80 percent of Soviet citizens now possess higher.
complete 0 r partial secondary education) promotes improvement of their moral
qualities and aesthetic tastes and induces positive changes in the individual's
consciousness. In other words, a high degree of ideological maturity, politi-
cal awareness and social activeness on the part of the masses is characteristic
of a developed socialist society.

The present level of socialist societal awareness, which is continuously being
enriched with new content, serves as that reliable foundation on which party
ideological-indoctrinational work is constructed. It is taken into account
thereby that young generations of builders of communism are entering active
production and sociopolitical affairs. They are filled with energy and en-
thusiasm and are willing to make their contribution to the common cause. The
life experience of young people is limited, however; they have not experienced
that school of political conditioning which the people of the older generation
have gone through, people who gained knowledge of the essence of Marxism-Lenin-
sim in the flame of class battles and the ordeals of war. Therefore in condi-
tions where affirmation of the socialist ideology is taking place with considera-
tion of vigorous ideological hostility, the party is endeavoring to arm young
people with firm theoretical knowledge and, on this basis, to develop
ideological conviction in them, to teach them practical application of the
theses and conclusions of Harsism-Leninist theory. As was emphasized by Com-
rade L. I. Brezhnev in his report at the 26th CPSU Congress, it is essential

to ensure that the high ideals assimilated by young people stimulate social

activeness on the part of the younger generation, their productivity, and
directly reflect in daily activities.

Growth is the consciousness and overall cultural standards of Soviet citizens
also determines a new, exceptionally high level of demands on the content of
party ideological work. Two elements must be distinguished here: on the one
hand, the tasks of ideological-political influence on the masses are facil-
itated -- propagandists as a rule are dealing with a well prepared audience,
possessing broad aspirations and diversified interests; on the other hand, these

38

FOI10FFICJA1.lEﬂE(HVLV
tasks are significantly complicated due to the necessity of conducting
propaganda and agitation at a higher level.

Speaking of change in the conditions and specific features of ideological-
political work today. one should note the fact that workers on the

ideological front have at their disposal an arsenal of means of influencing
literally all segments of this country's population. The periodical press,
which has a combined circulation of 380 million copies of newspapers and
magazines. is a reliable channel of daily /information./ Periodicals are
published at a rate of more than four per Soviet family. Books and

pamphlets are published in press runs in the many millions of copies. Our
country is practically totally radio-served, and fourofifths of the population
watch Soviet television. Millions of lecturers, propagandists, agitators and
political information people regularly address audiences of workers. kolkhos
farmers, intelligentsia,young students and Armed Forces personnel. Our
literature and art -- socialist in content, national in form, and international-
ist in spirit —- constantly exert ideological influence on the masses.
Development of the information media has led essentially to the creation of a
new information situation, which fosters a substantial improvement in the
ideological-political indoctrination of Soviet citizens, including army and
navy personnel. The Soviet people are promptly informed on the most important
party and government decisions, on current events at home and abroad. At the
same time a wealth of information is received at newspaper and magazine of-
fices, radio and television studios on the state of affairs locally. on the
attitudes. needs and aspirations of working people. This makes it possible
Quickly and efficiently to correct discovered deficiencies. to synthesize and
widely adopt advanced know-how, and to specify new, concrete tasks in Com-
munist indoctrination of Soviet citizens.

The favorable situation, however, which is created for ideological workers in
the course of the rapid development of propaganda and agitation means. once
again imposes higher demands on the activities of propagandist activists. This
applies both to improvement in the forms and methods of ideological-indoctrina-

tion work and improving the methods skills of fighters of the ideological
front.

Another feature of the conditions in which the party is conducting ideological
work is aggravation of the [class struggle in the world arena] and increased
ideological activeness on the part of the propaganda centers of our class
adversary. The successes of the Soviet Union and the other nations of the
socialist community in building a new life are keeping international reaction
in a state of agitation. They are stteapting by all methods and means to
impede the forward movement of socialism and to undermine the socialist world
from within. They are employing the foulest and most villainous means to
achieve this, from economic pressure and political blackmail, support and en-
couragement of counterrevolutionary forces, hypocrisy and demagoguery to base
lies and falsification. Our enemies will stoop to any devices to blscken so-
cialism. to distort its essence and to diminish its prestige in the eyes of
the gullible.

Antisocialist forces have extensively utilised the events in Poland toward
these ends. They have attempted to compromise the Polish United Horkers' Party

39

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
tUI W‘NLML USS ONLY

and to take away its leadership role in society. Reactionary circles in the
Best are doing everything they can to urge agents in the Polish socialist
state to engage in numerous debates with the aim of pushing through views
which are alien to Hsrxism—Leninisn, of provoking apostasy, and propagating
so‘called ”pluralism,” that is, a diversity of ideological and political
currents and aggravation of the crisis situation in the economic and societal
affairs of People's Poland. However. as Conrade 1.. I. Brezhnev stated in his
address at the 26th CPSU Congress, ‘hve shall not leave socialist Poland.
fraternal Poland in the lurch, and we shall not allow it to be wronged!”6

The iaperialist bourgeoisie is clearly cognizant of the fact that a revolu-
tionizing influence on the nonsocialist part of the world is exerted not only
by the economic successes of the Soviet Union. by all genuine socialisn, but
also by the example of our monolithic morale-political unity. Therefore in-
ternational reaction, and particularly 0.8. imperialists, seeking to halt the
victorious march of Conunist ideology, is more and more persistently building
up its efforts in antisocialist, anti-Soviet propaganda. “any political leaders
in the United States and a amber of other Uestern countries freQuently ig.
nore the political realities of today's world. They are asking decisions
which are not nerely inconensurate to the state of affairs but are totally
contrary to the spirit of our time. Irresponsible politicians, who have
succeeded in forgetting the stern lessons of history, are seeking in vain to
halt or alter the course of the historically objective movement of mankind
toward a bright future. And the danger of these efforts lies in the fact that
nilitant isperialist circles, entertaining hopes of blocking the spread of
Col-unist ideas", are rattling their sabers and continuing to place their hopes

on military force. Such a policy is fraught with the greatest threat to all
mankind.

Activation of the bourgeoisie in the ideological struggle against conunism
and intensification of its atteqats to blacken and slander co-misa and
Soviet authority urgently dictates the necessity of further inroving political
indoctrination work, increasing the effectiveness of ideological efforts, and
achieving a steady increase in their yield. Our party is constantly con-
cerned with improving and perfecting Co-unist indoctrination of working
people. It continuously devotes enormous attention to equipping ideological
cadres and all Conunists with a methodology of indoctrination work which
makes it possible skillfully to explain to people the conclusions of Marxist-
beninist science and to form staunch ideological convictions in them.

Attesting to this in particular is the fact that in the period between the
25th and 26th CPS" congresses the Central Conittee of the party issued
decrees on experience in comprehensively solving problems of ideological in-
doctrination work. on tasks of party education, direction of the mass informa-
tion and propaganda media, on enhancing the role of verbal political agitation,
on neasures to improve lecture propaganda and. finally,on further inprovement
of ideological and political indoctrination work. In the latter docusent
emphasis is essentially on reorganizing many areas and donains of ideological
work. This reorganisation, toward which the congress proceedings also focus
us, should be conducted in the direction of raising the scientific level and
increasing the aggressiveness of all ideological indoctrination work and

60

M OFFICIAL LEE ONLY
strengthening its link with the practical realities of life. The task con-
sists in propaganda not sidestepping sensitive subjects. in propagandists
speaking with people in a lively and interesting nanner - not in the
language of standard sets of ready for-ulna, but in the language of concrete
facts. persuasive armments, so that they truly influence people's hearts and
souls, instilling in then an unswerving resoluteness and the will to bring
the cause of building co-unisn to a victorious conclusion.

3. Principal Directions of Ideological Bork, Rays to Increase Its Effective-
ness

The party Central Co-ittee decree entitled ”0n Further Iqrove-ent of
Ideological and Political Indoctrination work" contains very ilportant
theoretical syntheses and practical conclusions characterizing party
ideological activities in conditions of developed socialisn, examines cur-
rent problems of ideological-political indoctrination, and defines concrete
ways to increase its effectiveness.

when we speak of inproving the quality of ideological work, we have in nind
prinarily such detersining indicators as ideological thrust. scientific

argunentation of points and recs-endations, and overall level of sophistica-
tion.

The attention of party organisations and propagandist-sctivists is today con-
centrated on hot: to ensure a high scientific level of propaganda and agitation.
how to inprove their efficiency and concreteness. to strengthen their link with
practical realities. with accleishing econonic and political tasks. and how
to develop the aggressive character of propaganda and agitation. Acconplish-
nent of these tasks lakes it possible to fill with profound ideological-
theoretical content each of the areas of ideological work and to ensure in-
creased effectiveness of this work.

The central thrust of ideological work in the nilitary is I forning in personnel
a Harrist-beninist ideological outlook,/ which deternines to a decisive degree
the strength of influence of the ideological factor on accoqlishing the tasks
of building co-Iunisn in general and strengthening national defense in
particular.

Ideological outlook is akin to a person's spiritual bridgehead, defining his
political attitude, class feeling. and sense of citizenship. Building con-
nunisn and defendin revolutionary achieve-ants densnd of people a high

degree of ideological conviction, a broad educational level, and noral naturity.

In the society of developed socialisa the -jority of Soviet citizens have
certainly assimilated Hardst-Leninist teaching, which conprises the principal
source of forning a Co-unist ideological outlook. Consistent study of
Harsist-Leninist theory develops dialectical thinking and gives it a sig-
nificant, acute, flexible. and innovative character. The party seeks to
achieve a situation where each and every Soviet citizen possesses scientific
views on the developsent of society and is profoundly aware of his place in
the struggle for co-unisn.

lol

momcutuseonu
constantly changing, and asn hinself is also changing. The problem of forning
a (Jo-mist ideological outlook the level of which would correspond to the
present stage of developsent of our society and, in particular. to the tasks
of Soviet nilitary organisational developed“, is highly pertinent. ls-
pecially inportant in this regard is a deeper sastery of ideological-
theoretical knowledge by our cadres - co-enders, political workers, leaders
and indoctrinators of their subordinates.

sechanisns and patterns of defense of the achieve-ants of the socialist
revolution. the paths of inrovenent of the Araed Forces and nsintaining then
in a continuous state of codat readiness. It is difficult and sonetines is-
poseible for a person who does not possess scientific knowledge of an
ideological character to reach correct conclusions on developsent trends in
the world unitary-political situation. as well as trends in the develop-mt of
silitary affairs as a whole or individual areas within nilitary affairs. It
is also difficult for such a person to understand the coupler aggregate of
relationships within the nilitsry collective. Knowledge of the laws governing
the develop-sot of nature and society and the factors affecting the course and
outcone of war enables one nentally to foresee events, as it were, to look in-
to tonorrow. The ability to foresee. to consider in one's work the require-
nents and possibilities of the future, today is one of the essential condi-
tions which ensure success in the activities of nilitary cadres.

An important role in forling a scientific ideological outlook in officers is
played by our nilitary educational institutions, co-and authorities. and
political agencies. The task consists in ensuring that each in”! every
graduate of a nilitary educational institution is conprehensivew prepared for
work in line units, is able to approach in a scientific nanner the organization
of conbat and political training. training and indoctrination of any and

navy personnel. It is also essential to ensure that an officer continues
persistently studying after graduating free the service school and acadeny.

An ilportant aspect in foraing a scientific ideological outlook in cadres in
present-day conditions is depth of assinilation of ideological-theoretical
knowledge.

In his report at the 26th CPS" Congress, Conrade 1.. I. Brezhnev stressed: "Re
want to ensure that party policy nergss with the activities of the senses, that
party education teaches people, to quote V. I. Lenin "to act as mine in
fact demands.” Heriting full support in light of this not: iuportsnt point is

sanders. political agencies and party organisations to officer independent
study of pri-ry sources and the proceedings of the 27th CPSU Congress. In
present-day conditions, when the value of knowledge is rapidly growing, one
cannot count nerely on one-tins assiailetion of a specified sun total of
facts - it is inortsnt to inert to cadres the ability independently to in-
crease their knowledge and to gain their hearings in the swift flow of socio-
political inforaation.
ideological training is organically linked with [forning a high level of
political consciousness./ A clear understanding of Commist Party policy and
a clear-cut concept of the paths of inplenentation of the resolutions of the
26th CPSU Congress, the achievenents and problem of genuine socialism, as well
as the sins of iaproving the Soviet arsed Forces - all this ensures develop-ant

of an integral person and noral preparedness successfully to carry out coqlex
conbat nissions.

Political ideas are capturing the consciousness of nillions. Exerting deter-
nining influence on the fornation of ideological outlooks, they help people
adjust and mobilize for the accowlislnent of constructive tasks and, in case
of war, to defend the socialist hoaeland. At the sane tine the forning of
political consciousness is a very comlex process. It is not limited to the
franework of book knowledge and the accosplishaent of course curricula.

He can note with satisfaction that in recent years there has been an appreciable
increase in interest on the part of all categories of ailitary personnel in
studying the theoretical legacy of the founders of Haraisn-beninian. CPSU
decisions, and the works of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev as well as other party and
governnent leaders. Particular attention is focused on understanding the
collective wisdon of our Leninist party, reflected in the proceedings of its
26th Congress. Study of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress today con-

stitutes the core of liarxist-Leninist education of cadres and all Soviet
servicemen.

Reports and lectures are presented and consultation sessions held to assist
the aesbers of officer Harrist-Leninist training groups, warrant officer
political education groups, and political instructiOn classes for nonco-is-
sioned officers and enlisted personnel. Up-to-dsue fans of infornation-
propagandist work are becoming increasingly widespread. for-s which take into
account the fact that a tinely, concise and clear co-entary is frequently
eore effective and such sore strongly influences the consciousness of service-
aen than an extensive but belated explanation.

An inportant source for forning ideological conviction is people's practical
labor and, in conditions of the aray and navy, ailitsry activity which, on
the one hand, enables one to becoae convinced of the truth of theoretical
points and on the other hand denanda of a person volition, courage, and a
resolute struggle to inleaent these points. Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev stressed
at the congress: "It has long been known that truth is fir-1y assinilated
when it is experienced, not sinply taught."8

Knowledge of co-unisn obtained only fron textbooks, only free lectures and
reports, without work and without a struggle to iaplenent this knowledge en-
genders quotation nongers and braggarts. A person who has not consolidated his
erudition in the area of the social sciences with active participation in the
canon Co-unist cause is not guaranteed against being transfer-ed under
certain conditions into the east typical philistine, distant free the in-
terests of society. Political consciousness should and nust be deter-lined on
the basis of how usefully a person works for the benefit of the people, how

broadly and how state-centeredlyhe thinks when carrying out his duties, and how
highly noral his conduct is.

43

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sun WOOLIAL 03C. ”ALI

There is taking place in the process of developnent of our society an ever
increasing enricl'nent of the spiritual resources of the people, the aray and
navy. The noble features of the spiritual countenance of the Soviet citizen

are also inproving with the aid of forts and nethods which coqarise the con-
tent of moral indoctrination.

Carrying out the party's denands pertaining to further inprovenent of ideologi-
cal work, nilitary comcils. co-anders, political agencies and party organiza-
tions specify as one of the cost inportant areas of their political indoctrina-
tion activity the laoral inprovaent of Soviet service-em] Moral indoctrina- -
tion of aray and navy personnel is grounded on the principles and standards of
Columnist aorality, observance of which in conditions of nilitary service is
assuning particular significance - it involves perforasnce of tasks pertain-
ing to defense of the socialist hoasland and the achievements of socialise.

It is not acre happenstance that the noral standards of conduct of the Soviet
service-en, on an equal footing with legal standards, are incorporated into the
texts of the nilitary oath and general nilitary regulations and have the force
of law. Observance of the denands of these docunents, which regulate the

life and activities of ailitary collectives, is nandatory for each and every
citizen-soldier of the USSR.

Another specific feature of noral indoctrination lies in the fact that it is
based not sinply on the dennds of society expressed in standards of aorality
but on concrete nodels of behavior in which these standards are nost fully

and genuinely eabodied. The noble countenance of revolutionaries of the Lenin
guard, heroes of the struggle for the freedoa and independence of the socialist
homeland. and leading-perform“ workers of the five-year plan, who have given
and continue to give all their knowledge and energy for the source of affirm-
tion of the highest aorsl ideals, has served and will always serve as a source
of inspiration for our young people. In light of the resolutions of the 26th
CPSU Congress, higher denands are being inposed on the personal exenplariness
of leaders, including co-anders and political workers. Leadership of military
collectives has been entrusted to then. Subordinates are particularly sensi-
tive to the conduct of an officer-co-ander. People frequently judge not only
his personal qualities but also the truth of the oral values of our society by
how he observes noral standards, how dennding he is on hinself, and how honest
he is in relations with his superiors and subordinates, as well as during off-
duty hours. He believe that in analyzing the state of affairs in a given sub-
unit, things in which do not correspond to the high denands of regulations and
aorality, one of the causes of this situation nay be a lack of personal
exenplariness on the part of the co-nder and political worker. By their en-
tire conduct both on and off duty they are called upon to enbody in their oral
countenance the lofty standards of Co-nnist mrality.

in his report to the 26th 0980 Congress, Conrade L. I. Brezhnev stated the
question of increasing the responsibility of leader personnel for carrying out
their duties and the dennds of the Soviet State. Attention was drawn to the
necessity of further inroving [legal indoctrination] -- one of the inportant
areas of ideological work.

4‘

”WISCONLY
The laws of the Soviet State. created on the basis of the USSR Constitution
(Fundamental Law), express the will of the party and the entire people. The
force of indoctrination]. effect of these laws lies in the fact that they
officially and formally state the legal principles and standards on which
Co-unist sorality is primarily based. This is why legal indoctrination
should not only give servicemen a precise idea of their rights and obliga-

tions but should also fore in then a highly moral attitude toward the laws in
effect in our country and toward observing the demands of these laws.

He sust particularly stress a final aspect. in the arny and the navy Soviet
laws. and in particular the USSR Law on Universal Military Service Obligation,
the silitary oath and general nilitary regulations, serve as an effective
scans of regulation by the state of societal relations in the real- of
defense. These laws. defining the funds-ental guidelines of manpower sc-
quisition, structure and organisation of all Armed Forces life and activities,
guard the fitness of the adopted procedure of performce of nilitary ser-
vice. the rights and legitimate interests of nilitary personnel. Observance
of legal standards actively fosters increase in the cubat efficiency of units
and subunits and strengthening of conscious discipline.

V. l. Lenin viewed rule of law as a phenomenon dictated by the general level
of culture of the masses. lie considered disregard of the rule of law and
violation of the law to be one of the nsnifestations of a low level of cul-
tural and moral standards. Linked with people's cultural level is their
political and moral awareness. the entire process of foraing a scientific
ideological outlook in then. "(he can become a Co-unist only when one an-
riches one's nemory with the knowledge of all those riches which have been
produced by nankind."9 stated the leader of the proletarian revolution.

In conditions of developed socialise the party is continuing to increase
efforts aimed at [growth of the level of culture and enrichnent of the in-
tellectual and spiritual world of Soviet working people and silitary personneL/
Thanks to the concern of the party, an extensive network of officers' clubs,
clubhouses and libraries, lecture agencies and universities of culture has
been established in the Araed Forces. Every day millions of copies of news-
papers are delivered to the units and naval ships. in recent years there has
been a threefold increase in television set availability to personnel, and

a 10-fold increase in availability of radio receivers. Establishment of a
patron relationship between people in culture and science and the Armed Forces
has assxmed an enormous scale -- every year approxinately 2 aillion different
cultural-patron events are held. All this fosters the develop-ant of

amateur talent activity in the units and on naval ships and enriches opportuni-

ties for the cultural growth and aesthetic indoctrination of nilitsry per-
sonnel.

The Leninist party teaches us efficiently to utilize the capabilities of
developed socialise for [intensification of patriotic and internetionalist
indoctrination of Soviet citizens, aray and navy personnel./ By its entire
content and by all its tested and proven means and aethods, ideological work
is called upon to form in working people a socially active feeling of love
toward the hmeland and dedication to the socialist societal and governmental

65

FORMING!!!”
F0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systen, and to the (Jo-unist Party of the Soviet Union, and a feeling of pride
in the achievenents of our people, who are proceeding. under party guidance.
at the forefront of world social progress. Patriotic indoctrination sins at
assisting Soviet nan in deeply perceiving the necessity of arned defense of
the socialist honeland and at developing in his the willingness and readiness
selflessly to carry out his sacred civic duty.

Soviet patriotisn is international in essence. The CPS!) has struggled and will
always struggle resolutely against such nanifeststions alien to the nature of
socialisn as chauvinis- and nationalisn. and against any and all nationalistic
deviations. such as anti-Senitisn or Zionisa. for example. The 26th CPSU
Congress esphasised: "It is the party's sacred duty to indoctrinate working
people in a spirit of Soviet patriotisn and socialist internationasisn, a
proud feeling of belonging to the great. united Soviet hoaeland.“

The international character of Soviet patriotisn is unifested in an organic
unity of dedication and faithfulness on the part of Soviet citizens to their
honeland and the entire socialist mity, to the cause of class solidarity
with the working people of all countries. The consistency of the liarxist-
Leninist line followed by the Soviet Union and the other nations of the so-
cialist col-unity in foreign policy and in defense of the achieveasnts of
socialisa was convincingly denonstrated in the course of the 26th CPSU Congress and
recent congresses of the other brother parties of the socialist nations.

Nobody can doubt the resolve of the peoples of the nations of the socialist
calamity to safeguard their interests.

The daily life and codat training of the non of the Joint Arned Forces of
the Harsaw Pact nenber nations is perneated by a spirit of internationalisn.

One of the east isportant tasks of ideological work in the any and navy in

the final analysis is indoctrination of personnel / in a spirit of excellent
vigilance and constant conbat readiness, guaranteeing an i-ediate and resolute
repulsing response to any sggressor.l In order successfully to fora in nilitary
personnel the requisite aural-political and fighting qualities and to naintsin
in the units and on naval ships a high degree of conbat readiness, it is
extremely important to ensure that servicenen thoroughly assinilate party con-
clusions on the present distribution of class forces in the world and gain

a realistic idea of the existing nilitary danger.

It is clearly evident froa the proceedings and resolutions of the 26th CPSU
Congress how the scale of influence of ideological work on Soviet servicenen
has grown. The task consists in obtaining sari-sin return on this effort. And
the road is obvious -- we sust ensure that the content of ideological indoc-
trination activity on the part of nilitary councils, co-anders. political
agencies and party organizations been-es sore pertinent and that its forns
correspond to present requirements and needs of the Arned Forces.

lo. Guarantee of Success -- A Combined Approach
of particular inortance for successful i-plenentetion of the guidelines of

the 26th CPSU Congress in the area of ideological indoctrination work is the
nore than 2 years experience of execution in the arny and navy of the dcnsnds

106

msomanussomv
of the 26 April 1979 CPS" Central Co-ittee decree. A good many positive

achievements have been gained in practical ideological activities during
this time.

The style of direction of ideological work is improving. Co-snd-political

leader personnel are taking are active part in it. Party nominees are pay-
ing greater attention to ideological-political indoctrination of (Io-mists and
all military personnel. An aggressive character of propaganda and agitation is

developing. and its scientific character. efficiency and concreteness are in-
proving.

Heasures adopted for further increasing the effectiveness of ideological work
are having a positive effect on strengthening the morale of Armed Forces
personnel. accomplishment of ooabst and political training tasks. and
strengthening of the indoctrinational role of military service. But these

are merely first steps toward meeting the demands of the CPS!) Central Co-ittee

decree entitled "0n Further inrovement of Ideological and Political indoctrina-
tion Hark."

The content and style of political indoctrination activity in the military
masses are today determined by the demanding, critical and constructive spirit
of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress. Co-snders. political agencies.
party organizations and the entire body of ideological activists are called upon
to affirn this spirit of bolshevik principledness and productive activeness

in the affairs of each and every collective. and to indoctrinate an implacable
attitude toward shortcomings and toward all deviations from the Soviet way of
life. The congress's innovative approach toward matters of indoctrination was
expressed in the fact that it examined them taking into account social reali-
ties. without separation from developing societal relations, the processes of

the socialist way of life, and the intense class struggle in the international
arena.

An important demand proceeds from the congress resolutions: to construct the
ideological indoctrination process in an inseparable link with practical

tasks. Concrete deeds have been and continue to be the measuring stick of
success in ideological work. The party teaches us that the main criterion of
the ideological maturity of the Soviet citizen is achievement of the greatest
possible performance results in his sphere of activity, unity of word and deed,
organization and discipline, an active and implacable position in the cam-

paign against any and all deviations from standards of (Jo-mist mrality and
socialist intercourse.

In his report at the 26th CPSU Congress, Cosrade L. I. brezhnev revealed with
Leninist precision the meaning of this demand: "...‘i‘he point is to achieve in
a practical manner a unity of party ideological-theoretical, political-
indoctrination, organizational and administrative work."11 In other words,
the basic path to increase the effectiveness of Cos-mist indoctrination of
Soviet citizens lies in adoption of a combined approach toward it.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Olllﬂﬂﬂﬂtlhh Uhﬂiiﬂle

The coeplexity and responsibility of the tasks whose accqlislunt has

been assigned by the party and people to the Arned Forces, and the necessity of
continuously strengthening one of the min cements of the coﬁat potential
of the any and navy — the Iorele of personnel — denand strict adherence to

these sane reference points within the fra-ework of develop-eat of nilitary
affairs as well.

Ideologicaleindoctrination activity is inconceivable without conprehensive

consideration of the realities of the life of our society and the international
situation.

IA conhined approach to Co-unist indoctrination of Soviet citizens] is one of
the fundanental principles of CPSU theoretical thought and practical activity.
It is rooted in the very view by Harries-Lenin“- of society as a specifically
organized systen, all elenents of which are in a close link, interdependence
and in a certain subordination. Therefore a codined approach should be
viewed both as a nethod of system analysis of the processes of reality and as
the fundanental basis of organization of ideological neasures.

Having stressed the long—tern, prograu nature of the CPSU Central (Jo-ittee
decree entitled "0n Further laprovnent of Ideological and Political Indoctrina-
tion Bork," the 26th 0980 Congress once again noted that in conditions of
developed socialisn (Io-mist indoctrination of working people should be con-
structed on the principle of a coﬂined approach. This scene first and fore-
nost conscious. planned nanagenent of all interrelated aspects and cowonents
of the indoctrination process and secureaent of its interaction with other
processes of societal affairs. A codined approach excludes one-sidedness in
fomlating and accoaplishing tasks of ideological indoctrination work and
excludes Matitution of a single itu, even a very inportant one, for an ag-
gregate of itess. Such an approach is fully in confornity with the beninist
principle of the nain link, that is, selection of the soot inortant, deter-
nining iten, on which the success of the entire undertaking depends.

lnplenentation of the denands of the 26th CPS!) Congress pertaining to the
entire business of indoctrinating people in conditions of a society of
developed socialise presupposes a clear understanding of the principal oh-
jectives of ideological work and the ability to achieve the. in the course of
accoqlishing diversified practical tasks of econonic, cultural and nilitary
organizational develop-cot. Co-on goals of ideological influence are achieved
by neans of concrete forms of indoctrination work. This is pronoted in
particular by the party-elaborated for-ula of unity of ideological-political,
labor (nilitary). and aoral indoctrination.

As we know, nunerous [objective factors of socialist reality,/ including the
absence of man's exploitation of Ian, utilization of all asterial and

spiritual riches in the interests of the working people, a guaranteed right to
labor. study and rest, collectivisa, and coaradely mutual assistance beneficial-
ly influence on a day-to-day basis the consciousness of the Soviet citizen.
including USSR Arned Forces personnel.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The entire structure of service in the Soviet Arned Forces exceptionally
strongly affects the consciousness of nilitary personnel. In these conditions
the couples problen of controlling the spiritual develop-eat of personnel
consists in coordinating such for-ing factors as social environnent, systen of
training and indoctrination, self-education and self-indoctrination, etc. Con-
fornity between people's notives, thoughts, deeds, and conduct on the one hand
and the delsnds of the objective 1m and patterns of socialisn on the other is
ensured by neans of inroving the ferns and nethods of all the work of con-
nanders, political agencies and party organisations, strengthening of nilitary
cadres. and utilization of all the opportunities presented to us by our so-
cialist reality, the conclusions of science, and anassed enperience.

It would be an unnecessary si-plification, hovever, to rely solely on the
favorable influence of objective conditions of life and the socialist societal
environ-eat on developnent of the personality of the Soviet service-en. It is
essential to drav attention to this because sone leaders of nilitary collectives
believe that the powerful influence of the socioecononic conditions of developed
socialisn on forning the ideological-noral comtenance of today’s defender of
the honeland sinplifies concern for Co-mist indoctrination of subordinates.

In actuality effectiveness of the influence of the social environ-eat also
depends on how correctly people perceive thnselves in this envirouent and

how nature their ideological and noral positions are. For eaanple, increased
naterial prosperity per se does not always lead to a growth in spiritual
require-eats. Under certain circtnstances this can even result in relapses of
philistine, petit-bourgeois psychology.

Such relapses, just as other deviations free the noral standards of the so-
cialist society which are still encountered in this country, are in contradic-
tion with the essence of the Soviet vay of life. The 26th CPS“ Congress
stressed that the efforts of all work forces, all public organisations, and
all Co-unists should be directed toward a canpaign against deviations fron
the norsl standards of our vay of life. The task of universal affiliation of
the [prestige of honest. conscientious. productive labor] is advanced to the
forefront here. Acconplisl-ent of this task is a nost inportant condition for
success in the canpaign against consuer attitudes and philistinisn.

The note actively indoctrinational work is conducted, the note effective is the
l influence of the social environ-eat] on fornation of the individual character.
The general tasks of Co—unist indoctrination are acconplished in a unity of

all types of ideological and sociopsychological influence on the individual,
that is, in a conbined nanner.

Adoption of a conbined approach to organization of ideological indoctrination
work nakes it possible actively to influence all donains of nilitary activity,
extensively to enploy all neans of ideological indoctrination. and to enlist
all co-anders, political workers, engineers and technicians and staffs and
services officers to practical participation in it. There is no nilitary oc- ‘
cupntional specialty which would not carry an ideological work load.

Speaking of a conbined approach to handling Co-unist indoctrination of work-
ing people and Arned Forces personnel, one should also bear in nind such a

69

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
rvn wensna. 93'. W‘L'

feature of this nethod and principle es [study and consideration of public
opinion./ In order successfully to accouplish the task, specified by the

26th CPS!) Congress. of reorganizing any areas and donains of ideological work
and to increase its effectiveness, it is inortant to learn to feel at any
given onset the depth of people's understanding of mist Party policy

and the tasks of the entire Soviet people and the Arned Forces as well as one's
own direct tasks. As V. l. Lenin stated, it is necessary to be able to
deter-nine, without a shadow of false idealization, the degree of consciousness
of the nasses and the force of influence of various prejudices and vestiges of
the past on the eesses.12

Public opinion is a specific phenonenon of the spiritual affairs of our so-
ciety. It reflects the actual state of consciousness of collectives, social
groups, class”. and the entire people, people's understanding and appraisal of
various societal events, phenonena and processes. Hanifested not only through
the judpents of the esters of society but through their actions and deeds as
well, public opinion is capable of regulating the behavior of the individual.
This is why it is a synthesis of word and deed, as it were.

In elaborating its policy, end goals and tasks, the Co-unist Party relies on
the scientific foundation of the objective laws and patterns of societal
develop-ant. At the one tins it takes carefully into consideration public
opinion and the level of consciousness of the assess. Thanks to such a
dialectical approach, CPSU policy expresses the root interests of the worker
class and of all working people.

The congress advanced the densnd of continuing to inprove study of public
opinion. having stressed the enoreous significance in this area of work with
letters fron working people to various govern-ant and public bodies and the
activities of the sass infornation and propaganda nedia. This ensures further
broadening of ties between the party and the worker easses, which run into the
easy nillions, which is the nein thing in organisational and political
indoctrination work and e prinry prerequiiste for leaking correct decisions.

The dynanic nature of contesporary socioecononic processes and spiritual and
intellectual affairs in our society, consistent development of socialist
denocracy. and broadening of the donein and increasing the intensity of
propaganda, which is called upon purposefully to influence every population
group, each and every Soviet citizen - all this increases the necessity of a
genuinely scientific approach to study of public opinion. In connection with
this statenent of the question, we should particularly note the ever in-
creasing practical significance of sociology. Putting it in nore concrete
terns, applicable to the Arned Forces, the scientific personnel of nilitery
educational institutions and stay and navy research establish-eats working on
unitary-sociological prohlens still owe results to co-nnders, political
agencies and party organisations, which expect fron scientists nore practical
reco-endations, neeting today's denands, on nethodology of studying public
opinion in the subunit, unit, and on the naval ship.

Study of public opinion sakes it possible to fore an objective idea on the
effectiveness of ideological indoctrination work, to deter-ins its echievenents

SO

momtussmv
and shortcomings, and to conduct Communist indoctrination of servicemen

taking account of the actual level of their consciousness, interests and
aspirations. A combined approach to ideological work. in an indissoluble unity
with study of public opinion, makes it possible efficiently to adjust manage-
ment of the indoctrination process through various channels and to correct the
forms and methods of ideological influence on personnel.

As we know, the heart of all ideological indoctrination work is formation of
a scientific ideological outlook in Soviet citizens and servicemen, total
dedication to the cause of the party and Communist ideals, love toward the
socialist homeland. and proletarian internationalism.

At the present stage one of the most important conditions for successful ac-
complishment of these tasks is thorough study and explanation within the mili-
tary masses of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev's report at the 26th CPSU Congress as
well as other congress materials in a close link with Armed Forces life and
activities.

In the army and navy, just as in the country as a whole, work on dissemination
of the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress began in the pre-congress period.
it assumed an intensive nature duringandespecielly after the congress.
Political agencies efficiently briefed propagandist cadres for giving a
skilled explanation of the Central Cos-uttee Accountability Report and other
congress documents, and aggressively enlisted delegates to the party forum
and experienced lecturersand propagandists to publicize these documents.
Everywhere scheduled classes were held on the congress proceedings in all
forms of personnel political instruction.

But all this is merely a first step. Assimilation of the ideas of the 26th
CPSU Congress is a long-term process. It will be necessary to conduct pains-
taking work in order to focus the energy and initiative of the personnel of
units and warships toward successful accomplishment of the tasks assigned by
the party congress. This is the primary goal of all ideological activity in
the army and navy.

It should be clear that the interests of increasing the effectiveness of
ideological indoctrination work dictate the necessity of a more innovative
attitude toward it, with bold rejection of everything which is inflexible and
obsolete, which fails to correspond to the realities of the present and future,
with persistent adoption of everything new and progressive engendered by
theory and practice.

The problem of further improvement of the [system of ideological work] exist-
ing in the Armed Forces is advanced to the forefront. The solution to this
problem lies in filling the basic forms of ideological-political work with new,
concrete content and increasing the methods skills of propagandist cadres and
all army and navy officers.

The question of methodological skills of officers. their ability to draw cor-
rect conclusions from theory and independently to apply theoretical pointstn pnmxb
cal [items is very aﬂcal. It is therefore exceptionally important to achieve a

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
situation where classes in Marxist-Leninist training give officers not only
knowledge but also develop in them the need to and skills of sharing this
knowledge with others and utilizing it in their practical work. Such an
approach to Marxist-Leninist training will ensure that all military cadres
become deeply aware of the innovative character of the congress resolutions,
the policy and activities of the party and its Central Comittee.

Long-range thematic plans of lHarxist-Leninist officer training] have been
drawn up taking into account the necessity of a closer link between the
problems of theory being studied and the practical tasks of military affairs.
The principal efforts of officer personnel will be concentrated on comprehen-
sive study of the ways to achieve further improvement of the economic, sci-
entific. social, and moral-political elements of the combat potential of the
Soviet Armed Forces. At the same time subject matter in the curricula pertain-
ing to problems of the ideological struggle. the contemorary military-
political situation in the world and in concrete theaters of military opera-
tions has been expanded, and the demands of the CPS!) Central Co-ittee for
further intensification of the indoctrinational role of the Soviet Armed
Forces have been reflected.

[Political instruction classes for enlisted personnel and nonco-issioned of-

f icers/ are the most mass form of organized study of the congress resolutions
and proceedings in the army and navy. Among the many conditions ensuring
successful organization of this important and critical matter, we should
specify training of group leaders. It is essential to bear in mind that two
thirds of this category of propagandists occupy emany and platoon comnder
slots, that is. they are young officers. The indoctrinator experience of the
majority of these officers totals only two or three years. Even under the con-
dition that 66 percent of political instruction group leaders possess hiyier
education. their training requres the most serious and close attention on the
part of political agencies. To ensure that each and every political in-
struction class is held in an interesting manner - this task has been advanced
by practical realities. Today's propagandist should be able to analyze,
synthesize and consent on facts without bypassing. as was stressed in the
Central Conittee Accountability Report to the 26th CPS!) Congres, sensitive
topics and without fearing to deal with ao-called difficult questions. Of
course discussion of critical topics is never easy. It requires a high
degree of competence in understanding the class essence of phenomena and facts
and the ability to expose lies and disinformation in a convincing manner. But
for this reason the task of all those who carry to the masses the thoughts and
ideas of the party and explain party policy is more honorable and responsible.
Development of skills of answering difficult questions, convincing people,
helping them form correct views on such questions is one of the most inortant
conditions for growth of maturity of the ideological worker.

Equipment and facilities to assist the teaching process in the political
training system are of great importance. A large nuber of pamphlets have been
sent to the line units, containing the reports of comrades L. I. Brezhnev and
N. A. ‘rikhonov at the 26th CPSU Congress, the "Hain Directions of Economic and
Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990," as
well as the collected volume "Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress." Anumber

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of manuals are available to assist in the political instruction of enlisted
personnel and nonco-Iissioned officers. Publication of a series of pamhlets to
assist in the Marxist-Leninist training of officers on the seminar topics of all
instructional curricula will continue. Folders of visual aids are being pub-
lished. Methods materials are being published in journals to assist the
teaching process, and filmstrips and short training film are being produced.

Now it is a matter of more actively utilizing this powerful source of knowl-
edge in daily activities.

Of course dissemination and explanation of the congress proceedings and all
ideological-indoctrination work cannot be limited merely to official forms of
political training. It is essential more actively to employ the entire rich
arsenal of ideological work and influence on personnel, including the reading
of series of lectures on items discussed in the CPSU Central Co-ittee Ac-
countability Report, and the holding of theoretical conferences and discussions,
specific-topic evenings-and get-togethers with congress delegates, party
veterans, officials of local party, soviet and economic agencies, and leading-
performance workers in industry and agriculture.

More extensive utilization of the [mass information and propaganda medial is
extremely important, as is development in personnel of the ability correctly
and rapidly to become oriented in the vast and diversified flow of information.
To achieve this it is obviously necessary, first of all, more efficiently to
utilize radio and television broadcasts intended for servicemen. It is in-
portant to change the notion, which still occurs in some places, of television
broadcasts solely as a means of amusement and recreation. Secondly, it is
necessary to work even more actively to incorporate newspapers, magazines and
books in the daily lives of servicemen. it is an urgent task to form in per-
sonnel the ability to perform independent studies with published materials,
the ability not only to cognize the new but also to formulate for oneself con-

crete practical conclusions in order to utilize them in the process of per-
formance of duties.

It is also necessary, however, to examine the problem of utilization of the
mass propaganda and information media in ideological-indoctrination work from
another aspect -- from the viewpoint of further improvement of the activities
of our military press. Responsible tasks for the military press proceed from
the resolutions and materials of the 26th CPSU Congress and from the 26 April
1979 CPSU Central Comittee decree. It is necessary to achieve a situation
whereby army and navy press entities become a genuine forum of public opinion
for Comnists, Komsomol meabers, and all Armed Forces personnel.

It is important that political agencies more purposefully guide the work of
the staffs of [newspapers and journals./ going more deeply into their
productive activities, and inform journalists in a timely manner on the most
important party and government decisions, assigning them concrete tasks, and
helping them irorove not only the content but also the layout of publications.
One should also hear in mind that the effectiveness of the press is secured
by truthfulness, well-reasoned arguentation, and current significance of
published materials. and by the ability to focus heat on errors of omission

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul‘flt IAI. UM. ONLY

and deficiencies and to concentrate efforts on affirmation of the new and
progressive.

The resolutions and materials of the 26th CPSU Congress define the main
directions of ideological activity of army and navy political agencies and
party organisations. One of the main conditions for the success of this ac-
tivity is a Leninist work style by ideological cadres. To work in this style
means not only to ensure and plan effective organization of ideological-in-
doctrinational activity among servicemen but also constantly to he at the

heart of this work, to monitor its actual results, and to respond to the
growing intellectual aspirations of personnel.

In accomplishing ideological tasks, one should more actively seek to ensure
that each and every party organization is in fact a genuine center of daily
ideological-indoctrination activity. Success in such an important realm of
party-political work is inconceivable without this. It is an important.
critical task constantly and ins practical manner to teach the secretaries of
party committees and bureaus the skill of organizing ideological-indoctrina-
tion work in party organizations and in military collectives.

Each and every party worker, each and every Communist must learn to be an
aggressive fighter on the ideological front, must learn, to quote V. I. Lenin.

"consciOus selection of means, techniques, and methods of struggle capable of
producing the greatest and firmest results with the least expenditure of

resources."
FOOTNOTES

1. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS” [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 63.

2. Ibid., page 77.

3. Ibid., page 53.

6. Ibid., page 75.

5. Ibid.

6. Ibid., pp 9-10.

7. lhid.. pp 76-77.

8. lhid., page 67.

9. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch.," [Complete Works], Vol bl, page 305.
10. "Haterialy...," op. cit., page 57.
11. Ibid., page 77.

12. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 64. page 368.

54

FOR¢NHHC1AI.USE(NVLY
Chapter Three. 5m 0? LIFE, SCMOL 01’ W10]!

Success in indoctrinating the new nan. it was noted at the 26th Congress of the
beninist party. is ensured only when it rests on the fir- foundation of socio-
economic policy. Party ideological work inroves and its any areas and
donnins are reorganized precisely on this foudation, in the lost direct.
living link with accomplishment of the diversified urgent tasks of building
cos-unis- and strengthening our country's defense. In other words, the point
is to achieve full utilization of the increased material and spiritual
capabilities of Soviet reality. including ailitary service, in the interests of
forming an ideologically convinced. concientious and skilled defender of the
homeland.

proper. Of course our any and navy were not specially created for indoctrinat-
ing youth. They are an instrusent of defense of the socialist hoaeland against
any aggression. At the sane tine one of the aost iaportant preconditions for
successful accoqlishaent of this task is indoctrination of personnel in a
spirit of profound (Jo-mist conviction. Soviet patriotism and socialist in-
ternationalisn. a high degree of morality md discipline. Pornation of the
spiritual countenance of the defender of the hoaeland presupposes indoctrina-
tion of a citizen-warrior, an active fighter for the came of co-misn,
willing and able to carry out a codat order at any cost. It is in this sense
that we speak of the indoctrinational role of the Soviet Amy and Navy and
service in the ailitary as a school of life and indoctrination.

Comprising a military organization of the socialist type, our stay and navy
by necessity have always occupied a prominent place in the lives of Soviet
citizens and their Co-unist indoctrination. "The Bed Arty trains not only
fighting men; the Red Army is a school of socialism for millions of peasants
and workers" — this was the party's appraisal of our any's indoctrinational
role 10 years after its establishmt.

In conditions of developed socialism the indoctrinational role of the Soviet
Arned Forces has grown and hecone enriched with new content. Conrade 1.. I.
Brezhnev noted: "Young nen enter the nilitary family without having 123--
perienced the school of life. But they return fron the army with maturity,

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sun WI’I\ ”CI. v.39. URL.

having attended the school of aelf-nastery and discipline. having acquired
technical, occupational knowledge and political training.“

The cowlesity and conflictive nature of the international situation, the vital
inortance of naintaining a continuous state of coebat readiness. and eg-
gravation of the ideological struggle in the vorld arena increased denands on
indoctrinational work in the Arned Forces. The CPSU Central (Jo-ittee decree
entitled "On further Improve-est of Ideological and Political-Indoctrination
work” stresses the necessity of further inroving indoctrination of the Soviet
service-an as a selfless defender of the honeland. a genuine citizen, patriot.
and internationalist.

1. Objective Factors of Indoctrination

The present world situation is coqler and conflictive. As was noted at the
26th CPSU Congress, an intensive struggle between ideological directions is
taking place in world politics. 0n the one hand we have a side advocating
peace between people. It is represented by the USSR, the other nations of the
socialist co-unity, and progressive forces throughout the world. On the other
hand, there is the side advocating preparations for another world war. under-
lining detente, escalation of the arse race, and a policy of threats and
interference in the affairs of others and suppression of the liberation
struggle. This side is represented by the United States, by the NATO
countries, which follow at the heels of 0.8. policy, and other enenies of
peace and cooperation. These forces are expanding military production, are
increasing appropriations for building increasingly mre destructive weaponry.
and are attenting to convince the people of their countries that a nuclear war
can be linited. seeking to have people accept the idea of the admissibility of
such a war. A dangerous focal point of international tension is also being
created as a result of the hegemnist aspirations of the present Chinese
leaders.

The Col-mist Party and Soviet Govern-cut, carefully analyzing develop-eat of
the international situation, do not for a single day forget natters pertaining
to strengthening national defense and the codaat power of our Aned Forces.

Considering the increased responsibility of the Soviet Arny and Navy for the
security of the honeland, nilitary councils, conmders, political agencies.
party and Konsonol organisations are directing their efforts toward ensuring
continuous growth of the political consciousness of personnel and a deep
understanding by servicenen of their great responsibility for the security of
the honeland and defense of the achieve-ents of socialiu. Loyalty to the
ideals of co-unisn i-pels the defenders of the honeland conscientiously to
naster nodern nilitary affairs. vigilantly to guard the great building
process which is taking place throughout our country and the revolutionary
adnievmts of socialise. and to be prepared at all tines to defeat any
aggressor. In the last five years thousands of nilitary personnel have been
awarded USSR nedals and decorations for ere-piety perfornance of the tasks
assigned by co-and authorities and for successes in conbat and political
training and nastery of new equipnent.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A nutter of objective factors foster strengthening of the indoctrination].
role of the Arned Forces. [Develop-eat of the social-class stmcture/ of our
society is the nost iq>ortant of these. In recent years there has been con-
tinuation of the drawing together of the classes and social groups coqrising
our society. As was noted at the 26th CPS!) Congress, our sin is creation of
a society in which people will not be divided into classes. And we can state
quite definitely that we are advancing slowly but surely toward this greet
objective.

All the societal characteristics of our classes and social groups are

changing particularly appreciably in conditions of developed eocialien. Levels
of eaterial prosperity. housing and hone conditions, the psychology and
cultural level of persons belonging to different social strata of the social-
ist society are drawing closer together on the basis of growth. All this is
beneficially reflected in the quality of Arned Forces personnel.

Steady inprovenent in the naterial and spiritual living conditions of Soviet
citizens promtes develop-ent of new traditions and conceptions. Joint labor
by the were of society, their daily participation in mag-eat of govern-
nental and societal affairs. and develop-cot of Co-Inist relations, conradely
cooperation and nutual support are leading to transforaation of people's
consciousness in a spirit of collectivisn, industry and hmnisn. A co-mity
of root interests and drawing together of the living conditions of classes and
social groups objectively proeote the fornation and develop-eat in all nsdaers
of our society and nedwers of the Arned Forces of co-on sociopsychological
traits, such as pride in the socialist system, hatred toward its enemies. and

an aspiration to accosplish feats for the sake of the interests of the hone-
land.

Development of good citizenship in military personnel is pronoted by their
active participation in sociopolitical affairs. All Soviet nilitary personnel --
veterans and newconers. co-anders and subordinates — are full-fledged

citizens of our country. They enjoy all the sociopolitical rights guaranteed

by the USSR Constitution. Thousands of representatives of the arty and navy
have been elected as deputies to soviets or nabsrs of rayon, city, oblast.
kray, republic and central party bodies.

An iwortant factor in enhancing the indoctrinational role of any and navy ser-
vice is further strengthening of the unity of arty and people. In conditions
of developed socialisn it has becone deeper and has becolse filled with new
content. Soviet citizens display constant concern for furnishing the arny and
navy with nodern weapons and conbat equip-ant. as well as preparing young people
for nilitary service. A great deal of work is being done in the cities and
villages to develop in the younger generation a Comnist ideological outlook,
patriotism and proletarian internationalisn, and constant readiness and will-
ingness to defend the honeland. An orderly systen of preparing reliable
defenders of the homeland has fared in the process of joint activities of
party and Konsonol organizations and ideological establish-cuts with nilitary
co-issariats, agencies of public and vocational-technical education. DOSMF,
and political agencies of nilitary units.

57

MOI-'HCIALUSEONLY
rust th‘ltsns. Van. Van”

Uorthy replace-ents are entering the any and navy. The weapons and cowat
cquipnent with which units and naval ships are equipped are in reliable hands.
Soviet service-en are people of a new. socialist systen. indoctrinated by the
Leninist party and by the entire Soviet way of life in a spirit of loyalty to
the honeland and revolutionary ideals. Approximately 90 percent of any and
navy personnel are Co-unists and honoIol were. Virtually all conscripts
possess secondary or inoonplete secondary education, while a significant per-
centage enter nilitary service with a higher education.

In light of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress, consideration of the
specific features of young people as a social-age group within our society and
the individual qualities of each young an is of great iQortance. Cosprehen-
sive study of nilitary personnel according to their social status prior to
nilitary service. education, and habits of organization developed prior to in-
duction is very helpful for enhancing the indoctrinational role of nilitary
service. Young nen enter nilitary service vith already for-ed character
traits. detenined by the social qualities they have for-ed at hone, in the
school, on the job. and in the Konsonol organization. Everything acquired
prior to nilitary service is subjected in the any to a rigorous test of
strength and naturity. At the sane tine the process of toning sorel-
political qualities and labor conditioning in young people continues in the
any and navy with even greater intensity. Study of the general educational
and cultural level and psychological features of yomg service-en entering the
any fron the various social strata of our society and fron the various parts
of our country sakes it possible to increase the indoctrinational influence of
nilitary service. Conanders, political agencies, party and Kononol organiza-
tions, studying the life experience of each servicemen. his character and
propensities, help his overcone the difficulties which he encomters in
transitioning fron civilian life to nilitary service.

Enhance-ent of the indoctrinational role of ailitary service is also fostered
by the objective circumstance that citizens of [all nationalities and ethnic
groups in the USSR] are carrying out their sacred duty to defend the socialist
hoaeland. The Soviet Arned Forces, which are nultinational in conposition.
constitute a unified nationwide nilitary organization of all brother union
republics. all nationalities and ethnic groups in the USSR. The Co-unist
Party and Soviet Govern-est are continuously concerned for equality of rights
and obligations of all citizens, regardless of nationality. and perfonnnce of
nilitary duty by these citizens.

The entire tenor of life in the Soviet Arned Forces is penested with a spirit
of internationaliss. Joint labor brings together service-en of different
nationalities in ailitsry service and indoctrinstes then in a spirit of aili-
tary conradeship. and pronotes their ideological, spiritual and cultural nutual
enrich-eat.

Service-en as a rule are stationed other than in their own repiblic. kray, or
oblast. Co-snders, political agencies. local party and Konsonol agencies seek

to ensure that intercourse between the personnel of units, naval ships. and
brother peoples and acquaintance with their culture. ways. custons and

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
traditions help form internationalist awareness in military personnel. In-
doctrination of military personnel in a spirit of fraternal friendship is
pronoted by the entire system of training and indoctrination work and organiza-
tion of the entire life and activities of the multinational nilitary collectives.

of course it would be a simplification to assume that matters pertaining to
indoctrinating personnel in a spirit of friendship among peoples are resolved
automatically. Joint military labor per se does not form internationalist
awareness. views. or attitude. In connection with this there arise tasks of
strengthening the internationalist indoctrination of servicemen, considera-
tion of the ethnic cowosition of a given unit and subunit in propaganda and

agitation, and conduct of work with individual servicemen taking into account
their ethnic features.

The main thing in working on internationalist solidarity of servicemen is a
profound explanation of the principles of proletarian, socialist interna-
tionalism and our party's Leninist nationalities policy. An inortant role

in assimilation by servicemen of theory and CPSU policy in the area of ethnic
relations is played by well-organised political instruction classes and
political information sessions. Lenin readings. republic days, radio and
television broadcasts, and get-togethers with distinguished individuals,

heroes of labor and combat - all means and forms of ideological work make it
possible actively to form the spiritual countenance of the Soviet servicemen —
a patriot and internationalist.

Personnel show lively interest in the works of Soviet writers and in our
multinational culture. Guidance of reading by servicemen is an important
area in indoctrinating then in a spirit of friendship of peoples.

Loyal to the glorious traditions of class solidarity of the working people of
all comtries, Soviet servicemen serve with honor is forces temporarily
stationed on the territory of the brother peoples of Bmgary, the ans. Poland,
and Czechoslovakia. At the present time there is a limited contingent of
Soviet troops in Afghanistan, helping the Afghan people repulse imperialist
aggression.

Performance of internationalist duty engenders and strengthens in the con-
sciousness of Soviet servicemen feelings of solidarity with the working
people of other countries. A good memory of them remains wherever they help
our friends defend revolutionary achievements against the encroachments of
isperislist reaction.

The difficulties of army and navy service and the high degree of intensity of
combat training demand of each and every servicemen a maxim- output of
resources and energy. Appropriate living conditions have been created for
regenerating expended energy. which also promotes enhancement of the lin-
doctrinational role of nilitary service./ The requisite material and tech-
nical foundation of food and clothing supply services has been established

in the units and fleets, a smoothly-ruining supply system is in operation,

and units and naval ships are furnist with modern equipment enabling them to

mechanize and automate processing of foodstuffs and the process of meal prepara-
tion.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9w 0"?“ IAI. but. Ul‘Ll

A distinctive feature of off-duty nilitary life lies in the fact that for the
east part it is created by the hands of the service-en themselves. Much in
the arrange-sot of handling their daily needs depends on their innovativeness
and initiative, as well as on the significance which party and louoaol or-
ganisations attach to this inortant natter. Providing the conditions of
everyday life does not tolerate callousness and cold indifference, but
denands search and the ability sensitively to listen to people's desires. to
the phenouena and processes taking place in the Arnsd Forces.

Military councils, co-snders, political agencies and party organisations

view their task as continuously inroving material and living conditions for
personnel and ensuring observance of precise organisation of the workday, rest
and recreation. In spite of the severity and rigorousness of conditions in
the eilitary. it is necessary constantly to seek to ensure that there is plenty
of warnth. light and confort in the barracks. that they offer a real house to
the soldier, cowrising a center of intercourse and cohesion of service-en into
a single fighting fanily.

2. Indoctrinational Role of Hilitary Labor

Enornous influence is exerted on the spiritual develop-ent of Soviet service-en
in the process of their Con-mist indoctrination by ailitary labor proper which,
in conditions of developed socialisn, is correctly viewed as a specific variant
of societal labor. Its specific features are dictated first and forecast by
constitutional provisions - the USSR Fmdanental Lav defines nilitary service
in the ranks of the Arned Forces as the honorable obligation of Soviet citizens.
and defense of the socialist honeland as their sacred duty.

As regards the content side of nilitary labor, as a result of the enornous
influence of scientific and technological advances on nilitary affairs, which
have resulted in the develop-eat of weapons of unprecedented power and tech-
nical complexity. this labor has undergone quite substantial changes. The new
nechanisns of warfare which developed have denended radical changes in the
forms and nodes of conduct of conbat operations. The nethods of preparing
personnel for coebat activities have also changed.

The naterial foundation for training and indoctrination of Soviet service-en
is characterized today first and format by a high degree of saturation with
systees of devices corresponding to the latest advances in science and tech-
nology. in other words. today's army and navy aria-eat is distinguished by

a high degree of technical comlexity, while practical realities affirn in-
tensification of nilitary labor as an objective pattern and the objective con-
sequence of the developnent of weapons and coehat equipnent.

The existing systen. forms and nethods of organization of military labor in
the any and navy basically correspond to the contemporary stage of develop-ent
of nilitary affairs and party denands forenhancing the indoctrinational role of
eilitary service. to the interests of preparing staunch. courageous defenders
of the socialist homeland and the tasks of ensuring conditions of peace for
building comnisn. The entire tenor of life in the subunits. units and on
naval ships actively fosters practical inplenentation of the Leninist precept

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that Soviet citizens should be indoctrinated from youth in conscientious and
disciplined labor.

The great social significance of Soviet military labor, the principal leaning
of which consists in guaranteeing the security of the homeland, defines its
great indoctrinational capabilities. Strict regisentation of all actions,
considerable stress. and the necessity of constant subordination of the ef-
forts of each individual serviceman to prior-assigned and unexpectedly arising
tasks -- these important aspects of army and navy life, together with the
inspiration of the entire process of military service and its lofty goals form

in people courage, efficiency. persistence, tenacity, initiative. and dis-
cipline.

And the aims of military labor hassocialist arIy are exceptionally noble.
Therefore a serviceman's constant readiness to carry out a coebat order con-
stitutes the sale aoral criterion of service in the Arned Forces.

In this connection we should once again emphasise the necessity of appraising
the effectiveness of all party-political and indoctrinational work prinarily
on the basis of people's attitude toward military labor and toward performing
their nilitary service obligations. Such an approach makes it possible to

see clearly how the demands of the 26th CPSU Congress and the 26 April 1979
CPSU Central Conlittee decree on stepping up the indoctrinational role of army
and navy service by each and every connander and political worker, by every
party organisation are being carried out.

Military exercises, live missile firings. flight operations. alert duty. and
cruises by submarines and surface warships in the world Ocean are of special
indoctrinational significance. particularly in the area of high moral-politi-
cal and psychological conditioning of servicemen. Precisely in these types of
activities by troops and naval forces,where psychological models of battles
are created, is engendered that seat valuable experience which in peacetime
conditions gives a precise idea of how training and indoctrination of per-
sonnel should be accomplished so that it naximally corresponds to the denands
of combat operations in present-day conditions.

Military and fleet exercises constitute the highest degree of excellence of
morale-fighting qualities and moral conditioning of the personnel of units and
warships. The largest-scale exercises conducted in recent years became a
unique army and navy accountability report to the CVSU Central Committee. the
Soviet Government, and to the entire people on levels achieved in improving
combat readiness. In the course of these exercises the men demonstrated

their ability to withstand severe psychological and psysical stresses and
skillfully to utilize weapons and conbat equipsent. and gained skills in
mobilizing forces for achieving victory in battle against a powerful adversary.

It is essential to utilize every bit of this experience to isprove indoctrinao
tional work in the units and on naval ships. Conmanders. political agencies
and staffs should be permeated with a high degree of responsibility to ensure
that when elaborating the tasks of field, air and sea proficiency the dynamics
of combat actions and party-political work correspond. both fundamentally and

61

IND! OFFICIAI.USIZ(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in detail, to the character of contemorary war. This will lake it possible
for leaders of nilitary collectives and party—political activists to analyze
with a high degree of accuracy the potential and actual consequences of
their correct or erroneous actions and to ensure the instructiveness and
requisite indoctrinational effect of training activities.

The indoctrination]. role of military labor is aanifested fully only when this
labor is scientifically organised, when it is secured in a aaterial-organisa-
tional and aural-political regard. It follows fro- this that questions per-
taining to strengthening political influence at headquarters, control agencies,
and anong all categories of leader cadres asst-e particular inportance in

light of the resolutions and naterials of the 26th CPSU Congress.

Successful application, in training and indoctrinating servicenen, of the
scientific principles which take into account the dmnds of today’s conhat
engagenent. Ithe recs-endations of nilitary education science and psychology,/
effective utilization of the invaluable experience of the Great Patriotic liar
and the experience anassed in the any ad navy in the postwar years and

during the period of incorporation of the achieve-eats of the scientific and
technological revolution depends chiefly on any and navy leader cadres.

it is iaportant to ensure that each manure to support the training process,
each and every training activity is an eaawle of a political approach to
things. As we know, the task of training consists not only in developing in
service-en habits of skilled actions and efficient elploymet of weapons and
equipnent in today's conbat. Leaders of ailitary collectives should, in the
course of iaproving the conhst skills of personnel, sake every effort to
strengthen in the sen their awareness that nilitary labor is just as valued t:
the people, just as essential to our society as the labor of the worker,
kolkhos far-er, and intellectual, that this labor is a natter of glory, valor
and heroisa, for it is connected with guaranteeing the security of the world's
first socialist state and the entire socialist co-unity.

The task of general affination of conscientious, productive labor is today
advancing to the forefront. The foraing of a new nan, his ideological condi-
tioning. and affix-nation of the standards and principles of the socialist way
of life define the necessity of skilled, precise selection in indoctrinational
work of everything new and progressive which should he supported and developed,
of a tenacious, consistent struggle against that which iapedes our forward
Dove-eat.

[n the course of a precisely organised training process, to which unnecessary
relaxataion of denands and unnecessary sinplifications are alien, favorable con-
ditions are created for forming in people a feeling of collectivisn and
developnent of a striving toward nutual assistance in battle. Indoctrination
of personnel in a spirit of lnilitary conradeship/ has been and will continue to
he one of the nost important tasks of co-anders. political agencies, and party
organizations.

There is an enornous indoctrinational and noral potential in [socialist con-
petition,l which today enhraces practically all realm of nilitary activity.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HI. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As follows from the resolutions and materials of the 26th CPSU Congress.
maximun realization of all the possibilities contained vithin this mass
patriotic novenent of Soviet service-en is essential.

a wealth of experience has been amassed in the practice of socialist conpeti-
tion in the Armed Forces. At the same time the search for even more effective
forms and methods of nobilizing personnel for the campaign to achieve stable
high results in combat training continues to remain an inportant task. lain
efforts must be concentrated on developing in every possible way the military
activeness of servicemen and their creative initiative. It is necessary to
bring propaganda and the adoption of advanced know-how to the level of today's
party deaands. in order to draw up lagging personnel on the basis of this
know-how and to stiaulate further improve-est of the conbat skill of personnel.

Requiring special attention in this regard is the experience of those units
which are initiators of socialist conpetition in the branches of service. in
the districts. groups of forces. and the fleets. It is necessary to ensure
that the daily practical activities of the initiators is a genuine creative
laboratory of advanced know-how in personnel training and indoctrination and
in inducing personnel to achieve exeaplary perforlance of their filial duty
as defenders of the homeland and resolving of problems of development of the
personality and character of the Soviet servicemen. his political. moral, and
cultural growth.

Each and every conmander and political vorker, each and every party activist

is obliged to adhere rigorously and consistenﬂyto the fundanental thesis

stated by Conrade L. l. Brezhnev: "Counterplans and other such initiatives
should be regarded as paramount, following a line 'from bottom to top': worker.
brigade, enterprise. branch.”2 Applied to army and navy conditions this means
that drafting of personnel pledges should begin at the louest, primary levels
of military collectives, so that personnel have an acute sense of their
responsibility for achieving the targeted performance levels. The party

views this as one of the nest inportant indoctrination potentials of competi-
tion.

Socialist competition is first and foremost competition among individuals and
collectives, sanctified by patriotism. For this reason for-alien and the
slightest departure fron Leninist principles of organization of coepetition is
particularly intolerable in such an inspired activity. To utilize its in-
doctrinational potential effectively means to ensure broad publicity, reliable
operation of a system of comparability of results, and publicity of experts in
nilitary affairs. Dissemination of the finest examples of military labor and
practical adoption of advanced know-how in all ailitary collectives also is

an effective forn of ideological. nilitary and noral indoctrination of per-
sonnel and the campaign against shortcomings.

Carrying out the task of enhancing the indoctrinational role of military labor,

special enphasis nust be placed on improving its organization and unsverving

observance of the demands of military regulations, manuals. orders and
directives.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0. OHI'ICIAI. USE ONLY

3. Discipline as a Factor of Indoctrination

Reliable defense of the achieveunts of socialise and diversified activities
of silitary personnel, directed toward all-out inrovenent of the conbst
readiness of units and warships -- everything cowrised within the tern
"silitsry labor.” requires exceptionally high discipline, efficiency and
initiative on the part of personnel, their readiness and willingness to
carry out an order at any price.

The increased isportance of discipline on the part of Soviet service-en in
present-day conditions is due to a “01' of objective factors.

They include, first of all, [the social isportance of nilitary labor/ for the
fate of the honeland and the entire socialist co-unity of brother peoples.
One lust consider the fact that aggressive inperialist forces, mdernining in-
ternational detente, are continuing arns escalation, are expanding and
strengthening nilitary bases. and are creating a threat to the socialist

countries and developing nations born on the rubble of for-er isperialist
colonies.

The necessity of further inrove-ent of organisation of performance of duty
and discipline of Soviet service-en is dictated, secondly, by the rapid
developsent of nilitary affairs and, as was already noted, by the extensive
adoption of the latest weapons and codat equipeent in the line units.
Practical realities deland that the technical knowledgesbility of today's
defender of the honeland and his nilitary expertise coalesce on the basis of
a high degree of conscientiousness and discipline.

Hore stringent duands on discipline are dictated, in the third place, by the
increasing comlexity of the content of military activities and intensifica-
tion of the process of training and indoctrination of personnel. The entire
any and navy reginen of duty and off-duty activities, which is in full con-
fornity with the points of silitary regulations, is celled upon conprehensive-
ly to discipline training and indoctrination of servicemen.

Hilitary service, if it is organized correctly. day by day and hour by hour
polishes the facets of the character of the individual Soviet servicenan, as
it were. The servicessn develops excellent noral qualities -- honesty, truth-
fulness. vigilance. preciseness and resolutenese of actions, the en-

deavor to and habits of carrying out orders swiftly, on schedule - that is.
all those qualities which sake a person nilitary disciplined.

It is prinarily a deep understanding of the societal significance of these
denands and a feeling of personal responsibility for the security of the
honeland and the achieve-ents of socialisl which inpels the Soviet servicenan
to execute rigorously and precisely the demands of the nilitary oath and
regulations, orders issued by co-anders and other superiors. "The Red Army."
stressed V. I. Lenin. "has created unprecedentedly fins discipline not under
the lash but on the basis of conscientiousness, dedication, and self-sacrifice
on the part of the workers and peasants thenselves."3

66

MWLIJSEONLY
Hilitary discipline in our army is one of the for-s of socialist state dis-
cipline, the question of which was so acutely stated at the 26th CPSU Con-
gress. The societal relations of comradely cooperation and mutual assistance
by working people who are free of exploitation are reflected in Soviet mili-
tary discipline. The mutual relations of comasnders and the rank and file.
superiors and subordinates, veterans and newcomers are developed in our mili-
tary on the basis of a unity of root interests. on a co-unity of political
conditions and moral principles on the part of all military personnel -
representatives of the worker class, the kolkhoz peasantry. and the Soviet
intelligentsia.

Conscious discipline presupposes culposure and precision in a person's ac-
tions. Koch here depends on those habits with which a young man entered

the army or navy. Positive habits greatly assist a young soldier and make his
service easier. Such an obligation as exemplary performance of nilitary

duty will not seem difficult to a person who taught hi-elf. prior to in-
duction into the army. to do every job swiftly and conscientiously. It will
be easy for a young man who is accustomed to being polite at all times to
assisilate such a demand of military discipline as showing respect to com-
manders and superiors, and strict observance of the rules of military courtesy
and saluting. If a person is accustoned to tell the truth at all times.
naturally be will properly perceive the demand of discipline that he be honest
and truthful.

Of course young servicemen may also have negative habits, but awareness of the
necessity of subordinating oneself to the demands of military discipline will
sake it possible to eliminate these habits in short order.

I should like to stress the following. Discipline is a moral trait. It in-
cludes a broader concept than simply obedience, execution and precision.
He call disciplined in our society a person for when order and regimentation
of activities are important as a scans of successful performance of one's
societal duty. in short. it is a person who sincerely strives for the cows
cause and who does not wait for additional instructions if he sees that

it is necessary to act independently.

Disciplined conduct is mandatorily linked with the necessity of possessing the
ability at any time to sacrifice personal interests for the sake of the
interests of society. Discipline presupposes continuous self-indoctrination,
in the process of which a person develops control over himself, as it were.
over his desires and feelings. Such self-discipline is a deeply perceived
necessity of acting at all tines and in all things in strict conformity with
the demands of the military oath and regulations, an inner need to act as they
col-and.

It proceeds directly from the resolutions and materials of the 26th CPSU
Congress that a decisive role in indoctrination of disciplined, efficient
servicemen is played by the one-Ian co-ander, who bears personal responsibili-
ty to the Columnist Party and Soviet Government for the continuous cowat
readiness of the unit and subunit, and who organizes the daily routine, off-
duty activities, training and codat activities of his subordinates. Con-
stant Ito-sander demandingnessl teaches a servicemen to be composed, smart of

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0'0“ 0ft“ IAI. irhl'. UNI)

appearance. and ready for action. Substantial positive changes are taking
place in the character of the young men under its daily influence.

The Soviet cormander, imposing the demands of regulations on a subordinate,
is obliged at all times to take into consideration his capabilities and
degree of mastery of military affairs and his occupational specialty. The
experienced officer and noncouaissioned officer will never demand of the
young soldier that which he can demand of the more highly trained individual.

Genuinely paternal [concern] for the soldier and sailor is an inortant
condition for maintaining a high degree of military discipline. Demanding
and at the same time solicitous. sensitive and attentive to soldiers' needs,
the comander enjoys the love and respect of his subordinates and seeks to
achieve optimal results in training and indoctrination. Our conander
should not treat certain men better than others. His denandingness is
identical toward all subordinates. Nothing -- neither friendly relations

or even blood kinship — should serve as a reason for any special treatment
of a subordinate.

Commander denandingness develops in servicemen a feeling of responsibility for
the assigned job, for precise and faultless performance of service duties,
orders and instructions. Thus it promotes the forming in personnel of habits
of disciplinedbehavior and helps correct character deficiencies.

The indoctrinational role of demandingness is secured by the fact that one-
man commanders display demandingness constantly and continuously. The
Disciplinary Regulations state: "The interests r " defense of the homeland
oblige the couander (superior) resolutely and firmly to duand observance
of military discipline and order and that not a single breach of regulations bya
813M493“: be ignored." The very fact of mandatory execution of each and

every order and practical actions connected with that order exert great in-
fluence on the consciousness of the serviceman. One should not assume, how-
ever, that it is sufficient merely to issue orders in order to ensure that
discipline in the subunit and unit is always strong. The campaign for
observance of regulations. a high degree of organization and military discip-
ltne is primari Y the indoctrination of an individual who will perform his
duties responsibly, with initiative and innovatively. who keenly supports
the performance of his military collective.

h‘o army other than that of a socialist state possesses such a powerful moral
principle as Icollectivist The courageous love of the Soviet serviceman
toward his homeland grows and becomes strengthened only in a collective
unified by the lofty goals of defending the achievements of socialism. He is
indoctrinated as a consistent internationalist only in the collective.

The function of the military collective is combat. It operates under the laws of
the military oath and regulations. which are permeated with POI-unist

ideological content and the collectivist morality of our so...ety and the army

of a new type. The Internal Service bgulations of the USSR Armed Forces

state: "The serviceman shall... value military comradcship, assist his com-

rades by word and deed, keep them from comitting unworthy actions and, with

no thought for his own life, shall rescue them from danger."

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Two functions are inherent in the military collective. First of all, practical-
ly all service activities of military personnel are carried cut within it.
Secondly. the collective ensures the development of correct mutual relations
among personnel.

Loyalty to comradeship is highly valued in any realm of Soviet life. But this
noble tradition is especially highly prized by members of the Armed Forces.

The aggregate of reasons for this outstanding characteristic contains the

very specifics of military service and the nature of the tasks assigned the
armed defenders of the homeland. in a combat situation, when standing duty, in-
cluding combat alert duty, and during a blue-water cruise — the knowledge that
a comrade is near. that one can count on him. his assistance and support, are
essential elements of military service.

Contemporary war ineasurably increases the importance of unity of the military
collective and coordination of all elements of the subunit and unit. complex
weaponry and the modes of its employment have demanded unification of per-
sonnel, weapons and combat equipment into various systems, the elements of
which are mutually dependent on one another, and frequently separated by great

distances. Sometimes the success of an entire system depends on an individual
element.

The indoctrinational force of the Soviet ailitary collective lies in its
democratic nature. Its structure of service-positions is supplemented by

ties among personnel along lines of party, m1, propagandist, and mass
cultural work. ‘

The party organization in the military collective is its cementing force, its
source of spiritual energy and political nucleus. Therefore enormus meaning
is contained in the demand of the 26th CPSU Congress and CPS" Central Co-ittee
decree dated 26 April. 1979 which states that primary party organizations and
groups shall become genuine [centers of daily ideological indoctrinational
activity./ Of prime significance here is concern to ensure further increase in
activeness and aggressiveness in the work of party organizations at all
echelons, consistent development of intraparty demcracy, strengthening of

the influence of party organizations on improving the system of indoctrination
and placement of cadres, and increasing the responsibility of party members for
the assigned task. It is advisable to increase attention toward verifying
execution of party decisions, to increase demandingness on Comists for their
personal exemplariness in training and service. to work persistently to develop
criticism and self-criticism, and to seek to ensure that each and every Com-
munist is an ideologically convinced and active party fighter and demonstrates
an example of discipline and creative initiative. Party organizations are
called upon to appraise in a are principled manner both successes and
deficiencies in training and service, and to he are strictly demanding on
Communists for their work in the masses, especially amng youth.

It is important to take concrete measures which ensure further cohesion of
military collectives and improvement of indoctrinational work directly in the

subunits. In this connection one should specify measures to improve the
pedagogic skills of officers, warrant officers, and noncoalnissioned officers,

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MM (”I'll Iv“. |-.‘0I'. ONLY

and more vigorously to enlist the army and navy community to combat violations
of military regulations, lack of discipline, and deviations from standards of
Communist morality. Each and every officer and Communist should serve as an

example of excellent organization and moral purity and should demand this of
others.

Romsomol organizations work side by side with army and navy Communists in all
areas which determine the combat readiness of subunits, naval ships, and units.
and the cohesion of military collectives. In their work they utilize their
endowed right of broad initiative in discussing and raising before commanders,
political agencies and party organizations questions connected with improving
indoctrination of yOumg army and navy personnel, organization of their off-duty
daily routine, rest and recreation. Party organizations must exercise daily
guidance of the work of Komsomol organizations pertaining to the Communist in—

doctrination of army and navy youth, who comprise three fourths of all Soviet
military personnel.

The concern of army and navy party organizations for further enhancing the
indoctrinational role of the Soviet Armed Forces should he directed primarily
toward all-out cohesion of military collectives. Each and every party member
should he focused toward this. Any and all. even the most complex combat
missions are within the capabilities of a cohesive. smoothly functioning mili-
tary collective.

FOOTNOTES

1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Na strazhe mira i sotsializma" [Guarding Peace and So-
cialism], Moscow, 1979, page Q35.

2. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 58.

3. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sohr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 38, page 260.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONCLUSION

The ideas of the 26th CPSU Congress, capturing the masses, are becoming an
increasingly more powerful creative force. The social activeness of Soviet
citizens and army and navy personnel, who are implementing the plans specified
at this Leninist party forum, is growing under their influence.

The proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress, its resolutions, and the unanimous
reelection of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev as general secretary of the CPSU Central
Committee. evoked an exceptionally strong surge of patriotic enthusiasm among
military personnel. Enthusiastically approving of the points and conclusions
contained in the Central Committee Accountability Report to the party congress
and the new, grandiose plans of building communism elaborated at the congress,

the defenders of the Soviet homeland are intensifying their efforts to increase
combat readiness.

Loyalty to the ideas of the party and the heroic fame of our fathers and
grandfathers impels army and navy personnel conscientiously to master modern
military affairs and vigilantly to guard the great building activities which
are taking place throughout our country and the revolutionary achievements

of socialism, and to be prepared at all times to defeat any aggressor. The
high appraisal of the combat potential of the Armed Forces. given by Comrade
L. I. Brezhnev at the party congress, is the finest testimonial to our military
cadres. army and navy party organizations, and all Soviet servicemen, who are
worthily carrying out their historic mission. The Armed Forces delegation
solemnly assured the party and people from the congress rostrum that Soviet
servicemen are on the alert at all times. The potent weapons which the home-
land has entrusted to them are in reliable and skilled hands.

The fighting ranks of the Armed Forces are monolithic and powerful. Party
ideological work constitutes a powerful means of further increasing their com—
bat potential. Through the entire wealth of its content and diversity of

means and methods, it develops in army and navy personnel a high degree of
political consciousness, the aspiration, will and ability to defend the people's
revolutionary achievements.

The most important thing today in party-political work in the army and navy is
to comunicate to the consciousness and heart of each and every serviceman the
great meaning and historic significance of the documents of the 26th CPSU
Congress and to embody them in concrete deeds for the benefit of our homeland.
The actual contribution of cur ideological activists toward further increasing
the combat readiness of the Soviet Arny and Navy consists in seeking to ensure
that a spirit of Bolshevik principledness and creative activeness is affirmed
in the life of each and every military collective and in instilling an im-
placable attitude toward errors of omission in combat and political training
and intolerance toward any and all deviations from the demands of regulations
and the standards of Communist morality.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.~-. ~.-... . . -n-~ .....

All the successes of the Soviet people in building co-unisn snd in
strengthening our country's econonic snd defense night and its international
prestige are insepsrshly linked with strengthening the leadership role of the
CPS!) in the developed socislist society. Total dedication to the ideas of
the Leninist party constitutes the deepest and lost reliable source of
selfless service by Soviet nilitsry personnel to the socialist honeland and
their constsnt coﬂst readiness to defend the building of counts- and to
preserve world peace.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenisdst, 1981

3021:
C80: 81“] 0902

-END-

70

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY