FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPHS L/10084
30 October 1981'

Near East/North Africa Report

”090.9215 1),

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

anus L/10084
30 October 19&

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(P000 39/81)

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Rays of Increasing Arab Inﬂuence in Rodin Ruined
(AL'QATM "0"MI’ "riou. d.u.) ooooooooooooooooaoooooo 1

AFGHANISTAN

Detector Denounces Kobul Governnent
(Alexander Thomson; m comm. 19 Oct 81) ............. 21

Cofounder Describes Presto-in: of 'Rodio Ru Afghaniotan'
(lento Rounllini Interview; LA “MA. 9 Sop 81) ..... 23

LEBANON

Bnahir al-Juuyyil Intenieved
(Bubir nl-Juuyyil Interview; AL-HA'IAI AL-‘ABABI, 9 Oct 81) 25

SUDAN

Pinnncial Situation Analyzed; Deficit Gtovo "one
(WORKS TROPICAUX nmzums. 18 Sop 81) .......... 29

Prospect. of Sugar Industry Diocuuod
("ARMS TROPICAUX 31‘ 13311333433338. 18 Sep 81) .......... 31
FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

HAYS 0F INCREASING ARAB INFIDIHGB II MEDIA BXAHINED
Paris AL—HATAH AL—‘ARABI in Arabic 16-20, 21-21 Aug 81

[No 235. 1a-20 Aug 81 pp 18-21]

[Text] How can Arabs prevail on world public opinion
and win its sympathy?

The international character of the Arab media.

Can Arabs imitate THE HERALD TRIBUNE, RBUTBR and

the BBC?

Eighty percent of the news we relay about our Arab world
is filtered first by British, 0.8. and French media.

When young students went out in a demonstration to protest the fact that
they were being forced to purchase their clothes from textile plants owned
by Her Excellency the Empress [of the Central African Empire], "is Excel-
lency Emperor Jean-Bidel Bokassa was enraged and ordered that the stu-
dents be shot. Those who escaped the emperor's bullets were strangled in a
prison cell by the emperor's divine hands, and their tender flesh was
turned into a delicious meal that was served at his table.

when Gen Hohammad Zia-ul-Haq--and what an inappropriate name that is--came
to power in Pakistan 6 years ago, he said he would stay in power 4 months
only. He promised he would reinstate the constitution and restore liber-
ties, but then this general whose name means light and truth forgot his
promises. He has stayed in power until now and has no intention of giving
up power in the near future. Instead, he slowly and cunningly removed from
power his benefactor, his president and his leader. Dhulfiqar 'Ali Bhutto,
because his presence used to remind him of the demands of 20 million
Pakistanis who were subjected to his brand of justice and have been its
captives ever since.

There are regimes in the Middle last that fall somewhere between Bokassa‘s
and Zia-ul-Haq's. These regimes destroy constitutions and liberties and

do away with liberals and with those who oppose them. However, they do
refrain--and we do thank them for this--from eating the flesh of those who
oppose them.

FIIICHHICIAl.lEiE(HHLY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE(HVLY

Are these and other regimes qualified to undertake by themselves the task
of giving the outside world information about what is happening in their
countries and their homelands?

Briefly, this is the question with which UNESCO, the UN Organization which
oversees the affairs of education, science and culture in the world. has
been preoccupied since i970. In recent years this question has developed
into a political question that provokes noisy debate between the communists
of the east and the capitalists of the west and between the rich people

of the north and the poor people of the south.

Three fourths of the 154 countries that are members of UNESCO are saying
yes. The constant argument [that is being advanced] is the need for "a

new worldwide information order" that would eliminate the discrimination
that western agencies and media practice in reporting the news, questions
and problems of the Third World. Such a new order would restore balance to
the flow and transmittal of news so that world public opinion does not
become overwhelmed with the questions and concerns of the wealthy advanced
people and forget the tragedies and hardships of poor, backward people.

it is painful that the distinguished Arab delegates to UNESCO-and we hope
that we do not arouse their anger-are taking the side of the former
emperor and the present general in supporting the right of governments to
impose greater control on the process of selecting local and domestic news
and information which has been prepared for transmittal abroad or for
foreign consumption.

Although this Arab posture is painful to us, it is in fact neither sur-
prising nor curious. This is because despite their vast knowledge and educa-
tion. none of these delegates is a professional journalist who knows quite
well the hardships. problems and danger encountered by the press in its
daily and constant contact with the mentality of the agencies that are

in control. These delegates do not have to deal with these agencies' under-
standing of the role of the media and the press and their curious explana-
tion of freedom and democracy.

The argument is crystal clear and almost compelling. It is the western
media that control today the influential, active and more powerful public
opinion in the world. They are almost the only means by which news and
information about the Third World can be derived. transmitted and relayed
to the world because of their trained manpower and their superior tech-
nology devices. The process of selecting the kind and quantity of news that
is transmitted is quite unfair to the Third or developing world. Negative.
provocative or trivial aspects of daily life and society are always chosen.
and the positive features of progress and development as well as the aspira-
tions of nations and the struggles they go through to achieve a better
future are never covered.

However-~and we are also addressing the distinguished Arab delegates in

UNESCO--it would not be reasonable to remove the injustice of the western
media and to replace it with another that is official and more dangerous.

Ft"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ ’
FINI<HﬁﬂC1A1.lﬂﬂE(MWLY

We cannot for example assume that Emperor Bokassa or Gen Zia-ul-Haq can
also become correspondents for THE TIMES or L! MONO! and provide them with
information about what was happening in their countries and under their
regimes.

If the outside world knows nothing about "development and progress" in
Central Africa or Pakistan because of discrimination by the western media.
would the outside world have learned something about that if the official
regime were supervising the selection and the flow of news abroad? Would
the outside world have known about the emperor killing and strangling chil-
dren? Would the outside world have known that human flesh was eaten at
official banquets? Would the outside world have known anything about what
happened to Bhutto during his last days in his cell on death row?

The noisy debate which is taking place in the hallways and meeting rooms of
UNESCO and which has been extended to the pages of international newspapers
is quite stimulating. It is ultimately, however, a futile debate that does
not deserve all this attention. It may end, as the evidence indicates, in a
modest recommendation to establish a training program to help the
developing world develop its ledia and the means by which it communicates
its news to the advanced world. implementation of this program may take
many years and will yield inconsequential results that are not worth the
importance and the hopes that had been placed on it.

AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI's purpose in this review is not to keep itself and the
distinguished gentlemen, the Arab delegates in UNESCO, preoccupied with

an argument about the "new world-wide information order," which is being
heralded by Ahmed Ishtar M'bow, the intellectual, distinguished director
of UNESCO. [Nor is it its purpose to become involved in an argument] about
whether or not governments have a right to impose greater control over the
flow of news abroad. ALnWATAN AL-‘ARABI rather wants to explore and to find
out the proper and practical way of presenting Arab questions to world
public opinion, especially the more important western sector of that public
opinion which exercises more influence on its governments. Western public
opinion also plays a greater part in forming the political decisions of
western governments and in shaping the foreign tendencies on whose bases
these governments deal with the world and its questions.

We must concede that the Arab countries have failed--perhaps inadvertently
and for reasons beyond their control-to convey an accurate image of the
Arabs and their causes to world public opinion. Despite the relative under-
standing that is presently available for the Palestinian question, the
image of the Arab which is imprinted in the mind of most people in the
world, especially in the West, does not go beyond three distorted and“~
negative images of the original. in the mind of the world the Arab is an
individual who is looking for a good time with a blonde; a murderous.ter-
rorist who has no pity or mercy; or an unemployed man, wandering in the
Arab ghettos of Europe's cities and undergound tunnels. None of these
images. naturally, does credit to the true Arab or his just causes.

The old motif that had settled in the back of the western mind helped

3
itﬂlfnﬂﬂCIAl.llﬂE(ﬂWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

outline this new image. This motif goes back to the ages of armed conflict
with Arabs and Muslims, who were either conquerors, threatening Europe or
warding off an invasion of their homeland and their old east. This motif is
strengthened by a large measure of condescension mixed with disdain and
scorn for Arab and Islamic culture. It filtered down with the modern
European renaissance which was built on science and material objects which
refuse to recognize the major influence of spiritual considerations and
religion in society.

Then colonialism conveyed an ugly picture of backwardness in the Arab and
Islamic worlds to justify to the European nations the fact that they were
being dragged and involved in the invasion, conquest, exploitation and
plunder of the Arab nation and the Islamic people. Colonialism was followed
by world Zionism which distorted the Arab image further. To do so Zionism
used its financial influence and its influence in the media and in adver-
tising, and it took advantage of the fact that Jews have contributed for a
long time to the cultural, artistic and political organizations that are in
control in the west.

Thus the process of changing the features of the Arab image in western
minds is not easy. This process will take a long time and will require
intelligence, patience. deliberation, expertise and experience in penetra-
ting the traditional western view of Arabs. It will require a thorough
understanding of the western mind whose thinking is based on reading;
making judgments; observing; experimenting; extreme precision in dealing
with figures; absolute respect for counter and opposing opinions; a tire-
less search for truth; and staying away from abstractions, complications
and theoretical and creative analysis. .

Furthermore. Arab media that address the west must completely and fully
remove from consideration the direct information which is based on blatant
propaganda for regimes and exaggerated praise for their leaders and their
men. Although a few regimes can justify the use of such information in
their countries and in the locations where they exercise control, this kind
of information is not acceptable in any form to western public opinion.

There are several means and methods of the media which can convey the Arab
voice to world public opinion gently, deliberately, without supervision and
without affectation, obtrusion or imposition.

The first one of these methods may be that of publishing a daily inter-
national newspaper in English in a European capital, in London or Paris,
for example. This newspaper would follow the exclusive rules of journalism
and information in covering and analyzing the news. it would offer the
western reader news of interest about developments in the questions of the
world in which he lives, the world that is around him. Such a newspaper
would offer the western reader no more articles of Arab interest than he
can accept and digest on a daily basis.

This daily "Arab dosage" can be presented cleverly through the news and
general analyses. It would not be tainted by bias, emotion, enthusiasm or
FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY

the exaggeration that still characterizes the way we deal with each other
in the media.

Diversity in this daily dosage is an obligatory duty. The newspaper would,
for example, deal carefully. scientifically and objectively with political
developments regardless of how sensitive they are. It would not exclude
any question or problem over which the official media imposes a blackout
or sets up a screen. The newspaper is also to include reports, impressions
and observations about social and economic questions and daily life in the
Arab world written in an elegant and succinct journalistic style. These
articles are also to show the value of the old and modern cultural, educa-
tional and human heritage of the Arabs.

If this daily dosage of information can prevail upon western beliefs
through a sedate, elegant and attractive international newspaper, such a
newspaper will in time exercise considerable influence not only on the
average western reader's understanding and indirect sympathy with Arab
questions. but it will also influence the circles where political decisions
are made, especially if modern technology, the communications revolution
and the means of orderly and rapid distribution are made available to that
newspaper so that it would arrive daily on schedule at the basic principal
locations in the five continents.

Suffice it here to refer to the obvious direct and indirect services which
are offered to the ruling u.s. establishment in Uashington by an inter-
national newspaper like THE INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE. This newspaper,
which has been published in Paris for about 100 years with the help of

the news service and the analytical material of the two largest and most
influential u.s. newspapers, THE NEH YORK TIMES and THE WASHINGTON POST,

is now distributed on the day it is published in the capitals and cities of
Europe, southeast Asia, the Far East and perhaps the Middle East. Through
its development, its elegance and its simplified linguistic and journalis-
tic American style, it has been able to impose itself on the average reader
who speaks English fluently or who knows some English and keeps up with
international questions.

An analyst or an observer who has been with THE HERALD TRIBUNE for a long
time can perceive in its headlines, predispositions and choices of the news
and subjects it promotes the declared and undeclared lines of U.S. official
policy. The newspaper does not impose this or prescribe it obtrusively, but
it rather presents it through its general international subjects where
interest in European 4uestions primarily prevails.

THE HERALD TRIBUNE does not disregard the questions of the Hiddle East.

At first, it appears or tries to appear to be balanced in its presentation
of the developments of the Arab-Israeli struggle. But as soon as one fol-
lows its presentation of a question like that of the missiles crisis or

the Palestinian-lsraeli fighting, an observer discovers how biased the
newspaper is toward israel. Begin's threatening statements to the Arabs
were headlined on the first pages of the newspaper most days of the crisis,
whereas Arab points of view were hidden in the back and presented in bits

FOI‘OFFNJAI.U8810NLY
FOR OFFICIALI1§E(MNLY

and pieces. Similarly, the press coverage given to the brutal raid on
Beirut was equal, as far as importance is concerned, to the random
Palestinian shelling of the border settlements.

The bias is extreme in an angle that may not be of interest to the average
reader but is of interest to the intellectual and critical reader. This
angle is that of the book review and criticism section. The newspaper
quotes from THE NEH YORK TIMES and THE WASHINGTON POST everything that is
published by Jewish authors, but it never occurs to the [editors of the
newspaper] to review a book by an Arab literary writer or novelist,
including those who made peace with Israel and recognized "the genius" of
Jews. like al-Hakim, Najib Mahfuz and al-Husayn Pawzi.

Ne hope readers will forgive us for talking at length about an inter-
national newspaper like THE HERALD TRIBUNE. Our purpose in doing so is to
let them realize the effect of the daily "Zionist dosage" that is carried
by this U.S. newspaper which has close ties with 0.8. agencies. This
"Zionist dosage" has an effect on the western, average, politicized reader
and on the circles where political decisions in the world are made. These
circles cannot manage without reading the newspaper.

Publishing an international newspaper in English is not an extremely diffi-
cult task for Arabs if they have courage, good intentions and pure national
objectives. Arabs have the money; they have the educated minds that can
absorb the self-evident principles and the foundations of western intel-
lect, psychology and culture; they also have the journalistic staff that
can contribute to such a project or take part in it. The Arabs are predis—
posed to seek the help of distinguished foreign press elements that are
sympathetic with Arab questions or at least conscious of them and not
prejudiced against them.

The second means of information that is not less important than publishing
an international newspaper is that of establishing an international news
agency that also follows the proper methods of journalistic work and com-
petition with other agencies for news and business.

Official and unofficial Arab correspondents have not yet realized the not
readily obvious importance and significance of this international infor—
mation agency. International news agency networks with their correspon-
dents, their special assignment reporters, their stations. their offices,
their receivers and their transmitters are tantamount to arteries through
which news flows every minute and every instant to newspapers, radio and
television stations. financial and commercial centers and rulers' and
senior officials' offices.

A country that has an international or at least a regional news agency

can with intelligence mold world or regional public opinion in accordance
with its wishes, its interests, its predispositions and its interests.

The British REUTER Agency has monopolised the formation and molding of
world public opinion for scores of years. The British are truly the masters
of formulating newspaper news. They've had competition for a few decades

FTMICMH '
FIHI¢MWHC1Al.lEHE(NNLY

from Americans who established The Associated Press (:27; the biggest and
fastest agency in the world, and from its arch competitor, the United
Press. They also had competition from the French who established the French
Press Agency on the ruins of the well-known Navas Agency.

In order for the Arab reader to appreciate the importance of a news agency,
suffice it to say that until the mid fifties the British used to monopolize
the means of communication and news exchange in the Arab world through the
Arab News Agency. Cairo knew no more than what London would allow it to
know about what was happening in Baghdad; nor did Damascus know more than
what London would allow it to know about what was happening in Amman or
Beirut. Through its international agency, RBUTER and its regional agency,
the Arab News Agency, the British capital continued to determine the amount
of news that one capital would receive from its neighboring capital. This
news was fornmlated and molded with unmatched British skill in accordance
with the supreme interests of the empire on whom the sun never set.

Then Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir came along, and he realized with his sharp sense
for information the importance of connecting the nerve [endings] of the
Arab nation. So he established the Middle East News Agency. Today, however,
25 years after its establishment the agency has become more like the well-
known Hikalat al-Balah in the Egyptian junk market. It has been bogged down
by Egypt's astonishing red tape, by the discrimination that exists between
its Egyptian employees and its Arab correspondents and by the weak Egyptian
awareness of the Arab world's problems. Then came the Camp David disaster,
which along with the erosion of Egypt's [influence] in politics and infor-
mation stripped the agency of even its semi-regional Arab feature and made
it retire inside its principal office, preoccupied with [the task of]
fabricating news and inventing information that is damaging to the Arab
nation and advantageous to al-Sadat and to Begin.

Arab public opinion may be surprised, distressed and hurt if it finds out
that 80 percent of what is published, broadcast and received by newspapers,
radio stations, television stations, banks and officials‘ offices in the
Arab world about the Great Homeland is based on what is relayed by the four
principal western news agencies between the Arab capitals.

He offer this bare informational fact to Arab public opinion. Every reader
can verify that by simply following the sources of the news daily. These
are indicated in the newspapers on the first line of every Arab news story
that is printed.

Yes, this is what is happening after 30 or 40 years of independence with

20 official Arab news agencies in existence. Despite their exorbitant
expenses most of these agencies have not been able to get out of the
clutches of the official, local, regional and government red tape and
acquire a regional or pan—Arab scope--and we are not saying a world scope--
so as to offer their news materials to their clients and subscribers in an
accurate press formulation and provide full, reasonable and trusted
coverage that is neither biased nor fragmented.

Fl”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1kl.lﬂiE(MNLY
FIHRIJFFICLAL.USII(M§LY

It is our right to wonder after all this: have we lost hope that the Arabs
would have a regional or an international news agency?

The answer is no. Arab manpower is available. With much or little training
in the art of formulating news and the methods of receiving, compiling

and classifying news according to their importance. these human resources
can become the "professional“ nucleus for a real news network on a pan-
Arab, regional level. Foreign human resources specializing in the arts and
in journalism are also available.

There remains the sincere desire to rise above the narrow, local, political
and personal interest. We do not exaggerate were we to say that any wealthy
Arab country can exercise tremendous influence on the course of Arab and
perhaps international politics if it can establish and finance an inter-
national or a regional news agency that would have administrative indepen-
dence, a trusted journalistic and news personality and a network of corres-
pondents and offices scattered in Arab and international capitals.

If the countries are incapable of providing this independence to a news
agency. private Arab capital. whose hobby these days is to amuse itself

by publishing newspapers and magazines that lose money. can finance a pro-
ject to establish a regional or a world-wide Arab news agency that would
have the greatest measure of independence possible as well as professional
and political credibility. In addition to its national service to Arabs.
such a project would be commercially profitable 2 or 3 years after it is
established.

The third information project that would help present Arab questions to
world public opinion would be a strong radio station that can broadcast
around the clock in English or in more than one modern language.

It would be all right here to copy and to imitate the broadcasting experi-
ments and experiences which advanced countries have had before us, such as
adopting the sound and high standards of broadcasting and journalistic
professionalism of the world-wide program of the British Broadcasting Cor-
poration. The BBC has been able to combine in a praiseworthy manner
indirect informational guidance with the art of presenting and analyzing
news.

The importance and vitality of this project are affirmed by the struggle
that is taking place on the air waves between the East and the West for
control of what the masses of world public opinion hear, feel and believe.
with its worldwide program whfch it broadcasts in English, Radio Moscow has
largely been able to match the BBC's broadcasts. It has largely and
cleverly managed to rid itself of the starnnass and rigidity of a bureau-
cratic socialist administration. With astonishing flexibility it has dealt
with millions of listeners in the world, attempting to reach their convic-
tions after having reached their hearts and their minds.

What Moscow did any country or group of wealthy Arab countries can do.
It can also be done by private Arab capital with the indirect participa-
tion of one or more Arab states. The opportunity is there for a strong

8
Ft!!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂ§LY
FOIiOFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

Arab broadcast in English to attract a broad sector of world public
opinion. It would benefit from the continuing and anticipated reduction in
the services of the BBC's worldwide program.

What is curious here is that after the decline of their colonialist empire,
the British became more objective in understanding the questions of nations
and they began to reduce their wireless communications with their audiences
at a time when they most needed to have their voice heard in the world.

The fact that the BBC has been pulling back continuously is the truest
expression of the fact that the spark of intelligence which British politi-
cal leaders had in the past is waning. It is the most serious evidence of
the present leadership's inability to understand the importance of a huge
media facility which, like the British crown, has become one of Britain's
distinctively historical features.

The success of a worldwide Arab broadcast is not to be achieved by pro-
viding it with strong devices. The success of such a broadcast requires
rather a conviction that it is the right of the body of persons that over-
sees the broadcast to present its news and international and Arab analyses
with full independence. Such a broadcast is to deal with Arab questions
without restrictions, without favoring any regime and with full protection
against [all] pressures.

These are the broad outlines of three practical information projects that
may help change the distorted or obscure features of the Arab's image and
causes as these are seen in general by westerners.

The importance of the change lies in the fact that the increased understan-
ding and sympathy of western public opinion for Arab questions constitute
two factors that would apply pressure on political leaders and on those who
make political decisions. Thus, political leaders and decision makers would
assume more moderate positions that are closer to Arabs' positions,
especially in the Arabs' crucial struggle with Israel and Zionism.

if improving the Arab image in western minds is desirable in the next
stage, there is no doubt that we too have to change. Every step that we
take on the road to development and modernization; every step we take
towards developing our regimes, expanding their popular bases and ridding
them of the appearance of a police state; every measure to achieve social
justice and to narrow the gap between the haves and the have nots; every
alleviation of the direct and naive propaganda that abounds in exaggera-
tion, verbosity. praise, commendation and personal adulation--all these
measures—-will help win world public opinion over. These measures would
make us appear more mature, more aware, more stable and more balanced in
the eyes of those we are addressing.

world public opinion in our age has become a moral force whose influence

in winning political, diplomatic and military battles cannot be discounted.
Any openness toward world public opinion. every approximation of the pre—
dominant and principal political trends in it, and every step away from

its suspect. secret and extremist movements--rightist or leftist-«sake

our struggle more legitimate on the international scene.

9
F0!!0FFKJAI.U§B(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These international information projects which we discussed in this review
would best be implemented by private Arab capital with the moral support
and encouragement of political regimes and even with their indirect
material participation. The fact that these projects would stay away from
the official aspect would make it easy for them to set themselves up in

the countries from where they will launch their project. It would give them
more freedom in addressing public opinion and make them more acceptable to
the political and popular movements in the capitals and countries where
they will work.

A discussion about Arab information addressing world public opinion remains
lacking if it is confined to Arab initiative carried out through these
projects to approach the people's centers of action in the world. This
discussion also requires talk about the initiatives of the foreign and
worldwide media to come close to us. In other words. it requires a dis-
cussion about official Arab dealings with the press and with foreign and
world news agencies. Such a discussion would be more stimulating and more
exciting and would deal with the semi-confidential aspects of our official
mentality and understanding of the function of foreign and world infor-
mation. This discussion would also deal with the methodology of the foreign
media in dealing with the Arab world, and it would deal with the method,
work and performance of foreign reporters on temporary assigments or cor-

respondents in Arab capitals.

in the preliminaries to this discussion we said that a history of mutual
misunderstanding has existed between us and the world media. especially the
western media. This made us accuse the media of total and absolute bias on
the side of our adversaries and enemies.

Why is this so? Is this a true accusation? If it is, to what extent is
it true? ﬂow can this relationship between us and the foreign media be
cleared and re-established on clearer and firmer foundations?

This is the subject of the next installment in the discussion about "the
international character of the Arab media." Until next week, God willing.

[No 236, 21-27 Aug 81 pp 18-21]

[Text] Is the western press biased? The answer to

that question is yes and no; we must accept the rela-
tionship between the media and intelligence.

Begin speaks with correspondents every day, but Arab
capitals leave them alone without monthly or even annual
press conferences.

Radio Monte Carlo does not represent the true face of
France; it promotes self-indulgence among the new Arab
generation.

In the first installment of "The International Character of the Arab Media"
we proposed three practical projects for approaching world public opinion.
He said that an international newspaper, a worldwide or regional news

FOROFHCIALIBEONLY
FORIDFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

agency and a modern language program that would be broadcast around the
clock from a powerful transmitter would help win the emotions and prevail
upon popular sectors that are active and exercise influence in their
societies' decision making )rocess, and especially in the advanced
societies.

But this would not be sufficient if we do not know how to deal with the
attempts that are being made by the world media, especially the western
media, to approach us. There has been a history of mutual misunderstanding
between us and the western media. This made us accuse the western media of
total and absolute bias on the side of our adversaries and our enemies and
against our causes.

This accusation requires review and correction because a generalization
such as that which is not supported by considerations and full information
makes us captive to our judgments. Accordingly, these judgments do in time
restrict the actions we take to address world public opinion through the
powerful means of the western media. Unfortunately, these means are still
the only ones through which world public opinion can be reached.

Part of the review and correction process requires us to criticise our-
selves. and especially the official view of how we are to deal with the
western media.

We have accepted the self-evident notion that the function of the media

is merely that of official propaganda. This belief stems from the fact that
the Arab media is almost fully controlled [by the authorities] and has been
turned into a mere mouthpiece for direct propaganda.

Thus when a senior official deigns to agree to an interview with a foreign
correspondent--and this is rare-~media aides and advisers try to make the

correspondent commit himself to printing the official's full responses.

In fact, they sometimes interfere and determine the questions in advance.

They either do not know or are ignoring the fact that the text of an inter-
view in any respectable newspaper in the world is subject to editing.
During that process redundant details that do not affect the principal
statements, opinions and components of the interview are deleted. Further-
more, self-respecting magazines handle official interviews as side elements
that complement the basic report which is compiled by the reporter who is
on assignment, or by the press delegation in the country in question. In
true reportage, whose purpose is to serve the reader and win his confi-
dence, what a government official says in the course of a classical inter-
view where a question is raised and a creative, long-winded response is
given is no longer of any importance. Official statements may not [convey]
the whole truth. [Usually] three fourths of that truth 7ie in what the.
correspondent is able to put together from his inquiries and investigation.
This is the true reportage which every self-respecting journalist aspires
to and which every newspaper or magazine that is primarily interested in
the confidence of public opinion wants.

FOR<0i1IC1Al.USE(NVLY
EOR<OUIWC1A1.UEIZ(M'LY

If we allowed the process of self-criticism to continue and to touch upon
details, we will be faced with a set of impressions and observations about
our dealings with the western media. The most important of these may be
[the following]:

In most cases there is an insistence on speaking in abstract, general.
stylized and long-winded terms to which we are accustomed in our local and
Arab press. The western reader finds this impossible to understand regard-
less of his awareness and his knowledge. Sometimes the eloquence and the
ambiguity of the statements make the task of translating the interview into
the easy and acceptable language of the press impossible.

There is a belief, which is beginning to gain support and acceptance in
some of our official sectors, that it is possible to use two languages and
two jargons in addressing public opinion. One of them would be used for
foreign consumption; it would define positions and points of view on
specific crucial questions. The other language, which would utilize
emotion, passion, abstraction, generalization and obfuscation would be used
for local consumption.

This attempt "to outsmart" the public has negative effects. The modern
communications revolution has abolished the barriers that used to exist
between the public opinion sectors in the world. It is now easy to re-broad-
cast a news brief of any interview directed for public consumption and to
make it available to local consumption sometimes even before the interview
is published in the foreign newspapers and magazines.

As a result of the contradictions between the specific positions we offer
foreign public opinion and the ambiguous ones with which we appear in front
of local public opinion a tremendous amount of distortion is produced. This
"clever" distortion causes considerable damage to our national questions
and makes us appear to ourselves and to foreign officials and correspon-
dents who are concerned with these questions to be not serious and not
truthful.

We take another step in the process of self-criticism, and we say that

so far we have not utilized official spokesmen who are capable of talking
to journalists and correspondents. The resident correspondent or the
reporter who is on special assignment works hard to find an official agency
that would give him answers to the daily questions he has or that would
help him pursue a subject that came up unexpectedly. In this case he finds
no one in front of him but the authorized minister, who in most cases can-
not be reached in person or by telephone. If the correspondent finds a
minister, that minister dodges the interview or avoids making a comment

or giving an explanation either because he is in awe of the responsibility
or out of consideration for local sensitivities.

Israel has realized this and has selected two official or semi-official
civilian and military spokesmen. They respond to all the questions of cor-
respondents and provide all the explanations [that are called for].

12
I!”l(ﬂﬂﬂtlhl.USB(NVLY
FoaiﬂﬂﬂCIALllﬂEONlY

Thus we find that the quantity of news. information and daily investigative
reports coming out of Israel almost equals or exceeds everything that comes
out of all the Arab capitals together. Then we go on to lament and blame
the foreign press.because it adopts Israel's point of view and everything
that comes out of Israel.

We take another step in the process of review and self-criticism.

An event takes place in an Arab capital or in an Arab country: a demon-
stration, a strike or a clash with security forces in which people are
wounded and killed. But all media officials ignore the event: no reference
is made to it; no commentary is heard about it; and no explanation [is
provided to the public]. It were as though demonstrations, strikes and
even armed clashes or verbally expressed opposing opinions did not occur
or should not occur in our Arab world. [If they did]. they diminished the
worth, the reputation and the popularity of those in power.

But distorted or exaggerated information about these events soon filters--
perhaps through the private means of resident correspondents or reporters
who are on assignment. This information is circulated by the biased and the
non-biased foreign press. When it is laid out on the pages of newspapers,
our delayed official explanations are no longer useful and beneficial even
if they were true. This is because at first the event captures the reader's
attention and consciousness and is imprinted on his mind and in his heart
in the biased or exaggerated manner in which news of it was received. Any
details or explanations that come after that recede and are lost with the
reader's gradual declining interest in the event.

There is another example of the negative effects of delaying official infor-
mation. A local or broad Israeli military operation is carried out against

a certain sector on the confrontation line. Few seconds after that opera-
tion is completed, correspondents begin sending the Israeli version of

the incident to their principal centers of the world news agencies. These
agencies immediately transmit the news to the newspapers, radio stations,
television stations and official offices throughout the world which sub-
scribe to their services.

The Arab bulletin about the operation, however, is delayed for many hours
and may not even be issued or released to the local media. Then we lie

back easily as though the world would [eventually] hear of the event simply
because it was broadcast on our radio or television station. In this case
the correspondent is forced to relay the news late. Uhen his main office
begins to broadcast the news again, valuable hours would have been lost,
newspapers would have published the Israeli version and radio stations and
television stations would have broadcast the news all over the world. And
then we go on to lament the fact that the foreign media listen and give
their attention to what Israel boradcasts and publishes.

It would be all right to expatiate a little here on the subject of dealing
with world news agencies and resident correspondents for newspapers, radio
stations and television stations.

13
FKHRCMHHCJAI.lEﬂE(H‘LY
FORiOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

We do not appreciate the value of these foreign information embassies that
travel or reside in our midst at no material costs to us. it is not an
exaggeration to say that the correspondent of any world agency or newspaper
is much more important and beneficial than the ambassador of that country
whose nationality he carries. It is extremely important to win his affec-
tions and to get him to believe [our point of view]. It is enough, for
example, to open for him a few official doors so we can talk with him or
provide him with some information and news. A mutual relationship is estab-
lished with him through daily interaction, and that relationship can

develop into a profound understanding of what we want and do not want pub-
lished.

It is astonishing that senior Arab officials do not think of holding
regular weekly, monthly or at least annual press conferences in their capi-
tals during which they would talk to residing correspondents or reporters
who are on assignment. At the same time Begin is allowed to talk with cor-
respondents every day on the way to or from his office.

In fact, some Arab capitals do not allow foreign correspondents to estab-
lish residence in the first place. In most of these countries. if foreign
correspondents are allowed to enter and live in the country, their life and
their work are made unbearable. They are shunned, ignored, subjected to
stern censorship, treated with disdain and contempt, and the process by
which they send their news articles to their main offices is hampered.

It is ironical that some Arab capitals complain of the fact that senior
official visitors wish to hold press conferences in those capitals when
they visit. These capitals forget the importance of having their names
repeated in the newspapers and broadcasts of the world. They are not aware
of the importance of becoming sources of news and information. This would
yield beneficial media effects to the Arab regimes and would spotlight the
political role of these capitals.

So far we do not know how to take advantage of news agency offices and
correspondents in our capitals in the war of reporting and political
initiatives and maneuvers. There is not one Arab capital that has mastered
the art of launching "trial balloons" or "taking the pulse" [of a situa-
tion] by suggesting to correspondents news or information that is not
official in character. At the same time we are overwhelmed daily by scores
of "trial balloons" that are sent to us on the air waves from Hashington,
London, Moscow, Paris and Israel through the news agencies and the western
press. Through these "trial balloons" we are subjected to views, pressures
and maneuvers. In fact, we get lost; we disagree; we split with each other;
we become fragmented; we fight over explaining and analyzing these trial
balloons; and we assume conflicting positions on them. [In the mean time]
they would have performed the political and tactical objective that was
intended by launching them and trying them out.

The only thing we know so far is to make the correspondent stick to the

text of the interview, the statement or the bulletin that we issue. If
he makes a mistake in transmitting, translating or interpreting a

FIH!(HHN(£%&.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

statement, we punish him with imprisonment or expulsion [from the country]
or we deny him [the right] to practice his profession.

None of us sees the 0.3. fleets when they sail in our waters or assemble
opposite our shores. Official 0.8. agencies, however, provide the world
news agencies with news and pictures of these movements. They exercise
considerable craft in directing and arousing [public opinion] in order

to achieve the required strategic or tactical goal. be that "to scare,"
terrorize or support, etc.

with all the legitimate and illegitimate means [at its disposal] Israel has
succeeded in winning over a large number of resident correspondents or
neporters on assignment. Israelis have opened officials' doors to them, and
they've tempted them with money and sexual favors. We, however, do not stop
with the restrictions we place on them. He chase them sometimes in the
streets of Beirut and we gun them down with our bullets. The reader may
appreciate after that the effect of these thoughtless bloody acts on
official and popular Arab reputation.

We continue the process of self-criticism and we talk about the costly
supplements or paid advertisements [that are designed] to improve Arab
reputation. These are published by the major newspapers of the world about
some Arab countries.

This foreign media action is futile. 0n the one hand, it falls under the
category of direct propaganda which Arab public opinion rejects and does
not accept. 0n the other hand, it is a waste of money on promotional adver-
tisements that create an effect opposite that which is required. The news-
paper. its editors, writers and correspondents are not necessarily sym—
pathetic with the country that is placing the advertisement as one thinks
or imagines.

in the course of criticizing ourselves [we have indicated] a few important
and principal aspects of our practice in dealing with the world's media and
particularly with the western media. If we have engaged in this much criti-
cism without making officials impatient with us, we will have achieved

a major benefit in revealing what is painful or astonishing in these
dealings in the hope that we can review and correct [our actions].

To be fair we have to talk about how the western media deals with us with
the same measure of objectivity.

The first thing that can be said and stated in general terms about the
western media‘s view of us is that it is biased against us. If we wish to
dilute this description, we can say that the western media views us with a
lack of concern that sometimes approaches gloating or ridicule. One can
read between the lines of their written, audible or visual statements sup-
pressed or visible varieties of resentment and hatred of everything that is
Arab or lslamic.

There is no room here for expanding the analysis of the reasons for this.

15
ron omcm. use onu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suffice it to say that this negative view of Arabs and Muslims is part of
a media view that has been passed down since the Third World was colonized
when the Third World was seen as "a backward world with incurable ailments
and chronic problems. a world whose non—white people had an indifferent
nature."

Although ownership of most of the western press has shifted from colonia-
list lords ard aristocratic families. who look down in disdain through

their monocles on the Third Horld, to multi-national monopolies and corpora-
tions, [the latter] did replace the old colonialism in plundering the
wealth of the Third World and dividing its consumer markets. Notwith—
standing the editorial staff's independence from the directives of the
board of directors on which the owners and directors of these monopolies

and corporatiors sit. traces of the interests that control a newspaper are
clearly evident on its pages and in its commentaries.

Perhaps the way the question of energy has been handled in the western
press provides evidence and testimony to the western press's bias for
capitalist monopolies against Arab interests. The way this subject has been
handled shows that the Arabs are envied because God did bless them with
this resource and did not bless the other countries of the former colonia-
lists who are "more deserving of this wealth" because they are more know-
ledgeable and more advanced.

Although the western media's bias for Israel has somewhat receded and
declined in the last few years. the character of the discussion about Arab
causes is still largely negative. One still senses that a correspondent
shows a lack 0! concern when he records his impressions and observations
[of Arabs]. he locuses on everything that is negative in society and on
everything that would suggest to the reader a pessimistic outlook on the
possibility that the Arabs would overcome their problems.

Let us take one aspect of the way the Lebanese question was handled. The
Arab Front with its three leaders. Bashir, his father. Pierre al-Jumayyil
and their ally Camille Sham'un, became the center of interest with western
newspapers. correspondents and news agencies simply because the Front's
leaders were rejecting [the notion of] an Arab Lebanon and were dealing pub-
licly or secretly with Israel. At the same time [interest in] Raymond lddih
and Sulayman Franjiyyah vanished or almost vanished simply because the

first was neutral and the second refused to deal with Israel.

Thus in the view of the western press Arab societies are backward, emo-
tional societies with torn loyalties and affiliations. They have no
national or ethnic ties that bring them together; they are rather con-
trolled by family. tribal and sectarian disputes and prejudices.

Let us acknowledge in return that the western press does discuss internal
lsraeli problems and that it sometimes expatiates upon the conflicts of
lsraeli society at length. However. its discussion always remains that of
the sympathizer and the compassionate. affectionate critic who hides [the
difficulties]. looks for excuses and justifications and is optimistic about

16
FOR‘DFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the possibility of overcoming the difficulties. This is because Israel

is "western civilization's" spoiled daughter and the "only oasis of democ-
racy in a world that abounds in military dictatorships and medieval
regimes."

This does not lead us at all to generalize that the western press is
Zionist or that it is totally subject to Zionist influence. This accusation
blows the situation out of proportion. There are now on Fleet Street in
London and on the Champs Elysees and Opera Street [in Paris] where the best
western newspapers are published a large number of editors, commentators
and writers who sympathize and agree with Arab questions after having dis—
covered the falsehood of lsraeli and Zionist propaganda.

Despite all this. however, Jewish and Zionist hands are not far from the
centers where directions are set and decisions made in newspapers and news
agencies. Jews and Zionists work cleverly to maintain the negative image of
the Arab in western minds and to exonerate Israel from all forms of pre-
judice, barbarism and brutality practiced by Begin against the Arabs. They
try [to continue] showing [Israel] as the innocent lamb that fell in the
clutches of the old wolf, Begin. It were as though they were not the ones
who brought Begin to power.

Even though the European press did change its biased conduct against the
Arabs in recent years, Arab correspondents of principal western agencies
have more than daily evidence that their agencies are biased. How much news
is transmitted in a fair manner but is then broadcast in an abbreviated,
distorted or biased form?

And here too the hidden facts about the actions and the biases of news-
papers, news agencies and radio stations of the world against the Arab
nation must be revealed. For scores of years these media have been choosing
their local correspondents in the Arab capitals from groups that mostly
belong to racial, sectarian or religious minorities in the Arab societies.
They have done that to assure themselves of these correspondents' bias
against the aspirations of the nation in which they live. Fortunately, this
group of journalists is beginning to shrink and to become extinct with time.

what is more important and more serious than all this is the fact that

all local correspondents for the principal western news agencies in the
capitals of the Arab east are tied to the regional office or foreign corres—
pondent who lives in Beirut in one way or another--through administration,
information and directions. Unless it is absolutely necessary. they are not
allowed to send their news directly to the principal centers in Europe.

Thus the news these reporters send, even if it were unbiased, undergoes

a preliminary review in the agency‘s regional office in Beirut. This review
is carried out by the foreign correspondent who lives in Beirut and who is
inlluenced by the separatist environments which oppose everything that is
Arab, or it is carried out by local editors who belong originally to these
environments or minorities. Because of [their affiliations] they reject
Arabism and do not entertain an ounce of solicitude for Arab causes.

17
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The final refining, sifting and slanting process takes place after that

at the principal European center which returns the news formulated in accor-
dance with the interests of the state or the organization that owns the
agency.

Media bias against the Arabs and the Third world is not confined to the
process of picking up. formulating and slanting news. it is also manifested
in the selection process of foreign press members who are chosen as resi-
dent correspondents or sent on temporary assignments.

The Soviet news Agency TASS has cut short the process of western hypocrisy.
it treats its correspondents like diplomats and gives most of them diplo-
matic passports. it considers them an inseparable part of its official,
diplomatic and intelligence missions operating in the Arab world.

Western countries. however. do not give their corespondents diplomatic
passports. but their intelligence agencies are not above recruiting and
employing some of them. It is enough to refer here to the fact that the
British journalist. Harold Philby (Kim) a senior Soviet intelligence
officer in British intelligence, was employed recently in the years that
preceded his escape to the Soviet Union as a correspondent for several
British newspapers in the Middle East and that he lived in Beirut.

In this regard also we must remind [readers] that 2 weeks ago the Central
intelligence Agency decided to re-hire all 0.5. and non-U.S. journalists
and correspondents who work in foreign capitals.

The fact is that gathering news is very close and very similar to gathering

intelligence. Therefore. [intelligence officials} consider [media] represen-
tatives. reporters and correspondents a valuable network for gathering news

and information and for observing current political and social trends in

the countries that have controlled democracies.

And here another fact must be revealed. The vast majority of the regional
offices of foreign newspapers and news agencies in Beirut and Cairo under-
take in one way or another the task of gathering and compiling news and
information that is at the heart of the intelligence gathering process.
This is done while their foreign correspondents are fulfilling their tours
oi duty in Arab capitals or through the network of local correspondents
that are related to those correspondents. Some of this information surfaces
In newspapers and western news agencies in the form of “private information
from confidential sources“ to serve specific political purposes and objec-
tives. Some of it goes on a silent. secret course to laboratories where it
is analyzed and monitored by the intelligence agencies in the major
countries.

Does the fact that we are approached by western media in this biased
fashion and in these various negative ways require us to approach the wes-
tern media in return with a similar negative attitude?

No, we do not believe so. He must accept all these negative features; we

18
FOIiOFT1CJAl.U5213NLY
li)Ri0FiIC1Al.l£5EZ(MVLY

must contain them and overlook them as much as possible in the effort and
the hope of achieving the greater and the more important goal of addres-
sing the broader and the more influential sectors of public opinion in the
world and in the west.

The absolute bias that we used to complain of in the paSt has now turned
to a kind of negative or positive interest in Arab questions. This bias
and its negative features can be reduced every day. If this has happened
because of the activities and the efforts of the intellectual elite in the
Palestine Liberation Organization and because of Arab intellectuals in
western organizations and universities. the Arab diplomatic corps is being
called upon [now] to contribute to the task or to complete it.

The phenomenon that still bewilders us is that the Arab diplomatic corps
remains generally unable to establish warm friendly relations with jour-
nalists. writers and political thinkers in the principal capitals of the
west. The first principles for success in establishing such relationships
require that the halo or the pomp with which the diplomat surrounds himself
and his work be set aside so he can mix easily with journalists. befriend
them and win their confidence and their affecrion in an atmosphere from
which affectation. flattery and protocol are removed. Such an atmosphere
would be closer to the friendly. ordinary and simple environments that all
journalists like in their work and in their lives.

This relationship helps not only in winning the affections and the sym-
pathies of western journalists. but it must also make the mission of those
who travel to Arab capitals for temporary or permanent assignments easier.
A diplomat who encounters and lives with those journalists and follows
their instructions and what they write closely can always provide good
assistance to his government in dealing with the western media and under-
standing their peculiarities.

The dangers oi an open door atmosphere to western and eastern media, which
are manifested in the relationship some journalists and correspondents have
with intelligence agencies. must be accepted. In today's world--the world
of satellites, AUACS airplanes. fishing fleets that are equipped with radar
and sonar devices and microelectronics which disappear in a button or a
hole--there are no longer many secrets that can be kept. The fundamentals
of the intelligenCe game have to be accepted. even if they were covered
with innocent silk gloves.

if anything can be done to alleviate the damage effected by intelligence
agents who pose as journalists, that can be accomplished by getting the
members of the Arab diplomatic corps to help by gathering information about
them, about their past and about their work to verify whether they are in
fact journalists to be trusted and honorable in their work.

Pressure must also be applied on news agencies to make them appoint local

correspondents in Arab capitals who have the authority to transmit news and
communicate directly with their principal offices. The preliminary sifting
and refining process which takes place in the regional office in Beirut or

19
FOR 0F1NC1AI.USIECMNLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cairo is to be eliminated to ensure that the news arrives at the principal
office without distortions and to determine what changes or alterations of
the basic text that was transmitted by the correspondent in the Arab
capital took place.

The effort by governments and agencies that oversee Arabic programs or
broadcasts in western countries to employ Arab broadcasters and personnel
who are really affiliated with their Arab heritage and not with their
resentful minorities, sects and prejudices comes in the context of the
mutual rapprochement that is taking place with the western media. This way
a broadcast like that of Monte Carlo Radio. for example, which reflects in
one form or another the intcszsts of the French media in the Arab world,
would not become a nest for the hornets of the Lebanese Front and a point
from which this daily flow of trivia and self-indulgence is broadcast to
the new Arab generation. He cannot accept this as the media and political
facade of France--the France of freedom. justice and culture--through which
it addresses the Arabs day and night.

what more is there?

A discussion about a mutual rapprochement between the Arab and western
media can be lengthy and diversified. AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI wanted in these
two installments to formulate a set of suggestions. observations and jour-
nalistic impressions that would form a suitable nucleus for an expanded
academic study of the means by which this exchange can be furthered.

The Arabs cannot win their political and social battles if they do not
have the sympathy of world public opinion. This popular sympathy can con-
stitute an influential and an effective pressure factor on official
policies, on the directions these policies take. on the decisions that are
made and on the positions that are assumed on various world questions
including our Arab questions.

Winning over governments by turning the oil on or off is not enough. If

the predominant trend in French. British and American public opinion is

not applying pressure on the governments and is not sympathetic to the Arab
causes. Reagan's position and Mitterand's outlook will not change simply be-
cause of a polite diplomatic protest or an official memorandum formulated
with the [exemplary] courtesy of Chadli Kalibi or the eloquence of Habib
Chatti.

Mutual economic interests create official positions that are temporarily
close. But getting to the hearts and minds of people is the only means
by which firm and permanent policies can be formulated; these policies
would not change as governments succeed each other and leaders fall.

Copyright: 1981 AL HATAN AL ARABI
8592

C50: 6306/147

20
F0310FFK3A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APGHANISIAN

DEFECTOR DBJOUNCBS KABUL GOVERNHBH'
P24191539 London THE GUARDIAN in English 19 Oct 81 p 11
[Dispatch by Alexander Thompson: "Afghanistan Regime 'On the Point of Collepse'"l

[Text] Peshawar-Hr what-ad Yusif Farand. a senior Afghan official who has
defected to Pakistan, said yesterday that his country has almost ceased to exist
as a functioning political, administrative and economic entity, and that there

were strong rumours that the Babrak Karmal regim might soon be replaced by
another conunist administration.

Hr Parand, who has been a special adviser to the Afghan Government on economic
affairs, was president of the board controlling textiles, sat on the board of the
national airline, Ariana, and was approached by the governor to take part in

the National Fatherland Front set up earlier this year to try to give the govern-
ment a more popular base. is the most senior of hundreds of Afghan administrators

who have fled over the past few weeks.

He said that, in effect, the government of Afghanistan has become merely the
government of the capital, Kabul.

Hr Farand, who escaped to Pakistan four days ago, said the faction in power in
Kabul at present, the Parcham (F118). is a small unrepresentative group based
only in the cities.

without the Russians, he said, they would be nothing. If the Soviet Army ever
withdrew they knew they would have to withdraw ahead of them. lie describes them
now as spoilt and scared children clinging on to their mothers' skirts.

The faction which ruled before them, the Khalq people, were very bitter. he said.
They still believed they would have succeeded in transforming Afghan society if
Moscow had not overreacted. They still had sipport in the arny, but the Afghan
Army now was nothing.

Both factions had failed and were now discredited with the Afghan people.

There were reports that the Russians might be thinking of removing Hr Karmal from
power and replacing him with a new faction headed by Hr Zahir Oufuq, a medaer of

the Academy of Sciences in Kabul. who leads what he likes to see as a more inde-

pendent and less compromised commist grouping.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hr Farand was particularly scathing about the National Fatherland Front which
held its first meting in January. He said one of the main reasons for its
failure was the refusal of the govern-ant to involve any parties or organisa-

tions. lhwership was restricted to individuals who often join only because
they are well paid and enjoy the special status conferred on then.

If a genuine attempt had been made to involve progressive elements, and a

program had been drawn up which included the ultimate withdrawal of the Soviet
Army, it could have been sore successful. He said that when he started question-
ing the front his invitation to attend was withdrawn.

Host of the hundreds of defectors over the past few weeks were young men escaping
conscription assures announced a month ago. Mr Parand said the effect of such

an exodus would have been severe if the administrators in Afghanistan had are
to do. But in at least one ministry, finance, there was only a quarter of the

manpower left. Those remaining were not overworked. The ministry now has to do
less than a quarter of what it had to before the Soviet invasion. As the coun-

try slips away from central control, income taxes, land taxes and other revenue
remain ungathered.

Industry is faring no better, apart from the natural gas industry which is close
to the Soviet border, heavily guarded, and of particular value to lbscow.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 19 Oct 81

C80: («600/68

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AFGHANISTAN

comma DBSCRDBS mar 'RADIO FREE ANKANISIAN'
M61118 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 9 Sep 81 p 1

[Interview with Renso Rossellini, cofounder of 'Radio Free Afghanistan" by Lietta
Tornabno in Venice: "A Voice for Afghanistan, a Proud People"-date not given]

[Excerpt] Venice--"It was a highly secret operation. I had to take three radio
transaitters into the country. train a group of resistance fighters to use then and
start broadcasts." Renae Rossellini, 60-year old son of Roberto, who is himself

a fill producer, chaimn of the Italian Gamaont Colpany and a former director of
Rose's leftwing radio station Ratio Citta Future and who has just returned froa
Afghanistan, described how, with French philosopher Bernard-Bend Levy and dissi-
dent Russian writer liarek (Halter). living in exile in Paris. he set up the first
conunications systea anong the anti-Soviet fighters.

"The nilitary situation necessitated special technical solutions. At present there
are three transnitters. which are designed to be light. simple. easy to transport
and nodest: they cost 1.8 million lire each. There should eventually be 36. They
broadcast mainly at night. for a few hours, one taking over fron the other so as to
becone a kind of national radio~ broadcasting political news and debates in three
langues: Dari [apparent line drop].

The broadcasts in Russian. prerecorded on tapes by Russian'dissidents in Paris.

are intended to have a special line of developsent. Rossellini said: "They are also
to be used to urge Rad Art-y soldiers in Afghanistan to desert, but two conditions
are required. first, the resistance fighters amt not kill Russian prisoners: this
is a war in which nobody takes prisoners. Second, the International Red Cross lust
agree to take charge of the deserters, undertaking not to hand then over to Soviet
diplonatic representatives but to guide then to neutral countries until the end of
the conflict and then allowing then to obtain political asylua. perhaps in Switzer-
land or the Netherlands. The local Red Cross agrees: Negotiations are now going
on at the international headquarters in Geneva. and if they are successful Radio
Free Afghanistan [Radio Afghanistan Liberal will i-ediately start broadcasting
calls for desertion.”

[Question] Do you think they will have an effect?

[Answer] I think that any people will desert; I think that many Soviet soldiers
are horrified by what they are doing. [mater ends]

23
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The initiative. Rossellini said, has been received very enthusiastically by the Afghan
anti-Soviet fighters: "One of the worst traumas in the occupation, which places

the entire comunications system in Soviet hands, is the lack of information."

The initiative has been received so enthusiastically that even political or religious
organizations representing various military groups have for-ed a joint comittee

to run the radio: "This was the only condition we set." It was not difficult to
teach the people who were to operate the radio in an intensive and rapid 10-day
course. "There was an electronics engineer among the resistance fighters, and

there were boys who had studied at French or American universities and who already

knew how to use tape recorded and tuning equipment. Operating a radio was there-
fore fairly simple.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editrice La Stamps S.p.a.

CSO: 1628/2

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY ‘

LEBANON

BASBIR AL-JUHAYYIL INTERVIEVED
~1111213110 Paris Ala-"ATM AL-'ARABI in Arabic 9 Oct 81 pp 40-102

[AL-HAHN AL-‘ARABI interview with hashir al-Juamyyil, commader of the Lebanese
forces--place and date not given]

[Excerpts] [Question] Since the latest round of meetings between the Arab
Followup Couittee and the Lebanese Front, you have been wagering on an Arab
solution. that has happened on the regional and international levels to make
this wager realistic?

[Answer] Since the beginning, we have responded to the resolutions of the Riyadh
mini-summit in 1976 which provided for the formation of an Arab comittee to
follow up the ilplenentation of the su-it's reconendations and assist President
President Ilyas Sarkis in doing so. The Lebanese Front, particularly the Lebanese
Phalangist Front, performed an effective role regarding the convocation of the
Riyadh mini-summit and the foraulation of its recoundstions. hence, as a
Lebanese Front, we wagered from the beginning on what can be termed an Arab solu-
tion to the Iebanese crisis. Our wager was on both the political and security
levels: political through our response to the work of the Arab Followup Com--
mittee and security through allowing the then Arab deterrent forces to enter the
heart of our regions.

However, it is the Arabs who relinquished their role in Lebanon. Sons of then
withdrew halfway fro. the Followup Comittee and the Arab deterrent forces, while

others. that is Syria, deviated from the right track and its forces were trans-
formed from deterrent forces to occupation forces.

However, this tine, the representatives of the Arab countries which are members
in the Arab Followup Oomittee have taken it upon theaselves not to confront
Syria but to stand fast against any Syrian attewt to alienate then anew and
singlehandedly tackle the Lebanese situation. He hope that this time our wager
will be justified, because we care about our good relations with the Arab coun-

tries. Furthernore, the facilities rendered thus far to the Arab Followup Com-
nittee after more than 4 months were all rendered by m; whereas, Syria has not

rendered any facility; instead, it is blocking the implementation of all the
reconnendations aade by this connittee.

[Question] Does the lebanese forcea' decision to stop its arse cooperation with
Israel mean that the Lebanese l-‘ront has found another ally on the regional level?

25
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Every nation needs support and backing in resisting the wresting of its
independence and in achieving sovereignty. This is the lot of big and small
nations. The most bitter part of the contemporary Lebanese experience has been
the participation of quarters. which we considered to be props and supports for
our existence, in seeking to cut down to size and to contain the Lebanese
presence. However. the steadfastness of the Lebanese people over the past 7
years has prompted some Arab and foreign states to reconsider their hostile
stands toward the Lebanese issue. However, this new trend has not resulted in
effective, firm and final support for our determination to reunite our homeland
and safeguard its independence and sovereignty. Yet we are determined to provide
this new trend with all the required weight to transform it into the aspired
cooperation.

[Question] Do you believe that the strategic equations which brought the Syrian
forces to Lebanon continue to hold true? Or do you believe that the new equa-

tions impose a gradual Syrian withdrawal?

[Answer] The Syrians entered Lebanon within the framework of the Arab deterrent
forces under three equations: a Lebanese equation based on a Syrian-Christian
agreement; an Arab equation based on a Syrian-Egyptian accord; and an inter-
national equation based on a U.S.-Soviet understanding. All three equations have
fallen: the first under the lOO-day war in 1978; the second after Camp David;
and the third after the shelving of SALT II and the invasion of Afghanistan.

Moreover, the declared aims for which the Syrians entered Lebanon have not been
realized. The Syrians could neither preserve Lebanon's security and territorial
integrity--on the contrary'they committed aggression against all the Lebanese
people--nor could they protect the Palestinians from the Israeli raids. Today,
the Lebanese people do not need the Syrians to enable them to comnunicate with
the Palestinians. The Palestinians are also not in need of the Syrians to enable
them to face Israel, especially following the signing of the cease-fire in the
south through the mediation of U.S. envoy Philip Habib and with the help of Saudi
Arabia. Therefore, the new equations inside Syria, inside Lebanon and in the
Middle East necessitate Syria's withdrawal from Lebanon so that Lebanon can
regain its sovereignty and hence its full role without depriving the Arabs of
their interests.

[Question] What will be the alternative to the Syrian forces? Will it be mixed
Arab forces, international forces. forces of the legitimate authorities or Arab-
international-legitimate forces?

[Answer] The Syrian forces had not been there in the first place; why should they
have an alternative? The lebanese Army should assume responsibility for the

security problems, something which the Syrian forces prevent it from doing now
despite the demands of the Lebanese people and authorities.

when we say that the Lebanese Army can regain its role from the Syrian forces, we
are not ruling out probable assistance to this army from the local forces in
Lebanon and some contribution from an international force if need be.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Is there any conflict between the Syrian and Saudi roles in Lebanon

at least in the present stage? How hot are Syrian-Palestinian relations follow-
ing the new Lebanese developments?

[Answer] I would prefer not to distress the internal problems of the Arab forces
and states and their bilateral relations, and I would like the Arab position to
be unified. particularly at this stage in which we witness iwortant political
and military developments. However, I notice that the Saudi role in Lebanon
differs from that of Syria, and that there is a struggle in Syrian-Palestinian
relations. 1111s is due to the fact that Syria wants to prevent Saudi Arabia from
dealing with Lebanon in order to monopolize the Lebanese situation, and it does
not want the PLO to take independent diplomatic initiatives in order to monopolize
the Palestinian factor. This is the crux of the struggle which is spreading in
Lebanon at this stage.

[Question] To what extent can your recent stand toward Israel open the door for
dialogue between you and the PLO with regard to the previous agreements and to

organizing the Palestinian presence in Lebanon? Does this stand make possible
the resumption of dialogue between you and Damascus?

[Answer] The Lebanese people have long been wagering on the Palestinian cause.
Today, the Palestinians in general are asked to wager on the Lebanese cause
because Lebanon's security is beneficial to everyone including the PLO. To the
extent that the Palestinians respond to the requiremnts of security and
sovereignty in Lebanon, we will have scope for understanding with them.

As for establishing an independent dialogue between us as a Lebanese force and
Damascus, I say that Syria fears the establishment of such a dialogue. Damascus,
moreover, does not want any serious and fundamental dialogue with us because it
does not want a solution to the Lebanese problem at this stage.

[Question] You have previously stated in are than one interview that President
Ilyss Sarkis' replacement will not be a person but a new political formla. Do

you still believe in this as the undate of the regime is nearing its end?

[Answer] Of course. President Ilyas Sarkis' replace-eat will not be a person
but a new political formula because the forthcoming presidency is an important
and basic step for us on the road to settling our crisis. As long as the current
political formula continues to exist, the man who emerges if elections are held

will not be the one whom the Lebanese are waiting for to reshape their future and
destiny.

[Question] Can constitutional procedures for the election of a new president be
implemented while the Syrian presence continues to exist in its present form,
and do you agree to holding presidential elections while Arab deterrent forces
continue to be present in Lebanon?

[Answer] This was exactly what I meant in my previous reply. The Syrian presence
in its present form beware the constitutional game and practically mitigates
against holding honest elections. That is why many doubt the possibility of new
elections being held. Sousa have started to talk about extending President Sarkis'

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mandate. The Syrians are working for the election of a person who will be come

pletely loyal to them, such as Babrak Karmal in Afghanistan and Husak in Czecho-
slovakia. This is sonething we reject and which we shall oppose.

[Question] Hhat will be the fate of Sa'd Haddsd's state if security relations
between you and Israel rennin severed?

[Answer] The situation in Sa'd Haddad'a region will return to its normal state
immediately after Palestinian occupation of the south ends. Everything that Sa'd

Haddad has done has been in response to the threats facing the Christians in the
border strip.

[Question] Do you see any strategic relationship between the expected changes in
the Iranian situation and the Saudi role in Lebanon in the next few months?

[Answer] The entire East is passing through a stage of instability. Some of its
countries are suffering from ailitary crises and others fron political crises.

Any event that takes place in one of these countries is linked to the current
overall developments and the expected changes. Something will take place because

all these wars in Afghanistan, Iraq and Lebanon in addition to the disturbances in
Egypt, Syria and some Gulf countries will inevitably produce a new situation

sooner or later.

[Question] There is increased talk about clear 0.5. options in the region and
Lebanon. How can one envisage such options in light of your U.S. trip?

[Answer] There is no doubt that the options of the new 0.3. adainistration will
be partially or completely opposite to many options of the former administration.
If the Vietnam war has caused a psychological shock in the Uhited States, the
war in Lebanon must produce a political shock. In other words, the current U.S.
administration regrets that Iebanon has reached this tragic situation, and offi-
cials there show determination to seek a solution to the lebanese crisis or at
least a long truce until the other Middle East issues are solved. 0.8. officials
believe that the nonsolution of the Iebaneae crisis complicates the solution of
the Middle East crisis while for-er 0.8. officials used to believe that the con-
plication of the Lebanese crisis would facilitate the solution of the region's

crisis.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN ALPARABI

CSO: 4&04/45

28
FORGDFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
INDR OFIWCJAL lEHEtNVLY

SUDAN

FINANCIAL SITUATION ANALYZED; DEFICIT GROHS HORSE
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2378

[Text] The balance of payments for the 1979-1980 fiscal year ending on 30 June

shows a deficit of $68 million, while that of the preceding year had a surplus
of $6 million.

The trade balance thus grew substantially worse, with a deficit of $765.5 million,
compared with $611 million for the 1978-1979 fiscal year. This worsening in the
situation mainly results from the increased cost of oil imports ($254 million,
compared with $178 million for the previous year), representing 20 percent of all
imports and 40 percent of all sugar exports and imports, which leaped to

$123 million, compared with only $28 million during the previous fiscal year.

This tendency toward a worsening trade deficit persisted and grew slightly worse

in 1980-1981, despite a rather strong improvement in agricultural production
(see MARCHES TROPICAUX of 11 September, p 2327).

The current balance of payments shows a continuous increase in foreign aid and

in deposits of Sudanese working abroad, along with a reduction in interests to pay
for service on the debt as a result of agreements to spread out both the private
and public debt, agreements obtained at the Club de Paris.

It is essentially the direct aid to the balance of payments made by the Arab na-

tions (Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Qatar) for some $200 million for the
1979-1980 fiscal year, and by the European Economic Community and the International

Monetary Fund, which made it possible to bring the overall deficit down to $48
$68 million.

Sudan's foreign debt at the end of 1980 amounted to $3,003,000.000, half
31.511.000.000) due to foreign governments, mainly Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates and Kuwait. International financial organizations (World Bank, the
special OPEC Fund, the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development) are owed
$587 million. Debts owed to banks and private financial institutions amount to

$547 million and finally, $358 million are due to suppliers as unsecured private
credits. .

In November 1979, negotiations engaged in by Sudan with its public and private
creditors within the framework of the Club de Paris enabled it to obtain advanta-
geous conditions for its guaranteed public debts (some $450 million). In addition,

29
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the five commercial banks (Arab African Bank, Connercial Bank, Citibank. Deutsche-
bank and UBAF [expansion unknownl) accepted a modification of terms involving some
$1050 million, on the following conditions: repayment in 7 years with a 3-year
deferment and an interest rate 1.75 percent over the Libor.

Service on the debt during the 1979-1980 fiscal year totaled $90 million, including
$70.5 million in interests. In 1980, service on the debt represented 21.3 percent
of all Sudanese exports of goods and services.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

11,661;
CSO: 4519/6

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR 0Fl1C1AI.USI:(MNLY

SUDAN

PROSPECTS OF SUGAR INDUSTRY DISCUSSEP
Paris HARCHES TROPICADX ET HEDITERRANBENS in PrenCh No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2378

[Text] In order to halt the foreign exchange drain caused by sugar imports

($123 million in 1980), the Sudanese Government wants to modernize the sugar in-
dustry to make it an exporter and enable it to generate foreign exchange receipts
for the country.

The Islamic Development Bank in Jeddah is studying the possibility of participating
in the financing of the project to rehabilitate sugar refineries. For its part,
the German Government has already granted a sum of 33.3 million Deutsche marks

for the rehabilitation of the New Halfa and Junayd plants.

The following table gives the characteristics of the major sugar complexes:

Location, Area in Daily Annual Sugar Annual Total Refin.
Year of Startup Cane Crushing Refining Production Sugar Con- Capacity
(Acres). Capacity Capacity 1979-1980 sump. Sudan 'Available

(Tons) {Tone} Stone) {Tons} {Tons}

Junayd (al-Jazirah

Province)

1962-1963 37,000 6,000 60,000 29,600
New Halfa (Kassala

Province)

1965-1966 42,000 5,000 75,000 63,053
Sannar (Blue Nile

Province)

1976-1977 30,000 6,500 110,000 30,523
As Silaia (Hhite Nile

Province)

1980-1981 30.000 6.500 110,000 7,560
Halut (Upper Nile

Province)

1982-1983) 40,000 6,500 110,000

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIMVLY

Semi-Public Sector

Kinanah (White Nile

Province)
1980-1981 80,000 17,000 330,000 20,000
Totals 795,000 130,736 350,000 465,000

According to the different studies, mainly by the Dutch company EVA-International,
the investments needed to rehabilitate the different units would be around (in
millions of U.S. S): Junayd, $9.5 million; New llelfs, $10 million; Sannar,

$38 million; and As Silaia, $38 millién.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

11,466
050: 6519/6

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

BRIEFS

INYORMA‘IION MINISTER REPORTED“ msrrmlzm-Alrmm AL-‘ARABI has learned from
reliable sources that Syrian Information Minister Ahmad Iskandar Almd is in a
London hospital suffering from an acute illness. The Syrian minister was trans-
ferred from Damascus to London last week on board a special plane under strict
security measures, after falling victim to an edolism in his brain at his office.
The Syrian minister is now unable to move or speak. Hr Ahmad underwent critical
surgery in London. Hell—informed sources say that he is still unable to move or
speak despite the surgery and that he is in the intensive care unit. Doctors
believe that it will be 5 to 7 weeks before they will be able to decide on the
next step of his treatment. [Text] [31312125 Paris Ala-mm Alr'ARABI in Arabic

28 Aug 81 p 18] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Ala-HAM Alp-MI]

CSO: 4404/45 END

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY