FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10113

12 November 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 42/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGFI LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 42/81)

Comeurs

IRAN

Begin Allegedly Visited Tehran in 1978 To ﬂeet auh
(THE Jmsm m, 12 at 81) .0...‘..Q...O..0.0.0.9....IO.

Diplomats Kidnapped in Undercover Arms Purchase Deal
(THE SW! Tm, 18 wt 81) oooeooooco0.0000000000000000...

LEBANG!

Raymond Iddih Discusses Political Situation
(Raymond Iddih Interview; Ala-WAT“ AL-‘ARABI, 21-27 Aug 81)..

Briefs
' Alt-NADA?) Director Kidnapped

LIBYA

Journalist Describes Recent Changes
(Hohmd Somali; Jm mom, 3083p 81) OOOOOOOOQCOOOOOC.

Briefs
Factories Opened
Plastics Contracts
Oil for Goods Deal
Accord ﬁlth Czechoslovakia
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BEGIN ALLEGEDLY VISITS!) YEW IN 1978 TO MEET SHAH

Jerusalem IRE JEWSALEH POST is) Engl 13h. SUCCOT 3!!an

[In an excerpt from his new hook, "the Iranian Triangle.
the Israeli Prime Minister's

in February, 1978]
{Emery}?

THE FIRST HALF of ms was
markad hy increased tension in
lsraeHran relations. The
cessation of the negotiations
between Israel and Egypt in
Jerusalem. on January l6. gave a
renewed push to Arahoppositlen to
the Egyptian peace initiative. and
raised fears in Washington and
Teheran for the safety of Sadat's
MM -

The mounting hoetillty to Sadat’s
regime found upresaion ‘
rorist takeover of an Egyptian dr-
liner in Cyprus. In an attempt to
free the t rushed a
commando unit to the aca air-
port. but the utenpt failed and IS
Egyptian soldiers were killed.
Cyprus cut off its relations with
Egypt in protest against the viola-
tion of its ”weighty. A: a mull
of this fiuco. the hostility already
felt towards Sadat throughout the
Arab world we tinetured with con-
tempt.

Making an effort to break the
stalemate in the peace tallts. Presi-
dent Jimmy Carter invited the

ptian president and Premier
enachent Begin to Washington on
separate visits. Sadat vent to the
US. on February 4. while Begin
was due there on Mm“. l5.

On his return from Washington.
Sadat flew to Bucharert on
February .l :c 1pm: to Runeam'an
President Nieo'te Ceaucescu on his
talk . with Carter. A. the 2:15.: ...-:r.
he dist-etched his vice :r‘tiden'
Henri l«lunart'.. :o Tel-rm. tel:

trip to Tehran for aecret

theshdiahoutthedifhculdesitthe
negotiations with Israel.
Meanwhile. Carter met with
F ‘ M'nister Moshe Dayan in
mid. eh .tvhileSadathelddis-
cations vi the head of the op-
position. Labour Party chaiman
Shinton Pom. in .

Biff THESE meetings failed to
move the peace talks ' forward.
Dayan's talks with Carter failed to
achieve their aim. «Idle Peres nude
it clear to Sadat that only legin's
government was authoriaed to com
duet negotiations in Israel‘s nuns.
But Washington waa detnnnined to
keep up the motnentuat. and dis.
patched Aaaistant Secretary ofStete
Alfred ("Roy") Athenon on a shut-
tle round hetween Cairo and
Jet-tale"

‘fhts :ateasivc auivity led

few-now?“

the idea of mm a meeting
between Begin and the shah in
order for there to get acquainted
and to examine the ttaksnare in the
peace oroceu lo a broad inter-
national content

The hall is the talks occurred
10.:le with a deterio. alien in the
internal security situation in Iran.
9'“: stud. 'I) on; th ~v~ :- u" 3" Rte:
t'.'t .l '14-th ‘::.'. t ‘ ‘2' .' I11." .

the shah.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’

T120ct81p7

" Shaunl Segev describes
talks with the shah

Iran's internal problem. even if
they stemmed rotn indigenous
causes. were part of a- series of
events that occurred then in the
northwest corner 0!. the Indian
ocean. an area of considerable
strategic importance to the West.

At the beginning of ms the
dove in the Horn of Africa
uteri e focus of international at-
tention. Butinthetpringdhepro-

coup in Afghanistan occur-
nd. which the diah's
mad‘ .Even hefotetht
Noodhath in Kabul at the end at
April. the shah had warnedthe us
of the Soviet Union's deaigns it
Afghanistan. but the message fell or
deaf'eara. The nevi ruler ol
Afghanistan. Nur Mohammec

the stability of the entire Gul
region. Some weeks later. in Junt
”78.th assassinationsoftht
rulers of both parts of Yemen

which shook the entire Arabitr
Peninsula.
SOVIET AFIlVlTY at

South Yemen greatly inﬂuenced UN
shah's state of mind. and tht
behaviour of his allies inthereo'on
The shah. King Khaled of Sand
Arabia. Sadat hid the president of
Sudan. la'afar Numeiri. saw these
Soviet moves as aimed at the Gulf
and Red Sea areas. with the purpose
ofencircl‘m Saudi Arabia. lraoand
the Nile V . Thus in response to
the stepped-up Soviet-Cuban aid to
Ethiopia. thee four nations in-
creased their aid to Somalia. and
tool: tneasures designed to preserve
the independence of North Yemen.

irsn toolt peralleI steps by con.
tinuing its aid to Oman. Since I973
the shah had extended naval. air
and ground support to Sultan
Qaboos to help him put down the
rebellion which was backed by
South Yemen. but mainly by the
Soviets. Moscow. though. followed
a modems course towards lran.
The first press report on lran's in-
ternal instability appeared in Pravda
in April I978. but it was written in
an objective tone. Only in
November 1973 when the Soviets
suspected American llllamio' to
save the shah. did Leonid Brezhnev
warn Carter. “that any foreign in-
tervention in iran. a country
bordering on the Soviet Union. will
be regarded as intended to harm the
Soviet national interest."

The events in the Horn of Africa

found Israel and iran on different '
sides. While lran. Sudan. Egypt and -

the Saudis supported Somalia .

a-nn Ethan. hast atone-tenths
Marxist regime of Col. Matgistu
i-iails Mariam. Israel was thus
pan of an unusual Toint front with
the Soviet Union. Orbs. Libya end
the Republic of South Yemen. Iran
had raised this matter in a number
of discussions with lsraeli dl’tcials.
But Israel had tried to allay the
thah's concern by arguing that the
West had an interest in Israel Iteep~
ing an eye on Soviet activities in the
area.

iSRAEL‘S POLITICAL. economic
and military ties with Ethiopia dated
from the days of ilai‘le Selassie.
lsraeii experts helped to train the
various forces in his army. and other
advisers helped the my suppress
Moslent underground groups in
Eritrea. After Haile Selassie's
overthrow. Col. Mengistu kept up
the Israeli connection. perhaps

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because he wanted to lteep some
room for maneuver in his relptions
with the Soviets and Cuba. or
perhaps because the Ethiopian ﬂgh
command valued the expertise
provided by the lsraeli officers But
"' “meme 2."?
made a p t e
tongue.“ 'm which he drained to
cooperation with Ethiopia in
various wheres. This put Msnp‘stu
‘ hwesd siuatioa. and under
pressine from the Soviets and Litya
he cut oil all ties whh least.

The ireniane supported Somalia.
but never its ubitlone to web the
Ogaden Desert from Ethiopia.
When the Sornali leader. President
Ziad Barre. visited Tehetan early in
I978. the shah told him in no uncero,
tain terms that he must resolvewhs:
d' utewithEthsopia' 'inapea u
«:2»... Iran provided Somalia with
medical supplies and small m
but explicitly opposed its expansion
at Ethiopia's expense. in March
I978. Ethiopia defeated Somalia in
the Ogden. but‘iighting continued
in Eritrea. ~ -

In the midst of these international
cross-currents. Begin arrived for his
first and only visit to Teheran. It
wu actually supposed to have taken
place several weeks earlier. but
because of the revelation of
Dayan's visit there in December 26.
I977. the lraniens postponed
Begin's visit. and set the condition
that it would take place only if the
Israelis undertook to keep it a
secret

As on several oceuions 'm the
rut. there was no real reason for
tract to keep the matter under
wraps. But out of comideration for
the internal situation in Iran and the
slsah‘s own dehcate position. Israel
accepted the condition and
obscured it scrupulously.— For that
reason. only three ministers -
D uty Premier Yigael Yedin.

enee Misuster Eaer Weiss-n.
and Dayan~wereatonthesecret.
The rest otthecabinetwestold only
when Begin had resumed.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i
l

i
I

111E PRIME nthi‘nter left lsrael for
Teheran in a Boeing 707 on
Wednesday February 22. l91l. and
returned home Friday mornina He
was accompanied by hi chief of
huremt. Yehiel Kadmai; and his
military secretary. Tat-Aluf
Ephrasn Pores. Alter the plane
came to a stop on a away
from ted“: 'tlerminal. Begin was
gree y tan's 'er.
whowmahoht “PW PW
Gen. Na'amtolla

cover of darkness. and watched
over by a heavy guard of Israeli and
trains security men. the convoy
nude its way to the government's
ofﬁcial guest residence in one ofthe
mhern suburbs of the city.

-The following morning before his
meeting with the shah. Begin toolt
final counsel with his advisers
before he went to see him. in con-
trast to Y'aahalr Rabin. who was
ah'vays tense before her encounters
with the shah. Beg‘m was missed
and inhighspititautditwasciear
that he had mend carefully for
the meeting. Begin was‘of course
gas“ of Pﬁﬂmm troubles.

no es impending
dinner.

At the appointed hour Gen:
Naeiri appeared at the guest
rem'denee to aeconmasy Begin on
hi vh'n to the shah‘s palace. After
more than three hours Begin
named with a smile of satisfaction
on hh face. “it was an excellent dis-
euasion.” he exclaimed.

Several hots-s later. on the plane.
I re talked about his

o

stro '
leginwasilwressedbyhisbroad

3
a?
g:
5
mgr or m wen-3i"
«mummy Middle '

Salt peace pm. The thah
lavished mite-on Sadat. aoo dwelt
on hiaetatu aa a leaoet in the Arab
Votld: . He believed in Egypt'a
sheen date for paaee. no need
qun to be ﬂexible torn. Sadat
and not to let thh chance to: peace
it‘p throat hi ftapen.

Befn ehaeettthe ehah’a concern
ahoat Mannheim in the Millie
But. He mono hit
timing Wotid Wat II. hia Main.
in Soviet priaoneamand how he
ted an Wan mitten-goon
tn the statute to: Independence.

Concerning the peace peoeeaa.
Begin wodtteed documenta to top.
poet his eminent that latael's
ptopoaala vete moot pm. He
expreated hie aatooiahniant at the
my in which the lmadent peace
negotiationa had been halted.
desetihed the virtue: of hi:
ptouatntne lot Palestinian
autonomy. at! met! the shah
that even now latael mid ho will.
in: to new the take with ﬁn!
without peioe conditions. Even
uioogh Begin had not requesteotbe
m to act a an intetnted'uy. it
van den to hoth leaom that the

Who'ikmmuk_

mm‘ow a" pan».

eoopot-Iin between .
mom-eatipothiedio
plum I the We a the
paaeetah; not. inninmview
the Wuhan-Pawnee“
7. Imuu Maideespite
them-rehamnoteaaonto
Iopoiltliptneatato luael. “lfllte'
3:.saplnn't’ohaltheﬂovof
t stout eatttopm
plieatotheletaeli my." hex
Beth waa the last Iraai Ieadet
to meat with the then. Internal
develwoentaialmhthe coming
ntontha did not permit {nutter
hilatanl. ooataets at the highest
Mandalloftholtah'a enemies
were foeaaedoaaavim hiethtone.
mathnoaiaternuonal drain.

%

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Shane]. Segev.
Fran 'The Iranian Triangle: The Secret Contacts
Between Israel, Iran and the 0.8.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DIPLOMATS KIDNAPPH) IN UNDERCOVER ARNS PURGIASE DEAL
P11180936 London THE SUNDAY TIMES in English 18 Oct 81 p 6

[Unattributed report in the "Insight" feature: "The $60m Arms Deal That
Ended in a Kidnap"]

[Text] Three Iranian diplomats, early last week, walked into flat 37 on the
thirteenth floor of the expensive Hater Gardens Flats, close to London's
Marble Arch. They expected to put the finishing touches to a deal under
which they would pay almost $60 million for desperately needed anti-tank
missiles. Instead they found themselves kidnapped.

It was the bizarre culmination of a deal that stretched from America through
Europe to Iran and in which the government of Ayatollah lthomeyni was dealing
with a former member of the SAVAK, the late shah's secret police.

An American embargo on arms for Iran has forced the Teheran government to buy
its arms wherever it can and not ask too many questions. Earlier this year
arms-dealing circles in London heard that the Iranians wanted to buy a large
quantity of wire-guided anti-tank missiles. These missiles, which can be
adapted for use on helicopter gunships, are made by the American Hughes
Corporation. The number mentioned was l0,000--and the cost almost $60 million.

The Iranians were soon told that there was a way to obtain the missiles they
wanted. As the Iranians understood it, the missiles would come from NATO
stock in Portugal. A large and reputable Spanish arms dealer was said to be
supplying th- and they would be shipped from Portugal to Antwerp, for loading
on to an Iranian ship.

Arms dealers recognise this supply route as a convenient way for Spanish and
Portuguese dealers to cover their tracks: neither Spain nor Portugal will
supply arms direct to Iran at the moment. But to satisfy the Spaniards, "end
user certificates," would have to be produced to show which government was

to be the ultimate customer for the arms. The Iranians expected their supplier
to buy these certificates from one of several countries that are none too fussy
about issuing fake ones for cash.

By the beginning of last week the Iranians believed that the missiles were
waiting from then in Antwerp, ready for loading. It is believed that the
original plan was to use a ship called the Iran Shahadat, but this ran aground

a

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at Dunkirk. The only Iranian ship in Antwerp at the moment is the Nezhat, which
was diverted from a journey between Hamburg and Bremen to dock in Antwerp on
Tuesday of last week. Its next destination is Bandar 'Abbas in the Gulf,

but the Antwerp port authorities say that it has been delayed because of

engine trouble. Two people alleged to be concerned with the deal stayed in
Antwerp last week.

Although the Iranians are not too scrupulous about whom they buy from, they have
become much less free about how they pay. In the chaos of post-revolutionary

Iran, several deals have left the government short of money and even shorter
of the goods they were buying.

And this was not the first time that the Khomayni government had dealt with
former employees of the shah: about 18 months ago a $6 million deal to buy
Irish meat collapsed in mysterious circumstances.

As a result of such experiences the Iranians decided to pay for this shipment
of arms by letters of credit. A leading clearing bank in London was to
release payment when the arms were safely on board. 30 when the three Iranian
negotiators at the London and of the deal walked into the flat in the water
gardens, they were not carrying suitcases full of money.

In the early hours of Friday morning armed police stormed the flat to free
the three Iranians, who by then were being held hostage. A number of people,
including Britons and Iranian nationals, were taken for questioning at
Paddington Green police station.

The British police say that three other members of the negotiating team are
being held hostage in Belgium, but last night the Antwerp police said they knew
nothing of any kidnapping in their city.

The police team who carried out the London raid was led by detective superintendent
John Pole, of the anti-terrorist squad. It is believed that the police only
learned of the whole affair early on Thursday evening. The anti-terrorist

squad was supported by men from the Scotland Yard's Dll firearms squad and armed

special patrol group officers, who took up positions in around the flats.
However, no shots were fired.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspaper Limited, 1981

C50: 6600/79

5
roe OFFICIAL use omv
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

LEBANON

RAYMOND IDDIH DISCUSSES POLITICAL SITUATION
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 236, 21-27 Aug Bl pp 22-27

[Interview with Raymond lddih by Habil Haghrabi: "Raymond Iddih Castigates,
Makes Suggestions. Shows His Hand; Soviet Experts Are in Lebanon"]

[Text] Ilyas Sarkis in Hashington? This is ludicrous.
The Syrian army in Lebanon behaves like an enemy in an
occupied country.

If I were to stay in Lebanon. nothing would be easier
than having me kidnapped.

Hafiz al-Asad wants to keep Lebanon embroiled in war
and is therefore opposing the deployment of UN forces.
I am not thinking now about the presidential elec—
tions, but I am thinking about liberating the country.

Brig Gen Raymond Iddih has been making predictions for years: they want
to "Cyprusize" Lebanon; they are partitioning it; they want to settle the
Palestinians; they want to give the south Litani area to Israel and
al-Biqa'. 'Akkar and Tripoli to Syriao-instead of the Golan; they want to
establish a Christian ghetto on the remaining area of land.

The brigadier general continued to talk about "the conspiracy" from Beirut
and from Paris as well. The notion of "conspiracy" and conspirators became
worn out. but he did not weary of them. He accuses: he caatigates; and he
casts doubts. He is shot at more than once. People bargain over the truth
with him. They urge him to keep quiet, but he continues to hold on to his
convictions.

The campaign for the presidential elections in Lebanon is approaching, and
there is some discussion about the possibility of amending the constitution
so the elections can be held sooner. Raymond Iddih is a permanent candidate
for coming to the rescue because he is the only one among the Christian lea-
ders who did not burn the bridges of understanding with the other Lebanese
party. He continues to denounce Israel. the Syrian regime and the Haronite
leaders. and he has also remained on good terms with all the Lebanese.

He has also stayed outside the tempestuous bloody game.

6
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The brigadier general has not talked with an Arab newspaper for 6 months.
AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI went to him on the Cote d'Azur where he was on a brief
vacation. The magazine re-evaluated with him the stages of the Lebanese
war through the recent new factors in Lebanon. It may be that the most
notable of these new factors since the Syrian—Soviet treaty is the new ".5.
action to make preparations so that the presidential campaign can take
place in a suitable atmosphere. This action consists of the mediation of
Philip Habib and an invitation to a few "key" Lebanese figures to come to
Hashington. There are those who are saying--but the Lebanese president is
denying this--that President Ilyas Sarkis in particular would be invited to
Washington.

The Soviet part of the Kissinger conspiracy; the Syrian-Soviet presence

in Lebanon; Israel's ambitions: alternative U.S. aspirations; the features
of Lebanon‘s and Palestine's future. These topics are the most salient
topics of this Interview. The old and new Raymond Iddih remains the obsti-
nate. surly Raymond lddih, searching for the truth. -

At present the brigadier general is on a brief vacation in Juan les Pins in
the south of France. a few kilometers from Cannes. The hotel where he is
staying overlooks the sea; Raymond Iddih spends some of his time every day
on the beach which resembles the beach of the St George Motel in Beirut. in
the old days.

The leader of the National Bloc party was wearing a casual outfit: a yellow
shirt and light summer trousers. The effects of the Mediterranean sun were
clearly evident on his face. They were as clear as his answers to the
various questions that were dealt with in this comprehensive interview.

[Question] You have stopped granting interviews to the press for a rather
lengthy period of time. The time.has come for a new evaluation of the
developments and repercussions of the Lebanese crisis.

The questions began, and the brigadier general's replies were effusive in
the revealing meeting that lasted 6 full hours during which he focused

on the Syrian role in Lebanon. He called upon President hafiz al-Asad to
withdraw his troops. and he called upon the Lebanese president to ask the
United Nations for UN forces to replace the Syrian troops. This is the
text of the interview.

[Question] Alter 6 years of war. has there been in your view a new signifi-
cant lactor in the Lebanese crisis that can alter the equations which have
been in existence so far? in other words. what is the most important new
development in the course of this crisis?

iAnswer] Yes. a new factor has been introduced into the area. That factor
is the Syrian-Soviet treaty which President Hafiz al-Asad signed in Moscow
on 8 October 1980. According to this treaty Moscow is to provide Syria with
military aid if that becomes necessary. As a result of that. the number
of Soviet military experts in Syria has increased. We have recently seen
the joint maneuvers between the Syrian navy and the Soviet navy in Latakia.

7
FTMRCHWWCLALIISEimVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore. there are reports which affirm that today a number of Soviet
experts can be found with the Syrian army in Lebanon. especially near the
SAM missiles. This new situation has had numerous consequences. the most
important of which is the faCt that after today it is no longer possible
for an agreement to take place in this area without the approval of the

Soviet Union.

It seems that President Reagan is convinced now that Camp David will not
lead to the required comprehensive solution for the Palestinian question
and that it will not put an end to the problems of the Middle East.

1 am certain that Soviet presence in Syria can be terminated in two ways
only: via war by means of Israel with the help of the United States, and
this is unlikely today; or diplomatic means. that is, through some agree-
ment or through reviving the Geneva Conference or a second Yalta that would
include several matters. including oil questions, since the oil is one of
the principal objectives of Soviet presence in the area.

Everyone now knows that the Soviets are gaining new footholds and new
grounds without fighting. If they fight. they do so through an inter-
mediary. that is, through other parties. The Soviets are now in
Afghanistan. in Ethiopia. in South Yemen. in Syria and in a special way in
Libya. They may be in Chad. not to mention other countries. Thus the area
is now surrounded by the Soviet Union. Among the consequences of that is
that nothing can take place. even with regard to Lebanon, without the
Soviet Union. All this is the result of Israel's obstinacy and its refusal,
with the consent of the Kissinger-Carter U.S. administration, to establish
a Palestinian homeland in Palestine.

In short, this is the new factor that has been introduced into the develop-
ments of the Lebanese crisis: it is the Soviet presence near the UN forces
in the Golan, perhaps in the Litanl area in south Lebanon and in the Biqa'
Valley with the Soviet missiles. This has consequences and repercussions.

[Question] You've talked many times in the past about a Kissinger con-
spiracy in Lebanon. "hat connection do you find today between this con-
spiracy and the new factor that has been introduced into the crisis, that

is. the presence of Soviet troops?

[Answer] This presence is one of the results of the ordeal which Israel
brought about in Lebanon to keep war away from its territory and, actor—
dingly. to keep the Arabs preoccupied with each other in one battleground,

which is Lebanon.

This is an old lsraeli plan that Ben Gurion had devised in 1954. It was
not carried out then because of the Suez Canal war. This plan requires

the creation oi political disturbances and unrest in the area to destabi-
lize it. Implementation of the plan began in 1976. At that time I warned
that thorn was an intention to "Cyprusize" Lebanon and to "Vietnamize" the

area I

8
MI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then came Camp David which divided the Arabs. It was followed by‘the war
between Iraq and lran in which President Hafiz al-Asad and Col al-Qadhdhafi
took sides with Tehran. The Syrian president soon felt isolated and alone
facing Israel, so he signed a defense treaty with the Soviet Union whose
role with Damascus will be similar to the role which the United States is
playing with lsrael. That is, there will be a Sixth Fleet in the
Mediterranean to support Israel militarily when that is necessary and a
Soviet fleet in Syria's territorial waters to support it militarily if
that becomes necessary. All this is due to the fact that the Palestinian
question is still without a solution because Israel is refusing the estab-
lishment of a Palestinian homeland despite the Security Council resolu-
tions, especially Resolution 242, which obligate Israel to withdraw from
all the territory it seized in the 1967 war. It is known that Israel is
refusing to implement even the March 1978 resolutions of the Security
Council which followed the Israeli attack on Lebanon. Everybody also knows
that Israel still has a military presence in some Lebanese areas adjacent
to the Israeli bogdgrs in addition to the forces of Sa'd Haddad.

Thus Kissinger‘s conspiracy, whose aim had been to partition Lebanon and
which i called "Cyprusizing Lebanon," since its aim was to settle the
Palestinians in a part of Lebanon, along with Camp David led to the "legiti-
mate" introduction of the Soviets into the area. That is, the Soviets came
to the area by means of a defense treaty with Syria. It is thus possible to
establish a connection between this new factor and the conspiracy of
Kissinger, who adopted the Israeli policy.

[Question] what in your view are the dangers of the Soviet presence in
Syria and in Lebanon?

[Answer] Soviet presence [in the area] may lead to war between Israel

and Syria. I personally think that this is unlikely because such a war
would necessarily lead to U.S.-Soviet participation and perhaps even a
Third World War. This Soviet presence cannot yield a new Yalta-type con-
ference at Lebanon's expense. [If that were to happen], Syria would get
part of Lebanon. specifically, al-Biqa', Tripoli and 'Akkar; Israel would
get south Lebanon until the Litani [River], after evicting 200,000 Shi‘ite
citizens from the area; and the Haronites would keep the present Haronite
ghetto, which includes half al-Hatn, Kasrawan and Jubayl. in expectation of
extending that area to the north, which is presently controlled by former
president Hr Sulayman Franjiyyah.

[Question] At present. are you optimistic or pessimistic with regard to
the possibilities for a solution to the Lebanese crisis?

{Answer} The question is not one of optimism or pessimism. I am a prac—
tical, realistic man. in my view there can be no solution to the Lebanese
crisis apart from [a solution to] the Palestinian question. As long as
the Palestinians remain in Lebanon, the situation will remain unchanged.

II Haiiz al-Asnd's Syria entered Lebanon for three reasons--to prevent
partition. to stop the lighting and to protect the Palestinian Resistance--
POI! OFFICIAL I'SR 0N] \‘

the Syrian regime did bring about a partitioning of Lebanon that is
favorable to it. Today, 80 percent of Lebanon's territory is controlled by
the Syrian army. The Israeli army controls 10 percent, and the Lebanese
forces control the remaining 10 percent. The fighting, however, is still
going on everywhere in Lebanon despite the presence of the Syrian army. As
far as protecting the Palestinian Resistance is concerned, we saw how the
Syrian army did that during the recent Israeli raid on Beirut.

[Question] But there are some indications that the United States is
becoming sympathetic in its handling of the Lebanese crisis. Among these
indications are invitations to Lebanese figures to visit washington and
consult [with government officials] on possible solutions.

[Answer] These invitations will not yield any results. They may, however,
give political support to those who are invited, or they may cause them to
lose the local influence they have. The war, however, is another matter.
Contrary to what some people imagine about the possibility of achieving an
understanding or an intra—Lebanese accord, this accord cannot be accom-
plished as long as the israeli army first and the Syrian army second con-
tinue to be stationed on Lebanon's territory.

[Question] What about President ilyas Sarkis's visit to washington? Will
it too not yield an outcome to speak of? He too was invited....

Brig Gen lddih interrupted me.

[Answer] I read this news in a few Lebanese newspapers, but 1 find this
visit unlikely. I also read that Ilyas Sarkis will reassure Hafiz al-Asad
that he will not deliver a speech at the United Nations lest he be accused
of trying to place Lebanon under international control.

This is truly ludicrous.

Despite my concern for the future of my country, I laughed when I read

this news item. South Lebanon has been placed under international control
with everyone's consent. 1 challenge the Lebanese government to ask-and it
can do that--the UN forces to leave Lebanon!

Not only that, but the presence of UN forces in the Golan near
nl-Qunaytirah on Syrian territory is also a form of internationalization.

What is perculiar is that the mandate of the UN forces in Syria is renewed
every 6 months without any clamor and with everyone's consent.

Hafiz al-Asad used to oppose the presence of UN forces in south Lebanon.
But when he saw that it was in the interests of his country to sign an
economic and military friendship treaty with the Soviet Union, he did so
promptly. This is a form of internationalization, as long as Soviet mili-
tary experts can be found alongside the Syrian army. I wonder, why is llyas
Surkis afraid oi putting Lebanon under international control?

10
INIRiOFFICJAI.USI:(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llyns Sarkls ls nliaid oi putting Lebanon under international control
because he is in fact afraid of Hafiz al-Asad and not of the UN forces. It
is known that internationalization this time supposedly involves increasing
the number of UN troops south of the Litani. This would bring about the
implementation of two 1978 resolutions: Resolution 425 and Resolution “26.
In other words this would get the Israeli forces out of Lebanon's territory.

The anticipated internationalization means UN troops would be sent to the
area north of the Litani. Hafiz al-Asad who is supported today by the
Soviet Union cannot possibly agree to that. Sending these forces to the
area north of the Litani means they will be stationed in the al-Shaqif
stronghold which the Israeli army has not yet been able to penetrate to
eliminate the Palestinian Resistance, [which is garrisoned there].

Naturally the Palestinian Resistance will turn down this solution and will
turn to Syria to defend its presence in that stronghold. what will Syria do

then? It will turn to the Soviet Union which will turn to its veto power in
the Security Council.

The gist of this is that every step taken in Washington wh0se aim is not a
solution to the Palestinian question will be unsuccessful. In other words,
it will not lead to a way out of the Lebanese crisis since the two ques-
tions are unfortunately connected.

[Question] It is known that you advocate the deployment of UN forces in
various parts of Lebanon. Do you still subscribe to that view?

[Answer] Yes, and I am still calling for it. But when I noticed after

the recent Lebanese complaint that the hands of the Security Council were
tied with a U.S. veto, if the discussion led to a condemnation of Israel,
and with a Soviet veto, if the discussion did not lead to the condemnation
of Israel, I decided to call for the creation of an Arab-European force
outside the Security Council so we can sidestep the veto. Naturally, this
force will not include Syrian troops because Syria has ambitions in
Lebanon, and we've seen how the Syrian army behaved recently under orders
from its command against Christians and Muslims in Zahle and Tripoli.

[Question] But do you believe this plan can be implemented?

[Answer] The European Economic Council--the 10 countries of the European
Common Market--adopted this plan. However. the events of Zahle, the Israeli
elections and Begin's recent vicrory have delayed an investigation into

the practical Iormolation of this plan.

It may be that the trip to Lebanon, Syria and Jordan which French foreign
minister, Claude Cheysson will make will prompt the Europeans [to take
action] again. But i believe that the Americans prefer to come to a direct
agreement with the Soviet Union and not to have the Europeans thrust into
the efforts to solve the crisis of the Middle East.

[Question] Reactions to the Saudi peace plan have been varied. Do you
believe that the plan inaugurates a post-Camp David stage in the area?
How do the features of this stage appear to you?

11
FORIMWWCUU.USE(MVLY
non omcut use ONLY

[Answer] I believe that any suggestion which is not approved by the libera-
tion organization will not be successful. 0n the other side of that coin,
any suggestion that Israel does not approve of and that the United States
cannot impose on Israel will not succeed either.

It seems that the Reagan administration is not as devoted to Camp David

as the Carter administration was. Next April, which is the date for the
withdrawal of the Israeli army from all of Sinai and the replacement of
the Israeli army with multi-national troops, will provide an indication
for all the possibilities of the future. If the Israeli army withdraws,
then the first step in the Camp David process will have been achieved and
the question of the Nest Bank and Gaza will remain pending [and awaiting a
solution]. I do not believe that Begin will agree to a withdrawal from
Sinai. This means that the Palestinian question has not been solved.

Mitterand Told Me

[Question] You spoke about Arab and European forces and about Europe's
role. By the way, do you believe that socialist France can play a winning
hand in the Lebanese crisis in view of President Mitterand‘s upcoming visit
to Saudi Arabia and the tour of his foreign minister in Lebanon, Syria

and Jordan?

[Answer] When I came to France a years ago I asked to meet with the sec-
retary general of the Socialist party, Hr Francois Hitterand.

When I met with him I found him to be well-informed about the question

of Lebanon and the question of Palestinian presence in Lebanon. His inter-
pretation of Resolution 2&2 was one that called for Israel's withdrawal
from all occupied territories. This has been France's position for a long
time. It has also been the Soviet Union's position.

I believe that President Hitterand, who is originally a man of juris-
prudence, views Lebanese and Palestinian questions more from the pers-
pective of what is right, of international law and of respect for Security
Council resolutions than from an economic perspective.

Personally, I want to be optimistic about Mitterand's policy in the area.
It is true that the man is friendly with the Israelis and especially with
the Labor party, but President Hitterand has proven that he thinks first
along legal lines. As I said, his thoughts are based on justice, on what is
right and on international law. He saw how he had stated that his first
[foreign] visit in the area would be to Israel, but then he changed his
position after Israel bombed the Iraqi nuclear reactor in July. His first
visit to the area then was to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

[Question] Let us go back to the Syrian role in Lebanon. 00 you expect
an end for that role soon?

[Answer] All the Lebanese people know how the Syrian army entered into

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma “FFIC'IAI. I‘SI' “NIX

Lebanon. The Syrian army came into Lebanon at the request of Islamic
figures who had met at the home of the country's mufti, the official
expounder of islamic law. in ‘Armun early in January 1976, following the
well-known events of Karantina. Those who were at that meeting asked Presi—
dent Hafiz al-Asad to help them. At first he refused and said that he had
sent the Lebanese and Palestinians weapons in quantities and varieties that
outnumbered those which were in the possession of the rightist forces. This
was mentioned in his well-known address of 20 July 1976 in the auditorium
of the University of Damascus.

it was at the insistence of the 'Armun group that al—Asad sent the
PaleStine Liberation army, which is subject to Syrian command. to Lebanon.
Al-Asad sent that army without the approval of Lebanese authorities. He
mentioned in his address how President Franjiyyah had contacted him by
telephone. expressing surprise that the Syrian army had entered Lebanon.
President al-Asad said that he told President Pranjiyyah. "This is a
serious matter. and i hope. my dear president. that all the Arabs will
understand us. As far as the Palestinians are concerned. our position is
firm. As far as the Palestinians are concerned. there is a red line which
we will absolutely not allow anyone to cross."

This means that Syrian troops entered Lebanon without the knowledge or
consent of President Sulayman Franjiyyah. At that time the minister of

the interior, Camille Sham'un objected. indicating to the press that 10,000
Syrian soldiers had entered into Lebanon. The truth was that 10,000 persons
in the Palestine Liberation army. which is subject to Syrian command. had
entered Lebanon. A statement to that effect was made later by Prime
Minister Rashid Karami who had resigned at that time and was merely dis-
posing of business. He made that statement specifically after the entry

oi the Syrian regular army into Lebanon on the lst of June 1976. [Karami
said]. "I was surprised by the entry of that army into Lebanon."

All this indicates that the Syrian army did not enter Lebanon that day
at the request of the Lebanese authorities. and I repeat that.

When the battle of al-Jabal between the Lebanese Front and the National
Movement began--and the Phalangists were then on the verge of losing the
battle--a Phalangist delegation went to Syria to ask for help. Thus the
Syrian army entered Lebanon on the 1st of June 1976 while the Christians in
particular applauded. for they believed that hafiz al-Asad would do away
with the Palestinians and the Muslims and would ally himself with the

Phalangists.

These calculations were not altogether inaccurate. The Syrian army after-
wards fired its artillery on West Beirut. Kamal Junblatt had destroyed

a Syrian tanks in Ru'aysat SEVflr and the people of Sidon had destroyed
17 Syrian tanks in the city of Sidon itself. But 2 years later the tables
were turned when Hafiz al-Asad destroyed al-Ashrafiyah. then Zahle. Today
the battles between Syrians on the one hand and Lebanese Muslims on the
other have been resumed in the city of Tripoli.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Brig Gen Raymond Iddih paused for a while. He reviewed his numerous notes.
then he leaned back. recalling and correcting other events.

[Answer] 0n 8 July 1976 the National Alliance Front was established at my
house. it included all former prime ministers, including Rashid Karami, but
excluding one former prime minister. and Muslim and Christian members of
parliament. This front had two principal objectives: to prevent partition
and to try to get the Syrian army to depart from all Lebanese territory.

According to the information I have today, the majority of the Lebanese
people. Muslims and Christians, are opposed to the Syrian presence in
Lebanon after they saw how the Syrian army handled them physically and
how it handled their funds and their possessions. This army has no respect
for the Lebanese citizen. and it behaves as though it were the army of an
enemy in an occupied country. Therefore, the Syrian army and Hafiz
al-Asad's Syria are in Lebanon against the wishes of the vast majority of
Lebanese citizens.

One gets this feeling in the circles of the Palestinian Resistance where
Palestinians have suffered considerably from the attitudes of the Syrian
government not only in Syria, where this Resistance cannot budge, but also
in Lebanon.

This aversion increased when the Palestinian Resiscance saw how the Syrian
army. the Syrian air force and the Syrian missiles remained motionless

or, like ostriches. hid their heads in the sand in view of Israel's raids
on Beirut, and specifically on the al-Fakahani section. Israel's raids were
carried out under the pretext that there were pockets for the Resistance in
that section of the city. Israel's raids spared neither children nor women.

The Palestinian people most certainly cannot be grateful to the Syrian
army which entered Lebanon originally to protect them. You ask me, “Will
the Syrian role in Lebanon end, and if so when?" And 1 reply, "The future
of the Syrian troops today depends on a decision from the two superpowers
or from one of them."

[Question] Brigadier General. some people accuse you of criticizing others
and accusing them without coming forward with a plan or a view of a com-
prehensive solution to the Lebanese crisis. [What do you think of that]?

The hrigadier general is surprised by this question and this charge. He
asks me. "Now can that be? My position has been clear since 1966."

Helu Does not Know Uhere al-Hazzani Is

[Answer] l've had one plan, and it has not changed. And here we must go
back quickly [to the past]. when President Charles Helu decided to divert
the tributaries of the Jordan River--and among these tributaries is the
source of al-Hazzani so as to implement a decision made by President Jamal
‘Abd—ulnNasir, i told Helu who didn't know the location of the al-Hazzani
and had nor visited the south. "This river originates from the al-Hasbani

_ 1h
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (MIA

Valley. 2.5 kilometers from the Israeli border. Israel thinks it has rights
to these waters which flow into al-Hawlah. If you want to implement
'Abd-al-Nasir's decision, I suggest that you ask U-Thant. the secretary
general of the United Nations to send UN troops to Lebanon to protect the
diversion operations. It he agrees to send the UN troops, and this is
unlikely. we will have UN protection. If he refuses, I would advise you not
to carry out the plan because Israel will consider it an aggressive
action." Charles Nelu turned down my suggestion. Then I proposed to him
again that he try to build a dam on the al-Hasbani River, and I told him.
“There is a plan in this regard prepared by Ibrahim 'Abd-al-‘Aal. Don't
call it the diversion of the al-Hasbani River, but rather a utilization of
its waters. The al-Hasbani area needs irrigation water and drainage, and
the al-Hasbani River originates 20 kilometers inside Lebanon's territory.
Israel has no rights to these waters which are 100 percent Lebanese."

And Charles Helu replied. "An agreement has been reached to divert the
al-Hazzani: the Syrian army will protect the diversion operations and the
Lebanese contractor who was awarded the project contract. In addition.
the Arab League has provided all the necessary equipment.“ On 25 September
l965 digging operations began in the presence of Syrian tanks under Comman-
der Hajid Arsalan. who was the minister of defense at that time and who was
then at his farm, al-Kharwa'ah . Today, the name of that farm is
al-Majidiyyah .

At noon. one Israeli airplane raided the area. It destroyed the Syrian
tanks and the tractors of the Arab League; and the contractor fled.

This was the first time I had called for UN troops.

The second time I called for UN troops was when I was minister during the
term of President Charles Helu and I was serving in a four-member emergency
cabinet that was led by 'Abdallah al-Yafi. This was specifically after
Beirut Airpcrt was bombed. I proposed then that we ask for UN troops
thrOugh the complaint that Lebanon submitted to the Security Council. But
Charles Helu did not approve because 'Abdallah al-Yafi was opposed [to that
idea]. Muslims then were opposed to the UN troops. This happened before the
Cairo Agreement was signed on 3 November 1969. Had Charles Helu been able
to persuade al—Yafi and the Muslims. south Lebanon would not have found
itself where it is today; UN troops would have preserved the truce agree-
ment between Lebanon and Israel; and the Israeli army would not have had
the audacity to attack south Lebanon and all of Lebanon after that. And
this is not all.

I opposed the signing of the Cairo Agreement after the Lebanese government
and the parliament approved it without knowing what was in it. My party
was the only party that opposed this agreement in form and substance.

we opposed it in form because the government and parliament voted on it
before they knew what was in it. This is unprecedented in the history of
parliaments.

15
con omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we opposed its substance because the agreement invalidates the truce agree-
ment and gives lsrael an excuse to attack and occupy the south and evict
its population. especially the Shi'ite population. from the area. And this
is what happened in March 1978.

The brigadier general paused for a few moments and referred again to his
notes before going on to say, "The third time I asked for UN troops was.
after the Israeli attack in March 1978. The Lebanese government did not
dare ask for UN troops because Hafiz al-Asad was not in agreement with
it. In addition. he wanted to keep Lebanon embroiled in war, and the UN
troops would prevent that."

Scandal in the South

[Answer] The only service that President Carter rendered to Lebanon was
that of sending UN troops. This was done with the consent of Britain
without resorting to the Soviet veto as has been customary. However. these
forces were unfortunately not able to carry out resolutions #25 and 626
which were adopted in 1978.

There is another thing too. In the Litani area between Day? Mines and

the village of Balat there is an area about 9 kilometers long where no UN
troops are stationed. The Israeli army can enter Lebanon through this area
without confronting these forces. This is of course scandalous.

Today, I am still calling for UN troops in al‘ Lebanon. To avoid the veto
I suggested Arab and European forces or multi-Lational troops. among which
would be troops of Arab countries that have no ambitions in Lebanon.

[Question] Other than putting Lebanon under international control, what
other suggestions do you have to bring an end to the Lebanese war?

[Answer] First. the Israeli army is to withdraw to implement Security
Council resolutions.

Second, Syrian troops are to be withdrawn and replaced by UN troops or by
Arab and European troops.

Third. the Lebanese army is to be given the power to carry out its duties
toward the Lebanese lawful government on all the territory of Lebanon.

Fourth. with regard to the Palestinians. they did agree in the past on

the Tunis Resolutions and they agreed to stop launching their operations
against Israel from Lebanese territory. At any rate. these operations are
fewer now. and I am hoping that other Arab countries will agree to adopt an
agreement similar to the Cairo agreement so I can give my consent to the
resumption of the Palestinian struggle from Lebanon and elsewhere.

[Question] The brigadier general stays in constant contact with Lebanese
political figures. Have you thought of establishing a broad front of
moderate leaders. for example, to include Sa'ib Salan. Rashid Karami and
other»?

16
IIJRiOFIWCJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I do not believe in this kind of fronts because I am basically
not convinced by present plans for [establishing] accord. I repeat, the
conspiracy is still going on.

[Question] What are the first thoughts that come to your mind when we
say to you the phrase. "Lebanon's Muslims?" In other words, what do you
tell Lebanon's Muslims now after all that happened? Do you have something
to say to Muslims on this occasion?

[Answer] Unlike yesterday. there is today more than ever before a tacit,
undeclared agreement between Muslims and Christians to reject the presence
of the Israeli army and the Syrian army, now that Lebanon has become the
land where the dispute between the United States and the Soviet Union is
taking place. Lebanon is a strategic post, the gateway to the Orient and an
area of contention between the two superpowers. Discussions about accord,
the frequent meetings that take place and proposing "local" solutions--all
this is done "to pass the time."

The evidence for this lies in the fact that Lebanon's prime minister went
to Damascus and negotiated with Hafiz al-Asad about the Lebanese problem
alter issuing orders that the passes between East Beirut and West Beirut be
cleared. When he returned from Damascus. the shooting resumed.

I would tell Muslims, "Accept the only solution now: internationalization.
This is because Arabization means the Syrian army stays.

[Question] And what would you tell Christians?

[Answer] There are two groups of Christians. One group supports the libera-
tion of Lebanon from Israel but agrees to the presence of the Syrian

forces. and the second group supports the liberation of Lebanon from the
Syrian army but agrees to the presence of Israelis on Lebanese territory.
This second group cooperates with the Israelis. I would tell them
sovereignty is indivisible. I would tell them liberate Lebanon from the
Israeli army and from the Syrian army as well.

The only way to achieve that. and I say this for the tenth time now, is
to ask for UN forces for all of Lebanon so that the lawful government can
build a neutral Lebanese army which would have one commander who would
answer to the minister of defense. The minister of defense in turn would
answer to the Chamber of Deputies.

[Question] What would you say to President Ilyas Sarkis?

[Answer] I would ask him to go to the United Nations. If he arrives in
New York in November. the General Assembly will be in session. and this
will give him the opportunity to explain the Lebanese question. to defend
it and to ask for UN troops.

But President Sarkis can only act in accordance with what President Hafiz
al-Asad wants.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Did he not become the president because of Hafiz al-Asad? Did he not take
the constitutional oath in Shtaurah surrounded by Syrian troops and not in
the capital?

[Question] Uhat would you say to President Hafiz al-Asad?
[Answer] One thing: take your army out of Lebanon.
[Question] what would you say to Mr 'Arafat?

[Answer] He has one objective: Palestine and returning to Palestine. To
achieve that objective he will agree to sacrifice everything. he will sac-
rifice Palestinian and Lebanese fighters who befriended him. He was for-
tunate in finding a hospitable nation.

'Arafat believed that the Palestinian Resistance can triumph over the
Israeli army in a few weeks and that. consequently, Palestinians would go
back to Palestine. But 33 years have gone by. and the Palestinians are
outside Palestine. But Abu 'Ammar persists in his battle, and he threatens
the Arabs if they do not help him financially and militarily. He has thus
succeeded in his mission and in creating the Palestinian question, but

he has not yet regained Palestine.

But the Lebanese people were off their guard, and it was their fault for
letting down their guard. Abu 'Ammar is insisting on the Cairo Agreement,
and the Lebanese authorities do not dare abrogate it. In return, Ilyas
Sarkis is ignoring the Lebanese question and does not want to defend it in
the United Nations.

I Will not 60 to Beirut until...
[Question] when will you go back to Beirut?

[Answer] I will not go back as long as the Syrian army is located close to
my house in the Ministry of Information. It is shameful that the Lebanese
government has not been able to replace the Syrian force, which is
stationed at that ministry, with a company of the Lebanese army or of the
police torce. It seems that the Lebanese government has no sense of
national dignity. and I cannot do what the state has to do.

Therefore, I decided to transfer my activity abroad in the interests of
liberating my country from the Israeli and Syrian armies. I can speak
freely abroad, but if I were in Lebanon, there would be nothing easier
than having me kidnapped.

[Question] we are on the verge of the presidential elections in Lebanon.
Tell us frankly, are you a candidate?

[Answer] It would be shameful for us to talk about the presidential elec-
tions now.

18
FIMR()FFIC1Al.lEﬂE(NWLV
FOI.0FFKJA1.US£IJNLY

Before the elections. the country must be liberated. If the elections take
place under the auspices of the Syrian army, they will be similar to the
eleCtion of Ilyas Sarkis.

[Question] Let me ask you again, are you a candidate?

[Answer] I am not thinking of the presidential elections. I am only thin-
king of liberating my country. The major countries. from the United States
down to the countries of Europe, are saying that accord must be established
among the Lebanese and that they are the only ones who can liberate their
country. This is no more than talk. France, for example, despite the fact
that De Gaulle was heading the [French] resistance would not have been able
to embark upon the battle of liberation in 1954 had it not been for the
landing of U.S. troops. I am not asking for troops to descend on Lebanon.
but i am asking for UN forces.

[Question] A final question. How do you explain the lsraeli attack on
the Iraqi reactor in July?

[Answer] lsracl would not have had the audacity to carry out such aggres-
sion were not the Arabs divided and had it not been convinced that the
United States will be satisfied with press reactions to this action that
contravenes all customs and laws. it is true that President Reagan sus-
pended the delivery of F-lS's and F-i6's to israel, but Israel does not
need these airplanes now. and Begin announced that he would get the air-
planes these days.

What is shameful is that 150 million Arabs have not been able to create

an Arab lobby to rival the Zionist lobby in Hashington despite the enor-
mous Arab funds and the oil resources. This is truly shameful. I am hoping
that the United Nations in its future meetings will condemn the Israeli
aggression of July and will impose penalties on Israel. Condemning such a
serious attack is the least that the international community can do.

Copyright: l98l AL—HATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C50: 5304/i57

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWDR‘OFF1C3A1.USEZ(NHLY

LEBANON

BRIEFS

AL-NAHAR DIRECTOR KlDNAPPED—-The story whose details have not been pub-
lished in Beirut has to do with kidnapping the director of the Beirut news-
paper. AL-NARAR. The director of the newspaper was kidnapped by persons
who stated they were members of Syrian intelligence. The details of the
incident are that five civilians entered the building of the newspaper,
AL-NAHAR, which is located in the western area of Beirut opposite the
Ministry of lniormation and asked to see the editor-in-chief. When they
were told that he was not there, they asked to see the director, and they
were granted their request. When the director greeted them, they asked

him to accompany them without putting up any resistance or making any move
because his life would otherwise be in danger. He obeyed their orders. They
took him downstairs in the elevator, and they left in a U.S.-made car to
take him to the area of al-Janah-al-Rawshah. 0n the way they explained to
him that their action this time was a warning not only to him but also to
all newspaper employees. They did not want the newspaper to publish any-
thing from now on about the Syrians in Lebanon that would infringe upon the
reputation and the dignity of Syria. When the director asked them what had
annoyed them and infringed upon the dignity of Syria, they said that one of
the pictures shot in the area of al—Fakahani showed a power shovel
belonging to the Syrian troops removing the rubble of the Israeli attack.
"This picture was printed on the ist page and it was meant to taunt us."
When the director oi the newspaper promised he would do what they asked,
they did not take him to their destination, but they dropped him in the
middle of the street without iorgetting to impress upon him that he had no:
been kidnapped. in the meantime the staff of the newspaper, AL-NAHAR had
contacted the presidential palace and apprised the Council of Ministers
which was in session of the incident. President Sarkis immediately sent
iniormation minister, Michel Iddih and tourism minister Marawan Hamadah to
ascertain the accuracy of the report which was soon denied by Colleague
‘Aql to obviate the consequences. [Text] [Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in
Arabic No 235. 14-20 Aug 81 p i6] [cormomz i981 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI] 8592

C50: #304/157

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. IBYA

JOURNALIST DESCRIBES RECEIT CHANGES

Paris .120!!! APRIQUE in French No 1082, 30 Sep 81 pp loo-b3
[Article by Mohamed Selhaai: "What an Changed"]

[Text] It has been decided. I an leaving for Tripoli, but without any great en-
thusiasm. It's boring in Libya. That is well known. So, is this a tendency
toward masochism or is it rather a wish to see close up where this country stands
at present? It is 2 years since I set foot in the country of the people of the
Green Book. And for a good reason. JBUNE AFRIQUE is not highly regarded there.
What can have changed in 2 years? Qadhdhafi is still there, intractable, impos-
sible to predict, given to episodes of humr. Bis "third universal theory" con-
tinues to inspire the most extravant decisions, whether they concern domestic
policy or relations with the rest of the world. Seen from the outside, Libya
resembles a spoiled adolescent who rejects his surroundings, often violaatly. In
the aircraft some memries from my last visit come back to me.

It is 1 September 1979 in Banghszi: 10th anniversary of the revolution. A fired-
up crowd was waving pictures of the Guide [Colonel Qsdhdhafi] and repeating at the
top of their voices the slogans of the Jamahiriya [socialist community]. The pave-
ment of the streets was breaking up under the weight of the tanks, the clouds
parted at the passage of mo and Mirage aircraft. There were also the men.
Especially them. Their faces streaming with sweat, their eyes haggard, they
paraded by with a Kalachnikov automatic rifle on their shoulders. My heart
tightened in the face of this spectacle of a military Libya blended with the Libya
of the Green Book.

i. ‘? sin-gust 1981 my aircraft landed. I am resign-i L.) be bored. I am going to
man again revolutionary leaders—on their facsimile-who have cone from the four
corners of the world to wake Tripoli their platform. Two years ago I had drunk in
their words until i was no longer thirsty. They spoke words ending in "isms" which
they distributed to all coaers, to every wind. I encountered the first surprise:
the airport was sparkling with cleanliness. And I thought that in Libya no onc
mm how to do anything any more but give interview! It was better than that:
:ardly a quarter of an hour after my arrival I found myself in an automobile be--
tanning to the reception service, flanked by a guide with .1 set smile. No salaams
.- "l--.sha11al:'s," that magic expression rarely fulfilled. This time they gave the
.- _-~;:.ion of being serious.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This was just an impression, which was going to leave its mark during the days
that followed, to give place to the most total kind of mystery. "Rnen will I do
this?" "when will I go there?" I tried to insist, but this did not hasten things
by one second. Decidedly, the notion of time is not Arabian. Even less is it
Libyan. That doesn't stop the buildings from proliferating in magnificent dis-
order. Some 200,000 homes built in In years! This is a record in a Third World,
where the problem of urban hausing is as sharply felt as that of food. Qadhdhafi
has promised a home free to all of his fellow citizens. "Bere we said good-bye to
the last shack on 3 Hatch 1980," says a placard.

Contrasts

Here I am again in Tripoli, capital of terrorism, if there is one. Our car just
missed a collision with a truck which, in avoiding us, knocked over a street light.
The passersby paid no attention, so accustomed are they to traffic accidents. how
many vehiclu coming and going in all directions, honking, breaking, sometimes
colliding! Libya is certainly the most motorized country in Africa.

We are on the Avenue Omar el-Hokhtar. The walls are freshly whitewashed, and the
doors of the houses are painted green. This green, symbol of the new Jamahiriya,
gives Tripoli a certain air of softness which contrasts with the tone of the slo-
gans-u-also green--painted on white banners: "We Hill Fight to the Death";
"Qadhdhafi, We Will Avenge You!" (already); "Arms in the Hands of the basses of
the People!"

Green Square on 1 September 1981, the cone-oration of the 12th anniversary of the
revolution. I find myself in a group of about 100 journalists, facing the official
stand where well-known visitors are seated: the Palestinian Yasir Arafat, the
presidents of Chad and Madagascar, the coordinator of the junta in power in Nicar-
agua. No and one-half hours of waiting before finally seeing the author of the
Green Book arrive. It is noon. A leaden sun beats down on the crown of the faith-
ful. Escorted by motorcycle police in immaculate white uniforms, mounted on snw
cycles, standing up in his large American convertible, Qadhdhafi arrives, his
hands outstretched, and he sits down an the podium. He makes a gesture, and the
military parade gets under way.

It is no: the immense exhibition of 1 September 1979. but it is still impressive.
"Rejoice, Moroccan! It's also your army," a Libyan colleague shouts to me. The
side remarks surprises me, of course, and then I realize that Libya and lbrocco
have been reconciled. I wink at him and I return my gaze to the official platform.
It doesn't have many well-known visitors. I note in particular the absences of the
Syrian president, Hafiz al-Assad, and the Algerian president. Chadli Bendjedid.

It appears that relations between Algeria and Libya have deteriorated, because of
an old border dispute: Tripoli claims a territory of about a thousand square kilo-
meters all along the frontier, beginning with Ghadames. After a dinner, a Libyan
minister showed me the map, dating from the time of Mussolini (Libya is a former
Italian colony), where a part of the Brg Adlner area is shown as Libyan. "It is

the same problem as the one involving Algeria with its Moroccan and Tunisian neigh-
bors," the minister emphasizes (in fact, the question has been settled between
Algeria and Tunisia). Moreover, in Tripoli I noted a certain hostility toward
Algeria. "President Chadli Bendjedid is a liberal, almost a rightist," many Libyans
told as.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the border dispute has been added the new Libyan position in the Sahara affair.
There has not yet been a divorce between Qadhdhafi and the POLISARIO guerrillas,
but the latter will no longer benefit from the military and political support of
Tripoli in their war against Morocco. Rabat has reportedly received assurances

in this sense. That is why King nasaan II has hastened to renew diplomatic re-
lations. The Libyans one meets do not hide their satisfaction. And in Tripoli
Moroccans are the object of gestures of esteem-the more so since their courageous
resistance on the Golan Heights during the Arab-Israeli Mar of 1973 has not been
forgotten. Colonel Qadhdhafi, moreover, evoked thunderous applause when, in his
speech on the 12th anniversary of the revolution, he stated: "We hope that the re-
ferendum on the Sahara will go well. And we ask the Moroccan Army and the Hestern
Saharans [Saharoui] to g: and fight in Palestine."

A Change of Direction

Among those attending was a delegation of the POLISARIO guerrillas, led by their
secretary general, Mohamed Abdelaziz. The latter has not budged, and his replies

to the journalists after the ceremony could be summed up in two words, "We'll see."
Apparently, he counts on a change of direction by Qadhdhafi. Meanwhile, no docu-
ment of the International Congress of Solidarity with the Jamahiriya, held in
Tripoli from 28 to 31 August, made any mention of the struggle of the Saharan people.
The Malagasy chief of state, an ardent supporter of the POLISARIO guerrillas, was
even asked to avoid the subject in speaking before the congress. And President
Ratsiraka carefully followed the advice.

"It is not Qadhdhafi who is the source of this change of direction. It is the
people," a Libyan officer tells me. Be informs me that Libyans and Saharans met

in Tripoli in July to debate the question of the Sahara. "This open and democratic
debate led us to conclude that the struggle of the Saharans was not as just as we
believed." The result: a rapprochement with Morocco.

The Libyan boasted of this and hoped that the same thing would happen with Iraq,
Tunisia, and even Saudi Arabia, whose role in the oil market affects their economy.
In Tripoli they talk of a boycott orchestrated by the United States, which the
countries of the Persian Gulf, Nigeria, and Gabon have joined. The high levels of
their oil production and the refusal by these countries to increase prices place
Libya in a bad position. Libya has difficulty in selling its petroleum: $15
billion less than planned for in 1981. And as a consequence Libya will have diffi-
culty in achieving its 5-year plan (1981-1985).

Already certain projects, in the agricultural field in particular, have been re-
duced in scope. for the lack of foreign exchange! "They want to drive us back in
selling our gold. They will not succeed," a mdnister told me. Qadhdhafi has
found a solution: austerity. "We are ready to abandon our cars and walk, to do
without imported industrial or food products," he says. Is it also for that renun-
that Tripoli seems to have lost interest in a certain number of liberation movwrm

Antisovietism

What do the Libyans think of it? would they accept these restrictions, now that
they have acquired a taste for the charms of the affluent society? Beyond the
vegetables, the fruits, the meat, there are the automobiles, which have become an

23
FOR OFFICML USE ONL‘.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

integral part of their life. There are the home appliances, the hi-fi sets and
the video recorders which one finds in practically every home. Qadhdhafi knows
this well. That is why he would hesitate to break with the Heat, and with the
United States at the head of the list. It is true that he says he is ready to ally
himself militarily with the USSR, but rightly or wrongly he is hardly believed
here. That is for the simple reason that the Libyans are viscerally antisoviet,
beginning with Qadhdhafi himself. None of those I spoke with, officials or simple
citizens, spoke highly of the merits of Russia. They recall that the Green Book
attacks Marxian.

In Libya the only things Soviet are the weapons and...2,000 advisers, although the
Libyan Army buys its military equipment from all countries which agree to sell it
to Libya: France, "est Germany, Italy. Brazil. and, until recently, the llnited
States. Thus, the threat by Qadhdhafi to jump into the Soviet camp seems in this
atmosphere to be purely technical, if not verbal.

"See our fleet, a real patchwork." I was told when I was traveling in the company

d” Qadhdhafi and his guest, the Nicaraguan Daniel Ortega, on the waters of the

Gulf of Syrte. we had gone to see the Libyan warships maneuver. This was one way
to answer the American Sixth Fleet after the 16 August incident, when two Libyan
Sukhoi 22 aircraft were shot down. I must say that the only foreign officer whom

I met was an American colonel, detached to the naval base at Brega to provide after-
sales service for 0.8. weapons!

I could not take my eyes away from Qadhdhafi. He has a face of marble, a fixed
stare, seldom smiling. One might say that he wears a mask. Before going aboard
ship he surprised everyone. Impossible to know why, in front of a petrified Ortega,
he hit one of his officers and his director of protocol with his stick. But the
crowd began to shout his name, with fervor. No force seems capable of disturbing
him. I still thought this when I was leaving Libya, a country of riches and of in-
coherence, baffling and attractive at the same time...in a word, entrancing.

The Jamahiriya is not to be classified as either to the right or to the left. And
this is true. despite a very Western form of modernism and a socialism which is
agreeably confused. The notion of capital has been outlawed, since land belongs
to him who works it. and a house belongs to him who lives in it. "A producer and
not a salaried person." says the Green Book.

Success

An example: a Lebanese restaurant on the seashore in Tripoli. This was an excel-
lent business for the former proprietor, a native of Beirut, who employed about 20
workers. One evening in autum. 1980, the workers ”stmnoned" the boss to tell him
that the restaurant would henceforth belong to all of them. It was for him to
choose: becole 'a stockholder or be fired? The Lebanese told me his problem while
serving my meal. Yes, he is now a hotel waiter.

Officially, there is no longer any private business firm. Even the shops have been
closed for the benefit of the large stores called “people's markets." There you
find everything and not too expensive. Thenstate subsidizes a compensation fund
for products widely consumed. both those imported as well as those produced
locally. A sheep, for example. is sold to the state for the equivalent of F 1,000.

2;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On the market it is worth half as much. The Libyans do not have a shortage of
food. Qadhdhafi very early became interested in having the land worked. Thus, you
can eat lettuce in the Fezzan desert. Sebha, capital of this region, has become a
major agricultural center. water is drawn from a layer of water extending over
220,000 square kilometers, at a depth of more than 200 meters. When you fly M...
the Mediterranean coast, you note the large green fields. Above Banghazi, you see
the Djebel-Lakhdar area (Green Maintain), which represents a success for the agri-
cultural policy of Qadhdhafi.

Another success: reforestation. Some 400,000 trees have been planted in the four
corners of the country. On the border with the Sudan about 12,000 hectares of
desert have been made fertile. This area was once called the "valley of death."
The Green Book has re-baptized it the "valley of life." Life! This word is on
everyone's lips. "The Guide has brought us out of misery. Above all don't say that
this is thanks to petroleum There are countries which have petroleum and which
are still in misery. . ."

Arabism

Qadhdhafi perhaps has many faults, but his social policy is undoubtedly a success.
It is the best propaganda in favor of the Green Book. This is a sacred book, ven-
erated by a multitude of Libyans. It is in the name of the Green Book that the
young people, girls and boys, enlist in the army. A young man 21 years old admitted
to me that he had participated in the assassination of an oppositionist in Rome.

"He dared to criticize our Guide. Be deserved the punishment," he said by way of
justification, looking at me intensely. He said that he was ready to liquidate
Anwar El-Sadat, "if that is the wish of our Guide."

The Egyptian president is considered the mortal enemy of the Jmahiriya. Gaafar
Nimeiri is beloved in the same way, because of his relations wibh Cairo and his
support for liissein liabre.

"We have no expansionist claims to Chad. Our military intervention was dictated
by a strategic concern. This country represented for us a danger as long as it
was the theater of imperialist operations. He were obliged to defend ourselves."
The officer who expressed these views to me is part of the staff of Colonel
Radouane, leader of the expeditionary corps in Chad. "And the Aouzou strip?" I
asked. He answered with a cynical laugh, "He won't go back. Aouzou is fully
Libyan." He who lives will see.

Arabian is a very strong sentiment in Libya. "As long as the Arabs remain divided,"
Qadhdhafi says voluntarily, "our people will never regain their dignity." It is in
the name of dignity tlmt the Libyans say toz [shut up!] to America, that they are
ready to die. The attachment to Palestine is visceral here. Qadhdhafi is sincere
when he urges the unity of the Arab world. But what: disappointments he has hnd'

The hardest blow for him was the Syrian turnabout. Only three months after hn'rﬁn“
accepted the principle of union between the two countries (in Tripoli on 1 Squim" :
1980), Hafiz al-Asaad reversed gears.

However, who among the "friends" of Qadhdhafi is really sincere? The colonel. h:-
few illusions. Hence. perhaps, the secret of his reversals of course.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afriqus GRUPJIA 1981.

31 70
-_~:-.,.: 6519/16 25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

BRIEFS

FACTORLBS OPENED—As part of the ceremonies organized for the 12th anniversary of
the 1 September revolution, Colonel Qadhdhafi opened various industrial enter-
prises, anong them the El Yorga I fertilizer factory in the Barika region, which
the JANA press agency ranks among the country's "industrial citadels." This
factory, with a production capacity of 365,000 tons per year, is the third in a
series of factories envisaged for the petrochemical industry development program.
Colonel Qadhdhafi also laid the first stone for two new petrochemical factories,
anong them 31 Yorga II, with a capacity of 1,750 tons per day, and the second
methanol factory, with a capacity of 1,000 tons per day. Furthermore, a toilet
soap factory was opened at Janzour. The capacity of this factory is 2,000 tons
of soap per year. when the factory reaches maximum production, it will supply
80 percent of the Jamahiriya's needs. [Text] [Paris mums TROPICADX n
ICEDITl-ZRRANBENS in French No 1872, 25 Sep 81 p 2436] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Karen: at
Cie Paris 1981.] 9636

PLASTICS CONTRACTS-41b” has just signed contracts totaling 8 million pounds .
sterling ($14.1. million) with two British firms for the construction of a plastics
factory at has Lanuf, on the Mediterranean coast. The order, issued by the Ana-
wiya Oil Refining Company, a state enterprise, will be entrusted to Imperial anem-
ical Industries (ICI), which will provide the technology, and to Six-chem, s cm-
pany specializing in large-scale works, which will be in charge of construction.
The factory, which is expected to begin operations toward the end of 1986, will
produce 55,000 tons of low-density polyethylene per year. This product can with-
stand temperatures of boiling water and is used to manufacture numerous household
and industrial articles, toys, mechanical parts, packaging, etc. [Text] [Paris
mats TROPICAUX ET MEDrl'BRRANKENS in French No 1872, 25 Sep 81 p 2436] [COPY-
RIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9435

011. FOR GOODS' DEAL—Negotiations between the Indian caspany Kamani Engineering

and Libya have been at a standstill since Tripoli's announcement in August that
advance payments for the provision of an electric transmission station would be
made in oil and not in cash. Before going any further, the Ksmani capany is
waiting for authorization from the Indian Government, which has the monopoly on
trade in oil. A special representative from the Indian Oil Compmy, who went to
Tripoli to study the Libyan proposal, considered it negotiable on the price level.
Negotiations will continue in New Delhi on the possibility of such barter agree-
nents. It should be recalled that some 10 Indian companies are in the running for
contracts with Libya with a total value of some 625 million pounds sterling. [Text]

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Paris HARCHES 1'30le 81' HEDITWNS in Prmch 1872, 25 Sep 81 p 2636) [COPY-
RIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9636

ACCORD um: (ZECHOSLOVAKlAuGuatav Buaak, Qechoslovak chief of state and Col-amist
Party secretary general, left Tripoli on 10 September at the end of an official
three-day visit to Libya. During his stay in the Libyan capital, Hr. lined; and the
members of the large delegation which accompanied bin, had two official discussions
with Libian officials, led by Colonel Qadhdhsfi. At the conclusion of these discus-
sions, the two delegations signed the text of a draft agreement on bilateral econ-
omic, scientific and technical cooperation. [Text]. [Paris means TROPICAIIX ET
HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1872, 25 Sep 81 p 2&36] [OOPYRIGH'h Rene Koren: et

Cie Paris 1981.] 9634

C80: 6519/13 END

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY