FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10468

20 April 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFl-‘IGAL USE ONLY
m

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and nterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sunlaarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P WIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN AMERICA REPORT

(rouo 5/02)

CONTENTS

COUNTRY SECTION

INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

Central American Peace Congress Denounces 0.8. Intervention
(PRELA,4A|)1’82)............................nun...“

Briefs
Peruvian Minister on Halvinas
Venezuela To Support Argentine

ARGENTINA

Government Reportedly To Lift State of Siege
(DmtostIcIAs, llwr 82) OIOCIOOCCOOOOICCCOOOCOIOO

CUBA
READEX, Ocean Venture Exercises Denounced
(PRELA, 30 Mar 82) ......................................
'PRELA' Outlines Decree on Mixed Enterprises
(Joae dos Santos; PRELA. 16 Mar 82) .....................
EL SALVADOR

Salvador's Duerte Interviewed by 'PARIS HATCH'
(Napoleon Duerte Interview; HATCB, 26 Mar 82) ...;.......

Guerrilla Leader Speaks with 'AKAHAIA'
(Habil; mm, 29 Mar 82)

Briefa
D'Aubuiseon Supports Amnesty Lav

-.- un-u-lu

JNJR OF1WCJAL USEiﬂVLY
GUATEMALA

'PPxLA' Intervievs Peace ComitCee Head
(Victoria N. Cops; PRBLA, 1 Apr 82) .............

'AFRIQUB-ASIB' Interviews Guatemalan Guerrilla:
(Nut Delay; AFRIQU‘B-ASIB, 29 Mar-11 Apr 82)
CENTRAL AMERICAN PEACE CONGRESS DBNOUNCBS 13.8. INTERVENTION

PAOSOIOZ Havana PRELA in English 1920 CHI 4 Apr 82

[Text] San Jose, 5 Apr (PL)-‘l'he participants in the third conference of
peace and sovereignty in Central Amrica and the Caribbean denounced the
United States' interventionist policy in the area.

Crenodian representative Basil Gahagan said that the "United States does not
want peace nor an authentic process of self-determination" and added that
Ronald Reagan uses ”lies and infamy to justify aggression" against his coun-

try.

For his party, Barry ﬂandas. secretary of the Peace Council of Guyana,
declared that his people reject the aggressive 11.8. policy against Central
America and the Caribbean.

Also, the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, Jorsleus Cradige. accused
the USA of interference in the internal affairs of his country to torpedo

the popular and denocrstic novenent.

The third conference for peace and sovereignty in Central America. thrice
and the Caribbean was opened hiday by Costa Rican President Rodrigo Csraso.

In the Saturday session the «claim of the Nicaraguan people to fight to the
death if their country is invaded was confireed by Father Fernando Csrdenal.
delegate of the FSLN, who said his people will prevent the penetration of

any aruy, be it Sonozist, from the Southern Cone or from the USA. -

"We do not want a peace like the one proposed last year by U.s.vAssistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Tho-es Radars, who went so far

as to say to the Sandinista leaders that we would have good relations with
the use. if we stopped being so friendly with Cuba."

But, continued Csrdenal, Enders was told that We Nicaraguans paid the price
of fifty thousand dead for the right to choose our on friends."

Delegates from all the countries condemed the recent 0.8. Security Council
veto.

mammomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A motion in that regard made by the movement of support to the progressive
Costa Rican coalition Pueblo Unido was hailed with lengthy applause while
the delegates of more than 30 countries demanded respect for the self-
deternination of the peoples of the area.

Representatives of Central America, the Caribbean and South Anerica declared
that today more than ever before world peace is threatened by the current
0.8. administration. -

Those present at the meeting called on the 0.8. people to reject the aggres-
sive policy of Washington.

Salvadoran writer Claribel Alegria said that the 0.8. aggressivity [as

received] against the liberation movements in Guatemala and El Salvador has
no parallel in contemporary history.

She said that any invasion of the zone would place the world on the brink of
a war of incalculable results.

Spanish writer Alfonso Sastre warned that no country in the world is safe
from Washington's aggressive policy. The Central Anericane and Caribbeans,

he said, suffer the 0.8. onslaughts in one way while we Europeans feel then
in another .

The 8.8. Government without any doubt played its part to make us Spaniards
part of the European powderkeg, added the writer.

He agreed in calling on the 0.5. people to stop any future invasion of
Central America.

Jesus Reyes of Cuba said that the peoples of the region are determined to

defend their liberty and independence. notwithstanding the 0.8. threats and
aggressions.

The Cubs delegate added that the struggles also signify a contribution to the
attainment of a peace that will benefit all the nations of the world.

The region has become the center of the struggles of the continent for its
genuine liberation, peace. justice and social progress, he indicated.

Reyes went on to state that the peoples of Central America and the Caribbean

are demonstrating with their fight for freedom and the defense of their
sovereignty that the Cuban revolution is not an isolated event of an
historically exceptional nature.

C80: 3020/92

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

PBRUVIAN MINISTER 0N HALVIIIAS—Lins, 6 Apr “MOUTH—Peruvian Foreign
Minister Javier Arias Stella has stated that the recovery of the Halvinas
Islands by Argentina is based on the 1960 and 1965 UN resolutions that call
for a peaceful decolonisation of the Halvinas Islands. Similarly, the
Peruvian foreign minister noted that the presence of arsed British ships
cause fear and concern for the peace of the continent. Arias Stella voiced
his hope that the British action will be of a diasuasive nature and not one
designed for specific offensive purposes. [Excerpt] [PY061856 Buenoa Aires
SAPORITI in Spanish 1535 GMT 6 Apr 82] '

VENEZUELA m SUPPORT ARGENTINAwCaracas. Venezuela, 5 Apr (80011111)—
Venezuelan Foreign Minister Alberto Zssbrsno Vslasco has said that the
Venezuelan Govern-eat cannot act on the basis of suppositions, but if there
is a confrontation regarding the Helvinas Islands we have to comply with our
responsibility as a signatory of the TIAR [Inter-Amrican Reciprocal
Assistance Treaty) and support Argentina. The TIAR is the Inter-American
Reciprocal Assistance Treaty and the country would comply with it since it
represents a case of extra-continental aggression. On his part. Cesar Rondon
Lovers, Venezuelan ambassador to Panama, also gave his opinion by pointing
out that he hopes that a diplomtic agreesent will be reached during the 2
weeks it will take the British fleet to reach the Halvinas. However, he
added. in the case that the confrontation should take place, Great Britain
will be defeated since it cannot naintain logistics for an army hundreds and
hundreds of miles from its base. [Text] [PYOSl724 Buenos Aires SAPORITI in
Spanish 1615 GMT 5 Apr 82]

C80: 3010/1287

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
GOVERNMENT RBPOR‘IBDLY m LIFT STATE 01’ 81363
”111323 BIBMO Aires D‘iitRIOS Y MICIAS in Spanish 1214 GMT 11 Apr 82

[Text] Buenos sires, 11 Apr (mm—The newspaper LA HACION stated today
that the government is studying the possibility of lifting the state of
siege and of issuing a law of ameaty to facilitate the participation of
former guerrillas in the future political reorganization.

In its Sunday political commentary, the earning paper states that the two
resolutions are part of a detailed report on the national situation which
President Leopoldo Galtieri has on his desk.

'nae document. which according to the newspaper, was prepared at the General
Secretariat of the Presidency headed by Gen Rector Norberto Iglesias. is
based on the new domatic situation created with the recovery of the
Halvinas on 2 April.

The initial paragraphs of the study indicate that an unprecedented political
situation has been created in the country. which met be answered with

gestures which are also unprecedented. from the government standpoint, LA
NACION states. '

According to the newspaper's report, the seven points of that documnt
which are under study by President Caltieri are:

Establishing comunications channels with all political parties seeking
their participation in the agreenent of a minimum political plan;

Issuing a generous law of amesty for all those involved in political crilas,
the scope of which could also include situations ate-sing from the war
against subversion;

Totally or partially cancelling the corresponding institutional act;

Lifting the ban on political activities through the approval of a new
statute for political parties. The cancellation of the ban on political
activities without the iwlenentation before or simltaneously, of a new

statute would be unthinkable because in this case the political parties
would automatically be ruled by the Illia statute;

6‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Lifting the state of siege:

Issuing a new special and temorary rule which will allow the executive
branch to maintain at its disposal certain terrorists confined to be
dangerous;

Counting sentences .

LA NACION states that to prepare the political plan. the govermsnt will
call all leaders of all political parties within the next few nonths.

CSO: 3010/ 1282

\

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm SECTION CUBA

READBX, OCEAN VENTURE EXERCISES DENOURCBD
PA311228 havana PRELA in English 2320 CHI 30 Mar 82

[Text] Washington, 31 Mar (PD-“The thited States persists in its atteapts
to turn the Caribbean into a war theater with the announcement of two sets
of maneuvers for April, READEX 2-82 and Ocean Venture 82.

According to Pentagon sources the READS! exercises will begin on 6 April
with the participation of 39 naval mits including two task forces headed
by the aircraft carriers Independence and Porrestal, and 200 planes.

It was also reported that British and federal German naval forces will take
part in the maneuvers with the 0.8. vessels. The three countries belong to
NATO.

The sources said that the Ocean Venture 82 maneuvers, to start at the end of
April and rm through the middle of May, will include an invasion rehearsal
in Puerto Rico, a Karine landing at the Guantanamo naval base, Cuban territory
illegally occupied by Washington, the use of 3-52 bombers and the NATO uti-
air warning system. -

The series of maneuvers will take place less than a month after the U.S.A.
and other NATO comtries staged their first joint maneuvers in the Gulf of
Mexico and the Florida strait.

The decision of the U.S.A. and its NATO allies to carry out "Safe Pass 82"
precisely while washington stiffened its campaign against Cuba, Nicaragua
and Grenada and upgraded its intervention in El Salvador, was repudiated by
world public opinion as a threat to peace.

Although the Pentagon tried to define Safe Pass 82 as routine training
exercises, observers said that they were planned with the sin of extending
NATO activity to other regions.

The forces that took part in the maneuvers approached NAm's operation limits.

The Western limit of the exercises was the Tropic of Cancer. at 23 degrees
27 ninutes northern latitude, that is, close to the city of Havana.

080: ”20/90

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

'PRBLA' OUTLINES DEGREE 0N MIXED ENTERPRISES
PA170117 Havana PRELA in English 2320 on 16 Ear 82
[By Jose dos Santos]

[Text] Havana, 17 Mar (PL)--Economic partnership between Cuban enterprises
and foreign interests designed to support the country's economic development
is the object of a neasure adopted by the Council of State.

Decree law 50 enacted last month establishes that such a link is contewlated
for activities whose financial resources. raw tutorials, technology and mar-

kets are not vithin Cuba's reach but are nonetheless indispensable for the use
of Cuban human and natural resources.

The central standard to be used is that such partnerships promted or accepted
by the socialist state must promote the consolidation of this country's eco-
nomic and social system.

The new legislation stresses that the prise aim of mixed ventures include the
expansion of Cuban exports and the promotion of foreign tourism.

Partnerships may take the form of mixed ventures with Cuba. and foreign capi-
tal with their own assets and personality, or other forms that do not involve
the creation of a legal personality.

In order to regulate the operations of such ventures, the Cuban state has set
up a commission to grant the -authorization for their formation and the condi-
tions under which they operate.

The measure states that the duration of the ventures must be such as to promote
the recovery of (word indistinct] capital invested and the obtention of
profits that will make it attractive to both sides.

The mixed ventures will adopt the form of corporations with nominal shares,
with Cuban nationality and the possibility of opening representations abroad.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The other rat-uh of economic relation are organized through partnership con-
tracts.

The financiil regulations established by (Ida include [umber indistinct]
percent limiton foreign ownership of the mixed venture.

The Cuban state will guarantee the foreign partner free transfer abroad of
the dividends or net profits obtained.

The partners’r'ln nixed ventures will be exempt from payment of taxes on the
gross income of the institution and personal income, althoud: they will be
liable for payment of taxes on profits, tariffs and on vehicles.

Under the measures the zones of top priority for international tourism could be
declared tax free with entry facilities throud: the national tourism institute.

Finally, the measure states that these stipulations are not applicable to

partnerships organized in can at the agreement of the Council for Mutual Boo-
nomic Assistance (CHM) or the Latin American Economic System (8m).

cso: 3020/83

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SALVADOR'S DUARTE INTERVIEHED BY 'PARIS 'NATCE'
151231705 Paris MATCH in French 26 Her 82 pp 70, 72

[Interview with El Salvador's President Napoleon Duarte by Patrick Forestier:
"France Wants To Inpoee Terrorism on Us"--date and place not given]

[Text] HARE: "hat do you think of [French] President Hitterrand's and [taxi-
can] President Lopez Portillo's joint declaration on the election in El Salvador?

Napolean Duarte: I think that the French and Hex-ism presidents' joint state-
ment calling for negotiations and the recognition of the Parebundo Marti Nation-
al Liberation Front [mm and the Revolutionary Denocretic Front [FDR] as
parties to the conflict and as representative political forces is a direct
intervention in the country's internal affairs. I do not think any country in
the world would agree to another country inposing its conditions on it. Conse-
quently that declaration is a flagrant intervention in El Selvedor's internal
affairs. We have chosen the sane nethod as Mr Hitterrand: the electoral method.
I will not say the same of the Mexican Government, because that is a different
natter.... If Mr Hitterrand's governaent new has the right to nationalize the
banks it is because he won the elections and has his people's support—whether
or not we agree with that measure. Similarly, we have proposed that the lethod
here should be that of elections and not that of bullets and death. Just con-
sider that Mr Hitterrand and Mr Lopez Portillo are proposing a method which
delegates power to the guerrillas: that contradicts the principles which they
uphold in their own countrites. The French Government maintains that the elec-
tions are not representative because the left is not represented. The left has
never been representative in this country. [National Revolutionary lbvenent
leader] Ungo did not obtain 1,000 votes in the whole country on the only occa-
sion he ran alone in the elections. '

Ihe argument that the extrene left is not representative [as published] or is
not taking part is not valid in an election process. The extrene left has never
believed in elections, it only believes in the use of force--bullets, nechine-
guns. death, terrorism—to impose a will opposed to the people's will.

Observe the paradox: the extreme left says that it is defending the people, that
it is struggling for the people, but it does not want to allow the people to
express their opinion. “by? Sinply because that is called totalitarianisn. in
all languages. It is deception. mat is how things are.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HATCH: Can the French Government play a role in the Salvadoran crisis?

Napoleon Duarte: I believe that the best role which the French people and govern-
ment can play is to give the Salvadoran people the opportunity to determine
their future. Anything else they try to do can only be called intervention.

As for President Mitterrand, he must not continue to upset the balance in Cen-
tral America’s internal forces. Because as he gives arms to the Nicaraguans so
he upsets the balance of forces and Central America runs the risk of a blood-
bath. That is not helping the peeples. It is going against the people and
trying to impose on then his personal will.

MATCH: A propos, what do you think of the French Governmt's arm salesnto
Nicaragua?

Napoleon Duarte: The fact that one country sells arm to another country is

not important per se. But the fact that they are being sold in a premediated
way as France is doing is certainly dangerous because that implies Prance's
participation in a plot which is aimed at upsetting the balance in Central Amer-
ica. If it was just a trade like any other, there would be no problem. But it
is a political sale. What is the objective of that sale? Hr Hitterrand must
explain that. Not me.

HATCH: If Mr Mitterrand were sitting opposite you what you you say to him?

Napoleon Duarte: I would tell him exactly what I am busy telling you: that
he has no right to interfere in Salvadoran affairs. But he is perfectly enti-
tied to express his opinion, and I respect it. However, he cannot impose his
conditions on anybody. Just as France would never allow conditions to be im-
posed on it. France's history shows that. Therefore if he did so he would be
anti-French.

MATCH: Would you accept French observers during the elections?

Napoleon Duarte: Yes. We have appealed to all comtries so that they can ob-
serve that these elections are free. Observing is one thing, interfering is
another.

MATCH: Do you sincerely think that the elections on 28 March will be free?

Napoleon Duarte: You have seen the people today. People saw and heard an army
colonel assuring then that they will be free. We are repeating that throughout
the country. We are making a specific effort to ensure that the people know
these elections will be free.

HATCH: But how will the inhabitants in the-zones controlled by the guerrillas
be able to vote?

Napoleon Duarte: They will be able to vote because there is no village which is
under the guerrillas' control. Cite as a single such village. Cite me the
name of one village which is controlled by the guerrillas.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HATCH: What abéut the Horason region?

Napoleon Duarte: There is no village in the guerrillas' hands. There are re-
mote desolate places...but they are not villages. The whole population is in
the villages did the villages are controlled by the arned forces.

HATCH: If you win the elections will you negotiate with the guerrillas?

Napoleon Duarte:! If you analyze it the idea of negotiation ammts to our un-
conditional surrender. It neans the seizure of power. They clain to negotiate
on the army and want to give the guerrillas the status of army. They want to
negotiate on the govern-ant and have the right of veto. They want to negotiate
the economic, political and social program in order to inpose their will. Nobody
can negotiate that. A dialogue to incorporate then into the denocratic process
is possible before, during and after elections. In other words. if they are
prepared to abandon their weapons, abandon violence and accept the rule of
democracynas has happened with many comist parties in Europe—we are prepared
to dialogue with then as of now. But if they want to negotiate with a nachine-
gun on the table, we reject that.

HATCH: The guerrillas have warned that they will continue the fight whatever
happens.

Napoleon Duarte: There is no doubt about that. It is their decision. If
they continue to struggle the government will continue to defend itself.

MATCH: So, despite the elections the situation will not change?

Napoleon Duarte: Of course it will, it will change because the guerrillas now
say that the government is not legitinste, that it does not represent the peo-
ple, that the government is a de facto govern-ant. They want a share of power.
But after the elections they will not be able to clain that. Jmt as they are
now scarcly talking about the agrarian reform. Just as they are no longer say-
ing a word about the reforn of state structures. All they are talking about now
is power. When the people have chosen who will govern them, that power will no
longer be negotiated by anybody. The conditions will have changed. They will
have to agree either to join the democratic gen or to remain guerrillas--
isolated from the people. In the long term that means peace.

HATCH: But it is not difficult to fight the guerrillas?

Napoleon Duarte: No. It is not difficult if the outside support is severed.
And that is the problen with the intervention of France. Hence, Cubs. Nicara-
guae, Russia, Libya, Vietnam and all those countries which are strengthening the
guerrillas.

HATCH: Are you cowering France with Cuba?

Napoleon Duarte: No, no. they are not the sans. France is a deancratic coun-
try. Hitterrand won free elections and has the right to be in power. That is
not true of Cuba. But, unfortunately there are countries who are giving mili-
tary aid and others who are helping by playing into the hands of the extreme
left. In doing that the French Government is playing into the commists' hands.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MATCH: The left and extreme left are criticizing you violent. Are you strong
enough to maintain power?

Napoleon Duarte: When we took power the extreme right and the extreme left said
we would only last a week. we have been in power for 2 years. And we are
going to continue.

HATCH: The army is said to have most power in El Salvador. Do you not fear a
coup d'etat?

Napoleon Duarte: Of course. A coup is still possible. The extreme right con-
stantly plays on [the threat of] a coup. But at present there is no danger of
a coup. There is no danger of the army taking an attitude opposed to the com-
promise to which it is committed.

HATCH: Do you share President Reagan's view that if the guerrillas triumph in
El Salvador all the Central American countries will be won over by conmism?

Napoleon Duarte: That is the domino theory. I think that there is a stratey
for Central America. If you consider geopolitics, you realize that communist
strategy is developed by sectors. After acting in Cuba they acted in the
Dominican Republic, Panama, Guatenla, Jamaica, and throughout the Caribbean.
They have kept Cuba. Lost the rest and have penetrated South America. Che
Guevara in Bolivia, then in Argentina, Uruguay. Paraguay and Chile. when they
failed in that sector they mobilized in another region, Central America: Nicara—
gua, El Salvador, Guatemala. If they triumph here they will have a spearhead.
And if they fail the will make plans for another region. Colonbia, Venezuela,
Peru or Ecuador. They do not launch into just one country. They create sec-
tors which guarantee the stability of the co-unist regime. They know that
with just Nicaragua in Central America it is difficult for them to steer the
region toward communism. That is because they need other countries. That is
the justification for El Salvador but if they win, the next step takes them to
Guatemala. Then to Honduras to destabilize .the region and strengthen the com-
munists. may will not attain that because they will not win in El Salvador.
You can go to any part of the country and you will realize that the commists
are not winning here.

MATCH: what type of regime do you want in El Salvador?

Napoleon Duarte: The only acceptable regime is that of democracy. There is

no doubt that we have vanquished totalitarianism, which is the foundation of
social injustice and is responsible for the violence in this country.

MATCH: A democratic regime with the left?

Napoleon Duarte: A democratic and just regime. We say that there must be the ‘
alternative of a democratic revolution ini'the country. not a violent revolution,
which is the Harxists' idea.

MATCH: what is your attitude toward the left?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Napoleon Duarte: When I an asked whether I an on the right or the left, I
reply that I do not like to be labeled but that I love justice and freedom and
that I am working for social reform end for the poor people. In that case many
people could describe me as a leftwing individual.

HATCH: Is it true that the pope might cone to El Salvador soon?

Napoleon Duarte: Yes, be my come. He would he welconed by millions of Sal-
vadorans.

HATCH: Have you already had contacts with John Paul II?

Napoleon Duarte: No. The archbishop has asked his to come. The foreign nin-
ister has also asked his: to com.

MATCH: Hhet will you do if you lose the elections?

Napoleon Duarte: You ere asking us a pessimistic question.

HATCH: Is it not a possibility you have to consider?

Napoleon Duarte: I an optimistic. But in that eventuality I think that I will
con tinue to struggle for democracy outside or inside the governunt. That is
my role. I am not going to leave the country, I will stay here and I will strug-
gle.

HATCH: Hill you still take part in political life?

Napoleon Duarte: Fully.

HATCH: Do you fear for your life?

Napoleon Duarte: There have already been attespts on my life. The other week
Radio Vencerenos, the guerrillas' radio, stated that there might he attempts on
my life. But that is the price which has to be paid for saving the country.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 per Cogedipresse 8.A.

CSO: 3100/1091

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION EL SALVADOR

GUERRILLA LEADER SPEAKS WITH 'AKAEATA'

0W20905 Tokyo AKAHATA in Japanese 29 hr 82 p 7 ,

["Sumary" of remarks given by (ﬂabil), head of international affairs in the
Central Comand of the Farsbundo Ehrti National Liberation Front (m). to

AKAHATA correspondent Yasuhiro Tantka on 25 March in Managua]

[Excerpts] Managua, Nicaragua-Jim Salvadoran people fought with legitimate
means and elections for years against the exploitation of the oligarchic

government as well as against hunger and misery.

The U.S. inperialists were forced to modify their strategy after our general
offensive last year. They thus embarked on an open intervention.

First, they began injecting enornous funds to naintain the economy and help
the oligarchic forces regain the public's confidence.

Second, they sent military advisers to bolster the governnent forces. Although
those advisers were stationed in the capital city in the first months, they

are now openly seen in each camp and places where military operations are
going on. They are using assault helicopters. In addition to the open train-
ing of Salvadoran troops in the United States, secret training is in progress
at military bases in Panama and other places. Argentines and Israelis as
well as American troops are being used to torture nenbers of the liberation
forces. There are also the spying operations and infiltrations by the CIA

(U. s. Central Intelligence Agency).

Third, they are atteapting to turn neighboring lionduras into a counterrevolu-
tionary stronghold. The 0.8. Marine Corps and Green Berets are training

Honduran troops in counterguerrilla warfare to use then in interventionist

operations. In border areas, lbnduran troops are cooperating with Salvadoran
troops in antiguerrilla operations.

We want the people the world over to know about the increasing 0.8. interven-
tion in El Salvador over the past year. 0.8. intervention is no longer a
mere possibility. It is a reality now and is expanding.

The following is our appeal to the Japanese Govern-ant and people:

110
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
First, we want then to know the realities of and truth about El Salvador.
we are fighting for an improvement in our living conditions and for a society

and political system that respects hunsnity. Justice rests with the libera-
tion front, the'Demcratic Revolution Front. No nation would object to this

goal. We know the 0.5. imperialists are trying to pressure Japan into
cooperation with its interventionist policy against Central American states.

The Japanese Government should know it will gain nothing fro- cooperation
with the inter'vgptionists against national self-determination and rights of

the people.

We expect the Japanese people to manifest their support for and solidarity
with our struggle for freedom and self-deterlination and to raise their

voices to prevent the Japanese Government from taking part in the interven-
tion. In addition, we want them to extend us financial and msdical

assistance if possible.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kyosan-To Chuo linkai 1982 nen

(:80: 4105/80

15
FOROFI'ICMLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION EL SALVADOR

BRIEFS

D'AUBUISSON SUPPORTS ARREST! LAW-San Salvador, 2 Apr (mm—m3 Roberto
D'Aubuisson, leader of the Salvadoran extreme rightving that claimed victory

in the constituent elections held last Sunday, said on Friday that he sup-
ports e legal meaty for leftist guerrillas. The leader of the Nationalist

Republican Alliance (ARENA), told news-en that the 60 percent of the vote won
by his party and its four allies in Sunday's elections reflect the people's
rejection of the centrists in the Christian Democratic Party. Nevertheless,
he felt that it will be possible to hold talks with the Christian Democrats

on the formation of a government of national unity once the results of the
constituent elections are announced officially, perhaps this weekend. Major
D'Aubuisson emphasized. however, that the rightving will not accept can [as
received] Jose Napoleon Duarte, current president of the junta and leader
of the Christian Democrats, as an interim president. 0n the subject of the
leftist guerrillas, D'Aubuisson said: "We will adopt an annesty law, but _
we will not talk with those who do not accept denocracy. If they persist in
the bloodletting, our first seesure will be to expel them.” [Text] [PA022121

London 11301153 in French 2056 GMT 2 Apr 82]

C80: 3100/ 518

16
FOR MUSEONLY
'PEELA' IRTEEVfBiS PEACE comm READ
PA021615 Havana mm in Spanish 2023 an 1 Apr 82
[Article by Victorio )1. Oops]

[Text] Havana, 2 Apr (PL)-l'ormsr Guatemalan Foreign Hinister Guillermo
Toriello declared here that the recent nilitary coup in his country was pre-
pared and carried out with the support of the United States Department of

State.

lie also described as decisive the participation of Israel in naintaining the
repression in Guatemala and denounced the presence of military personnel

from Chile. Argentina and Taiwan.

In an interview with PRBNSA LATINA the president of the Guatemalan Peace Cor
mittee declared that Cuban-born terrorists are linked with the paranilitary

bodies operating in his country.

' He added that the State Department plan included having General Bernan
Ovidio lbral Paix energe in the first instance as the only one responsible

for the coup in order to observe reactions inside Guatemala and abroad.

"But when they saw that the plan received the support of the officers in
order to oust the government of General Romeo Lucas Garcia. they began to

maneuver so that' the real choices of the State Department would come to the
fore," added Toriello.

'lhe foreign minister in the government of Jacobo Arbens (1951-50 described
General Efrain Rios Montt as a protege of General Carlos Arena Oeorio. one
of the most bloodthirsty military chiefs in the country and know as the
"jackal of the east."

Toriello recalled that Rios butt was army chief of staff at the time of the
slaughter of 800 people in the faraing calamity of Sansirisay in the
Department of Progreso, Jalapa [as received], in the eastern part of the
country.

He said that the new regime chief served as director of the Polytechnical
School (a nilitary institution), representative in the Inter-Anerican Defense

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Board in washington, director of the Inter-American Military School and
nilitary attache in Hashington and Madrid.

Toriello said that Horacio Maldonado. promoted to general in 1980 by Roneo
Lucas Garcia, is very repressive and for years co-anded the "Honor Guard"
Brigade. one of the three main garrisona of maternala City.

He sdded that Colonel Francisco Gordillo Martinez is a pro-Washington counter-

insurgency specialist and until January, headed the military brigade of
mezaltenango, which conducted operations agath the guerrillas.

Toriello added that there has been no essential change in Guatemla and

stressed that what has occurred is a "change of military chiefs. It is a
government run by simian, sale of then gorillas and others orangutangs."

cso: 3010/1298 '

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'AFRIQUB-ASIE' INTERVIEWS GUAM mums
memos Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French 29 Mar-ll Apr 82 pp 38-39

[Report by Nur Delay: ”Between Ballot Bones and Aras"-undated interviews
conducted in Guateeala by Harte Harnecker (not further identified”

[Text] "If we had decided to fight right from the first day we would have

asde a serious mistake because the anew would then have launched its forces
against us with a great chance of wiping us out," Bapeil Samayac, co-ander

of the Third Front of the [Guatemalan] Organisation of the People in Ar-
IORPA], said.

lhose renarks take on special significance when you know the reasons for the
creation of the ORPA: to wage arned struggle. And, according to Cos-ender
Samayac. "the armed propaganda campaign sought-and that was one of its aost

important objectives--to portray the people's war as the definitive solution
to the existing problems and situation."

It might seem paradoxical, therefore. that the can spent 8 years without
carrying out any military action. lhis politico-ailitary organization is
now described by Harts Harnecker as "one of the armed groups in this country
which has carried out most military actions during the past 2 years. dis-
concerting the enemy and drawing admiration and respect from the other

- Guatenlan revolutionary "organizations." For the can that was still a
period of "inlantation," and they learned from the memory of several guer-

rilla movements which had been wiped out before they had even taken root.

As soon as it was formed the ORPA realized that the aim was not to achieve
small successes or spectacular actions in record time. Guerrilla warfare is

a war of attrition, and the main thing is to be able to keep going, while
draining the enemy's material and moral capabilities but also seeking to

extend the people's support for the struggle and to lead the masses toward
ins urrec tion .

‘lhe Revolutionary [as published] Armed Forces [FAR]. the oldest organisation
in the present araed struggle in Guatemala, knows about that. The Guatemalan
Labor Party [PCT] was largely responsible for its creation in 1962. The
latter. savagely persecuted after the overthrow of the progressive Arbenz
government. supported the conspiracy attewt by the denocratic military

19
”MUSEONIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

against Castillo Armaa' regime in 1955 and tried to overthrow it "by calling

the masses onto the streets and trying to spark off a political general
strike which would lead to insurrection." Indeed it was an attempt to

repeat the plan which led to victory in 1944 without analyzing a historical
situation which was no longer the same.

It was only after the triumh of the Cuban revolution that the PG! admitted
that sustained people's armed struggle is the only possible course for the
revolution in Guatemala. However, it was not easy to go into action. The

FAR was created after several failures and heavy losses. It is "a broad
organization of commist and noncoanunist militants grouped into three

movements": the 20 October vaemnt conrising party meﬁers; the
13 November bvementua group of rebel officers who took part in a plot

against the regime in l96l—which failed--and, finally, the 12 April Hove-
nent comprising students, mainly from the Commist Youth lbvelent.

Pablo Monsanto, who joined the guerrillas at the age of 17, has been com-

mander in chief of the PAR for 10 years. He is one of those in the best
position to comnent on the armed struggle in his country because he experi-

enced "the bitter moments of a guerrilla experiment which, despite its world
fame, suffered more defeats than victories in the'sixtiea." may guerrilla
attempts have developed and vanished into thin air before his eyes.

Unlike the other Guatemalan leaders Monsanto does not think it is the com-
munist parties' conventional organic concept which prevented them from taking

part in the armed struggle. It is a question of lineo-a question which,
moreover. is more "practical" than "theoretical."

"The problem is not one of a politicomilitary organisation," Ibnsanto said.
' "It is the struggle which is politicomilitary. But it is necessary to have
a military organization and a political organization. The two cannot be

confused, they coaplement each other or are coubined.... The political
leaderships can decide on the future of the war without being soldiers."

The need for these two levels of. organisation is clearly shown when it comes
to support from society, without which the guerrillas could not exist.
Referring to "logistics" as one of the weak points of any army lbnsanto

stressed the importance of organizing the masses who provide the logistical
support which is vital to the guerrillas. However, it is not "military"

organization of the masses but political organization "which makes them
aware of the fact that they should support the armd struggle and this mili-

tary force. and that that guarantees their victory and the triumph of the
revolutionary objectives . "

And the Masses...

If the masses are ever to join the armed struggle they themelvea lust be
convinced that there is no other solution.

"The guerrillas cannot bring about that conviction solely by their emaple."
bnsanto said. "An intermediate process of economic and social demands is

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
necessary before attaining political radicalization in order to love on .to
new form of struggle. If the guerrillas' Iilitary actions coincide with
the intensification of the na‘sses' struggle, those actions cat. serve as a
catalyst for the enthusiasm, will need those masses have to nave on to a
higher form of struggle which, in this case, would be armed struggle."
[sentence as published] - '

"It is wrong,"':lh_e also stressed, "to think that we are going to are the
entire Guatemalan people.. .. flhenssses will have other forms of participa-

tion." He was thinking of protests, general strikes and so forth. Although
the guerril-las' goal is to lead the nasses into insurrectional situations,

they are also aware that "the nasses do not launch into insurrection unless
they can count on a military force which is capable of neutralizing the
enemy's repressive forces."-

Rolando lbran, comader in chief of the Guerrilla Army of the Poor {BOP},
gave further details on the possible nature and diaensions of this partici-
pation by the masses in the revolutionary struggle: "First we tried to
apply conventional tactics," horan said: "penetration of the factories,
creation of cells. And yet that did not bring about the solution which we
were seeking.... He realized that the nasses of a country like Guatemala--
which is, first. an underdeveloped country and, second, a country assailed
by repression-—had differences determined by the levels of organization,
radicalization or awareness. ' In a situation of people's revolutionary war,
cadres do not necessarily energe directly froa broad sass organizations into
the political and ailitary vanguard to form the frontline contingents.... In
our case it is necessary to count on use organisations which are constantly
prepared and ready to move from strike action to political and revolutionary
struggle."

‘ihe work of political. organization to attain that objective is carried out at
three levels: the level of the unorganized masses, the level of organized
but nonpoliticized losses and, finally, snag the advanced sections of the
masses organized into associations, trade unions and so forth. "It is' this
sector which oust feed what is called the mess revolutionary organizations,"
Moran added. however, he specified that that is not synohynous with "having
a group in a trade union to win the elections in order to control the trade

union is under its influence from then on." That is a typical mistake of so
many novenents in so nany countries.... "In our view," Moran continued, "the

most important thing is the grassroots and their nest advanced sections."

The BOP, FAR, ORPA and PCT are now grouped within a coma front: the .
Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union, but the process which led to that
was not an easy one. The BC? and ORPA are the-selves organisations which
emerged from splits within the PAR back in 1965. .

In the second half of the seventies the revolutionary forces were divided,
weakened by internal struggles and incapable of directing the movement toward
the overthrow of the existing regiae and toward seizing power. Ihe repressive

Lucas governnent took advantage of that situation to hit all the organizations
equally hard—aside iron the can which had not yet fully emerged-rand the

21
MWUSEONLY
- . ron omcm. USE on“

coabative and repressed Guatemalan people are now in naming for thousands
of their children.

This fact has led to the recent creation of a United Patriotic Unity Cou-
Ilittee. The conittee'e sin is to support the guerrillas and to work for

the formation of a national patriotic unity front in which the vhole'oppoei-
tion would participate.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie .

cso: 3100/ 518

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BSTABLISW-Algiers, 2 Apr (PD—Suriname and Algeria
have decided to establish diplonatic relations at the level of ambassadors,
it was announced officially. Both governments have taken the decision that
will be effective imediately, "vith the desire to develop and consolidate
the relations of friendship and cooperation." Both [words indistinct] says
the announcement, [words indistinct] develop the relations between the two
states on the basis of international juridicial principles, as stipulated by
the charter of the United Nations, the principles of the movement of non-
aligned countries and in accordance with the Vienna convention, dated 16
April 1961. [Text] [PA021610 Ravens PRELA in English 1942 (341' 1 Apr 82]

cso: 3025/1074 m:

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY